==PAGE:1==
 
(Godtsygehusbyggeri, 2020B) 
 
Change Management Strategy of 
Nordfløjen at Rigshospitalet
 
Master thesis, MSc Design & Innovation 
S123399 Thomas Bardenfleth 
DTU Management 
 
February 2020 
 
1 
==PAGE:2==
1 Abstract 
The thesis has analyzed the change process of Nordfløjen at Rigshospitalet. 
Nordfløjen is planned to open in the summer of 2020 and will include new work 
routines at the operational clinic (OMO) focused on improving patient care. A central 
change is that the responsibility for overseeing operations is transferred from the 
individual clinics to the centralized OMO. 
After the opening and implementation it is important to review the change, to ensure 
that work routines are followed through and continuous efforts are made to keep 
improving the conditions after change. 
A model for a feedback system based on data gathered from Sundhedsplatformen 
has been proposed in the thesis. The model emphasizes the importance of time 
management that is critical in order for OMO to run at its intended capacity.  
The feedback would help OMO identify potential problems, understand these 
through data and help them find solutions for the issues. It is suggested that OMO 
use the Improvements Department (Forbedringsafdelingen) and the employees at 
OMO to help define these issues and get a greater understanding of these. 
Furthermore it is also recommended that future change projects at Rigshospitalet are 
facilitated using a framework for change management, such as ADKAR, that the 
Improvements Department has had experience with. 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:3==
2 Acknowledgements 
Esben ​Sidelmann Tvergaard, Civil engineer, Forbedringsafdelingen,​ ​Rigshospitalet 
Melanie Kreye, Associate Professor, DTU 
Morten Finnemann, Chief consultant, Forbedringsafdelingen, Rigshospitalet 
Pernille Olsbro, Head nurse at Department of Anesthesiology, Rigshospitalet 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:4==
 
1 Abstract
2 
2 Acknowledgements
3 
4 Introduction
6 
5 Literature
11 
5.1 How to define change
11 
5.2 Character of change
13 
5.3 Improving change boundaries after launch
14 
5.4 Performance criteria of change
14 
5.5 Sustaining change
16 
5.5.1 Factors affecting longevity of change
18 
5.6 ADKAR as a framework to facilitate change
19 
5.7 Learning to improve change
19 
5.8 Theoretical approach to creating goals
20 
5.8.1 Scenarios based goal modeling
21 
6 Methodology
22 
6.1 Assessing project status
23 
6.2 Student worker bias
24 
7 Data collection
26 
7.1 Affinity diagram
29 
7.2 Project planning tool
30 
7.3 Envision
31 
7.3.1 Centralizing and streamlining care
31 
7.3.2 Physical layout of NF supports workflow
32 
7.4 Planned
33 
7.4.1 Increasing the preparations for surgery at OMO
33 
7.4.2 Quantified risk log of concerns for transition
34 
7.4.3 Training new personnel at NF
35 
7.4.4 Ensuring appropriate information for patients
35 
7.4.5 Activities changed for OMO
36 
7.4.6 Concern for the flow of OMO
37 
7.5 Executed
37 
7.5.1 Hosted event by the administration to focus on the transition
37 
7.6 Feedback
41 
7.6.1 Overview of activities at NF
41 
7.6.2 Phasing of capacity at NF
42 
7.6.3 Choosing feedback mechanisms for selected activities
42 
4 
==PAGE:5==
7.6.4 Planning the procedures
44 
7.6.5 Training for surgery at OMO
45 
7.6.6 Time management model for OMO
45 
7.6.7 Issues building SP rapport
46 
8 Discussion
49 
8.0.1 ADKAR project succession
49 
8.0.2 Framework comparison of ADKAR and Lewin
50 
8.1 Envision
51 
8.1.1 Linear change and non linear change
51 
8.1.2 Patient care values of NF
52 
8.1.3 Limitations to attributed goal graph
53 
8.1.4 Theoretical analysis of activities that were performed before the start of 
the project
54 
8.1.5 Affect on healthcare in municipality
55 
8.2 Planned
56 
8.2.1 Flexible implementation of OMO
56 
8.2.2 Ensuring clinics be involved in transition
57 
8.2.3 Engaging OMO in transition project
58 
8.2.4 Missing link between risk log and activities
58 
8.2.5 Training of personnel
59 
8.2.6 Further change of surgical plans based on risk log
60 
8.2.7 Special cases for patients at OMO
61 
8.3 Executed
61 
8.3.1 Insights from workshops
61 
8.4 Feedback
63 
8.4.1 Ensuring double-looped learning
63 
8.4.2 Data reports from SP currently exist
63 
8.4.3 Feedback more critical for OMO than other clinics
63 
8.4.4 Learning process
63 
8.4.5 The role of FA in data monitoring
64 
8.4.6 Thoughts on literature
65 
8.4.7 Solution management bias
65 
8.4.8 Challenges of building SP report
66 
8.5 Consequences of delay
66 
8.6 Future plan of action
67 
9 Conclusion
69 
10 References
71 
11 Appendixes
73 
5 
==PAGE:6==
4 Introduction 
The Danish healthcare system is under pressure. A 2% yearly budget cut has been 
in effect since 2016 and has been planned to last until 2022 (Dansk 
Magisterforening, 2018). In 2019 the regional hospitals were expected to cut 400 
million DKK where Rigshospitalet (RH) accounted for 67 million (17%). The fiscal 
tightening is felt by the employees at the hospitals where the downsizing of staff and 
reduction of resources leads to employees experiencing not being able to handle the 
workflow from patients and having the time to offer proper care (Information, 2019). 
Meanwhile the Danish population is growing larger and more people are becoming 
chronically ill as populations get older and their need for more advanced care grows. 
According to Patient Organisationen in Denmark, one in four Danes over the age of 
16 is afflicted by two or more chronic diseases and the number is growing 
(Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2017). The number of outpatient visits has been steadily 
growing during the last 10 years (Godtsygehusbyggeri.dk, 2020B) 
 
Figure 1. Development of outpatient visits 2009-2017 (Godtsygehusbyggeri.dk, 2020B) 
 
One way the Danish public healthcare is accomodating for the stricter budgets while 
having a growing population in need of expert care, is by constructing hospitals with 
6 
==PAGE:7==
larger capacity and more specialized units. These hospitals are called 
Supersygehuse and are managed by the Danish Regions. The Danish Regions have 
formulated the following vision for the Supersygehuse: “The goal is a better and 
more coherent patient treatment, increased patient safety, improved efficiency and 
higher quality care” (Godtsygehusbyggeri.dk, 2020). 
 
A comprehensive report was recently published by Sundhedskoordinationsudvalget, 
an organization in Region Hovedstaden responsible for supporting coherent patient 
treatment across municipalities, improving quality of care and utilization of resources, 
stating the goals and areas needing greater attention in the Danish healthcare 
sector. Among these is a vision to create a better cohesive treatment plan for 
patients with chronic illnesses by working closer together across medical fields 
(Figure 2) (Sundhedskoordinationsudvalget, 2019). 
 
 
Figure 2. Focus goals for healthcare (National Danish goals for healthcare 2019-2023) 
 
As part of the Supersygehus agenda, RH started planning the construction of the 
new building Nordfløjen (NF) in 2015 and it was originally expected to be finished in 
the fall of 2019. The vision for NF was driven by synergy of different faculties to 
improve collaboration and patient care, standardizing of patient rooms to improve 
flexibility and openness in patient rooms to improve the environment for recovery of 
patients. Thus NF is a way of meeting the demand for a higher level of healthcare for 
7 
==PAGE:8==
patients while also accounting for an increasing number of patients to treat. The 
vision behind NF aligned with those of the Supersygehuse and corresponds to the 
overall agenda for developing healthcare in Denmark. 
 
Due to unforeseen circumstances, the date for completion of NF has been 
postponed until further notice, but will hopefully be done by summer 2020. The 
project is expected to cost 1.85 billion DKK. NF is 54.000 m2, will have 233 bed 
capacity, 33 operating rooms and will employ 2.500 people. 
 
NF can be seen as a way to achieve a better and more coherent hospital where 
specialties work closer together to treat patients with multiple afflictions. The physical 
design of the building as well as changes to the patient journey throughout the 
operations facility have been made in order to achieve a more efficient workflow and 
higher capacity of patients for treatment. 
Being able to treat more patients in the hospital operations facility also aligns with 
the demand for higher utilization of resources in the hospital. A centralized 
operations facility called “Operationsmodtagelse og Opvågning” (OMO) will oversee 
all surgeries scheduled at NF and will modernize how surgeries are conducted with 
new work routines and new facilities. 
 
The Board of Management appointed the Improvements Department  to be 
1
responsible for overseeing the different project tracks, including detailing the clinical 
practices at OMO. FA is a department under the hospital’s management. The term 
“transition project” is used for describing the later parts of the project phase, which is 
to retain and sustain change at NF.  
The transition project was overseen by members of senior management from the 
hospital (B2). This group will be referred to as the project group throughout the 
thesis. 
1 The Improvements Department will be referred to as FA (Forbedringsafdelingen) throughout this 
thesis. 
8 
==PAGE:9==
 
Figure 3. Organizational diagram of RH (Rigshospitalet, 2020) 
 
The aim of the thesis is to understand how the transition process at NF is 
envisioned, planned, executed and followed up with feedback. The activities 
regarding feedback will be given special attention as this has been the main priority 
of the transition project. 
By understanding the workflow of OMO at NF in comparison to the existing surgical 
practises at Rigshospitalet, the transition process will be discussed with regards to: 
●
How the use of quality measurement can ensure that new work practises are 
carried out according to plan at OMO 
●
How the use of performance criteria can be used to ensure lasting change at 
OMO 
 
The thesis is presented in five sections: literature, methodology, data collection, 
discussion and conclusion. 
The thesis will mainly follow the transition project’s focus on retaining change and 
the efforts to follow up on the challenges after launch. This will create a frame to 
provide feedback to the clinics on areas and activities resulting from the transition 
project. 
9 
==PAGE:10==
The project plan can be seen as divided into the following phases: 
 
Figure 4. Pre- and post launch activities 
The thesis will also include the project’s activities related to the transition including 
“Educational course for new staff at NF”, “Moving to new facilities”, and “Creating risk 
log” (See Figure 5). These three project areas were already underway at the 
beginning of the thesis and were being overseen by 41 smaller projects. They will be 
discussed to create an understanding of how Rigshospitalet has approached the 
transition process.  
 
Figure 5. Planning project tracks (Godtsygehusbyggeri, 2020B) 
10 
==PAGE:11==
 
5 Literature 
5.1 How to define change 
Change is a series of interconnected events, decisions and actions. It is always 
happening as a result of factors such as interactions between people, institutions, 
politics, finance, resources, the interest of stakeholders and environmental change. 
Change can be curbed and affected by actions in order to achieve an end state that 
is more desirable to the institution (Hayes, 2014). A project can thereby appoint 
change managers to be in charge of facilitating and maintaining the change. 
According to Child and Keiser (1981) change is always happening within 
organizations and needs to be managed accordingly to ensure the organization 
constantly is moving in the right direction (Hayes, 2014).  
 
“.. change management is a crucial part of organisation growth and survival” 
(Kennedy 2004). Without it managers cannot accurately analyze how and when 
change may occur which may affect the further growth and success of the 
organization. “Therefore, there is a need for managers to have a means of planning, 
predicting and managing changes within their organisation” (Kennedy, 2004). 
 
There are many approaches to describing the dynamics of change and many 
theories of how and why change occurs, how it can be controlled, and how to ensure 
the right outcome from it. Van de Ven and Poole (1995) have created a framework of 
four process theories of change management. They are described as Life-cycle, 
Evolutionary, Teleological and Dialectical and each have a different understanding 
on the cause of change. 
 
The four process theories have different reasoning for how change is formulated and 
which strategy is used to carry out the change. A change project is often not driven 
by one single process theory, but rather includes several aspects from multiple 
11 
==PAGE:12==
theories. Being aware of how the theories can provide a more in depth analysis 
when combined than used individually, will allow for a greater interpretation of the 
many aspects that underlie the change process. “It is the interplay between different 
perspectives that helps one gain a more comprehensive understanding of 
organizational life, because any one theoretical perspective invariably offers only a 
particular account of a complex phenomenon” (Van de Ven and Poole, 1995). 
 
By analyzing how the hospital approaches the different tracks of the transition; 
Education of personnel, moving of facilities, and planning clinical procedures at OMO 
(see figure 5) we can evaluate the limitations of the change approach and give 
insight on how these could be improved. Some activities may best be implemented 
using incremental steps that need to be clear in advance, while others will have to 
remain uncertain for some time and may be less chronological. 
 
NF will bring many changes, both logistically and organizationally. There are entirely 
new facilities that the employees will have to get accustomed to as well as having 
new ways for the departments to collaborate together on patient care. 
Many factors go into how change is perceived and how people adjust to change, 
such as the level of inclusion people feel they have in the process and their 
perception of whether the change will be beneficial to them. Very often change 
projects are highly intensive at the start of a project but the efforts fade after time as 
other projects draw attention and resources. Creating an environment to ensure the 
change is long-lived is a common challenge for many change projects. 
Managing the change throughout the projects entirety can help overcome challenges 
during the change implementation and create change that is long-lasting. This is 
primarily done from the point of view of an overseeing project or change manager.  
 
When first starting to use new facilities and new workflows some adjustment might 
be needed to ensure the right trajectory of the overall change management plan is 
followed. Some aspects might not work as envisioned and unforeseen activities 
might arise. To overcome obstacles and facilitate a smooth transition, proper change 
management can be used to help guide the process and transition. 
12 
==PAGE:13==
5.2 Character of change 
There are two ways of viewing change; planned and emergent. Planned change is “a 
process that moves from one “fixed state” to another through a 
series of pre-planned steps” (Bamford, 2003). Hayes describes the work of people 
overseeing emergent change as “.. having to develop an implementation plan on the 
basis of broadly defined goals and a general direction for change.”  
The difference between these is the ability to plan the future steps in advance, where 
this is only possible in the planned change process. 
The emergent change process is also “..less dependent on detailed plans and 
projections than on reaching an actual understanding of the complexity of the issues 
involved and identifying the range of possible options” (Wilson, 1992). 
Planned change is easier to implement in a large scale organization than emergent 
change, since it allows for better alignment of the involved stakeholders and there 
can be a clearer communication between those executing the change and those 
whom it affects. Emergent change is more unpredictable and the change process 
needs to be facilitated more closely because each step is dependent on the outcome 
of the previous step. With an end state in mind the management team can rally 
personnel together and join them in common values expressed in the imagined work 
flow such as flexibility and openness at NF (Bamford, 2003). 
The emergent process also enables people to voice their concerns if they are 
unhappy with steps during the process. It is up to the management team to create a 
process where people feel heard and take their feedback into account to ensure the 
employees can handle the workflow and activities they are left in charge of. In this 
case the overseeing entity will be FA and other heads of the clinics. 
 
It is not every aspect that can be accounted for and planned in great detail when 
establishing a transition project such as the one at NF. The relocation, training of 
personnel, securing facilities, testing of workflow, ect. all have the possibility to 
uncover unforeseen circumstances. As mentioned previously, the project has been 
13 
==PAGE:14==
delayed several times due to “water damage, lack of manual workforce, and 
controversies with a contractor” (Pedersen, 2019). 
These side steps need to be addressed in order for the project to continue as 
planned, possibly with some delay.  
5.3 Improving change boundaries after launch 
To ensure that change is maintained it is important to put in measures to ensure it is 
sustained. Forbedringsafdelingen (FA) proposed in September 2019 a transition 
project for NF, together with the clinics management, which will help develop a 
performance criteria outlay for the different stages of the transition.  
 
When creating a change project, there are often goals which can either be abstract 
or concrete that can be listed for tracking the progression of a project to determine 
how far along the project is. 
The creation of these goals has an impact on the project as a whole from that point 
on and is therefore not a trivial task. It will steer the project in a described direction 
which can be a helpful tool from a project managers perspective. (Rolland, 1998) 
“It is often assumed that systems are constructed with some goals in mind. However, 
practical experience shows that goals are not given and therefore the question as to 
where they originate from acquires importance” (Rolland,1998). 
From having a main goal, the process of creating subgoals can help to delegate 
tasks to other people in order to synergise the project forwards. 
The number of goals that are created depends on the scale of the project and the 
resources that are given to the project. Creating too many goals can make it hard to 
follow through with each goal which will seem to be a failure for the project. Too few 
goals will introduce the risk of overseeing important areas that are core to the 
change project, which will be mismanaged as a consequence (Rolland,1998). 
5.4 Performance criteria of change 
Tracking change is important in order to evaluate how the change project is 
progressing. A method of understanding the pace and progress of change is to 
14 
==PAGE:15==
monitor the progress and collect data from the time the new building is initiated and 
until project management is satisfied and confident that the implementation of new 
work routines has been successful. This time period is often kept too short and 
victory is declared too soon: “..instead of declaring victory early on, change 
managers should use the credibility afforded by early wins to go on and modify some 
of the systems and structures that may be inconsistent with the transformation 
vision” (Kotter, 1995). 
Other theories agree that one of the most important areas of the change process is 
how the change project is finalized “Typically, the problems start early in the process: 
the urgency level is not intense enough, the guiding coalition is not powerful enough, 
and the vision is not clear enough. But it is the premature victory celebration that kills 
momentum. And then the powerful forces associated with tradition take over” (Kotter, 
1995). 
 
The process of forming performance criteria will allow the OMO as well as FA to 
explicitly share their concerns and special interest with regards to these activities 
and agreements that have been made. By formulating these criteria it will allow for 
greater consensus when intervention has to be made and who is responsible for 
carrying out this adjustment. 
The performance criteria is also an important tool for institutionalizing change in 
corporate culture, “.. a conscious attempt to show people how the new 
approaches, behaviors, and attitudes have helped improve performance” (Kotter, 
1995). 
Being able to use a performance criteria will allow change managers to decide what 
further action to take to ensure that change plan is kept on track, “It is essential that 
performance measures should be related to the outcomes that are important to key 
stakeholders and to the hypotheses about cause-and-effect relationships embedded 
in the change plan. Without the feedback that such measures can provide, change 
managers will be unable to monitor what is going on and determine what further 
action may be required to successfully implement the change plan” (Hayes, 2014) 
The performance criteria can thereby be seen as a main guideline and tool to 
determine if an activity needs adjusting. 
15 
==PAGE:16==
 
To ensure a good use of the performance criteria to plan interventions, it is important 
to evaluate how the departments go through the process of observing the activities 
and adjusting accordingly. 
5.5 Sustaining change 
Ensuring that change projects take lasting effect is an important topic in the field of 
change management. Often projects are short lived, even after experiencing 
successful implementations, Lewin (1951) refers to this “After a ‘shot in the arm’, life 
returns to the way it was before.” (Hayes, 2014). According to Lewin's’ three-stage 
process theory the final stage “refreezing” focuses on the importance of adjusting 
people's behaviour, work atmosphere and setting to continuously self-reinforce these 
factors further to maintain the new adopted practices. 
“Change is sustained when it becomes an integrated or mainstream way of working 
rather than something ‘added on’” (Hayes, 2014). 
 
Lewin (1951) has an additional point to the final stage “the final stage involves 
refreezing behaviour at this new level, for as long as it is beneficial to do so.” (Hayes, 
2014) 
Lewin argues that in some cases it may not be beneficial to continually pursue a 
change that has not yielded adequate results or created unanticipated 
consequences that are not compatible with the overall change plan.  
This clause, while having a valid point, opens up the discussion of whether or not a 
change process should be continued or not, based on different individuals 
experience within the change. Managers might have one opinion of the change while 
other staff members might have different experiences of the change and their belief 
of the benefit of the change might differ and might not agree to what extent the 
change is worth pursuing and spending resources on. 
It is therefore even more important that the people in charge of the change process 
continuously evaluate whether the change is worth pursuing, considering the 
implication from all layers. 
16 
==PAGE:17==
 
There are many different factors that go into retaining change, and different 
explanations as to why change projects relapse and are more or less rolled back 
after some time. Lewin (1951) has the following description of the behavior of people 
and culture for a sustaining change: “The behaviour of an individual, group or wider 
system is maintained in a condition of quasi-stationary equilibrium by a force-field 
comprising a balance of forces pushing for and resisting change. This level of 
behaviour can be changed by either adding forces for change in the desired direction 
or reducing the opposing or resisting forces” (Hayes, 2014) 
 
Hayes describes the process of goal creation as such: “It is essential that 
performance measures should be related to the outcomes that are important to the 
stakeholder achieving the goal and to the hypotheses about cause-and-effect 
relationships embedded in the change plan” (Hayes, 2014). 
Two things become evident from this quote. It is important to involve the perspective 
of people assigned to achieving the goal when creating it. If a goal is set for a target 
audience that they have no interest in or understanding of, it will be quite difficult 
later on to force them to keep this goal in mind when they are doing required tasks 
and planning activities to improve their workflow. 
 
The second take away from the previously mentioned quote from Hayes is to 
critically consider the cause-and-effect relationships that lay the basis for our 
understanding of how factors correlate. This is important to understand in order to 
either maintain the status quo or to understand opportunities for change. Examples 
of cause-and-effect relationships could be incentivizing people in order for them to 
adapt to a new workflow, reducing wait time for patients in order to achieve a higher 
level of patient satisfaction, making sure that employee frustration associated with 
adaptation to changes are being heard, and is seen to be taken seriously, in order 
for employees to feel valued and appreciated, which in turn will decrease the 
push-back the employees show the new changes. 
 
17 
==PAGE:18==
Hayes also states that goal creation should have a vision for the future, 
“Performance measures should be related to vision/long term goals” (Hayes, 2014). 
This is to ensure that there is a control over where the project is headed throughout 
the process and can help specify what culture you wish people to aspire to. It can be 
a way of planning the steps from a larger perspective so trying to ensure that the 
smaller tasks given to people add up and have a cumulative effects aligned with the 
larger, broader goal. 
5.5.1 Factors affecting longevity of change 
The approach of how a change project is initiated will affect the push/pull effect from 
people affected by the change process. Winning over people at the beginning will 
determine what culture you incentivise during the change process and what culture 
will prevail when the project inevitably will have less attention after it is deemed 
“completed” by management. If a negative attitude is adapted by some groups of the 
people affected by the change, this can be spread to other groups or individuals if 
they are exposed to the negative narrative of the change. This can make it more 
difficult to implement and facilitate change, because people will be resistant to 
change.  
As previously mentioned a factor that affects the longevity of change is that victory is 
declared too soon and managers move to other areas of importance. 
It is often necessary to follow up on a change process to ensure the change is 
permanent, before moving on to the next project. 
“To reinforce change, we need to monitor whether the change is being sustained or 
not. Who is logging in, following workflows and using the new software successfully” 
(Hiatt, 2006). The goal here is to reinforce the new habit, by showing how the 
change is having a positive effect and encouraging employees to continue enforcing 
the change. If barriers for the change occur, it is important to understand why they 
occur, in order to overcome them. 
18 
==PAGE:19==
5.6 ADKAR as a framework to facilitate change 
ADKAR is a goal-oriented change management model that is aimed at analyzing 
factors that go into creating change. It has a holistic approach to change and 
believes that in order for an organization to change it must be understood how 
change works on an individual level to be able to have an effect on the 
organizational level. ADKAR describes that change happens in two dimensions: the 
business aspect and the human aspect. Both of these will need to be managed in 
order for a successful implementation of change. 
The business side relates to identifying the need, defining the problem, designing the 
solution, and implementing the solution. 
The people side of change follow the steps named by the acronym ADKAR: 
Awareness, Desire, Knowledge, Ability and Reinforcement. 
This describes a chronological step-by-step process of informing people about 
change, encouraging them to partake in the change, giving them the knowledge they 
need to execute the change, giving the employees the ability and resources to 
implement the changes, and finally ensuring that the changes are sustained. 
5.7 Learning to improve change 
The ability to learn from data and be able to act upon this is part of a learning 
process.  
Hayes (2014) describes the act of learning and intervening to be either single-looped 
or double-looped. It is often more desirable to go through the double-looped learning 
process as it is possible to achieve a higher degree of reflection on the results, as 
ones actions may affected by own biases or preconceived assumptions. By being 
aware of one’s presumptions that form our understanding, it is possible to be critical 
of these and see if they are deemed valid in every case. This will lead to a better 
understanding of how to change the activity to obtain the desired results. 
19 
==PAGE:20==
 
Figure 6. Double-loop learning (Hayes, 2014) 
 
The key point in  double-loop learning is to ensure that the people responsible for 
converting learnings into new actions are aware of their biases. This will enable the 
change process to be objective and easier to implement.  
5.8 Theoretical approach to creating goals 
There are different ways of approaching the creation of goals to ensure that the 
feedback is given based on the information the clinic will need. All approaches will 
have advantages and drawbacks. 
One method that was considered during the creation of goals to analyze activities 
was using a goal attributed graph (Tanabe, 2008). The method involves creating a 
graphical representation of the goals and their subgoals that are needed to achieve 
the overall goal. The subgoals can further be divided into smaller tasks and so forth 
to get a collective overview of how all the subgoals relate to their parent goal. The 
subgoals could consist of requirements for numbers of surgeons, number of beds 
and surgery rooms, flow capacity, etc.  
 
20 
==PAGE:21==
 
Figure 7. Attributed Goal graph for creating goals and subgoals (Tanabe, 2008) 
 
The method allows for central intangible goals to be divided into more tangible goals 
in order to effectively create a change process. 
One consideration with this method is that it is uncertain whether the end-state 
solution is compatible with the surrounding factors that also affect the final solution. 
For example, if you only focus one goal when making each decision, this may 
negatively impact other areas. This final solution would perhaps increase the 
hospitals capacity by 10% for many types of surgeries, but might create incompatible 
environments for a few surgery types and need additional adjustments to achieve a 
satisfactory solution. 
5.8.1 Scenarios based goal modeling 
Another theoretical approach is to use a scenario based approach to identify 
requirements for the change process through goal modeling (Rolland, 1998). This 
involves creating a use scenario with relevant people in the change process; 
patients, staff, nurses, doctors, and orderlies, etc. This can be done through 
interviews where an understanding of the workflow can be modelled, and be a base 
for solution space.  
21 
==PAGE:22==
The process is able to provide insight into what their thoughts, frustrations and 
desires are for each scenario and the collective experiences from multiple individuals 
can be combined to design new ways of improving the use case.  
The method will also have an embedded bias which should be understood. The 
understanding and experiences of one person might be different from another 
person, even if they are aimed at the same issue. Factors such as a person's 
qualifications, stress caused by other tasks, level of engagement will all affect the 
way a person sees the issue at hand and the feedback or input they will provide 
through an interview. 
6 Methodology 
The thesis has been following the transition project of the NF at Rigshospitalet which 
as stated previously has been underway since 2015. The thesis was initiated when 
the transition project was in its final phase of preparing for the opening. The 
hospital’s transition project was to be overseen by a project group consisting of 5 
colleagues from different departments at RH. They had all been involved in the 
building project working with different aspects of the construction and could help 
create a framework for how to follow up on the activities at NF after launch. This 
follow up project was defined as the “transition project” for NF, to ensure that 
changes were effectful, and the transition would be smooth. This was the same 
frame chosen by the thesis.  
The project was downscaled to only focus on the operational functions of OMO after 
a disagreement of the initial project proposal. 
I have been a student worker at FA since 2017 working with patient safety and was 
asked to be involved in the hospitals transition project to help them decide how to 
ensure a successful transition to the new building. 
 
My work as a student has given me insight into the structure of the hospital, project 
execution, as well as employee satisfaction and frustration through other projects 
that I have been involved in. A particular project involving getting feedback from 
patients through a questionnaire posed several challenges that were relatable to the 
22 
==PAGE:23==
current thesis. This involved changing nurses’ attitude towards a project that very 
few had confidence in, getting them to understand the benefits of a project and how 
their investment in the project would help them improve their work flow. This has 
definitely given me perspective into how clinics can see new challenges, how the 
specific communication of change can affect people’s attitude towards a project and 
decrease resistance towards change. 
 
My time as a student at FA has also given me connections to employees at FA and 
allowed me to utilize these connections to further my understanding of the project 
areas. I have been able to discuss with them about the feasibility of my solution, that 
would otherwise not have been possible, if I had not been working at FA. 
6.1 Assessing project status 
A significant amount of time was initially spent getting an overview of the different 
project activities that were ongoing, since the project’s beginning in 2015. This was 
done through gathering materials from the internal drive, meeting summaries, project 
drafts, etc. (see appendix B2). Not everything was relevant for the project. 
 
The scale of the project made it difficult to assess the activities before the thesis 
started, as did the lack of one main report of the overall project status. These were 
split into multiple documents, some of which had not been updated for some time. 
The first period of the thesis included studying literature of general change 
management, that was more broad in its inclusion than change management at RH. 
These included such areas of change management within a business, having a 
mindset focused on profit earnings.  
It was only after having attended a few meetings with the project group and my 
project contact, that it became clear that the focus would be implementation of 
change and managing the change at Nordfløjen. 
 
23 
==PAGE:24==
Most of the data was gathered during interviews and meetings held with the project 
group members. Meeting summaries were conducted and translated based on the 
topics discussed at the meeting. 
An initial meeting was held with the project group to try and reach a common 
understanding of the project ahead. From this, Morten Finnemann, chief consultant 
at FA and head of the project, and I created a concrete project proposal to pitch to 
management. 
The project focus then pivoted to focus on OMO, where the initial focus was 
understanding the differences between the previous work routines of the clinics and 
the operation facilities compared to how the future OMO would function. 
 
The topics of the meetings were centered around what activities had been done and 
what news there was in a non-chronological structure. This made it difficult to get an 
overview of the overall progression of the transition project. An affinity diagram was 
made to get a sense of how the different activities were related to the overall 
transition project. 
6.2 Student worker bias 
The thesis, from its beginning, has been aligned with the hospital’s transition project. 
It has been focused on the objective and all results have been disclosed, regardless 
of how they reflected on the project. 
My previous work experience at RH has made me aware of issues regarding patient 
safety. This was also a point that was raised during the initial project pitch. The 
patient safety agenda is also clearly stated as a guideline for the transition project to 
NF. 
 
In the conflict between FA and the clinics that ultimately lead to the cancellation of 
the transition project, more could have been done to reach an understanding with the 
clinics. My own interpretation was that the clinics were at fault for not wanting the 
help of FA in the process of ensuring a smooth transition. 
24 
==PAGE:25==
Their dissatisfaction of being controlled by numbers and performance quotes meant 
they did not see the potential of how the project could benefit them. 
It has afterwards become more apparent, that the clinics were not against a 
transition project per se, but rather the method of how the follow up process was 
proposed consisting of measuring and adjusting continuously. This can distract  from 
focusing on the patients and their needs, which is a central value that the clinics 
prioritize. This is something that management could have addressed earlier on and 
found a compromise or a common goal for a transition project that would both 
appease management as well as the clinics. 
 
25 
==PAGE:26==
7 Data collection 
The change aspect for the transition project for NF can be viewed as a two-fold 
project. The first part focused on preparing to move from the main building at RH to 
NF. This part has been in progress for a year and has involved planning the facilities, 
specifying work procedures for the staff, and training personnel. This has been the 
main focus for the multiple groups of people. 
 
The second part of the transition project is ensuring that all of the new working 
procedures for running the hospital including time schedules, employee satisfaction 
and patient safety, are being upheld and that no factor is overlooked or forgotten.  
 
There are aspects that bridge these two parts, where adequately preparing for a 
large scale transition will more likely ensure that the desired outcome is reached 
when the new work tasks are taken into effect. These include training of personnel 
and cataloging every patient treatment  plan (B13) that their patients will be 
following. 
 
FA made the first proposal for the transition project, that focused on ensuring a 
systematic implementation, adjustment, and documentation of the changes to patient 
treatment and workflow that do not work as intended (B8).  
 
This suggestion was, however, rejected by the Board of Management, due to lack of 
resources for the project as well as a disagreement between the head of the clinics 
at NF and FA. This meant that the hospital would not facilitate a transition project, 
but instead manage this on an ad-hoc basis. This also meant that the scope of this 
thesis was modified to solely focus on the logistics and operations of OMO. The 
management of OMO were very interested in engaging in a transition project to 
ensure that their workflow would be functioning. 
 
26 
==PAGE:27==
A document entailing the previous activities of the construction of NF can be seen in 
B10. This document describes many of the logistical transitional activities, such as 
cleaning, beds, uniforms, mail, meals, meeting rooms, etc.  
 
A lot of work has been done within each of these topics as well as planning 
education for staff and creating a risk log. The risk log is a collection of risk 
assessments made by doctors and nurses collected during interviews held by the 
project group. It details what problems may occur in an area, the level of risk and 
how this risk will be addressed. See an example below in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. B9 Risk Log. Excerpt of risk log  
 
OMO will be a transclinical surgical ward overseeing almost all surgical practises in 
NF. Currently each ward is responsible for the surgery of their own patients and 
oversee all the tasks regarding pre-, during, and post-operation with little 
involvement of OMO. 
This will change in NF where each clinic will outsource all tasks regarding pre-, and 
during operation and the majority the post-op tasks to OMO. The clinics will therefore 
only be responsible for scheduling the surgery and handling further care if needed. 
This important change is visualized in the differences between Figure 9 (Surgical 
procedure at existing clinics) and Figure 10 below (Surgical procedure at OMO) that 
describes the pre-, during, and post-operative phases of a patient’s surgery.  
27 
==PAGE:28==
One of the biggest changes resulting from this is a more rigid and stepwise structure 
for the surgical time plan (see yellow section in Figure 10). All of the activities that 
are currently done on the “Day before surgery” (Figure 9) will be moved to “Pre op” 
that takes place on the same day as the surgery (Figure 10). There are also more 
steps involved in the check-in to the hospital, because OMO has more patients from 
different clinics. This accounts for the much larger portion of the activities scheduled 
before the operation in Figure 10 than on Figure 9. 
Thus, time management is especially important and is the basis for the final solution 
of a time management model, which is later described (B4). 
 
 
Figure 9. B5A. Current surgical procedure at clinics 
 
28 
==PAGE:29==
 
Figure 10. Excerpt of B5B. Future surgical procedure at OMO 
7.1 Affinity diagram 
An affinity diagram was created based on the interviews conducted throughout the 
thesis to present the different discussions and main points that had been made (See 
B2). The findings were compiled into nine different topics or areas of importance. 
The affinity diagram divides the project phases into envisioned, planned, executed 
and feedback, where the first three activities are viewed as being part of the 
pre-phase activities before the launch of NF and feedback includes the post-phase 
activities, after the launch of NF. This construct was made to be able to make it 
easier to analyze the different phases of the project with regards to a timeline. 
 
Many of the bullets contain open questions while some contain ideas for solutions to 
problems. The majority of open-ended questions reveals that the focus for many of 
the employees has been to collect information rather than provide solutions, 
suggesting that there may be a need for an improved chain of information between 
29 
==PAGE:30==
the groups of employees, that could communicate the progress of each group to a 
wider audience. 
 
Figure 11. Appendix B6. Categories from affinity diagram divided into phases of transition project 
7.2 Project planning tool 
The ADKAR change management model was selected to structure the transition 
project. One of the members of the project group introduced the tool and it was 
viewed as a solid framework for facilitating the transition project. 
The management tool has two main tracks for describing the change; business side 
and people side of change. From a business perspective, the new centralized OMO 
facility to handle operations, will allow for increasing the capacity for surgeries at NF 
and as previously mentioned correlates well with Sundhedskordinationsudvalgets 
vision for the future of Danish healthcare. 
The people side of change is the focus of the transition project and the following 
sections will in further detail describe the people side of change. Different activities 
have been done to increase the employees’ awareness and desire to participate in 
the coming change to NF. As an example, an introduction of NF was held for all 
employees who are moving to NF at the Arbejdsmiljødag in October 2019. The risk 
log is also an example of how employee involvement has been done in the project. 
30 
==PAGE:31==
7.3 Envision 
As mentioned previously, the project plan has been postponed several times due to 
water damage, lack of construction workers, plumbing, and other construction 
issues. Initially some parts of the new building were to be used in October 2019. It 
was later expected to be January 2020, then it was postponed to March 2020, and 
finally it has been postponed indefinitely, earliest July 2020. The frustration is clear in 
the following quote: “One must say that it is a very difficult process to build NF. In 
these types of cases a lot of time is spent fighting over, whose is at fault and I’m 
surprised that so many problems have arisen.” says Leila Lindén (S) Chair of the 
political group appointed to oversee the construction of NF. 
7.3.1 Centralizing and streamlining care 
This section will describe the activities that have been guiding for the bigger picture 
throughout the project. A main vision for NF has been to increase the surgical 
capacity by centralizing the surgical ward from multiple clinics to a single large scale 
facility. This has been with the aim of shortening the time from when the patient 
arrives to the hospital to when the patient is discharged. 
The decision to create a centralized operational clinic (OMO) has been a result of 
continuous medical advancement, that allows for surgeries to be done quicker and to 
have shared knowledge and expertise amongst the surgeons, which allows them to 
function more broadly in the surgical field. 
The amount of surgeries that have been performed as same-day surgeries has been 
increasing over the last few years, to the point where a centralized operational clinic 
can offer specialized care to both same-day as well as longer surgical procedures. 
The decision to create OMO comes as a resolution between a societal need to 
improve healthcare and hospital management creating a facility to handle this need. 
31 
==PAGE:32==
7.3.2 Physical layout of NF supports workflow 
At a conference attended by all the future employees of NF, the COO of RH 
Susanne Poulsen explained how the physical environment of the new building 
supports the envisioned new workflow in three areas (B2): 
●
Closeness​ - The building is constructed in a zigzag design which enables 
more specialties to be side by side and allows staff to travel between these 
without having to bother patients (See Figure 12). The operation facility and 
recovery area are also physically placed closely together to streamline the 
operation process. 
●
Standardization and flexibility​ - The rooms in NF have been designed so that 
they are usable as either a patient room or a patient/doctor consultation room 
and can be converted between these if needed. The long hallway of rooms 
also enables departments to “borrow” rooms from adjacent departments if 
they experience sudden increase in demand for capacity. 
●
Openness and availability​ - Almost all patient rooms are private one-person 
rooms. This allows patient privacy and space for visitors to come. The rooms 
allow lots of natural light for a better environment for the patient to recover in. 
 
 
Figure 12. NF with its zigzag structure (Godtsygehusbyggeri, 2020B) 
32 
==PAGE:33==
7.4 Planned 
As mentioned previously, the project plan was initially to have a wide transition 
project that would cover the activities and clinics moving to NF to help them 
transition to new work routines. The original scope would measure selected activities 
or processes in order to give valuable feedback to the different clinics on which parts 
were not performing as expected and how they could improve. As a result of 
organizational politics and lack of resources, the thesis instead continued with a 
scope focusing on OMOs transition to new work routines. 
7.4.1 Increasing the preparations for surgery at OMO 
As mentioned, NF was built to increase the capacity to treat people efficiently. As an 
example, OMO will have more operating room capacity than bed capacity, which 
means that an important part of their activity will be ensuring that patients are 
transferred quickly in and out of surgery. Many surgical treatments will be concluded 
within a couple of hours, which means that the patients will be admitted, have 
surgery performed, and be sent home the same day. 
 
Currently at RH, patients would show up the day before a surgery and be admitted to 
the hospital. They will have the necessary pre-exams taken as well as blood work to 
ensure they are cleared for surgery. This information is tracked in the procedurepas, 
which details all the necessary information of a patient’s surgical journey. Early next 
morning they would fast and be operated on. They would then be sent to the 
recovery rooms and afterwards back to the bed wards. They would stay there for a 
couple of days depending on the amount of recuperation required. 
 
At OMO at NF patients will show up fasting on the day of the surgery. They will get 
operated on and afterwards will be sent to the recovery rooms. Depending on their 
condition they are either sent home directly or spend a few days at the hospital ward 
to recuperate. 
 
33 
==PAGE:34==
The change means that a lot of preparation has to be done before a patient is 
admitted for the surgery. This includes blood work and other tests needed to clear a 
patient for surgery. These are all logged in the procedurepas. Currently each clinic 
has time to ensure these prerequisites are managed, when patients are admitted to 
the hospital the day before their surgery. This will not be possible when patients are 
operated on at OMO, because of the shorter time frame. Each clinic will still remain 
responsible for ensuring the procedurepas is managed before the surgery is to take 
place. This is usually done at the last outpatient visit before the surgery and can be 
done a couple of weeks in advance. 
This change requires the patient treatment plan to follow a rigid schedule and is less 
flexible than before. Each clinic will have less responsibility regarding the surgical 
procedure, but will be required to manage the overall treatment plan for the patient 
more strictly than before. 
7.4.2 Quantified risk log of concerns for transition 
There have been multiple workshops with all clinics to map out all of the work 
activities that could go wrong and where it would be expected, that they might fail. 
Every possibility has been evaluated of how likely it is to go wrong and how serious 
the flaw may be. The risk log is common for all of NF, but individual departments 
may have special risks regarding unique work activities or setups. All these have 
been described in a joint risk log for NF. The risk log allows for project planning and 
measuring progression for the project track regarding moving of facilities.  
 
During the initial meetings about a full scale transition project for the whole of NF the 
risk log was suggested to be used as a tracking checklist to build a feedback system 
upon. This was never realised since the transition project for NF was not accepted 
by the Board of Management. 
34 
==PAGE:35==
7.4.3 Training new personnel at NF 
An educational symposium was held on September 16th, 2019 where the curriculum 
of training had been decided on in order to prepare the future staff for the transition 
to the new facilities at NF. 
The main topic during the symposium was how to best proceed with the transition, 
but no major conclusion was reached among the participants as the method of 
professionally and strategically overseeing such a transition is difficult (B12). A 
paragraph from one of the participants taken from the meeting summary reads as 
follows: ​“It is still very unclear how a professional approach is used to handle a 
relocation without facing major difficulties”. 
The quote illustrates that the transition to NF is highly complex and the employees 
are not able to address this by doing “...as they have always done”.  
There was not mentioned a concise approach of how the general facilitation of the 
transition to NF should be planned. The educational training was described as 
including areas of patient inclusion. How this would be effectuated was to be 
determined at a later date. The area of focus was later explained by Pernille Olsbro, 
head nurse at Anesthesiology Department and the leading head nurse at OMO, as 
involving safety, medical practises, and a tour of the new facilities (B2).  
7.4.4 Ensuring appropriate information for patients 
One area of importance that was identified was the amount and character of 
information given to patients before and after their surgery. “Giving the patients the 
necessary information about what they need to be aware of before and after the 
surgery, giving them the right medicine and bandages to bring home, etc. are factors 
that will improve the recovery of the patient” Vibeke Lund, nurse at children's hospice 
Sankt Lucas. 
For surgical same-day procedures at OMO, there is a shorter timeframe for giving 
people the necessary information. It is important that the staff are aware that the 
patients they care for have a shorter contact with the hospital, than at other clinics 
and need to be given information within the time of their stay. 
35 
==PAGE:36==
 
7.4.5 Activities changed for OMO 
A model was developed to help understand the new practices at NF and OMO (B3).  
The entire process for monitoring the change, including: planning of activities, 
gathering of data, designing intervention and using best practices is described (B3) 
using the buffet activity as an example, which will be the main way of serving food to 
patients at NF.  
The model details how a performance measure can be used to track different 
activities, such as procedures, the reception, bed occupation, and patient safety, 
which are all important areas to manage during the transition and afterwards. The 
goal would be to track status and allow for adaptation or improving the activity based 
on feedback collected of the activity. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. B3 Buffet concept process 
 
The model was presented to Pernille Olsbro, head nurse at Anesthesiology 
Department and the leading head nurse at OMO and was well received as being 
helpful to understanding the changes. 
36 
==PAGE:37==
7.4.6 Concern for the flow of OMO 
Some clinics at NF expressed concern with the new practise of compressing the 
surgical plan for same day treatment. The employees at the Neurological 
Department expressed concern that they have to evaluate their patients prior to a 
surgery to assess the cognitive functionality of the patient prior to surgery. This is 
important in order to better assess their recovery and be able to safely discharge 
them from the hospital. However this would require the patient to come in to the 
hospital the day before and follow the old procedure path and take one bed day of 
the hospital's capacity.  
Other clinics have also expressed concerns with the patient flow at OMO due to 
reasons of patient safety and might have their patients follow the old schedule of 
having them arrive the day before a surgery to be processed.  
There exists a challenge to ensure that the clinics at NF feel comfortable having their 
patient’s surgery be performed at OMO. If problems should arise due to safety 
concerns or if clinics are uncomfortable with the new workflow, some may decide to 
regress to previous, slower work routines that they are more familiar with in order to 
alleviate their concern.  
7.5 Executed 
7.5.1 Hosted event by the administration to focus on the transition 
The Arbejdsmiljødag (Work Environment Day) is a yearly event held by FA. It is a 
day where multiple workshops are organized for 200+ doctors, nurses, and staff from 
RH. This year two Arbejdsmiljødag were held; one for all employees and one 
specifically for the employees moving to NF. The aim of the day was to prepare the 
employees for the transition to NF with four workshops focusing on;  
●
How to get accommodated to the new facilities 
●
How to deal with frustration and confusion 
●
Synergy and collaboration in the new NF 
●
Workflow and physical environment 
37 
==PAGE:38==
The workshops were held within the office spaces in NF and thus provided 
employees the first view of many of the new buildings and facilities.  
The workshops offered different accounts of how to ensure the wellbeing of 
employees during a major transition phase, as well as presenting typical concerns 
held by employees when major change is affecting their work routines. 
The employees were informed that FA could help mediate problems that may arise 
post-launch of NF. FA has a unit that functions as a mediator for conflict resolution 
for clinics. 
 
The workshop also presented specific actions that could be taken by management 
as well as employees to try and tackle the issues that might arise from the transition, 
such as: 
●
Open communication between management and employees about decisions 
and progress. 
●
Ensuring employees directly affected by change have the option to voice their 
concerns as well as having some sort of influence on the change. 
●
Ensuring that new working relations are supported by local management and 
that employees engage openly towards new work environments. 
38 
==PAGE:39==
 
Figure 14. Workshop at NF on Arbejdsmiljødagen about the physical work environment 
 
A full summary of the attended workshops can be found in (B2). 
 
Together with the invitation to the workshops people were asked to provide feedback 
about their primary concerns regarding the transition. These have been compiled in 
B7.  
Many of these concerns have to do with logistics and facilities, how the personnel 
will learn where all equipment is located, how the new joint offices will promote or 
hinder work efforts, etc.  
39 
==PAGE:40==
 
Figure 15. New medical facilities at NF (Godtsygehusbyggeri, 2020B). 
 
The following quote highlights some of the frustrations from not being able to affect 
the change that is being decided from a central position in the organization: 
“I’m not concerned per say. But there are some difficulties in getting everyone on 
board with the changes and not resistant to them. There have been some central 
decisions that don’t necessarily make sense for our small clinics. Not all decisions 
make sense but are made based on the bigger picture.” ​(B7) 
The following quote elaborates and describes the frustration of not being heard and 
having influence in the decision making process: 
“​Our working processes are being changed. Not because we want them changed, 
but because we are not asked how we would like it to be. The staff is frustrated that 
other people get to decide work routines that affect people. It creates a very negative 
attitude. It’s a very sore subject in our department​” (B7). 
The importance of feeling heard as an employee in the change process is 
emphasized by Allen (2007): 
“.. when organizational members feel they have been treated with respect and dealt 
with fairly, even if they are unhappy with the consequences of a decision, they will be 
less likely to engage in dysfunctional behaviours” (Allen, 2007). 
 
40 
==PAGE:41==
The issues brought forth from the workshop regarding dissatisfaction with the 
change process should be addressed during the later training courses held or should 
otherwise be addressed to ensure that employees feel comfortable with the change.  
There does not, however, appear to have been dedicated resources to ensure that 
the learnings are brought forward from these collectively gathered interviews to later 
activities that are scheduled. 
 
A quote from the workshop at first seems to show the uncertainty of the change 
process: ​“Will someone ensure that we all learn where the different things are?”​ (B7). 
The AKDAR model sees this as an example of people understanding the need for 
change and accepting it, and furthermore focusing on understanding the change. 
There is therefore evidence that some groups of people are more accepting of the 
change process that lies ahead. 
7.6 Feedback 
7.6.1 Overview of activities at NF 
An initial project meeting was held with Morten Finneman, chief consultant at FA, to 
get an overview of areas where new work routines and facilities would create 
environments or situations that might need adjustment after a period of transition. 
The adjustment would happen if areas were not functioning optimally. An extraction 
of this model can be seen here (B1). 
 
Area 
Agreement made / 
Detailed work description  Success Criteria 
How is data obtained? 
Outpatient 
There has been made an 
agreement on waiting times Delays must be x min long 
SP 
Buffet 
concept 
All patients must be able to 
get food 
100% of patients need to be 
asked if they want food 
Checkmark list 
Figure 16. Excerpt from B1 Detailed list over activities at NF to possibly track 
 
41 
==PAGE:42==
The list was made as part of the pitch to management how the transition project for 
NF would engage in different areas to help adjust factors and environments that 
were not running optimally. A suggestion was also made to combine the risk log 
together with the feedback system to ensure that the areas or work practises that 
had been expected to be difficult to manage would be monitored. One of the areas 
needing to be monitored could be the buffet concept (B3).  
 
As mentioned previously, it was seen as an overstep for FA to be involved in the 
process of correcting the activities not fulfilling their purpose as this was deemed a 
task strictly for the clinics and the staff at NF. 
FA was therefore only expected by the clinics to  be involved in setting the 
framework and standards for what activities could be measured to achieve insight 
into the transition progress, and not be involved in the task of management. 
7.6.2 Phasing of capacity at NF 
OMO will not run at full capacity at launch. This is to allow the involved employees to 
get used to the new routines and ensuring that the work is understood. 
The clinics and management hold different expectations of how quickly the activities 
and surgeries will reach full capacity. The common consensus held by Susanne 
Poulsen, COO at RH is that capacity will start at 50% at launch and within 5 days, 
will incrementally be raised to 100%. 
 
During the period with lower capacity, the surgical schedule will prioritise treating 
more critical patients first. The patients will be operated on by the specialists within 
the different fields. The phasing of capacity will also result in some surgeons to not 
be doing surgeries during this period of low capacity. 
7.6.3 Choosing feedback mechanisms for selected activities  
The success criteria for different areas were discussed in minor details at the initial 
project meeting held September 30th, 2019 (See appendix B2). The focus of the 
meeting was sharing ideas of how to obtain data and making areas of importance 
42 
==PAGE:43==
quantifiable in order to make a status. A full list of these were described in appendix 
B1. 
 
There are different sources from where these results can be gathered from. There 
are available data sources such as Sundhedsplatformen (SP) and Dansk 
Patientsikkerheds Database, where quantitative data of areas such as bed 
occupancy and number of incidents regarding patient safety can be obtained. Other 
sources of data are not readily available, but could be gathered in the form of 
questionnaires for patients or be generated by observing behaviour in the 
departments. These could be useful for tracking ease of wayfinding as well as more 
in depth patient experiences. 
 
There are many activities that could be of interest to track progression of a part of 
the project group’s task to decide which activities should be monitored. These 
activities include ; Buffet concept, procedurepas, OMO, reception, patient safety, etc. 
All these activities are unique and have different levels of complexity and each are 
seen as having different concerns for their function. The performance indicators will 
help the different departments acknowledge which areas need additional resources 
or need adjustment for fulfilling the intended purpose. A proposal for intervention 
practices for different activities will also be formulated by the project group together 
with the hospital center management, to ensure that the learnings for how the 
departments handle the problems are shared internally to form best practices.  
 
Choosing which areas to focus on for creating a feedback mechanism can be 
approached in two ways. One is to decide which areas are of utmost importance, 
which could be established using the risk log. After choosing which activities to 
monitor, a specification can be done on which data collection approach would be 
best suited; data from SP, random sampling, interviews with employees or patients, 
or with checkmarking activity. This approach will ensure that the most important 
areas are monitored after launch and ensure feedback is given to help improve 
operations. 
43 
==PAGE:44==
Another approach is to decide which information sources are appropriate to use with 
regards to cost efficiency. Some data sources require little or no additional input to 
be collected, such as data from SP. These can be continuously utilized throughout 
future operations and will be a solid basis for further data feedback. 
Other data sources require human observation to gather, such as sampling or 
checkmarking, and are more appropriate for short, intensive surveys needed for 
specific interventions. These will cut into operations cost unless the cost is allocated 
to a separate unit overseeing the status check. 
 
To adequately tailor the transition project to the resources it was allocated, it would 
have been better to have the availability of data weigh greater as a factor, than 
ensuring the activities themselves were to be tracked. An initial exploration of which 
data resources were readily available and how much this data would cover, could 
have been done in order for management to get the proper overview of the 
progression status with the resources available. 
7.6.4 Planning the procedures 
The management at OMO has spent several months formulating the descriptions for 
the same day surgical procedures for the envisioned NF (B11, B13). 
 
 
Figure 17. B11 Patient journey for surgical practise, pre-, during, and post-op 
 
44 
==PAGE:45==
Since 2016 when the procedures started to be formulated these procedures have 
been through several iterations where they have become more detailed as the 
surrounding aspects of the activities have been established. The future management 
of OMO invited all six of the clinical specialists to discuss which of their patients are 
currently undergoing a surgical same day procedure, which of their patients are 
suitable for same day procedures and which are not suitable. 
This was an attempt to get an overview of all the surgical procedures totaling 32 as 
well as having each step of the individual surgical procedure noted down to minor 
details. Four of these can be seen in (B11). This enabled planning of what OMO 
needed to be capable of. 
7.6.5 Training for surgery at OMO 
Employees have since December 3rd, 2019 begun training to get accustomed to the 
new procedure at OMO. 
There are very few options to test out the envisioned work schedules and processes 
that have been planned for OMO. There exists some uncertainty that OMO can live 
up to the standards that are prescribed for them, and is why the management 
overseeing activities at OMO are focused on setting up a feedback system to provide 
detailed information of the transition. 
7.6.6 Time management model for OMO 
A model was made based on the needs discussed with Pernille Olsbro, head nurse 
at Anesthesiology Department, and used to understand the patient flow from the 
specific patient journeys to formulate a time management model for OMO (B71). 
The model details the prescribed patient journey for same-day surgery patients, with 
each important step noted and marked whether or not it is logged in SP or not.  
The goal was to describe how the patient flow could be measured using data from 
SP in order to create a system that would allow OMO to obtain helpful information 
about their own operation. 
The solution took into account the following factors: 
45 
==PAGE:46==
●
The departments do not have specific resources allocated to run internal meta 
review of their daily operations. A report from SP would be an automatic 
report generated by the loggings of activities in SP. 
●
Time management is a crucial factor for OMO to function at full capacity. 
Without it OMO will not be able to operate as desired and will have to cancel 
surgeries, creating a backlog. 
7.6.7 Issues building SP rapport 
The proposed model (B4) was validated by an SP-expert from FA, who said that 
building the SP report is most likely feasible, but will take some time to complete due 
to the technical complexity of the databases that are used for collecting data. Three 
databases are used in this process: Clarity is the database where all the data from 
the SP lands initially. The data is then converted and is then layered on a different 
database called Chronicles which serves as an online archive. Lastly the database 
Caboodle converts the data to a format that is easier to understand and is used to 
report the data. An umbrella term for these data platform structures is Cogito. 
Finally there is an SAP-interface WEB-i, which is an interface that employees at FA 
use to easier build reports to send in-house to the different clinics.  
Some of the time stamps may already be noted in SP and some may need to be 
added to the work routines of the employees.  
 
46 
==PAGE:47==
 
Figure 18. B4 Time management model 
In order to complete the SP report it will be necessary to talk to the heads of the 
departments running OMO. The process may not be known by one single individual 
and it may be necessary to talk to multiple clinicians, nurses and other people 
involved in each step in order to get a full understanding of what data is collected 
now and how it is noted to be able to work together with people from FA to build the 
final SP report. “It doesn’t have to take a long time to build the report, since most of 
the structures may exist. But we might have to build it from the ground up, and that 
may take some time” Esben ​Sidelmann Tvergaard, FA. 
 
The hospital’s ability to efficiently treat patients with cancer is of high concern 
politically and there has been much focus internally at the hospital to ensure the time 
frame from when a patient is diagnosed with cancer, to when the patient is offered a 
treatment plan, when they will receive their first treatment session as well as other 
steps of the treatment plan. There has been an ongoing project in FA to attempt to 
conduct a similar time frame analysis of cancer patients to ensure that these time 
frames are kept. This process has proven somewhat difficult because a lot of 
groundwork had to be done in order for FA to even be able to get solid, reliable data. 
47 
==PAGE:48==
“We have spent three quarters of a year working with nurses and clinicians to be 
able to build a good base for gathering data.” Camilla Gjedsted Fabricius, 
Implementation coordinator at FA. 
 
The tasks of creating the SP model based on the platforms infrastructure and the 
changes to the staff’s work routines were therefore not manageable before the 
deadline of the thesis and a recommendation of how to proceed in these areas has 
been given to FA and OMO later in the thesis. 
 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:49==
8 Discussion 
8.0.1 ADKAR project succession 
The framework that the ADKAR model presents for goal-oriented change can be 
used throughout a transition project. The model helps change managers understand 
the dynamics for implementing a change by planning for activities before, during, and 
after a change project is introduced and implemented. 
Morten Finnemann, chief consultant at FA on the ADKAR model, “The model is very 
relevant for such a transition project and could have helped similar projects such as 
the transition in Århus to complete a successful transition. They experienced that 
people were unsure of their professional competencies which could have been 
addressed and understood by engaging more with the employees”.  
By using such an approach, less resistance can be expected by the employees 
affected by the change, which is a key factor in successful, long lasting change.  
The framework can be used as a tool for other change projects, such as the future 
building “BørneRiget”. The project is expected to run from 2019-2025, so it would be 
possible to plan and manage the change from the very beginning of the construction. 
 
The ADKAR analysis was able to describe how employees' attitudes towards change 
was positive with regards to the change process even though it appeared as a 
concern ​“Will someone ensure that we all learn where the different things are?”​ (B7). 
The employee is concerned with whether they will be able to learn the new work 
practises, which reveals that they are not stuck being concerned with the change 
being redundant or a hindrance for them. This information will be useful for 
managers to be able to understand what state that employees are at with regards to 
the five step process of ADKAR. It will then enable the managers to create the 
appropriate next steps to further engage the employees and implement the change. 
 
The overall project of relocating to NF has followed the prescribed steps of action 
according to ADKAR to a high degree; ensuring to inform the employees of the 
49 
==PAGE:50==
change process, by inviting to a conference of NF, and to allow them to voice their 
concerns about the change. This will help the employees to understand the new 
processes and training will be more effective. 
 
The ability to maintain change processes will be evident after the launch of NF. The 
possibility of reverting to old habits will most likely happen in clinics who have 
concerns about their patients in the new patient flow, and might opt to have their 
patients follow the older schedule, thus not fulfilling the same-day surgery procedure. 
The primary concern will be if OMO has the ability to sustain the change, not 
because they will revert to old habits since the new procedures are much embedded 
into the new facilities, but because it will impact the patient flow and yield lower 
results than expected. 
8.0.2 Framework comparison of ADKAR and Lewin 
Lewin's three stage process can be compared to ADKARs progression model as 
they both can be seen as frameworks for managing change. Both have a view of 
change happening in chronological order, where necessary steps are needed to be 
addressed before subsequent actions can be taken. The three major steps: raising 
awareness of the need to change, the actual change related activities, and lastly, the 
need to freeze or provide reinforcements to hold on to change are similar for the two 
frameworks. 
The ADKAR framework seems to be more pragmatically oriented and is well suited 
for change managers to engage in the change process, by providing useful tools. 
Lewin’s approach seems to be more focused on a theoretical literature analysis of 
change. The approach to change management from FAs point of view has been 
focused on planning the different activities, such as the buffet concept. These 
activities involve patients and humans as factors, which are important to manage but 
have not had explicit focus. The change focus has been on the logistics of the 
activities and how they affect the surrounding system. This is evident from the 
description of the activities (B10) that focus on the agreements and the changes to 
activities.  
50 
==PAGE:51==
Based on this, the ADKAR framework seems to be well suited for facilitating future 
change projects at RH. It is both a framework for understanding the factors that 
affect change as well as a tool for managers to use to facilitate the change.  
8.1 Envision 
8.1.1 Linear change and non linear change 
The transition project to NF can largely be seen as a project guided by life-cycle 
process theory. Many aspects of the logistical change is stage-gate oriented and 
sequenced accordingly, since previous steps need to be accomplished before the 
following steps can be done. This is true especially for the activities regarding 
moving to new facilities. 
The physical environment needs to be built before you can start to install interior and 
IT, which at that point you can test the facilities thoroughly and finally you can move 
patients to the building and start to run functionally. Skipping steps here will either 
not be possible or will lead to safety issues for patients and employees and will be 
easier to deal with, if it had been addressed earlier. 
One of the causes of change is the growing level of medical advancement, that 
always increases the degree of patient care that can be provided for patients. 
Another is the steady growing number of patients that forces the capacity to equally 
expand to provide care for the patients. These causes can be viewed much like 
continuous organic growth which the life-cycle change process views as explanation 
for change. 
 
The activities regarding specifying the work flow at OMO can be seen as following a 
dialectical process theory, where the end goal has been to have adequate capacity 
for surgeries and keeping the time flow. The steps however to achieve these are not 
known in advance, and will need to be evaluated once OMO is running and handling 
surgeries. There is not a stepwise plan to achieve the results needed, but rather an 
idea of an end state in mind, and it is up to the management of OMO to reach these 
results. 
51 
==PAGE:52==
 
The difference in approach explains how the physical layout dictates how the 
appropriate work flow can be planned accordingly, “The physical boundaries are 
designed long before you start to develop the clinical work procedures - things 
change” (Godtsygehusbyggeri, 2020B). 
 
A linear change process can be planned out in advance to a high degree, while 
dialectical change is more flexible in its facilitation. The ability to view different areas 
of the transition according to theory allows for better understanding of the underlying 
process, and how a plan of action can be created (Van de Ven and Pool, 1995). 
8.1.2 Patient care values of NF 
The intended values that were transcribed to NF are examples of implementation of 
a blueprint change where the desired end state is known in advance (Hayes, 2014). 
The physical layout of the building has been tailored to support the change to how 
the facilities will work and helps to transition the staff to new working procedures. 
There is a set of envisioned values, including closeness of medical specialties, 
standardization of hospital rooms to accomodate flexibility and patient privacy. There 
seems to be a coherence between the envisioned values of NF and the underlying 
principles for designing the facilities. It also details how there has been a determining 
vision throughout the project with regards to the physical layout of NF. 
 
The process is low in terms of flexibility because of the massive planning that goes 
into executing such a project of this scale. Unforeseen circumstances will lead to 
delays that create even further push back of other events since the track is set and 
must be followed. This could explain why the timeline for the initiation of NF was 
pushed back several times during the project. 
The necessity of having a due process with a linear plan for the project management 
is in most cases not replaceable with a more agile approach. To do this you would 
need to employ many more project managers overseeing the incremental changes 
done and will increase the cost of executing a project of this scale. 
52 
==PAGE:53==
8.1.3 Limitations to attributed goal graph 
Limitations in using a goal graph include the fact that the description of the goals 
must be very detailed, reducing flexibility for goals that are not compatible with the 
largely binary view of goals that the model prescribes. For a complex matter such as 
“patient safety”, there are many factors that go into creating an atmosphere focusing 
on improving patient safety such as, increasing time of patient/staff consultation to 
limit errors, proper training of staff with regards to equipment and layout of hospital 
floor, ensuring the documentation of errors, when they occur, so staff can learn from 
mistakes. 
Many of these goals are difficult to describe in a binary value, for example whether 
they have been accomplished or not, since many of them vary to different degrees. 
Each goal would have to be assigned a level of when it had been achieved, which in 
some cases would be a hard task to track.  
In the example of increasing patient safety through recording errors, it is an ongoing 
task to get employees to report such incidents. It is almost impossible to track the 
actual amount of cases, as some go undocumented. Setting a target number of 
cases to be reported in order to achieve the target goal is therefore meaningless, as 
this is not specific enough. It might be that one department has many errors and 
therefore reports many cases, which then seems like they are achieving high scores, 
whereas other departments might have low levels of reporting and subsequently 
report fewer cases. It may therefore not make sense to compare two clinics' number 
of cases with each other to determine their level of action taken in patient safety. 
 
For the time management model (B4) it was evident, that time was a key factor for 
OMO, so the model was based around this fact and optimized the flow according to 
time management. 
The method of using the AND-OR graph, however, has some clear limitations for this 
thesis in the sense of its method restricting the goal creation process in its rigidness. 
The method and accompanying model was therefore not explicitly used in the thesis. 
The base idea of achieving a main goal was shared with the approach used to create 
a model for analysing patient flow in OMO (B4). 
53 
==PAGE:54==
8.1.4 Theoretical analysis of activities that were performed before the 
start of the project 
Applying theory to activities that had been performed before the start of the project 
was difficult. The activities that have taken place before the start of the thesis have 
detailed the outcome of the activities, but had little to no description of the underlying 
processes of the choices. Some activities did include details about their process 
such as the educational symposium, which concluded that there was not a golden 
standard for facilitating such a complicated project. Other activities such as those 
described in B10 only include what the decisions made have been.  
 
The document entails the following service concepts within the following 
areas, with regarding to prerequisites, other dependencies, internal 
interfaces, risks and economical consequences: 
1. Cleaning 
2. Mattresses and beds 
3. Uniforms, ID-badges and wardrobes 
4. Mail and tests 
5. Food and drinks for patients 
6. Cafe in the vestibule 
7. Meeting rooms 
Figure 19. Excerpt from B10. 
 
Although these activities that were decided prior to the start of the thesis are not the 
primary focus for the thesis, it was still deemed relevant as they could help enlighten 
the approach to change directed by the hospital. 
With regards to this, there appears to have been attempts to define a framework for 
facilitating the change process, but it would not appear that one framework was 
found to satisfy the process. 
 
54 
==PAGE:55==
The focus of the training program correlates with the ADKAR frameworks aim, 
specifically the two steps K (Knowledge) and A (Ability). By giving people the 
knowledge of the change and giving people the ability to manage the new facilities 
and work within new routines. 
The ADKAR framework could perhaps have helped the process of creating a 
educational program based on the change management perspective in a general 
sense, but would not have been able to offer insight into the specific learnings that 
they would need to educate the future staff. 
8.1.5 Affect on healthcare in municipality 
The major change is that OMO will send patients home earlier than before and give 
the responsibility of physical therapy to the responsible municipality. This extra task 
does not come with additional resources and this development may cause problems, 
where the focus of the hospital will be to get patients in to the hospital, deliver 
increasingly specialized care and send the patients home as soon as possible.  
This debate is covered in the radio show “Orientering” on P1: “We need to have a 
dialogue between the regions and the hospitals of how to solve the growing 
challenge of care in the municipality” Jacob Bundsgaard, head of national 
association of municipalities (Kommunernes Landsforening). 
 
Jakob Kjellberg, professor of health economics recounts on the issue, “The 
development of having shorter hospital stays has been going on for many years now, 
and is not only before and after Supersygehusene. Hospitals have less capacity and 
the turnover of the beds are expected to be higher, which in turn means that parts of 
the patient care is outsourced to the different municipalities. There is clinical 
evidence that patients do not recover well being in the hospital lying still in a bed for 
days following their operation. Patients should receive specialized care at the 
hospital and then be sent home to focus on recovering.” 
 
There needs to be a close collaboration and negotiation of how patients are cared for 
at the hospitals and when they are discharged to their municipalities. It is necessary 
55 
==PAGE:56==
to determine a fair resource allocation for patient care and to ensure that care of the 
patient is not neglected by the system. 
8.2 Planned 
8.2.1 Flexible implementation of OMO 
The different areas of the transition project related to education of staff, moving and 
transferring facilities, and planning clinical procedures are different in characteristic 
of how they can be implemented. It seems apparent that the educational track and 
moving track of the project have mostly a linear procession plan to follow in order to 
ensure a successful transition. “Education” needs to be stepwise, but not necessarily 
in a certain order. There needs to be a basis for the employees to understand the 
magnitude of change and prepare them for the training. The different medical 
training does not seem to be conducted in a particular order. 
“Moving of facilities” involves activities that require a chronological and planned 
execution in order to function properly. Of course certain activities can be performed 
in parallel, while ensuring that areas such as patient safety are taken into 
consideration. As example, the equipment needs to be in place and functioning, 
before patients are moved.  
 
The planning of the clinical procedures needs to have a more flexible implementation 
and needs to be prepared to change after the opening of NF. A change to one clinic 
can affect how their patients are funneled through OMO, and they will need to be 
prepared to encounter changes even after launch. 
 
If the plan for treatment is slightly changed at the clinics, this will also affect OMO, so 
they need to adapt their own practise to these changes of the clinic. 
This also emphasises the need for OMO to be aware of their own operational 
activities, if there are bottlenecks that need to be addressed, if communication is 
flowing as expected, etc. This will most likely require a specific effort to conduct such 
56 
==PAGE:57==
a meta review of the flows at OMO. This underlines the validity and need for such a 
transition project and solution that is proposed in the thesis. 
8.2.2 Ensuring clinics be involved in transition 
The transition project was closed down due to an internal difference in opinion of 
which processes the overseeing entity (FA) should be involved in. 
The initial project proposal involved various processes at NF, that were to be 
measured quantitatively in order to assess how the transition process was 
developing. After learning this, the clinics pushed back and halted the further 
development of the project. It was seen as an overstep by FA to be involved in 
practises, that have traditionally been overseen by the medical clinics themselves.  
 
The misalignment between clinics and management may have been caused by a 
misconception of the cost of the project.  
The method for gathering information to provide feedback was not decided upon, as 
to whether it should be automated (e.g. SP data) or very labor intensive (e.g. 
observations). This may have caused concern for the clinics as they already felt 
pressured to adapt to the changes, and conducting internal reviews would be too 
overwhelming. Thus, it would end up being a burden rather than an asset. 
 
It was also apparent that the clinics felt, that FA were getting involved in areas that 
were outside of their expertise and may have caused concern, that they would not be 
able to work efficiently together to improve activities based on the difference in 
approach; the clinics having a focus on the individual patient experience, while FA 
may be focused on compiling data to improve operations.  
This may have been avoided, if these differences were addressed initially at the 
onset of the project and areas of focus had been delegated. A compromise or 
understanding may have been reached between the groups and a full scale 
transition project may have been agreed upon. 
 
Additionally, more effort could have been made to ensure that the clinics’ interests 
were explicitly stated at the beginning of the project work to ensure they remained 
57 
==PAGE:58==
engaged in the process. More work could have been done to detail, what areas the 
clinics were focused on and ensuring the transition project incorporated these. 
8.2.3 Engaging OMO in transition project 
It was decided to rescope the thesis to focus on the activities of the new OMO. This 
ensured a continuous coherence between the work I was involved in and has 
retained the interest of the thesis as well as that of OMO. This had created a basis 
for a meaningful feedback project, aimed at improving the activities at OMO after 
launch. 
 
The scoping to OMO also meant a more concise focus of the project as well as more 
detailed final solution to be provided to OMO. 
It was also possible to map out in greater detail the activities at OMO (B4), that 
would not otherwise have been possible to achieve if all activities at NF had to be 
considered.  
This provided for better navigation of the processes since the focus was narrower. It 
also made it easier to investigate a solution space and tailor a solution to fit the 
requirement. 
8.2.4 Missing link between risk log and activities 
The risk log has not been formally used in the feedback setup for OMO. 
One reason for this is the general character in which the log has been formulated. It 
describes very widely the different activities that may go wrong. OMO has received 
a clear description of what they need to do to improve their operations, which 
included a time overview of their patient flow. 
 
There have been no observed links between the risk log done by the project group 
and how the construction of NF has changed or taken special precaution to an area, 
highlighted as a potential risk. This may be because the risk log is a tool used 
primarily by the project track associated with moving of facilities. 
58 
==PAGE:59==
There is a likelihood that this learning will be overlooked, because there are no 
dedicated resources to follow up on these and no one is directly responsible for the 
issues. 
8.2.5 Training of personnel 
There was a weak opportunity for the thesis work to influence the further direction of 
the training curriculum or scheduled activities. These had been in planning since 
before the thesis started. The project therefore did not focus on training of personnel, 
and it was kept at the theoretical level. 
 
The process for the training of personnel could be seen as having elements of both 
emergent change as well as blueprint change. The main steps of the process; trying 
to plan the training with a symposium, to hold these training courses and to know 
how the specific end goal for patient care should be, can be viewed as planned 
change steps. The education planning committee is able to prepare in advance for 
the next step, which enables them to create a timeframe for the transition. 
However, the education planning committee has not had a specific approach to how 
to go from one step to the next, but are aware that things will not be handled the 
same way they are done now. 
 
59 
==PAGE:60==
Figure 20. Extract of educational activities for employees 
The change in the way the staff delivers information to patients was identified as an 
important area. “People very easily become critical about things, they are unsatisfied 
with and may feel that are part of a conveyor belt that exists only to save the hospital 
money. If patients feel safe about their treatment plan, they are less likely to be 
readmitted at other clinics in need of further care” (Vibeke Lund, nurse at children 
hospice). 
It is important that patients feel taken care of and one way is to acknowledge their 
needs and tailor the information given to them. 
In order to do this, OMO needs to be very precise at giving patients the necessary 
information, since their patients may only spend a short time at the hospital. 
An example of this could be for a patient, who has a very active lifestyle, who is 
interested in knowing, when they will be able  to perform physical activities again. 
The nurse can select the relevant information to give to the patient, in order for them 
to feel empathized and feel like they are being heard and well taken care of.  
 
This change needs to be apparent for the staff of OMO and should be included in the 
training course, they complete. “If patients feel safe about their treatment plan, they 
are less likely to be readmitted at other clinics in need of further care” (Vibeke Lund, 
nurse at children's hospice Sankt Lucas. 
8.2.6 Further change of surgical plans based on risk log 
Some aspects are not as linear in their development. There might be an end goal in 
mind, but the road to its succession may not be known. To develop the specific 
workflow for NF and OMO, there had to be designed new workflow and patient 
journey to achieve the envisioned “one-day surgical” practise of performing surgery 
on patients and being able to safely discharge them the same day. To design these 
new workflows, several workshops were held prior to this thesis with the focus of 
highlighting dangerous fringe scenarios, where special attention had to be made to 
an area of concern. These findings were catalogued in a risk log compiling all 
concerns for every aspect of the changes. 
60 
==PAGE:61==
These findings can have an impact on the designed workflow for OMO and the 
clinics. It may result in further changes to the workflow and patient journey to resolve 
the unresolved issues. Some of these issues might not be possible to foresee but 
might need testing to show if they are plausible. 
8.2.7 Special cases for patients at OMO 
Some patients may require prerequisite treatment before a surgery and might not fit 
into the planned course at OMO. Other patients, for example some neurological 
patients may need to be evaluated before a surgery in order to be able to conclude 
the effect of the surgery, which is not directly compatible with the proposed model for 
handling surgeries and will require additional planning pre-op to manage. 
 
These concerns affect how the entire workflow and patient journey at OMO are 
effectuated. Some aspects of the change can be difficult to maintain full control over 
and may have to be adjusted depending on how the performance indication is shown 
to be. The iterative process of being able to adjust certain aspects within a change 
plan allows for a better solution ultimately, when dealing with change factors that 
may have unforeseen consequences or limiting factors.  
8.3 Executed 
8.3.1 Insights from workshops  
The affinity diagram contains the category “Ensuring successful transition and good 
work environment for employees”. These have all been gathered during the 
workshop focusing on the wellbeing of the work environment for employees.  
The transition affects many people moving to NF and could have been better utilized 
during discussions, including which parameters to focus on and measure 
post-launch of NF and OMO. 
 
61 
==PAGE:62==
The notion that the changes and decisions are made by upper management 
affecting employees without their ability to offer other solutions, may create 
unwanted tension and resistance to change. 
It is central to a change process to get the people affected by the change involved in 
the change process. This will create awareness of the goals behind the change, urge 
desire and understanding of how people can benefit from the change. This in turn 
will minimize the resistance towards the change process and yield a smoother 
transition.  
The quotes from the workshop describe the lack of involvement of the staff in the 
change process and will ultimately create resistance towards the changes. This may 
affect other people and the general attitude towards the change overall, which will 
only make it more difficult to complete the transition. 
To minimize the tension it would be a good approach to engage with staff, who feel 
overlooked in the process and attempt to help them with their concerns or 
frustrations towards the change. 
 
Figure 21. Workshop at NF on Arbejdsmiljødagen about work culture and synergy 
62 
==PAGE:63==
8.4 Feedback 
8.4.1 Ensuring double-looped learning 
The feedback-process of OMO, reviewing data and ensuring that the right measures 
are taken to improve the flow, may follow either a single- or double-looped learning 
cycle. By using FA as a sparring partner to interpret data, OMO can ensure that their 
biases do not cloud their perception of the troubles and will enable them to have a 
double-looped learning process, that will ultimately help them define the issues after 
launch and help correct them afterwards.  
8.4.2 Data reports from SP currently exist 
Feedback is still somewhat of general character. The solution is based on practises, 
that they can do as of now, but don’t. They can see these time checks, if nurses and 
staff checked boxes in SP. But they don’t. Minor change to make data available. 
Could explore why they don’t already do this, but it’s most likely because they don’t 
have ressources to do this work. 
8.4.3 Feedback more critical for OMO than other clinics 
OMO does not have a possibility to test out their planned activities before launch. 
Major change will affect them and they have little option to prepare adequately, 
before they are dealing with actual patients. 
Other clinics may only need to focus on adjusting to the facilities and equipment, but 
do not experience the same procedural changes. This may be one reason why 
clinics have not made a strong statement for supporting the need to engage in a 
feedback mechanism. 
8.4.4 Learning process 
The process was mostly discussed as a single looped process, ​“The project will most 
likely consist of measuring, correcting, measuring, correcting, ect.” ​Appendix (B2)​. 
63 
==PAGE:64==
Going back and forth between observing and correcting this process, could be seen 
to be much like the single-looped learning process described by Hayes. 
The distinction would be to which degree, they are able to review data or 
surrounding factors that affect the activity, to ensure activities are adjusted to better 
results. 
Using the buffet concept as an example, it is important to consider what could hinder 
patients from being able to actively ensure they are given food. They may be too ill to 
get their own food and need assistance, the new buffet concept may be confusing to 
patients and they will need a proper explanation of how the concept works and 
offered assistance. These considerations will not simply arise from measuring, if 
people are getting food, but will require a deeper understanding of the underlying 
factors. 
Additionally, entities with a greater ability to distance themselves from the 
biases/routines of the clinics, would be one such as FA, since they are not actively 
involved in the daily activities of the clinic. They would be able to help clinics achieve 
a higher degree of reflection of the results and how to deal with problems 
encountered, much like the process described in the double-looped learning 
(Hayes). 
8.4.5 The role of FA in data monitoring 
My own involvement at FA, being a student worker, may have hindered my pursuit of 
a purely academic investigation of how to analyze change. My role as a student 
worker was focused on the feedback part of the transition project. It was also 
deemed by analysis that other areas such as personnel training, and planning of 
facilities were areas that were partially completed or locked in their planning. The 
ability to create a solution for the existing problems of the project lay in the feedback 
phase of the transition project, so that coincide with the focus on this phase from a 
student workers perspective. 
64 
==PAGE:65==
8.4.6 Thoughts on literature 
Literature was chosen based on the change management perspective and to 
understand how a change management project can be planned and carried out. 
What human factors to be aware of and how to deal with them was facilitated by 
creating a framework for understanding change. Using the theory allowed for a better 
understanding of the change process and provided insight to create a solution for the 
feedback needs for OMO. 
Theory and its applicability in practise was sometimes difficult to align. Real cases 
are often complex and fall into different categories, such as the literature regarding 
“blueprint change”. It is cited that moving to a new building is an example of blueprint 
change, where the magnitude of change is foreseeable, the end state can be 
envisioned, and change managers can lay out a plan of how to achieve that state.  
The new facilities and changes to the work procedure of OMO made some aspects 
hard to predict and define clearly. The patient flow is one example, where many 
factors have to be taken into account to accurately predict the needs and limitations 
to activities of OMO; receptions, recovery rooms, communication, ect. 
8.4.7 Solution management bias 
The solution is based on the framework and understanding obtained through 
interviews with Pernille Olsbro, head nurse at the Anesthesiology Department. The 
solution is tailored to management of OMO, who will be overseeing operations and 
responding to the data. The insight and involvement of the employees has not been 
included in the process of creating the time management model. Because of this, it is 
suggested that the management of OMO includes the employees during the process 
of reviewing the data to understand, what the issues are that OMO faces. It would be 
meaningful for OMO to engage in a dialogue with their staff in different steps; 
reception, nurses station, porters, ect. 
These people would be able to give a detailed account of the issues, that they 
experience first hand, and will be able to give a greater understanding of the 
underlying issues.  
65 
==PAGE:66==
8.4.8 Challenges of building SP report  
The process of building the report as well as getting the data from the clinicians may 
be more difficult than initially expected.  
The change of work practices may be seemingly small for the individual people, but 
the efforts to change these should not be underestimated or assumed to happen 
automatically. FA has previously participated in a project dealing with the treatment 
of cancer patients. A tremendous amount of work had to be done to even be able to 
obtain data, and then be able to analyse what factors needed to be changed to 
achieve a good result. 
It was estimated to be a simpler task, to create the data feedback system for OMO, 
than it has proven to be. However, in light of the postponement it may still be 
achievable to create a SP report in time for the launch of OMO and create a 
feedback system. 
8.5 Consequences of delay 
The delay can have implicit consequences for the people moving to NF. The stress 
of continuously having expectations to a process and having to constantly change 
these will undoubtedly increase the scepticism towards the project and might cause 
them to question the competence of the project management. It might also increase 
the resistance towards change and create a bitter atmosphere for the people having 
to move. Other activities such as the training might also have to be retaken, if too 
long time passes before the medical staff are able to partake in learning the new 
routines of work. 
The stress of not knowing, when their department would move has also forced some 
people to resign from their position, because it was too stressful for them, “Of the 
many nurses I knew that were moving to NF, only two remain still employed. The 
rest have quit and moved to other positions, because they could not handle the 
continuous uncertainty of not knowing when they were moving” Marianne 
Bardenfleth, former nurse at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck 
Surgery & Audiology at Gentofte Hospital, which is a joint department between 
66 
==PAGE:67==
Gentofte Hospital and Rigshospitalet. The department was scheduled to move since 
the beginning of the planning of OMO.  
Marianne Bardenfleth also describes how the anticipated relocation has affected the 
clinics new initiatives with regards to dealing with issues the clinic faces. 
 “It didn’t make sense to initiate something, that we were not able to complete before 
we had to move”. The continuous delays have kept innovation from happening at 
some departments, that could not realistically plan for their relocation. 
8.6 Future plan of action 
●
Present the plan for feedback to management of OMO. Ensure the correct 
information is drawn and finalize the format of the report. 
Discuss the details for feedback. How often do they wish to receive data? 
Who will be responsible for overseeing weekly reports? How will they plan to 
use the data reports? 
●
Contact the person from FA who is responsible for SP to help build the report 
structure. Design the layout of data to ensure the people receiving the reports 
can understand them and be able to act upon them. Ensure the conclusion is 
consistent with what the data supports. 
This is an important step, because some clinics might be biased about how 
they choose to interpret the data. 
●
Deliver data report to OMO. Ensure they understand the format of the data 
feedback. This could be done by going through a report based on dummy 
data.  
●
Use previous project information from Camilla Gjedsted Fabricius, 
Implementations Coordinator at FA, who has worked with changing 
employees’ work routines, to be able to gather data from SP efficiently. 
●
FA should offer assistance to OMO the first weeks after the launch of NF. The 
format could be weekly meetings to help with understanding the data and 
figure out which areas are not performing, help them understand why and 
propose solutions based on this. 
67 
==PAGE:68==
It is also recommended that the head of OMO engage in dialogue with 
employees in areas needing improvement. If the data report shows the 
reception is experiencing delays, be sure to talk to people involved in this 
process, to quickly assess problems and obtain valuable insight. 
The inclusion of employees in the further change also feeds back into the 
efforts of including people in the change process and will be an important step 
to ensure employee confidence in the process and make it easier to adjust the 
activities after launch. 
 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:69==
9 Conclusion 
Nordfløjen (NF) can be viewed as a way of meeting the future challenges of the 
Danish Healthcare system by introducing new facilities, improved workflows, higher 
surgical capacity and a better collaboration between specialties. 
These new ways of working will require staff to adjust to new practises and will 
require them to follow up to ensure that they work as intended. 
 
The thesis suggests incorporating a quality measurement system to track activities at 
OMO after launch to ensure OMO’s ability to improve procedures, that do not 
perform adequately. 
The most useful and most important factor for flow management at OMO is the 
timeframe for all the activities during pre-, and post patient surgery. A detailed model 
of activities and timeframe has been created for the same-day surgeries, which will 
be a newly developed way of handling surgeries. The model ensures that OMO has 
the correct information in order for management to know which steps of the surgical 
procedures are not performing as intended. This will allow management to determine 
which areas may need to be changed to ensure that OMO can run at full capacity for 
their surgical units. 
 
The fact that OMO is involved throughout the entire change process allows for OMO 
to control and direct the change they are implementing. It has proven helpful to use a 
framework for change management to allow for better control of the transition project 
and to become aware of the different stages of implementing change. 
From the field work there are examples of the hospital’s project group proactively 
engaging in change; creating a risk log, and inviting for a change conference. These 
activities have a positive effect on the change project and allow for better 
understanding of the shortcomings and challenges. 
There are also examples of the change project mismanaging the underlying factors 
of the change process, which can affect the culture of how the change process is 
seen and eventually the outcome of the change processes, that will come with NF 
69 
==PAGE:70==
and OMO. This is made evident in interviews with employees, who have felt ignored 
in the decision making process. The change project at NF and OMO does not 
currently have any plan to follow up after the completion of NF, but will conclude with 
the opening of the clinics. There is a concern that problems will arise, that the clinics 
will have to handle by themselves and are not able to directly synergise on proposing 
solutions across clinics. In order to attempt to limit the issues that may arise, it is 
recommended to conduct a follow up report, drawing information from the 
Sundhedsplatformen based time management model that was created for the thesis 
(B4). It is also recommended that the ADKAR framework, a tool that OMO and 
management at the Improvements Department is familiar with, is used for future 
transition projects such as the BørneRiget currently under development, since it will 
allow for more cohesive planning of change activities. 
 
 
 
70 
==PAGE:71==
10 References 
Andrew H. Van de Ven. (1995). Explaining development and change. Texas A&M 
University. 
 
Bamford, D. (2003). Managing planned and emergent change within an 
operations management environment. Manchester School of Management. 
 
Danske Patienter. (2020). Multisygdom skaber store udfordringer. Retrieved on 20th 
September 2019. From: 
(​https://www.danskepatienter.dk/politik/temaer/multisygdom/multisygdom-skaber-stor
e-udfordringer​)  
 
Gadegaard, B., (2020). P1 Orientering. Retrieved on 14th February 2020. From:  
https://www.dr.dk/radio/p1/orientering/orientering-2020-02-07 
 
Godtsygehusbyggeri. (2020). Hvorfor bygger regionerne nye sygehuse? Retrieved 
on 20th September 2019. From: 
https://godtsygehusbyggeri.dk/maal-og-styring/kort-fortalt-om-sygehusbyggerierne/h
vorfor-bygger-regionerne-nye-sygehuse 
 
Godtsygehusbyggeri. (2020B) 
https://godtsygehusbyggeri.dk/media/12155/3b-det-er-slut-med-at-arbejde-som-vi-pl
ejer.pdf 
 
Hayes, J. (2014). The theory and practice of change management, fourth edition. 
England: Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
 
Hiatt, J. (2006). The Prosci Adkar model. ​A goal-oriented change management 
model to guide individual and organizational change.​ England: Macmillan Publishers 
Limited. 
 
Kennedy, A. (2004). Change management. School of Computing. Dublin Institute of 
Technology. 
 
Kotter, J. (1995). Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. Harvard Business 
Review. 
 
71 
==PAGE:72==
Langgard, K. (2018). 5 ting du skal vide om 2-procent-besparelserne. Dansk 
Magisterforening. Retrieved on 20th September 2019. From: 
https://dm.dk/nyheder/2018/5-ting-du-skal-vide-om-2-procent-besparelserne 
 
Najm, N., Almeidiyeen, M., (2015). Impact of change management dimensions on 
performance criteria at Greater Amman Municipality. University of Jordan. 
 
Nigam, A., Huising, R., and Golden, B. (2016). Explaining the selection of routines 
for change during organizational search. Cornell University. 
 
Pedersen, F. (2019). Syge må vente på at flytte ind. Berlingske. Retrieved on 20th 
December 2019. From: 
https://www.berlingske.dk/samfund/nye-problemer-paa-riget-syge-maa-vente-laenge
re-paa-at-rykke-ind-i 
 
Ritcher, L. (2019). Presset på de danske sygehuses børneafdelinger vokser. 
Information. Retrieved on 20th September 2019. From: 
https://www.information.dk/indland/2019/03/presset-paa-danske-sygehuses-boernea
fdelinger-vokser 
 
Rigshospitalet. (2020). Organisationsdiagram. Retrieved on 18th February 2020. 
From: 
https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/om-hospitalet/organisation/Sider/organisationsdiagram.
aspx 
 
Rolland, C., Souveyet, C., and Achour, C. (1998). Guiding goal modeling using 
scenarios. 
 
Sundhedskoordinationsudvalget. (2019). Vores sundhedsaftale. Retrieved on 20th 
September 2019. From: 
https://www.regionh.dk/Sundhedsaftale_2019/Documents/Sundhedsaftale_2019-202
3.pdf 
 
Sundhedsstyrelsen. (2018). Danskernes Sundhed - Den Nationale Sundhedsprofil 
2017. Retrieved on 20th September 2019. From: 
https://www.sst.dk/da/udgivelser/2018/danskernes-sundhed-den-nationale-sundheds
profil-2017 
 
Tanabe, D., Uno, K., Akemine, K., Yoshikawa, T., Kaiya, H., Saeki, M. (2008). 
Supporting requirements change management in goal oriented analysis. Tokyo 
Institute of Technology, Japan. 
 
72 
==PAGE:73==
11 Appendixes 
Appendix B1 - B6 have been created by the author Thomas Bardenfleth 
B1 - Draft of agreements for NF to measure 
B2 - Summary of project meetings 
B3 - Buffet Concept as activity at NF 
B4 - OMO Time check model 
B5A - Patient treatment journey at RH main building 
B5B - Patient treatment journey at OMO  
B6 - Affinity diagram of interviews 
 
Appendix B7 - B13 are collections of gathered relevant information for the 
thesis 
B7 - Survey answers from workshop 
B8 - Project pitch for transition project for NF 
B9 - Extract of risk log 
B10 - Service concepts 
B11 - First draft of surgical patient description 
B12 - Summary of Educational Symposium 
B13 - Final draft of surgical patient description 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
