==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Keystone Locations in Human Mobility Data
Asge Pontoppidan Darr (s110694)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Researchers describe human trajectories as sequences of displacements between
stop locations. However, the structure of human mobility is more complex than this.
In this research paper, I propose the concept of keystones which is a new way of
thinking about the essential locations in human mobility that tie the trips within
the human trajectories together by being the locations from which we depart and
to which we return(home, work, next of kin).
We have invented the ”keystones
algorithm” that reveals keystones and the fundamental structure of trajectories from
human location data. This thesis explores the feasibility of using the knowledge of
keystones in machine learning models do to next place prediction. The study shows
that keystone locations are on an average visited for 11.8 hours compared to 2.25 for
non-keystone locations and keystones are furthermore visited 135 times compared to
3.5 times on non-keystones. The keystone feature is used to train machine learning
models like logistic regression, random forest, label powerset and MLKNN for next
place prediction to test how well the keystone feature affect the performance of the
machine learning models. The study concludes that even though a model trained
solely on the keystone feature achieves an average accuracy of 32.31%, the keystone
feature does not improve on the performance of a model trained on location data.
A model trained solely on location data has an average accuracy of 39.66% without
being trained on the keystone feature and 39.65% when being trained on the keystone
feature and location data. The study shows that the keystone feature gives essential
information about which locations in the human trajectories are important, and it
shows that the keystone locations are used much more than standard locations, but
the feature itself is not enough to improve on next place prediction if location features
are available.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was produced at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark with elements of collab-
oration from Copenhagen Center for Social Data Science(SODAS) at Copenhagen
University in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in En-
gineering degree in Computer Science and Engineering. Sune Lehmann Jørgensen is
the supervisor of this project and the co-supervisor is Laura Alessandretti.
The thesis assesses the possibility of characterizing the use of keystones in human
trajectories and investigates how keystones can help forecasting mobility by the use
of machine learning algorithms in next place prediction.
Kongens Lyngby, February 26, 2020
Asge Pontoppidan Darr (s110694)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank Sune Lehmann for his excellent guidance throughout the research
of this thesis. Thank you for answering all of my many questions. I want to thank
Laura Alessandretti for being a great guidance in the field of human mobility. I want
to thank Ulf Aslak for helping me when I could not get access to the data I needed
for the project and to introduce me to the data framework when I finally got access.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Human Mobility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Models of Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Human mobility patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Human mobility patterns - Synthetic mobility trajectory gener-
ation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Keystones
9
3.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Discoveries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.1
Location trajectory networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.2
Applying the keystones algorithm and filtering
. . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.3
Time distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.4
Fraction of total time that we stay in keystone home/non-home
14
3.4.5
Home statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.6
Peak hour distribution of most visited keystone . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.7
Peak hour distribution for most visited non-keystone location .
19
3.4.8
Peak hour distribution for the first keystone which is not used
during the night
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Data set
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.1
Copenhagen Network Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Data set statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Personal data and GDPR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Methods and theory
29
5.1
Recommender Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Different fundamentals in recommender systems
. . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Machine learning algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.2
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.3
Label powerset and ML-k-nearest neighbour . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Performance evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Modeling with Keystones
37
6.1
Software stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Designing the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Model with only base features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Applying Markov chain as baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
General feature generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.6
Feature importance on base features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.7
Accuracies depending on the training size. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.8
Model comparison between all mobility steps and only transitions . . .
43
6.9
Model exploration prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.10 Model with multiple features - minor tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.11 Cumulative Modelling with fewer features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.11.1 The actual predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.12 Modeling with restricted target space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.12.1 Large scale target-size accuracy dependency test
. . . . . . . .
49
6.12.2 Accuracies for 5, 10 and 100 locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.13 Large scale accuracy comparison across multiple users . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Results & Discussion
57
7.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.1
Recommender system as solution design . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.2
Performance measuring and accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.3
Time constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2.4
two-layer cross-validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2.5
Keystones in a business-oriented view
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Conclusion
61
9
Further work
63
9.1
Collective vs individuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
9.2
User and location characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.2.1
Returners vs explores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
9.3
Time-series analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
By predicting human trajectories it is possible to get a grasp of how human mo-
bility has an important impact on our daily lives in the society. The research in the
field of human mobility can help us develop better applications for fields like urban
planning, traffic forecasting and estimating the pressure on public hubs. In more
confined areas it can help to get a better understanding of the usage of large public
areas like metro stations, concert halls, stadiums and larger public areas in terms of
design and evacuation.
Human trajectories contain locations that we visit every day over and over again. i.e.
locations like home, office, or next of kin. To get an understanding of how these
locations affect every users’ daily mobility, I present the keystones algorithm which
finds keystone locations in trajectories and gives a new way of thinking about these
important locations within human mobility. The knowledge on how we as humans use
keystones every day gives an opportunity of training machine learning algorithms on
more knowledge about how humans move when trying to make next place prediction.
I will through this paper, explain the concept of keystones, to show that they exist
in human mobility data to build a system for testing next place prediction using the
features of keystones. At the end will I assess how keystones are a part of daily tra-
jectories of humans and how well prediction models perform in next place prediction
when trained on the keystone feature compare to features like location and time.
1.1
Research Objectives
Researchers describe human trajectories as sequences of displacements between
stop locations. However, there is more structure in human mobility (that is not ac-
counted for in the current description): trips are anchored to keystones from which we
depart and to which we return (home, work, hotel, parent’s house). We have invented
the ”keystones algorithm” that reveals keystones and the fundamental structure of tra-
jectories from human location data. Analysing large data sets of human trajectories,
we want to characterise the way people use keystones. Also, we want to investigate
how this novel description can help to forecast mobility. The following two research
questions are addressed in this thesis:
• How is keystone locations used compared to non-keystone locations?
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
• How does the keystone feature impact the performance when doing next step
prediction?
1.2
Thesis Overview
The structures of the thesis go as follows:
• Chapter 1 Introduction - A short introduction to the thesis and research
objectives and scope.
• Chapter 2 Literature Review - A description of relevant research made in
the field of human mobility.
• Chapter 3 Keystones - An explanation of the concept of keystone and the
algorithm used to detect them.
• Chapter 4 Dataset - An presentation of the data used throughout the re-
search.
• Chapter 5 Methods and theory - A description of used methods and theories
in the research done within this paper.
• Chapter 6 Modeling with keystones - A description of how the modeling
has been performed and the result thereof.
• Chapter 7 Results and discussion - A discussion of results and limitations.
• Chapter 8 Conclusion - A reflection on research carried out.
• Chapter 9 Further work - Proposals for future work.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
This next section contains a review of relevant literature needed to get a broader
understanding of the field of study and provides the background information needed
to ensure the familiarity of relevant articles and research in the field of human mobility.
The purpose of this chapter is to give the reader an understanding of where to place
this paper in the chain of research done in the field of human mobility.
2.1
Human Mobility
For the past decade researchers has tried to model human mobility patterns to get
a better understanding of human mobility and to improve on a wide range of areas
such as urban planning [26], the spread of diseases [10, 46], smart traffic management
[35, 48], Ubiquitous computing [40], transportation engineering [4] as well as to get an
overall better understanding on how we as humans behave based on how our mobility
patterns which falls under clusters with distinct mobility characteristics [38]. The
sections underneath contain coverage of the research done within the field of human
mobility, to establish a baseline of knowledge needed for a reader to recreate the
study in the future.
In 2006 is the first studies in human movement patterns done at a global scale by
analysing the circulation of banknotes in the United States [8]. The research shows
that the travel distance decays following a power-law distribution which means it re-
sembles a scale-free random walk called Lévy flight. They furthermore show that the
probability of spending a certain amount of time in smaller regions have a long-tailed
distribution.
In 2008 some researchers did a similar study [19] where they assess the trajectory
of 100.000 mobile phone users. The location information from every time a user ini-
tiate or receive a call or a text message is stored through the cellular towers routing
the communication. Like the study from 2006, this study also bases the mobility
patterns on the random walk Lévy flight, but in comparison, they also introduce a
truncated edition of the Lévy flight. The research shows that human trajectories
show a high degree of temporal and spatial regularities like the fact that users have
a high probability of return to a few high-frequent visited locations. The researchers,
therefore, suggests that human motion follows the truncated edition of Lévy flight
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Literature review
better than the original Lévy flight.
In 2010 a study [42] showed the shortcomings of the continuous-time random-walk
(CTRW) and Lévy flight model for human mobility by comparing the earlier models
to empirical data recorded by observing 1000 users and registering their location ev-
ery hour for two weeks. The study comes up with three empirical observations. (A)
Observations show that users tend not to visit previously unvisited locations. Both
Lévy flight and CTRW expect this to be following a random distribution S(t) tµ [28]
for random moving objects. (B) Observations show that humans visitation patterns
tend to be uneven, and the frequency of the most visited locations follows Zipf’s law.
Both Lévy flight and CTRW expect that for most visited locations the number of
visits follow t −→∞. (C) Humans tend to return home every day as part of their
mobility pattern, which CTRW contradicts since it predicts that the longer we follow
a user, the more the prediction drifts from its initial location. The research, therefore,
suggests an individual-mobility model containing two parameters which ensure the
user’s tendency to explore and the tendency to return to previously visited locations.
In a study [41] from 2013, it shows, by looking at daily mobility patterns, that
by using the concept of motifs, it is possible to construct nearly all daily mobility
pattern only by using 17 unique networks. The study then shows that it is possible
to reproduce these mobilities by the use of Markov chains, and the 17 networks can
describe 90 per cent of daily trips. The previous study [19] from 2008, shows that the
before mentioned motifs can describe the daily routine patterns like time distribu-
tion between home- and work-location, by observing individual trajectories extracted
from mobile phones data. The final model suggested in the study is a modified finite
Markov chain embedding with Bernoulli trails.
As seen in previous studies, it starts to show that humans tend to explore new loca-
tions and return to familiar locations. In a survey from 2014 [38], based on GPS data
from vehicles and phone call locations gathered by Global System for Mobile Commu-
nication the researchers try to distinguish between two different types of individuals;
”explores” and ”returners”. The study shows that it is possible to classify the individ-
uals as ”explorer” or ”returners” depending on the total radius of gyration for k−th
most visited location. i.e. it is possible to quantify recurrent mobility in the overall
mobility by gyration and thereby classify the users. ”Returners” can be recognised
by their mobility pattern primarily consists of their two most visited locations, where
”explorers” tend to have a lot more locations in their trajectories. Another study [2],
from 2018, in the research area of exploration with human mobility, states that the
number of often visited locations for an individual is typically around 25 locations,
and this size correlates with their number of social interactions. The data used in the
study is a data set of high-resolution mobility trajectories which also contains inter-
actions across social channels. This study also supports the observation of ”explores”
and ”returners” and the study states that ”explores” tend to have a larger size of
often visited locations than ”returners”.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Human Mobility
5
A study [3] from 2016, contains a comparison of over 30 data sets containing mo-
bility data. The purpose is to find the best distribution of displacement, duration
of stays and displacements between discoveries. The researcher computes all distri-
butions and constructs models from the data set. The constructed models, from the
more than 30 data sets, are then compared further to 68 external models to confirm
the results of whether the chosen best distribution is the correct. This comparison
then shows that distribution of displacement and displacements between discoveries
comes closest to following a log-normal distribution:
P(x) =
1
√
2πσ2x
e−1(logx−µ)2
2σ2
(2.1)
The tails of the distribution come closest to following a Pareto distribution:
P(x) = (1 + ξx)
ξ+1
ξ
(2.2)
The gamma distribution is the best model to describe the whole distribution:
P(x) =
1
Γ(k)θk xk−1e−x
θ
(2.3)
A study [13] from 2016 looks into feature importance of next place predictions
models by the use of Markov chains as a baseline. The comparison is done by train-
ing logistic regression models on separate features, obtained from the Copenhagen
Network Study, and assess the accuracies of the different models’ predictions. Copen-
hagen Network Study, which is another social study [43], collected data from 1000
individuals through smartphones and social sensors. The study [13], furthermore, also
cover exploration within locations and shows that between 20% and 25% transitions
are to unexplored locations and that around 70% of locations visited are only visited
once.
In the before-mentioned study [13] from 2016, they research next cell, and next place
prediction. Next cell prediction is the attempt to predict the next geographic cell a
user will be in, in her next time step. In this research paper, the time step is ∆15
minutes and the cells are of the approximated size 50-meter x 50-meter. Next-place
prediction is the attempt to predict where the user’s next transition transient. In this
case, the locations predicted are created by clustering GPS-coordinates together with
nearby visited GPS-coordinates. Markov chains and logistic regression models are
constructing these predictions. A similar study [11] from 2017 compare accuracies in
next-place prediction from supervised learning models trained with single and multi-
ple features. The models used is M5 decision trees and linear regression. The research
suggests adding an algorithm named NexTclustering algorithm as an extension to the
supervised learning models. This algorithm computes and assesses a corresponding
score, to the predicted next location. If the system can not compute a prediction, the
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Literature review
algorithm feeds different parameters to the prediction model. The study concludes
by showing that the NexTclustering algorithm improves on the supervised learning
models chosen.
To provide realistic synthetic mobility data for further research in systems based
on mobility trajectories, a study [37] from 2016 presents a model named DISTRAS
(DIary-based TRAjectory Simulator) for simulating patterns of human mobility. The
model creates mobility data based on diaries generated from real data, to capture both
routines of human mobility, and exploration as well.
In the sections above a review of important research has been presented. It shows
how research has gone from based on the circulation of banknotes to being based on
data from social sensors in smartphones. The researchers has tried to characterise
human mobility based on properties like exploration, visitation patterns and social
clustering. In the next section, the important mobility models like Lévy flight, Toploc
and Markov chain will be explained in full detail to give an understanding of impor-
tant research in the topic of human mobility and to ensure the link between earlier
research and this thesis.
2.2
Models of Mobility
In the following section will I review and explain the models of mobility from the
articles presented above further.
2.2.1
Human mobility patterns
The models within the section have the main purpose of estimating human mobil-
ity trajectories, but almost all models have are used throughout research for estimat-
ing trajectories in general.
Random walks
One of the first algorithm used in human mobility research is a
fundamental edition of random-walk. This model is used in comparison to the Lévy
flight in the study [19] from 2008, where the study tries to classify individual travel
patterns. Karl Pearson [39] invented the random walk. Karl Pearson was an English
mathematician and biostatistician in 1905. The most simple version of a random
walk is based on spatial displacements ∆Xi. This version is also presented in the
Physics Report: ”Human Mobility: Models and Application” [6]. Each displacement
is drawn from a probability distribution f(∆x), so the location is determined by the
random variable:
X(tN) =
N
∑
i=1
∆Xi, for discrete time ti
(2.4)
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Models of Mobility
7
One well known class of the random-walk is the Brownian motion class [6, 42].
This motion was first described in 1827 by botanist Robert Brown and was developed
to describe motion of pollen submerged in water. In 1905, Albert Einstein published
a paper [17] describing the model. The Brownian motion random-walk produces tra-
jectories created by series of irregular and random displacements. In a 1-dimensional
walk the displacement at step k will be given by:
Xk(tN) =
1
√
k
tk
∑
i=1
∆Xi, for discrete time ti
(2.5)
Executing the limit k −→∞produce a Brownian motion. The distribution then
tends toward a normal distribution, based on the Central Limit Theorem(CLT).
Another random-walk is Continuous-time random-walk(CTRW). This model is used
by Chaoming Song [42] to characterise the distribution of human motion and was
presented by Elliott Waters Montroll and George Herbert Weiss in a study [34] from
1965.
Another well-known class is the Lévy flight class. Of the before mentioned arti-
cles is the Lévy flight class used, in a study [19], together with the random walk to
show that these models contradict the observed human trajectories in terms of travel
distance and high-frequency return tendencies. The study, therefore, suggests a trun-
cated Lévy flight model. Unlike previous mentions, the unaltered Lévy flight does not
follow the CLT. Lévy flight produces a series of small displacements with occasional
large displacements. The displacements are distributed at random with a long-tailed
distribution because of the few occasional large displacements. The distribution looks
as follows:
f(∆x)
1
∆x1+β , with 0 < β < 2
(2.6)
It is also mentioned in the physics report Human mobility - Models and application
[6] that the Lévy flight only can be seen as a rough approximation of actual human
mobility.
Models of Next place prediction
By venturing from characteristics and proper-
ties into next place prediction, the study [13] introduces two new strategies; Toploc
and Markov chains. Toploc is straight forward and is based on the current test-user’s
location history up to the prediction point. The strategy is to go through previously
visited location and choosing the most visited location as a prediction for the next
location. The difference between Toploc and Markov chains is the fact that Markov
chains do not take the user’s history into account in the prediction itself but makes
the prediction only based on the current location. Markov predicts by constructing
a transition table once containing all probabilities for transitions between locations.
These probabilities are computed by looking at how often a transition from location a
to location b exists divided by the number of transitions from location a in the user’s
data set. It has to be mentioned that a and b are only placeholders in this example.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Literature review
The data set used in this paper contains many more locations and will be reviewed
in chapter 4.
Next-place prediction using Machine learning
In a study [11] from 2017 is an
M5 decision tree model use. This model is based on the regression tree method. Earl B.
Hunt presented decision trees for the first time in Concept learning: An information
processing problem [5].
The general idea behind decision trees is a flowchart-like
decision process where every node in the tree is a question, and the leaves are resulting
in class labels. The tree can be binary or multi-branched, where the test sample’s
features characterise the input of the node. i.e. colour, size, age or in the topic of this
thesis; arrival time(day or night), previous location, visitor or current location. In our
case, the leaves(class labels) would be the next predicted location. Other presented
methods are linear and logistic regression. Linear regression is also used in the study
[11] by Carmela Comito from 2017, and logistic regression was used in the study [13]
by Andrea Cuttone in 2016. The linear regression model assumes a linear relationship
between the variables fed to the model, xi and the target y. The most simple linear
regression follows Y = b0 + b1 ∗X + e, where e is the error and quantifies how far
from the model x is located. An extension is multivariable linear regression which
extends simple linear regression with multiple variables, but it is still based on the
assumption of linearity between xi and yi. Logistic regression is based on a sigmoid
function instead of a linear function. The purpose of the Logistic regression is to
predict the probability of getting the target y. The probability of a class y can be
written as :
P(y|ϕ) = σ ∗(wT ∗ϕ),
(2.7)
where ϕ is the feature vector, w is the hyperparameters, and σ is the sigmoid function.
2.2.2
Human mobility patterns - Synthetic mobility trajectory
generation
As addressed in a study [37] by Luca Pappalardo and Filippo Simini, synthetic
mobility data have great importance in a broad range of application and research. In
the study they suggests a framework named DITRAS. DITRAS works in two steps.
In the first step, DITRAS creates a mobility diary to reassembles human mobility’s
temporal characteristic by specifying when the individual arrives at each location and
duration of the stay. They propose an algorithm called Mobility Diary Learner(MDL)
for the construction of the diary, which is represented as a Markov model. MDL
creates the diaries from real mobility data to ensure patterns which are as close as
possible to empirical data. For the second step, DITRAS converts the mobility diary
into trajectories by the use of the d-EPR model, which is an exploration model with
preferential returns. The d-EPR model is proposed in another study [36] by Luca
Pappalardo and Filippo Simini, which also tries to simulate human mobility.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Keystones
This chapter contains the introduction to the concept of keystones. In the sec-
tions underneath is the concept of keystones first explained in-depth and afterwards
applied to a data set containing pseudonymized human trajectories data, to show
how keystones are used in daily mobility. This pseudonymized data is created by
replacing the trajectories’ GPS locations with labels to ensure the pseudonymization
and the data set contains the characteristics and preferential return patterns of real
human mobility.
3.1
Concept
Keystones is a new way of thinking about important locations in human mobility.
The motivation lies in the fact that throughout the locations we visit every day, some
of them are important. These are locations like home, office, study and next of kin.
From the approaches seen in earlier research, we have not seen any trying to use
these locations in prediction or for trace generation. e.g. most people get up in the
morning at home and goes to work around the same time every day or students stay
late at university for their studies, or the younger segment of the population might
visit their girl-/boyfriend every afternoon after school. By classifying these locations
as keystones, it would make sense if it could help when predicting human mobility
since these locations are significant to us, and we spent most of our time at keystone
locations. The concept of keystones is an attempt to quantify some of these patterns
of daily human trajectories. A work-life pattern would on average be pieced together
by a
14 hour home period, and a 3.5 to 8.6 hours work period, depending on the
job [41]. A study [22] shows that daily human patterns tend to have the average
most visited locations located near public transportation hubs surrounding the city
and that the second most visited locations are mostly located around the city centre
which suggests a home-work pattern. A keystone is a location feature which tries to
quantify these daily chances of users’ locations. The idea behind keystones is that a
location characterized as a keystone is a place where the user would rest and stop to
”store her luggage”. The keystone feature is an attempt to characterize these of the
user’s locations that have a higher probability of recurrence in the trajectories and
which is also often the start and the end of a trajectory loop. The desire to enables
the characterization of these locations is rooted in predicting human mobility. The
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Keystones
keystone feature, therefore, contains information about which locations to suggest
when trying to predict preferential returns and in theory, increase the predictably of
human mobility.
3.2
Algorithm
To locate keystones within a user’s trajectories, I propose the keystone-algorithm
seen in Algorithm 11. The key idea behind the Keystone algorithm is to locate the
locations that start and ends loops within the user’s trajectories.
If the algorithm is fed the input [a, c, d, c, a, b, f, b] as a list of locations the resulting
output would be [a, [c, [d], c], a, b, [f], b]. In this example, the resulting keystones are
a, c and b since these are the locations that create loops within the trajectory.
Figure 3.1: The figure shows the overall steps in how the keystones are found in the
trajectories.
The algorithm works by going through every location in the sequence step by step
and create a cue of open trips and cue containing the current trip. The first steps
can be seen in Figure 3.1. For every location, we append the location to a list of
1The Keystone algorithm has been developed through discussion and guidance from Sune
Lehmann, Laura Alessandretti and Ulf Aslak
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Algorithm
11
outputs and create a list for the inner loops’ trips. While the cue of the current
trip contains locations, the first location is pop-ed and then used as a start location.
We then iterate through all locations until we find the same location as the current
start location(a loop). Every location we pass by without using we append to our
cue of open trips(as they could contain inner loops) and a list containing the output.
Appending these locations is done to ensure we can find inner loops afterwards. When
the location we are currently searching for is found(and we can close the loop) we
remove every location within the current trip from the cue of open trips. After this,
we pop all but the end locations, within the current loop, from our output list. Then
we append them to the left of the list of the inner loops’ trips. From here we now got
our keystone and completed a loop in the trip. This keystone is then used to update
our output list. The closing of the current loop completes the outer loop, and now
all possible inner loops have to be found. After going through the cue of the current
trip, we append all locations from the cue of open trips to the current trip.
Since it is difficult to keep track of all loops of the algorithm when explained in
writing, I have written the pseudo-code for the keystone algorithm underneath, in
Algorithm 1 and shown the first steps in Figure 3.1, to ensure complete insight in
how the algorithm works. From the keystone algorithm, it is now possible to obtain
all of a user’s possible keystones but to ensure that these keystones also uphold the
general idea behind keystone, i.e. a location where the user would put her bag down,
I apply extra filtering in the next section depending on the locations are used.
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Keystones
Algorithm 1 Keystone algorithm
1: procedure Hierarchy Detection(sequence)
2:
output ←list deque
3:
que ←list deque
4:
que2 ←deepCopy(que)
5:
keystones ←set[]
6:
for location in sequence do
7:
output ←(output + location)
8:
trip ←list deque
9:
n ←0
10:
while length of que2 > 0 do
11:
oldLocation ←(que2.pop())
12:
if oldLocation == location then
13:
for i in range(n) do
14:
que.pop()
15:
arrival ←output.pop()
16:
locTrip ←None
17:
while not locTrip == location do
18:
locTrip ←output.pop()
19:
trip[] >> 1
20:
trip[0] ←locTrip
21:
departure ←trip.popleft()
22:
output ←(output + departure)
23:
keystones.update(departure)
24:
output ←(output + trip)
25:
output ←(output + arrival)
26:
break
27:
n ←n + 1
28:
que2 ←deepCopy(que)
29:
que ←(que + location)
30:
Return output, keystones
3.3
Filtering
After locating the potential keystones in a user’s data set, I apply filtering based
on the knowledge I have obtained regarding the common characteristics of the daily
mobility patterns presented in Chapter 2.
The idea behind filtering is to remove
locations like the average grocery store, childcare centres and recurrent locations
which do not follow the idea behind keystones, from the keystone pool.
An easy
difference between locations like childcare centres, grocery stores and likewise and
keystones is the time spent at each location. Locations visited by a user which does
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Discoveries
13
not follow the following rules are filtered out as keystone. It has to be mentioned that
a location only has to be classified as a keystone once for it be a keystone. I chose
this to ensure I would not remove home-like locations because of short trips. The
filtering goes as following:
• Locations with check-in between 6:00 and 18:00 has to either:
– have a check-out time 9 hours later and be on the next day or
– have a check-out time 4 hours later
• Locations with check-in between 18:00 and 6:00 in the morning has to either:
– have at least 5 hours stop between 21:30 and 5:00 the next day or
– have a check-in time outside of 21:30 and 5:00 and a check-out time 4 hours
later
I created the filtering based on the fact that most people’s life cycle consists of either
work or study and recovery during the night. This filtering will, therefore, contain
important stops during a daily mobility trajectory. In the next section, I apply the
algorithm and filtering to a data set and assess how the keystone locations differ in
use from the normal locations..
3.4
Discoveries
In this section, I apply the keystone algorithm and filtering to a data set contain-
ing 852 user’s trajectories and two corresponding timestamps for each location in the
trajectories. At first, I construct vitalizations of keystones, within a user’s trajectory,
when the trajectories are mapped as a network. To get an overall idea of which loca-
tions are keystones. Afterwards, I go through the basic characteristics of keystones
and the overall data.
3.4.1
Location trajectory networks
To get a visual indication of whether or not the output from the keystone pro-
duced central locations I chose to create plots like the following in Figure 3.2 where
I mapped the complete trajectory of a user as a network with edges and nodes. The
nodes represent the locations, and the edges are transitions between locations. The
nodes increase in size depending on the number of visits.
The complete route of
the user exists in the network, but the network does not contain distance or real-life
locations. I used ForceAtlas2 to ensure that I was able to compare the corresponding
networks visually(a network containing all locations and one containing only keystone
locations). I used NetworkX to create the network itself and then I used ForceAtlas2
to create the graph layout to ensure all locations would be placed in the same position
within the single plot. Figure 3.2 contains some of these visual representations. It
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Keystones
can also quite easily be seen how the keystone algorithm and filtering are keeping
the major locations hubs in the keystone networks and how outliers and not so often
visited locations are removed.
3.4.2
Applying the keystones algorithm and filtering
After applying the keystone algorithm and doing further filtering a user2 comes
down to having on average 3.1% of their locations being keystones. The distribution
of keystones can be seen in Figure 3.3.
By plotting the distribution of visits at keystones and at non-keystones it is shown
that keystones on average are visited 134 times where non-keystones are visited 3.5
times which is a major difference. Figure 3.4 and 3.5 shows the two distributions.
3.4.3
Time distribution
To see whether or not the keystones time distribution assembles the work/home
mobility patterns shown [41] in other research, I computed the average time spent at
the 100 most visited keystone locations throughout the data set. As the keystone loca-
tions would contain locations like work, home, loved once and nearly every important
location, I figured that the time distribution across non-keystones would produce a
rather flat plot which did not depend on frequencies of locations. These two plot can
be seen in Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.7. As expected, the two most visited location has
a very high average time spent. These locations could be home- and work-locations.
The second rise that exists in the plot in Figure 3.6 and 3.7 is because the most
visits are within the three most visited location and since the frequency drops the
average time spent rise because of the characteristics of the keystones. In comparison
to Figure 3.6, the distribution in non-keystone location in Figure 3.7 is nearly flat as
expected.
3.4.4
Fraction of total time that we stay in keystone
home/non-home
Another interesting thing to look into is how much time the average user spends
outside her home location compare to the time spent at home. Studies [41] show
that work hours peaks around 3.5 and 8.6 hours which correspond quite well with
the distribution shown in Figure 3.8 since most of the visits are around half as long
as the home peak hour, which is around 14 hours.
2With more than 1000 data points.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Discoveries
15
(a) The network containing a user’s complete
trajectory.
Non-keystones have blue nodes
and keystone have green nodes.
(b) The network containing trajectory only
consists of keystones.
Figure 3.2: Network representation of trajectory data. (a) and (b) are an example of
how keystones within trajectories are the locations that bind the trajectories together,
and by looking at the pair in the figure, it can easily be seen how the most important
parts of the trajectory are kept. These plots do not contain any real geo-information,
so the distances between the nodes or placement do not have a meaning drawn from
the real locations. The node sizes depend on how many times a location is visited.
i.e. the most visited node is the largest.
Figure 3.3: The plot shows the distribution of keystones for users with more that
1000 data points in their trajectories. Between 2% and 4% of most users’ locations
are keystones with an average of 3.1%
3.4.5
Home statistics
By looking into the time spent at the most visited locations, i.e. home, throughout
the data set, it can be seen that the users, in general, follow the same distribution.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Keystones
Figure 3.4: The plot show the distribution of how often keystones locations are visited.
Figure 3.5: The plot show the distribution of how often non-keystones locations are
visited.
At first, the plots contain a peak between 1 and 2 hours duration and then another
peak around 14 hours. An explanation of this could be that midday visits are around
1 to 2 hours in duration where visits after work usually have a duration around 14
hours since afternoon visits contain both spare time and a night’s sleep.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Discoveries
17
Figure 3.6: Average time in hours spent, at non-keystones and keystone locations in
descending order based on the frequency in visits. Here it can be seen that for the
non-keystones location the average is quite steady throughout the locations, though
the least visited contains some clear outliers. It can be difficult to assess the keystone
location precisely but a clear to see that they, in general, are visited for longer time
periods.
Figure 3.7: Average time in hours spent at non-keystones and keystone locations in
descending order based on the frequency in visits focused on the first 100 locations. It
is interesting to see that first location, which I, in general, would argue is home, is not
significantly higher even though most nights are spent here. A reason for this could
be all the short trips during the day, which takes the average down. It is clear to
see that all but around 5 keystone locations are visited longer than any non-keystone
location, and these 5 locations are the least visited locations.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Keystones
Figure 3.8: The distribution of hours spent outside the most visited location compared
to the time spent at the single most visited location. Here it can be seen that most
stops outside of the home have a period of around the 50% the average time spent at
the most visited location
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.9: The plots shows 3 users time distribution in their most visited location.
The red line indicated the shortest 10% of the visits. It can be seen that all users
have two distinct peaks which shows that users’ mobility in regards to their home
location is quite similar.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Discoveries
19
3.4.6
Peak hour distribution of most visited keystone
Since the time duration distribution of the home location showed two distinct
peaks, I wanted to ensure that the second peak followed the distribution shown in
the study [41] by Christian M. Schneider which suggest that the home locations
duration peak around 14 hours. The duration peak can also clearly be seen in this
data set, and Figure 3.10 shows that the average hours, spent at home, for the second
peak, in the distribution, is around 14 hours for all users in the data set.
Figure 3.10: The average duration spent at their most visited keystone location for
all users in the data set, with short visits excluded.
3.4.7
Peak hour distribution for most visited non-keystone location
Looking into the peak hour distribution for the most visited non-keystone location,
Figure 3.11 shows how most of the visits are below 1 hour, and a very few come above
2.5 hours. Comparing this to most visited keystone location in Figure 3.10, we can see
a significant difference between keystones and non-keystones, where keystones peaks
around 15 hours on average duration.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Keystones
Figure 3.11: The average duration spent at their most visited non-keystone location
for all users in the data set.
The plot shows a clear difference from the average
duration spent at keystones.
3.4.8
Peak hour distribution for the first keystone which is not used
during the night
In hopes of seeing that the first keystone which is not used during the night would
act as a work location, I tried to plot the distribution of the peak hours. In Figure
3.12 a minor bump in the curve can be seen around 4 hours and a minimal increase
around 7-8 hours, but it would be very vague evidence of the location being, in general,
being the users’ work location.
Figure 3.12: Peak hour distribution for first keystone which is not used during the
night.
Throughout this chapter, I have shown that there exists a distinct difference be-
tween keystone locations and non-keystone locations, which can be seen in how often
the keystone locations are visited. Keystone locations are also on average visited for
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Discoveries
21
a longer duration of time. The difference in number of visits are shown in Figure 3.4
and 3.5 and the longer duration of visits are shown in Figure 3.7.
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Data set
Throughout this paper, the research is based on the data from the Copenhagen
Network Study [15]. The data contains multiple data sets which contain a lot of
different data collected from smartphones. In this research, I focus my analysis on
location data and timestamps from the Copenhagen Network Study, but it contains
more than just location data.
4.1
Copenhagen Network Study
In a period from 2013 to 2017, The University of Copenhagen and the Technical
University of Denmark collected activity data from
1000 undergraduate students
at the Technical University of Denmark. By collecting data like call-logs, Facebook
friend, location, SMS information, transport time and weather information, the pur-
pose of the study were to an attempt to map human activity and interactions. The
collection happened through LG Nexus 4 smartphones containing an app developed
to data collection. The location data contains data from the whole world but have
its origins in Denmark. Trips and vacations can therefor be seen outside of Denmark
and Europe.
Figure 4.1: Location stop recorded across the world in the Copenhagen Network
Study.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Data set
Assessing the data further, it can be seen that nearly all data location points are
located within the borders of Denmark. Furthermore, can it be seen in Figure 4.2
that Copenhagen is the origin of nearly all data.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: Figures showing that the major part of the data set’s location data is
located within Denmark
The data set contains collected data from the first week of 2013 and until week 45
of 2015. Figure 4.3 shows the number of collected data points per week, and it shows
a peak in week 60 with 16252 data points collected. There is, furthermore, something
that could look like downtime in week 120, which only 237 data points. Compared to
week 119, which contains 6493 data points and week 121, which contains 5187 data
points, it could look like an error. The data set contains 1084400 observations across
852 users. The features used from the data set are; user, timestamp, lat, lon, label,
arrival, departure. user is the username which consists of a number between 0 and
852. timestamp is a timestamp of when the collection has been recorded. lat and
lon is GPS coordinates latitude and longitude. label is a name which represents the
cluster of GPS coordinates that creates a location. label values range from 0 to 681
but label 0 for one user does not necessarily contain the same GPS coordinates as
label 0 for another user. These label-names are therefore unique for the individual
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Copenhagen Network Study
25
users. arrival and departure are two timestamps which tell when the user has arrived
and departures from the current location.
Figure 4.3: A timeline over the collection of data week by week. A significant decrease
in data observations can be seen from week 60 and forward.
4.1.1
Data set statistics
The 852 users have, on average, 175 locations in their pool of visited locations
and on average
1270 data point in their data set. I have chosen to exclude data
set containing less than 1000 data points from the study to ensure complete human
trajectories. Figure 4.4 shows a distribution of visited locations per user been seen.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of locations visited per user. It has to be mentioned that
even though I have excluded users with less than 1000 data point there is still a
different amount of data available and the plot could lose some of the long tail by
having the same amount of data for all users.
By assessing characteristics of the locations seen throughout the data set, I can
see that the average duration of a visit is 4.3 hours, but 51% of the stops is below
2 hours in duration. It has to be mentioned that all visits with a duration above 30
hours have been excluded as I see them as deviant in terms of mobility patterns on a
daily base. 2% of the data point has a duration longer than 30 hours which is 25953
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Data set
data point and 130 of these being over 1000 hours in duration. i.e. there has to have
been recorded with some error. In Figure 4.5 can the distribution of visits with a
duration below 30 hours be seen.
To get an understanding of how many single-use locations exists within the data
set, I computed the distribution of fractions of locations visited once per user. Figure
4.6 shows that around 65% of a user visited locations are only visited once. This
distribution means that on average, a user has only around 64 locations which are
visited more than once. The average exploration can be seen in Figure 4.7, and it
shows that the peak is a margin above 4 location per week averaged over the user
size. Just after the peak the exploration decreases and the average exploration across
all weeks1 is 1.5 location per week where the average after week 100 is down a 0.7
new location per week. A reason for this could be the decrease in weekly observed
data points shown in Figure 4.3
4.2
Personal data and GDPR
The data of the Copenhagen Network Study fall under personal data and is
protected through the General Data Protection Regulation(GDPR) under EU law.
GDPR was implemented on the 2.5 May of 2018 by the European Parliament and
Council of the European Union. I have signed an NDA, and all content of this research
has been treated as strictly confidential.
1Weeks not containing any data points in the data set has been removed in this calculation.
Figure 4.5: The plot shows how visits duration of time are distributes for visits below
30 hours. It can be seen that the median is located around 2 hours.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Personal data and GDPR
27
Figure 4.6: The plot shows the fraction of locations only visited once per user, and
it can be seen that the average fraction is around 64%.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: The average discovery of new locations(explored) per week. For the first
year of data(starting at week 35) the average is around 2.2 new location per week
then it peaks and decreases. The accumulated discoveries grows linear[2] for the first
year and flatten afterwards. A reason could be a decrease of data but more data does
not necessarily mean more exploration. It can therefore be difficult to state the exact
reason for the decrease in exploration.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Methods and theory
The research objective of this paper is to assess the possibility of keystones being a
help to forecast mobility and how keystones are incorporated into human trajectories.
I will in this chapter give explanation and argumentation for which methods and
theories I have used to throughout the research of this study to show how keystones
are an important part of human mobility. In the section Recommender Systems I make
an argumentation on how I chose to design a next place prediction system based on
the theory behind recommender systems. Afterwards, I make a brief explanation of
the base algorithms and theory used and tested in an attempt to propose a successfully
working system.
5.1
Recommender Systems
Recommender systems comes from information filtering systems and is often seen
in commercial businesses like Amazon, Netflix and Google. Throughout the 1990’ties
research [30, 31, 9] in the field started and has evolved to the systems we are familiar
with today.
The idea behind recommender systems is to feed information to the
system, which then computes a recommendation base on filtering the information
based on knowledge about the fed information.
5.1.1
Different fundamentals in recommender systems
Recommender systems can be designed with different approaches, and this sec-
tion, contains an explanation of the different approaches for the filtering done in
recommender systems.
Collaborative filtering
Collaborative filtering[18] is based on the idea that users
with a similar decision from the past tend to make unanimous decisions in the fu-
ture. i.e. the system cluster users which histories are alike and then base its recom-
mendations on these observations. These computations can be done with similarity
measurements and the k-nearest neighbour algorithm.
Content-based filtering
In contrast to collaborative filtering, the content-based
filtering[29] is also based on user preferences, but instead of making recommendations
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Methods and theory
on user similarities, the system makes recommendations based on the content chosen
instead. The content-based filtering works by looking at properties of the available
content to see if the user has chosen content in the past, which have the same prop-
erties as the available content. This approach can typically be implemented by using
machine learning concepts like decision trees, probabilistic classifiers or artificial neu-
ral networks(ANN).
Multi-criteria recommender systems
A multi-criteria recommender system [1]
contains a combination of collaborative and content-based filtering. The systems still
search for nearest neighbours, but instead of matching on whether or not a product
satisfies, the rating of content is more complicated. User information now contains
ratings on features of content. e.g. the rating of a movie could be based on special
effect, scenery, producer and storyline and the representation could be an array of
ratings between 0 and 10 corresponding to each feature. The recommendations of the
system are therefore based on multiple criteria which increase performance compared
to single criteria.
Knowledge-based recommender systems
Knowledge-based recommender sys-
tems [9] is based on relationship models and how content relates based on properties.
Compared to the multi-criteria recommender systems, the knowledge-based recom-
mender systems are not fed a history of ratings but instead a description of needs.
e.g. a search using a keyword like ”burger” in the search query could recommend
fast-food in general, since a relationship between a burger and fast-food is establish
in the underlying model. Systems like these can see drawbacks since they are not
based on user ratings but have the advantage of not recommending something utterly
different than what the user requires.
Location-recommender systems
Location-based recommender systems[44] is sys-
tems that incorporates location information which is seen in apps like Yelp, Foursquare,
Facebook and Snapchat. Systems like these is often based on locations’ similarity and
nearest neighbour principles.
Chosen approach
Most real-life implemented systems are based on a hybrid ap-
proach containing multiple elements from different approaches. My approach is, there-
fore, to incorporate the elements from the different systems which can provide addi-
tional information to the recommendation process in hopes of improving performance.
My approach going forward is a location-based multi-criteria recommender systems
with few knowledge-based elements. To elaborate will the prediction be made on a
history of locations with multiple features, which is the location-based multi-criteria
part and the knowledge-based elements are the keystone feature and time features.
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Machine learning algorithms
31
5.2
Machine learning algorithms
The following section contains an explanation of the theory behind the machine
learning concepts used in the design of the system and the forecasting of human
mobility.
5.2.1
Logistic Regression
Logistic regression is in contrast to linear regression(Figure 5.1a) based on the
logistic sigmoid function and the purpose of logistic regression(Figure 5.1b) is to model
probabilities between 0 and 1 of a data points being in a classes. The probability of
class 1 being: p(C1|ϕ) = y(ϕ) = σ(wT ϕ) [7] where σ is the logistic sigmoid function:
σ(z) =
1
1+e−z .
This gives p(C1|ϕ) =
1
1+−wT ϕ .
As an example can a data set of
containing two features, depending on the threshold ψ be classified by p(C|ϕ) =
σ(w0 + w1 ∗x1 + w2 ∗x2) and ψ ≤w0 + w1 ∗x1 + w2 ∗x2. wi is the regressions
coefficients and these are optimized using gradient descent.
Multinomial logistic regression
The multinomial logistic model is one of the
models used in the research presented in Chapter 2 and since the model is multinomial
in it’s output it has the assumption that independence of irrelevant alternatives holds
which means the relative probabilities is not dependent on the size of the output class
pool. The probabilities are given by a softmax transformation [7] of linear functions
of feature variables:
p(Ck|ϕ) = yk(ϕ) =
eak
∑
j eaj
(5.1)
where ak are given by ak = wT
k ϕ and we therefore get the equation underneath which
assemblies the probability of a single class in logistic regression.
p(Ck|ϕ) =
ewT
k ϕ
∑
j ewT
j ϕ
(5.2)
Multi-label multi-class logistic regression
The system chosen is designed as
a multinomial multi-label regression problem which means it maps instances into
three or more classes, but the multi-label regression part states that the classification
can have more than one output class. To elaborate, this means the system maps the
multiple input-features xi into a continuous target vector y where each element in y is
a probability, i.e. a multinomial regression with multiple classes. However, normally
in a multinomial classification, only one element of y can be true.
5.2.2
Random forest
The random forest [25] algorithm is constructed from multiple decision trees. The
basic idea behind a decision tree is to classify the input by a sequential decision
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Methods and theory
(a) The four plots are examples of linear regres-
sions models having the same regression line
even though the their distributions are differ-
ent. These plots is also known as Anscombe’s
quartet but is only used here to shown the lin-
ear regression.
(b) An example of a logistic regression model
where it can be seen how the model classifies
the data.
Figure 5.1: The plot shows classification done by linear and logistic regression.
process happening while traversing a tree-based framework. An example of a data
set partitioned into five classes can be seen in Figure 5.2. To determine the structure.
i.e. input into each split and the number of nodes. A minimization of sum-of-squares
error is simply infeasible due to the many options of possible tree structures. The
approach is, therefore, a greedy optimization strategy to achieve the smallest error
per split vis-à-vis the smallest sum-of-squares error possible.
The multiple trees in the random forest are created at random from the subspace of
the feature space. The random forest gives a 2m subspaces in a m dimensioned feature
space, where a tree is created for each of the chosen subspaces. The combination of
the multiple decision trees is done through majority voting, which gives us the best
model from all the decision trees.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Machine learning algorithms
33
Figure 5.2: A binary decision tree [7] partitioning a data set into five classes.
Multi-label multi-class random forest
Like mentioned earlier, about logistic
regression algorithm being multi-label and multi-class have I chosen to have the same
approach with the random forest algorithm
5.2.3
Label powerset and ML-k-nearest neighbour
Label powerset and K-nearest neighbour has been used as comparison models
throughout testing. Label powerset is a multi-class classifier where the basic idea
is to assumes that any combination of labels are unique and does not share any
characteristics with another combination of labels. This idea stands in contrast to the
approach of solving a multi-class classification problem using only one binary classifier
per label. i.e. the label powerset transformation constructs one binary classifier for
each combination of labels and not one-to-one. An example of the mapping can be
seen in Figure 5.3. The ML-k-nearest neighbour is just an extension of the k-nearest
neighbour to work for multi-label classification.
Sum-of-squares error function
Sum-of-squares error function computes how much
off the fitted model is from the data set in supervised learning which is very relevant
from logistic regression and curve fitting in general. An example of different fitted
(a) The approach of solving a multi-
class classification problem using bi-
nary classifiers [24].
(b) The approach of solving a multi-
class classification using label power-
set [24].
Figure 5.3: Two different approaches to address multi-class classification
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Methods and theory
model can be seen in Figure 5.4. The basic principle is fitting the curve using a M
order polynomial function:
y(x, W) = w0 + w1x + w2x2 + + wMxM =
M
∑
j=0
wjxj
(5.3)
When the polynomial has been fitted, the task is to minimize the error func-
tion[5.4]. The error function is used to compute the sum of errors between the pre-
diction and the target.
E(W) = 1
2
N
∑
n=1
y(xn, W) −tn
2, where xn is the prediction and tn is the target
(5.4)
5.3
Performance evaluation
There exist some standard approaches to evaluate the performance of the binary
models trained. The evaluation is computed from a confusion matrix containing True-
Figure 5.4: Plots showing a fitting to minimize sum-of-squares error [7]. It can be
seen that the last fit minimizes the error best but is definitely overfitted if new data
point were to be introduces. The red curves show the fitting.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Performance evaluation
35
and False-positive and True- and False-negative. The following description is taken
from An introduction to Machine Learning and Data Mining [23].
• True Positive(TP): Number of observations which are en fact positive and
classified correctly as positive.
• False Positive(FP): Number of observations which are en fact negative and
classified incorrectly as positive.
• True Negative(TN): Number of observations which are en fact negative and
classified correctly as negative.
• False Negative(FN): Number of observations which are en fact positive and
classified incorrectly as negative.
Accuracy states a fraction of correct predictions. Precision states a fraction of
correct predictions which are positive and recall states a fraction of correct positive
predictions. These are both independent of the true negatives, which is good for a
model with a large output size and a sparse result. The F1-score5.8 is the weighted
average of precision and recall. There has been raised a concern [21] regarding the
fact that the F1-score is equally weighted between precision and recall. I address
this in Chapter 7 where the difficulty of measuring accuracy in a system like this is
discussed. The Hamming-Loss gives a fraction of incorrect labels across all labels.
This value is included because the construction of the problem has been done as a
multi-label classification problem. The evaluation methods underneath were used for
a good portion of the research but were discarded in favour of counting correct and
incorrect predictions. i.e. accuracy of 1. This decision is discussed further in Chapter
7 - Discussion.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(5.5)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(5.6)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5.7)
F1Score = 2 ∗(Precision ∗Recall)
Precision + Recall
(5.8)
Hamming −Loss =
1
nlabels
nlabels−1
∑
j=0
(prediction ̸= trueV alue)
(5.9)
==PAGE:48==
36
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Modeling with
Keystones
In this chapter, I go over how I implemented next place prediction using the
machine learning introduced in Chapter 5 and the keystone features presented in
Chapter 3. Since my goal is to assess how keystones are used in human trajectories
and their help in forecasting mobility, I also assess the impact of introducing keystones
to the features when training the machine learning models. I have used three different
machine learning’s algorithms: Logistic regression, K-nearest neighbours and Random
forest. At first, I go through the software stacks used to make the implementation
possible and how the system is designed. After looking into how the models performed
using only the base features, I established Markov as a baseline and generated multiple
extra features. These features are then used throughout multiple tests as comparison
to assess the possible performance enhancement of training models on the keystone
features.
6.1
Software stack
I have written the implementation in Python 3.7 and have been working using
the Project Jupyter IDE. Guido van Rossum is the designer of Python, and it was re-
leased in 1991. The name is a tribute to Monty Python. Python is an object-oriented
programming language with automatic memory management and an extensive stan-
dard library. Fernando Pérez and Brian Granger founded Project Jupyter in 2015 as
an extension of IPython developed by Fernando Pérez. The following list contains
the most used libraries used in the implementation. Important libraries:
• Pandas - 0.25.1
• Scikit-learn - 0.21.3
• NumPy - 1.17.2
• NetworkX - 2.3
• ForceAtlas2 - 0.3.5
==PAGE:50==
38
6 Modeling with Keystones
• Matplotlib - 3.1.1
• Seaborn - 0.9.0
• Sensible_raw - 0.3
Pandas [32] contains a data frame object which enables easy manipulation of
massive data set imported as CSV. I use The Pandas library because it contains
multiple operations for navigating and manipulating a more substantial amount of
data easy. Scikit-learn [12] contains all used machine learning algorithm and tools
for working with data analysis. NumPy [14] gives a range of mathematical functions
for working with large-scaled multi-dimensional arrays which have been very relevant
throughout the research. I used NetworkX [20] and ForceAtlas2 [27] for modelling
the human mobility trajectories as networks to get a visual understanding of which
parts of the trajectories contained keystones. NetworkX is a tool created to study
complex network structures, and ForceAtlas2 is a tool to create network visualisations.
Matplotlib [16] is a plotting library which I have used for all my plot throughout the
paper and Seaborn [49] is an extension to Matplotlib made for statistical graphics
and contains methods to extend the visualisation to make complex data visualisations
easier to assess. Sensible_raw is a loader used for accessing the Copenhagen Network
Study’s data.
6.2
Designing the system
The basic design idea was to make the system modular, so I easily could replace
training features, test size, machine learning model or performance indicators.
I
present a simplified algorithm of the system in Algorithm 2. The basic principle is
to run the predictions on multiple users for comparison, and this is done by finding
users at random within the data and create a training set of the given size. A Markov
Transition matrix is constructed to be able to compute a baseline. Afterwards, the
machine learning models are fitted. The models could be logistic regression, random
forest or K-NN, and I did also construct a method to mix and match features if my
tests depended on it. For simplicity, I did not include it in the algorithm underneath.
After fitting the models, a test suite of a given size is constructed and tested. The
test data is constructed by choosing the x_test at random without replacement from
the user’s complete data frame. During the tests are the performance measurements
of the models stored to make it possible to assess exactly how well every model have
performed.
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Model with only base features
39
Algorithm 2 next place prediction algorithm
1: procedure next place prediction()
2:
for user in testUserPool do
3:
x_trainingSet ←dataFrame[user][trainingSize]
4:
y_trainingSet ←constructTargetVector(x_trainingSet)
5:
markovTransitionMatrix ←createTrasitionMatrix(user)
6:
MLModel ←ML.fit(x_trainingSet, y_trainingSet)
7:
for test in range(0, testSize) do
8:
randomIndex ←dataFrame[user]
9:
x_test ←constructFeatureVector(randomIndex)
10:
y_test ←constructTargetVector(randomIndex)
11:
performanceMesurements ←MLModel.predict(x_test, y_test)
12:
markovAccuracy ←computeMarkovChainResult(x_test.label)
13:
computeAndStoreUserResults(performanceMesurements, markovAccuracy)
6.3
Model with only base features
As a start, I wanted to see how the different machine learning algorithm did
with only the original features give for training. I was not interested in the specific
accuracies but instead to see if one feature was outperforming the others.
Since
the purpose of the research objectives was to investigate the impact of keystones
in the mobility forecasting, I knew that the comparison of machine learning models
would be a large part of the research and already from the start I experienced that
training and testing models take up a lot off time and this could introduce obstructions
throughout the project. In comparing the different algorithms’ general performance,
I used the machine learning algorithms Random Forest, Label Powerset, MLKNN
and Markov Chains as a baseline. The Label Powerset is based on logistic regression.
The comparison ran on 12 users, and all three models were trained on 60% of their
data and tested on 30%. The number of models would sum up to 36 models trained
and 48 models tests1 with an average of
1038 training vectors and
519 tests per
user. Training and testing would, on average, take 40 minutes, which resulted in this
minor comparison-test taking just around 20 hours. This running-time was quite a
cumbersome amount of time when anticipating tests much more substantial than this
throughout the research. It would, therefore, be favourable to settle on one machine
learning algorithm. The results, which can be seen in Figure 6.1 would show that the
random forest approach outperformed both ML-KNN and Label Powerset by a lot,
which meant I could just continue using random forest with Markov as a baseline and
this constellation would reduce running-time on additional training.
1Markov does not need to be trained but instead is a transition matrix constructed
==PAGE:52==
40
6 Modeling with Keystones
Figure 6.1: The plot shows that both the Markov baseline and the random forest
algorithm outperformed ML-KNN and Label Powerset by a lot when trying to predict
next place location.
Random forest’s average accuracy was 56%, and it’s lowest
accuracy was 49.6%. This was higher than the average of the Markov, which was
at 48.8% with its lowest accuracy being 43.5%. The label powerset fluctuated a lot
with accuracy down to only 10% but also going up to 41% with an average of 28%.
MLKNN performed the worst by far, and the average accuracy was around 9%
6.4
Applying Markov chain as baseline
Inspired by multiple articles [41, 13, 6] I chose to use Markov chain as a baseline
since it was not affected by training or randomness and would perform the same each
time. By using the same date and Markov chains as a baseline, it would, later on,
make my results comparable with Andrea Cuttone [13]. In the implementation(seen
in algorithm 2) of the next place predictions is the data of every user reshaped into
a training set and from this training data is a Markov transition matrix constructed.
The locations from the training data are the only feature that is used during the
construction of the transition matrix.
The transition matrix is a right stochastic
matrix which contains all the probabilities of transitioning between two locations. The
transition matrix is computed by going over every location present in the training set.
For each location, the probability is constructed directly by counting the number of
times a transition to a given location is done from the current location. The number
of transitions counted is divided by the number of transitions there exists, from the
current location. When the transition matrix is used during the test, the test location
is found in the transition matrix and the chosen location to predict is the one with
the highest probability.
6.5
General feature generation
When importing the stop_locations data through the sensible_raw loader the data
contained the features; user info, timestamp, latitude, longitude, label, arrival and
departure. Boiled down the timestamp did not give me any more information than
arrival time and since I was looking at how the locations were used and not where in
==PAGE:53==
6.5 General feature generation
41
the world they were located the features latitude and longitude could be dropped in
replacement for the label, which was not as unique as GPS coordinates but unique
for the single user. The construction of these labels was done by clustering of closely
located coordinates, and a short explanation can also be found in the study [13] by
Andrea Cuttone. After removing non-necessary features, I obtained a Pandas data
frame containing user info, label, arrival and departure time. Because I had the idea
that the more we could characterise the location, the better our prediction had to
be, I constructed 11 features more based on the information given and the keystone
algorithm. The features can be seen In Table 6.1. Most of them are self-explanatory
but the once which are not I explain. classifiedAsKeystone is whether or not the
current users’ location are classified as keystones e.g. label named 1(location 1) can
have both True and False as a value throughout the data set since the value is user-
dependent. keystoneProcentage is the fraction the current location represent in the
current user’s complete keystone pool. e.g. if the user have visited a keystone location
with the label 1 10 time and a keystone location with the label 2 90 times, then loca-
tion labeled 1 will have a keystoneProcentage of 10%(0.1 in the dataset) and location
labeled 2 will have a keystoneProcentage of 90%. commonTimeSpendKeystone is the
average time duration a location is visited when is has been classified as a keystone
and commonTimeSpendGeneral is just the average time duration a location is visited.
weekendToWeekdayRatio is the fraction visits done during the weekend compared to
the weekdays, at a location. 1priorLabel and 2priorLabel is the previous label visited
and the one before that.
Features
Type
Description
user
int
user ID
label
int
location ID
arrival
int
arrival hour (0-23)
classifiedAsKeystone
boolean
keystone True or False
keystoneProcentage
float64
fraction of visits
commonTimeSpentKeystone
float64
time spent on average at keystones
commonTimeSpentGeneral
float64
time spent on average at location
numberOfVisits
int
number of visits
numberOfVisitors
int
number Of Visitors
weekendToWeekdayRatio
float64
fraction of visits during the weekend
arrivalWeekHour
int
arrival week hour (0-167)
arrivalWeekDay
int
arrival week day (0-6)
1priorLabel
int
prior location
2priorLabel
int
the one before the prior location
Table 6.1: The table contains the features used for training and testing of the machine
learning’s models. Furthermore can the datatype also be seen.
==PAGE:54==
42
6 Modeling with Keystones
6.6
Feature importance on base features
After choosing to continue using only the random forest algorithm I added all
the features from Table 6.1 but arrivalWeekHour, arrivalWeekDay, 1priorLabel and
2priorLabel to the tests in hopes of starting to see how the different features impacted
the performance. The features omitted was added later in the process after I assessed
the basic models.
The reason was that I wanted a greater understanding of why
the models performed as they did with the newly added features before adding more
features. I ran a test on around 20 users, trained on 60% of their data and a test size
of 50 tests for each user. What I did not expect was that the models performed with
very few fluctuations in their performance. An example of this can be seen in the
sub-figures of Figure 6.2, which shows four of the users’ accuracies. This result raised
a concern about whether or not the features had a different impact on the models.
Intuitively the should since it would not make sense that models trained on visits
and visitors could predict as well as the one trained on location and arrivalTime. I,
therefore, made a small test using the scikit-learn build-in feature importance tool on
the base features of the data set. The result can be seen in Figure 6.3, and it showed
that the features did not have the same importance on the model, so the problem
had to lie elsewhere. The scikit-learn build-in feature importance tool compares how
the features of the model impact the output and are defined as the overall decrease
in node impurity averaged over the random forest.
6.7
Accuracies depending on the training size.
The next thing I could test to assess why the models performed the same was the
training size. I, therefore, constructed a test that would train models on 80%, 70%,
60%, 50% and 40% of users’ data. I furthermore, constructed two features more that
had to perform badly on its own. This was arrivalWeekDay and arrivalWeekHour. I
created the test to run on 20 users, and a test size of 50 and it started to show that
the more tests I did, the more I experienced models that fluctuated in performance. It
was also consistent that arrivalWeekHour outperformed arrivalWeekDay which made
sense since arrivalWeekHour contained the same information and more than arrival-
WeekDay because it was possible to go from arrivalWeekHour to arrivalWeekDay but
not the other way around. It, therefore, came to light that these models did not
perform the same just very much alike. An example from the test can be seen in
Figure 6.4, which contains the test results from user 445 and minor differences in the
models can be seen throughout all training sizes. The training size only impacted the
overall performance of the model, and I just needed to make sure the models were
well tested going forward since a larger test size resulted in easier distinguishable
models. I, therefore, up-scaled the training size from the way too small amount of 50
test to 100, 200 or 30% of the users’ data, going forward. The following shows that
this made the models easier to interpret.
==PAGE:55==
6.8 Model comparison between all mobility steps and only transitions
43
(a) The accuracies for user 707 from mul-
tiple models trained on different features.
(b) The accuracies for user 460 from mul-
tiple models trained on different features.
(c) The accuracies for user 221 from mul-
tiple models trained on different features.
(d) The accuracies for user 204 from mul-
tiple models trained on different features.
Figure 6.2: These four plots is an example of the performance of the models being
very similar even though they were trained on different features. From the plots, it
looks like the models do not learn anything from additional features, but later on,
I found out that the small test size of 50 made the models nearly indistinguishable.
The models would show minor differences by running them multiple times on different
user, but the differences would be too small to conclude anything.
Figure 6.3: Feature importance of the base features in the data set. Taken from a
random forest model. It can be seen that the time features have the greatest impact
on the model.
6.8
Model comparison between all mobility steps and
only transitions
Another interesting thing to look into would be how the models performed if I
only predicted transitions in the trajectories when doing next place predictions since
most of the real work applications of human mobility are only concerned about the
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Modeling with Keystones
(a) The accuracies for user 445 from mul-
tiple models trained on 80% of 445’s data.
(b) The accuracies for user 445 from mul-
tiple models trained on 70% of 445’s data.
(c) The accuracies for user 445 from mul-
tiple models trained on 60% of 445’s data.
(d) The accuracies for user 445 from mul-
tiple models trained on 50% of 445’s data.
(e) The accuracies for user 445 from mul-
tiple models trained on 40% of 445’s data.
Figure 6.4: These five plots is an example of the performance of the models when
trained on different sizes
transitions within the trajectories. As long as the individuals are stagnant, the output
of most applications would not change. Since there was a chance that the earlier
discarded label powerset had better performance when only working with transitions,
I introduced it again.
The test result can be seen in Table 6.2 and a portion of the user tests can be
seen in Figure 6.5. The results show that it of cause is more difficult for the models
to predict transitions only a reason for this could the general users’ stagnations at
work and home which is both average good predictions for the models. The models
were trained using 60% of their data and only tested on 502 tests. It can be seen
from the results that Markov outperforms the other models, which is because of the
training size of the models. The interesting part of the result is that the label powerset
approach is less impacted in performance than the random forest algorithm with a 2%
decline compared to 7.56% decline. A reason for only a minor performance difference
2I did this test during the test on different training sizes, and the test size has therefore not been
up-scaled yet.
==PAGE:57==
6.9 Model exploration prediction
45
Model
Accuracy
MarkovChain
49.33 %
MarkovChainTransitionsOnly
48.00 %
RandomForest
36.00 %
RandomForestTransitionsOnly
28.44 %
LabelPowerset
28.00 %
LabelPowersetTransitionsOnly
26.00 %
Table 6.2: The table show a comparison in accuracies between models trained and
tested on all data and models trained and tested on transitions only. They table shows
markov is best by far, a clear reason for this is because of the small training size of the
models. Since I was more interested in the impact on the models individually I chosen
the smaller training size. Random forest had the largest decrease in performance
which was at 7.56%
could be a result of the independent prediction classes of the label powerset, but the
random forest algorithm still outperforms the label powerset by a lot. After the test
can, I still confirm that the random forest is still the right approach for the research.
Figure 6.5: The plot shows a part of the resulting accuracies per user when comparing
transition models to non-transition models.
6.9
Model exploration prediction
To assess how well these my models handled exploration and return, I made a
test to see how well the models predicted whether or not the next step would be
exploration or return. The test ran across 40 users with a training size of 30% and
a test size of 100 tests. In Figure 6.6, the results of the test can be seen, and they
show that the models, in some way, manage to get the exploration correct for most
users. In the Chapter 7 I talk about going forward with more testing on exploration
and how this direction could help in getting better predictions, but as for now the
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Modeling with Keystones
results hinted that the models were capable of incorporating an exploration rate good
enough for it not to be a problem standing in the way of the research objectives. I,
therefore, did not look further into exploration- and return-rate.
Figure 6.6: The figure shows the accuracies per user when a logistic regression model
and a random forest model predicts exploration or non-exploration. It can be seen
that both models depend on the user and for some users, their significantly worse but
both models perform similarly with random forest delivering better accuracy overall.
The baseline is a model guessing on the majority class, and the users are sorted based
on the number of explorations they have done from low to high.
6.10
Model with multiple features - minor tests
To assess if the performances showed, in Figure 6.4, held and in hopes of the
feature performances being more distinguishable across multiple users I made a couple
of minor tests and took the average accuracies across the users. The tests consisted of
three users trained on 60% of their data and tested on 500 random tests. By assessing
the accuracies, a distinct difference could be seen from the tests, but the different
models only varied at around 0.8% in their accuracies, but a meaningful difference
could be seen. In Table 6.3 can the results of the three users; 445, 288 and 663 be
seen. It is interesting to see that location and arrivalWeekHour is enough features for
a model to predict as well as a model trained on all features. It can furthermore be
seen that the features location and keystoneProcentage perform equally good. At last
the relationship between arrivalWeekHour, arrivalWeekDay and arrivalTime, which
I mentioned in Section 6.7, holds and can be seen in the results as arrivalWeekHour
performs better than arrivalWeekDay and arrivalTime.
6.11
Cumulative Modelling with fewer features
To verify the increase in performance when adding features, which can be seen in
Table 6.3, I made an accumulated feature test to verify that performance increased
==PAGE:59==
6.11 Cumulative Modelling with fewer features
47
training features
Accuracy
all
0.641333%
location+arrivalWeekHour
0.641333%
location+arrivalWeekDay
0.640000%
location+arrivalTime
0.638667%
location+weekdayRatio
0.633333%
location
0.633333%
keyStone+location
0.633333%
keyStoneProcentage+location
0.633333%
keystoneProcentage
0.633333%
arrivalWeekHour
0.329333%
arrivalWeekDay
0.201333%
keyStone
0.130667%
visitors
0.130000%
visits
0.130000%
Table 6.3: The table show the accuracies for the test made on user 445, 288 and 663.
Training size was 60% and test size was 500. In the results it can be seen that time
information enhance the performance of the model if trained together with location.
It can also be seen that keystoneProcentage and location performs equally good.
when adding features. The idea was to start with two models trained on arrivalTime
and location separately and then adding models with features added accumulated.
These test did not give an unambiguous result. One could assess the results and see
that a minor improvement was shown by adding features but the models either fluctu-
ated to giving worse results when adding features or did just perform the same. I there
chose to look into the distribution of how the models predicted, which led the test of
how a restricted target space would impact the models’ performance. Some results
from the accumulated feature test can be seen in Figure 6.7. A small improvement
can be seen, but the performance stagnates very fast, and a more detailed assessment
is required. The abbreviations in model goes as follows; loc: location, arrival: arrival
time in hour of the day, KSP: keystone percentage, 1previous: contains one previous
location and 2previous: contains two previous locations.
6.11.1
The actual predictions
Taking the accumulated feature tests and assess how the actual models predicted,
I saw the models predict quite differently depending on training size and the number
of features used for training. As the amount of features and training size increases
the models goes from just predicting top 3 locations to predicting up to above 10
different locations. Models trained only on arrivalHour and models trained on ar-
rivalHour and location rarely gets over predicting within top 3 of the most visited
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Modeling with Keystones
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.7: The graphs shows the accuracies from the users 810 and 590 and a small
improvement can be seen when introducing location to the models. By looking at the
models one could think that they did not learn. This is not the case. The reason for
the similarity in the models performance is that nearly all models contains location
and later I show that non of the other features improves on the performance of models
trained with only location.
locations. Training on location alone results in models making predictions on more
than 10 different locations which could imply that the arrival time restricts the model
from broader predictions. When keystoneProcentage and previous locations are added
to the training features most models starts predicted more than 10 different locations.
This observation led me to test how a restricted target space would impact the perfor-
mance of the next place prediction models if they only had to predict a small number
of locations instead of all locations.
6.12
Modeling with restricted target space
For the test of restricting the target space and assessing how it impacted the
performance, I chose to restrict it to 1,5,10 and 20 most visited locations.
This
restriction was done by grouping the rest of the locations into an ”or-something-else”
group. The idea behind the single location target was to see how well the model
would predict ”home” or ”out”. Which showed to be all too simple for all models. I
created the test to run on three users a training size of 60% of the data and a test size
of 50. I chose the small test size deliberately since this test would contain; 3 users, 18
==PAGE:61==
6.12 Modeling with restricted target space
49
models and 4 target sizes which would result in 216 models to train and test. This
took a great amount of time. After running the complete test, I plotted each model
based on their training to asses how each combination of features performed when
introducing restrictions. The results can be seen in Figure 6.8 and obviously, it shows
a decrease in performance as the size of the target grows but most models trained
on location or average time spent at the location have an increase when going from
5 to 10 in target size. It can be difficult to argue why this increase happens, and I,
therefore, extended the test to run on all target sizes from 1 to 100 in the following
test. By assessing the plots in Figure 6.8 it can also be seen that the models trained
on arrivalWeekDay, keystone(True/False), visitors and visits separately only can be
used to predict ”home” or not and they all fall to an accuracy between 0% and 10%
when introducing a larger target size.
6.12.1
Large scale target-size accuracy dependency test
In an attempt to improve on the previous test, I chose to extend the test to running
across all target sizes from 1 to 100. By up-scaling on the number of target sizes, I had
to go from 3 users to 1 since a test on one user would include training 1800 models. I
plotted out the resulting accuracies for all features in Figure 6.9 and even though it is
a bit messy because of all the fluctuations, it tells some interesting things. At first, it
can be seen that the feature keystone(True/False) produces some correct results up to
a target size of 20 which could imply that there exist patterns of trajectories between
keystone and non-keystone locations. The feature arrivalWeekDay also produces some
correct results which could be hinting a minor connection between the day of the week
and location. The accuracy improves quite a bit by replacing arrivalWeekDay with
arrivalWeekHour which could confirm the connection between location and time of
the day/time of the week.
Assessing keystonePercentage it can be seen that this
feature outperforms arrivalWeekHour and fluctuates around 40% with a target size
larger than 40. From keystonePercentage, the next increase in performance we see is
the models containing the locations feature combined with other features. By the fact
that keystonePercentage falls below the location-models in performance but still keeps
a fluctuating accuracy around 40% confirms that knowledge of keystones contains
information about the patterns in human trajectories.
For an overall assessment
of the plot, it can be seen through the fluctuations that the models decrease in
performance as the target size increases, but the decrease also diminishes as the
target size increases.
6.12.2
Accuracies for 5, 10 and 100 locations
Diving into the massive plot of Figure 6.9 and looking at single target sizes, the
overall hierarchy of the models’ performance can be seen. In Figure 6.10 ,6.11 and
6.12 the models are arranged by accuracy in decreasing order and even though the
fluctuations makes the models jump a bit in performance and thereby hierarchy, it
==PAGE:62==
50
6 Modeling with Keystones
Figure 6.8: Plots showing the accuracies of models trained on different features with
various target space.
What can be seen is that the models trained on only time
features, keystone(True/False), or visits/visitors has a significant drop in performance.
Most of them hitting 0% accuracy after a target size of 5. Nearly all of the rest of
the models starts decreasing after a target size of 10 and the decrease is not that
drastically. It can also be seen that the different users’ models have some similarity.
is quite clear that features like location, keystonePercentage and arrivalTime are im-
portant for the features performance. It can furthermore, be seen that the feature
commonTimeInGeneral, which is the average time duration of visits at locations, is
performing very well.
A reason for this could be that the duration of stops(seen
in Figure 3.10) at keystone locations or often visited locations are longer than less
frequently visited locations, and it is, therefore, possible to distinguish between the
locations based on how long time duration the user’s stay is.
==PAGE:63==
6.13 Large scale accuracy comparison across multiple users
51
Figure 6.9: The plot shows how the accuracy models trained on different features
decreases when the target size is increased. What is interesting in this plot is that fact
that a bit under all the locations trained on location information, follows the model
only trained on the keystone percentage(dark green) and just beneath that is the
model trained only on arrival week hour(dark blue). This confirms that the keystone
features are important and contains information in regards to human mobility motifs.
6.13
Large scale accuracy comparison across
multiple users
As a final test, I wanted to use all the knowledge gained throughout the research
done to create a test which showed the distributions of performance of the most
important features in regards to the research objectives. Throughout the test done
in the previous sections, I have found random forest to be the best algorithm for
next place prediction which can also be seen in Figure 6.1. From Sections 6.6 about
the importance of base features, I discovered that the time features(arrival time,
==PAGE:64==
52
6 Modeling with Keystones
Figure 6.10: The plot show the accuracies of the models used in the test shown in
Figure 6.9 when the target space is of size 5.
Figure 6.11: The plot show the accuracies of the models used in the test shown in
Figure 6.9 when the target space is of size 10.
Figure 6.12: The plot show the accuracies of the models used in the test shown in
Figure 6.9 when the target space is of size 100.
departure time and timestamp) had the greatest positive impact on the performance.
To get the best prediction as possible for the models, I did not remove stagnations
only to keep the transitions as I did Section 6.8. I interpreted the results of the minor
test about exploration(Section 6.9) as I did not need to go into deeper complexity
of the model to incorporate exploration. My tests also showed me that I needed a
large enough test size to ensure the quality of the results, therefore has this test been
done using a test size of 30% of the users’ data size. I have chosen to go forward
==PAGE:65==
6.13 Large scale accuracy comparison across multiple users
53
with the features; all, location, location+arrivalTime, keyStone, keyStone+location,
keyStoneProcentage+location and arrivalWeekHour from Section 6.11. For this test,
I wanted to see how the models performed when trained and tested as best as possible
both to assess how keystones are incorporated in human trajectories and the impact
on bettering the performance in forecasting mobility. I, therefore, kept the complete
target space since this would be most true to the research objectives and also gives
the opportunity of comparing the results to the litterateur I have reviewed by not
restricting the target space.
I created the test setup using two-layer cross-validation on 25 users and 7 different
models, using the before mentioned features. The two-layer cross-validation consists
of 1 outer loop and 3 inner loops this was chosen based on time constraints and
that starting tests using two-layer cross-validation did not show great differences
in performance based on the outer loop. The outer loop split creates Dpar, which
consists of 90% of the data and Dtest, which is the last 10%. Dpar is then split three
times in the inner loop to create Dtrain of 66% and Dval of 33%. Each model is
therefor trained on 66% of the Dpar training set and tested on 33%. After the inner
loop, all models are trained once more to compute the test error. This is done on the
last 10%, Dtest. Usually, the two-layer cross-validation is used to find the best model,
but in my case am I still interested in less accurate models. Altogether the test trains
21 models in the inner loop and 7 more in the outer, which gives 28 models per user.
The models are on average, trained on 984 locations and tested on 492, which results
in around 40 minutes of training and testing per model. Training and testing all my
models meant that the test had to run for around 470 hours or 19.5 days for 35 users.
The distribution of the average accuracies can be seen in 6.13, which shows that the
best average performance has an accuracy of 40%.
In 6.13 we can see that keyStone+location, keyStoneProcentage+location and lo-
cation all have an mean of 40% and a very broad distribution across the users. It
can furthermore be seen that the keystone features both True/False and percentage
does not contributed to the performance when combined with locations. Looking at
the keyStoneProcentage feature by it self it can be seen that the feature provide some
useful knowledge and the model is not without capabilities. By assessing the model
location+ArrivalTime in Figure 6.13 it can be seen that ArrivalTime somehow im-
pairs the location feature since it in general performs worse by including ArrivalTime
to the training features.
In Figure 6.14 can the validation errors be seen. These errors correspond directly
to the accuracies seen in Figure 6.13 and these errors are used together with the
estimate of the generalisation error in the two-level cross-validation. If these valida-
tion errors are below our generalisation error estimate(seen in Figure 6.15) then there
is a good chance that the models are too optimistic and a reason for this could be
overfitting. A discussion about the random forest algorithm and overfitting can be
found in Chapter 7. The idea behind two-level cross-validation is to use the estimate
of the generalisation error per model, which is computed in the inner loop, to choose
the best model. This model is then trained and tested on the data split of the outer
loop to compute the final generalisation error of the model. From Figure 6.15 Markov
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Modeling with Keystones
Figure 6.13: The plot shows the average accuracies of the models trained. It can be
seen that Markov performs the best and one reason for this could be that the trained
models vary very much in performance depending on the user data. We can therefore
see that some of the models trained with the location feature perform at an accuracy
of around 0% and three of the models also have accuracies up till around 90%. It is
also interesting to see that the models only trained on the keystone percentage still
delivers some performance which indicated that the keystone feature has important
information on the human trajectories.
Figure 6.14: The plot shows the average validation error which corresponds directly
to the average accuracies seen in Figure 6.13 and it can be seen that markov has the
lowest amount of errors. It can also be seen that for some users the machine learning
models performs better that the markov but on average they perform worse.
can be seen as the best model structure, and this should be the one to chose. Since
I want to assess the overall performance when introducing keystones, I compute the
final generalisation error for all models when trained on a new test set. If I had to
ensure the reliability of the models in regards to overfitting, I could conclude, from
Figure 6.15, that none of the models are overfitted. This can be see by comparing
Figure 6.14 and 6.15 which shows that none of the models performs better than the
final generalisation errors.
Figure 6.13, 6.14 and 6.15 shows that markov perform the best overall but this
also tells us that markov have the most steady performance where as the performance
==PAGE:67==
6.13 Large scale accuracy comparison across multiple users
55
Figure 6.15: This model shows that the average generalisation errors of the models
are lower than what we seen in figure 6.14 which means that most of the models are
not too optimistic in their predictions on average. The models with an validation
error below 30% could be seen to be too optimistic from the average generalisation
error.
of the random forest models depend very much on the data fed to the system and
we therefore see that they fluctuates very much in their performance. Some of these
fluctuations could maybe have been avoided by only looking at the best trajectories
in terms of how often data was recorded. This is also done in the study[13] by Andrea
Cuttone where they only look at trajectories which contains steady amount data with
a cutoff threshold of 15 minutes.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Results & Discussion
In this chapter, I will first address and answer the research questions constructed
from the research objectives and afterwards, will I discuss relevant elements and
subjects that have emerged during the work of the research.
7.1
Results
As stated in the research objectives, I intended to assess how keystones were used
throughout human trajectories and quantify the impact of keystones on the perfor-
mance in regards to next place predictions. To answer the first research question;
How is keystone locations used compared to non-keystone locations? I call attention
to the general distributions computed in Chapter 3. Figure 3.6 and 3.7 suggest that
there exists a major difference in how keystone and non-keystones are used in terms
of time duration spent in average. Where keystone locations, in general, are visited
for longer periods. I plotted the average duration of a stop for keystones and non-
keystones in Figure 7.1 to conclude that this was the case. The average stop at a
keystone location is around 11.8 hours and only around 2.25 hour for non-keystone
locations.
Figure 7.1: The plot show the distribution of time spent at keystones and non-
keystone locations and it can be seen that the visits at keystones locations are much
longer than non-keystone locations.
Since I from Chapter 3 could conclude that humans, in general, spent most their
time during a day at keystones I back this general result by looking into how many
times a keystone location is visited compared to non-keystones so that it clearly can
be seen that keystones are visited for a longer period and many more times than non-
==PAGE:70==
58
7 Results & Discussion
keystones. This can be seen in Figure 3.4 and 3.5 in Chapter 3 where non-keystone
locations on average is visited around
3.5 times compared to the
135 times that
keystones on average is visited.
The observations done, therefore, clearly shows that the keystone locations are
used more frequently and longer than non-keystone locations. To address the second
research question; How does the keystone feature impact the performance when doing
next step prediction?, I call attention to the models presented in Chapter 6. With the
final test done in section 6.13, the keystones features did not show to be a supplement
to the location feature which was the feature used for the best performing model ex-
cluding the Markov baseline and the keystone feature models could not outperform
location alone. Even though the keystone features did not improve on performance
it could still be seen as a very explanatory feature that contains much information
about the user since the keystoneProcentage feature alone performs okay compare to
the rest and it even outperforms location+arrivalTime. These results show the char-
acteristics of keystones contain much information about the users’ mobility patterns,
and even though they do not improve on performance, there could be future poten-
tial in continue working with characteristics and improve on the idea of keystone to
enhance the performance of potential prediction models.
7.2
Discussion
This section contains a discussion on dilemmas introduces throughout the research
and elements which could have been accessed differently.
7.2.1
Recommender system as solution design
The recommender system design of the system showed to be unnecessary for the
research I ended up doing.
It showed to elevate the system complexity since the
models throughout the tests were designed to predict the probability of multiple
features which would never be used. It could have been interesting to analyse this
distribution further to assess if patterns would have shown up for the next and third-
best prediction. It could also have been as evaluation for the predicted values and as
an extension to redo the prediction with extra features inspired by the NexTclustering
algorithm from the study [11] by Carmela Comito.
7.2.2
Performance measuring and accuracy
The system was designed as a multi-labelled classification model, and this meant
that the predictions of the models contained multiple values. The problem this intro-
duces was that a sparse prediction vector could produce excellent accuracies because
of all the true negatives. Furthermore would both precision1 and recall also be im-
1Introduced in section 5.3 of Chapter 5
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Discussion
59
pacted because of the sparsity of the prediction.
It would make it look like the
models performed very well because they got all the non-interesting locations correct.
i.e. where would the user not go? I, therefore, chose to use only accept a correct
prediction if it was 100% correct and then use accuracy2, precision, recall and more
for clarification if I was in doubt of the results. I also interpreted Andrea Cuttone’s
[13] models to have been constructed with the same way of performance evaluation
in mind.
7.2.3
Time constraints
Time has been a major constraint for the research. As features were added, and I
wanted to compare models trained on different features, the training- and test times
grew which resulted in the overall test ending up taking very much time to execute.
The consequences of this were that if the test results were bad the time spent on the
test was lost, and some test had to be shortened in user-size or test-size so that I could
obtain quicker indications of the directions of the results before running larger and
more thorough tests. By utilising parallel computations through GPU, it could have
been possible to speed up the process to come around some of the time constrains.
This is also shown in a study [33] from 2014 where they speed up a random forest
by utilising the parallel architecture of the GPU. This was sadly not possible on the
hardware available. NVidia GPU’s could be used for further research since they have
software that optimizes them for research in the field of machine learning.
7.2.4
two-layer cross-validation
Two-layer cross-validation can be introduced to a model to ensure better results.
Not exactly better performance but more trustworthy results. Throughout forums
and articles online is it possible to obtain the belief that random forest can not overfit
because the randomisation of multiple decision trees reduces variance which counter-
acts overfitting. These believes are also presented in an article [45] named When do
random forests fail? from 2018 where they assess in which cases random forest models
tend to overfit. In another study [47] from 2017 shows that in their case, optimisation
strategies for three different machine learning models(random forest included) results
in overfitting. The optimisation is done in the input of the algorithm and does not
change anything in regards to the random forest algorithm. This article, therefore,
shows that random forest indeed can overfit. To ensure my models were not overfitted,
and I could trust my results, I introduce two-layer cross-validation.
2This refers to the accuracy score presented in section 5.3 and not the overall accuracies computed
for the model throughout Chapter 6, since these states how many of a model’s predictions has been
correct.
==PAGE:72==
60
7 Results & Discussion
7.2.5
Keystones in a business-oriented view
By combining the idea behind keystones with the DISTRAS[37] framework, there
could exist a business idea for producing even more realistic synthetic mobility data.
By incorporating the knowledge about how individuals use keystones, it could be
possible to ensure that the preferential returns of DISTRAS were valid to how humans
use keystones in their trajectories.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Throughout this research, I have tried to characterize the way people use keystones
and attempted to investigate how keystones can help to forecast mobility. I proposed
a new way of classifying important locations within human trajectories known as
keystones, namely through the keystone algorithm. I looked into how keystones are
incorporated into human mobility and how they could be utilized when doing next
place prediction.
By assessing how keystones are used in human mobility my research presented in
Chapter 3 showed how it was possible to locate these important locations named
keystones and show that they were used differently than normal locations since they
were both used a lot more often and for longer periods. It could, furthermore, be
seen that not all keystones had the same importance and somewhere used more than
others, but they all had in common that the duration visited was much higher than
non-keystone locations.
The keystone information was then used in next place prediction.
I designed a
location-based multi-criteria recommender system where I used the machine learn-
ing algorithms logistic regression, random forest and multi-label k-nearest-neighbour
for next place prediction. I used Markov chains as a baseline for the models. Through-
out testing, I concluded that random forest outperformed the logistic regression and
MLKNN by far.
By looking into the performance of models trained with multiple different features, it
showed that the location feature was the strongest overall and models train solely on
this feature delivered the best performance. This was seen throughout most of the
test of Chapter 6. The test shows that the feature keystone(True/False) rarely could
be used for any prediction or improvement to other features for a model. The key-
stone percentage1 showed to contain more important information for the prediction
process, but it did sadly not improve on models trained on the location feature. I
was seen that models trained only the keystone percentage had an average accuracy2
of 32.3% where models trained on location solely had an average accuracy of 39.66%.
Adding keystone percentage would actually decrease this accuracy by 0.01% to an
1how often a keystone has been visited compare to other keystones
2This can be seen in Figure 6.13.
==PAGE:74==
62
8 Conclusion
average accuracy of 39.65% for models train on location and keystone percentage.
It can be concluded that keystones are still of great importance and tells us something
about which locations within human trajectories are important for the overall human
mobility because it contains important information on why humans move like they do.
However, when trying to do next place prediction, I can conclude that the keystones
do not improve on the overall performance if location information is available when
trying to forecast human mobility.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 9
Further work
In this section I will go over ideas that could be interesting to research further.
9.1
Collective vs individuals
Throughout my research, I have chosen to use models for individual prediction,
and it could be exciting to see how collective models would compare in performance
in next place prediction. By clustering users based on their used locations, a model
could learn more about how the different users use the same locations and this could
result in a performance enhancement. Clustering users together which do not use
the same locations or resembles each other would most likely result in a decrease in
performance, and I, therefore, think that the clustering process is critical and it had
to be tested to see how different types of clusters would impact overall performance.
9.2
User and location characteristics
It could also be very interesting to be looking into more information about the
user and the locations in the data set. This could be interesting both for collective
modelling and individual modelling. User information would only give something in
a cluster of users. However, information like job status, civil status, family infor-
mation(their trajectories) or hobbies, could have a positive impact on the prediction
performance since more of the users life is mapped out and gives us an opportunity
of know why the users are moving as they are. If we could combine this with more in-
formation about the locations visited, I think we would see overall better predictions.
The information about the locations could be what type of location is it, residential,
offices, industrial, stores or entertainment. It also is exciting to incorporate the users’
social network since there is a good chance that social events could be predicted by
these networks and have a major influence on how the users’ trajectories form out.
These networks would, therefore, give us great information when it comes to next
place prediction. These additions could introduce major GDPR violations, and we
had to ensure the data was obtained correctly.
==PAGE:76==
64
9 Further work
9.2.1
Returners vs explores
Maybe the performance could increase even further if the users are divided into
returners and explores [38]. Since research has shown a distinct difference between
returners and explores, it could be interesting to incorporate this in a system. This
would only make sense in a collective system since, for the individual prediction, the
models adapt the behaviour of the single user. It could be interesting to search for
more characteristics like returners and explores. Maybe could an A/B personality
have an impact on how the users’ transition throughout the day.
9.3
Time-series analysis
It could be exciting to look into time-series analysis in terms of next place pre-
dictions since this would enable us to incorporate the history of the user into the
prediction process where we at the moment only ask where the user go from the cur-
rent location. This would require a complete redesign of everything within the system,
and time-series analysis does not work the same way as what is presented in this pa-
per, but it could be very interesting to see how it would impact the performance of
the predictions.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Adomavicius, N. Manouselis, and Y. Kwon. In: October 2011. Chapter Multi-
Criteria Recommender Systems, pages 769–803.
[2]
L. Alessandretti, P. Sapiezynski, S. Lehmann, and A. Baronchelli. “Evidence
for a Conserved Quantity in Human Mobility”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 2
(July 2018). doi: 10.1038/s41562-018-0364-x.
[3]
L. Alessandretti, P. Sapiezynski, S. Lehmann, and A. Baronchelli. “Multi-scale
spatio-temporal analysis of human mobility”. In: PLOS ONE 12 (September
2016). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171686.
[4]
T. Arentze and H. Timmermans. “Albatross: A Learning Based Transportation
Oriented Simulation System”. In: Transportation Research Part B: Methodolog-
ical 38 (August 2004), pages 613–633. doi: 10.1016/j.trb.2002.10.001.
[5]
F. Attneave. “Earl B. Hunt. Concept learning: An information processing prob-
lem. New York: John Wiley and Co., 1962”. In: Behavioral Science 8.4 (January
1963), pages 346–346. issn: 0005-7940. doi: 10.1002/bs.3830080408. url:
https://doi.org/10.1002/bs.3830080408.
[6]
H. Barbosa, M. Barthelemy, G. Ghoshal, C. James, M. Lenormand, et al. “Hu-
man Mobility: Models and Applications”. In: Physics Reports (September 2017).
doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2018.01.001.
[7]
C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science
and Statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006. isbn: 0387310738.
[8]
D. Brockmann, L. Hufnagel, and T. Geisel. “The scaling laws of human travel”.
In: Nature 439.7075 (2006), pages 462–465. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/
nature04292. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04292.
[9]
R. Burke. “Knowledge-Based Recommender Systems”. In: (2000), page 2000.
[10]
V. Colizza, A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, A.-J. Valleron, and A. Vespignani. “Mod-
eling the Worldwide Spread of Pandemic Influenza: Baseline Case and Contain-
ment Interventions”. In: PLOS Medicine 4.1 (January 2007), pages 1–16. doi:
10.1371/journal.pmed.0040013. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.0040013.
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
[11]
C. Comito. “Where are You Going?: Next Place Prediction from Twitter”. In:
2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics
(DSAA). 2017, pages 696–705.
[12]
D. Cournapeau. scikit-learn, Machine Learning in Python. 2007. url: https:
//scikit-learn.org/stable/ (visited on February 7, 2020).
[13]
A. Cuttone, S. Lehmann, and M. C. Gonzalez. “Understanding Predictability
and Exploration in Human Mobility”. In: EPJ Data Science 7 (August 2016).
doi: 10.1140/epjds/s13688-017-0129-1.
[14]
N. Developers. NumPy. 2005. url: https://numpy.org/ (visited on February 7,
2020).
[15]
D. Dreyer Lassen. Social Fabric - Copenhagen Network Study. 2013. url: https:
//sodas.ku.dk/projects/social-fabric/ (visited on February 4, 2019).
[16]
M. Droettboom. Matplotlib. 2003. url: https://matplotlib.org/index.html
(visited on February 7, 2020).
[17]
A. Einstein. “Über die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte
Bewegung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen”. In: Annalen
der Physik 322.8 (January 1905), pages 549–560. issn: 0003-3804. doi: 10.1002/
andp.19053220806. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.19053220806.
[18]
D. Goldberg, D. Nichols, B. M. Oki, and D. Terry. “Using Collaborative Fil-
tering to Weave an Information Tapestry”. In: Commun. ACM 35.12 (Decem-
ber 1992), pages 61–70. issn: 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/138859.138867. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/138859.138867.
[19]
M. C. González, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabási. “Understanding individual
human mobility patterns”. In: Nature 453.7196 (2008), pages 779–782. issn:
1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature06958. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature06958.
[20]
A. Hagberg, D. Schult, and P. Swart. NetworkX - Software for complex network.
2014. url: https://networkx.github.io/ (visited on February 7, 2020).
[21]
D. Hand and P. Christen. “A note on using the F-measure for evaluating
record linkage algorithms”. In: Statistics and Computing 28.3 (February 2018),
pages 539–547. doi: 10 . 1007 / s11222 - 017 - 9746 - 6. url: https : / / app .
dimensions.ai/details/publication/pub.1084928040.
[22]
S. Hasan, C. Schneider, S. Ukkusuri, and M. C. Gonzalez. “Spatiotemporal
Patterns of Urban Human Mobility”. In: Journal of Statistical Physics 151 (April
2012), pages 1–15. doi: 10.1007/s10955-012-0645-0.
[23]
T. Herlau, M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning
and Data Mining. Technical University of Denmark, September 2018.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
67
[24]
D. Higgins. Classify all the Things (with multiple labels): The most common
type of modeling task no one talks about. June 2018. url: https://blog.domi
nodatalab.com/classify-things-multiple-labels/ (visited on February 6,
2020).
[25]
T. K. Ho. “Random decision forests”. In: Proceedings of 3rd International Con-
ference on Document Analysis and Recognition. Volume 1. 1995, 278–282 vol.1.
[26]
M. W. Horner and M. E. O’Kelly. “Embedding economies of scale concepts for
hub network design”. English. In: Journal of Transport Geography 9.4 (2001),
pages 255–265.
[27]
M. Jacomy, T. Venturini, S. Heymann, and M. Bastian. “ForceAtlas2, a Contin-
uous Graph Layout Algorithm for Handy Network Visualization Designed for
the Gephi Software”. In: PLOS ONE 9.6 (June 2014), e98679. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0098679. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0098679.
[28]
H. Larralde, P. Trunfio, S. Havlin, H. Stanley, and G. Weiss. “Number of dis-
tinct sites visited by N random walkers”. In: Physical review. A 45 (June 1992),
pages 7128–7138. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.45.7128.
[29]
H. Li, F. Cai, and Z. Liao. “Content-Based Filtering Recommendation Algo-
rithm Using HMM”. In: Proceedings - 4th International Conference on Compu-
tational and Information Sciences, ICCIS 2012 (August 2012), pages 275–277.
doi: 10.1109/ICCIS.2012.112.
[30]
P. Maes. “Agents That Reduce Work and Information Overload”. In: Commun.
ACM 37.7 (July 1994), pages 30–40. issn: 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/176789.
176792. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/176789.176792.
[31]
P. Maes, R. H. Guttman, and A. G. Moukas. “Agents that Buy and Sell: Trans-
forming Commerce as we Know It”. In: (1999).
[32]
A. C. Management. Pandas. 2012. url: https://pandas.pydata.org/ (visited
on February 7, 2020).
[33]
D. Marron, A. Bifet, and G. Morales. “Random forests of very fast decision
trees on GPU for mining evolving big data streams”. In: Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence and Applications 263 (January 2014), pages 615–620. doi: 10.3233/
978-1-61499-419-0-615.
[34]
E. Montroll and G. Weiss. “Random Walks on Lattices. II”. In: Journal of
Mathematical Physics 6 (February 1965), pages 167–181. doi: 10 . 1063 / 1 .
1704269.
[35]
K. Nagel and M. Paczuski. “Emergent traffic jams”. In: Phys. Rev. E 51 (4
April 1995), pages 2909–2918. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.51.2909. url: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.51.2909.
[36]
L. Pappalardo, S. Rinzivillo, and F. Simini. “Human Mobility Modelling: Ex-
ploration and Preferential Return Meet the Gravity Model”. In: ANT/SEIT.
2016.
==PAGE:80==
68
Bibliography
[37]
L. Pappalardo and F. Simini. “Data-driven generation of spatio-temporal rou-
tines in human mobility”. In: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 32 (De-
cember 2017). doi: 10.1007/s10618-017-0548-4.
[38]
L. Pappalardo, F. Simini, S. Rinzivillo, D. Pedreschi, F. Giannotti, et al. “Re-
turners and explorers dichotomy in human mobility”. In: Nature Communica-
tions 6 (September 2015). doi: 10.1038/ncomms9166.
[39]
K. PEARSON. “The Problem of the Random Walk”. In: Nature 72.1865 (1905),
pages 294–294. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/072294b0. url: https://doi.
org/10.1038/072294b0.
[40]
D. Quercia, N. Lathia, F. Calabrese, G. Lorenzo, and J. Crowcroft. “Recom-
mending Social Events from Mobile Phone Location Data”. In: December 2010,
pages 971–976. doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2010.152.
[41]
C. Schneider, V. Belik, T. Couronné, Z. Smoreda, and M. C. Gonzalez. “Unrav-
elling daily human mobility motifs”. In: Journal of the Royal Society, Interface
/ the Royal Society 10 (April 2013), page 20130246. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.
0246.
[42]
C. Song, T. Koren, P. Wang, and A.-L. Barabasi. “Modelling the scaling prop-
erties of human mobility”. In: Nature Physics 6 (October 2010). doi: 10.1038/
nphys1760.
[43]
A. Stopczynski, V. Sekara, P. Sapiezynski, A. Cuttone, m. Madsen, et al. “Mea-
suring Large-Scale Social Networks with High Resolution”. In: PloS one 9 (April
2014), e95978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095978.
[44]
Y. Takeuchi and M. Sugimoto. “CityVoyager: An Outdoor Recommendation
System Based on User Location History”. In: (September 2006), pages 625–636.
doi: 10.1007/11833529_64.
[45]
C. Tang, D. Garreau, and U. Luxburg. When do random forests fail? October
2018.
[46]
M. Tizzoni, P. Bajardi, A. Decuyper, G. Kon Kam King, C. M. Schneider, et al.
“On the Use of Human Mobility Proxies for Modeling Epidemics”. In: PLOS
Computational Biology 10.7 (July 2014), pages 1–15. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1003716. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003716.
[47]
T. Tusar, K. Gantar, V. Koblar, B. Zenko, and B. Filipic. “A Study of Over-
fitting in Optimization of a Manufacturing Quality Control Procedure”. In: Ap-
plied Soft Computing 59 (May 2017). doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2017.05.027.
[48]
P. Wang, T. Hunter, A. M. Bayen, K. Schechtner, and M. C. Gonzáleza. “Un-
derstanding Road Usage Patterns in Urban Areas”. In: Scientific Reports 2 (1
December 2012), pages 2045–2322. doi: 10 . 1038 / srep01001. url: https :
//doi.org/10.1038/srep01001.
[49]
M. Waskom. Seaborn: statistical data visualization. 2012. url: https://seabo
rn.pydata.org/ (visited on February 7, 2020).
