==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Characterization of anti-virulence
compounds against Staphylococcus
aureus produced by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Amalie Hartmann Rasmussen (s143824)
February 26th 2020
Master thesis in biotechnology
35 ECTS
Supervisors: Mikkel Anbo, Lars Jelsbak
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a multidrug resistant pathogen
causing severe human infections. Only few antibiotics are currently eﬀective against
this pathogen, emphasizing the importance of developing new anti-staphylococcal
drugs. Hence, alternative therapeutic approaches such as anti-virulence treatments
are currently being explored. The clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PADK2
has been found to exhibit an anti-virulence eﬀect against S. aureus, which has been
attributed to products of the pqs system of PADK2.
In the present study the eﬀect of WT PADK2, PADK2 ∆pqsL and PADK2 ∆pqsH
on the gene expression of RNAIII, hla and spa in both the MSSA 8325-4 and MRSA
JE2 (USA300) strain was investigated. Furthermore, a quantitative —-galactosidase
activity assay was set up to measure the eﬀect of an ethyl acetate extract of PADK2
on S. aureus virulence gene expression, when administered at concentrations that did
not inhibit the growth of S. aureus. Finally, the ability of the PADK2 extract to
rescue MRSA-infected Galleria mellonella larvae was assessed.
Based on the results obtained in this study, it was found that products of the
AQNO pathway of the pqs system are responsible for both the eﬀects observed on
virulence gene regulation and a growth-inhibiting eﬀect on S. aureus by PADK2.
Moreover, concentrations of a PADK2 organic extract that did not inhibit the growth
rate of S. aureus were still able to aﬀect RNAIII expression in 8325-4. However, when
the same concentrations of the PADK2 extract were injected to MRSA-infected lar-
vae, an increase in larvae death was observed compared to a PBS-treated group. This
indicates that the initial goal of identifying a new anti-virulence drug against MRSA
by the PADK2 pqs system might not be achievable. Conclusively, it is hypothesised
that diﬀerent concentrations of HQNO aﬀect S. aureus diﬀerently to an extent compa-
rable to many antibiotics, with high concentrations having a strong growth-inhibiting
eﬀect, whereas subinhibitory concentrations of HQNO may have a diﬀerential eﬀect
on S. aureus virulence gene regulation.
i
==PAGE:3==
Resume
Methicillin-Resistente Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) er en multiresistent patogen,
som forårsager alvorlige humane infektioner. Kun få antibiotika er stadig eﬀektive
imod denne patogen, hvilket understreger vigtigheden af at udvikle nye anti-stafylokok
medikamenter. Der bliver derfor intensivt forsket i alternative terapeutiske metoder
så som anti-virulente behandlinger. Den kliniske Pseudomonas aeruginosa stamme
PADK2 er blevet påvist til at udvise en anti-virulent eﬀekt imod S. aureus, hvilket er
blevet tilskrevet til produkter fra pqs systemet i PADK2.
Dette studie undersøgte eﬀekten a WT PADK2, PADK2 ∆pqsL og PADK2 ∆pqsH
imod genekspressionen af RNAIII, hla og spa i både en MSSA 8325-4 og MRSA JE2
(USA300) stamme. Derudover blev et kvantitativt —-galactosidase aktivitetsforsøg
sat op for at kunne måle eﬀekten af et ethyl acetat ekstrakt fra PADK2 imod virulens
genekspressionen i S. aureus, når tildelt i en koncentration som ikke påvirkede S.
aureus’ vækst. Til slut blev det undersøgt, hvorvidt PADK2 ekstraktet var i stand
til at redde MRSA-inﬁcerede Galleria mellonella larver.
Baseret på dette viste det sig at produkter fra AQNO-vejen af pqs systemet
er ansvarlige for både den observerede eﬀekt på virulens genekspressionen samt en
vækstinhiberende eﬀekt på S. aureus af PADK2. Herudover viste det sig, at kon-
centrationer af et PADK2 organisk ekstrakt, som ikke påvirkede vækst-raten af S.
aureus, stadig var istand til at have en eﬀekt på RNAIII ekspressionen i 8325-4.
Når samme koncentrationer af PADK2 ekstraktet blev injiceret til MRSA-inﬁcerede
larver, viste der sig dog en forøgelse i larvedødelighed sammenlignet med en PBS-
behandlet gruppe. Dette indikerer, at det oprindelige mål med at identiﬁcerer et nyt
anti-virulent medikament imod MRSA fra PADK2s pqs system nok ikke er muligt. Af-
slutningsvis blev der opsat en hypotese om, at forskellige koncentrationer af HQNO
påvirker S. aureus forskelligt, på en måde som er sammenligneligt med mange an-
tibiotika, hvor høje koncentrationer har en stærk vækst-inhiberende eﬀekt, hvorimod
subinhibitoriske koncentrationer af HQNO kan have en ukendt eﬀekt på S. aureus’
virulens genekspression.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Preface and Acknowledgement
This thesis was completed as the ﬁnal part of a Master of Science degree in Biotech-
nology, Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was
carried out from August 26th 2019 to February 26th 2020 with the research group
Infectious Microbiology Group (IMG) at DTU Bioengineering lead by Professor Lars
Jelsbak. The project had a workload of 35 ECTS points and was supervised by Mikkel
Anbo and Professor Lars Jelsbak.
I would like to give my gratitude to a great number of people, as their help has been
of enormous value for ﬁnishing this thesis. First of all I would like to give a special
thank you to Mikkel Anbo for his invaluable help and guidance throughout the project
and for always ﬁnding the time to answer my questions. A special thank you to Lars
Jelsbak as well for always being available for questions and a thorough discussion of
the results obtained in this study. Also, a thank you to Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen for
taking the time to enlighten me about the theory of LC-DAD-MS.
I would like to thank the whole IMG research group as well together with the associ-
ated students. It has been a pleasure to work in this group with so many helpful and
welcoming people, who have assisted me in several aspects of the experimental work.
It has been a great working environment!
Last but not least, I would like to thank family and friends for their invaluable sup-
port, patience, and understanding throughout this process, and especially Javier Durá
María and Anders Hartmann Rasmussen for proofreading of my thesis and giving
valuable feedback.
Amalie Hartmann Rasmussen
February 2020
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Staphylococcus aureus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
The agr system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Other important virulence regulators in S. aureus . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Anti-staphylococcal therapies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Anti-virulence therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Suitable infection models for assessing the in vivo eﬃcacy of
new anti-staphylococcal agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Pseudomonas aeruginosa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.1
The pqs system and its products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.2
Interactions between P. aeruginosa and S. aureus . . . . . . .
12
1.5
The project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Materials and methods
14
2.1
Media and cultivation conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Qualitative interaction assay between P. aeruginosa and S. aureus . .
15
2.3
Bioactivity of organic extracts from P. aeruginosa towards S. aureus
16
2.3.1
Ethyl acetate extractions of P. aeruginosa cultures
. . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Qualitative bioactivity assay of P. aeruginosa organic extractions 16
2.4
Bioactivity of PADK2 4448c mutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Generation of PADK2 ∆pqsL and PADK2 ∆pqsH mutants . .
16
2.4.2
Study of the PADK2 4448c mutants eﬀect on S. aureus reporter
strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Quantitative study of the PADK2 4448c extract’s eﬀect on S. aureus
virulence gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5.1
—-galactosidase activity assay of S. aureus reporter genes . . .
19
2.5.2
The eﬀect of diﬀerent 4448c extract dilutions on S. aureus growth 20
2.5.3
—-galactosidase activity assay of S. aureus reporter genes when
grown with a 4448c extract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
The antistaphylococcal eﬀect of Fraction 14 in the infection model G.
mellonella . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6.1
Toxicity of Fraction 14 to G. mellonella
. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6.2
Treatment of MRSA infected G. mellonella with Fraction 14 .
22
2.7
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Results
24
3.1
PAO1 and 4448c aﬀect gene expression of RNAIII, hla and spa in both
MSSA and MRSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Bioactivity of organic extracts from P. aeruginosa . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
PAO1 and 4448c have diﬀerent AQ proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Organic extractions from PAO1 and 4448c aﬀect virulence gene
expression in both MSSA and MRSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:6==
3.3
The AQNO-pathway of the pqs system is related to both the anti-
virulence and growth-inhibiting eﬀects observed by PADK2 towards S.
aureus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Quantitative study of the PADK2 4448c extract’s eﬀect on S. aureus
virulence gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.1
RNAIII and Hla expression peaks after approximately 3-4 hours
of growth in both 8325-4 and JE2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.2
Fraction 14 aﬀects the growth rate of S. aureus at certain dilutions 35
3.4.3
Fraction 14 aﬀects RNAIII expression in 8325-4 through a mech-
anism that is not related to growth-inhibition
. . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Assessment of the antistaphylococcal eﬀect of Fraction 14 in the infec-
tion model G. mellonella . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5.1
Fraction 14 is not toxic to G. mellonella, when given at the
optimal concentrations found in section 3.4.2 . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5.2
Fraction 14 seems to have a negative impact on larvae survival,
when these have also been infected with MRSA . . . . . . . .
42
4
Discussion
45
4.1
Qualitative studies of PADK2’s eﬀect towards S. aureus reporter strains 45
4.2
Quantitative studies of the PADK2 extract’s eﬀect on S. aureus viru-
lence gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
The PADK2 extract’s eﬀect on MRSA in G. mellonella . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusion
51
6
Future prospects
52
List of Figures
53
List of Tables
55
Appendices
71
A Media recipes
71
B Plate set-up of qualitative interaction assays
72
B.1 Bioactivity assay of organic extracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B.2 Co-culture assay with 4448c ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH mutants
. . . . . . .
72
C Plasmid, primers and protocols used during the generation of the
PADK2 mutants
73
C.1 Primers utilised . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.2 The pNJ1 plasmid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.3 Digestion protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
C.4 Ligation protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
C.5 DreamTaq PCR conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
D Relevant gel pictures
77
E BPCs and EICs of organic extractions from P. aeruginosa
78
v
==PAGE:7==
F Alignments of the ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH alleles with the WT genes
81
G A420 over time without Fraction 14
82
H A420 over time with Fraction 14
85
I
Growth curves of 8325-4 and JE2 in the fraction dilution assay
87
J
Comparison of BPCs from a PADK2 organic extract and Fraction
14
88
K Standard curve of the correlation between OD values and CFU/mL
in WT JE2
88
L Eﬀectiveness of the bead beater treatment
89
vi
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
2-ABA
2-aminobenzoylacetate
2-ABA-CoA
2-aminobenzoylacetyl-CoA
2-HABA
2- hydroxylaminobenzoylacetate
Agr
Accessory gene regulator
AI
Autoinducer
AIP
Autoinducing peptide
AMP
Antimicrobial peptide
AQNOs
2-alkyl-4-hydroxyquinolone N-oxides
AQs
2-alkyl-4-hydroxyquinolones
BPC
Base Peak Chromatogram
CA-MRSA
Community-associated Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
CF
Cystic ﬁbrosis
CFTR
CF transmembrane conductance regulator
CFU
Colony Forming Units
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
EIC
Extracted Ion Chromatogram
FDA
The Food and Drug Administration
HA-MRSA
Healthcare-associated Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
HHQ
2-heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline
HQNO
2-heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline-N-oxide
HR
Homology Region
IMG
Infectious Microbiology Group
LA-MRSA
Livestock-associated Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
LB
Luria-Bertani
MRSA
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSSA
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus
ONPG
O-nitrophenyl —-o-galactopyranoside
PBP
Penicillin-binding protein
vii
==PAGE:9==
PBS
Phosphate-Buﬀered Saline
PCR
Polymerase Chain Reaction
PNAG
Polysaccharide poly-N-acetylglucosamine
PQS
Pseudomonas quinolone signal
PSM
Phenol-soluble modulins
QS
Quorum-sensing
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
Rot
Repressor of toxins
Sae
S. aureus exoprotein expression
Sar
Staphylococcal accessory regulator
SCCmec
Staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec
SCV
Small-colony variants
SE
Standard Error
SolB
Solonamide B
TCS
Two-Component System
Tet
Tetracycline
TSA
Tryptic Soy Agar
TSB
Tryptic Soy Broth
TSST-1
Toxic shock syndrome toxin 1
VISA
Vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus
VRSA
Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
WHO
World Health Organization
WT
Wild-Type
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus is known to cause a variety of hu-
man infections, ranging from moderately severe skin infections to life-threatening dis-
eases like fatal pneumonia and sepsis [1, 2]. However, treatment of S. aureus infections
have become severely complicated by the fact that this pathogen has acquired resis-
tance towards a great number of antimicrobial agents [3] (Figure 1). The multidrug-
resistant strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) have received
a great deal of attention as only few antibiotics are currently eﬀective against this
pathogen. Hence, in 2017 it was labelled by the World Health Organization (WHO)
as a “high priority” pathogen for which new anti-infective drugs must urgently be
developed [4]. Glycopeptides like vancomycin have long been the drug of choice for
anti-MRSA therapy [2, 5]. However, since the beginning of year 2000 vancomycin-
resistant S. aureus (VRSA) strains have started to appear [6, 7]. This emphasizes the
urgent need for the development of new anti-microbial drugs against this pathogen.
Figure 1: The development of antibiotic resistance within S. aureus
strains.
A timeline from the 1940’s to the beginning of 2000 showing the
emergence of resistance in S. aureus relative to the introduction of signiﬁ-
cant antibiotic classes. CA-MRSA; community-associated MRSA, LA-MRSA;
livestock-associated MRSA, VISA; Vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus, VRSA;
Vancomycin-resistant S. aureus. Figure obtained from [8].
1
==PAGE:11==
Unfortunately, an increasing number of pharmaceutical companies have either
dramatically reduced or discontinued their research and development eﬀorts within
the antimicrobial area. Due to the ability of many pathogens to quickly acquire new
resistance mechanisms towards new drugs on the market, it is simply not a good
investment for a ﬁrm to develop and commercialize new antibiotics [9, 10]. Further-
more, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has required that the prescription
of antibiotics should be done systematically with the newest commercialized drugs
being administered as a last resort and physicians are encouraged to only prescribe
antibiotics when clinically necessary [11]. Though this is done to minimize the devel-
opment of resistant strains, these regulations further diminish the proﬁt that may be
gained of releasing a new antibiotic on the market. Hence, a range of alternative ther-
apeutic approaches are currently being investigated including antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs) [12], anti-staphylococcal vaccines [13, 14], probiotics [15, 16] and virulence
suppression strategies [17, 18, 19, 20].
A clinical strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, namely PADK2, has been found to
exhibit an anti-virulence eﬀect against S. aureus, which is thought to be caused by
some (or several) of the 2-alkyl-4-hydroxyquinolones (AQs) produced by P. aerugi-
nosa. This study therefore seeks to investigate the potential of these bioactive com-
pounds as new anti-virulence drugs against S. aureus.
1.2
Staphylococcus aureus
S. aureus is a facultative aerobic, gram-positive bacteria part of the Firmicutes family
[2, 21]. Under the microscope they appear as cocci that usually cluster together in
a grape-like shape [22] (Figure 2).
The bacteria is a usual member of the body
microbiota colonizing approximately 30% of the healthy adult population [23, 24, 25]
with the anterior nares of the nose being the most frequent carriage site [23, 26, 27].
However, it is also commonly found in the perineum, pharynx [28], and on the skin
[27]. Though S. aureus is part of the human commensal microbiota, it is also an
opportunistic pathogen responsible for a range of both acute and chronic diseases [1,
2]. Infections are typically initiated if the bacteria gets access to adjoining tissues or
the bloodstream through a breach of the skin or mucosal barrier [2].
Figure 2: S. aureus. Scanning electron micrograph of S. aureus forming grape-
like clusters. Obtained from [29].
2
==PAGE:12==
The pathogen generally cycles between its host and diﬀerent terrestrial milieus,
which requires for it to be able to survive a range of diverse stresses. Hence, it has
developed a high capacity for adapting to diﬀerent environmental conditions [2, 30].
Furthermore, treatment has become severely complicated, as S. aureus isolates are
becoming increasingly resistant towards a great number of antimicrobial agents. Not
long after a new antibiotic has been introduced on the market, a staphylococci strain
is found with a successful resistance mechanism towards it [3, 5].
Especially the MRSA strains are considered a serious health concern worldwide
being labelled as "high priority" pathogens by WHO in 2017 [4]. These strains ex-
press an altered penicillin-binding protein (PBP) compared to methicillin-sensitive S.
aureus (MSSA) strains [31, 32]. PBP’s are membrane-bound enzymes responsible for
the catalyzation of the transpeptidation reaction needed for the cross-linkage of pep-
tidoglycan chains [33]. The PBP’s produced by MRSA (namely PBP2a or PBP2c)
are encoded by the mecA or mecC genes, respectively [5, 34]. The mecA gene is the
best known genetic resistance determinant in MRSA and is found on the mobile ge-
netic element designated staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec) [35, 36].
The mecC gene was discovered more recently. It was found to be a mecA homolog
and is located on a similar mobile genetic element designated SCCmec XI [34, 37].
PBP2a and PBP2c both have a low aﬃnity for —-lactam agents (including methicillin)
compared to "normal" PBP’s, enabling mecA/mecC-encoding bacteria to survive ex-
posure to high concentrations of this type of antibiotic. Thus, this mechanism confers
resistance towards all —-lactam agents [5].
MRSA isolates were once conﬁned largely to hospitals and other health care en-
vironments. However, during the 1990’s community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA)
strains such as USA300 started to appear (Figure 1) being genetically diﬀerent from
the traditional healthcare-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA) strains [38, 39]. These have
since emerged on every continent [40] and especially isolates of USA300 are of big
concern due to their hypervirulent nature compared to other CA- and HA-MRSA
strains [41]. This is partly caused by an increased expression of multiple core genomic
global regulatory and downstream genes thought to be important in the virulence of
S. aureus, including the accessory gene regulator (agr) system and the S. aureus exo-
protein expression (saeRS) Two-Component System (TCS) [41, 42]. The importance
of these two systems for S. aureus virulence will be further elaborated below.
1.2.1
The agr system
In order for S. aureus to survive and adapt to the diﬀerent environmental niches it is
exposed to, the bacteria has evolved an intricate regulatory network for the production
and control of its virulence factors [43, 44]. These factors, and the belonging regula-
tory machinery, are not essential for normal growth and the corresponding genes are
therefore known as accessory genes. Their main functions include nutrient acquisition
and degradation, adherence to host cells, as well as evasion of host defenses. They are
primarily utilised to promote the establishment and proliferation of S. aureus within
the host [43]. Several master regulators of virulence have been reported in S. aureus
with some of the most prominent being; the agr system, the staphylococcal accessory
regulator (sar), the repressor of toxins (rot) and the saeRS system [43, 44].
The predominant and most extensively studied of the virulence master regula-
tors is the agr system, which is a quorum-sensing (QS) system known to regulate a
3
==PAGE:13==
great deal of the virulence factors in S. aureus [44, 45]. QS is a bacterial cell-to-cell
communication mechanism through which bacteria can monitor their local population
density via secretion and detection of small signaling molecules (autoinducers, AIs).
These types of systems are utilized to alter the gene expression of diﬀerent genes in a
coordinated manner with the rest of the population [46, 47].
The agr system consists of two adjacent transcripts; RNAII and RNAIII, which
are divergently transcribed from the P2 and P3 promoters, respectively (Figure 3) [48].
The RNAII transcript is an operon consisting of four genes, agrBDCA, encoding all
the main components of the QS machinery [17, 43, 49]. The signal sensed by the agr
system is an autoinducing peptide (AIP) which contains a ﬁve-membered thiolactone
ring and is seven to nine amino acids in lenght [44, 50]. The agrD gene encodes
the precursor AIP, AgrD, which becomes proteolytically processed and exported as
mature AIP by the integral membrane endopeptidase AgrB [51, 52]. Secreted AIP is
then sensed by the membrane-bound receptor histidine kinase AgrC, which is part of
the AgrCA TCS. Upon binding of AIP to AgrC, AgrA is subsequently phosphorylated
in the cytosol [43, 53, 54], which can then bind to the P2 and P3 promoters leading
to increased expression of both RNAII and RNAIII [55]. Thus, expression of RNAII
eﬀectively leads to a positive feedback loop of its own expression.
Figure 3: Schematic representation of the S. aureus agr system. The
system consist of the two transcripts RNAII and RNAIII. RNAII encodes the
agrBDCA operon, which encodes all the main components of the QS machinery.
RNAIII is the main eﬀector molecule of the system and drives the expression of
downstream target genes. Picture modiﬁed from [17, 43].
4
==PAGE:14==
Additionally, phosphorylated AgrA has also been found to induce the expression of
several phenol-soluble modulins (PSMs), which are a family of amphipathic, –-helical
peptides found to have multiple roles in staphylococcal pathogenesis [56].
The RNAIII segment of the agr system codes for a large regulatory RNA molecule
that acts as the main eﬀector of the QS system [57].
Furthermore, the RNAIII
transcript encodes the delta-hemolysin gene (hld) [57], also known as the ”-toxin.
Some of the virulence factors upregulated by RNAIII include secreted proteins like
the –-toxin (hla) [45] and serine proteases (SspA, SplA-F) [58]. The –-toxin is a
pore-forming cytotoxin [59] secreted by almost all strains of S. aureus and it is an
important virulence determinant in both endovascular infections [60], pneumonia [61]
as well as in skin and soft tissue infections [62, 63].
Contrarily, other virulence factors are downregulated by RNAIII including the
staphylococcal Protein A (spa) [45, 64] and the surface receptors MnhA, MnhF, and
MnhG [43, 58]. Protein A is a cell wall anchored protein with the ability to interact
with several host components [65] and stands out as a dominant virulence factor in
several types of S. aureus infections including septic arthritis [66], pneumonia [61] and
bloodstream infections [67].
To date, four allelic groups of agr systems have been identiﬁed within the S.
aureus group designated as agr I to IV [68], however, every strain only contains
one of the agr alleles. The agr locus is activated in post-exponential growth once
the organism has reached a critical threshold in cell density [45, 57].
This leads
to a sequential expression of virulence factors with surface proteins being mostly
dominant during the exponential phase and secreted proteins being mainly synthesized
during the stationary phase [45, 57]. This is likely of clinical importance. During an
infection, the initial expression of surface proteins with ability to bind extracellular-
matrix molecules can promote a successful colonization of host tissues, whilst later
on the synthesis of excreted proteins may facilitate the spread of the pathogen to
adjacent tissues [2, 45, 69].
The agr locus is responsive to a range of diﬀerent modulating factors including
environmental cues, host-derived stimuli as well as other regulatory proteins (the
latter will be further elaborated in section 1.2.2). pH was one of the ﬁrst abiotic
factors found to inﬂuence the agr system. Maximum agr expression is obtained near
neutral pH as both acidic and alkaline pH have been shown to repress the system [70,
71]. Another environmental factor known to inﬂuence agr activity is reactive oxygen
species (ROS). These lead to oxidative stress within the cell, which can decrease agr
expression through the formation of disulﬁde bonds in AgrA, compromising its ability
to bind to its target promoter [72]. Among the host-derived factors with inﬂuence on
agr activity both hemoglobin and host serum, in particular apolipoprotein B, have
been found to downregulate the system [73, 74]. Additionally, the AIP’s produced
by the diﬀerent agr systems have been found to have inhibitory activity towards the
other versions of the agr system [17, 75].
1.2.2
Other important virulence regulators in S. aureus
Sar is a family of homologous transcriptional factors that includes SarA, SarR, SarS,
SarT, SarV, MgrA and Rot [76]. SarA signiﬁcantly induces the expression of the
agr system [76, 77], thus enhancing the expression of toxins like the –-toxin (hla),
while repressing Protein A (spa).
Furthermore, SarA is also required for bioﬁlm
5
==PAGE:15==
formation [78] and has been shown to directly up-regulate other virulence factors
such as the toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1) [79]. Rot is known to repress
several toxins including the –-toxin [80], while inducing the expression of virulence
factors like Protein A [81]. However, the expression of the protein is itself repressed
both on the translational level by RNAIII [82], as well as on the transcriptional level
via a direct binding to the promoter site by SarA [83].
The saeRS system is a TCS composed of the sensor histidine kinase SaeS, the
response regulator SaeR and two auxiliary proteins named SaeP and SaeQ [84]. This
system has a profound eﬀect on staphylococcal virulence gene expression and patho-
genesis [85, 86], driving the expression of several important exoproteins, including the
–-toxin, Panton-Valentine leucocidin [42], TSST-1 [87] and –-, —-, and “-hemolysins
[86]. SaeRS does not inﬂuence the expression of Agr and SarA, however, many of the
genes under the control of SaeRS are also aﬀected by these two systems [88].
Other regulatory proteins worth of mentioning are CodY and MgrA. CodY gen-
erally regulates the cell’s response to metabolic stress [89] and has been found to be a
negative regulator of Agr [90], while MgrA is generally known as a positive regulator
of the system although its regulatory eﬀect on the agr system does seem to be highly
strain speciﬁc [43].
It is clear from the above that the regulation of S. aureus virulence factors are subject
to regulation by a complex network of several virulence regulators, some of which af-
fect the expression of the same genes. This should be kept in mind, when studying the
expression of virulence factors. An observed induction or repression of a certain viru-
lence gene may be a result of the gene being directly targeted, or alternatively, being
indirectly targeted by aﬀecting the expression of one or several virulence regulators.
1.3
Anti-staphylococcal therapies
Many MRSA strains are often only susceptible to glycopeptide antibiotics such as
vancomycin - a group of broad-spectrum antibiotics with considerably lower eﬃciency
compared to —-lactam agents.
[91].
Hence, vancomycin was for a long time the
drug of choice for anti-MRSA therapy [2, 5]. However, since 1997 the ﬁrst strains
of S. aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin and teicoplanin was reported
[92], and isolates with complete resistance towards vancomycin (VRSA strains) was
reported already in 2002 in the U.S. [6]. Though several other VRSA isolates have
been reported since then [7, 93] the occurrence of vancomycin-resistant MRSA isolates
have fortunately so far remained rare in clinical practice [94]. Nevertheless, there is
an urgent need for the development of new anti-microbial drugs against MRSA. Thus,
various alternative therapeutic approaches are currently being investigated including
a range of virulence suppression strategies [17, 18, 19, 20].
1.3.1
Anti-virulence therapy
Anti-virulence drugs are a group of compounds that speciﬁcally target bacterial mech-
anisms that promote infection and are essential to persistence of the pathogen within
the host and/or mechanisms responsible for causing disease symptoms. Thus, this
group of compounds speciﬁcally targets the pathogens virulence factors [20]. This
type of drug may be administered alone or together with standard antibiotics. If ad-
ministered alone, the drug should ideally disable microbial virulence in vivo, allowing
6
==PAGE:16==
for the host immune system to eﬀectively clear of the infection, as the pathogen will be
impaired in defeating host defences. Alternatively, anti-virulence drugs could be used
in a combination therapy with antibiotics, in which symptoms induced by pathogenic
virulence factors are suppressed by the anti-virulence drug, while bacterial clearance
in this case is mediated by the antibiotic [20].
The advantage of using anti-virulence drugs over conventional antibiotic strate-
gies is that the latter targets cellular processes that are crucial for microbial sur-
vival, thereby exerting a great selective pressure on the pathogen to rapidly mutate
and develop genetic resistance [95, 96]. Contrarily, most virulence factors are non-
essential genes and inhibition of virulence should therefore exert less selective pres-
sure on the pathogen for acquiring resistance [97, 98]. However, studies must still
be undertaken to elucidate potential rates of resistance. Furthermore, treatment of
toxin-producing bacteria with antibiotics may result in an over-stimulation of the
patient’s immune system due to a sudden high release of toxins upon bacterial cell
death (e.g. Lipopolysaccharides released from lysed gram-negative bacteria) [20, 99].
Also, antibiotic treatment is often associated with undesirable alterations of the host
microbiota, which may lead to the proliferation of disease-causing bacteria over ben-
eﬁcial gut inhabitants [100, 101]. These challenges may be overcome with the use
of anti-virulence drugs, which does not directly kill the cells and ideally should only
target pathogen-speciﬁc mechanism that are not present in the commensal bacteria.
However, eﬀective deployment of anti-virulence drugs requires a lot of insight
regarding mechanism and regulation of bacterial virulence and pathogenesis. As vi-
rulence factor expression is highly regulated by various regulators, knocking down
one virulence-related pathway may have an eﬀect on the expression of other virulence
factors [102]. Thus, for optimal therapeutic eﬀect multiple virulence factors should
be simultaneous suppressed. Much research has therefore been focused on directly
trying to target pathogenic bacteria’s QS-systems [103], as these are often responsible
for controlling the expression of multiple virulence factors [17, 20, 44].
This is also the case in S. aureus where numerous studies have shown the im-
portance of the agr system for S. aureus virulence [15, 42, 44, 50] and much focus
have therefore speciﬁcally tried to target this system as a potential new means of
anti-staphylococcal therapy [17, 46].
Among these, the natural compound solon-
amide B (SolB) produced by the marine bacterium Photobacterium halotolerans has
been shown to interfere with the agr system in both the MSSA strain 8325-4 and
the MRSA strain USA300 [104] via binding to the AgrC sensor histidine kinase and
thereby preventing interaction between AgrC and AIPs [105]. Furthermore, fengycin
lipopeptides produced by probiotic Bacillus bacteria have also been shown to inhibit
the agr system via competitive inhibition of AgrC [15].
Recently, the clinical P. aeruginosa strain PADK2 was also found to aﬀect the
expression of diﬀerent virulence factors in S. aureus [Cristina Amador, Unpublished
data]. When plating transcriptional reporter strains carrying the lacZ gene fused to
speciﬁc virulence gene promoters on plates containing X-gal (5-Bromo-4-chloroindol-3-
yl-b-D-galactopyranoside), the expression of the genes can be studied based on colour
change [106]. The lacZ gene encodes the enzyme —-galactosidase. When this enzyme
is exposed to the compound X-gal, —-galactosidase will cleave the compound into two
smaller products, one of which produces an intense blue colour. Thus, expression of
the target gene can indirectly be studied, when its promoter is fused to the lacZ gene,
through the production of blue colour. Using this method, Christina Amador from
7
==PAGE:17==
the Infectious Microbiology Group (IMG) at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) found that when spotting PADK2 next to four S. aureus reporter strains with
the lacZ gene fused to the promoter of the RNAIII, hla, spa or the rot virulence gene,
respectively, the expression pattern of the virulence genes were altered, compared to
when the reporter strains where spotted alone (Figure 4). RNAIII and Hla both had
a reduced expression while Spa had an increased expression at the P. aeruginosa-S.
aureus interface, indicating an interference with the agr system in some way. Ad-
ditionally, the expression of Rot was also increased at the interface, indicating that
several virulence regulators may be aﬀected by the clinical PADK2 strain. Finally,
an important observation is that based on this assay the eﬀect seen on virulence gene
expression by PADK2 did not seem to be a result of growth inhibition of S. aureus.
Figure 4: PADK2s eﬀect on S. aureus virulence gene expression. Four
S. aureus reporter strains having the lacZ gene fused to the RNAIII, hla, spa
or the rot virulence gene promoter, respectively, were spotted on X-gal plates
either alone (left) or next to the clinical PADK2 P. aeruginosa strain (right).
Expression of the reporter genes resulted in the production of blue colour. Data
obtained from [Cristina Amador, Unpublished data].
This anti-virulence eﬀect observed for PADK2 has been attributed to be caused
by one or several of the AQ compounds produced by P. aeruginosa, as a knock-out
in the pqsB gene (required for AQ production, see section 1.4.1) in the PADK2 strain
resulted in a strain with no anti-virulence eﬀect against S. aureus [Cristina Amador,
Unpublished data].
1.3.2
Suitable infection models for assessing the in vivo eﬃcacy of new
anti-staphylococcal agents
After a new antimicrobial compound has been found to be non-toxic but eﬀective
in vitro, the eﬃcacy and toxicity of the compound needs to be evaluated in vivo.
Typically, a mammalian system such as a murine infection model is utilized for this
purpose. However, these experiments are both expensive, time-consuming and require
a lot of ethical consideration [107]. As many of the compounds that reach this stage
for various reasons prove to be ineﬀective in vivo, there is a need for initially using an
8
==PAGE:18==
alternative infection model that is able to quickly and inexpensively generate in vivo
data in order to quickly highlight the compounds that are unlikely to be eﬀective in
the mammalian systems [107].
Valuable preliminary infection models are insects, as these possess a relatively
complex innate immune system similar to the innate immune response of mam-
mals [108, 109], while at the same time does not require the same ethical con-
siderations as mammalian systems. Especially the wax moth larva model Galleria
mellonella has proven to be a valuable and highly used infection model for several
microbial pathogens, including S. aureus [107, 110, 111]. The beneﬁts of using G.
mellonella compared with some other non-mammalian models of infection include:
they are amenable for assessing the eﬃcacy of antimicrobial agents (including anti-
staphylococcal) [107], they are relatively large (larvae before pupation are about 2
cm long and weight approximately 250 mg), which enables the injection of deﬁned
doses of either bacteria or anti-microbial compound [111]; insect rearing is easy and
relatively cheap [111] and infection studies can be conducted between 15 ¶C to above
37 ¶C [112, 113], allowing experiments to mimic mammalian environments. Hence, G.
mellonella seems like a suitable preliminary in vivo model for assessing the eﬃcacy
of new anti-staphylococcal agents.
1.4
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
The gram-negative bacterium P. aeruginosa is another broad-host opportunistic patho-
gen found in a range of serious human infections. Among these, P. aeruginosa is
responsible for causing debilitating infections in both cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and im-
munocompromised patients as well as in individuals with severe skin burns [114].
However, opportunistic infections most often occur in a polymicrobial context within
the host [115]. This is also the case in infections where P. aeruginosa is a causative
agent and it is frequently co-isolated together with S. aureus in the airways of CF
patients [116, 117] and in wound infections [118].
CF is a hereditary disease caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conduc-
tance regulator (CFTR) gene, which encodes a protein that controls the movement of
salt and water in and out of cells. A faulty CFTR gene can lead to a thickening of mu-
cus in the lungs, which over time predisposes patients to pulmonary dysfunctions and
chronic infections by multiple microorganisms [119, 120], where P. aeruginosa and S.
aureus are among the most dominant inhabitants [116, 117]. S. aureus is generally
one of the dominant pathogens during the early phase of CF lung infection, whereas
later on P. aeruginosa is observed to become the predominant pathogen [117, 119].
It is not well understood which factors contribute to this shift. However, it has
been hypothesized that the previously mentioned AQs produced by P. aeruginosa
may contribute to its eventual dominance over S. aureus [121].
1.4.1
The pqs system and its products
The general structure of AQs are a bicyclic aromatic structure with an alkyl chain and
a hydroxygroup on the second and fourth position, respectively (Figure 5). Additio-
nally, some AQs contain an extra hydroxy group on the third position, or alternatively,
an N-oxide group has replaced the quinolone nitrogen on the ﬁrst position (the latter
known as N-oxide AQs, AQNOs) [122, 123, 124]. In total, seven diﬀerent series of
AQs and AQ-related compounds have been detected and described [122].
9
==PAGE:19==
Figure 5: General structures of the AQs produced by P. aeruginosa.
Obtained from [122].
To date, more than 50 diﬀerent AQs have been found to be produced by P. aerugi-
nosa [122, 123] exhibiting a variety of functions like cell signaling, virulence factor reg-
ulation, iron acquisition and antimicrobial activity [125, 126, 127, 128]. The best stud-
ied AQs are the 2-heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline (HHQ), 3,4-dihydroxy-2-heptylquinoline
(the Pseudomonas quinolone signal, PQS) and 2-heptyl-4-hydroxy-quinoline-N-oxide
(HQNO). HHQ and PQS mainly function as QS molecules and are responsible for
inducing the expression of several virulence genes [123, 129]. Conversely, HQNO does
not function as a QS signal molecule [125] but has instead been shown to suppress
the growth of several gram-positive bacteria, including S. aureus [123, 128, 130].
All AQs are products of the P. aeruginosa pqs system, which mainly consist of
four transcriptional units; pqsABCDE, pqsR, pqsL and pqsH [125] (Figure 6). Initially,
PqsA is responsible for activating anthranilic acid into anthraniloyl-CoA [131], which
is subsequently condensed with malonyl-CoA to form 2-aminobenzoylacetyl-CoA (2-
ABA-CoA) by PqsD [132]. This compound is then hydrolysed into 2-aminobenzoyl-
acetate (2-ABA) with help from a thioesterase (mainly PqsE) [133]. Next, 2-ABA is
directly converted into HHQ through a condensation with octanoyl-CoA catalyzed by
the PqsBC heterodimer [134, 135]. Lastly, HHQ can be further converted into PQS via
hydroxylation by monooxygenase PqsH [136]. Alternatively, to produce the AQNOs
2-ABA can be converted into 2-hydroxylaminobenzoylacetate (2-HABA) through the
action of PqsL. 2-HABA can then, like HHQ, condensate with octanoyl-CoA via
PqsBC, which in this case leads to the product HQNO [122, 137].
HHQ, PQS and HQNO all have a C7 alkyl side chain, as a result of octanoate being
introduced into the pqs system by PqsBC. However, P. aeruginosa is known to also
produce AQs with shorter, longer, and mono-unsaturated alkyl chains depending on
the input to the system, causing the large variety of AQs known to be produced. Ne-
vertheless, PqsBC have been shown to prefer medium-chain acyl-CoA’s as substrate,
which is why the most common AQs contain a C7 or C9 alkyl side chain [138].
The pqs system responds to both PQS and its precursor HHQ, when these are
bound to the multiple virulence factor regulator (MvfR), also known as PqsR, as
these complexes induce the expression of the pqsABCDE-operon, thus resulting in a
positive feedback loop [123, 125, 129]. However, the production of PQS is dependent
on a functional LasR protein [129], which is a protein part of the las QS system in P.
aeruginosa known to be responsible for enhancing the production of several virulence
factors [139]. LasR directly regulates the expression of PqsH [140], thus aﬀecting the
10
==PAGE:20==
Figure 6: Schematic representation of the P. aeruginosa pqs system.
The system consist of the transcriptional units; pqsABCDE, pqsR, pqsL and
pqsH. These produce the compounds responsible for the conversion of antranil-
lic acid into a variety of AQs depending on the activated alkyl chain that is
introduced into the system via the PqsBC heterodimer. The ﬁgure shows the
conversion of antranillic acid into the three best characterized AQs; HQNO,
HHQ and PQS. Picture modiﬁed from [125, 138].
production of PQS from HHQ.
Besides from acting as a QS signal, PQS has been found to have additional pro-
perties such as the ability to promote membrane vesicles [141], induce virulence factor
production via a PqsR-independent pathway [125] and chelate ferric iron (Fe3+) [142].
The latter is believed to provide P. aeruginosa a survival advantage in a mixed species
population by limiting the availability of iron to co-inhabitant species [143]. Also,
HHQ may provide the pathogen with additional properties than just working as a
signalling molecule. Nguyen et al. [130] have shown that HHQ also exhibit innate
antimicrobial activity against S. aureus through a mechanism likely to be similar to
HQNO’s (though not nearly as active as HQNO). Furthermore, this antimicrobial
activity is hypothesized to be enhanced in an iron limited environment [130]. Hence,
the production of AQs and AQNOs may be a mean by which P. aeruginosa is able
to compete and dominate in a mixed species community.
11
==PAGE:21==
1.4.2
Interactions between P. aeruginosa and S. aureus
An interesting discovery is that in the presence of aminoglycoside antibiotics like
tobramycin, meant for killing both P. aeruginosa and S. aureus (i.e. in a CF pa-
tient), the presence of HQNO has been shown to select for S. aureus small-colony
variants (SCV) - a phenotype known to provide aminoglycoside resistance and persis-
tence in chronic infections [144]. Hence, though HQNO is known to inhibit S. aureus
growth it seems that this AQNO also helps to protect S. aureus against aminoglyco-
side antibiotics. Another interesting point is that peptidoglycan released from gram
positive bacteria like S. aureus upon cell lysis has been shown to induce PQS and
pqsA transcript levels as well as enhance the overall virulence of P. aeruginosa [145].
Combined, these studies demonstrate a complex relationship between the two oppor-
tunistic pathogens when part of the same bacterial community.
However, the outcome of interaction between them is also strain dependent. When
the MRSA strain JE2 (USA300) is spotted next to the wild-type (WT) P. aerugi-
nosa strain PAO1, a distinct colony morphology and interaction pattern is observed,
compared to when JE2 is spotted next to the clinical PADK2 strain [146]. PAO1 de-
veloped a smooth, green-pigmented colony that inhibited the growth of JE2, whereas
PADK2 instead appeared with a thickened colony morphology at the P. aeruginosa–
S. aureus interface showing a commensal-like interspecies interaction. Notably, this
distinct interaction pattern was reproducible on several diﬀerent agar media. Further-
more, a diﬀerent AQ proﬁle was observed for PAO1 compared to PADK2. Though
PQS and HQNO were found to be produced by PAO1 these two AQs were not de-
tectable for the PADK2 strain. Instead, PADK2 showed an increased production of
HHQ compared to PAO1 [146]. Such metabolic divergence may explain the diﬀerent
interaction patterns observed for PAO1 and PADK2 with S. aureus.
It has been suggested that during chronic infections, the loss of certain virulence
factors may help bacteria to evade host defenses [147], while other mutations may
enable the bacteria to speciﬁcally adapt to the new environment within the host
[148]. In the case of P. aeruginosa it has been well established that it also evolves
during long-term infections in humans (i.e. CF patients) into less virulent strains
[147, 149]. A common change in CF patients is loss-of-function mutations in the lasR
gene [147, 150]. Such a mutation has also been detected in the clinical PADK2 strain
together with other regulatory mutations [151], which is likely to explain the low
production of PQS, while having a high production of HHQ compared to PAO1 [140,
146]. Inactivation of lasR in P. aeruginosa has been shown to reduce acute virulence
in a range of model hosts including plants, fungi, insects and mice [152]. Furthermore,
LasR is known to regulate several genes involved in central metabolic functions [153]
and the deletion of this gene has turned out to confer metabolic adaptation of P.
aeruginosa. Hence, a knock-out of LasR may possibly be a determinant of chronic
virulence [150, 148].
As mentioned in section 1.3.1, PADK2 has been found to show an anti-virulence
eﬀect against S. aureus, which has been attributed to the AQs produced by P. aerugi-
nosa. It is likely that the same anti-virulence compounds produced by PADK2 is also
produced by the WT PAO1. However, PAO1 is also known to inhibit S. aureus growth
due to the production of a range of additional anti-staphylococcal molecules with some
of the most important being; pyocyanin known to inhibit S. aureus respiration and
select for the SCV phenotype [154, 155, 156], the staphylolytic proteases LasA [157,
12
==PAGE:22==
158] and LasB [159] and then of course the previously mentioned HQNO [123, 128,
130]. Hence, potential anti-virulence eﬀects induced by PAO1 are overshadowed by its
strong growth-inhibiting eﬀects towards S. aureus. However, in clinical CF strains of
P. aeruginosa several virulence factors have been abolished or the expression highly
reduced [150], and with respect to PADK2 a proto-cooperative interaction is observed
between this strain and S. aureus [146, 151]. This makes PADK2 a good candidate
for the study and characterization of bioactive compounds produced by P. aeruginosa
with an anti-virulence eﬀect against MRSA.
1.5
The project
The purpose of this study is to characterize and examine the function of bioactive
compounds produced by P. aeruginosa with an anti-virulence eﬀect against MRSA.
The main focus will be on the AQs produced by the pqs system in the clinical PADK2
strain. However, the WT PAO1 strain will be included as a control strain together
with a PADK2 ∆pqsB mutant strain (designated as CFM25) and the clinical strain
IMG213. The latter is a strain acquired from the same CF patient as the PADK2
strain but at a diﬀerent time point. Though IMG213 is the same lineage as PADK2,
it does not show the same anti-virulence eﬀect towards S. aureus. The S. aureus
strains utilized in this project will be transcriptional reporter strains of the MSSA
8325-4 strain and the MRSA JE2 (USA300) strain carrying the lacZ gene fused to
the RNAIII, hla or the spa virulence gene promoter, respectively. This makes six S.
aureus reporter strains in total.
The interaction between the four P. aeruginosa strains with the six S. aureus
reporter strains will initially be studied qualitatively via plate assays in order to
examine the eﬀect on gene expression of RNAIII, hla and spa in both the 8325-4
strain and the JE2 strain. Next, organic extractions of the four P. aeruginosa strains
will be made and the bioactivity of the extracts towards the S. aureus reporter strains
will be examined. PADK2 ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH mutants will be created through a two-
step allelic exchange method, and the eﬀect of these on the S. aureus reporter strains
will be assessed. This is done to narrow down on the possible candidate molecules
accountable for the anti-virulence eﬀect observed by the PADK2 strain.
A quantitative —-galactosidase activity assay will then be set up to examine how
much the WT PADK2 extract aﬀects S. aureus virulence gene expression, when ad-
ministered at concentrations found not to inhibit the growth. Cleavage of the com-
pound o-nitrophenyl —-o-galactopyranoside (ONPG) by —-galactosidase results in a
yellow colour production, and the —-galactosidase activity can therefore be measured
through ONPG cleavage.
Furthermore, preliminary in vivo studies will be carried out in the insect virulence
model Galleria mellonella starting with a toxicity assay of the PADK2 extract towards
the larvae, followed by an infection assay, where the ability of the PADK2 extract to
rescue MRSA infected G. mellonella larvae will be assessed.
Ideally, this project will help to identify and elucidate the potential of using bioac-
tive compounds produced by the PADK2 strain as new anti-virulence drugs against
S. aureus, which may in the future be utilized as an alternative anti-staphylococcal
therapy to conventional antibiotics.
13
==PAGE:23==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Media and cultivation conditions
The bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table 1 and have all been ob-
tained from the IMG group at DTU. The six reporter strains of S. aureus all con-
tained an Erythromycin resistance (EryR) marker. All bacterial strains were stored
at -80 ¶C in 18.75% glycerol [Merck, 8.18709] (freeze stock). Antibiotics used were
Erythromycin (Ery) [Sigma-Aldrich, 114-07-8], Tetracycline (Tet) [Sigma-Aldrich, 60-
54-8] and Chloramphenicol (CAM) [Sigma-Aldrich, 56-75-7].
Table 1: Bacterial strains used in this study.
Bacterial strains
Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PAO1
WT
4448c (PADK2)
Clinical strain
CFM25
PADK2 ∆pqsB mutant strain, transposon inserted in pqsB
IMG213
Clinical strain
Staphylococcus aureus
8325-4 RNAIII::lacZ
MSSA strain with the lacZ gene fused to the RNAIII pro-
moter, EryR
8325-4 Hla::lacZ
MSSA strain with the lacZ gene fused to the Hla pro-
moter, EryR
8325-4 Spa::lacZ
MSSA strain with the lacZ gene fused to the Spa pro-
moter, EryR
JE2
WT USA300 MRSA strain
JE2 RNAIII::lacZ
USA300 MRSA strain with the lacZ gene fused to the
RNAIII promoter, EryR
JE2 Hla::lacZ
USA300 MRSA strain with the lacZ gene fused to the Hla
promoter, EryR
JE2 Spa::lacZ
USA300 MRSA strain with the lacZ gene fused to the Spa
promoter, EryR
Escherichia coli
pNJ1
Contains the pNJ1 plasmid (TetR marker and sacB
counter selection marker)
CC118⁄pir
CC118 strain lysogenized with ⁄-pir phage
HB101/pRK600
CAMR, helper plasmid in triparental matings
Unless otherwise stated, all media were prepared as explained in Table 15 in
Appendix A. P. aeruginosa strains were revived by streaking on Luria-Bertani (LB)
Agar plates and then incubated at 37 ¶C for 1-2 days. Cultures of P. aeruginosa were
14
==PAGE:24==
prepared by inoculating single colonies in LB broth followed by incubation overnight
at 37 ¶C and 200 rpm. S. aureus strains were revived by streaking on Tryptic Soy
Agar (TSA) plates before being incubated at 37 ¶C for 1-2 days and S. aureus cultures
were prepared by inoculating single colonies in either Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) (JE2
WT) or 5“ TSB Ery (the six reporters strains) followed by incubation overnight at
37 ¶C and 200 rpm. These conditions will be referred to as standard conditions from
now on.
2.2
Qualitative interaction assay between P. aeruginosa and
S. aureus
The interaction between the four P. aeruginosa strains and the six S. aureus reporter
strains were studied qualitatively on TSA X-gal plates using a protocol adapted from
Nielsen et al. [106].
An overnight culture was prepared for each of the ten diﬀerent strains accor-
ding to standard conditions.
Samples were collected from each overnight culture
and centrifuged for 5 minutes at room temperature and 6000 g. The supernatant
was discarded and the pellet re-suspended in Phosphate-Buﬀered Saline (PBS). Next,
each S. aureus reporter strain was diluted to OD600nm = 0.001 and plated on a TSA
X-gal plate. PBS was plated on a seventh plate as a growth control (see plate set-up
Figure 7). Five wells were made on each plate and 60 µL of the four diﬀerent P.
aeruginosa cultures (OD600nm = 1) were added to the respective wells according to
the plate set-up, allowing for the interaction between all P. aeruginosa strains and all
the individual S. aureus reporter strains to be studied. PBS was added to the ﬁfth
well on all plates as a negative control. Finally, the plates were left to dry at room
temperature until all liquid in the wells had been absorbed into the agar, whereupon
the plates were incubated at standard conditions. The plates were inspected after
both one and two days of incubation.
Figure 7: Co-culture plate set-up. Each S. aureus reporter strain was plated
on a TSA X-gal plate.
PBS was plated on a seventh as a growth control.
Cultures of PAO1, 4448c, CFM25 and IMG213 were added to the wells according
to the plate set-up seen on the picture (PBS was added as a negative control).
15
==PAGE:25==
2.3
Bioactivity of organic extracts from P. aeruginosa to-
wards S. aureus
2.3.1
Ethyl acetate extractions of P. aeruginosa cultures
Overnight cultures were prepared of each P. aeruginosa strain according to standard
conditions and grown for at least 24 hours. Next, from each overnight culture 1 mL
was transferred to an Eppendorf tube (LB media was used as control) followed by the
addition of 1 mL ethyl acetate. Next, a thorough vortexing and subsequent centrifu-
gation at full power for two minutes was carried out and the organic phase (unpolar)
was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. The tubes were dried under N2 ﬂow un-
til all visible liquid had evaporated before the organic extractions were redissolved
in 200 µL methanol [SIGMA-ALDRICH, 67-56-1]. Of these, 80 µL was transferred
to an HPLC vial, which was subsequently sent for LC-DAD-MS analysis using pos-
itive Electrospray Ionisation (ESI+). The data obtained from this was analysed in
MassHunter. The remaining methanol dissolved organic extracts (120 µL per tube)
were stored at -20 ¶C until further biological testing was conducted.
2.3.2
Qualitative bioactivity assay of P. aeruginosa organic extractions
The organic extracts obtained from the same P. aeruginosa strain (three biological
replicates of each strain) were pooled together into one tube, and the bioactivity of the
pooled extracts were tested against all six S. aureus reporter strains in a qualitative
plate assay on TSA X-gal plates. The assay was carried out according to the same
procedure explained in section 2.2 though with the diﬀerence of adding 30 µL of
pooled organic extract or methanol (negative control) to the wells according to the
plate set-up in Figure 24 (Appendix B.1) instead of bacterial culture.
2.4
Bioactivity of PADK2 4448c mutants
2.4.1
Generation of PADK2 ∆pqsL and PADK2 ∆pqsH mutants
PADK2 4448c ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH mutants were made with a two-step allelic exchange
technique using a protocol adapted from Hmelo et al. [160], which utilizes homologous
recombination to target an endogeneous gene and replacing it with a mutant allele.
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, plasmid DNA was puriﬁed according to section 5.2 in
MACHEREY-NAGEL’s "Plasmid DNA puriﬁcation User manual", while plasmid and
genomic DNA loaded and run on an agarose gel were puriﬁed from the gel according to
section 5.2 in MACHEREY-NAGEL’s "PCR clean-up Gel extraction User manual".
Puriﬁed DNA concentrations were determined with a Denovix Spectrophotometer
(DS-11+, Saveen Werner).
The pNJ1 plasmid (Visualised in Appendix C.2) was
used as vector and contains a Tet resistance marker (TetR) as well as the sacB gene
encoding levansucrase, which is a counter selection marker, as bacteria expressing this
enzyme cannot grow on sucrose [160]. The primers used in this study are all listed in
Table 16 in Appendix C.1.
Insertion of pqsL and pqsH mutant fragments into pNJ1
Initially, deletion fragments of the two genes were made and inserted into the pNJ1
vector to be ampliﬁed. Between each step, the DNA samples could be stored at -20
¶C until continuation.
16
==PAGE:26==
Upstream and downstream fragments of the pqsL and pqsH genes were ampliﬁed
and assembled together by Mikkel Anbo from the IMG group via overlap exten-
tion PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) using the primers Pr1&2 (upstream pqsL),
PR3&4 (downstream pqsL), Pr5&6 (upstream pqsH) and Pr7&8 (downstream pqsH).
This created deletion fragments of the genes, where the middle part of the genes had
been deleted while still having homologous regions to upstream and downstream se-
quences of the WT genes. Overnight cultures of E. coli containing the pNJ1 plasmid
were prepared in 8“ LB Tet media followed by pNJ1 puriﬁcation from the overnight
cultures.
Next, pNJ1 as well as the pqsL and pqsH mutant fragments were digested with
the two restriction enzymes XbaI [Thermo Scientiﬁc, FD0685] and SacI [Thermo
Scientiﬁc, FD1134] with the digestion conditions and reaction mixtures described in
Appendix C.3. FastAP [Fermentas, EF0651] was added to the digestion mixture where
pNJ1 was added in order to dephosphorylate the plasmid after cutting, decreasing
the chance of religation.
After digestion, the samples were loaded and run on a
0.8% Agarose gel stained with Ethidium bromide (0.5 µg/mL) [Sigma-Aldrich, 1239-
45-8]. Bands appearing at approximately 1300 bp (pqsL fragment), 1100 bp (pqsH
fragement) and 6700 bp (pNJ1) (gel pictures in Appendix D Figure 27) were cut out
of the gel and the DNA puriﬁed.
Digested pqsL and pNJ1 were ligated together and digested pqsH and pNJ1 were
ligated together (all cohesive ends) using T4 DNA ligase [Invitrogen, 100004917]. The
ligation conditions and reaction mixtures are described in Appendix C.4. Insert:Vector
molar ratios of 2:1, 3:1 and 5:1 were used for both inserts, giving 6 reactions in total.
The concentrations needed in the diﬀerent reactions of the vector and the inserts were
determined using the ligation calculator NEBioCalculator [161]. A negative control
reaction was included where only digested pNJ1 was added (no insert).
Preperation of competent E. coli CC118⁄pir cells
Next, the ligated plasmids were transformed into E. coli CC118⁄pir, as these strains
express an initiation protein essential for the initiation of pNJ1 DNA replication
[162], which is not present in PADK2. However, initially the E. coli strain was made
chemically competent to enable it to acquire extracellular DNA.
An overnight culture of E. coli CC118⁄pir was prepared in LB and subsequently
inoculated into a 250 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask containing 50 mL LB (pre-heated to 37
¶C) to OD600nm = 0.05. The culture was incubated in a shaker at 37 ¶C and 180 rpm
until an OD600nm = 0.3≠0.4 had been reached, whereupon the shake ﬂask culture was
transferred to an ice bath for 30 minutes to stop cell growth. The culture was divided
into two 50 mL Falcon tubes (ice-cold), which were subsequently centrifuged at 8.000 g
for 5 minutes and 4 ¶C. The supernatants were discarded and the pellets redissolved in
5 mL ice-cold 100 mM CaCl2 [Sigma-Aldrich, 10035-04-8], which were then incubated
on ice for 30 minutes. The cells were centrifuged again (8.000 g, 5 minutes and 4 ¶C),
the supernatants discarded and the pellets were this time re-suspended in 1 mL ice-
cold solution containing 100 mM CaCl2 and 15% glycerol. Finally, 50 µL aliquots of
cells were added to Eppendorf tubes, which were subsequently stored at -80 ¶C.
17
==PAGE:27==
Transformation into E. coli CC118⁄pir
Heat-shock transformations of the ligation mixtures into the chemically competent
E. coli cells were then performed. A transformation was carried out for each of the
six ligation mixtures (L2:1/pNJ1, L3:1/pNJ1, L5:1/pNJ1, H2:1/pNJ1, H3:1/pNJ1
and H5:1/pNJ1). Furthermore, four controls were included being; digested and li-
gated pNJ1 (ligation control reaction), digested pNJ1 (to check the success rate of
the restriction enzymes to cut the plasmid), uncut pNJ1 (positive control) and H2O
(negative control).
The transformations were carried out by initially adding 5 µL of ligated plasmid
(or control) to 50 µL of chemically competent E. coli CC118⁄pir cells (thawed on
ice), followed by incubation on ice for 30 minutes. The cells were then heat-shocked
by placing them at 42 ¶C for exactly 30 seconds, whereupon the cells were placed on
ice for 2 minutes. One mL LB (pre-warmed to 37 ¶C) was added to each vial, and the
cells were grown for 1 hour at 37 ¶C and 200 rpm. Afterwards, the cells were plated
on 8“ LB Tet plates to select for strains that had obtained the plasmid. These were
incubated at 37 ¶C overnight.
Transformants were re-streaked on 8“ LB Tet plates (incubated at 37 ¶C overnight),
and colony PCR was used to identify transformants containing the desired plasmid
(i.e.
pNJ1 with either ∆pqsL or ∆pqsH inserted) using the primer pair Pr9&10.
Template DNA was obtained by transferring a single colony from the re-streaked
transformants directly into a PCR vial containing the other reagents needed for the
reaction (PCR reaction mixture and conditions are shown in Appendix C.5). The
initial denature was set to run for 5 minutes instead of 3 in order to boil the colony
and release its DNA.
Overnight cultures were made of those transformants found to contain the desired
plasmid in 8“ LB Tet media. The plasmids were then puriﬁed and used as template
DNA in a regular PCR (Appendix C.5), again using the primer pair Pr9&10. PCR
products were loaded and run on a 0.8% Agarose gel stained with Ethidium bromide
(0.5 µg/mL). Bands appearing at approximately 1800 bp (Homology region (HR)
on pNJ1 + pqsL fragment) and 1600 bp (HR on pNJ1 + pqsH fragment) were cut
out of the gel (gel picture in Appendix D Figure 28), the DNA puriﬁed and sent for
sequencing on both strands with sequencing primers Pr9&10 at Euroﬁns Genomics
to verify that the correct sequences had been inserted into pNJ1. Additionally, freeze
stock cultures were made of the overnight cultures.
Conjugation into the PADK2 4448c strain
The pNJ1 plasmids veriﬁed through sequencing to contain either the ∆pqsL or ∆pqsH
gene were transformed from the E. coli transformants into WT 4448c through tri-
parental mating using the helper strain E. coli HB101/pRK600. Two homologous
recombinations then needed to occur for successful replacement of the WT genes with
the mutant versions.
The transformants veriﬁed to contain the ∆pqsL/pNJ1 or ∆pqsH/pNJ1 plasmid
were revived from -80 ¶C on 8“ LB Tet plates, WT 4448c was revived on an LB plate,
while E. coli HB101/pRK600 was revived on a 6“ LB CAM plate. Overnight cultures
were made of all four strains using the same distribution of antibiotics and incubated
at 37 ¶C and 200 rpm. Next day, the 4448c overnight culture was incubated for 3
hours at 42 ¶C and 200 rpm in order to make the strain more prone for receiving DNA
through conjugation. One mL was collected from all four cultures and washed twice
in LB (10.000 g for 2 minutes) before being diluted to OD600nm = 1. The recipient
18
==PAGE:28==
strain (WT 4448c), Helper strain (HB101) and one of the two donor strains (E. coli
∆pqsL or ∆pqsH) were then mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio and centrifuged at 15.000 g for
3 minutes. The supernatants were discarded from the two conjugation mixtures and
the pellets redissolved in 200 µL LB and subsequently transferred to the middle of
an LB plate. The two plates were left to dry until all liquid had been absorbed after
which the plates were incubated overnight at 37 ¶C.
Using a sterile inoculation loop, the entire conjugation mix was swapped of the
plates and transferred to 1 mL 0.9% NaCl. The two tubes were thoroughly mixed
before 100 µL from each was plated on two 50“ Pseudomonas Isolation Agar (PIA)
plates to select for 4448c merodiploids (having the whole plasmid integrated into its
chromosome). Furthermore, the leftover conjugation mixtures were centrifuged at
1.000 g for 4 minutes, 800 µL of the supernatants were discarded and the pellets re-
dissolved in the remaining 100 µL, which were subsequently plated on 50“ PIA plates
in order to increase the chance of obtaining conjugates. The plates were incubated at
37 ¶C for 48 hours. Single colonies were re-streaked on LB plates containing 15% su-
crose and without NaCl (incubated at 37 ¶C for 48 hours) selecting for colonies where
pNJ1 was looped out again. This happens either through a double-crossover resulting
in 4448c ∆pqsL or ∆pqsH mutants or through reversion to WT 4448c. However, spon-
taneous ∆sacB mutations can also occur resulting in colonies that are able to grow
on the sucrose plates despite still having the plasmid integrated [160]. A subsequent
colony PCR of the colonies growing on sucrose was therefore carried out in order to
screen for the presence of the mutated allele versions using the primer pairs Pr11&12
(veriﬁcation of the ∆pqsL allele) and Pr13&14 (veriﬁcation of the ∆pqsH allele). Gel
picture in Appendix D Figure 29. PCR veriﬁed mutants were re-streaked on PIA
followed by PCR ampliﬁcation of the mutant allele and subsequent puriﬁcation of the
PCR products according to section 5.1 in MACHEREY-NAGEL’s "PCR clean-up".
Finally, the puriﬁed PCR products were sent for sequencing on both strands with
sequencing primers Pr11&12 and Pr13&14 at Euroﬁns Genomics to verify the allelic
replacement mutants. Additionally, freeze stock cultures were made of both mutants.
2.4.2
Study of the PADK2 4448c mutants eﬀect on S. aureus reporter
strains
The eﬀects of the 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH mutants on virulence gene expression
in S. aureus were assessed in a qualitative plate assay on TSA X-gal plates according
to the same procedure explained in section 2.2 though with the diﬀerence of adding
cultures of 4448c ∆pqsL, 4448c ∆pqsH, WT 4448c and PAO1 to the wells made on
each plate (see plate set-up in Appendix B.2).
2.5
Quantitative study of the PADK2 4448c extract’s eﬀect
on S. aureus virulence gene expression
2.5.1
—-galactosidase activity assay of S. aureus reporter genes
A —-galactosidase activity assay was set up to study the virulence gene expression in
S. aureus over time under normal circumstances.
Three biological replicates of the S. aureus reporter strain being assayed were
grown overnight according to standard conditions before being inoculated into three
250 mL shake ﬂasks containing 30 mL TSB (preheated to 37 ¶C) to a ﬁnal OD600nm
19
==PAGE:29==
= 0.05.
Next, the shake ﬂask cultures were grown in a waterbath at 37 ¶C and
200 rpm for 6 hours and samples were collected every hour (except at time point
T1 corresponding to 1 hour after the strains had been inoculated).
An OD600nm
measurement was carried out for each sample followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes
at 6000 g. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet stored at -20 ¶C.
All cell pellets were re-suspended in 50 mM Tris buﬀer (pH = 8.0) [Merck, 77-
86-1] to an OD600nm = 1 and then transferred to Fastprep tubes containing 300 mg
<106 µm acid-washed glass beads.
Afterwards, the cells were mechanically lysed
using a FASTPREP FP120 Bead Beater machine with two cycles of 40 seconds at
speed 5.5 m/s having a 1 minute break between the two cycles. After the bead beater
treatment, 500 µL lysed cell material was transferred from each sample to a tube
containing 200 µL Z-buﬀer followed by incubation at room temperature for 5 minutes.
As a negative control, 500 µL 50 mM Tris buﬀer (pH = 8.0) was added instead of
lysed cells. Finally, 50 µL ONPG [SIGMA, 369-07-3] solution (4 mg/mL) was added
to all tubes, which were subsequently vortexed before 200 µL from each sample was
transferred to three wells on a 96 microtiter plate [Greiner Bio-one, 655097] so that
three technical replicates were created for each biological replicate. Autoclaved H2O
was added to surplus wells. The microtiter plate was placed in a Cytation 5, Imaging
plate reader and incubated for 18 hours, 28 ¶C with omnidirectional shake, while A420
was measured in each well at 2 minutes intervals.
As a veriﬁcation of the eﬀectiveness of the bead beater treatment; 50 µL was
acquired from samples collected from one of the shake ﬂask cultures both before and
after the bead beater treatment of the samples. These were used for visual inspection
of S. aureus cells under the microscope.
2.5.2
The eﬀect of diﬀerent 4448c extract dilutions on S. aureus growth
The eﬀect of a two-fold dilution series of a PADK2 4448c extract, which had been
further fractionated based on polarity (Fraction 14, 1 mg/mL), towards S. aureus
growth was assessed.
To a 96 microtiter plate, Fraction 14 (diluted in TSB to 10.3 µg/mL corresponding
to a 1% dilution of the original concentration) was added to row A-C, column 1. A
1% concentration of methanol (diluted in TSB) was added to row D-F, column 1, as a
solvent control (Figure 8). A two-fold dilution series was carried out from column 1 to
10 ending up with a 0.002% concentration in column 10 (Fraction 14 in row A-C and
methanol in row D-F). Three biological replicates of the reporter strain being assayed
were added to column 1-11 to a ﬁnal OD600nm = 0.001 with one of the biological
replicates being added to row A and D, the second to row B and E and the last to
row C and F (total volume in the wells were 250 µL). Thus, column 11 functioned
as a growth control as no organic extract or methanol was added, and column 12
acted as a media control, as only TSB was added to these wells.
The microtiter
plate was incubated in the Cytation imaging plate reader for 18 hours at 37 ¶C with
omnidirectional shake. OD600nm was measured in each well at 3 minutes intervals.
20
==PAGE:30==
Figure 8: PADK2 4448c fraction dilution assay. A set-up of the PADK2
4448c fraction dilution assay in a 96 well microtiter plate. Bacterial culture
was added to column 1-11. Fraction 14 (Row A-C) or methanol (Row D-F)
was added to Column 1-10 being diluted two-fold between each column with
the highest concentration starting in column 1 and the lowest in column 10
(concentrations given in percentage). Column 11 acted as a growth control and
column 12 as a media control.
2.5.3
—-galactosidase activity assay of S. aureus reporter genes when
grown with a 4448c extract
Using a modiﬁed version of the —-galactosidase activity assay explained in section
2.5.1, the expression of virulence genes over time when exposed to Fraction 14 was
investigated.
This time, the overnight cultures were inoculated into six 100 mL shake ﬂasks
containing 10 mL preheated TSB (each biological replicate was added to two shake
ﬂasks). Fraction 14 was added to three of the shake ﬂask cultures (containing three
diﬀerent biological replicates), while methanol was added to the other three. Fraction
14 and methanol were added to a ﬁnal concentration corresponding to the optimal
concentrations found in section 2.5.2 that did not aﬀect the growth rate. The shake
ﬂask cultures were then grown in a shaking incubator instead of a waterbath at 37
¶C, 200 rpm and samples were collected only 3, 4 and 5 hours after the strains had
been inoculated.
Regarding the ONPG activity part, the samples were homogenised in the Bead
Beater machine with two cycles of 40 seconds at speed 6.5 m/s with a 1 minute
break between the two cycles, where the samples were put on ice. After the bead
beater treatment the samples were centrifuged at 11.000 g for 1 minute at 4 ¶C. The
supernatant was transferred to new tubes (avoiding glass beads), which were then
centrifuged again at 11.000 g for 1 minute at 4 ¶C. 500 µL cells acquired from the
supernatant was used for the rest of the procedure explained in section 2.5.1.
Again, a veriﬁcation of the eﬀectiveness of the bead beater treatment was carried
out. For one of the biological replicates, Colony Forming Units (CFU) was determined
for the samples collected from it 3, 4 and 5 hours after inoculation. This was done right
before and after the bead beater treatment of the samples (after second centrifugation
step) for both the Fraction 14 grown culture and the methanol grown. CFU was
determined by plating on TSA.
Furthermore, the eﬀect of methanol on S. aureus growth in the new set-up was
determined by inoculating three overnight cultures (biological replicates) into six 100
21
==PAGE:31==
mL shake ﬂasks containing 10 mL TSB (preheated to 37 ¶C) to a ﬁnal OD600nm = 0.05
(each replicate was added to two shake ﬂasks). Methanol was then added to three
of the shake ﬂasks (containing three diﬀerent biological replicates) while nothing was
added to the other three. The six shake ﬂasks were grown in a shaking incubator for
6 hours at 37 ¶C and 200 rpm. Samples were collected from all shake ﬂask cultures 2,
3, 4, 5 and 6 hours after the strains had been inoculated and OD600nm was determined
for all samples.
2.6
The antistaphylococcal eﬀect of Fraction 14 in the infec-
tion model G. mellonella
2.6.1
Toxicity of Fraction 14 to G. mellonella
The toxicity of Fraction 14 towards the wax moth larva G. mellonella was examined
using a protocol adapted from [107] and [111]. The experiment included eight groups
with 6 larvae in each.
Three of the groups received three diﬀerent concentrations of Fraction 14, while
three other groups received the same dilutions of methanol (solvent controls). These
ﬁnal concentrations of either Fraction 14 or methanol in the larvae were obtained via
dilution in PBS, knowing that each larvae on average weighted 250 mg [107] (end
volume was therefore approximately 250µL) and 10 µL was to be injected into each
larva. PBS was given to the seventh larvae group as a negative control, while the last
group received supernatant collected from a WT 4448c overnight culture that had
been further grown overnight in a 96 microtiter plate before the colony was boiled
and subsequently centrifuged (done my Mikkel Anbo).
The larvae were injected intrahaemocoelic in the last proleg using an automated
syringe pump (Harvard apparatus, PHD 2000) with the diameter set to 4.6, infusion
rate to 10.000 mL/h and target volume to 10 µL. A 1 mL syringe was ﬁlled with
either Fraction 14, methanol, PBS or pure 4448c supernatant after which a 0.4 x
40 mm needle was attached to the syringe, which was subsequently placed in the
injector machine. A control injection was initially done into an empty PCR tube
before injecting a new larvae group to control an injection volume of 10 µL. Injected
larvae were placed in petri dishes (all larvae from the same group were placed in the
same petri dish), which were subsequently incubated at 37 ¶C for 96 hours. The
larvae were inspected every 24 hour and were considered dead if they did not move
in response to touch.
2.6.2
Treatment of MRSA infected G. mellonella with Fraction 14
The ability of Fraction 14 to rescue MRSA infected G. mellonella was assessed. This
experiment consisted of ﬁve groups with 8 larvae in each.
Initially, an OD-CFU/mL correlation was created for the JE2 WT strain by
pre-paring six overnight cultures according to standard conditions, which were sub-
sequently washed twice in PBS (6.000 g, 5 minutes) before being diluted to both
OD600nm = 1 x 10≠6 and OD600nm = 1 x 10≠7. Both dilutions from all six biological
replicates were plated on TSA followed by incubation at 37 ¶C overnight after which
CFU/mL was determined.
Next, a new overnight culture of JE2 WT was made and 1 mL from this was
washed twice in PBS (6.000 g, 5 minutes) before being diluted to an OD600nm = 0.05,
22
==PAGE:32==
corresponding to approximately 1.5 x 107 CFU/mL. Four of the larvae groups were
then injected with 10 µL of the bacterial culture (giving a ﬁnal concentration of 6 x
105 CFU/mL JE2 in the larvae) using the same protocol explained in section 2.6.1.
The ﬁfth group was not infected.
After infection, the larvae were left at room temperature for 2 hours. Then, two of
the MRSA infected larvae groups were injected with 10 µL Fraction 14, diluted to two
diﬀerent concentrations. A third group received PBS and the ﬁnal JE2 infected group
received the boiled 4448c supernatant. The larvae group that had not been infected
with WT JE2 was injected only with PBS. All larvae were subsequently incubated at
37 ¶C for 96 hours and larvae survival was determined every 24 hour, being considered
dead if they did not move in response to touch.
2.7
Data analysis
All data analysis and statistics were done in Microsoft Excel. —-galactosidase activity
(measured through ONPG cleavage activity) was found as the slope of the linear
part of the curve that resulted when plotting A420 against time. The growth rates
of S. aureus reporter strains in the fraction dilution assay were determined based
on linear regression on the exponential part of log10 transformed growth curves. The
growth rate corresponded to the slope of the resulting line. Means and standard errors
were determined for the three biological replicates at all sample points in both the
—-galactosidase activity assays and the fraction dilution assays. Signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between cultures grown with Fraction 14 and cultures grown just with methanol (at
same dilutions) were determined using a student t-test (– = 0.05, two-sided). This
was done for all dilutions of Fraction 14 and methanol in the fraction dilution assay
as well as for all three samples points taken in the —-galactosidase activity assay from
section 2.5.3.
Furthermore, a standard curve of JE2 WT was created correlating
CFU/mL to the respective OD values. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were created for
both larvae experiments and a Log Rank Test (– = 0.05, df = 1) was performed to
evaluate signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the survival curve of the PBS-treated group
with the survival curves of the other JE2 infected groups.
23
==PAGE:33==
3
Results
3.1
PAO1 and 4448c aﬀect gene expression of RNAIII, hla
and spa in both MSSA and MRSA
Initially, the interaction between the four P. aeruginosa strains with the six S. aureus
reporter strains were studied visually on TSA X-gal plates. This was done to examine
if each of the P. aeruginosa strains speciﬁcally aﬀected the gene expression of RNAIII,
hla and/or spa in both the 8325-4 strain and the JE2 strain. Each S. aureus reporter
strain was plated on a TSA X-gal plate, while cultures of PAO1, 4448c, CFM25 and
IMG213 were added to wells made on each plate (see Figure 9).
Figure 9: Co-culture plate assay. Each S. aureus reporter strain was plated
on an X-gal plate, while cultures of PAO1 (top), 4448c (right), IMG213 (bottom
right) and CFM25 (bottom left) were added to wells made on each plate. PBS
was added as a solvent control (left). The production of blue colour is a result
of the reporter genes being expressed.
When visually inspecting these plates it can be seen that under normal circumstances
RNAIII and Hla are both highly expressed in both the JE2 and 8325-4 strain (reporter
strains have turned blue). For the Spa reporter strains there is a diﬀerence in the
expression, as Spa seems to be highly expressed in the JE2 strain, while no expression
is observed in the 8325-4 strain.
However, for all six reporter strains an altered expression pattern of the reporter
genes are seen when interacting with both the PAO1 and 4448c strains. An increase
in blue colour is observed on the 8325-4 Spa plate around the wells where PAO1 and
4448c have been added, while a decrease in blue colour is observed around these wells
for the other ﬁve reporter strains.
Contrarily, no change in gene expression were observed around the wells where
CFM25 and IMG213 were added except for the 8325-4 Spa plate. Sometimes, when
24
==PAGE:34==
performing this assay, a blue zone appeared around these two wells (Figure 10) indi-
cating that these two strains do seem to induce the expression of Spa in 8325-4 but
through a mechanism that does not aﬀect the expression of the other reporter genes.
However, it should be noted that this eﬀect on 8325-4 Spa did not appear consistently.
Figure 10: An assay where CFM25 and IMG213 upregulated Spa in
8325-4. The 8325-4 Spa strain plated on X-gal, while cultures of 4448c (bottom
left), IMG213 (bottom right) and CFM25 (top right) were added to wells made
on the plate. PBS was added as solvent control (top left). The production of
blue colour is a result of the reporter gene being expressed.
When examining the eﬀect on S. aureus growth, a clear reduction in growth is
observed around PAO1 for all six reporter strains, visualised as clearing zones, where
no colonies of S. aureus have appeared. For the 4448c strain no clearing zones are
observed, however, the S. aureus colonies growing around these wells have signiﬁcantly
decreased in size compared to those growing around the PBS wells. This indicates
that the 4448c strain does have some inﬂuence on S. aureus growth. Lastly, no eﬀect
on S. aureus growth is observed around the wells were CFM25 and IMG213 were
added.
Thus, based on the observations stated above it can be concluded that both PAO1
and 4448c aﬀect the expression of the three virulence genes in both the MSSA and
MRSA strain, while CFM25 and IMG213 only seem to sometimes inﬂuence the expres-
sion of the spa gene in 8325-4 (Table 2). Also, compared to the PAO1 strain, which
clearly inhibits S. aureus growth, 4448c aﬀect the growth far less (Table 3), making
it a better candidate for the characterization of potential anti-virulence compounds
against S. aureus produced by this strain.
25
==PAGE:35==
Table 2: The eﬀect of the four P. aeruginosa strains (PA) on RNAIII,
Hla and Spa expression in 8325-4 and JE2. + Increased expression, %
Decreased expression, +/- Sometimes an increased expression, - No eﬀect.
PA Strains
8325-4
RNAIII
8325-4
Hla
8325-4
Spa
JE2
RNAIII
JE2 Hla
JE2 Spa
PAO1
%
%
+
%
%
%
4448c
%
%
+
%
%
%
CFM25
-
-
+/-
-
-
-
IMG213
-
-
+/-
-
-
-
Table 3: The eﬀect of the four P. aeruginosa strains on the growth of
8325-4 and JE2. +++ Clearing zone observed, + Decreased colony size, - No
eﬀect observed.
PA Strains
8325-4
RNAIII
8325-4
Hla
8325-4
Spa
JE2
RNAIII
JE2 Hla
JE2 Spa
PAO1
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
4448c
+
+
+
+
+
+
CFM25
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMG213
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.2
Bioactivity of organic extracts from P. aeruginosa
3.2.1
PAO1 and 4448c have diﬀerent AQ proﬁles
Next, unpolar (or slightly polar) molecules produced by the four P. aeruginosa strains
were extracted from overnight cultures using the organic solvent ethyl acetate (dis-
cards highly polar molecules). Three organic extractions were made for each strain
(biological replicates) and samples from all extractions made were sent for LC-DAD-
MS analysis using ESI+. The data obtained were analysed in MassHunter with the
purpose of identifying the prevalence of HHQ, HQNO and PQS in the samples.
Initially, Base Peak Chromatograms (BPCs) were extracted for all samples and
compared with the BPC of an LB control sample. Figure 11 shows the BPC for one
of the biological replicates of each P. aeruginosa strain. The BPCs for the remaining
biological replicates are shown in Appendix E, as these are similar to the ones seen
in Figure 11.
When comparing to the LB control sample, no extra peaks are observed on the
CFM25 and the IMG213 BPCs.
Contrarily, several peaks were identiﬁed on the
PAO1 and 4448c BPCs that are diﬀerent from the peaks seen on the LB BPC. These
peaks corresponds to secondary metabolites produced and secreted by the two strains.
Notably, a diﬀerent metabolite proﬁle is observed for the PAO1 strain compared to
the 4448c strain.
An attempt to identify the three most characterized AQs; HQNO, HHQ and
PQS, was carried out by extracting EICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) of [M+H]+
Mass-to-Charge (m/z) values of 244 ([M+H]+ of HHQ) and 260 ([M+H]+ of PQS and
26
==PAGE:36==
Figure 11: BPCs of the P. aeruginosa organic extractions. The BPCs
obtained for an LB control sample and one of the biological replicates of each
P. aeruginosa strain.
HQNO) [122] (EICs in Appendix E Figure 34 and 35). During the LC-DAD-MS ana-
lysis LC-MS/MS fragmentation was also carried out, where each compound analysed
and detected was fragmented into smaller molecules. Each compound has a unique
fragmentation pattern, which can be utilized for the identiﬁcation of the compound.
Lepine et al. [122] have identiﬁed the most common fragments (m/z values) that
occur for each of the seven diﬀerent series of AQs produced by P. aeruginosa. Hence,
with the knowledge of HHQ being a series 1 AQ, PQS being a series 3 AQ and HQNO
being a series 4 [122] the identiﬁcation of these AQs were carried out by studying the
speciﬁc m/z [M+H]+ values and the belonging fragmentation patterns in MassHunter.
Using this method, all three AQs (HQNO, HHQ and PQS) were identiﬁed in the PAO1
organic extract (Figure 12), while only HHQ and HQNO were detected to be present
in the 4448c organic extract - no PQS could be detected.
Assuming that each sample contained approximately the same concentration of
cells before the ethyl acetate extractions were made, a rough estimate of the relative
quantity of HHQ and HQNO present in the PAO1 extract compared to the 4448c
extract was determined. This was only done for one of the PAO1 and 4448c extracts
analysed, as the BPCs obtained for the biological replicates originating from the same
P. aeruginosa strain were more or less identical. The relative quantity was determined
by comparing the area under the peaks determined to be HHQ or HQNO, respectively,
on the PAO1 and 4448c EICs. Based on this analysis, the relative concentration of
HHQ was more than seven times higher in the 4448c extract compared to the PAO1
extract (Table 4). However, the relative concentration of HQNO was more than 14
times higher in the PAO1 extract compared to the 4448c extract. As PQS could not
be detected in the 4448c extract, no comparison was made of the quantity of this AQ
in the two extracts.
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 12: AQs detected in the PAO1 and 4448c organic extracts. HHQ,
HQNO and PQS could be detected in the PAO1 extract, while only HHQ and
HQNO could be detected in the 4448c extract.
Table 4: Relative quantity of AQs detected in one of the PAO1 extracts
compared to one of the 4448c extracts.
AQs
Relative quantity (PAO1:4448c)
HHQ
> 1:7
HQNO
> 14:1
PQS
-
These results show that the AQ proﬁles of the PAO1 and PADK2 strains clearly diﬀer
from each other, as PAO1 had a higher production of both HQNO and PQS, while
PADK2 had a higher production of HHQ.
28
==PAGE:38==
3.2.2
Organic extractions from PAO1 and 4448c aﬀect virulence gene
expression in both MSSA and MRSA
The bioactivity of the organic extracts from the four P. aeruginosa strains towards
S. aureus virulence gene expression was then qualitatively investigated on TSA X-gal
plates. The assay was carried out as the co-culture plate assay (section 3.1) with each
S. aureus reporter strain being plated on a TSA X-gal plate. However, in this case
the organic extractions from PAO1, 4448c, CFM25 and IMG213 were added to the
wells instead of bacterial cultures (see Figure 13).
Figure 13: Bioactivity of the P. aeruginosa organic extractions. Each
S. aureus reporter strain was plated on an X-gal plate, while organic extrac-
tions from the PAO1 (top right), CFM25 (right), IMG213 (bottom) and 4448c
(bottom left) were added to wells made on each plate. Methanol was added
as a solvent control (top left). The production of blue colour is a result of the
reporter genes being expressed.
From this plate assay, an eﬀect on S. aureus virulence gene expression is observed
around all the wells where the PAO1 and 4448c extracts were added (less clear for two
RNAIII reporter strains). The expression of RNAIII, Hla, and Spa in JE2 were all
down-regulated by the PAO1 and 4448c extracts (decrease in blue colour). A decrease
in the expression of RNAIII and Hla in 8325-4 is also observed, while 8325-4 Spa was
upregulated by both the PAO1 and 4448c extracts. No eﬀect on S. aureus virulence
gene expression is observed around any of the wells where the CFM25 or IMG213
extracts were added (results are summarised in Table 5).
Furthermore, the CFM25 or IMG213 extracts did not have any visible eﬀect on
S. aureus growth.
However, the eﬀect on growth by PAO1 and 4448c is hard to
determine based on this picture. A clearing of cells is observed around PAO1 on the
JE2 Hla plate (better visualised in Figure 14), where a clear eﬀect on growth is not
observed by the 4448c extract. Colonies do appear very close to the wells where this
29
==PAGE:39==
extract is added but it is hard to determine, whether these are smaller than under
normal circumstances. For the JE2 RNAIII, JE2 Spa, 8325-4 RNAIII and 8325-4 Hla
plates the eﬀect on growth by the PAO1 and 4448c extracts is hard to determine,
while on the 8325-4 Spa plate no eﬀect on growth is observed by the two extracts
(results are summarised in Table 6).
Figure 14: Zoom of wells, where PAO1 and 4448c extracts were added
on the JE2 Hla plate from Figure 13.
From these results it can be concluded that organic extractions from both PAO1
and 4448c aﬀect the gene expression of RNAIII, hla and spa in both the MSSA and
MRSA strain, while no such eﬀect is observed by the CFM25 and IMG213 extracts.
For both the PAO1 and 4448c extracts, the eﬀect on S. aureus growth is hard to
determine for many of the reporter strains, which is in contrast to when bacterial
cultures of PAO1 and 4448c were added to the wells (section 3.1). However, a clearing
of bacteria is still observed around PAO1 on the JE2 Hla plate, while the eﬀect of
the 4448c extract on S. aureus growth is generally hard to determine. No eﬀect on S.
aureus growth was observed by the CFM25 and IMG213 extracts.
Table 5: The eﬀect of organic extractions from the four P. aeruginosa
strains on RNAIII, Hla and Spa expression in 8325-4 and JE2. +
Increased expression, % Decreased expression, - No eﬀect.
PA Strains
8325-4
RNAIII
8325-4
Hla
8325-4
Spa
JE2
RNAIII
JE2 Hla
JE2 Spa
PAO1
%
%
+
%
%
%
4448c
%
%
+
%
%
%
CFM25
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMG213
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
==PAGE:40==
Table 6: The eﬀect of organic extractions from the four P. aerugi-
nosa strains on the growth of 8325-4 and JE2. ++ A clearing of cells is
observed, +/- Hard to determine eﬀect, - No eﬀect observed.
PA Strains
8325-4
RNAIII
8325-4
Hla
8325-4
Spa
JE2
RNAIII
JE2 Hla
JE2 Spa
PAO1
+/-
+/-
-
+/-
++
+/-
4448c
+/-
+/-
-
+/-
+/-
+/-
CFM25
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMG213
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.3
The AQNO-pathway of the pqs system is related to both
the anti-virulence and growth-inhibiting eﬀects observed
by PADK2 towards S. aureus
The pqsL and pqsH genes were knocked out in the PADK2 strain in order to narrow
down on the possible candidate molecules accountable for the anti-virulence eﬀect
observed for the PADK2 strain towards S. aureus. As mentioned in section 1.4.1,
PqsL is responsible for the production of AQNOs in the pqs system, while PqsH
converts HHQ into PQS.
The two PADK2 mutants were constructed using a two-step allelic exchange
method, which utilizes homologous recombination to target an endogeneous gene and
replacing it with a mutant allele. More speciﬁcally, deletion fragments of the two
genes were inserted into the plasmid pNJ1, which were subsequently transformed into
and ampliﬁed in E. coli CC118⁄pir, before being conjugated into PADK2 through
tri-parental mating.
Single cross-over strains were selected for through TetR, and
true double cross-over strains were selected for by counter selection on sucrose plates.
Finally, the ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH alleles were sent for sequencing on both strands, and
the resulting sequences were aligned with the WT pqsL and pqsH genes in PADK2,
verifying the successful replacements of the WT genes with the deletion fragments
(alignments shown in Appendix F).
The PADK2 4448c ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH mutants were included in a new co-culture
plate assay, carried out as in section 3.1. However, this time bacterial cultures of
PAO1, WT 4448c, 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH were added to the wells made on
the X-gal plates (Figure 15).
From these plates it is observed that the eﬀect of the 4448c ∆pqsH mutant on
S. aureus virulence gene expression is very similar to the eﬀect observed by the WT
4448c strain. The spa gene is upregulated in 8325-4 and the other ﬁve virulence genes
are down-regulated around the wells where this mutant is added. Also, the S. aureus
colonies that appear around these well have a decreased size (like around the WT
4448c wells) compared to when S. aureus is grown alone.
Conversely, no eﬀect on S. aureus virulence gene expression is observed by the
4448c ∆pqsL mutant (except on the 8325-4 Spa plate). No reduction in blue colour
is observed around the wells where this mutant is added for all three JE2 reporter
strains as well as the 8325-4 RNAIII and Hla strains. However, an induction of Spa
in 8325-4 is observed but this may be a result of an alternative mechanism such as
31
==PAGE:41==
Figure 15: Co-culture plate assay with 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH
mutants. Each S. aureus reporter strain was plated on an X-gal plate, while
cultures of PAO1 (top), WT 4448c (right), 4448c ∆pqsH (bottom right) and
4448c ∆pqsL (bottom left) were added to wells made on each plate. PBS was
added as solvent control (left). Blue colour production is a result of the reporter
genes being expressed.
was seen for the CFM25 and IMG213 strains in section 3.1. Furthermore, no eﬀect
on S. aureus growth is observed around 4448c ∆pqsL.
Hence, these results indicate that both the anti-virulence and growth-inhibiting
eﬀects observed by WT 4448c towards S. aureus are related to the AQNO pathway
of the pqs system in PADK2 4448c (the results are summarised in Table 7 and 8).
Table 7: The eﬀect of PAO1, WT 4448c, 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH
on RNAIII, Hla and Spa expression in 8325-4 and JE2. + Increased
expression, % Decreased expression, - No eﬀect.
PA Strains
8325-4
RNAIII
8325-4
Hla
8325-4
Spa
JE2
RNAIII
JE2 Hla
JE2 Spa
PAO1
%
%
+
%
%
%
WT 4448c
%
%
+
%
%
%
4448c ∆pqsL
-
-
+
-
-
-
4448c ∆pqsH
%
%
+
%
%
%
32
==PAGE:42==
Table 8: The eﬀect of PAO1, WT 4448c, 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH
on the growth of 8325-4 and JE2. +++ Clearing zone observed, + De-
creased colony size, - No eﬀect observed.
PA Strains
8325-4
RNAIII
8325-4
Hla
8325-4
Spa
JE2
RNAIII
JE2 Hla
JE2 Spa
PAO1
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
4448c
+
+
+
+
+
+
4448c ∆pqsL
-
-
-
-
-
-
4448c ∆pqsH
+
+
+
+
+
+
3.4
Quantitative study of the PADK2 4448c extract’s eﬀect
on S. aureus virulence gene expression
3.4.1
RNAIII and Hla expression peaks after approximately 3-4 hours of
growth in both 8325-4 and JE2
It was then assessed whether the PADK2 extract had an eﬀect on the S. aureus
reporter genes expressions through a mechanism independent from growth-inhibition.
In order to determine this, a —-galactosidase activity assay was set up to measure the
expression of the virulence genes over time, initially under normal circumstances, and
subsequently, when grown with the PADK2 extract at a concentration that did not
aﬀect the growth of S. aureus.
The initial —-galactosidase activity assay was carried out by growing the strains
over a period of 6 hours, collecting samples every hour (except 1 hour after inocula-
tion). The amount of —-galactosidase produced by the cells at a certain time point (as
a result of the virulence promoter being activated) was determined by adding a ﬁxed
amount of ONPG, which upon cleavage by —-galactosidase produces a measurable
yellow colour. Hence, virulence gene expression was positively correlated with ONPG
cleavage activity in this study. This protocol was used to study the normal expression
of RNAIII and Hla in both the 8325-4 and JE2 strain (three biological replicates).
The measured ONPG cleavage activity at each sample point for the RNAIII and
Hla reporter strains are shown in Figure 16 and 17, respectively, along with the
belonging OD curves of the growth cultures. The activities are given in Miller units:
Miller Units = 1000 ú (A420/min)
VCulture ú OD600
= 1000 ú (A420/min)
0.2 ú 1
A420/min is equal to the ONPG cleavage activity and was determined by plotting
the measured A420 values (absorbance of yellow colour produced) against time (these
curves are shown in Appendix G). A420/min corresponded to the slope of the linear
part. VCulture is the volume in the microtiter plate (200 µL) and OD600 is the OD
value at the given time point, which had been normalised to 1 in all samples.
In the JE2 strain, gene expression of RNAIII and hla seemed to peak after 4 and
3 hours, respectively. For the 8325-4 strain Hla expression peaked around time point
3, whereas the maximum expression of RNAIII in this strain is hard to determine due
to the high standard errors (SE) observed at time point 2. Generally, there is a high
33
==PAGE:43==
Figure 16: RNAIII expression over time in S. aureus 8325-4 and JE2.
Mean ONPG cleavage activity values (given in Miller units) and standard errors
for the two RNAIII reporter strains at each sample point as a measure of the
corresponding RNAIII expression. The mean OD values and standard errors of
the growth cultures are plotted as well.
Figure 17: Hla expression over time in S. aureus 8325-4 and JE2. Mean
ONPG cleavage activity values (given in Miller units) and standard errors for the
two Hla reporter strains at each sample point as a measure of the corresponding
Hla expression. The mean OD values and standard errors of the growth cultures
are plotted as well.
SE at time point 2 in all four assays, and for the two Hla assays, time point 3 also
have a relatively large SE.
In three out of the four assays, the OD curves looked normal with the exponential
phase occurring between time point 2 and 5 after which the cultures grew more slowly.
However, for the 8325-4 RNAIII reporter strain, the growth curve looked abnormal
with the OD values obtained at time point 5 being lower than at time point 4. This
34
==PAGE:44==
is likely a result of the cells aggregating, and the samples acquired at this time point
may therefore not be representative for the true OD value of the growth cultures.
As gene expression of the two virulence genes were detected to peak after 3-4 hours
and the SE’s were quite low at time point 4 and 5 (also time point 3 for RNAIII),
it was decided to focus on time point 3, 4 and 5 in the subsequent —-galactosidase
assay, where the eﬀect of the PADK2 extract on S. aureus virulence gene expression
over time was assessed (section 3.4.3).
3.4.2
Fraction 14 aﬀects the growth rate of S. aureus at certain dilutions
Next, the highest concentration of the PADK2 extract that did not inhibit the growth
rate of S. aureus was identiﬁed. However, in this case the PADK2 organic extract used
had been further fractionated based on polarity by Mikkel Anbo. Among these frac-
tions, Fraction 14 (1 mg/mL) showed a high anti-virulence activity against S. aureus
and the eﬀect of a two-fold dilution series (from 1% to 0.002% dilution) of Fraction
14 on S. aureus growth was therefore investigated (three biological replicates). As
Fraction 14 was dissolved in methanol, S. aureus was also grown with the same con-
centrations of methanol. A growth control was included where neither Fraction 14 or
methanol was added (six biological replicates). The assay was tested on the 8325-4
RNAIII and JE2 RNAIII reporter strains.
Growth curves were created for each dilution of Fraction 14 (or methanol) (Ap-
pendix I) and the subsequent growth rates were determined based on linear regression
on the exponential part, as the slope of the resulting line. The growth rates found for
the two reporter strains, when exposed to the diﬀerent dilutions of Fraction 14, were
plotted together with the subsequent solvent controls (Figure 18).
Figure 18:
The eﬀect of Fraction 14 (4448c extract) on S. aureus
growth rate.
Mean growth rate values and standard errors of the 8325-4
RNAIII (top) and JE2 RNAIII (bottom) strains, when grown with diﬀerent di-
lutions of either Fraction 14 (beige bars) or methanol (blue bars). The growth
control was grown without both Fraction 14 and methanol. The dotted line
represents the mean growth rate value of the growth control. **p-value < 0.05,
***p-value < 0.01.
35
==PAGE:45==
Studying this ﬁgure, it is observed that none of the concentrations of methanol
used seemed to have a noteworthy eﬀect on the growth rate of 8325-4 RNAIII or
JE2 RNAIII (all were more or less comparable to the growth control). However, a
diﬀerence in the growth rate was observed for those cultures that received diﬀerent
concentrations of Fraction 14 (average growth rates and p-values are listed in Table
9 and 10). For the 8325-4 RNAIII strain, the cultures that received a 1% and 0.52%
dilution of Fraction 14 had a signiﬁcantly lower growth rate compared to the solvent
controls (p-values < 0.01). In the JE2 RNAIII strain, a signiﬁcantly lower growth rate
was observed for those cultures grown with a 1% (p-value = 0.016), 0.52% (p-value
< 0.001), 0.26% (p-value = 0.009) and 0.13% (p-value = 0.029) dilution of Fraction
14 compared to those grown with the same dilutions of methanol. Interestingly, JE2
RNAIII actually obtained a signiﬁcantly higher growth rate when grown with a 0.064%
(p-value = 0.038) and 0.016% (p-value = 0.005) dilution of Fraction 14 compared to
the corresponding methanol grown cultures.
Table 9: Mean growth rates and standard errors obtained for 8325-4
RNAIII with the diﬀerent dilutions of Fraction 14 (F14) or methanol
(MeOH). The p-values obtained when comparing the individual Fraction 14
grown culture with the subsequent solvent controls are listed as well. The ave-
rage growth rate for the growth control was 0.0042 ± 5.4 x 10≠5 min≠1.
Dilutions
Growth rates (F14)
Growth rates (MeOH)
p-values
1.03 %
0.0029 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0041 ± 1.5 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.004
0.515 %
0.0033 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0039 ± 5.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.003
0.258 %
0.0042 ± 5.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0040 ± 1.0 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.176
0.129 %
0.0043 ± 1.3 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.0042 ± 5.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.433
0.064 %
0.0044 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0041 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.062
0.032 %
0.0043 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0041 ± 1.0 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.232
0.016 %
0.0042 ± 1.0 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.0041 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.644
0.008 %
0.0044 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0043 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.379
0.004 %
0.0044 ± 1.5 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.0040 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.090
0.002 %
0.0042 ± 6.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0041 ± 5.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.493
Additionally, as Fraction 14 had previously been sent for LC-DAD-MS analysis by
Mikkel Anbo, a comparison was made of the relative quantity of HHQ and HQNO
present in Fraction 14 compared to in the PADK2 4448c organic extract produced in
section 3.2.1 using the same technique explained in that section. The results of this
analysis is shown in Table 11 (belonging BPCs are shown in Appendix J), showing that
the PADK2 extract produced in this study contained more than a 5 times higher re-
lative concentration of HHQ compared to Fraction 14, while the relative concentration
of HQNO was approximately the same. PQS could not be detected in Fraction 14,
which was also the case for the PADK2 extract.
36
==PAGE:46==
Table 10: Mean growth rates and standard errors obtained for JE2
RNAIII with the diﬀerent dilutions of Fraction 14 (F14) or methanol
(MeOH). The p-values obtained when comparing the individual Fraction 14
grown cultures with the subsequent solvent controls are listed as well.
The
average growth rate for the growth control was 0.0053 ± 4.9 x 10≠5 min≠1.
Dilutions
Growth rates (F14)
Growth rates (MeOH)
p-values
1.03 %
0.0034 ± 3.1 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.0054 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.016
0.515 %
0.0043 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0054 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.001 >
0.258 %
0.0048 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0054 ± 5.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.009
0.129 %
0.0050 ± 6.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0053 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.029
0.064 %
0.0055 ± 6.1 x 10≠19 min≠1
0.0053 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.038
0.032 %
0.0055 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0054 ± 1.3 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.829
0.016 %
0.0057 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0052 ± 5.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.005
0.008 %
0.0055 ± 8.8 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0053 ± 5.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.102
0.004 %
0.0058 ± 1.5 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.0056 ± 1.2 x 10≠4 min≠1
0.300
0.002 %
0.0053 ± 6.7 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.0053 ± 3.3 x 10≠5 min≠1
0.439
Table 11: Comparison of the relative quantities of HHQ and HQNO
in the PADK2 organic extract and Fraction 14.
AQs
Relative quantity (Fraction 14:PADK2 extract)
HHQ
> 1:5
HQNO
1.5:1
Based on these results, it can be concluded that a 0.26% and 0.064% dilution of
Fraction 14 are the highest concentrations of the extract that does not reduce the
growth rate of 8325-4 RNAIII and JE2 RNAIII, respectively. These concentrations of
Fraction 14 were therefore utilized for the subsequent studies of its eﬀect on S. aureus
RNAIII expression.
Also, when comparing Fraction 14 with the PADK2 organic
extract produced in this study in respect to their relative quantity of HHQ, PQS and
HQNO, it is mainly the concentration of HHQ that seem to diﬀer.
3.4.3
Fraction 14 aﬀects RNAIII expression in 8325-4 through a mecha-
nism that is not related to growth-inhibition
Having determined the optimal concentrations of Fraction 14 that did not have an
eﬀect on the growth rates of 8325-4 and JE2, the question of whether the fractionated
PADK2 extract had an eﬀect on virulence gene expression in S. aureus through a
mechanism independent from growth-inhibition could now be assessed.
For this purpose, a new —-galactosidase assay was set up. The eﬀectiveness of
the bead beater treatment utilized in section 3.4.1 had been examined via microscopy
of some of the samples before and after their homogenisation (Appendix L), which
showed that though a reduction of S. aureus cells did appear in the samples after
37
==PAGE:47==
the bead beater treatment compared to right before, it was not always with the same
factor of reduction in each sample. Furthermore, problems with aggregation was also
frequently experienced, especially when growing the shake ﬂask cultures with Fraction
14 or methanol. Hence, an optimization of the protocol was needed.
To avoid the problems with aggregation, the shake ﬂask cultures were moved to
a shaking incubator instead of a waterbath. Furthermore, all shake ﬂask cultures
were shaken vigorously before each sample acquisition. Using this set-up, the eﬀect
of methanol on 8325-4 RNAIII’s growth was tested by comparing the growth curve
obtained for 8325-4 RNAIII when grown with methanol compared to when grown
alone (Figure 19). Methanol was diluted to 0.26%, as this concentration of Fraction
14 was the highest concentration that did not aﬀect the growth of 8325-4 RNAIII.
As the two growth curves are very alike, it can be concluded that a 0.26% dilution of
methanol does not have an eﬀect on the growth of 8325-4 RNAIII in the new set-up.
Also, problems with aggregation were overcome with the new set-up.
Figure 19: Eﬀect of MeOH (0.26%) on 8325-4 RNAIII growth. OD
curves of 8325-4 RNAIII grown either with methanol (blue curve) or without
methanol (red curve).
The graph shows the mean OD values and standard
errors.
In order to improve the bead beater treatment of the cells, the samples were
homogenised at a higher speed (6.5 m/s instead of 5.5 m/s), put on ice in between the
two cycles of homogenisation (instead of room temperature), and after the treatment
the samples were centrifuged twice (11.000 g, 1 minute, 4 ¶C) to avoid glass beads
and cell debris.
Using this protocol, the eﬀect of Fraction 14 on the RNAIII gene expression in
8325-4 and JE2 was examined. The reporter strains were grown both with the optimal
concentrations of Fraction 14 (0.26% for 8325-4 and 0.064% for JE2) as well as with
the same dilutions of methanol (solvent controls). Samples were collected after 3, 4
and 5 hours of cultivation.
The eﬀectiveness of the optimized bead beater treatment was assessed again
though this time via CFU determination instead of microscopy of samples collected
both from a methanol grown and a Fraction 14 grown culture. CFU was determined
by plating on TSA right before and after bead beater treatment of samples collected
from all three sample points (Table 21 in Appendix L). These results showed that
viable cells were lysed with more or less the same factor with the optimized treatment
protocol for both RNAIII reporter strains. For one of the samples collected after the
treatment (JE2 After, T3 (F)) the plate got overgrown. However, these bacteria must
have been a contamination, as they did not turn blue when re-streaked on an X-gal
38
==PAGE:48==
plate. All the other samples collected after the treatment resulted in no growth or
only 1-3 colonies when plated on TSA.
Activity was determined as explained in section 3.4.1 (A420 against time curves
are shown in Appendix H).
Three biological replicates of 8325-4 RNAIII and six
biological replicates of JE2 RNAIII (split in two days with three replicates per day)
were included and the resulting activities are plotted in Figure 20 and 21, respectively.
The corresponding OD values determined at each sample point for both the Fraction
14 and methanol grown cultures are plotted as well. The mean activities and p-values
obtained are listed in Table 12 and 13).
Figure 20: Eﬀect of Fraction 14 (0.26%) on 8325-4 RNAIII expression.
Mean ONPG cleavage activity values (given in Miller units) and standard er-
rors obtained for 8325-4 RNAIII grown either with Fraction 14 (red bars) or
methanol (blue bars). The mean OD values and standard errors of the growth
cultures are plotted as well.
When examining the OD curves on Figure 20, the curve of the methanol grown
cultures is very similar to the one for the Fraction 14 grown cultures, showing that a
0.26% dilution of Fraction 14 does not seem to aﬀect the growth of 8325-4 in this set-up
either. Looking at the —-galactosidase activities detected (in this case corresponding
to RNAIII expression in 8325-4) a diﬀerence is observed. The expression of RNAIII
is generally lower in the Fraction 14 grown cultures compared to the methanol grown
cultures having p-values (two-sided t-test) of; 0.03 at time point 3, 0.06 at time point
4 and 0.23 at time point 5. A high SE is observed for time point 4 and 5 making
it harder to determine signiﬁcant diﬀerence. Nevertheless, these results show that a
0.26% dilution of Fraction 14 does seem to reduce RNAIII expression in 8325-4.
39
==PAGE:49==
Table 12: Mean activities (in Miller units) and standard errors ob-
tained for 8325-4 RNAIII, when grown with Fraction 14 (F14) or
methanol (MeOH). The ratio between the two mean activity values of the
Fraction 14 grown cultures with the subsequent solvent controls at the diﬀerent
time points are listed as well together with the corresponding p-values.
Time point
Activity
(F14)
Activity
(MeOH)
Ratio
p-value
Time point 3
0.32 ± 0.02
1.17 ± 0.17
0.85
0.03
Time point 4
0.33 ± 0.10
5.33 ± 1.33
5.00
0.06
Time point 5
1.32 ± 0.46
4.00 ± 1.61
2.68
0.23
Figure 21: Eﬀect of Fraction 14 (0.064%) on JE2 RNAIII expression.
Mean ONPG cleavage activity values (given in Miller units) and standard errors
obtained for JE2 RNAIII grown either with Fraction 14 (red bars) or methanol
(blue bars). The mean OD values and standard errors of the growth cultures
are plotted as well.
When inspecting the results of the JE2 RNAIII assay in Figure 21, the two OD
curves obtained for the methanol and Fraction 14 grown cultures are also alike, show-
ing that a 0.064% dilution of Fraction 14 does not seem to aﬀect the growth of JE2 in
this set-up. However, regarding the RNAIII expression in JE2, not much can be con-
cluded from this assay. High standard errors were obtained at all time points and the
activities obtained for all six biological replicates were 10 fold lower than the activities
obtained for JE2 RNAIII in Figure 16, where the general expression of RNAIII over
time was examined. Also, when studying the curves obtained when plotting the A420
values against time (Appendix H), these look peculiar. The methanol grown cultures
vary a lot. An example is Figure 47b, where one methanol grown biological replicate
show the highest activity, while one of the other methanol grown replicates made the
same day (same time point) show the lowest activity. This indicates that something
with the updated protocol aﬀects the —-galactosidase activity in the JE2 strain to
an extend where it is not reproducible, as these problems were not observed for this
strain when using the old protocol from section 3.4.1.
40
==PAGE:50==
Table 13: Mean activities (in Miller units) and standard errors ob-
tained for JE2 RNAIII, when grown with Fraction 14 (F14) or
methanol (MeOH). The ratio between the two mean activity values of the
Fraction 14 grown cultures with the subsequent solvent controls at the diﬀerent
time points are listed as well together with the corresponding p-values.
Time point
Activity
(F14)
Activity
(MeOH)
Ratio
p-value
Time point 3
0.27 ± 0.04
0.60 ± 0.18
0.33
0.23
Time point 4
0.41 ± 0.04
0.60 ± 0.13
0.19
0.15
Time point 5
0.66 ± 0.16
0.48 ± 0.03
0.18
0.01
Based on these results it can be concluded that Fraction 14 does seem to reduce
RNAIII expression in 8325-4 through a mechanism that is not related to growth-
inhibition of the strain, while the eﬀect of Fraction 14 on JE2 RNAIII expression
cannot be concluded based on the current assay. A further optimisation of the —-
galactosidase protocol for this strain is needed in order to answer this.
3.5
Assessment of the antistaphylococcal eﬀect of Fraction
14 in the infection model G. mellonella
3.5.1
Fraction 14 is not toxic to G. mellonella, when given at the optimal
concentrations found in section 3.4.2
In order to assess the ability of Fraction 14 to rescue MRSA infected G. mellonella,
the toxicity of the extract towards the infection model was initially examined.
The experiment included eight groups with 6 larvae in each. Three of the groups
received three diﬀerent ﬁnal concentrations of Fraction 14 being 0.26%, 0.13% and
0.064% diluted extract, corresponding to the optimal concentrations that did not
aﬀect the growth rate of the two RNAIII reporter strains as well as the concentration
in between.
Three other groups received the same dilutions of methanol (solvent
controls). PBS was given to the seventh larvae group as a negative control taking
the impact of physical trauma into account, while the last group received boiled
supernatant collected from a WT 4448c overnight culture. Hence, this group received
a non-diluted, unknown high concentration of secondary metabolites excreted from
the 4448c strain. This boiled supernatant had in a previous study carried out by
Mikkel Anbo been given to already MRSA-infected larvae, which resulted in 100%
larvae death (n = 15). It was therefore included with the purpose of acting as a
positive control in the subsequent larvae assay in section 3.5.2.
The injected larvae were incubated at 37 ¶C (simulating mammalian body tem-
perature) for 96 hours, and larvae survival was determined every 24 hour. A Kaplan-
Meier survival curve was created based on the results (Figure 22), which deﬁnes the
probability of surviving in a given length of time, while considering time in many
small intervals [163] (in this case intervals of 24 hours).
41
==PAGE:51==
Figure 22: Toxicity of Fraction 14 to G. mellonella. The probability of
larvae survival, S(t), over time when injected either with Fraction 14 (F14),
methanol (MeOH), PBS or boiled 4448c supernatant. Larvae survival was de-
termined every 24 hour, n = 6.
No larvae died in any of the groups (including the group receiving boiled super-
natant), thus resulting in 100% probability of larvae survival after 96 hours. This
shows that Fraction 14 in itself is not toxic to the larvae when given to the ﬁnal
concentrations of 0.26%, 0.13% and 0.064%.
3.5.2
Fraction 14 seems to have a negative impact on larvae survival,
when these have also been infected with MRSA
The ability of Fraction 14 to rescue MRSA infected G. mellonella could now be
assessed. This experiment consisted of ﬁve groups with 8 larvae in each.
Four of the larvae groups were initially injected with the MRSA strain JE2 WT
to a ﬁnal concentration of 6 x 105 CFU/mL, while the ﬁfth group remained unin-
fected. Using an OD-CFU/mL-standard curve correlating OD values to correspond-
ing CFU/mL for the JE2 WT strain (shown in Appendix K), the corresponding OD
value of the strain needed when injecting the larvae was determined. This concen-
tration of MRSA was chosen as it had previously been found by Mikkel Anbo to kill
50% of the larvae in a group (n = 15) after 96 hours.
The four MRSA-infected groups were then "treated" either with a 0.26% dilution
of Fraction 14, a 0.064% dilution of Fraction 14, just PBS or the boiled 4448c super-
natant. The uninfected larvae group was injected only with PBS and controlled for
the impact of physical trauma. All larvae were incubated at 37 ¶C for 96 hours with
larvae survival being determined every 24 hour. A Kaplan-Meier survival curve was
created for the results again (Figure 23).
42
==PAGE:52==
Figure 23: Survival curve of MRSA-infected G. mellonella. The proba-
bility of survival, S(t), over time for MRSA-infected larvae treated either with
Fraction 14 (F14), PBS or boiled 4448c supernatant. One group received only
PBS. Larvae survival was determined every 24 hour, n = 8.
The goal of this assay was to assess the ability of the PADK2 extract to rescue
MRSA-infected larvae. However, the concentration of MRSA injected did not cor-
respond to the LD50 as otherwise expected, as only 1 out of 8 larvae died in the
PBS-treated group resulting in a S(t) = 0.86 after 96 hours (expected S(t) = 0.5 after
96 hours). This question can therefore not be answered based on the current assay.
Nevertheless, this assay still resulted in some interesting observations.
Unexpectedly, the two groups that received Fraction 14 as treatment had a higher
proportion of larvae dying compared to the PBS-treated group. After 96 hours, a S(t)
= 0.57 was obtained for the group treated with a 0.26% dilution and a S(t) = 0.22
was obtained for the group treated with a 0.064% dilution. Curiously, the group that
received the lowest Fraction 14 concentration had the lowest chance of survival - a
concentration of Fraction 14 found not to inhibit the growth rate of JE2 RNAIII
in vitro.
Regarding the "positive" control groups, where it was expected that all
larvae would die, only 1 out of 8 larvae died (S(t) = 0.86). It should be noted that
when Mikkel Anbo injected MRSA infected larvae with the boiled supernatant, a
concentration of 106 CFU/mL MRSA had been used.
An attempt was made to evaluate signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the survival curve
of the PBS-treated group with the survival curves of the other JE2 infected groups
using a Log Rank Test (– = 0.05, df = 1). Based on this analysis neither the group
treated with boiled supernatant (x2
calculated = 0.002), 0.26% dilution of Fraction 14
(x2
calculated = 1.08) or 0.064% dilution of Fraction 14 (x2
calculated = 3.74) had a sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent survival curve compared to the PBS-treated group (signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was obtained if x2
calculated > 3.84 [163, 164]). However, it should be noted
that the sample size is very small (n = 8), which can aﬀect the accuracy of the Log
Rank test [165]. The results obtained in the infection assay are summarised in Table
14.
43
==PAGE:53==
Table 14: Summary of the results from the infection assay.
The ta-
ble summarises the amount of dead larvae and the survival probability, S(t),
obtained for each group after 96 hours. Furthermore, the x2
calculated values ob-
tained for the groups treated with boiled 4448c supernatant or Fraction 14
(F14) are shown (compared with the PBS-treated group). Signiﬁcant diﬀerence
is obtained if x2
calculated > 3.84.
Larvae group
Dead larvae
S(t) value
x2
calculated
PBS
0
1
-
JE2 + PBS
1
0.86
-
JE2 + Supernatant
1
0.86
0.002
JE2 + F14 (0.258%)
3
0.57
1.08
JE2 + F14 (0.064%)
5
0.22
3.74
Conclusively; though the ability of Fraction 14 to rescue MRSA infected G. mellonella
larvae cannot be determined based on these data, they do indicate that the PADK2
extract has a negative eﬀect on larvae survival, when these have also been infected
with MRSA.
44
==PAGE:54==
4
Discussion
4.1
Qualitative studies of PADK2’s eﬀect towards S. aureus
reporter strains
The clinical P. aeruginosa strain PADK2 was, in a previous study conducted by
Cristina Amador (Unpublished data), found to exhibit an anti-virulence eﬀect against
S. aureus. This was also observed in this study, as the PADK2 strain was found to
aﬀect the expression of the three virulence genes RNAIII, hla and spa in both the
MSSA strain 8325-4 and the MRSA strain JE2 (USA300).
All three virulence genes are known to be regulated by the agr QS system in S.
aureus with RNAIII (the main eﬀector molecule of the system) and Hla (the –-toxin)
being upregulated by the system [45, 57] and Spa (Protein A) being down-regulated
[45, 64]. This expression pattern was also observed for the 8325-4 reporter strains
when these were grown on TSA X-gal plates at a high cell density, a factor known to
activate the agr locus [45, 57], with RNAIII and Hla being highly expressed, while Spa
expression was not observed. However, for the JE2 reporter strain a high expression of
all three virulence genes were observed, indicating that Spa is regulated diﬀerently in
this strain compared to the 8325-4 strain. Virulence factors are subject to regulation
by a complex network of several virulence regulators. Besides the agr system, Spa is
known to be regulated by several additional regulatory factors including SarA, SarS
[102] and Rot [81]. The diﬀerent regulation of Spa in JE2 compared to 8325-4 may
therefore be a result of a changed expression of one or several of its regulatory factors.
However, an inverse expression pattern of the three virulence genes was observed
for both 8325-4 and JE2 when interacting with PADK2 as well as with an ethyl acetate
extract of PADK2. This indicates an interference with the S. aureus agr system by
one or several of the organic compounds produced and secreted by PADK2. This
relates to a study conducted by Mansson et al. [104], where a natural compound
(SolB) produced by P. halotolerans was found to reduce the expression of RNAIII
and Hla, while inducing the expression of Spa in 8325-4 using a gene reporter fusion
bioassay. This eﬀect was shown to be a result of competitive inhibition of AgrC by
SolB [105]. Of course, in this case it is not known whether the agr system is directly
targeted or if the observed interference is a result of another mechanism being aﬀected
with regulatory activity towards Agr.
The anti-virulence eﬀect observed by PADK2 has been attributed to be caused
by one or several of the AQ compounds produced by the pqs system, as a knock-out
in the pqsB gene (directly involved in the biosynthesis of AQs [135]) abolished this
feature [Cristina Amador, Unpublished data]. This was further demonstrated in this
study, as both the PADK2 ∆pqsB (CFM25) and PADK2 ∆pqsL mutants showed no
eﬀect against the virulence gene expression in the co-culture plate assays (except for
Spa in 8325-4). As PqsL is responsible for the production of AQNOs [122, 137], the
most characterized of which is HQNO, the eﬀect on virulence gene regulation in S.
aureus seems to be related to this particular pathway of the pqs system.
Regarding the observed up-regulation of Spa in 8325-4 by PADK2 ∆pqsL and
often also by CFM25 and IMG213, this phenomenon must be through a mechanism
independent from agr interference, as no eﬀect was observed towards the other S.
aureus reporter genes. Also, this eﬀect towards 8325-4 Spa observed by CFM25 and
IMG213 (and potentially also PADK2 ∆pqsL) are likely polar molecules discarded
45
==PAGE:55==
during the ethyl acetate extraction, as this eﬀect was lost when examining the bioac-
tivity of the CFM25 and IMG213 organic extracts towards S. aureus virulence gene
expression. Furthermore, no secondary metabolites could be detected in the CFM25
and IMG213 extracts that were diﬀerent from an LB control. Alternatively, it is pos-
sible that these strains produced compounds to a concentration below the detection
level of LC-DAD-MS.
Conversely, several secondary metabolites could be detected in the PAO1 and
4448c organic extracts through LC-DAD-MS. Corresponding with a study by Michelsen
et al. [146], a diﬀerent AQ proﬁle was observed when comparing the relative quantity
of HQNO, HHQ and PQS being present in the two extracts. Like in this study, they
also detected a higher production of HHQ by PADK2 compared to PAO1, while PQS
could only be detected to be produced by PAO1. However, no HQNO production
was detected by the PADK2 strain in their study (only by PAO1), which contradicts
with the results obtained in this study, where HQNO was detected to be produced
by both strains. Then again, the relative quantity of HQNO was more than 14 times
higher in the PAO1 extract compared to the PADK2 extract, showing that the HQNO
production has indeed been signiﬁcantly reduced in the clinical strain.
The observed lack of PQS-production in PADK2 is likely explained by the strain
having a loss-of-function mutation in the lasR gene. LasR is known to directly regulate
the expression of PqsH [140] - the monooxygenase responsible for converting HHQ into
PQS [136]. A non-functional LasR protein in PADK2 would also explain the increased
production of HHQ compared to the PAO1 strain. This question was assessed by
Michelsen et al. [146], who found a signiﬁcant decrease in pqsH expression in PADK2
compared to in PAO1, thereby supporting this hypothesis.
A diﬀerence in growth-inhibition of S. aureus was also observed between the
PADK2 strain and PAO1. In the plate assays, a strong inhibition of both 8325-4
and JE2 was observed by the PAO1 strain, while PADK2 aﬀected the growth far
less with no clearing zones appearing. This corresponds with ﬁndings by Michelsen
et al. [146], who observed the same diﬀerence in inhibition of JE2 by PAO1 and
PADK2 on several diﬀerent agar media. PAO1 is known to produce a range of anti-
staphylococcal molecules [128, 155, 157, 159], while in clinical P. aeruginosa strains
several virulence factors have been abolished or the expression highly reduced [150].
This is likely to explain the diﬀerence observed on growth-inhibition of S. aureus by
the two P. aeruginosa strains.
A signiﬁcant reduction in colony size of S. aureus was observed around both
PADK2 and PAO1 in the plate assays showing that PADK2 still had some eﬀect
on the growth of the reporter strains. This is likely a result of HQNO production,
conﬁrmed to be produced in both strains in the LC-DAD-MS analysis, as this eﬀect
was lost in the PADK2 ∆pqsL mutant.
Despite the suppressing eﬀect of HQNO
towards S. aureus growth [128], this compound has also been shown to select for SCV
formation, a phenotype known to provide aminoglycoside resistance and persistence
in chronic infections, in the presence of both pure HQNO as well as via interaction
of S. aureus with an HQNO-producing PAO1 strain [144]. However, pyocyanin may
also contribute to the SCV formation induced by PAO1 [154].
46
==PAGE:56==
4.2
Quantitative studies of the PADK2 extract’s eﬀect on S.
aureus virulence gene expression
As both the anti-virulence and growth-inhibiting eﬀects observed by PADK2 towards
S. aureus seem to be related to the AQNO pathway of the pqs system, one might ask;
is the eﬀect observed on virulence gene expression merely a result of growth-inhibition
of the strain, which of course would aﬀect the regulation of several genes, or does the
PADK2 strain also aﬀect virulence gene regulation in S. aureus through a mechanism
independent of growth-inhibition?
To answer this question, a —-galactosidase activity assay was set up in order to
quantitatively measure the expression of the virulence genes in the S. aureus reporter
strains through ONPG cleavage. This was studied both when the reporter strains
were grown under normal circumstances as well as when grown with an ethyl acetate
extract of PADK2 that had been further fractionated based on polarity and activi-
ty. This assay was originally developed by Jeﬀrey Miller in 1972 [166] and several
versions of this assay has since then been widely used to study gene expression in
molecular biology [167, 168, 169, 170], utilizing many diﬀerent methods for the cell
permeabilization stage [171]. In this study, the cells were mechanically lysed using a
Bead Beater machine. From this assay, it could be concluded that one or several com-
pounds present in the PADK2 extract reduced RNAIII expression in 8325-4 through
a mechanism independent to growth-inhibition of the strain.
Unfortunately, no such conclusions could be drawn regarding RNAIII expression
in JE2. An optimized —-galactosidase activity protocol had been used when examining
the eﬀect of the PADK2 extract towards virulence gene expression compared to when
studying the normal expression of the reporter genes. This was needed, as the initial
bead beater treatment used did not reduce the amount of S. aureus whole cells with
the same factor in each sample. However, it is possible that one of the steps optimized
had a negative eﬀect on the JE2 strain. One explanation might be the increase in
speed from 5.5 m/s to 6.5 m/s. Heat is generated during the homogenization of the
cells [172, 173], which is why a one minute break on ice was included in the new
protocol.
However, it is possible that the JE2 cells still got overheated with the
optimized protocol, resulting in a degradation of the —-galactosidase enzyme.
Problems with aggregation was also experienced during the growth of the reporter
strains with the initial protocol - especially when the shake ﬂask cultures were grown
either with the PADK2 extract (Fraction 14) or methanol (solvent control). Usually,
aggregation of S. aureus has been associated with the production of the extracellular
polysaccharide poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PNAG) [174], and studies have shown that
ethanol can lead to an induction of PNAG synthesis [175, 176, 177], thereby promoting
cell aggregation. Hence, it is very likely that methanol can induce the same eﬀect.
However, the problems with aggregation were overcome with the new protocol for
both 8325-4 and JE2, where the reporter strains instead were grown in a shaking
incubator, and each shake ﬂask culture was shaken vigorously before each sample
acquisition.
Hla expression over time in S. aureus has been studied previously in multiple
studies. Gao et al. [18] used both a gfp-reporter gene and the lux gene cluster fused
to the hla promoter in the plasmid pGL. Ohlsen et al. [167] utilized a trancriptional
fusion of the lacZ gene to the hla promoter, which was integrated on the chromosome
of S. aureus Wood 46 (lacZ expression was measured through a —-galactosidase activ-
47
==PAGE:57==
ity assay). In both studies, Hla expression had a high peak after 4 hours of cultivation
(37 ¶C) compared to after 3 hours. Then, an even further increase of expression was
detected at the subsequent later time points by Ohlsen et al. [167], while a small
reduction of Hla expression was detected by Gao et al. [18] (but the expression still
remained high). These data ﬁt with Hla being induced in the post-exponential phase
as a result of the agr system being activated [45, 57]. However, this did not ﬁt with
the Hla expression detected under normal circumstances in this study. Here, Hla
expression peaked after 3 hours of cultivation (time point 4 in 8325-4 also had a re-
latively high expression) after which the expression was reduced signiﬁcantly. These
data more seem to indicate an induction of Hla in the exponential phase.
Furthermore, RNAIII expression was measured over time by Ohlsen et al. [167]
via a Northern blot analysis, which detected a high peak in expression after 3 hours of
cultivation after which the expression increased even further. This ﬁts with RNAIII
being the main eﬀector molecule of the agr system [57] and its activation should
therefore occur before Hla activation.
However, in this study RNAIII expression
peaked after 4 hours of cultivation for the MRSA strain (an hour after Hla had been
determined to peak in this strain), while the highest RNAIII expression could not be
determined in 8325-4 due to a high SE at time point 2. In both strains, a reduced
RNAIII expression is observed after 5 and 6 hours of cultivation, opposing the results
obtained by Ohlsen et al. [167].
These results show that the —-galactosidase activity assay used in this study to
examine the expression of RNAIII and Hla over time under normal circumstances is
not ideal for this purpose. The bead beater treatment was found to not reduce the
amount of S. aureus whole cells with the same factor in each sample, which of course
also aﬀected the detected —-galactosidase activity. In order to get a better measure
of the normal activities of the virulence genes, the optimized protocol used in the
subsequent —-galactosidase assay (possible for the 8325-4 reporter strains) or an even
further optimized protocol (required for the JE2 reporter strains) is needed.
4.3
The PADK2 extract’s eﬀect on MRSA in G. mellonella
Last part of this study investigated the ability of the fractionated PADK2 extract
to rescue MRSA-infected G. mellonella larvae - an insect infection model shown to
be highly applicable for assessing the eﬃcacy of new anti-staphylococcal agents [107].
However, this question could not be answered based on the infection assay carried
out, as the concentration of MRSA injected into the larvae did not correspond to the
LD50 as otherwise expected. A ﬁnal concentration of 6 x 105 CFU/mL MRSA in the
larvae resulted instead in a survival probability of 86% (n = 8) after 96 hours. This
correlates closely to a study conducted by Desbois et al. [107], who found that a
ﬁnal concentration of 5 x 105 CFU/mL S. aureus Newman resulted in approximately
75% chance of survival (n = 30). Furthermore, this study found that diﬀerent con-
centrations of S. aureus Newman aﬀected G. mellonella survival with larger doses
of bacteria resulting in reduced larvae survival, and it seems fair to assume that the
same would be the case for the JE2 strain. Hence, in order to determine the ability
of the PADK2 extract to rescue MRSA-infected larvae a higher concentration of WT
JE2, corresponding to the true LD50, should be injected.
Another point is that the boiled 4448c supernatant was expected to act as a
positive control of proper larvae injection, and all larvae in the group treated with
48
==PAGE:58==
this was therefore expected to die.
However, only 1/8 larvae died in this group,
resulting in the same survival probability after 96 hours (86%) as the PBS treated
group. In the experiment carried out by Mikkel Anbo, where this supernatant was
injected to already MRSA-infected larvae, it had resulted in 100% larvae death (n =
15), contradicting with the results obtained in this study. However, in the study by
Mikkel Anbo the larvae had been injected with a ﬁnal concentration of 106 CFU/mL
JE2, thus being a much higher bacterial concentration than used in the current study.
This diﬀerence in JE2 concentration is likely to explain the diﬀerence observed in
larvae survival as well.
In spite of this, interesting observations can still be drawn from this infection
assay regarding the eﬀect of the PADK2 extract on MRSA in G. mellonella. The
toxicity assay in section 3.5.1 showed that the fractionated PADK2 extract was not
toxic in itself to the larvae when given to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.26% and 0.064%.
However, when the same concentrations of the PADK2 extract were given to already
MRSA-infected larvae, an increase in larvae death was observed compared to the PBS
treated group (57% and 22% chance of survival, respectively, after 96 hours). This
indicates that one or several compounds present in the PADK2 extract interacts with
JE2 in a way that leads to increased larvae death.
A possible explanation could be through an increased virulence of JE2. Though
the PADK2 extract (the non-fractionated form) is shown to down-regulate RNAIII,
Hla and Spa in vitro, it is possible that the expression of other virulence genes than the
three examined in this study, gets up-regulated by the PADK2 extract. Subinhibitory
concentrations of a large number of antibiotics have been shown to trigger a diﬀerential
gene expression in pathogenic bacteria in vitro compared to when given at therapeutic
doses [178]. In regards to S. aureus, subinhibitory concentrations of Tetracycline,
Clindamycin, and other protein synthesis inhibitors were found by Joo et al. [179]
to signiﬁcantly increase the expression of the agr system in USA300. Subinhibitory
concentrations of —-lactam agents strongly induced Hla expression in a study by
Ohlsen et al. [180] and Gao et al. [18] found that subinhibitory concentrations of
Ampicillin induced several virulence genes, including Hla, which led to an induced
adherence and invasion of A549 cells (human lung epithelial cells) by USA300. In this
study, the lowest survival probability was observed for the group that received the
lowest concentration of the extract (0.064% dilution) corresponding to the highest
concentration of the PADK2 extract that did not signiﬁcantly reduce the growth
rate of JE2 RNAIII in vitro (compared to a solvent control). This points to that
subinhibitory concentrations of the PADK2 extract may also aﬀect JE2 virulence
gene regulation to an extent that potentially makes it more virulent. In regards to
the initial goal of identifying a new anti-virulence drug produced by the PADK2 strain
against S. aureus, these results are not that promising.
As the eﬀect towards RNAIII, Hla and Spa expression in S. aureus by the PADK2
strain is associated with the AQNO pathway of the pqs system, it can be speculated
whether products of this pathway is also responsible for the assumed eﬀect on JE2 ob-
served in the infection assay. Though HQNO is known to be highly growth-inhibiting
towards S. aureus [123, 128, 130], it has also been shown to select for SVC formation
of S. aureus by Hoﬀmann et al. [144] - a phenotype known to provide aminoglycoside
resistance and persistence in chronic infections. Additionally, in association with the
formation of SCVs, HQNO has in a study by Mitchell et al. [181] been shown to
down-regulate the agr system, while at the same time stimulate bioﬁlm formation by
49
==PAGE:59==
S. aureus. This ﬁts well with HQNO being the active compound responsible for the
agr interference observed by the PADK2 extract, while also supporting the hypothe-
sis that this (and/or related compounds) may up-regulate other virulence genes in S.
aureus leading to an overall increase in virulence.
In both the study by Hoﬀmann et al. [144] and Mitchell et al. [181] the eﬀect
of 10 µg/mL HQNO was investigated. In this study, the highest concentration of
the PADK2 extract utilized was 10 µg/mL, while the concentration utilized in the
infection study was only 2.58 µg/mL and 0.64 µg/mL. Since the PADK2 extract is
a mixture of several organic compounds, the exact concentration of HQNO utilized
in this study is not known - only that it is lower than the concentrations utilized by
Hoﬀmann et al. [144] and Mitchell et al. [181]. To the knowledge of this study, the
eﬀect of HQNO concentrations below 10 µg/mL has not been examined. However,
based on the results obtained in this study it is hypothesized that diﬀerent concen-
trations of HQNO aﬀect S. aureus diﬀerently to an extent comparable to the eﬀects
observed by therapeutic versus subinhibitory doses of many antibiotics. High HQNO
concentrations have a strong growth-inhibiting eﬀect towards S. aureus, while subin-
hibitory concentrations of HQNO may instead have a diﬀerential eﬀect on S. aureus
virulence gene regulation, potentially to an extent that increases its overall virulence.
However, in order to properly answer this question further studies are needed.
P. aeruginosa is known to undergo substantial genetic changes during chronic
airway infections of CF patients, where especially virulence factors required for acute
infections are selected against [147]. HQNO has been detected to be present in CF
patients [182] showing that this compound is indeed produced in vivo. However, a
lower production of HQNO was found to be produced by PADK2 in vitro compared
to PAO1. This reduced HQNO production by the clinical strain may occur as part of
the bacterial adaptation to the CF lungs in order to facilitate co-existence with the
other bacterial species present in the CF lung microbiota - especially if HQNO does
indeed have a distinct eﬀect on S. aureus gene regulation, and perhaps also other
bacteria present in the lungs, when administered at a low dose.
50
==PAGE:60==
5
Conclusion
In this study, the anti-virulence eﬀect against S. aureus observed by the clinical P.
aeruginosa strain PADK2 was shown to be associated with compounds produced by
the AQNO pathway of the pqs system in P. aeruginosa. However, the same pathway
was also shown to be responsible for the growth-inhibiting eﬀects observed towards
S. aureus by PADK2 in the form of induced SCV formation.
Nonetheless, the anti-virulence eﬀect observed by PADK2 is not merely a result
of growth-inhibition of the strain, as an organic extraction from PADK2 stimulated
a down-regulation of RNAIII expression in 8325-4 at a concentration found not to
inhibit the reporter strain’s growth rate. This implies that one or several compounds
present in the PADK2 extract aﬀect S. aureus virulence gene regulation through
a mechanism independent to growth-inhibition. However, the PADK2 extract was
also found to increase larvae death, when administered to MRSA-infected larvae at a
concentration found not to inhibit the growth of the pathogen in vitro. As the PADK2
extract was not toxic to the larvae in itself at these concentrations, these results could
be explained by an overall induced virulence of USA300 (JE2). If this is the case,
then the original goal of identifying a new anti-virulence drug against MRSA by the
PADK2 pqs system might not be achievable.
As the eﬀect on RNAIII, Hla and Spa expression in S. aureus by PADK2 is
associated to products of the AQNO pathway of the pqs system, and HQNO has been
found to both down-regulate the agr system, while also up-regulate bioﬁlm formation
by S. aureus, it is likely that it also aﬀects several other virulence genes. It is therefore
speculated whether HQNO may also be responsible for inducing the overall virulence
of JE2, thus explaining the increase in larvae death.
Conclusively, it is hypothesised that diﬀerent concentrations of HQNO aﬀect S.
aureus diﬀerently to an extent comparable to many antibiotics, with high concen-
trations having a strong growth-inhibiting eﬀect towards S. aureus, whereas at lower
subinhibitory concentrations, HQNO may have a diﬀerential eﬀect on S. aureus vi-
rulence gene regulation. However, further studies are needed to test this hypothesis.
51
==PAGE:61==
6
Future prospects
To test the hypothesis that diﬀerent concentrations of HQNO aﬀect S. aureus dif-
ferently, the eﬀect of diﬀerent concentrations of HQNO on S. aureus survival and
virulence gene regulation should be assessed.
This would also determine whether
HQNO is indeed the compound responsible for the eﬀect observed on RNAIII, Hla
and Spa expression in S. aureus by PADK2. Furthermore, the eﬀect of other AQNOs
on S. aureus virulence gene regulation should be examined.
The —-galactosidase activity assay used in this study should be further optimized
(i.e. by utilizing a diﬀerent strategy for the cell permeabilization stage) in order to
determine whether the PADK2 extract also aﬀects RNAIII expression in JE2 through
a mechanism independent to growth-inhibition. Also, the assay should be repeated
for the 8325-4 RNAIII strain to reduce the standard errors as well as be carried out for
the other S. aureus reporter strains in order to determine the eﬀect of the extract on
Hla and Spa expression as well. Additionally, the normal expression of RNAIII, Hla
and Spa in both 8325-4 and JE2 over time should be assessed again using the same
protocol utilized for the study of the virulence genes in the presence of the PADK2
extract.
Alternatively, a diﬀerent method should be utilized to measure virulence gene
expression in S. aureus over time. One example is to use qPCR to quantitatively
measure the mRNA levels present at a given time point. Using this method, the
eﬀect of the PADK2 extract on the expression of several other virulence genes in S.
aureus can also be assessed, provided that you have speciﬁc primers for the genes of
interest. This should also help to elucidate whether other virulence genes in S. aureus
gets up-regulated in the presence of the PADK2 extract, thus providing insight into
whether subinhibitory concentrations of the extract does indeed increase the overall
virulence of JE2.
Also, an ethyl acetate extract from the PADK2 ∆pqsL mutant
should be included in this assay to determine whether the eﬀect on virulence gene
expression in S. aureus is indeed a result of products of the AQNO pathway of the
pqs system or not.
Finally, the infection assay should be carried out again using the true LD50 concen-
tration of the JE2 strain in order to properly assess the ability of the PADK2 extract
to rescue MRSA-infected G. mellonella larvae, or if an increase in larvae death is
observed again in the groups receiving the PADK2 extract as treatment. Also, more
larvae should be included in each group. It could also be interesting to include the
PADK2 ∆pqsL mutant in this assay, which should further validate whether products
of the AQNO pathway truly are responsible for the potential increased virulence of
JE2, or alternatively, if it is involved in the rescue of MRSA-infected larvae, depending
on the outcome of the new infection assay.
52
==PAGE:62==
List of Figures
1
The development of antibiotic resistance within S. aureus strains . . .
1
2
S. aureus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Schematic representation of the S. aureus agr system . . . . . . . . .
4
4
PADK2s eﬀect on S. aureus virulence gene expression . . . . . . . . .
8
5
General structures of the AQs produced by P. aeruginosa . . . . . . .
10
6
Schematic representation of the P. aeruginosa pqs system . . . . . . .
11
7
Co-culture plate set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
8
PADK2 4448c fraction dilution assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
9
Co-culture plate assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
10
An assay where CFM25 and IMG213 upregulated Spa in 8325-4 . . .
25
11
BPCs of the P. aeruginosa organic extractions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
12
AQs detected in the PAO1 and 4448c organic extracts . . . . . . . . .
28
13
Bioactivity of the P. aeruginosa organic extractions . . . . . . . . . .
29
14
Zoom of wells, where PAO1 and 4448c extracts were added on the JE2
Hla plate from Figure 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
15
Co-culture plate assay with 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH mutants .
32
16
RNAIII expression over time in S. aureus 8325-4 and JE2 . . . . . . .
34
17
Hla expression over time in S. aureus 8325-4 and JE2 . . . . . . . . .
34
18
The eﬀect of Fraction 14 on S. aureus growth rate . . . . . . . . . . .
35
19
Eﬀect of MeOH (0.26%) on 8325-4 RNAIII growth
. . . . . . . . . .
38
20
Eﬀect of Fraction 14 (0.26%) on 8325-4 RNAIII expression . . . . . .
39
21
Eﬀect of Fraction 14 (0.064%) on JE2 RNAIII expression . . . . . . .
40
22
Toxicity of Fraction 14 to G. mellonella . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
23
Survival curve of MRSA-infected G. mellonella
. . . . . . . . . . . .
43
24
Plate set-up of bioactivity assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
25
Plate set-up of co-culture assay with 4448c ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH mutants
72
26
Overview of the pNJ1 plasmid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
27
Digested pqsL, pqsH and pNJ1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
28
pNJ1 with either the pqsL or pqsH fragment inserted . . . . . . . . .
77
29
PCR veriﬁed ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH in 4448c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
30
BPCs of PAO1 organic extractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
31
BPCs of 4448c organic extractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
32
BPCs of CFM25 organic extractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
33
BPCs of IMG213 organic extractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
34
EICs of 244 m/z
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
35
EICs of 260 m/z
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
36
Alignment of the WT pqsL gene in PADK2 with the sequenced ∆pqsL
allele . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
37
Alignment of the WT pqsH gene in PADK2 with the sequenced ∆pqsH
allele . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
38
A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains at time point 2 82
39
A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains at time point 3 82
40
A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains at time point 4 83
41
A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains at time point 5 83
42
A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains at time point 6 84
43
A420 over time for 8324-4 RNAIII strain at time point 3 . . . . . . . .
85
53
==PAGE:63==
44
A420 over time for 8324-4 RNAIII strain at time point 4 . . . . . . . .
85
45
A420 over time for 8324-4 RNAIII strain at time point 5 . . . . . . . .
85
46
A420 over time for JE2 RNAIII strain at time point 3 . . . . . . . . .
86
47
A420 over time for JE2 RNAIII strain at time point 4 . . . . . . . . .
86
48
A420 over time for JE2 RNAIII strain at time point 5 . . . . . . . . .
86
49
Growth curves of 8325-4, when exposed to diﬀerent dilutions of fraction
14 or methanol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
50
Growth curves of JE2, when exposed to diﬀerent dilutions of fraction
14 or methanol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
51
BPCs of a PADK2 organic extract and Fraction 14
. . . . . . . . . .
88
52
Standard curve of the correlation between OD values and CFU/mL in
WT JE2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
53
Microscopy of S. aureus cells appearing in samples before and after
bead beater treatment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
54
==PAGE:64==
List of Tables
1
Bacterial strains used in this study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
The eﬀect of the four P. aeruginosa strains on RNAIII, Hla and Spa
expression in 8325-4 and JE2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
The eﬀect of the four P. aeruginosa strains on the growth of 8325-4
and JE2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Relative quantities of AQs detected in one of the PAO1 extracts com-
pared to one of the 4448c extracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
The eﬀect of organic extractions from the four P. aeruginosa strains
on RNAIII, Hla and Spa expression in 8325-4 and JE2
. . . . . . . .
30
6
The eﬀect of organic extractions from the four P. aeruginosa strains
on the growth of 8325-4 and JE2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
The eﬀect of PAO1, WT 4448c, 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH on
RNAIII, Hla and Spa expression in 8325-4 and JE2 . . . . . . . . . .
32
8
The eﬀect of PAO1, WT 4448c, 4448c ∆pqsL and 4448c ∆pqsH on the
growth of 8325-4 and JE2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
9
Mean growth rates and standard errors obtained for 8325-4 RNAIII
with the diﬀerent dilutions of Fraction 14 or methanol . . . . . . . . .
36
10
Mean growth rates and standard errors obtained for JE2 RNAIII with
the diﬀerent dilutions of Fraction 14 or methanol
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
11
Comparison of the relative quantities of HHQ and HQNO in the PADK2
organic extract and Fraction 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
12
Mean activities and standard errors obtained for 8325-4 RNAIII, when
grown with Fraction 14 or methanol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
13
Mean activities and standard errors obtained for JE2 RNAIII, when
grown with Fraction 14 or methanol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
14
Summary of the results from the infection assay . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
15
Media recipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
16
Primers used in this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
17
Reaction mixture for double cut of pqsL and pqsH fragments and pNJ1
using XbaI and SacI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
18
Reaction mixtures for the ligation of digested pqsL and pNJ1 as well
as digested pqsH and pNJ1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
19
Reaction mixtures of DreamTaq PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
20
Thermal cycler conditions of regular DreamTaq PCR . . . . . . . . .
76
21
CFU before and after bead beater treatment with the optimized protocol 89
55
==PAGE:65==
References
[1]
Kent B. Crossley. Staphylococci in human disease. Wiley-Blackwell, 2010, p. 623.
isbn: 9781444308464.
[2]
FD Lowy. “Staphylococcus aureus infections”. In: New England Journal of
Medicine 339.27 (1998). issn: 00284793.
[3]
FD Lowy. “Antimicrobial resistance: the example of Staphylococcus aureus”.
In: Journal of Clinical Investigation 111.9 (2003). issn: 00219738. doi: 10.
1172/JC1200318535.
[4]
WHO. WHO publishes list of bacteria for which new antibiotics are urgently
needed. 2017. url: https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/27-02-2017-
who-publishes-list-of-bacteria-for-which-new-antibiotics-are-
urgently-needed (visited on 09/17/2019).
[5]
Mario Gajdacs. “The Continuing Threat of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus”. In: Antibiotics 8.2 (2019), p. 52. issn: 2079-6382. doi: 10.3390/
antibiotics8020052.
[6]
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention. “Staphylococcus aureus
resistant to vancomycin–United States, 2002”. In: Mmwr. Morbidity and Mor-
tality Weekly Report 51.26 (2002). issn: 01492195. url: https://findit.
dtu.dk/en/catalog/112561888.
[7]
Will A. McGuinness. “Vancomycin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus”. In:
Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 90.2 (2017). issn: 00440086.
[8]
Tracy Schmidt, Marleen M. Kock, and Marthie M. Ehlers. “Antimicrobial Re-
sistance in Staphylococci at the Human– Animal Interface”. In: Antimicrobial
Resistance - An Open Challenge. InTech, 2015. doi: 10.5772/61785.
[9]
Steven J Projan. “Why is big Pharma getting out of antibacterial drug dis-
covery?” In: Current Opinion in Microbiology 6.5 (2003), pp. 427–430. issn:
13695274. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2003.08.003.
[10]
S Projan. “Antimicrobials: new solutions badly needed”. In: Current Opinion
in Microbiology 5.5 (2002), pp. 463–465. issn: 13695274. doi: 10.1016/S1369-
5274(02)00364-8.
[11]
HHS Food, and Drug Administration. “Labeling requirements for systemic
antibacterial drug products intended for human use. Final rule”. In: Federal
Register 68.25 (2003). issn: 00976326.
[12]
Rajashekhar Kanchanapally et al. “Antimicrobial peptide-conjugated graphene
oxide membrane for eﬃcient removal and eﬀective killing of multiple drug
resistant bacteria”. In: RSC Advances 5.24 (2015), pp. 18881–18887. issn: 2046-
2069. doi: 10 . 1039 / C5RA01321F. url: http : / / xlink . rsc . org / ?DOI =
C5RA01321F.
[13]
Julianne Clowry, Alan D. Irvine, and Rachel M. McLoughlin. “Next-generation
anti–Staphylococcus aureus vaccines: A potential new therapeutic option for
atopic dermatitis?” In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 143.1 (2019),
pp. 78–81. issn: 00916749. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.08.038.
56
==PAGE:66==
[14]
Stan Deresinski. “Antistaphylococcal Vaccines and Immunoglobulins”. In: Drugs
66.14 (2006), pp. 1797–1806. issn: 0012-6667. doi: 10 . 2165 / 00003495 -
200666140-00002.
[15]
Pipat Piewngam et al. “Pathogen elimination by probiotic Bacillus via sig-
nalling interference”. In: Nature 562.7728 (2018), pp. 532–537. issn: 0028-0836.
doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0616-y.
[16]
S. Even et al. “Staphylococcus aureus Virulence Expression Is Impaired by
Lactococcus lactis in Mixed Cultures”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbi-
ology 75.13 (2009), pp. 4459–4472. issn: 0099-2240. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02388-
08.
[17]
Akram M. Salam and Cassandra L. Quave. “Targeting Virulence in Staphylo-
coccus aureus by Chemical Inhibition of the Accessory Gene Regulator System
In Vivo”. In: mSphere 3.1 (2018). Ed. by Paul Dunman. issn: 2379-5042. doi:
10.1128/mSphere.00500-17.
[18]
Peng Gao et al. “Construction of a Multiplex Promoter Reporter Platform
to Monitor Staphylococcus aureus Virulence Gene Expression and the Iden-
tiﬁcation of Usnic Acid as a Potent Suppressor of psm Gene Expression”. In:
Frontiers in Microbiology 7 (2016). issn: 1664-302X. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.
2016.01344.
[19]
Peng Gao et al. “Suppression of Staphylococcus aureus virulence by a small-
molecule compound”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
115.31 (2018), pp. 8003–8008. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1720520115.
[20]
Lynette Cegelski et al. “The biology and future prospects of antivirulence ther-
apies”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 6.1 (2008), pp. 17–27. issn: 1740-1526.
doi: 10.1038/nrmicro1818.
[21]
M. Masalha et al. “Analysis of Transcription of the Staphylococcus aureus
Aerobic Class Ib and Anaerobic Class III Ribonucleotide Reductase Genes in
Response to Oxygen”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 183.24 (2001), pp. 7260–
7272. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.183.24.7260-7272.2001.
[22]
M. Adams. “Staphylococcus aureus and other pathogenic Gram-positive cocci”.
In: Foodborne Pathogens. Elsevier, 2009, pp. 802–819. isbn: 9781845693626.
doi: 10.1533/9781845696337.2.802.
[23]
J Kenner. “Rates of carriage of methicillin-resistant and methicillin-susceptible
Staphylococcus aureus in an outpatient population”. In: Infection Control and
Hospital Epidemiology 24.6 (2003). issn: 0899823x.
[24]
Werner E. Bischoﬀet al. “Staphylococcus aureus Nasal Carriage in a Student
Community Prevalence, Clonal Relationships, and Risk Factors”. In: Infection
Control & Hospital Epidemiology 25.6 (2004), pp. 485–491. issn: 0899-823X.
doi: 10.1086/502427.
[25]
Richard Leman et al. “Nasal Carriage of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus
aureus in an American Indian Population”. In: Infection Control & Hospi-
tal Epidemiology 25.2 (2004), pp. 121–125. issn: 0899-823X. doi: 10.1086/
502361.
[26]
RE WILLIAMS. “Healthy carriage of Staphylococcus aureus: its prevalence
and importance”. In: Bacteriological Reviews 27.1 (1963). issn: 00053678.
57
==PAGE:67==
[27]
C.A. Armstrong-Esther and J.E. Smith. “Carriage patterns of Staphylococcus
aureus in a healthy non-hospital population of adults and children”. In: Annals
of Human Biology 3.3 (1976), pp. 221–227. issn: 0301-4460. doi: 10.1080/
03014467600001381.
[28]
H. F. L. Wertheim et al. “Eﬀect of Mupirocin Treatment on Nasal, Pharyngeal,
and Perineal Carriage of Staphylococcus aureus in Healthy Adults”. In: Antimi-
crobial Agents and Chemotherapy 49.4 (2005), pp. 1465–1467. issn: 0066-4804.
doi: 10.1128/AAC.49.4.1465-1467.2005.
[29]
Janice Haney Carr et al. SEM micrograph of S. aureus colonies. 2007. url:
https://phil.cdc.gov/QuickSearch.aspx?key=true.
[30]
Mark O Clements and Simon J Foster. “Stress resistance in Staphylococcus
aureus”. In: Trends in Microbiology 7.11 (1999), pp. 458–462. issn: 0966842X.
doi: 10.1016/S0966-842X(99)01607-8.
[31]
B J Hartman. “Low-aﬃnity penicillin-binding protein associated with beta-
lactam resistance in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 158.2
(1984). issn: 00219193.
[32]
Y Utsui and T Yokota. “Role of an altered penicillin-binding protein in methicillin-
and cephem-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.” In: Antimicrobial Agents and
Chemotherapy 28.3 (1985), pp. 397–403. issn: 0066-4804. doi: 10.1128/AAC.
28.3.397.
[33]
Jean-Marie Ghuysen. “Molecular structures of penicillin-binding proteins and
—-lactamases”. In: Trends in Microbiology 2.10 (1994), pp. 372–380. issn:
0966842X. doi: 10.1016/0966-842X(94)90614-9.
[34]
Britta Ballhausen et al. “The mecA Homolog mecC Confers Resistance against
—-Lactams in Staphylococcus aureus Irrespective of the Genetic Strain Back-
ground”. In: Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 58.7 (2014), pp. 3791–
3798. issn: 0066-4804. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02731-13.
[35]
Y. Katayama, T. Ito, and K. Hiramatsu. “A New Class of Genetic Element,
Staphylococcus Cassette Chromosome mec, Encodes Methicillin Resistance
in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 44.6
(2000), pp. 1549–1555. issn: 0066-4804. doi: 10.1128/AAC.44.6.1549-
1555.2000.
[36]
Teruyo Ito, Kyoko Kuwahara, and Keiichi Hiramatsu. “Staphylococcal Cas-
sette Chromosome mec (SCCmec) Analysis of MRSA”. In: 2007, pp. 87–102.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-468-1_7.
[37]
Anna C. Shore et al. “Detection of Staphylococcal Cassette Chromosome mec
Type XI Carrying Highly Divergent mecA , mecI , mecR1 , blaZ , and ccr
Genes in Human Clinical Isolates of Clonal Complex 130 Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 55.8 (2011),
pp. 3765–3773. issn: 0066-4804. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00187-11.
[38]
Henry F. Chambers and Frank R. DeLeo. “Waves of resistance: Staphylococ-
cus aureus in the antibiotic era”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 7.9 (2009),
pp. 629–641. issn: 1740-1526. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro2200.
58
==PAGE:68==
[39]
M. Z. David and R. S. Daum. “Community-Associated Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus: Epidemiology and Clinical Consequences of an Emerg-
ing Epidemic”. In: Clinical Microbiology Reviews 23.3 (2010), pp. 616–687.
issn: 0893-8512. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00081-09.
[40]
José R Mediavilla et al. “Global epidemiology of community-associated methi-
cillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA)”. In: Current Opinion in
Microbiology 15.5 (2012), pp. 588–595. issn: 13695274. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.
2012.08.003.
[41]
Christopher P. Montgomery et al. “Comparison of Virulence in Community-
Associated Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Pulsotypes USA300
and USA400 in a Rat Model of Pneumonia”. In: The Journal of Infectious
Diseases 198.4 (2008), pp. 561–570. issn: 0022-1899. doi: 10.1086/590157.
[42]
Christopher P. Montgomery. “Importance of the Global Regulators Agr and
SaeRS in the Pathogenesis of CA-MRSA USA300 Infection”. In: (2010). doi:
10.1.1.292.1618.
[43]
Christian Jenul and Alexander R. Horswill. “Regulation of Staphylococcus
aureus Virulence”. In: Microbiology Spectrum 6.1 (2018). issn: 2165-0497. doi:
10.1128/microbiolspec.GPP3-0031-2018.
[44]
Richard P. Novick. “Autoinduction and signal transduction in the regulation
of staphylococcal virulence”. In: Molecular Microbiology 48.6 (2003), pp. 1429–
1449. issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03526.x.
[45]
P. M. Dunman et al. “Transcription Proﬁling-Based Identiﬁcation of Staphy-
lococcus aureus Genes Regulated by the agr and/or sarA Loci”. In: Journal
of Bacteriology 183.24 (2001), pp. 7341–7353. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/
JB.183.24.7341-7353.2001.
[46]
Burhan A Khan et al. “Investigational therapies targeting quorum-sensing for
the treatment of Staphylococcus aureus infections”. In: Expert Opinion on
Investigational Drugs 24.5 (2015), pp. 689–704. issn: 1354-3784. doi: 10.1517/
13543784.2015.1019062.
[47]
KH Nealson. “Bacterial Bioluminescence - Its control and ecological signiﬁ-
cance”. In: Microbiological Reviews 43.4 (1979). issn: 01460749.
[48]
H L Peng et al. “Cloning, characterization, and sequencing of an accessory
gene regulator (agr) in Staphylococcus aureus.” In: Journal of Bacteriology
170.9 (1988), pp. 4365–4372. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/jb.170.9.4365-
4372.1988.
[49]
R. P. Novick et al. “The agr P2 operon: An autocatalytic sensory transduc-
tion system inStaphylococcus aureus”. In: MGG Molecular & General Genetics
248.4 (1995), pp. 446–458. issn: 0026-8925. doi: 10.1007/BF02191645.
[50]
P. Mayville et al. “Structure-activity analysis of synthetic autoinducing thi-
olactone peptides from Staphylococcus aureus responsible for virulence”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96.4 (1999), pp. 1218–1223.
issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1218.
59
==PAGE:69==
[51]
Linsheng Zhang, Jianqun Lin, and Guangyong Ji. “Membrane Anchoring of
the AgrD N-terminal Amphipathic Region Is Required for Its Processing to
Produce a Quorum-sensing Pheromone in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Journal
of Biological Chemistry 279.19 (2004), pp. 19448–19456. issn: 0021-9258. doi:
10.1074/jbc.M311349200.
[52]
Matthew Thoendel and Alexander R. Horswill. “Random mutagenesis and
topology analysis of the autoinducing peptide biosynthesis proteins in Staphy-
lococcus aureus”. In: Molecular Microbiology 87.2 (2013), pp. 318–337. issn:
0950382X. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12100.
[53]
Gerard Lina et al. “Transmembrane topology and histidine protein kinase ac-
tivity of AgrC, the agr signal receptor in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Molecu-
lar Microbiology 28.3 (1998), pp. 655–662. issn: 0950-382X. doi: 10.1046/j.
1365-2958.1998.00830.x.
[54]
Boyuan Wang et al. “Activation and Inhibition of the Receptor Histidine Ki-
nase AgrC Occurs through Opposite Helical Transduction Motions”. In: Molec-
ular Cell 53.6 (2014), pp. 929–940. issn: 10972765. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.
2014.02.029.
[55]
R. L. Koenig et al. “Staphylococcus aureus AgrA Binding to the RNAIII-agr
Regulatory Region”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 186.22 (2004), pp. 7549–7555.
issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.186.22.7549-7555.2004.
[56]
Gordon Y.C. Cheung et al. “Phenol-soluble modulins – critical determinants of
staphylococcal virulence”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews 38.4 (2014), pp. 698–
719. issn: 1574-6976. doi: 10.1111/1574-6976.12057.
[57]
R P Novick. “Synthesis of staphylococcal virulence factors is controlled by a
regulatory RNA molecule”. In: Embo Journal 12.10 (1993). issn: 02614189.
[58]
Gordon Y. C. Cheung et al. “Role of the Accessory Gene Regulator agr in
Community-Associated Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Pathogen-
esis”. In: Infection and Immunity 79.5 (2011). Ed. by S. M. Payne, pp. 1927–
1935. issn: 0019-9567. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00046-11.
[59]
S BHAKDI. “Alpha-toxin of Staphylococcus-aureus”. In: Microbiological Re-
views 55.4 (1991). issn: 01460749.
[60]
Michael E. Powers et al. “ADAM10 Mediates Vascular Injury Induced by
Staphylococcus aureus –-Hemolysin”. In: The Journal of Infectious Diseases
206.3 (2012), pp. 352–356. issn: 1537-6613. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis192.
[61]
J. B. Wardenburg, R. J. Patel, and O. Schneewind. “Surface Proteins and Ex-
otoxins Are Required for the Pathogenesis of Staphylococcus aureus Pneumo-
nia”. In: Infection and Immunity 75.2 (2007), pp. 1040–1044. issn: 0019-9567.
doi: 10.1128/IAI.01313-06.
[62]
Adam D. Kennedy et al. “Targeting of Alpha-Hemolysin by Active or Passive
Immunization Decreases Severity of USA300 Skin Infection in a Mouse Model”.
In: The Journal of Infectious Diseases 202.7 (2010), pp. 1050–1058. issn: 0022-
1899. doi: 10.1086/656043.
60
==PAGE:70==
[63]
Scott D. Kobayashi et al. “Comparative Analysis of USA300 Virulence Deter-
minants in a Rabbit Model of Skin and Soft Tissue Infection”. In: The Jour-
nal of Infectious Diseases 204.6 (2011), pp. 937–941. issn: 1537-6613. doi:
10.1093/infdis/jir441.
[64]
Anders Bjokklind and Staﬀan Akvidson. “Mutants of Staphylococcus-aureus
aﬀected in the regulation of exo-protein synthesis”. In: Fems Microbiology Let-
ters 7.3 (1980). issn: 03781097.
[65]
K.H. Schleifer and R.M. Kroppenstedt. “Chemical and molecular classiﬁcation
of staphylococci”. In: Journal of Applied Bacteriology 69 (1990), 9S–24S. issn:
00218847. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.1990.tb01794.x.
[66]
Niklas Palmqvist et al. “Protein A is a virulence factor in Staphylococcus
aureus arthritis and septic death”. In: Microbial Pathogenesis 33.5 (2002),
pp. 239–249. issn: 08824010. doi: 10.1006/mpat.2002.0533.
[67]
Hwan Keun Kim et al. “Protein A Suppresses Immune Responses during
Staphylococcus aureus Bloodstream Infection in Guinea Pigs”. In: mBio 6.1
(2015). Ed. by Steven J. Norris. issn: 2150-7511. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02369-
14.
[68]
D. A. Robinson et al. “Evolutionary Genetics of the Accessory Gene Regula-
tor (agr) Locus in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 187.24
(2005), pp. 8312–8321. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.187.24.8312-
8321.2005.
[69]
A L Cheung et al. “Diminished virulence of a sar-/agr- mutant of Staphylococ-
cus aureus in the rabbit model of endocarditis.” In: Journal of Clinical Investi-
gation 94.5 (1994), pp. 1815–1822. issn: 0021-9738. doi: 10.1172/JCI117530.
[70]
B. Weinrick et al. “Eﬀect of Mild Acid on Gene Expression in Staphylococcus
aureus”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 186.24 (2004), pp. 8407–8423. issn: 0021-
9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.186.24.8407-8423.2004.
[71]
L B Regassa and M J Betley. “Alkaline pH decreases expression of the accessory
gene regulator (agr) in Staphylococcus aureus.” In: Journal of Bacteriology
174.15 (1992), pp. 5095–5100. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.174.15.
5095-5100.1992.
[72]
F. Sun et al. “Quorum-sensing agr mediates bacterial oxidation response via
an intramolecular disulﬁde redox switch in the response regulator AgrA”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109.23 (2012), pp. 9095–9100.
issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1200603109.
[73]
Melissa Pynnonen et al. “Hemoglobin Promotes Staphylococcus aureus Nasal
Colonization”. In: PLoS Pathogens 7.7 (2011). Ed. by Frank R. DeLeo, e1002104.
issn: 1553-7374. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002104.
[74]
Bradley O. Elmore, Kathleen D. Triplett, and Pamela R. Hall. “Apolipopro-
tein B48, the Structural Component of Chylomicrons, Is Suﬃcient to Antag-
onize Staphylococcus aureus Quorum-Sensing”. In: PLOS ONE 10.5 (2015).
Ed. by Malcolm James Horsburgh, e0125027. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0125027.
61
==PAGE:71==
[75]
Guangyong Ji, Ronald Beavis, and Richard P. Novick. “Bacterial Interfer-
ence Caused by Autoinducing Peptide Variants”. In: Science 276.5321 (1997),
pp. 2027–2030. issn: 00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.276.5321.2027.
[76]
Ambrose L Cheung et al. “Regulation of virulence determinants in vitro and in
vivo in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: FEMS Immunology & Medical Microbiology
40.1 (2004), pp. 1–9. issn: 09288244. doi: 10.1016/S0928-8244(03)00309-2.
[77]
Yueh-tyng Chien, Adhar C. Manna, and Ambrose L. Cheung. “SarA level is a
determinant of agr activation in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Molecular Micro-
biology 30.5 (1998), pp. 991–1001. issn: 0950-382X. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
2958.1998.01126.x.
[78]
Jaione Valle et al. “SarA and not ‡B is essential for bioﬁlm development by
Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Molecular Microbiology 48.4 (2003), pp. 1075–
1087. issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03493.x.
[79]
D. O. Andrey et al. “Control of the Staphylococcus aureus Toxic Shock tst
Promoter by the Global Regulator SarA”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 192.22
(2010), pp. 6077–6085. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.00146-10.
[80]
D. Li and A. Cheung. “Repression of hla by rot Is Dependent on sae in Staphy-
lococcus aureus”. In: Infection and Immunity 76.3 (2008), pp. 1068–1075. issn:
0019-9567. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01069-07.
[81]
B. Said-Salim et al. “Global Regulation of Staphylococcus aureus Genes by
Rot”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 185.2 (2003), pp. 610–619. issn: 0021-9193.
doi: 10.1128/JB.185.2.610-619.2003.
[82]
S. Boisset et al. “Staphylococcus aureus RNAIII coordinately represses the
synthesis of virulence factors and the transcription regulator Rot by an an-
tisense mechanism”. In: Genes & Development 21.11 (2007), pp. 1353–1366.
issn: 0890-9369. doi: 10.1101/gad.423507.
[83]
Adhar C. Manna. “Regulation and characterization of rot transcription in
Staphylococcus aureus. Microbiol”. In: (2015).
[84]
Qian Liu, Won-Sik Yeo, and Taeok Bae. “The SaeRS Two-Component System
of Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Genes 7.10 (2016), p. 81. issn: 2073-4425. doi:
10.3390/genes7100081.
[85]
Jovanka M. Voyich et al. “The SaeR/S Gene Regulatory System Is Essential
for Innate Immune Evasion by Staphylococcus aureus”. In: The Journal of
Infectious Diseases 199.11 (2009), pp. 1698–1706. issn: 0022-1899. doi: 10.
1086/598967.
[86]
X. Liang et al. “Inactivation of a Two-Component Signal Transduction System,
SaeRS, Eliminates Adherence and Attenuates Virulence of Staphylococcus au-
reus”. In: Infection and Immunity 74.8 (2006), pp. 4655–4665. issn: 0019-9567.
doi: 10.1128/IAI.00322-06.
[87]
Miren L. Baroja et al. “The SaeRS Two-Component System Is a Direct and
Dominant Transcriptional Activator of Toxic Shock Syndrome Toxin 1 in Staphy-
lococcus aureus”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 198.19 (2016). Ed. by A. M.
Stock, pp. 2732–2742. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.00425-16.
62
==PAGE:72==
[88]
K. Rogasch et al. “Inﬂuence of the Two-Component System SaeRS on Global
Gene Expression in Two Diﬀerent Staphylococcus aureus Strains”. In: Journal
of Bacteriology 188.22 (2006), pp. 7742–7758. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/
JB.00555-06.
[89]
Abraham L Sonenshein. “CodY, a global regulator of stationary phase and
virulence in Gram-positive bacteria”. In: Current Opinion in Microbiology 8.2
(2005), pp. 203–207. issn: 13695274. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2005.01.001.
[90]
C. D. Majerczyk et al. “Direct Targets of CodY in Staphylococcus aureus”. In:
Journal of Bacteriology 192.11 (2010), pp. 2861–2877. issn: 0021-9193. doi:
10.1128/JB.00220-10.
[91]
Michael Otto. “MRSA virulence and spread”. In: Cellular Microbiology 14.10
(2012), pp. 1513–1521. issn: 14625814. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.
01832.x.
[92]
K. Hiramatsua et al. “Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus clinical strain
with reduced vancomycin susceptibility”. In: Journal of Antimicrobial Chemo-
therapy 40.1 (1997), pp. 135–136. issn: 14602091. doi: 10.1093/jac/40.1.
135.
[93]
R. A. Weinstein and S. K. Fridkin. “Vancomycin-Intermediate and -Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus: What the Infectious Disease Specialist Needs to Know”.
In: Clinical Infectious Diseases 32.1 (2001), pp. 108–115. issn: 1058-4838. doi:
10.1086/317542.
[94]
B. P. Howden et al. “Reduced Vancomycin Susceptibility in Staphylococcus
aureus, Including Vancomycin-Intermediate and Heterogeneous Vancomycin-
Intermediate Strains: Resistance Mechanisms, Laboratory Detection, and Clin-
ical Implications”. In: Clinical Microbiology Reviews 23.1 (2010), pp. 99–139.
issn: 0893-8512. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00042-09.
[95]
Jose L. Martinez. “General principles of antibiotic resistance in bacteria”. In:
Drug Discovery Today: Technologies 11.1 (2014), pp. 33–39. issn: 17406749.
doi: 10.1016/j.ddtec.2014.02.001.
[96]
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention. “CDC publishes report
on antibiotic resistance threats in the United States for the ﬁrst time”. In:
Eurosurveillance 18.38 (2013). issn: 1025496x. url: https://findit.dtu.
dk/en/catalog/259423155.
[97]
Anne E Clatworthy, Emily Pierson, and Deborah T Hung. “Targeting viru-
lence: a new paradigm for antimicrobial therapy”. In: Nature Chemical Biology
3.9 (2007), pp. 541–548. issn: 1552-4450. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.2007.24.
[98]
Laura Nunes Silva et al. “Plant Natural Products Targeting Bacterial Virulence
Factors”. In: Chemical Reviews 116.16 (2016), pp. 9162–9236. issn: 0009-2665.
doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00184.
[99]
A. Ianaro, M. Tersigni, and F. D’Acquisto. “New Insight in LPS Antago-
nist”. In: Mini-Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry 9.3 (2009), pp. 306–317. issn:
13895575. doi: 10.2174/1389557510909030306.
[100]
Eugenia Becker. “Antibiotics Provoke a Dysbiosis - Isotretinoin Not”. In: Gas-
troenterology 148.4, Suppl. 1 (2015). issn: 00165085.
63
==PAGE:73==
[101]
Christine A. Butts et al. “Animal Model of Antibiotic Induced Gut Microbiota
Dysbiosis”. In: Proceedings 8.1 (2019), p. 11. issn: 2504-3900. doi: 10.3390/
proceedings2019008011.
[102]
J. Gao and G. C. Stewart. “Regulatory Elements of the Staphylococcus au-
reus Protein A (Spa) Promoter”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 186.12 (2004),
pp. 3738–3748. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.186.12.3738-3748.2004.
[103]
Sara Scutera, Mario Zucca, and Dianella Savoia. “Novel approaches for the de-
sign and discovery of quorum-sensing inhibitors”. In: Expert Opinion on Drug
Discovery 9.4 (2014), pp. 353–366. issn: 1746-0441. doi: 10.1517/17460441.
2014.894974.
[104]
Maria Mansson. “Inhibition of virulence gene expression in Staphylococcus
aureus by novel depsipeptides from a marine Photobacterium. 2010, to be
submitted for publication”. In: (2014). doi: 10.1.1.431.6555.
[105]
Anita Nielsen et al. “Solonamide B Inhibits Quorum Sensing and Reduces
Staphylococcus aureus Mediated Killing of Human Neutrophils”. In: PLoS
ONE 9.1 (2014). Ed. by Gunnar F. Kaufmann, e84992. issn: 1932-6203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0084992.
[106]
A. Nielsen et al. “Method for Screening Compounds That Inﬂuence Viru-
lence Gene Expression in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Antimicrobial Agents
and Chemotherapy 54.1 (2010), pp. 509–512. issn: 0066-4804. doi: 10.1128/
AAC.00940-09.
[107]
A. P. Desbois and P. J. Coote. “Wax moth larva (Galleria mellonella): an in
vivo model for assessing the eﬃcacy of antistaphylococcal agents”. In: Journal
of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 66.8 (2011), pp. 1785–1790. issn: 0305-7453.
doi: 10.1093/jac/dkr198.
[108]
Bruno Lemaitre and Jules Hoﬀmann. “The Host Defense of Drosophila melano-
gaster”. In: Annual Review of Immunology 25.1 (2007), pp. 697–743. issn:
0732-0582. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141615.
[109]
Kevin Kavanagh and Emer P. Reeves. “Exploiting the potential of insects for
in vivo pathogenicity testing of microbial pathogens”. In: FEMS Microbiology
Reviews 28.1 (2004), pp. 101–112. issn: 1574-6976. doi: 10.1016/j.femsre.
2003.09.002.
[110]
Thiago A. F. Ferro et al. “Cinnamaldehyde Inhibits Staphylococcus aureus Vir-
ulence Factors and Protects against Infection in a Galleria mellonella Model”.
In: Frontiers in Microbiology 7 (2016). issn: 1664-302X. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.
2016.02052.
[111]
Nalini Ramarao, Christina Nielsen-Leroux, and Didier Lereclus. “The Insect
Galleria mellonella as a Powerful Infection Model to Investigate Bacterial
Pathogenesis”. In: Journal of Visualized Experiments 70 (2012). issn: 1940-
087X. doi: 10.3791/4392.
[112]
A. Rejasse et al. “Temperature-Dependent Production of Various PlcR-Control-
led Virulence Factors in Bacillus weihenstephanensis Strain KBAB4”. In: Ap-
plied and Environmental Microbiology 78.8 (2012), pp. 2553–2561. issn: 0099-
2240. doi: 10.1128/AEM.07446-11.
64
==PAGE:74==
[113]
Robert T Jones et al. “Photorhabdus adhesion modiﬁcation protein (Pam)
binds extracellular polysaccharide and alters bacterial attachment”. In: BMC
Microbiology 10.1 (2010), p. 141. issn: 1471-2180. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-
10-141.
[114]
Robert B. Fick. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the opportunist : pathogenesis and
disease. CRC Press, 1993, p. 260. isbn: 0849348110.
[115]
Francesca L. Short, Sarah L. Murdoch, and Robert P. Ryan. “Polybacterial
human disease: the ills of social networking”. In: Trends in Microbiology 22.9
(2014), pp. 508–516. issn: 0966842X. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2014.05.007.
[116]
A. Lording et al. “Pulmonary infection in mild variant cystic ﬁbrosis: Impli-
cations for care”. In: Journal of Cystic Fibrosis 5.2 (2006), pp. 101–104. issn:
15691993. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2005.11.005.
[117]
F. Harrison. “Microbial ecology of the cystic ﬁbrosis lung”. In: Microbiology
153.4 (2007), pp. 917–923. issn: 1350-0872. doi: 10 . 1099 / mic . 0 . 2006 /
004077-0.
[118]
Irena Pastar et al. “Interactions of Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus
USA300 and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in Polymicrobial Wound Infection”. In:
PLoS ONE 8.2 (2013). Ed. by Michael Otto, e56846. issn: 1932-6203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0056846.
[119]
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. UK Cystic Fibrosis Registry Annual Data Report
2018. Tech. rep. 2018.
[120]
Singireddy Swetha Reddy et al. “An Overview on Cystic Fibrosis”. In: Asian
Journal of Pharmaceutical Research and Development 7.5 (2019), pp. 80–91.
issn: 2320-4850. doi: 10.22270/ajprd.v7i5.535.
[121]
L. M. Mashburn et al. “Staphylococcus aureus Serves as an Iron Source for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa during In Vivo Coculture”. In: Journal of Bacteriol-
ogy 187.2 (2005), pp. 554–566. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.187.2.554-
566.2005.
[122]
Francois Lepine et al. “Electrospray/mass spectrometric identiﬁcation and
analysis of 4-hydroxy-2-alkylquinolines (HAQs) produced by Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa”. In: Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 15.6 (2004),
pp. 862–869. issn: 10440305. doi: 10.1016/S1044-0305(04)00168-0.
[123]
E. Deziel et al. “Analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 4-hydroxy-2-alkyl-quinolines
(HAQs) reveals a role for 4-hydroxy-2-heptylquinoline in cell-to-cell commu-
nication”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101.5 (2004),
pp. 1339–1344. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0307694100.
[124]
J. W. Cornforth and A. T. James. “Structure of a naturally occurring antag-
onist of dihydrostreptomycin”. In: Biochemical Journal 63.1 (1956), pp. 124–
130. issn: 0306-3283. doi: 10.1042/bj0630124.
[125]
Giordano Rampioni. “Unravelling the Genome-Wide Contributions of Speciﬁc
2-Alkyl-4-Quinolones and PqsE to Quorum Sensing in Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa”. In: Plos Pathogens (2016). issn: 15537366.
65
==PAGE:75==
[126]
Eric Déziel et al. “The contribution of MvfR to Pseudomonas aeruginosa patho-
genesis and quorum sensing circuitry regulation: multiple quorum sensing-
regulated genes are modulated without aﬀecting lasRI, rhlRI or the produc-
tion of N-acyl- l-homoserine lactones”. In: Molecular Microbiology 55.4 (2004),
pp. 998–1014. issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04448.x.
[127]
Florian Bredenbruch et al. “The Pseudomonas aeruginosa quinolone signal
(PQS) has an iron-chelating activity”. In: Environmental Microbiology 8.8
(2006), pp. 1318–1329. issn: 1462-2912. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.
01025.x.
[128]
Zoe A. Machan et al. “2-Heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline N -oxide, an antistaphylo-
coccal agent produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Journal of Antimicro-
bial Chemotherapy 30.5 (1992), pp. 615–623. issn: 0305-7453. doi: 10.1093/
jac/30.5.615.
[129]
E. C. Pesci et al. “Quinolone signaling in the cell-to-cell communication sys-
tem of Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 96.20 (1999), pp. 11229–11234. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
96.20.11229.
[130]
Angela T. Nguyen et al. “Cystic Fibrosis Isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Retain Iron-Regulated Antimicrobial Activity against Staphylococcus aureus
through the Action of Multiple Alkylquinolones”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology
7 (2016). issn: 1664-302X. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01171.
[131]
J. P. Coleman et al. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa PqsA Is an Anthranilate-Co-
enzyme A Ligase”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 190.4 (2008), pp. 1247–1255.
issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.01140-07.
[132]
Yong-Mei Zhang et al. “PqsD Is Responsible for the Synthesis of 2,4-Dihydroxy-
quinoline, an Extracellular Metabolite Produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa”.
In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 283.43 (2008), pp. 28788–28794. issn: 0021-
9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804555200.
[133]
Steﬀen Lorenz Drees and Susanne Fetzner. “PqsE of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Acts as Pathway-Speciﬁc Thioesterase in the Biosynthesis of Alkylquinolone
Signaling Molecules”. In: Chemistry & Biology 22.5 (2015), pp. 611–618. issn:
10745521. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.04.012.
[134]
Carlos Eduardo Dulcey et al. “The End of an Old Hypothesis: The Pseu-
domonas Signaling Molecules 4-Hydroxy-2-Alkylquinolines Derive from Fatty
Acids, Not 3-Ketofatty Acids”. In: Chemistry & Biology 20.12 (2013), pp. 1481–
1491. issn: 10745521. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.09.021.
[135]
Steﬀen Lorenz Drees et al. “PqsBC, a Condensing Enzyme in the Biosynthesis
of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa Quinolone Signal”. In: Journal of Biological
Chemistry 291.13 (2016), pp. 6610–6624. issn: 0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M115.708453.
[136]
Jeﬀrey W. Schertzer, Stacie A. Brown, and Marvin Whiteley. “Oxygen levels
rapidly modulate Pseudomonas aeruginosa social behaviours via substrate lim-
itation of PqsH”. In: Molecular Microbiology 77.6 (2010), pp. 1527–1538. issn:
0950382X. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07303.x.
66
==PAGE:76==
[137]
Steﬀen Lorenz Drees et al. “PqsL uses reduced ﬂavin to produce 2-hydroxyl-
aminobenzoylacetate, a preferred PqsBC substrate in alkyl quinolone biosyn-
thesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 293.24
(2018), pp. 9345–9357. issn: 0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000789.
[138]
Florian Witzgall et al. “The Alkylquinolone Repertoire of Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa is Linked to Structural Flexibility of the FabH-like 2-Heptyl-3-hydroxy-4(1
H )-quinolone (PQS) Biosynthesis Enzyme PqsBC”. In: ChemBioChem 19.14
(2018), pp. 1531–1544. issn: 14394227. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201800153.
[139]
M J Gambello. “LasR of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a transcriptional activator
of the alkaline protease gene (apr) and an enhancer of exotoxin A expression”.
In: Infection and Immunity 61.4 (1993). issn: 00199567.
[140]
L. A. Gallagher et al. “Functions Required for Extracellular Quinolone Signal-
ing by Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 184.23 (2002),
pp. 6472–6480. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.184.23.6472-6480.2002.
[141]
Lauren Mashburn-Warren et al. “Interaction of quorum signals with outer
membrane lipids: insights into prokaryotic membrane vesicle formation”. In:
Molecular Microbiology 69.2 (2008), pp. 491–502. issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.
1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06302.x.
[142]
Stephen P. Diggle et al. “The Pseudomonas aeruginosa 4-Quinolone Signal
Molecules HHQ and PQS Play Multifunctional Roles in Quorum Sensing and
Iron Entrapment”. In: Chemistry & Biology 14.1 (2007), pp. 87–96. issn:
10745521. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2006.11.014.
[143]
Angela T. Nguyen et al. “Iron Depletion Enhances Production of Antimicro-
bials by Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 197.14 (2015).
Ed. by V. J. DiRita, pp. 2265–2275. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.00072-
15.
[144]
L. R. Hoﬀman et al. “Selection for Staphylococcus aureus small-colony variants
due to growth in the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 103.52 (2006), pp. 19890–19895. issn: 0027-
8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0606756104.
[145]
A. Korgaonkar et al. “Community surveillance enhances Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa virulence during polymicrobial infection”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 110.3 (2013), pp. 1059–1064. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.1214550110.
[146]
Charlotte Frydenlund Michelsen et al. “Evolution of metabolic divergence in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa during long-term infection facilitates a proto-cooperative
interspecies interaction”. In: The ISME Journal 10.6 (2016), pp. 1323–1336.
issn: 1751-7362. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2015.220.
[147]
E. E. Smith et al. “Genetic adaptation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa to the
airways of cystic ﬁbrosis patients”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 103.22 (2006), pp. 8487–8492. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0602138103.
67
==PAGE:77==
[148]
D. Nguyen and P. K. Singh. “Evolving stealth: Genetic adaptation of Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa during cystic ﬁbrosis infections”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 103.22 (2006), pp. 8305–8306. issn: 0027-8424.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0602526103.
[149]
Rasmus Lykke Marvig et al. “Genome Analysis of a Transmissible Lineage
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Reveals Pathoadaptive Mutations and Distinct
Evolutionary Paths of Hypermutators”. In: PLoS Genetics 9.9 (2013). Ed. by
Diarmaid Hughes, e1003741. issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.
1003741.
[150]
David A. D’Argenio et al. “Growth phenotypes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
lasR mutants adapted to the airways of cystic ﬁbrosis patients”. In: Molecular
Microbiology 64.2 (2007), pp. 512–533. issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2958.2007.05678.x.
[151]
C. F. Michelsen et al. “Staphylococcus aureus Alters Growth Activity, Autoly-
sis, and Antibiotic Tolerance in a Human Host-Adapted Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa Lineage”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 196.22 (2014), pp. 3903–3911. issn:
0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.02006-14.
[152]
David A. D’Argenio. “The Pathogenic Lifestyle of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in
Model Systems of Virulence”. In: Pseudomonas. Springer US, 2004, pp. 477–
503. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-9086-0_16.
[153]
Karin Heurlier, Valérie Dénervaud, and Dieter Haas. “Impact of quorum sens-
ing on ﬁtness of Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: International Journal of Medi-
cal Microbiology 296.2-3 (2006), pp. 93–102. issn: 14384221. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijmm.2006.01.043.
[154]
L. Biswas et al. “Small-Colony Variant Selection as a Survival Strategy for
Staphylococcus aureus in the Presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In: Ap-
plied and Environmental Microbiology 75.21 (2009), pp. 6910–6912. issn: 0099-
2240. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01211-09.
[155]
Michael J. Noto et al. “Mechanisms of Pyocyanin Toxicity and Genetic Deter-
minants of Resistance in Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Journal of Bacteriology
199.17 (2017). Ed. by George O’Toole. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.
00221-17.
[156]
H M Hassan and I Fridovich. “Mechanism of the antibiotic action pyocyanine.”
In: Journal of Bacteriology 141.1 (1980), pp. 156–163. issn: 0021-9193. doi:
10.1128/JB.141.1.156-163.1980.
[157]
E Kessler. “Secreted LasA of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a staphylolytic pro-
tease”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 268.10 (1993). issn: 00219258.
[158]
Efrat Kessler et al. “Inhibitors and Speciﬁcity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
LasA”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 272.15 (1997), pp. 9884–9889. issn:
0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.15.9884.
[159]
Joo-Hyeon Park et al. “Acceleration of protease eﬀect on Staphylococcus au-
reus bioﬁlm dispersal”. In: FEMS Microbiology Letters 335.1 (2012), pp. 31–38.
issn: 03781097. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2012.02635.x.
68
==PAGE:78==
[160]
Laura R Hmelo et al. “Precision-engineering the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
genome with two-step allelic exchange”. In: Nature Protocols 10.11 (2015),
pp. 1820–1841. issn: 1754-2189. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2015.115.
[161]
New England BioLabs. NEBioCalculator. url: https://nebiocalculator.
neb.com/%7B%5C#%7D!/ligation (visited on 02/07/2020).
[162]
Avigdor Shaﬀerman et al. “Plasmid R6K DNA replication. III. Regulatory
properties of the ﬁinitiation protein”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 161.1
(1982), pp. 57–76. issn: 00222836. doi: 10.1016/0022-2836(82)90278-9.
[163]
Jugal Kishore, ManishKumar Goel, and Pardeep Khanna. “Understanding sur-
vival analysis: Kaplan-Meier estimate”. In: International Journal of Ayurveda
Research 1.4 (2010), p. 274. issn: 0974-7788. doi: 10.4103/0974-7788.76794.
[164]
D.C. Montgomery and John Wiley & Sons. “Percentage Points of the X2 Dis-
tribution”. In: Design and Analysis of Experiments. 8th editio. 2013, p. 687.
[165]
Rui Wang, Stephen W. Lagakos, and Robert J. Gray. “Testing and interval
estimation for two-sample survival comparisons with small sample sizes and
unequal censoring”. In: Biostatistics 11.4 (2010), pp. 676–692. issn: 1468-4357.
doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxq021.
[166]
J H MILLER. Experiments in Molecular Genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Labo-
ratory, 1972. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/70417657.
[167]
K Ohlsen. “Analysis of expression of the alpha-toxin gene (hla) of Staphylo-
coccus aureus by using a chromosomally encoded hla::lacZ gene fusion”. In:
Infection and Immunity 65.9 (1997). issn: 00199567.
[168]
Ke Dai et al. “Construction of targeted and integrative promoter-reporter plas-
mids pDK-K and pDK-G to measure gene expression activity in Haemophilus
parasuis”. In: Microbial Pathogenesis 134 (2019), p. 103565. issn: 08824010.
doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103565.
[169]
Nisha Rathor et al. “An insight into the regulation of mce4 operon of Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis”. In: Tuberculosis 93.4 (2013), pp. 389–397. issn: 14729792.
doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2013.03.007.
[170]
Gili Aviv and Ohad Gal-Mor. “lacZ Reporter System as a Tool to Study Vir-
ulence Gene Regulation in Bacterial Pathogens”. In: Methods in Molecular
Biology. Vol. 1734. 2018, pp. 39–45. isbn: 9781493976034. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-4939-7604-1_5.
[171]
Jorrit Schaefer et al. “Single-step method for —-galactosidase assays in Es-
cherichia coli using a 96-well microplate reader”. In: Analytical Biochemistry
503 (2016), pp. 56–57. issn: 00032697. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2016.03.017. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0003269716001172.
[172]
Clent Life Science. Bead Beating & Homogenisation - Clent Life Science. 2018.
url: https://www.clentlifescience.co.uk/bead-beating-homogenisation/
(visited on 02/17/2020).
[173]
OPS Diagnostics. Mechanical Disruption Methods: Beating. 2012. url: https:
//opsdiagnostics.com/applications/samplehomogenization/homogeniza-
tionguidepart7.html (visited on 02/17/2020).
69
==PAGE:79==
[174]
H. A. Crosby, J. Kwiecinski, and A. R. Horswill. “Staphylococcus aureus Ag-
gregation and Coagulation Mechanisms, and Their Function in Host–Pathogen
Interactions”. In: Advances in Applied Microbiology 96 (2016), pp. 1–41. issn:
00652164. doi: 10.1016/bs.aambs.2016.07.018.
[175]
J. K.-M. Knobloch et al. “Bioﬁlm Formation by Staphylococcus epidermidis
Depends on Functional RsbU, an Activator of the sigB Operon: Diﬀerential
Activation Mechanisms Due to Ethanol and Salt Stress”. In: Journal of Bacte-
riology 183.8 (2001), pp. 2624–2633. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.183.
8.2624-2633.2001.
[176]
K. M. Conlon, H. Humphreys, and J. P. O’Gara. “icaR Encodes a Transcrip-
tional Repressor Involved in Environmental Regulation of ica Operon Expres-
sion and Bioﬁlm Formation in Staphylococcus epidermidis”. In: Journal of
Bacteriology 184.16 (2002), pp. 4400–4408. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/
JB.184.16.4400-4408.2002.
[177]
David Cue, Mei G. Lei, and Chia Y. Lee. “Genetic regulation of the intercel-
lular adhesion locus in staphylococci”. In: Frontiers in Cellular and Infection
Microbiology 2 (2012). issn: 2235-2988. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2012.00038.
[178]
Julian Davies, George B Spiegelman, and Grace Yim. “The world of subin-
hibitory antibiotic concentrations”. In: Current Opinion in Microbiology 9.5
(2006), pp. 445–453. issn: 13695274. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2006.08.006.
[179]
Hwang-soo Joo. “Subinhibitory concentrations of protein synthesis-inhibiting
antibiotics promote increased expression of the agr virulence regulator and pro-
duction of phenolsoluble modulin cytolysins in community-associated methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. An”. In: (2016).
[180]
Knut Ohlsen et al. “Eﬀects of Subinhibitory Concentrations of Antibiotics on
Alpha-Toxin ( hla ) Gene Expression of Methicillin-Sensitive and Methicillin-
Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Isolates”. In: Antimicrobial Agents and Chemo-
therapy 42.11 (1998), pp. 2817–2823. issn: 0066-4804. doi: 10.1128/AAC.42.
11.2817.
[181]
Gabriel Mitchell et al. “Staphylococcus aureus sigma B-dependent emergence
of small-colony variants and bioﬁlm production following exposure to Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa 4-hydroxy-2-heptylquinoline-N-oxide”. In: BMC Microbi-
ology 10.1 (2010), p. 33. issn: 1471-2180. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-33.
[182]
Helen L. Barr et al. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum sensing molecules cor-
relate with clinical status in cystic ﬁbrosis”. In: European Respiratory Jour-
nal 46.4 (2015), pp. 1046–1054. issn: 0903-1936. doi: 10.1183/09031936.
00225214.
70
==PAGE:80==
Appendices
A
Media recipes
Table 15: Media recipes.
Media
Media Recipes
TSA
According to manufacturing guidelines [Sigma-Aldrich, 22091].
TSB
According to manufacturing guidelines [Sigma-Aldrich, 22092].
PIA
According to manufacturing guidelines [Sigma-Aldrich, 17208].
LB broth
1 g NaCl [Merck, 1.06404], 1.25 g yeast extract [Merck, 1.03753]
and 2.5 g Peptone [Oxoid, LP0037] with demineralised water to
a ﬁnal volume of 250 mL (pH adjusted to 7.4).
LB agar
LB broth with the addition of 5 g agar [PanReac AppliChem,
9002-18-0].
TSA X-gal plates
150 µg of X-gal [Thermo Scientiﬁc, 7240-90-6] per mL TSA.
PBS
137 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl [Merck, 1.04936], 8 mM Na2HPO4 ú
2H2O [EMSURE, 1.06580] and 1 mM monopotassium phosphate
[EMSURE, 1.04873] with demineralised water (pH adjusted to
7.3).
Z-buﬀer
40 mM NaH2PO4 [AppliChem, A1938], 1 mM MgSO4 [Sigma-
Aldrich, 10034-99-8], 60 mM Na2HPO4 and 10 mM KCl.
71
==PAGE:81==
B
Plate set-up of qualitative interaction assays
B.1
Bioactivity assay of organic extracts
Figure 24: Plate set-up of bioactivity assay. Each S. aureus reporter strain
was plated on a TSA X-gal plate. PBS was plated on a seventh as a growth
control. Organic extracts of PAO1, 4448c, IMG213 and CFM25 were added to
the wells according to the plate set-up seen on the picture (methanol was added
as a negative control).
B.2
Co-culture assay with 4448c ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH mutants
Figure 25:
Plate set-up of co-culture assay with 4448c ∆pqsL and
∆pqsH mutants. Each S. aureus reporter strain was plated on a TSA X-gal
plate (PBS on a 7th as control). Cultures of PAO1, WT 4448c, 4448c ∆pqsL
and 4448c ∆pqsH were added to the wells according to the plate set-up seen on
the picture (PBS was added as a negative control).
72
==PAGE:82==
C
Plasmid, primers and protocols used during the
generation of the PADK2 mutants
C.1
Primers utilised
Table 16: Primers used in this study. Primer 1-10 were designed by Mikkel
Anbo, while primer 11-14 were designed in this study. All primers are given in
the 5’ to 3’ orientation.
Name
Sequence (5’ to 3’ direction)
Pr1-pqsL-UF
AGCGCATGGCCATAGGAGACCAGCCGTTGATCAGTACATCG
Pr2-pqsL-UR
ATTATAGAGCTCGCTCTCGGTCACCTCTTTCG
Pr3-pqsL-DF
ATAATATCTAGACTGGAGTACCTGGACGCAAC
Pr4-pqsL-DR
CGATGTACTGATCAACGGCTGGTCTCCTATGGCCATGCGCT
Pr5-pqsH-UF
ATTATTGAGCTCATGTTTTCGGACGGGCTCAT
Pr6-pqsH-UR
GGGTATTCCTCAGCCAGACGCGGTCATCCGTTGCTCCTTA
Pr7-pqsH-DF
TAAGGAGCAACGGATGACCGCGTCTGGCTGAGGAATACCC
Pr8-pqsH-DR
TTATAATCTAGATTAATCACGCTGCACCTCGT
Pr9-pNJ1-fw
AACAAACCCGCGCGATTTAC
Pr10-pNJ1-rev
GTAACGCACTGAGAAGCCCT
Pr11-Fw-pqsL
AGCAGGGCTTCTTCTACGTG
Pr12-Rev-pqsL
CTGGAACATGGGCGAGAACT
Pr13-Fw-pqsH
ATCTCGGCCTCGAGCAATTC
Pr14-Rev-pqsH
CAGACGGTGACTACCACGAC
73
==PAGE:83==
C.2
The pNJ1 plasmid
Figure 26: Overview of the pNJ1 plasmid. The plasmid contains both the
positive selection marker, TetR, as well as the counter selection marker, sacB.
Furthermore, the XbaI and SacI restriction sites used for insertion of ∆pqsL
or ∆pqsH are depicted along with the position of the primer pair 9&10. The
picture is obtained by visualising the pNJ1 plasmid in CLC Main workbench.
74
==PAGE:84==
C.3
Digestion protocol
Table 17: Reaction mixture for double cut of pqsL and pqsH fragments
and pNJ1 using XbaI and SacI. The table shows the reaction mixture of 30
µL reactions for the digestion of both the pNJ1 plasmid (middle column) as well
as the pqsL and pqsH fragments (PCR products, right column). FastAP was
added in order to dephosphorylate pNJ1 after digestion to prevent religation.
Reagents
Volume (Plasmid)
Volume
(PCR
products)
10x FD green buﬀer
3 µL
2 µL
FD XbaI
1.5 µL
1 µL
FD SacI
1.5 µL
1 µL
FastAP (1 U/µL)
1.5 µL
-
DNA (either plasmid or PCR product)
1 µg
0.5 µg
H2O
Up to 30 µL
Up to 30 µL
The digestion conditions for the PCR products were: 60 minutes at 37 ¶C (optimum
temperature for restriction enzymes) followed by 20 minutes at 65 ¶C (temperature at
which restriction enzymes are deactivated). For the plasmid the digestion conditions
were a bit diﬀerent: 20 minutes at 37 ¶C followed by 20 minutes at 80 ¶C (temperature
needed to deactivate FastAP).
C.4
Ligation protocol
Table 18: Reaction mixtures for the ligation of digested pqsL and pNJ1
as well as digested pqsH and pNJ1. Three diﬀerent ratios of insert (pqsL
or pqsH fragment) to vector (pNJ1) were used to increase the chance of success-
ful insertion. A control reaction was included with only pNJ1 to identify the
frequency of religation.
Reagents
L2:1
L3:1
L5:1
H2:1
H3:1
H5:1
Only
pNJ1
5x Ligase Reaction buﬀer
4 µL
4 µL
4 µL
4 µL
4 µL
4 µL
4 µL
Vector DNA
100
ng
100
ng
100
ng
100
ng
100
ng
100
ng
100
ng
Insert DNA
39.39
ng
59.09
ng
98.48
ng
33.33
ng
50.00
ng
83.33
ng
-
T4 DNA ligase
0.1
µL
0.1
µL
0.1
µL
0.1
µL
0.1
µL
0.1
µL
0.1
µL
H2O
Up to
20 µL
Up to
20 µL
Up to
20 µL
Up to
20 µL
Up to
20 µL
Up to
20 µL
Up to
20 µL
The ligation conditions were: 2 hours at 24 ¶C followed by 10 minutes at 65 ¶C.
75
==PAGE:85==
C.5
DreamTaq PCR conditions
Table 19: Reaction mixtures of DreamTaq PCR. DMSO was added to
make the DNA more labile for heat denaturation thereby enhancing ampliﬁca-
tion. Fw = forward, rev = reverse, DT = DreamTaq. *When performing colony
PCR, template DNA was added by transferring a single colony directly into the
reaction mixture with a sterile loop.
Reagents
Regular PCR
Colony PCR
10x DT green buﬀer
1 µL
1 µL
10 mM dNTPs
0.4 µL
0.4 µL
5 µM Fw primer
0.5 µL
0.5 µL
5 µM Rev primer
0.5 µL
0.5 µL
Template DNA
1 µL
-*
DT DNA polymerase (5 U/µL)
0.05 µL
0.05 µL
DMSO (100%)
0.5 µL
0.5 µL
H2O
Up to 10 µL
Up to 10 µL
Table 20: Thermal cycler conditions of regular DreamTaq PCR. *For
colony PCRs the initial denature was set to 5 minutes to initially boil the colony
and release its DNA.
Reagents
Temperature
Time
Number
of
cy-
cles
Initial denaturation
95 ¶C
3 min.*
1
Denaturation
95 ¶C
30 sec.
Annealing
54 ¶C
30 sec.
30
Extension
72 ¶C
1:30 min.
Final extension
72 ¶C
5 min.
1
76
==PAGE:86==
D
Relevant gel pictures
Figure 27: Digested pqsL, pqsH and pNJ1. Order of wells: 2 x pNJ1 (6700
bp), ladder, 2 x pqsL (1300 bp) and 2 x pqsH (1100 bp).
Figure 28: pNJ1 with either the pqsL or pqsH fragment inserted. Three
wells to the left; pNJ1 with pqsL fragment (1800 bp), three wells to the right;
pNJ1 with pqsH fragment (1600 bp).
Figure 29: PCR veriﬁed ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH in 4448c.
Order of wells;
∆pqsL, WT pqsL, ladder, WT pqsH, ∆pqsH.
77
==PAGE:87==
E
BPCs and EICs of organic extractions from P.
aeruginosa
Figure 30: BPCs of PAO1 organic extractions. The BPCs obtained for the
organic extractions made from three biological replicates of PAO1 compared to
an LB control (top BPC).
Figure 31: BPCs of 4448c organic extractions. The BPCs obtained for the
organic extractions made from three biological replicates of 4448c compared to
an LB control (top BPC).
78
==PAGE:88==
Figure 32: BPCs of CFM25 organic extractions. The BPCs obtained for
the organic extractions made from three biological replicates of CFM25 com-
pared to an LB control (top BPC).
Figure 33: BPCs of IMG213 organic extractions. The BPCs obtained
for the organic extractions made from three biological replicates of IMG213
compared to an LB control (top BPC).
79
==PAGE:89==
Figure 34: EICs of 244 m/z. The EICs of 244 m/z ([M+H]+ of HHQ) obtained
for one of the PAO1 (top) and 4448c (bottom) organic extractions. Based on
the fragmentation pattern obtained after LC-MS/MS fragmentation the peak at
retention time (acquisition time) 6.136 (top) and 6.134 (bottom) were identiﬁed
to both be HHQ.
Figure 35: EICs of 260 m/z.
The EICs of 260 m/z ([M+H]+ of HQNO
and PQS) obtained for one of the PAO1 (top) and 4448c (bottom) organic
extractions.
Based on the fragmentation pattern obtained after LC-MS/MS
fragmentation the peak at retention time (acquisition time) 6.155 (top) and
6.172 (bottom) were identiﬁed to both be HQNO, while the peak at retention
time 6.616 (top) was identiﬁed to be PQS. No PQS was detected in the 4448c
extract.
80
==PAGE:90==
F
Alignments of the ∆pqsL and ∆pqsH alleles with
the WT genes
Figure 36: Alignment of the WT pqsL gene in PADK2 with the se-
quenced ∆pqsL allele. The ∆pqsL allele was sent for sequencing on both
strands using the primers Pr11&12.
An alignment of the WT pqsL gene in
PADK2 with the sequenced ∆pqsL allele (green lines) veriﬁes deletion of the
gene. CBF257 = sequence obtained from the forward primer, CBF258 = se-
quence obtained from the reverse primer.
Figure 37: Alignment of the WT pqsH gene in PADK2 with the se-
quenced ∆pqsH allele. The ∆pqsH allele was sent for sequencing on both
strands using the primers Pr13&14. An alignment of the WT pqsH gene in
PADK2 with the sequenced ∆pqsH allele (green lines) veriﬁes deletion of the
gene. CBF263 = sequence obtained from the forward primer, CBF264 = se-
quence obtained from the reverse primer.
81
==PAGE:91==
G
A420 over time without Fraction 14
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 38: A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains
at time point 2. Three biological replicates (B1-3) of 8325-4 RNAIII (a), JE2
RNAIII (b), 8325-4 Hla (c) and JE2 Hla (d) at sample point 2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 39: A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains
at time point 3. Three biological replicates (B1-3) of 8325-4 RNAIII (a), JE2
RNAIII (b), 8325-4 Hla (c) and JE2 Hla (d) at sample point 3.
82
==PAGE:92==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 40: A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains
at time point 4. Three biological replicates (B1-3) of 8325-4 RNAIII (a), JE2
RNAIII (b), 8325-4 Hla (c) and JE2 Hla (d) at sample point 4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 41: A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains
at time point 5. Three biological replicates (B1-3) of 8325-4 RNAIII (a), JE2
RNAIII (b), 8325-4 Hla (c) and JE2 Hla (d) at sample point 5.
83
==PAGE:93==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 42: A420 over time for 8325-4 and JE2 RNAIII and Hla strains
at time point 6. Three biological replicates (B1-3) of 8325-4 RNAIII (a), JE2
RNAIII (b), 8325-4 Hla (c) and JE2 Hla (d) at sample point 6.
84
==PAGE:94==
H
A420 over time with Fraction 14
Figure 43: A420 over time for 8324-4 RNAIII strain at time point 3.
Three biological replicates grown both with methanol and with Fraction 14.
Figure 44: A420 over time for 8324-4 RNAIII strain at time point 4.
Three biological replicates grown both with methanol and with Fraction 14.
Figure 45: A420 over time for 8324-4 RNAIII strain at time point 5.
Three biological replicates grown both with methanol and with Fraction 14.
85
==PAGE:95==
(a) Assay 1
(b) Assay 2
Figure 46: A420 over time for JE2 RNAIII strain at time point 3. Six
biological replicates grown both with methanol and with Fraction 14 assayed
over two days (three replicates each day).
(a) Assay 1
(b) Assay 2
Figure 47: A420 over time for JE2 RNAIII strain at time point 4. Six
biological replicates grown both with methanol and with Fraction 14 assayed
over two days (three replicates each day).
(a) Assay 1
(b) Assay 2
Figure 48: A420 over time for JE2 RNAIII strain at time point 5. Six
biological replicates grown both with methanol and with Fraction 14 assayed
over two days (three replicates each day).
86
==PAGE:96==
I
Growth curves of 8325-4 and JE2 in the fraction
dilution assay
(a) With Fraction 14
(b) With methanol
Figure 49: Growth curves of 8325-4, when exposed to diﬀerent dilu-
tions of fraction 14 or methanol. Log10 transformed OD values against
time. The curves show the average values of 3 biological replicates.
(a) With Fraction 14
(b) With methanol
Figure 50: Growth curves of JE2, when exposed to diﬀerent dilutions
of fraction 14 or methanol. Log10 transformed OD values against time. The
curves show the average values of 3 biological replicates.
87
==PAGE:97==
J
Comparison of BPCs from a PADK2 organic ex-
tract and Fraction 14
Figure 51: BPCs of a PADK2 organic extract and Fraction 14. Note
that the y-axes are not the same.
K
Standard curve of the correlation between OD
values and CFU/mL in WT JE2
Figure 52: Standard curve of the correlation between OD values and
CFU/mL in WT JE2. The curve was forced to go through 0 thereby giving
a third point needed for making the linear regression.
88
==PAGE:98==
L
Eﬀectiveness of the bead beater treatment
Figure 53: Microscopy of S. aureus cells appearing in samples before
and after bead beater treatment. Samples were treated with the protocol
explained in section 3.4.1. The samples were collected at time point 2 (T2), 4
(T4) and 6 (T6) from the same shake ﬂask culture.
Table 21: CFU of 8325-4 RNAIII and JE2 RNAIII right before and
after bead beater treatment with the optimized protocol. The values
shown in the table correspond to the CFU of 100 µL from 10≠5 diluted samples
acquired right before and after the bead beater treatment of samples collected
after three (T3), four (T4) and ﬁve (T5) hours of cultivation of the two RNAIII
reporter strains. This was done both for a methanol grown (M) and Fraction
14 grown (F) culture.
*UC (uncountable); these bacteria must have been a
contamination as they did not turn blue when re-streaked on an X-gal plate.
Reporter
strain
T3 (M)
T4 (M)
T5 (M)
T3 (F)
T4 (F)
T5 (F)
8325-4
Before
331
344
542
359
390
304
8325-4
After
0
0
0
1
3
0
JE2
Before
421
510
504
345
476
556
JE2 After
0
0
0
UC*
0
0
89
