==PAGE:1==
KYb,Y i@3cCc VlzS4ĢlzSOW
#CRL30C,I 2N<CN33aCN<
?3aj b3<L3NjjCRN mcCN< /33U H3aNCN<
Kcj3a j@3cCc
nj@Ra-
DRc3~N3 pCIc$ǹII bnN0<a0
VcSk:f:zW
FRN<3Nc HwN<$w lzSO
bnU3aqCcRac-
ccY TaR83ccRa `cLnc `3CN@RI0 TnIc3N
T@/Acjn03Nj FaCcjCN3 qCI0 Dn@I
ccY TaR83ccRa KaC3 bN0 ia$3a<
==PAGE:2==
TaRE3,j jCjI3
?3aj c3<L3NjjCRN ncCN< 033U I3aNCN<
nj@Rac
DRc3~N3 pCIc$ǹII bnN0<a0 VcSk:f:zW. cjn03Nj. 3NaRII30 CN Kb, TaR<aLL3. #CRL30C,I 2N<CN33aCN<
bnU3aqCcRac
`cLnc `3CN@RI0 TnIc3N. ccR,Cj3 TaR83ccRa j BL<3 NIwcCc N0 +RLUnj3a ;aU@C,c. /im /3UajL3Nj
R8 UUIC30 Kj@3LjC,c N0 +RLUnj3a b,C3N,3
FaCcjCN3 qCI0 Dn@I. T@/ bjn03Nj j BL<3 NIwcCc N0 +RLUnj3a ;aU@C,c. /im /3UajL3Nj R8 UUIC30
Kj@3LjC,c N0 +RLUnj3a b,C3N,3
KaC3 bN0 ia$3a<. ccR,Cj3 TaR83ccRa j #CRL30C,I 2N<CN33aCN<. /im /3UajL3Nj R8 ?3Ij@ i3,@NRIR<w
TaRE3,j U3aCR0
b3Uj3L$3a lzS4A73$anaw lzSO
2+ib
kz URCNjc
7C3I0
?3aj b3<L3NjjCRN. +RLUnj30 iRLR<aU@w. /33U H3aNCN<
iwU3
Kcj3aȕc i@3cCc
/im +RLUnj3
/3UajL3Nj R8 UUIC30 Kj@3LjC,c N0 +RLUnj3a b,C3N,3
i3,@NC,I mNCq3acCjw R8 /3NLaG
l4zz FRN<3Nc HwN<$w. /3NLaG
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Whole heart segmentation from cardiac CT scans is a prerequisite for many clinical applica-
tions. Since manual delineation can be tedious and subject to both intra- and inter-observer
variation, automating the segmentation process has become an increasingly popular task in
the ﬁeld of image analysis. However, fully automatic whole heart segmentation is challeng-
ing due to the complex geometry of the heart, unclear boundaries between heart structures
and variation in orientation, shape, and size from patient to patient. The pipeline proposed
in this project attempts to overcome these challenges, by employing state of the art deep
learning methods for heart segmentation.
The multi-class segmentation of the 3D cardiac CT image volume is performed in a two-step
manner utilising 2D convolutional neural networks in a multi-planar approach, allowing 3D
information to be captured by the 2D networks. The ﬁrst step localises the heart in the scan
and crops the CT scans to limit the amount of background pixels and allows the second
step to focus of the heart region.
The second step performs ﬁne-grained segmentation
of seven heart structures; left and right ventricle, left and right atrium, left ventricular
myocardium, aorta and pulmonary arteries. Two networks were tested for this step; U-net
and an extended version of the U-net adding contextual input from the adjacent slice in
the 3D image volume. Results on the MM-WHS challenge data shows that the proposed
pipeline performs very well on the provided CT data, achieving an average Dice coeﬃcient
across the seven heart structures of 0.931. The generated segmentations are converted into
surfaces, and the average absolute distance from ground truth surface to the predicted
surface was 0.9 mm.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a part of the Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
programme at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The master project is written in
collaboration with Image Analysis and Computer Graphics at DTU Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science and Biomedical Engineering at DTU Department of
Health Technology. The thesis presents work conducted during the fall semester 2018.
The thesis is written under the supervision of Associate Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
from DTU Compute, and with co-supervision from Marie Sand Traberg from Biomedical
Engineering and PhD-student Kristine Aavild Juhl from DTU Compute.
Kgs. Lyngby, 31st of January 2019
Joseﬁne Vilsbøll Sundgaard
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to sincerely thank my supervisor Rasmus R. Paulsen for his
inspiration, guidance, and motivation throughout the work with this project. Thank you
for your time and for good discussions along the way. Also a big thank you to PhD-student
Kristine Aavild Juhl for valuable and encouraging support throughout the project and for
always being ready for a discussion or a question. Furthermore, I would like to thank
professor Anders B. Dahl, associate professor Vedrana A. Dahl and assistant professor
Anders N. Christensen for providing supervision, when Rasmus was not available.
I would like to thank associate professor Marie S. Traberg and PhD student Rasmus Hvid
for adding a diﬀerent angle to the project in an exciting application of the heart segmen-
tations, and showing a big interest in the results I have obtained.
I would also like to thank the Department of Cardiology at Rigshospitalet, for giving me
access to their large database of cardiac CT images, and to PhD-student Jakob M. Slipsager
for his previous work on anonymisation of the images.
Furthermore, I would like to thank my husband Simon for always showing interest in my
work, and allowing me to talk about my project whenever I needed to. You have been a
huge help this half a year, and for the whole duration of my studies, and I am so grateful,
that you are always supporting me. Lastly, a big thank you to my friends from Biomedical
Engineering at DTU, who have made the last ﬁve years the greatest time of my life.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Clinical background
7
2.1
The heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Cardiovascular disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Computed tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Cardiac CT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Heart segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Technical background
15
3.1
Semantic segmentation using deep learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Important aspects of convolutional neural networks . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Performance evaluation methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Data
21
4.1
MM-WHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
CGPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Methods
29
5.1
Image preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Pipeline for heart segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.1
Region CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.2
Region cropping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.3
Segmentation CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Segmentation post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.1
Removal of noise segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.2
Surface rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Results and analysis
43
6.1
Region network evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Visual results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Segmentation network evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2.1
Visual results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2.2
Surface rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Generalisation and prediction on CGPS data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
7
Discussion
63
7.1
Data challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
Evaluating method decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.3
Evaluation of semantic segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.4
Comparison to state of the art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.5
Clinical and research use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8
Conclusion
69
9
Future Work
71
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels. CVD
is the leading cause of death worldwide and accounted for 31 % of all deaths in 2015 [38].
Early detection and management of CVD are crucial to decrease cardiovascular risk and
mortality. Medical imaging is a vital tool for the diagnosis and treatment of CVD’s because
it delivers morphological and pathological information about the heart.
Computed Tomography (CT) is a widely used image modality for cardiac examinations,
used to gain information about the cardiac anatomy of the patient, preceding clinical
procedures and to evaluate physiological indices. When analysing the anatomic structures
in a CT scan, an important step is the extraction of features. This includes segmentation
to create delineation of the anatomic structures in the heart. Segmentation is the process of
assigning a label to each voxel in the image, based on the underlying anatomical structures.
Segmentation and registration of the whole heart in a 3D cardiac CT scan can be used
to evaluate important functional indices, such as ejection fraction and myocardial mass,
but also to examine congenital cardiac malformations. Accurate extraction of features and
precise anatomical information is therefore crucial. For evaluation of the heart, all larger
substructures, i.e. left and right ventricle, left and right atrium, myocardium, pulmonary
artery, and aorta are relevant.
With current methods, the segmentation and registration are performed manually by med-
ical professionals. This is a time consuming and tedious task, due to the complex geometry
of the heart and the large amount of data in a 3D scan. Other challenges include varia-
tion in anatomy from patient to patient, variation in the orientation of the heart during
scanning, low contrast between substructures and boundary uncertainties [42]. Due to the
high complexity of the task, both intra- and inter-observer variations will occur, which is
not desirable. To save valuable time and limit the segmentation variability, an automated
pipeline for the segmentation of the heart structures would be very valuable.
This project aims to develop an automated pipeline for whole heart segmentation, where
each substructure is separately segmented.
This task is a multi-class 3D segmentation
problem, which can be solved in many ways. Methods for this project will be within the
ﬁeld of deep learning and particularly convolutional neural networks.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
1.1
State of the art
Previous attempts of whole heart segmentation have focussed mainly on two groups of
methods: deformable models using statistical shape models (SSM) and atlas registration.
Limitations of these methods include computational time for the non-rigid registration in
atlas propagation, which is computationally expensive, and the extensive need for data
regarding SSM since examples of all variations of heart geometry is needed to create an
atlas. Deformation of the model is constrained to be within the shape of the SSM, because
of the strong prior in the model. With large variation in heart geometry, especially when
pathological cases are involved, the need for data becomes critical [42].
Since machine learning and particularly deep learning has gained ground in medical image
analysis and computer vision in general, many state of the art segmentation works are
based on deep learning and have been outperforming previous methods. Due to the many
challenges related to whole heart segmentation, previous deep learning approaches for
automatic heart segmentation have often focussed on one or two substructures, such as
myocardial mass or the left ventricle. For example, Avendi et. al [2] performs segmentation
of the left ventricle in cardiac MRI images using a combined deep learning and deformable
shape model approach.
Deep learning also dominates cardiac segmentation challenges.
In the MICCAI 2017 challenge "Multi-Modality Whole Heart Segmentation" (MM-WHS)
[18], six out of the nine best performing cardiac segmentation methods were based on
deep learning. An overview of the six deep learning approaches can be seen in Table 1.1.
All six contributions use the same basic network architecture; the U-net, using either 2D
operations, as the original implementation by Ronneberger et al. [29], or 3D operations,
as proposed by Cicek et al. [7].
The best performing network regarding CT segmentation was achieved by Payer et al. [26].
Their pipeline consisted of two fully convolutional 3D neural networks; one for localizing
the heart in the 3D images, and one for segmentation of substructures. The ﬁrst network
was used to crop the 3D images, resulting in a smaller volume with limited background sur-
rounding the heart. The second network, used for multi-label classiﬁcation, was a combina-
tion of the SpatialConﬁguration-Net [25] and the 3D U-net. The SpatialConﬁguration-Net
transforms the probabilities from the U-net output to the positions of other labels, allowing
the network to learn feasible anatomical structures. Other challenge participants have also
used the 3D U-net structure with diﬀerent modiﬁcations. Two of those [39, 40], attempted
to improve training using a loss function based on the Dice coeﬃcient instead of cross
entropy loss. Yang et al. [40] ranked second in the challenge, solving the issue regarding
class imbalance between the structures of the heart, without sacriﬁcing segmentation de-
tail. The proposed loss function combined a multi-class Dice similarity coeﬃcient and a
volume size weighted cross entropy loss function.
When performing 3D segmentation using a 3D convolutional network, multiple slices are
treated as a volume and the spatial context in the 3D image volumes is captured, and
==PAGE:13==
1.1 State of the art
3
Article
Dataset
Architecture
Pipeline
Loss function
Payer et al. [26]
CT
3D U-net
ROI CNN and
segmentation CNN
Multinomial logistic
Yang et al. [39]
CT
3D U-net
Single CNN
Multi-class Dice
Yang et al. [40]
CT
3D U-net
Single CNN
Hybrid of Multi-class Dice
and cross entropy
Tong et al. [35]
Fused CT
and MRI
3D U-net
ROI CNN and
segmentation CNN
Categorical cross entropy
Mortazi et al. [21]
CT
2D U-net
MP CNN
Simpliﬁed z-loss
Wang et al. [37]
CT
2D U-net
MP ROI CNN, SSM
and MP segmentation CNN
Categorical cross entropy
Table 1.1: Overview of the six best performing MICCAI contributions based on deep
learning.
ROI: Region of Interest.
CNN: Convolutional Neural Network.
MP: Multi-
planar. SSM: Statistical Shape Model
the spatial consistency between slices is preserved. The limitations of 3D methods include
the need for 3D volume data, which drastically reduces the number of training examples.
Furthermore, 3D operations require far more GPU memory and the solution is often to
downsample the data, which causes loss of information. 2D networks are lightweight when
it comes to GPU memory, and requires less training data since each volume contains many
training examples. A comparison of 2D and 3D approaches for heart segmentation in a 3D
MRI scan was conducted by Baumgartner et al. [3]. They compared 2D U-net segmentation
of each slice with a 3D U-net, and found that the 2D networks performed better than the
3D networks, due to the reduced amount of training data for 3D networks, the need for
downsampling due to GPU memory restrictions and the low through-plane resolution of
MRI images, making the 3D networks inferior. When analysing 3D image volumes using
2D networks, diﬀerent approaches can be used to further improve the results.
A multi-planar approach with three perpendicular 2D U-nets was proposed by Mortazi et
al. [21] and Wang et al. [37]. In [21], the networks performed segmentations in three
perpendicular planes and the following fusion of the three probability maps combined with
a connected component analysis resulted in 3D labels of each substructure. In [37], the
pipeline consisted of a scout segmentation performed by three perpendicular 2D U-nets,
followed by a shape model estimation, which was ﬁtted to the scout segmentations and
fed into three perpendicular U-nets, performing the ﬁnal segmentation. This approach
combines deep learning with shape context information, but the improvement from the
shape model was primarily seen on the MRI scans, and not on CT.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Besides the MM-WHS challenge, several other groups have worked on the task of heart
segmentation using deep learning, primarily on MRI data. Zheng et al. [41] proposed
an approach for segmentation of left and right ventricular cavity and left ventricular my-
ocardium in MRI data. Their method was based on a 2D U-net-like network, which was
propagated down through the slices of the MRI scan, from base to apex. They added a
recurrent element, using the generated segmentation of the adjacent slice as an extra input
for the current slice. This way, contextual information was propagated through the data,
assisting to include 3D information in a 2D segmentation.
These two approaches of combining the segmentation from 2D networks into a 3D volume
have obtained good results regarding spatial context while limiting the use of GPU memory
and exploiting the large amount of 2D training data in a 3D image volume.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Aim of thesis
5
1.2
Aim of thesis
The aim of this project is to develop an automated pipeline for whole heart segmentation,
where each substructure is segmented separately. The approach is based on cardiac CT
volume data from the MICCAI 2017 MM-WHS challenge [18].
The network structure
proposed in this project is a combination of the approaches of [41] and [21], using a multi-
planar structure with a recurrent element in the network architecture. A modiﬁcation of
the 2D U-net adds the segmentation of the previous slice as input for the current slice to
ensure spatial propagation through the image volume, and the segmentation is performed in
each direction (axial, sagittal, coronal) to create the multi-planar structure. The resulting
segmentations in each direction are fused to obtain a combined label map, followed by post-
processing using connected component analysis. The approach keeps the computational
assets of 2D methods while addressing 3D issues regarding spatial context.
Figure 1.1: Schematic representation of pipeline.
The ﬁrst region network generates a
bounding box around the heart based on a binary segmentation. The second network uses
to cropped data to create ﬁne-grain multi-class segmentation of seven heart structures
The structure of the pipeline is shown in Figure 1.1, where a two-step approach is proposed.
The ﬁrst part focuses on localizing the heart in the image volume, using a downsampled
binary label as ground truth and a similarly downsampled version of the dataset as input.
The reduction in dimensions is performed to limit the use of GPU memory on this rather
simple binary segmentation task. The output from this part of the pipeline is a bounding
box surrounding the whole heart. The bounding box is used to crop the original image
volume to only include the heart structures and limit the amount of background. The
cropped, high-resolution image volume is used as input in the second part of the pipeline,
where a ﬁne-grained multi-class segmentation network is used to obtain voxel labels of the
seven heart substructures.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Clinical background
2.1
The heart
The heart is a pump, which regulates the transportation of blood around the body. It has
the size of a closed ﬁst and is located between the lungs in the mediastinal space of the
intrathoracic cavity. The shape of the heart is like a blunt cone, where the blunt, rounded
point is called the apex, and the larger ﬂat part on the opposite side is called the base.
Figure 2.1: Systemic and pulmonary circulation.
Red colored areas mark oxygenated
blood, while blue colored areas mark deoxygenated blood. Arrows indicate the direction
of the blood ﬂow [22]
The heart has two parts; the right side of the heart, which receives blood from the high-
pressure systemic circulation and pumps blood into the low-pressure pulmonary circulation,
and the left side, which receives blood from pulmonary circulation and pumps the blood
==PAGE:18==
8
Clinical background
into the systemic circulation, as seen in Figure 2.1. The blood gets oxygenated in the lungs
through the pulmonary circulation, which then delivers oxygen and nutrients to limbs, head
and internal organs through the systemic circulation. The heart has four major functions;
generating blood pressure, routing blood around the two circulation systems, ensuring one-
way blood ﬂow using valves and regulating blood supply by changing rate and force of heart
contractions [36].
Figure 2.2: Anatomical structures of the heart. Red colored areas mark oxygenated blood,
while blue colored areas mark deoxygenated blood. Arrows indicate the direction of the
blood ﬂow [36]
There are several important structures in the heart, shown in Figure 2.2. The heart is
divided into four chambers; two atria and two ventricles. The atria, number 1 and 6 on
the ﬁgure, receives the blood from either the body or the lungs, depending on the side
of the heart. The atria are thin-walled, and valves ensure that blood only ﬂows one way
through the atria. The ventricles, number 2 and 7, receives the blood from the atria - left
atria carries blood to the left ventricle and similarly in the right side of the heart. The
ventricles have thicker and more muscular walls, which enables them to pump blood out
of the heart.
The heart wall is composed of three layers: the epicardium, myocardium, and endocardium.
The epicardium and endocardium function as an outer and inner layer, respectively, of the
heart wall. The epicardium is a thin serous membrane, while the endocardium is a simple
layer of epithelial cells and a layer of connective tissue. In between, is the muscle of the
heart, the myocardium.
This layer consists of cardiac muscle cells with the ability to
contract. The myocardium is clearly seen in the ﬁgure surrounding the ventricles from the
apex to the top of the ventricles.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The heart
9
The two vessels relevant for this heart study is the aorta, number 8 on the ﬁgure, and the
pulmonary trunk, number 4. Aorta carries blood from the left ventricle into the systemic
circulation, while the pulmonary trunk carries blood from the right ventricle into the
pulmonary circulation.
The heart pumps blood through the circulation with an average pump-rate of 70 beats per
minute. A heartbeat represents the contraction of the heart, which is a two-part pumping
action.
The heartbeat has a small beat, when the atria contracts, and then a louder
beat when the ventricles contract. The contraction of the heart is called systole, while
relaxation of the myocardium of the chambers is called diastole. First, the right atrium
is ﬁlled with blood from the systemic circulation, where it ﬂows from a system of high
pressure into the low-pressure right atrium. At the same time, the left atrium ﬁlls with
blood from the pulmonary circulation. Most of the blood from the atria passes into the
ventricles, as the ventricles relax after the previous contraction. When the atria contracts,
called atrial systole, ventricular ﬁlling is complete.
Contraction of the right ventricle,
called ventricular systole, pushes blood against the tricuspid valve, forcing it to close, and
against the pulmonary semilunar valve, forcing it to open. This way, blood ﬂows into the
pulmonary trunk. Likewise, contraction of the left ventricle forces the bicuspid valve to
close and the aortic semilunar valve to open, allowing blood to enter the aorta and the
systemic circulation. The systolic contractions are followed by both atrial and ventricular
diastole, which is characterized as isovolumetric relaxation of atria and ventricle, allowing
passive ﬁlling of the chambers. This two-part pumping action takes under a second and is
repeated over and over again, with increasing rate during exertion and a decreasing rate
at rest.
2.1.1
Cardiovascular disease
Cardiovascular diseases involve the heart or blood vessels and are a group of many diﬀerent
diseases. The underlying mechanisms vary, but many risk factors are lifestyle-related, such
as tobacco, physical inactivity, alcohol, and high fat and salt intake. Prevalence of CVD
has increased in the developing world, and it is the leading cause of death worldwide. Car-
diovascular diseases involve both blood vessels and the heart. Most common heart diseases
include cardiomyopathy (disease of cardiac muscle), heart failure (inability to supply suﬃ-
cient blood to tissues), arrhythmias (abnormal heart rhythm), inﬂammatory heart disease,
valvular heart disease and congenital heart disease (heart structure malformations).
==PAGE:20==
10
Clinical background
2.2
Computed tomography
Computed Tomography (CT) is a computerized X-ray imaging modality, creating 3D X-ray
images of the patient. A CT scanner produces 2D cross-sectional images of the patient
showing organs, bones and other tissues, which can be used to construct a 3D image volume.
The scanner consists of an X-ray tube rotating around the patient, and a detection system,
which can be static or rotating, depending on the model. The scanning system forms a
doughnut around a bed, where the patient is positioned, as seen in Figure 2.3. The system
rotates around the patient, while the bed passes through the scanner, allowing a large area
of the patient to be scanned.
Figure 2.3: CT scanning system [5]
The detector system measures the amount of ionizing radiation passing through the pa-
tient, and this information, combined from many angles around the patient, can be used to
reconstruct a 2D cross-sectional X-ray image. The contrast in a CT image reﬂects the at-
tenuation of X-rays by the patient. Diﬀerent tissues attenuate diﬀerently - bone attenuates
a lot, while air lets almost all X-rays pass. This property is called the linear attenuation
coeﬃcient of a tissue or material.
The coeﬃcient is represented by the corresponding
Hounsﬁeld value (HV) in a CT image:
HV = 1000 · µm −µw
µw
(2.1)
where µm is the average linear attenuation coeﬃcient in the voxel, and µw is the linear
attenuation coeﬃcient of water at the same spectrum of photon energies [14].
The Hounsﬁeld values of selected tissues are seen in Figure 2.4. Many soft tissues have
similar Hounsﬁeld values around 10-80, represented by variations of grey in the CT image.
This makes it diﬃcult to distinguish between the structures based on intensity only - then
anatomic relations in the image is used to determine organ or tissue type. The contrast in
soft tissues can be enhanced using a viewing window or during the scan acquisition using
a contrast dye.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Computed tomography
11
Figure 2.4: Hounsﬁeld values scale [14]
2.2.1
Cardiac CT
CT is used for various clinical examinations of the whole body, and many additional systems
to the basic CT has been developed to improve the acquisition of images of challenging
organs. Motion artefacts are one of the biggest problems in CT and it is particularly a
problem when scanning e.g. the lungs or the heart. When scanning the lungs, the patient
is asked to hold their breath and lie still, but the patient can not control the beating of
their heart. In that case, a cardiac CT, or Coronary Computed Tomography Angiography
(CCTA), can be performed, which is assisted by electrocardiography (ECG). ECG is the
recording of electrical activity of the heart, and it is measured using electrodes placed on
the chest. The ECG shows when the atria and ventricles contract or relax. This additional
information is used to time the scan, to limit motion artefacts in the images. A cardiac
CT is usually recorded during diastole, when ventricles are passively ﬁlling since it is the
most static part of the cardiac cycle.
When performing a cardiac CT, the patient receives an iodine-containing contrast agent
through an intravenous injection. This contrast agent runs through the vessels, and into the
heart to create contrast in the heart structures, as the contrast dye has a higher attenuation
than normal soft tissue. During a cardiac CT, scout scans are performed continuously to
monitor the progress of the contrast agent. A region of interest monitoring the Hounsﬁeld
value is placed at the aortic arch, which triggers the acquisition of the cardiac CT when
an increase in Hounsﬁeld value occurs in the region. This way, the system assures that
contrast is present in the left ventricle and the coronary arteries, when the CT scan is
acquired, creating a clearer image of these structures.
==PAGE:22==
12
Clinical background
A CCTA is usually used to examine the coronary arteries in the case of risk for coronary
artery disease, reduced heart function, coronary artery bypass grafts or other conditions.
The cardiac scans are primarily used to asses the presence and extent of plaques in the
coronary arteries. But, since the scans are performed on the full heart structure, the scans
can also be used to assess the heart anatomy.
When analysing CT scans, the 3D image volume can be visualized in three imaging planes,
deﬁned relative to a standing person. The axial, or cross-sectional plane, divides the body
into head and tail portions, the sagittal plane is perpendicular to the ground and can move
from left to right of the body, and the coronal plane is also perpendicular to the ground,
dividing the body in front and back. Since the heart does not lie perfectly in line with
the planes and is rotated relative to the body, the planes of the heart are challenging to
describe. The planes are seen in Figure 2.5, but due to patient-to-patient variation, the
planes will be oriented a bit diﬀerently in each scan. A cardiac CT can also be reconstructed
into other imaging planes, to achieve a better view of diﬀerent heart structures.
Figure 2.5: Directions in a cardiac CT scan. Blue slice shows the axial plane, red shows
the sagittal plane and green shows the coronal plane
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Heart segmentation
13
2.3
Heart segmentation
The task of analysing a heart scan can be immense, due to the complex geometry of a heart,
the limitations in a 2D view of a 3D image and the challenges of e.g. unclear boundaries
in the heart and variation in anatomy and orientation from scan to scan. Therefore, a
map of the substructures is very valuable, when assessing a scan. This map, also called
a segmentation, marks each substructure with a diﬀerent value or color, when assessed
visually, making it clear, which part of the heart is present at each location of the scan. The
segmentation is normally acquired manually by a medical professional. This is a tedious and
time-consuming task, and it is subject to both intra- and inter-observer variations, which
is undesirable. Automatic heart segmentation is highly valuable to save time on analysis,
and avoid any human input, leading to a streamlined process without large variations from
scan to scan. However, due to the many challenges of the task, developing an automatic
segmentation system is an huge and challenging task, and has not been achieved yet .
The use of heart segmentation is widespread in both the clinic and in research. Clinical
applications of heart segmentation could be the computation of ejection fraction, cardiac
output, peak ejection rate or ﬁlling rate, all used to assess the performance of the heart [42].
A 3D segmentation can also be used to 3D print a patient-speciﬁc heart model for advanced
procedure planning [8], or be used to assess congenital malformations or the anatomic
change after an operation. In research, surface models of the heart chambers are used
for computational ﬂuid dynamics modelling for biophysical simulation. An accurate and
realistic 3D surface mesh of the cardiac geometry is crucial when used for simulation. These
can be generated using CAD tools for general models or from medical images for patient-
speciﬁc models [17]. The simulations can be used to investigate blood ﬂow patterns in
the heart chambers, in order to monitor the progression of cardiovascular diseases, predict
physiological responses to intervention and measure haemodynamic parameters [20]. It is
therefore valuable to be able to create patient-speciﬁc models, to personalize treatment
and interventions.
==PAGE:24==
14
Clinical background
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Technical background
3.1
Semantic segmentation using deep learning
Semantic segmentation is the process of assigning a label class to each pixel in an input
image in order to obtain a pixel-wise classiﬁcation. Image segmentation is typically used to
simplify the representation of objects or boundaries in the image. The image is separated
into a number of classes, where each class has similar characteristics. These characteristics
can be based on color, intensity, texture or other features. Deep neural networks can be
used to solve segmentation tasks, by learning to decompose an image into feature maps,
identifying trends across training examples and performing predictions on new examples
based on their similarities with the training examples, without requiring human input.
Most commonly used deep neural networks for segmentation is the fully convolutional
neural network (CNN). A CNN consists of an input and an output layer, with multiple
hidden layers in between.
These hidden layers can be convolutional layers, applying a
convolution operation on the receptive ﬁeld in the input, or pooling layers, clustering the
receptive ﬁeld in the input into a single neuron in the next layer with either a maximum or
mean operation or other operations. A network is a cascade of multiple layers, where each
successive layer uses the output from the previous layer as input. The output of a layer
is structured in feature maps, representing the output activation of a given operational
kernel.
The beneﬁts of neural networks include the ability to model non-linear relationships, which
also leads to deep learning outperforming other methods in multiple domains. There is no
need for human input when compared to other machine learning techniques, where manual
feature engineering is a fundamental and time-consuming part of the process. This is a
huge beneﬁt of deep learning since the network can ﬁnd the features itself. Furthermore,
deep learning is applicable in many ﬁelds, and a neural network can easily be adapted to a
diﬀerent task. Some disadvantages of using deep neural networks include the computation
time, which is much higher than many other machine learning techniques due to a large
amount of trainable parameters. Furthermore, deep neural networks are prone to overﬁtting
to the training data, due to the fact that the network can learn rare dependencies in
the training data. Many regularization methods exist, including weight decay, drop out
layers and data augmentation, all aimed to prevent overﬁtting.
Deep neural networks
==PAGE:26==
16
Technical background
rely on large amounts of data, and the process of decision making performed by a neural
network is extremely hard to comprehend, as opposed to e.g. decision trees, k-nearest
neighbours and other machine learning methods.
This also means, that selecting and
tuning hyperparameters and deciding on a structure for a network can be very diﬃcult,
due to the lack of insight on the process of a neural network. Despite these disadvantages
of deep learning, there is a massive interest in this ﬁeld, due to the high performance of
the neural networks.
3.1.1
Important aspects of convolutional neural networks
In the process of designing a neural network, many choices have to be made regarding the
order of operations, the structure of network, hyperparameters etc. This is a long process
of training a network, analysing the results and adjusting the network, over and over. Since
not much theory is available regarding the design of neural networks, this process relies on
experiments and individual assessment. The networks described in Section 5.3 are the ﬁnal
structure and the choices made for each of the networks will be justiﬁed in that section,
whereas the theoretical background for these choices is presented here. Deep learning is a
big ﬁeld of science, thus only aspects or methods applied in the project are presented here.
Building blocks of convolutional neural networks As mentioned, the building blocks
of a neural network are the convolutional operations. The operations used in the neural
networks for this project are convolution, max pooling, and transposed convolution. A
convolution is performed using a kernel, which is multiplied with the image, while the
kernel is passing over the whole image, creating an output feature map.
This can be
performed with diﬀerent kernel sizes, strides, meaning how many pixels the kernel moves
for each convolution, and with or without padding of the image edge to avoid pixel loss
after the convolution. Max pooling decreases the size of the feature map by applying a max
ﬁlter to the receptive ﬁeld of the operation. This is a form of downsampling, reducing the
number of parameters while maintaining the important features. This provides a form of
translation invariance to the network. A transposed convolution is the opposite of a normal
convolution, often used as a way of upsampling the features in a network. Transposed
convolution uses a kernel, like in the normal convolution, but the kernel is applied to a
single pixel, increasing the size of the receptive ﬁeld.
Another important feature in convolutional neural networks is skip connections, which are
widely used in segmentation tasks e.g. in [29]. Skip connections pass information from a
shallow, ﬁne layer to deep, coarse layer in the network by copying the feature maps across
the network structure.
Segmentation CNN’s are usually structured in two parts: an encoder and a decoder. The
encoder takes the input image and generates low-dimensional feature maps by aggregating
features at multiple levels using convolution and downsampling, typically max or mean
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Semantic segmentation using deep learning
17
pooling, resulting in a rich feature representation of the input.
The decoder takes the
low-dimensional feature maps and generates a semantic segmentation mask in the original
input format using deconvolution and upsampling. This is the basic structure of most
segmentation networks.
The diﬀerence between the networks is how the encoder and
decoder parts are structured, and which operations and building blocks are used.
Regularization One of the biggest drawbacks of deep neural networks is the huge amount
of parameters to be trained. This leads to a long training time and the need for a lot of
GPU power.
Furthermore, this causes the neural networks to be prone to overﬁtting.
Overﬁtting means that the model performs an analysis too close to the distribution of the
training examples, and may fail to predict on new examples. The network simply does not
learn a generalized model, but a model speciﬁed to the features of the training examples.
As previously mentioned, several regularization techniques are found to prevent overﬁtting.
Drop out layers are a common feature included in network architectures to avoid overﬁtting
[23, 31]. In a drop out layer, nodes are randomly dropped from the neural network, along
with its connections. Dropping a node means temporarily leaving out the node from the
network. For each epoch, diﬀerent nodes are dropped, preventing nodes from co-adapting
too much, and allowing the network to learn robust features. The ﬁnal network is, therefore,
an average of all "thinned" networks trained in each epoch dropping out diﬀerent nodes.
When performing predictions after training (testing), the drop out is not applied, and
all nodes are used in this phase. Normal drop out performs very well in fully connected
networks, but it is found that it only increases the training time, but not the performance,
when used in convolutional neural networks [34]. This is due to the fact, that the pixels
in the convolution kernel are highly correlated, and dropping one weight in the kernel
only disturbs the training, and not improves it. Therefore, spatial drop out can be used
[34], where whole feature maps are dropped out in each epoch, instead of single pixels.
This allows each kernel to learn robust features independent of other kernels, but does not
disturb the process by removing single pixels in each kernel.
Another commonly used regularization method is data augmentation, where the data set is
artiﬁcially enlarged by performing label-preserving transformations. Common transforma-
tions used for data augmentation include rotation, scaling, translation, intensity variations,
ﬂipping, elastic deformations, and B-spline transformations. These alterations and varia-
tions in the training set assist to train a robust network, establishing invariance to the vari-
ations. Augmentation can be applied on the ﬂy or oﬀ-line, meaning that transformations
are performed during training in each epoch or prior to training, saving all transformed
images as training examples. The beneﬁts of on the ﬂy augmentation are the limited use of
memory since the transformed images do not need to be saved. However, if many epochs
are used for training, the same transformations are to be performed many times, increas-
ing the training time. Thus, it depends on the application of data augmentation, which
method is used.
==PAGE:28==
18
Technical background
Activation functions In each artiﬁcial neuron, an activation function calculates the
weighted sum of the output, adds bias and based on a threshold, decides whether or not
it should be activated. In the networks used for this project, only the ReLu and softmax
activation functions are used. The ReLu (Rectiﬁed Linear Unit) gives an output if x is
positive, otherwise, it outputs 0, which can be written as
A(x) = max(0, x)
(3.1)
, where x is the input to the neuron.
The softmax activation function is commonly used in the output of a classiﬁer, because
it represents the probability distribution over k diﬀerent classes [13]. The softmax will
therefore sum to 1 over the output layer. The activation function is given as
A(xi) =
exi
Pk
j=0 exi
(3.2)
, for i = 0, .., k, where k indicates the number of classes.
Weight initialization An important aspect of training a neural network is the initializa-
tion of the weights. If the weights are too small, the input signal will disappear as it is
propagated through the network, while a too large input signal due to large weights is also
useless, due to saturated activations. Saturated activations are very diﬃcult to unlearn,
as the gradient becomes small and learning slows. It is therefore important to ensure that
the weights are in a reasonable range before training the network. There are many ways of
initializing weights, and best practice is to initialize the weights randomly. Xavier initial-
ization [12] is a method of randomly initializing weights while ensuring the variance, and
therefore gradients, remain the same in all layers through the network.
Learning process The weights in the network are changed through the training process,
in order to minimize the loss function. The loss function is computed for each iteration,
and it is a representation of how wrong the output of the network is. Many diﬀerent loss
functions can be employed for a network, and for this project, cross entropy loss was chosen.
The binary cross entropy loss function, used for binary segmentations tasks, is given as
[23]
C = −1
n
n
X
x
(y1lnp1 + y2lnp2)
(3.3)
, where n is the number of pixels, yi is the true segmentation and pi is the obtained
probability for the labels. Due to the constraints P
j pj = 1 and P
j yj = 1, the expression
can be written as
C = −1
n
n
X
x
(y1lnp1 + (1 −y1)ln(1 −p1))
(3.4)
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Performance evaluation methods
19
This loss function has some important properties - it is always non-negative, and when the
output is close to the desired output, the cross entropy will be close to zero, while avoiding
the problem of learning slow down [23].
The multi-class version of the loss function is the categorical cross entropy loss function,
given as [23]
C = −1
n
M
X
c
n
X
x
yx,clnpx,c
(3.5)
, where M is the number of classes, n is the number of pixels, yx,c is the desired output
in a particular pixel for each class and px,c is the output probability for each class in
the same pixel. This loss function has the same properties and advantages as the binary
cross entropy. In the categorical cross entropy loss function, the loss is only based on the
probability for the true class, which means that the distribution of the probability across
the false classes is insigniﬁcant.
These loss functions are minimized using an optimizer. A simple, and the most popular,
optimizer is the gradient descent optimizer, which calculates the gradient of the loss func-
tion and takes a step in the descending direction, eventually reaching a global minimum.
Another commonly used optimizer, the Adam optimizer [15], which performs adaptive mo-
ment estimation. The Adam optimizer employs a similar stochastic optimization as the
gradient descent optimizer, but it utilises the past gradients to calculate current gradients.
For this project, the Adam optimizer is used, as it is computationally eﬃcient, requires
little memory, is well suited for large problems with many parameters and has shown to
be more eﬀective than the gradient descent optimizer. When employing an optimizer in
a network, several hyperparameters are to be tuned. The learning rate deﬁnes the step
size of each gradient change and is important to tune to avoid ending in a local minimum
and to reach the most optimal solution, the fastest way possible. For the Adam optimizer,
momentum is a parameter deﬁning the number of previous gradients to be included in the
computation of the current gradient.
3.2
Performance evaluation methods
When performing semantic segmentation, evaluation of the obtained segmentation is essen-
tial. For training and testing, ground truth segmentations are available, which means that
the diﬀerences between the ground truth and the output segmentation from the network
can be evaluated. For binary segmentation tasks, true positives (TP, correctly identiﬁed
object pixels), true negatives (TN, correctly identiﬁed background pixels), false positives
(FP, background pixels incorrectly identiﬁed as object) and false negatives (FN, object
pixels incorrectly identiﬁed as background) can be measured. From these counts, a variety
of performance metrics can be determined [33]:
==PAGE:30==
20
Technical background
Sensitivity also called true positive rate (TPR) or recall. Represents the ability to cor-
rectly detect object pixels, and it is given by
TPR =
TP
FN + TP
(3.6)
Speciﬁcity also called true negative rate (TNR). Represents the ability to correctly detect
background pixels, and it is given by
TNR =
TN
FP + TN
(3.7)
Accuracy is a statistical measure of the ability to correctly assign the correct class on pixel
level. It is given as the proportion of correctly assigned pixels among the total number of
pixels, written as
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(3.8)
Dice coeﬃcient is the most commonly used metric in validating medical image segmen-
tations [33]. The metric is an overlap measure between the ground truth segmentation Sg
and the output segmentation from the network St, and is given by
Dice = 2|Sg
T St|
|Sg| + |St| =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(3.9)
, where |Sg| and |St| are the number of elements in each array. Since Dice is used widely
in the literature regarding heart segmentation, this is chosen as a reference measure for
segmentation results.
Intersection over Union (IoU), also known as Jaccard index, is used for measuring the
performance of object detection. The metric is very similar to the Dice coeﬃcient, and can
also be used for segmentation evaluation, but it is not as widespread as the Dice coeﬃcient
in medical image analysis. It is, however, often used to evaluate bounding box detection,
using the following deﬁnition
Jacc = Area of overlap
Area of union
(3.10)
Accuracy, Dice coeﬃcient, and IoU lie in the interval [0; 1], where 1 is the highest score,
indicating a perfect output segmentation. The presented metrics are all based on binary
segmentation tasks. Weighted versions of the Dice coeﬃcients exist, where the metrics
for each class are weighted to obtain one coeﬃcient for a multi-class segmentation. The
problem with this approach is, that it does not take into account the size of each class, and
it does not show which classes are segmented well or badly. Therefore, it was decided to
compute these metrics per class using the deﬁnitions above, and present results per class
for multi-class results, instead of averaging over all classes.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Data
For this project, two datasets of cardiac CT scans are available: the MM-WHS and CGPS
data sets. The MM-WHS dataset is used to train the models, whereas CGPS is used as
a real-life application of the created models in order to evaluate the ability to create a
generalised model.
4.1
MM-WHS
The dataset from the MICCAI 2017 challenge "Multi-Modality Whole Heart Segmentation"
[18] consists of 60 cardiac CT and 60 cardiac MRI images, which cover the whole heart.
For this project, only the CT images will be used. The CT images were collected in a
clinical environment at Shanghai Shuguang Hospital, China with a routine cardiac CT
angiography. The angiography creates a clear contrast in the images in the left ventricle,
which makes it possible to distinguish between blood cavity and myocardium in the left
ventricle. The contrast also highlights aorta in the images. The images cover the whole
heart region from the upper abdominal to the aortic arch, with an in-plane resolution of
0.78 x 0.78 mm and a slice thickness of 1.60 mm.
Figure 4.1: Rendered surface model of manual annotations
The data is split into a training and a test set, with 20 and 40 3D scans in each set,
respectively. The training data is annotated with manual segmentation of seven of the
most important substructures of the heart:
==PAGE:32==
22
Data
1. left ventricle blood cavity (LV - yellow)
2. right ventricle blood cavity (RV - blue)
3. left atrium blood cavity (LA - light green)
4. right atrium blood cavity (RA - brown)
5. myocardium of the left ventricle (MYO - purple)
6. ascending aorta, deﬁned as the aortic trunk from aortic valve to the superior level of
the atria (AO - dark green)
7. pulmonary artery, deﬁned between the pulmonary valve and the bifurcation point
(PA - orange)
Figure 4.1 shows a surface rendering of annotations, giving a spatial overview of the struc-
tures to be segmented. The left ventricle blood cavity (yellow) is not visible in the surface
rendering, as it is encapsulated by the myocardium (purple). These substructures can also
be seen in Figure 4.3, where a three-plane view of an example CT scan is shown with
annotations as an overlay.
Figure 4.2: Axial view of low resolution (left) and high resolution CT scan (right)
There is a large variation in the 20 training images, arising from the use of diﬀerent CT
scanners. As described by the organisers of the MM-WHS challenge, the data set includes
images of relatively poor quality. Two examples of CT images in the data set from dif-
ferent scanners can be seen in Figure 4.2. While Figure 4.2(left) only shows the heart,
Figure 4.2(right) has a larger ﬁeld of view, which also shows the surrounding tissues. The
Hounsﬁeld values within one structure of the heart vary in Figure 4.2(left) due to noise in
==PAGE:33==
4.1 MM-WHS
23
the image, while the Hounsﬁeld values in Figure 4.2(right) are more homogeneous. Fur-
thermore, the quality in Figure 4.2(left) is grainy compared to Figure 4.2(right). When
training a neural network, the network is only able to learn to analyse the variation pre-
sented in the training data. It is therefore vital to include this variation, to ensure a robust
algorithm suitable for clinical usage.
Structure
Mean ± std [HV]
Min [HV]
Max [HV]
Background
-894 ± 300
-1291
-440
LV
344 ± 77
238
344
RV
154 ± 48
115
248
LA
412 ± 71
245
548
RA
151 ± 37
119
222
MYO
116 ± 18
81
135
AO
461 ± 112
254
550
PA
231 ± 91
144
407
Table 4.1: Hounsﬁeld values of diﬀerent heart structures. For each image volume, the mean
value within the heart structure is found, and the mean, min, max and std across all 20
annotated images is found for each structure
Table 4.1 shows the average Hounsﬁeld values in each region of the heart from the 20
training images, and it clearly shows the diﬀerence from scan to scan. For example, the
myocardium has a very low standard deviation across the 20 scans, and the Hounsﬁeld
values within this region are therefore very similar, whereas there is a very large variation
within the aorta and pulmonary arteries. In this table, the diﬀerence between the structures
can also be seen. It is clear, that aorta, left atrium and left ventricle has higher Hounsﬁeld
values than e.g. right atrium and ventricle, due to the intravenous contrast. Furthermore,
the right atrium and ventricle will look very similar in the scan since the Hounsﬁeld values
are almost identical in the two regions. The Hounsﬁeld values within the pulmonary arteries
span over a large range, which can be due to the poor annotation of the pulmonary arteries,
resulting in other structures being included in the region, or that the contrast is only present
in these vessels in some of the scans.
==PAGE:34==
24
Data
(a) Axial view
(b) Axial view with annotations
(c) Coronal view
(d) Coronal view with annotations
(e) Sagittal view
(f) Sagittal view with annotations
Figure 4.3: Example of CT images from MM-WHS dataset.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 MM-WHS
25
(a) Coronal view
(b) Coronal view with annotations
(c) Sagittal view
(d) Sagittal view with annotations
Figure 4.4: Example of CT images showing inconsistencies between anatomical structures
and annotations regarding the left atrium (marked with red arrows)
When visually inspecting the CT scans and corresponding annotations, some inconsisten-
cies were discovered. Figure 4.4 shows how the annotation and anatomical structure of the
left atrium (green) does not seem to match. The anatomical structure (left images) looks
to be much bigger than the annotation (right image). This is partly caused by the fact,
that the left atrial appendage is not annotated as a part of the atrium. But since the left
atrial appendage is not annotated separately either, it causes confusion when inspecting
the scans. It can cause problems since there is no clear boundary between the left atrium
and left atrial appendage, which will make the decision making diﬃcult for the neural net-
work. This diﬀerence between anatomical structure and annotation is evident in all three
viewing directions and throughout several scans regarding the right atrium and can cause
problems, when segmenting this heart structure.
==PAGE:36==
26
Data
4.2
CGPS
This data set is provided by the Department of Radiology, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, and is acquired as a part of the Copenhagen General Populations Study
(CGPS) performed from February 2010 and still continuing. The Copenhagen General
Population Study is a large ongoing cross-sectional population-based study in Denmark,
were health-related genotypic and phenotypic data are registered.
The study oﬀers a
research cardiac computed tomography angiography examination of the participating pa-
tients at Rigshospitalet, and 4295 participants over 40 years of age (47 % women, 53 %
men) underwent this examination within the ﬁrst three years of the study [11]. The follow-
ing exclusion characteristics were used in the study: Cardiovascular disease (self-reported
previous myocardial infarction, coronary bypass, percutaneous coronary intervention, or
stroke), hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, participants taking cardiovascular prescrip-
tion medication, overweight (BMI ≥25), diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities.
The CCTA examinations were performed on a CT scanner (Aquilion One, Toshiba Medical
Systems, Japan) with the operational settings shown in Table 4.2. The intravenous contrast
agent Visipaque was infused with a ﬂow rate of 5 mL/s in three phases.
The image
acquisition was triggered at an aortic arc attenuation of 180 Hounsﬁeld units.
Setting
Values
Gantry rotation time
350 ms
Detector collimation
0.5 x 320
X-ray tube voltage
100 - 120 kV
X-ray tube current
280 - 500 mA
Intravenous contrast
78 mL, 320 mg/mL
Axial image size
512 x 512 pixels
Z-plane size
560 or 640 pixels
Voxel size
0.43 x 0.43 x 0.25 mm
Table 4.2: Settings for the CCTA examinations for the CGPS study [11]
Out of the total 4295 scans, 105 were randomly selected by Jakob Slipsager [30] and
anonymised by removing all person sensitive DICOM tags from the CT image DICOM
header. These 105 scans are therefore available for this study. In this data set, no manual
ground truth segmentation is available from Rigshospitalet, which means that it is not
possible to train a model on these images. But the data can be used a real-life application
of the trained models, to assess the ability of the models to predict on other CT scans, not
provided for the MM-WHS challenge. Figure 4.5 shows an example of the scans available in
==PAGE:37==
4.2 CGPS
27
this data set. The segmentation shown in the ﬁgure is created by Master student Andreas
Ellegaard, in an attempt to create a ground truth segmentation for this data set. The
segmentations are created using a 3D U-net trained on the MM-WHS data set, and post-
processing in the form of manual assessment of the segmentation. In the post-processing,
clear misclassiﬁcation errors were corrected, and it was ensured, that only one coherent
segment is present in each class. These annotations are generated for 30 of the cardiac CT
scans.
(a) Axial view
(b) Axial view with annotations
(c) Coronal view
(d) Coronal view with annotations
(e) Sagittal view
(f) Sagittal view with annotations
Figure 4.5: Example of CT images from the CGPS study. The colors represent the same
heart structures as in Figure 4.3
==PAGE:38==
28
Data
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5
Methods
5.1
Image preprocessing
The MM-WHS data for training and evaluation of the neural networks has the dimensions
512x512 in the xy-direction, while the dimension in the z-direction varies for each image
volume, ranging from 177 to 363 pixels. To feed the data into a multi-planar network
structure, the dimensions in all directions need to be equal. Therefore, preprocessing of
image and label volume is needed prior to training.
For the ﬁrst network in the pipeline, the 2D region network, the input dimensions are
128x128, and for the second network, the 2D segmentation network, the input dimensions
are 256x256.
To obtain a cubic input volume for the multi-planar setup of three 2D
networks, padding is needed. This process of padding is shown in Figure 5.1. Along the
z-axis, the image is padded to 512 pixels, to match the xy dimensions. After padding, the
cubic volume is downsampled to the input size, 128 x 128 x 128 in the case of the region
network. To ensure label-preserving resizing, nearest neighbour interpolation was used for
both image and label volume resizing. Furthermore, the input images are normalized by
clamping all Hounsﬁeld values into the interval [−1000, 1000], to remove the very low values
outside of the scan image. A cardiac CT volume has a cylindrical shape, and outside the
cylinder, in the squared image is a very low Hounsﬁeld value (around -3000) automatically
inserted by the scanner. To decrease the impact of these low values on the contrast in
the CT images, this clamping is performed by changing all values e.g. under -1000 HV to
-1000 HV. The chosen interval of Hounsﬁeld values ranges from air to bone, representing
all important structures within a cardiac CT, as shown in Section 2.2. Finally, the pixel
values are normalized to the interval [−1, 1] in order to stabilize the gradients, since batch
normalization is not used in the network setup.
The cubic image volume is the input for all three directional networks, but the 2D slices
are extracted diﬀerently. This is shown at the bottom of Figure 5.1, where the stacks of
2D slices are presented. These three image volumes show how the original image volume
is rearranged, to allow the network to extract 2D training input from top to bottom of the
image volume.
==PAGE:40==
30
Methods
Figure 5.1: Preprocessing of the image data. The z-dimension of 300 is a random example,
since this dimension varies. First step pads in the z-direction to obtain a cubic image
volume, which is then downsampled to input dimensions. 2D slices are then extracted
from the data volume in diﬀerent directions (sagittal, coronal and axial, from left to right)
Preprocessing of the input for the segmentation network is performed a bit diﬀerently. The
bounding box is found in the region networks, which is used to crop a cubic volume from
the padded data (before downsampling). The extracted volume is then resized to 256 x
256 x 256, normalized, and rearranged as shown at the bottom of Figure 5.1, to allow
extracting of slices in the three directions.
5.2
Data augmentation
In a deep neural network, millions of parameters need tuning through training, which re-
quires examples to be passed through the network. Thus, training deep learning algorithms
require a large amount of data. Data augmentation is a common approach to increase the
amount of data in the training data set, by performing minor alterations of the existing
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Data augmentation
31
images, creating new distinct images. In the ﬁeld of medical imagining, data is often lim-
ited. Regarding CT scans, the accessibility to data is restricted since it is expensive and
time-consuming to perform CT scans of patients, and the patients are exposed to ionizing
radiation for each scan. Data augmentation is therefore crucial to create a sensible net-
work. Extensive data augmentation with the use of biomedical images is seen in [29], using
translation, rotation, intensity variations, and elastic deformations to increase the number
of training images. Similarly, data augmentation was used by many MM-WHS challenge
participants [35, 39, 26, 21].
Typical operations used for augmentation are geometric transformations and more ad-
vanced operations like intensity modiﬁcation, contrast enhancement, elastic deformations,
B splines or displacement ﬁeld transformation. When working with 3D images, the oper-
ations can be applied in 2D in each slice in one direction in the image volume or in 3D
to the full image volume. To be able to perform transformations in all directions, and to
preserve anatomical structures across slices, it was chosen to perform 3D transformations
of the CT images. A widely used toolbox for data augmentation is the open source library
Simple Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit (SITK) [16, 4], which can be used in
Python. Due to the computational time of the performed transformations, it was chosen
to perform augmentation oﬀ-line, and save each transformed volume as individual training
examples.
Since the data represent anatomical structures, the transformations need to be within an
acceptable and realistic range of deformations. There is no need to learn the network to
segment CT scans with very distorted hearts since these scans would never be included in
a study at the hospitals. Thus, the performed transformations should be within the limits
of the variation in human anatomy. Rotation is performed with ±15 degrees and shearing
with minor alterations. To account for anatomical variations from heart to heart, B-spline
deformation is also performed. This form of deformation is non-linear and aﬀects locally,
creating small alterations to the image. A 3D cubic B-spline is constructed by combining
1D B-spline basis functions, which can be deformed individually, creating the local defor-
mations. A basis function is a piecewise polynomial function, and the polynomial pieces of
the function meet at points called knots. B-spline deformation is performed for augmen-
tation with two diﬀerent settings, one with a higher deformation standard deviation but
fewer knots, and another with more knots and lower standard deviation. More knots lead
to more distortion in the image, since the basis functions can create more advanced shapes.
Besides geometric transformations, which teach the network to be robust to variations in
geometry and size of the objects, it is also important to learn invariance to intensity vari-
ations, which can occur when using diﬀerent scanners or due to artefacts. The intensity
augmentation is performed by using additive and multiplicative Gaussian bias ﬁelds to the
image volume. An example of the transformed images can be seen in Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:42==
32
Methods
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.2: Transformations for data augmentation viewed in axial direction. a) Original
image b) Intensity manipulation c) Rotation d) Shear e) B-spline with 5 knots and std. 15
f) B-spline with 10 knots and std. 10
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Pipeline for heart segmentation
33
5.3
Pipeline for heart segmentation
The segmentation of the heart structures requires several steps, which can be seen in the
detailed overview of the pipeline in Figure 5.3. The ﬁgure shows how the two-step approach
is structured and how the data is split into the three directions. Three networks are used
in the ﬁrst step, called the region network, to locate the heart in the CT scan and extract
a bounding box from the data. The second step, called the segmentation network, uses
three diﬀerent networks to perform ﬁne-grain segmentation of the heart structures on the
cropped data. The three networks in each part of the pipeline are trained on the same
training data, but extracting the 2D slices in diﬀerent directions in the 3D volume, as
explained in Section 5.1.
Since only 20 annotated image volumes are available, sensible use of this data is important.
When running a two-step setup, there are some important factors to consider in the parti-
tioning into training, test and validation data. After training the region network, all data
volumes need to be run through the region network, in order to obtain a full cropped data
set as input to the next step in the pipeline. This means, that no matter how the data is
partitioned, the region network will be used to predict and train on the same data, which is
not optimal. It is also crucial to remember the importance of the amount of training data.
As much data as possible should be used as training data, to ensure the networks ability
to learn a generalized model. It is therefore chosen to use the same 15 image volumes for
training all networks, and the same ﬁve images for testing. This way, the performance of
each network can be evaluated on data, that the network has not seen before, while the
majority of the available image volumes are used as training data. Out of the 15 training
images, 2 were selected for validation. Data augmentation, as described in Section 5.2, was
applied to the training data for both the region and segmentation network, but not on the
validation data. This increases the amount of training data six times, allowing the models
to be trained on 78 image volume examples, instead of only 13.
The networks are implemented in Python [27] using the library Tensorﬂow [1], and trained
end-to-end on a Titan X 12 GB RAM GPU.
==PAGE:44==
34
Methods
Figure 5.3: Diagram of pipeline. The upper section shows how the region network creates
a bounding box around the heart. The lower section shows how the segmentation network
creates a ﬁne-grained segmentation using the cropped data. Both parts slices the image
volume into three diﬀerent dataset based on the directionality (axial, sagittal, coronal) as
input for the networks. The fusion of the three results creates the ﬁnal output
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Pipeline for heart segmentation
35
5.3.1
Region CNN
The ﬁrst step of the heart segmentation pipeline is a network, which detects a region
containing the heart.
The output of this step is a cropped version of the original CT
scan, which can be used for ﬁne-grained segmentation. The purpose of this is to limit the
computations needed for the segmentation - if the input images are cropped and therefore
containing less background, it will be faster to segment the heart structures.
Figure 5.4: Region network architecture, modiﬁed from [29]. Each grey box corresponds
to a multi-channel feature map. The number of channels is denoted on top of the box, and
the dimensions of each map is listed at the lower left edge. White boxes represent copied
feature maps, and the arrows denote diﬀerent operations
The network used for region detection is a modiﬁed version of the 2D U-net, as seen in
Figure 5.4. The U-net [29] is a widely used image segmentation network with an encoder,
called the contracting path, and decoder called the expansive path. In this modiﬁed version
of the classic U-net, the contracting path consists of repeated blocks of two 3x3 convolution
operations with padding followed by drop out layer, a ReLu activation function and a 2x2
max pooling operation with stride two. The number of feature maps is doubled within
each block, except for the ﬁrst block, where the number is increased from 1 to 64 feature
maps, while the dimensions of each feature map are halved for each max pooling operation.
The expansive path takes the low-dimension feature maps as input and performs repeated
==PAGE:46==
36
Methods
blocks of 2x2 transposed convolution operations followed by two 3x3 convolution operations
with padding, a drop out layer and a ReLu activation function. In the expansive path, the
number of feature maps is decreased in each block, while the dimensions are increased for
each transposed convolution operation. The ﬁnal layer is a 1x1 convolution with a softmax
activation function in order to obtain the ﬁnal probability maps for each class. The drop
out layers perform spatial dropout, with a dropout rate of 0.50, which means that 50 % of
the features maps will be temporarily deleted in each iteration. Random feature maps are
selected for each iteration, forcing the network to learn more robust features. An important
detail of the architecture is the use of skip connections, seen as horizontal arrows leading
features from the contracting path to the expansive path in Figure 5.4. Skip connections
are included in the architecture to combine high-resolution features with coarse features to
ensure that the network learns both local and global structures.
The diﬀerences from the original U-net includes the extensive use of drop out layers. The
original structure included one drop out layer using normal drop out at the bottom of
the network, while spatial drop out is included after each block of two convolutions in this
network. Furthermore, in the original network, the input image was padded to increase the
size before being fed through the network, where each convolution operation removed one
row of pixels in each direction. Therefore, the output segmentation would have diﬀerent
dimensions than the input.
This is a relevant method, when performing segmentation
patch-wise in a larger image, and when the border of the image also contains important
information. In this segmentation task, the object of interest - the heart - is always centered
in the middle of the image and the image is processed at once, and not in patches. It was
therefore chosen to perform padding in each convolution operation, and preserve the image
size through the network. This also limits the use of GPU power, since the input image
is not required to be padded before entering the network, leading to a much larger input
image.
Since the goal is not to obtain perfect segmentations but to extract the region of the heart
from the CT scan, the input images are downsampled to speed up computation. The image
input size of the network is 128x128, and the output segmentation is the same size, due to
the use of padding in the convolution operations. The output segmentations are binary -
one class for the background, and another class for the heart, which can then be used the
extract the heart region.
5.3.1.1
Training
When training the region networks, an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1 · 10−5 is
used [15]. Batch size is set to one, and due to the small batch size, a high momentum of
0.99 is employed to ensure that a large number of the previous training samples contribute
to the update in the current optimization step. A binary cross entropy loss function is
employed, and it is minimized over a training period of 50 epochs. For these networks, each
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Pipeline for heart segmentation
37
extracted 2D image is handled individually, meaning that from the 78 image volumes, 9984
training examples of dimensions 128x128 are extracted. For each epoch, all 2D training
images are shuﬄed, to ensure a random training on each of the training images. This
way, each image creates an independent change on the network, without being biased by
the previous image in each epoch.
This removes the 3D spatial information from the
2D U-net, but it was necessary in this case. The heart image volumes contain many 2D
slices with only background pixels since the ﬁrst 30 to 50 images in each direction (axial,
sagittal, coronal) usually does not contain any heart structures. If the 2D images were
fed to the network sequentially from top to bottom, the many ﬁrst training images would
only contain background pixels. Since this occurs over many iterations, the impact on
the network weights is large and cannot be restored, when images containing heart is sent
through as training images. Furthermore, the network will overﬁt to one speciﬁc heart,
when feeding the images sequentially. This is not wanted, since the acquisition of the CT
scans vary, and the quality is therefore very diﬀerent across image volumes.
5.3.2
Region cropping
To include 3D information in the output segmentation, the three trained models are used to
predict the heart segmentation in each direction, and these predictions are fused to obtain
a combined probability map for each class (background and heart). When predicting on
new images, the input images are not shuﬄed, as the training images. The input images
are passed through the network sequentially and for each image volume, the resulting
probability maps are saved as a 3D array. From the three trained U-net, this result is three
probability maps for each image volume - one from the U-net trained in the axial direction,
one from the sagittal and one from the coronal direction. A combined probability map
for each image volume is obtained by merging the three probability maps. For each pixel
in the 3D image array, the maximum probability for each class from the three probability
maps is used. The maximum probability of the two classes in each pixel determines the
assigned class, and a label map is created.
The output label map from the fusion of the three probability maps is used to crop the
original CT scan. A cubic bounding box is created around the heart, adding a 2 % margin
around the detected heart to ensure that all structures are included. The bounding box
is cubic to enable the cropped data to be used as training in the segmentation network,
which also has a multi-planar network setup, requiring a cubic input.
5.3.3
Segmentation CNN
The goal in the second step of the pipeline is to create a ﬁne-grained segmentation of
each heart structure. This is performed using a multi-class convolutional neural network.
For this task, two diﬀerent network architectures are tested in four diﬀerent setups. The
==PAGE:48==
38
Methods
setups all aim to take into account the spatial context of the 3D image volume, while
using a 2D network architecture, but the methods are diﬀerent. The input is the same for
the four setups, and consist of the cropped image volumes from the region CNN, which
means that the volumes only contain heart structures with a limited amount of background.
Furthermore, preprocessing is performed, as described in Section 5.1.
5.3.3.1
CNN A: U-net in one direction
This setup employs a simple U-net structure similar to the region network, except the
input size and number of output classes has been changed, which are 256x256 and 8 classes
for this network. This is the most simple setup of the four since only one network is used
to perform predictions. The network predicts on an image volume slice by slice, and the
obtained probability maps for each of the eight classes are saved as a 3D array. Classes are
assigned to each pixel, deﬁned by the maximum probability across all classes. This setup
can be performed in all three directions, resulting in three diﬀerent label maps.
5.3.3.2
CNN B: Multi-planar U-net
This setup applies the same network structure as in CNN A, but the results from the three
trained networks in each directions are combined into one single probability map. This
approach includes 3D information by employing the multi-planar structure. The fusion of
the probability maps is performed as described in Section 5.3.2, where for each pixel in
each of the eight probability maps, the maximum value from the three probability maps is
used. The ﬁnal segmentation is found by assigning the class with the largest probability
in the fused map. This multi-planar U-net approach is also seen in [21, 37].
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Pipeline for heart segmentation
39
Figure 5.5: Segmentation network architecture with contextual input, modiﬁed from [29, 41], used for setup CNN C
and CNN D. The leftmost contracting path uses the previous training image and segmentation as input, while the other
contracting path (to the right) uses the current training image as input. Each grey box corresponds to a multi-channel
feature map. The number of channels is denoted on top of the box, and the dimensions of each map are listed at the
lower left edge. White boxes represent copied feature maps, and the arrows denote diﬀerent operations
==PAGE:50==
40
Methods
5.3.3.3
CNN C: Extended U-net with contextual input in one direction
This setup utilises an extended variation of the U-net architecture. This network architec-
ture attempts to include 3D information by introducing a recurrent element. This element
is used to include a contextual input, consisting of the output segmentation and training
image of the previous slice in the image volume. This ensures a spatial consistency from
slice to slice in the image volume by propagating the segmentation across the slices. As
seen in Figure 5.5, the contextual input is included in the architecture as a second contract-
ing path, allowing the previous output segmentation and training image to pass through
a contracting path parallel to the current input. The two paths are concatenated at the
bottom of the network, and the combined feature maps are used in the expansive path.
The skip connections in this network transfer only features from the contracting path with
current input to the expansive path. The network architecture for this approach is inspired
by [41]. In the original article, the training images are extracted in the axial direction, but
it can also be performed in sagittal and coronal direction, as in CNN A.
5.3.3.4
CNN D: Multi-planar extended U-net with contextual input
This setup combines the contributions from CNN B and CNN C, by applying the extended
U-net with contextual input shown in Figure 5.5 in all three directions to create a multi-
planar setup, where the ﬁnal probability map is a fusion of the results from the three
directional networks. Thus, this approach combines the eﬀorts of [41] and [21, 37] into
a new approach, in an attempt to use the information from all three directions, while
improving the segmentation in each direction by adding the contextual input. This is a
novel approach, which has not been proposed by any challenge participants or in other
published works, and it aims to evaluate a combination of the best characteristics of the
previous state of the art approaches.
5.3.3.5
Training
An Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1·10−5 is used when training the segmentation
networks [15].
The batch size is set to one, and due to the small batch size, a high
momentum of 0.99 is employed to ensure that a large number of the previous training
samples contribute to the update in the current optimization step.
A categorical loss functions is used for this network, and the loss function is minimized over
a training period of 30 epochs. For these networks, 19968 training examples of dimensions
256x256 are extracted from the 78 image volumes. As when training the region network,
each training input is handled individually, allowing all training inputs to be shuﬄed, to
avoid overﬁtting to the last heart in the training epoch. In CNN A and B, the shuﬄing is
performed as in the region networks, but CNN C and D requires a more complex setup.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Segmentation post-processing
41
In the original article presenting the contextual input network [41], the training images
are fed through the network sequentially, one heart at a time. For this implementation,
feeding the training data this way showed poor results, due to overﬁtting to each heart,
as previously discussed. During training, all training inputs are therefore shuﬄed as in
the region network. Since the output segmentation and input from the previous iteration
should be saved and fed as input to the current training input, this is more challenging.
In practice, this was solved by initializing all output predictions as a zero array and ﬁlling
it out during the ﬁrst epoch. As all training images are shuﬄed randomly, the output
prediction after a training iteration is saved as input for the preceding slice. This means,
that in the ﬁrst epoch, many of the contextual inputs will contain empty segmentations
since the slices in the image volumes are processed in random order.
5.4
Segmentation post-processing
Some post-processing should be performed of the obtained segmentation maps in order to
improve the results by e.g. removing noise and small errors. As previously mentioned, one
of the applications for the heart segmentation is computational ﬂuid dynamics modelling
(CFD). In order to perform CFD using the segmentation of one of the heart structures,
a surface of the particular heart structure is needed, and not the voxel-based semantic
segmentation. It is furthermore crucial, that only one surface of each class is generated,
and no noise components are present in the surface reconstruction. The post-processing
consists of connected component analysis to improve the segmentation and remove noise,
followed by surface rendering.
5.4.1
Removal of noise segments
Small errors and misclassiﬁcations are bound to occur in the ﬁne-grained segmentation of
the heart structures, leading to false positives in all classes. These are sought to be mini-
mized by performing connected component analysis (CCA) on the obtained segmentation
maps. The misclassiﬁcations can occur outside of the main heart structure, classiﬁed as
noise segments, but can also be present within the heart structures. These pixels should
not be changed to background pixels, since they are a part of the heart, but should be
added to the adjacent class. The post-processing is performed on each separate class since
CCA is an algorithmic application for detecting regions in binary images. For each heart
segmentation, eight binary images are generated, each consisting of one heart structure,
or class, and background pixels. CCA analyses each binary segmentation image and as-
signs all pixels to a component. The algorithm simply goes through all pixels, and the
ﬁrst object pixel is assigned component 1. All the following pixels, which are connected
to component 1 is labelled similarly until a new component is reached. The next object
pixel found, which is not connected to component 1, is labelled component 2, and so on.
==PAGE:52==
42
Methods
This way, the result is a map of all connected components present in the binary image.
From this map, the area of each component can be measured, which is used to determine
whether or not to keep the component in the ﬁnal segmentation. Only the component with
the largest area is considered to be true positives, and all smaller components are assumed
to be false positives. It was chosen to use nearest neighbour interpolation to ﬁll these small
components with the most realistic class. This is achieved by calculating the distance from
each pixel in the misclassiﬁed component to the nearest pixels of the trusted component of
each class and assigning the pixel to the nearest class. This way, it is attempted to merge
the noise components with the most reliable class, creating a better segmentation without
noise and small errors.
Another post-processing approach was considered for this project, in the form of Con-
ditional Random Fields.
CRF is seen in other works as a post-processing step after a
convolutional neural network [10, 6], and has shown good results. A 3D CRF was applied
to the predicted 3D probability maps, in order to improve the spatial coherence of the
heart structures and correlation of individual pixels through the slices of the volume, but
it did not improve performance and the process was very slow, compared to CCA.
5.4.2
Surface rendering
To be able to use the segmentation for CFD, the voxel-based segmentations needs to
be converted into an isosurface. This post-processing step is performed in the computer
program 3D Slicer [9], which generates smooth surfaces of each heart structure.
CFD
modelling uses the isosurface to simulate how the blood ﬂows within each heart structure,
which is why the surface of each structure should be generated separately.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Results and analysis
6.1
Region network evaluation
The three directional region networks for localization of the heart are trained and tested
on the MM-WHS data set. The training and validation accuracy and loss of the three
networks are seen in Figure 6.1. The four colors represent diﬀerent setups for the training
of the networks - Nothing (red) represents the network without drop out or augmentation,
only augmentation (green) is the setup with augmentation but without drop out, only drop
out (orange) is using drop out, but not augmentation, and both (blue) employs both drop
out and augmentation. For all three directional networks and all setups, it is seen that
accuracy for training increases rapidly in the ﬁrst epochs and then saturates at around 99.5
- 100 %. Only the orange curve has a slower convergence, as expected when employing drop
out. There are clear signs of overﬁtting for all directional networks since the loss increases
over the training epochs. The blue curve in all three networks, shows a limited amount
of overﬁtting, due to the use of regularization. It is seen that augmentation causes the
accuracy to converge faster, but the impact of augmentation on the loss is diﬀerent from
the three networks. In the sagittal network, augmentation regularizes and limits overﬁtting,
whereas for the axial and coronal networks the tendency to overﬁt is increased, when using
augmentation. It is seen in all three networks, that the best performing network is the
blue curve, as the validation accuracy is the highest, and this setup is therefore used for
the following results.
==PAGE:54==
44
Results and analysis
Figure 6.1: Graphs of accuracy and loss for training and validation of the three directional region networks
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Region network evaluation
45
Test image
1
2
3
4
5
Average
Dice coeﬃcient
0.955
0.951
0.949
0.949
0.965
0.954
Accuracy
0.992
0.998
0.995
0.997
0.992
0.995
Speciﬁcity
0.999
0.999
0.998
0.999
0.997
0.998
Sensitivity
0.926
0.952
0.928
0.937
0.960
0.940
True positives (%)
8.557
2.305
5.049
2.822
10.52
5.852
True negatives (%)
90.62
97.46
94.41
96.88
88.72
93.62
False positives (%)
0.132
0.123
0.145
0.114
0.302
0.163
False negatives (%)
0.688
0.116
0.394
0.189
0.451
0.376
Table 6.1: Statistics and measures of performance for the ﬁve test images
The training time of the networks using data augmentation was around 6.5 minutes per
epoch, while without data augmentation, the training time was around 65 seconds per
epoch, resulting in a total training time of 5.5 hours and 55 minutes, respectively. Hy-
perparameters, such as learning rate, momentum and drop out rate, are important to ﬁne
tune when training a neural network in order to obtain an optimal training process, but
for this project, the focus has not been on hyperparameter tuning. The reported hyper-
parameters in Section 5 might therefore not be the optimal settings for the experiments.
A few experiments regarding learning rate and drop out rate was conducted, but not in a
structured manner, which could be reported. Otherwise, the hyperparameters are assigned
values based on the experiments and results of other works.
Table 6.1 shows the performance of the merged probability maps from the region networks.
The performance measures are calculated after upsampling of the resulting segmentation
to the original size and compared to full size the ground truth. It is seen, that the accuracy
and speciﬁcity are very high - almost equal to 1, indicating that the network is good at
predicting background pixels. The sensitivity is lower, indicating that the network does not
predict heart structures as well. There is a big class imbalance between background and
heart, which aﬀects these results. The true negative pixels (background) are on average
93.6 % of the image volumes, while the true positives only consist of 5.8 %. The size of
the heart in the scan clearly varies greatly between the ﬁve scans, as the true positives
range from 2.3 % to 10.5 %. There is not a very big diﬀerence between the number of false
negatives and false positives (0.163 % compared to 0.376 % on average), but since the rates
are computed in relation to the amount on true pixels in each group, this will lead to a
lower sensitivity, compared to speciﬁcity. The Dice coeﬃcient is, as mentioned earlier, the
most commonly used performance measure for medical image segmentation tasks, and the
results for these segmentations are very good, with an average Dice of 0.954.
==PAGE:56==
46
Results and analysis
6.1.1
Visual results
(a) Probability map from axial network
(b) Probability map from sagittal network
(c) Probability map from coronal network
(d) Fused probability map
Figure 6.2: Probability maps from each directional network. High probability of being
object class (heart) is represented with white, and low probability is represented with
black. Red arrows indicate regions of signiﬁcance
The probability maps from each of the three directional networks can be seen in Figure
6.2. These probability maps are seen from an axial view, which is not how the sagittal and
coronal probability maps are generated. In general, all three networks generate reasonable
probability maps, but there is a clear diﬀerence in how the inner boundaries in the heart
are detected. Furthermore, some noise surrounding the heart is present in the sagittal and
coronal probability maps.
Figure 6.3 shows an input image and the diﬀerence between the ground truth and predicted
label.
As also indicated by the Dice coeﬃcients in Table 6.1, the combination of the
three networks perform very well, and the predicted segmentation is very similar to the
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Region network evaluation
47
Figure 6.3: The left image shows the input image, and the right image shows the diﬀer-
ence between ground truth (red) and prediction (blue). Light blue represents the overlay
between the two segmentations
ground truth. Diﬀerences are primarily seen in the middle of the heart structure, where
the output segmentation does not capture the boundaries completely, and there are some
inconsistencies at the edges of the heart structures.
Figure 6.4 shows the detected bounding box in the ﬁve test images. The bounding boxes
are estimated with a average IoU of 0.94. This is higher than the average Dice coeﬃcient,
as the most common error in the segmentation is in the center of the heart, which does not
aﬀect the bounding box. Furthermore, only errors on the boundaries furthest away from
the center of the image aﬀects the bounding box IoU. As seen in Figure 6.4, most of the
bounding boxes are well detected. The biggest problem is found in (c), where the detected
bounding box is smaller than the true bounding box, resulting in the removal of an area
in the scan containing a part of the pulmonary arteries. The extracted cubic regions of all
image examples (both train and test) are on average 365 pixels on each side - extracted
from a 512x512x512 image volume. This means, that the data size is decreased with 63.8
% on average, which is very beneﬁcial for the ﬁne-grain segmentation networks, as this will
reduce the computational complexity of the task. This also reduces the class imbalance
in the data, as previously discussed, since background pixels are removed. The smallest
bounding box is 298 pixel on each side, while the maximum bounding box has a side length
of 458, leading to a decrease in data size of 80.3 % and 28.4 %, respectively.
==PAGE:58==
48
Results and analysis
(a) Test image 1. IoU: 0.97
(b) Test image 2. IoU: 0.94
(c) Test image 3. IoU: 0.86
(d) Test image 4. IoU: 0.96
(e) Test image 5. IoU: 0.99
Figure 6.4: Bounding box detection results. Red square is the estimated bounding box,
the blue box is the true bounding box
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Segmentation network evaluation
49
6.2
Segmentation network evaluation
Figure 6.5: Graphs of loss for training and validation of the six segmentation networks
The curves of training and validation loss for both normal U-net and the contextual input
networks in all three directions can be seen in Figure 6.5. It is clear, that the axial network
performs better than the coronal and sagittal networks, as a much lower level is reached
for the validation loss of this network.
Furthermore, the loss for the normal U-net is
lower than for the U-net with contextual input. There are clear signs of overﬁtting for all
networks since the validation loss increases over the training epochs. This indicates, that
the trained model does not learn general features, but only learns to segment the training
examples. The loss function is the categorical cross entropy loss function, as described in
Section 5, which computes the loss based on the probability for each class. The increasing
validation loss indicates that the probability in a particular pixel for the true class decreases,
and the probability increases for a false class. This does not necessarily mean, that the
ﬁnal prediction is false since the probability for the true class can still be the highest.
With overﬁtting like this, it is important to employ early stopping, in order to avoid the
performance to decrease. But since the validation accuracy starts increasing already after
a few epochs and the accuracy kept increasing, it was chosen to train for 30 epochs. Table
6.2 shows training, validation and test Dice coeﬃcients. The overﬁtting is also clear in
these scores, as the training Dice coeﬃcients are much higher than the validation scores.
Contrary to the curves for the sagittal network in Figure 6.5, the contextual input network
shows the highest validation Dice score, but the highest loss in the training curve.
The training time for the networks is around 27 minutes per epoch for each directional
network with contextual input, and around 20 minutes for the normal U-net, resulting in
a total training time of 13.5 hours and 10 hours, respectively.
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and analysis
Network
Direction
Train
Validation
Test
U-net
Axial
0.976
0.863
0.913
Coronal
0.979
0.812
0.907
Sagittal
0.932
0.705
0.911
Context U-net
Axial
0.975
0.860
0.918
Coronal
0.978
0.823
0.914
Sagittal
0.980
0.808
0.917
Table 6.2: Average Dice coeﬃcient across all heart structures in all images of the training
(78 images), validation (2 images) and test set (5 images)
Table 6.3 shows the Dice coeﬃcients for each heart structure and whole heart segmentation
(WHS) for all four setups, described in Section 5.3.3. The whole heart segmentation result
represents the binary segmentation of the whole heart, where all separate heart structures
are combined into one segmentation mask. The WHS result is high since it is much easier to
detect the whole heart than determining the boundaries between all seven heart structures.
In general, pulmonary arteries (PA) has the lowest Dice coeﬃcient, since these vessels are
very small objects outside of the larger heart structure and as a result, they can be diﬃcult
to detect. Aorta (AO) has the largest Dice score for all setups, which can be related to
the clear boundaries to neighbouring structures and the contrast in the aorta, making the
edges of the structure evident in the scan. The contrast in the cardiac CT is, as mentioned,
present in the left side of the heart, which also leads to clearer boundaries in the images.
Due to the contrast, the left ventricle and atria (LV and LA) also get better results than
right ventricle and atria (RV and RA).
When comparing the four diﬀerent setups, there is a clear improvement from the predictions
performed in only one direction to merging the three directions (from an average Dice
coeﬃcient of 0.913 to 0.924 for the normal U-net). In the three directional networks, the
axial network achieves the highest average Dice score, and the coronal achieves the lowest
- for both normal U-net and contextual U-net. In the axial network, the resolution of the
input images is higher, which could explain this diﬀerence. As seen in the region networks,
data augmentation only had the desired eﬀect in the sagittal direction, which could cause
the higher performance of this network, compared to the coronal network. Even though the
axial network overall performs better, there are some heart structures, which are captured
best by the other networks. The left ventricle and myocardium are detected best by the
coronal network, and the right atria and pulmonary arteries are found best by the sagittal
network.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Segmentation network evaluation
51
Setup
Direction
LV
RV
LA
RA
MYO
AO
PA
WHS
Average
A
Axial
0.934
0.914
0.931
0.895
0.898
0.965
0.858
0.955
0.913
Coronal
0.937
0.887
0.908
0.897
0.905
0.955
0.861
0.948
0.907
Sagittal
0.931
0.912
0.915
0.901
0.893
0.954
0.871
0.952
0.911
B
0.939
0.926
0.926
0.919
0.912
0.971
0.880
0.959
0.924
B + CCA
0.939
0.928
0.928
0.921
0.912
0.975
0.887
0.960
0.927
C
Axial
0.934
0.917
0.937
0.900
0.892
0.970
0.878
0.956
0.918
Coronal
0.938
0.910
0.914
0.905
0.907
9.958
0.866
0.954
0.914
Sagittal
0.936
0.915
0.917
0.907
0.894
0.967
0.882
0.954
0.917
D
0.942
0.928
0.931
0.919
0.912
0.972
0.891
0.960
0.928
D + CCA
0.943
0.930
0.933
0.922
0.912
0.978
0.899
0.962
0.931
Table 6.3: Average Dice coeﬃcient for each heart structure over the ﬁve test images, for
each of the four network set ups (see Section 5.3.3, with and without connected component
analysis (CCA) post processing. Dice is computed for the full 3D label volume of each
test image. The average column is the average Dice coeﬃcient for all heart structures, not
including whole heart segmentation (WHS). Best performance for each heart structure is
marked with bold
The CCA post-processing improves the performance of the segmentations. Especially the
segmentation of pulmonary arteries is improved since the networks have a tendency to
detect many small components in the areas around the pulmonary arteries. As seen in
the CT images in Figure 6.4, the region below the heart has many small structures similar
to the pulmonary arteries, which will also be segmented. For the other heart structures,
the diﬀerence after post-processing is not as signiﬁcant, but there is still an improvement.
Even for the segments, where the Dice coeﬃcient does not increase much, this is still a
very important step in the pipeline, since small noise components will be a problem for
later use of the rendered surface.
The best performing setup is setup D with post-processing, and when presenting further
results, this setup will be used. The Dice coeﬃcients for each of the ﬁve test images are
shown in Figure 6.4. There is a big diﬀerence between the ﬁve test images and the networks
ability to segment based on the images. The worst segmentation is obtained on test image
3, with an average Dice of 0.899, and the best segmentation is obtained on test image 5,
with an average Dice of 0.956.
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and analysis
# image
LV
RV
LA
RA
MYO
AO
PA
WHS
Average
1
0.980
0.938
0.973
0.936
0.920
0.981
0.910
0.968
0.951
2
0.960
0.914
0.924
0.942
0.910
0.976
0.905
0.960
0.934
3
0.972
0.918
0.840
0.871
0.858
0.980
0.954
0.952
0.899
4
0.890
0.934
0.927
0.920
0.947
0.968
0.927
0.956
0.934
5
0.957
0.934
0.983
0.941
0.925
0.982
0.954
0.973
0.956
Average
0.943
0.930
0.933
0.922
0.912
0.978
0.899
0.962
0.931
Table 6.4: Dice coeﬃcients for each test image from setup D + CCA
6.2.1
Visual results
6.2.1.1
Probability maps
Figure 6.6 shows an axial slice from a cardiac CT image volume, the prediction from the
network and the probability map for each class. Generally, the network is very sure of
where the diﬀerent heart structures are located, indicated by the high probabilities in the
probability maps. Only a few areas have a low probability, such as the top of the right
atrium, where the network is not sure if it is atrium or not. Lower probabilities are also
found on the boundary from the myocardium to the blood cavity in the left ventricle (c and
g), indicating that this boundary is diﬃcult for the network to detect. Furthermore, an area
in the left atria is detected as right ventricle with high probability, which is not desirable,
and the small component is also present in the ﬁnal prediction. The post-processing step
is used to sort out these errors. The probability map of the pulmonary arteries (i) only
contains small noise points, since the pulmonary arteries are not present in this slice.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Segmentation network evaluation
53
(a) Cropped cardiac CT image
(b) Final prediction
(c) Left ventricle
(d) Right ventricle
(e) Left atrium
(f) Right atrium
(g) Left ventricular
myocardium
(h) Aorta
(i) Pulmonary arteries
Figure 6.6: Probability map from an axial slices in test image 2. White indicates high
probability for the speciﬁc class, whereas black indicates low probability.
In (b), each
shade of grey represents a label class
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and analysis
6.2.1.2
Postprocessing
Figure 6.7 shows the impact of post-processing on the created label map. The ﬁrst ﬁgure
from the left is the output from the segmentation network and the second ﬁgure shows the
result from performing nearest neighbour interpolation of the pixels in the noise segments.
As expected, the noise segments are added to the nearest segment, ﬁlling the holes in e.g.
the aorta segmentation and removing the big noise component outside of the heart.
Figure 6.7: Example of heart segmentation with (right) and without (left) post processing
6.2.1.3
Segmentation volumes
The resulting segmentation volumes for the ﬁve test images are shown in Figure 6.8. As pre-
viously shown, the prediction on test image 3 achieved the lowest Dice coeﬃcient, whereas
test image 5 achieved the highest. These volume renderings of the segmentations show
the diﬀerences between ground truth and prediction, such as branches of the pulmonary
arteries, which are not captured in the prediction, but also how well the true and predicted
segmentation volumes correspond. These volumes show how the shape of the heart is cap-
tured by the network, but the boundaries between the heart structures cannot be inspected.
These are shown in Figure 6.9, which presents axial slices through test image 2, where the
outline of the ground truth and prediction can be examined. Test image 2 achieved aver-
age performance, and is a good representation of the abilities of the pipeline. Some hearts
were segmented better, and some worse. Throughout the scan, the network struggles to
detect the boundary between the right and left ventricle (the two heart structures into
the upper right). Especially in the last images (e-f), the ending of the left ventricle is not
captured. Furthermore, the left atrium is generally underestimated in size, compared to
the ground truth annotation. Other structures, such as the aorta, are captured very well
by the network.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Segmentation network evaluation
55
(a) Test image 1
(b) Test image 2
(c) Test image 3
(d) Test image 4
(e) Test image 5
(f) Prediction 1
Average Dice: 0.951
(g) Prediction 2
Average Dice: 0.934
(h) Prediction 3
Average Dice: 0.899
(i) Prediction 4
Average Dice: 0.934
(j) Prediction 5
Average Dice: 0.956
Figure 6.8: Created segmentations (bottom row) and ground truth label maps (top row) of the ﬁve test images. Note
that the myocardium class is not visible these images, and that aorta is only visible in some of the images
==PAGE:66==
56
Results and analysis
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.9: Axial slices from test image 2. Red lines mark the ground truth, blue lines
mark the prediction. The yellow arrows indicate signiﬁcant areas in each slice
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Segmentation network evaluation
57
6.2.2
Surface rendering
From the voxel-based segmentation, isosurfaces are generated using 3D Slicer [9]. These
isosurfaces are triangulated surface representations of each heart structure, which can be
used for e.g. CFD modelling. An example of a generated surface is shown in Figure 6.10,
which also shows the triangulated surface. The generated surfaces of each heart structure
have been visually inspected and approved by PhD student Rasmus Hvid, who aims to use
the surfaces to simulate the blood ﬂow in the heart chambers.
Figure 6.10: The triangulated surface of the right ventricle
From the generated isosurfaces, a comparison of prediction and ground truth can be gener-
ated for each heart structure. The diﬀerence between the predicted surface and the ground
truth is computed using the computer program Sumatra [24], and the resulting surface
heat maps for test image 2 are seen in Figure 6.11. The surfaces are representations of
the ground truth, and the colors represent the distance to the predicted surface. These
can be compared to the axial slices shown in Figure 6.9, as it shows the same test image.
As previously described, the largest diﬀerences are seen on the boundary from one heart
structure to another. This is clearly seen on the top of the left and right ventricle, where
the ventricles are overestimated, and the left and right atria are underestimated in the
respective area at the bottom of the heart structures. As also indicated in the slices in
Figure 6.9, the tip on the top of the right atria is not captured in the prediction, leading to
the blue area, where the distance between the ground truth and prediction is around 6 mm.
As expected, the aorta has the lowest deviation from the ground truth, and diﬀerences are
only seen on the top slices and bottom boundary to the left ventricle, but only in the 1-2
mm range. The average absolute diﬀerence between ground truth and predicted surfaces
are shown in Table 6.5. In general, the average absolute distances for the heart structures
are quite small, all around 1 mm, with an overall mean of 0.91 mm.
==PAGE:68==
58
Results and analysis
Figure 6.11: The diﬀerence between generated surfaces of each heart structure and ground
truth of test image 2. From the top left corner: LV, RV, LA, RA, MYO, AO, PA. In
general, green is around 0 mm diﬀerence, red is when predictions have overestimated the
structure, blue is when the structure is underestimated. The color bar to the left of each
structure shows the numerical diﬀerence in mm. Figures are generated in Sumatra [24]
LV
RV
LA
RA
MYO
AO
PA
Average
Distance [mm]
0.88
0.96
1.03
1.26
0.69
0.31
1.26
0.91
Table 6.5: Average absolute distance from ground truth to the predicted surface, across
all ﬁve test volumes for each heart structure. The last column shows the overall average
diﬀerence
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Generalisation and prediction on CGPS data
59
6.3
Generalisation and prediction on CGPS data
The trained network can be used to predict on both the test set, and on other data sets.
The CGPS data set is not a part of the MM-WHS challenge, and therefore not a part
of the training data set. But the cardiac CT scans are similar, and the trained network
can therefore be used to create predictions on the CT scans from the CGPS study. As
mentioned in Section 4, the ground truth annotations for these images were generated using
a neural network and manual correction, and they are used to evaluate the predictions
obtained with this pipeline.
The annotations might not be perfect, but it will give a
valuable estimate of the performance of the pipeline on this data set. The predictions for
the 30 images are generated using setup B and D, with and with out post processing. The
average Dice coeﬃcients for each setup are presented in Table 6.6, and the achieved Dice
coeﬃcients from both setups using post processing are seen in the boxplot in Figure 6.12.
Setup
LV
RV
LA
RA
MYO
AO
PA
WHS
Average
B
0.838
0.795
0.728
0.783
0.728
0.789
0.552
0.869
0.745
B + CCA
0.854
0.806
0.748
0.803
0.726
0.848
0.544
0.864
0.761
D
0.857
0.791
0.825
0.813
0.698
0.799
0.648
0.881
0.776
D + CCA
0.869
0.803
0.854
0.822
0.695
0.866
0.657
0.876
0.800
Table 6.6: Average Dice coeﬃcient for each heart structure for the 30 CGPS cardiac CT
scans for each of the setups. Highest dice coeﬃcient for each heart structure is marked
with bold
Similarly to the MM-WHS test images, the contextual input network achieves the highest
Dice coeﬃcients, but on this dataset, the diﬀerence between the two setup is greater.
Except on the myocardium and right ventricle, the contextual input network achieves a
much higher score than the normal U-net. The post processing increases the performance
in most classes, and for e.g. the aorta and left atria, the performance is radically increased.
In some classes, such as the myocardium, the post processing step decreases performance,
because components, which should belong to the myocardium class are removed. As with
the MM-WHS dataset, the lowest performance is seen on the pulmonary arteries, which in
these images is very low. In Figure 6.12 it is seen that in one image, the Dice score is 0,
when predicted with the normal U-net, which means that the pulmonary arteries are not
detected at all.
The three worst and three best segmentations generated with contextual input network
and post-processing is seen in Figure 6.13. It is clear in the three worst segmentations,
that the myocardium of the left ventricle is not segmented well, as is it barely present in the
segmentation volume, and that the boundary between right atrium and ventricle is diﬃcult,
as the two classes are blended together in the segmentation. Furthermore, the pulmonary
==PAGE:70==
60
Results and analysis
Figure 6.12: Boxplot of Dice coeﬃcients for the 30 CGPS images for each heart structure
predicted with normal U-net and with contextual input network
arteries are barely segmented in Figure 6.13(c). The three best segmentations look very
much like the segmentations of the MM-WHS data and are very promising results from the
CGPS data. The CT scans of these six generated segmentations have been inspected, but
no clear diﬀerences were evident. It is therefore not known, from where this big diﬀerence
in segmentation quality arises.
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Generalisation and prediction on CGPS data
61
(a) Average Dice: 0.600
(b) Average Dice: 0.609
(c) Average Dice: 0.643
(d) Average Dice: 0.906
(e) Average Dice: 0.913
(f) Average Dice: 0.915
Figure 6.13: Generated segmentations from CGPS data using contextual input network.
Top row shows the three worst segmentations, and the bottom row shows the three best.
==PAGE:72==
62
Results and analysis
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
Discussion
7.1
Data challenges
A data-driven model, such as a neural network, is only as good as the data it is trained
on. To be able to train a generalized model, it is crucial, that the true variation of the
data is present in the training data. As described in Section 4, this is attempted to be
achieved for the full MM-WHS challenge training set. The problem is, that the training set
is split into training, validation, and test for this pipeline, as the ground truth annotations
are not available for the 40 test images. This does not allow the model to capture the
full variation in the data set. These limitations in data size lead to extensive use of data
augmentation, which improves the performance of the networks. But as seen in Figure
6.1, there is an indication in the validation loss curves for the three networks, that the
data augmentation does not aﬀect the performance in all directions in the 3D volume as
expected. It seems, that data augmentation works and regularizes the sagittal network,
but for the axial and coronal network, the loss curves overﬁt more, when applying data
augmentation, than without it. The validation accuracy is clearly increased when applying
data augmentation for the sagittal network, whereas the same impact is not seen e.g. the
axial network. Furthermore, data augmentation drastically increases the training time.
Besides the limitations in training the model on few image examples, a small test data
set conﬁne the ability to obtain an overall evaluation of the pipeline. With only ﬁve test
examples, the selection of test images has a large eﬀect on the performance scores. As
seen in Table 6.4, a great variation is present in the performance from image to image,
and thus the average performance of the pipeline will depend greatly on the chosen split
between train and test images. This is also clearly seen in Table 6.2, as the validation Dice
coeﬃcients are much lower than the test data. Since the ﬁnal model is used to predict these
Dice coeﬃcients, the validation and test Dice coeﬃcients should be in the same range. This
could be caused by a large variation in the CT scans, and the fact that the two validation
images are simply much more diﬃcult to segment due to poor image quality.
In the case of this project, the limitations in the data quality are mainly focussed on
the manual annotations. As seen in the results, the biggest diﬀerence between the man-
ual ground truth annotations and the neural network segmentations are at the transition
==PAGE:74==
64
Discussion
between heart structures, e.g. the border between left ventricular blood cavity and the
myocardium. Here, it is crucial that the ground truth annotations are very precise, which
is not always the case. The borders between heart structures are very diﬃcult to decide
since there is no clear boundary in the images and it is challenging to draw annotations
on a 3D volume. Usually, the annotation is performed one slice at a time in one direction,
which leads to an edged 3D representation of the annotations, as seen in Figure 6.8e. In
this segmentation, the annotations have clearly been drawn on slices with a high step size
in the through-plane direction, leading to these edges, especially seen on the right ventricle
and atrium. Due to the challenges of manual annotation of a cardiac CT, there might be
limits to the achievable Dice score, simply because the annotations do not correspond with
the true boundaries between the heart structures.
7.2
Evaluating method decisions
2D versus 3D network As the image data is a 3D volume, the approach for the heart
segmentation could also have been a 3D convolutional neural network, such as the 3D U-
net [7] or V-net [19]. One of the biggest struggles of a 3D network is the need for GPU
memory for the 3D operations and the larger input images due to the three dimensions,
which often leads to downsampling of the training examples. Payer et al. [26] employed a
3D U-net for heart segmentation, and the input volume was downsampled to 64 x 64 x 64
for the ﬁne-grain segmentation, while the input size for this 2D implementation was 256
x 256, and Mortazi et al. [21] employed input images of dimensions 350 x 350 for their
2D approach. This means, that much ﬁner details can be captured in the 2D approaches
since the details are not lost in the downsampling. Baumgartner et al. [3] found that the
low through-plane resolution of MRI scans reduced the performance of 3D networks. The
through-plane resolution is better in CT scans, compared to MRI scans, but it might still
be comparable to this project. In this project, it is found that the sagittal and coronal
networks do not obtain as good results as the axial network, which could be due to the
lower resolution. It is a beneﬁt of the pipeline in this project, that the axial prediction is
not aﬀected by this low through-plane resolution, as would be seen in a 3D approach.
Pipeline structure It is shown in this project, that the fusion of the three directional 2D
networks greatly improves the prediction in a 3D image volume compared to a single 2D
network, and that the performance could be further improved by employing the contextual
input network in each direction. With this setup, the spatial information was captured in
the 3D image, while still exploiting the beneﬁts of a 2D network.
As seen in the results from cropping the input data, a large amount of the background was
removed in this step, which optimizes the process of predicting the ﬁne-grained segmenta-
tion. This step is therefore very important for the pipeline, although it could have been
done in many ways. Normally, a bounding box would be found using a region detection
neural network, also called an R-CNN. This way, a segmentation is not generated, only
==PAGE:75==
7.2 Evaluating method decisions
65
a bounding box, which is a much simpler task and could save computational time. But
since the U-net was used for multi-class segmentation of the heart structures, it was the
simpler choice in terms of implementation to use the same architecture for both steps.
Furthermore, the same design choice was made by [26], [37] and [35].
Network architecture The choice of network architecture can seem arbitrary since there
is no theoretical ground for the used methods. The U-net architecture is widely used in
segmentation tasks across application ﬁelds, and in the MM-WHS challenge, all participants
using deep learning, employed a version of U-net. Thus, there is a strong indication that the
U-net architecture is the current best architecture for segmentation task. No experiments
regarding modiﬁcations of the architecture were conducted, but it would be relevant to
investigate the impact of the depth of the network and see if better results could be achieved
by removing the deepest layer. In general, the trained networks in this project struggle
to determine borders and boundaries between classes, which could be due to the coarse
features in the deepest layer. In the deepest layer, the locations of the coarse features
are lost, which are sought to be localized using skip connections, which might not work
properly in this case. Mortazi et al. [21] employs only two max pooling operations in the
contracting path, which decreases the depth of the network compared to the presented
network in this project, which employs four max pooling operations. This depth of the
network varies greatly for each challenge participant, and changing the depth will reduce
the capacity of the model, and lead to fewer parameters to be trained, which could also
assist in limiting the problem with overﬁtting.
Overﬁtting is a problem in this pipeline, and the amount of training data and the complexity
of the model are the two largest inﬂuencers. The model is most likely too big and complex
to be trained on such a small training set. Furthermore, the validation images have shown
to be diﬃcult to segment, which might lead to a false increase in loss. Another aspect
of the training process is the choice of loss function, which might not be optimal for this
task. As seen in the MM-WHS challenge participant’s approaches presented in Table 1.1,
many diﬀerent loss functions are employed in the diﬀerent approaches. Recent advances in
CT organ segmentation shows that IoU loss achieves better results than cross entropy loss
[28]. Likewise, Sudre et al. [32] shows that using an overlap based loss function like IoU
or Dice, instead of the pixel-based loss functions, will increase performance and generate
more robust solutions. Both [28] and [32] perform segmentation of medical images, where
class imbalance is usually an issue, and this change in loss function should aim to solve
this problem. It is also much more sensible to optimize over a metric related to the metric
used to evaluate the performance, and since medical image segmentation is ranked based
on Dice coeﬃcient, the loss function should represent a similar metric, in order to achieve
a high Dice coeﬃcient.
The contextual input network showed promising results when predicting on new images.
The additional input assisted the network in establishing coherence between slices through
the image volume, and predicting sensible anatomical structures. There are still limitations
to this network structure, such as the network being direction dependent. The prediction
==PAGE:76==
66
Discussion
will give diﬀerent solutions if the data is fed from one end of the dataset or the other.
This directionality could explain the lack of segmentation details in the apical slices in the
CGPS predictions in Figure 6.13, as the network seems to be very slow at detecting the
heart in the three worst segmentations, resulting in no segmentation detail in the apical
slices. A solution could be to predict in both directions and merge the two predictions - but
that would result in six predictions in total for the multi-planar structure, which might be
too much. In spite of this direction dependence, the contextual input network still achieves
better segmentations on the CGPS data, than the normal U-net.
7.3
Evaluation of semantic segmentation
The pipeline developed in this project achieves high performance scores on the test images,
and the networks generate sensible and realistic segmentations of the heart structures.
Heart segmentation involves many challenges, such as overlap of Hounsﬁeld values between
heart structures, which the network seems to have learned quite well in the MM-WHS data,
and class imbalance between some object classes and background, which was sought to be
solved by the ﬁrst region-step in the pipeline, with good results.
As shown in Figure
6.9, there are some diﬀerences between the boundaries detected by the network, and the
boundaries annotated in the ground truth. In general, the networks seem to underestimate
the heart structures, and the boundaries are the biggest challenge, which has not yet been
solved. The problem with using neural networks for this task is, that it is very diﬃcult
to determine to source of the errors, as the decision making is not comprehensible. The
predictions on the CGPS data shows that the similar Hounsﬁeld values of right ventricle
and atrium causes problems, and that the network struggles to detect the myocardium and
pulmonary arteries in some scans. But overall, the results indicate that the network can
be used to obtain sensible heart segmentations even on new and diﬀerent data.
The heart consists of many structures besides the seven larger structures evaluated in this
project. The generated segmentations is an overall model of the heart, but in and between
the structures, smaller anatomical structures are present, such as papillary muscles in the
ventricles. The papillary muscles constitute about 10 % of the total heart mass, and are
clearly visible in the CT scans, especially in the left ventricle due to the contrast. The
presence of these muscles arises an issue when predicting, since the Hounsﬁeld values are
very diﬀerent from the rest of the ventricle, and the boundary between the myocardium
and blood cavity is very diﬃcult to distinguish, as seen in Figure 7.1. The same issue
is present for the valves between the heart chambers, which could explain some of the
boundary issues with the segmentation between atria and ventricle.
==PAGE:77==
7.4 Comparison to state of the art
67
Figure 7.1: Papillary muscles present in the left ventricle. The ground truth segmentations
are outlined
7.4
Comparison to state of the art
It is worth mentioning that the approach of this pipeline is unlike any of the proposed
methods in the challenge. The elements are similar, but none of the participants, or other
published works, employed a two-step multi-planar approach using a contextual input
network. The pipeline takes the best characteristics of previous approaches and combines
it into a new constellation to test the possibilities in the ﬁeld of deep learning for heart
segmentation.
LV
RV
LA
RA
MYO
AO
PA
WHS
Average
Payer et al. [26]
0.918
0.909
0.929
0.888
0.881
0.933
0.840
0.908
0.900
Yang et al. [40]
0.923
0.857
0.930
0.871
0.856
0.894
0.835
0.890
0.881
Unknown
0.904
0.883
0.916
0.836
0.851
0.907
0.784
0.879
0.869
This project
0.943
0.930
0.933
0.922
0.912
0.978
0.899
0.962
0.931
Table 7.1: Average Dice coeﬃcients for each heart structure for the three best performing
participants from the MM-WHS challenge [18] and the results from this project.
Best
performing approach for each heart structure is marked with bold
The average Dice coeﬃcients for each heart structure from the eight participants in the
MM-WHS challenge are available on their website [18]. The results of the three highest
performing participants are shown in Table 7.1 together with the best result from this
project (setup D + CCA). It is not stated on the website, which participants achieved
the diﬀerent scores, though it was found in the respective articles that the best performing
approach was [26] and the second best was [40]. As seen in the table, the proposed approach
==PAGE:78==
68
Discussion
in this project achieves the highest scores on all heart structures and on whole heart
segmentation. It is important to notice, that the methods have not been tested on the same
test data, as the annotations for the test data for the challenge is not publicly available.
It is therefore not possible to test this approach on the same test set, as the three others
have been tested on.
7.5
Clinical and research use
There is great interest in an automated heart segmentation pipeline for cardiac CT scans
since it will save valuable time for the medical staﬀand streamline the generated seg-
mentations. There is still some way to go before an automatic pipeline can be applied in
clinical practice, but with the constant development within the ﬁeld of deep learning it is
a potential future application. For now, the results from this project can be used in two
particular studies.
CGPS data There is a large interest in automatic analysis of the CGPS cardiac CT scans,
since it is such a large database available for research, and with automatic segmentation
of all the scans, a lot of time would be saved and further investigation of the data can be
performed. Furthermore, PhD student Kristine Aavild Juhl is working on an analysis of
the left atrial appendage (LAA) on this data set. The LAA is not annotated in the MM-
WHS scans, but the only advances needed for this pipeline to also segment this structure
is to generate annotations on the training images. This way, the pipeline could be used to
assist in Kristine’s work.
The proposed pipeline achieves state of the art results in whole heart segmentation on the
MM-WHS challenge data and shows promising results when predicting on the CGPS data.
There are some issues with the obtained segmentation on the CGPS data, which should
be handled before the segmentation can be used. A possible approach could be to train
the pipeline on a mix of MM-WHS challenge data and some of the labelled CGPS images.
This way, the characteristics of the CGPS data will also be included in the models, and
the predictions will more than likely be improved drastically. It is important to keep in
mind, that the current annotations of the CGPS data are generated by a neural network
and with manual inspection of an engineering Master’s student. It would be necessary for
the annotations to be evaluated by a medical professional, to make sure they are of high
enough quality for a segmentation pipeline.
Computational Fluid Dynamics modelling As previously stated, the generated sur-
faces of each heart structure are sought to be used by PhD student Rasmus Hvid to simulate
blood ﬂow in the heart. For now, the generated surfaces from the MM-WHS challenge data
are of high quality and can be employed for modelling, but for the pipeline to be able to
predict on new data, further improvements are needed, as indicated by the results on the
CGPS data.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to investigate the possibilities of using deep learning to generate
whole heart segmentations from cardiac CT scans. A full pipeline for analysis of cardiac
CT scans was developed and implemented in Tensorﬂow, generating label maps of the
seven major heart structures; left and right ventricle, left and right atrium, left ventricular
myocardium, aorta and pulmonary arteries. The approach analyses the 3D image volumes
using 2D neural networks, by employing a multi-planar structure of three perpendicular
networks. This setup attempts to capture the spatial information of the image volume
while exploiting the computational beneﬁts of 2D networks.
The pipeline strives to solve the class imbalance problem commonly seen in medical images,
by utilising a two-step setup. The ﬁrst step crops a region of interest from the cardiac CT,
in order to limit the number of background pixels. It was shown that on average 93 %
of each CT scan consisted of background, and on average 64 % of the image volumes was
removed in the ﬁrst step, which makes the ﬁrst step very valuable for the pipeline in order
to limit GPU memory use, reduce computational complexity of the task and thereby focus
the network on the important features in the images.
The second step creates a ﬁne-grain multi-class segmentation of the cropped images, yield-
ing state of the art results when compared to other challenge participants. The proposed
approach, employing the extended U-net with contextual input in a multi-planar struc-
ture, is a novel approach, unlike any other challenge participants or other published works.
The pipeline takes the best characteristics of previous approaches and combines it into
a new constellation. It was shown, that the fusion of the three directional networks in
a multi-planar approach greatly improves the prediction in a 3D image volume and that
the performance could be further improved by using the contextual input network in each
direction. The implemented networks achieved an overall average Dice coeﬃcient of 0.931.
However, some problems arose in the process, including overﬁtting due to the limited
dataset of only 20 annotated images, which was sought solved using data augmentation.
With post-processing steps of the obtained label maps consisting of connected component
analysis and surface rendering, isosurfaces of each heart structure were generated. The
generated surfaces deviated on average 0.9 mm from the ground truth surfaces. This is a
very low deviation, and a highly satisfying result, as the surfaces are sought to be used for
simulation.
==PAGE:80==
70
Conclusion
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 9
Future Work
While the proposed pipeline achieves state of the art results, there is still room for im-
provement. In Section 7, several points for improvement were mentioned, and a summary
of these are presented here.
Data challenges As previously discussed, several pipeline design choices should be evalu-
ated, such as the partitioning of data into training and test data. Due to the small amount
of training data, and the varying quality of the images, the partitioning of the data could
have a big inﬂuence on the results. A cross-validation scheme would be very relevant to
employ, in order to test diﬀerent splits of the data, and obtain a general evaluation of the
pipeline.
Network architecture The ﬁeld of deep learning is in constant development, and new
methods and architectures are continuously published. Hence it would be relevant to look
into newer heart segmentation challenges and published works and evaluate if U-net is still
the best segmentation network for medical images. The eﬀect of network architecture depth
should also be investigated, in order to capture the boundaries of the heart structures and
simplify the model to prevent overﬁtting. This is expected to improve the performance
of the pipeline and solve some of the issues regarding the training process. Further im-
provements could be in the use of another loss function. Experiments with diﬀerent loss
functions based on the overlap, such as IoU loss, instead of pixel-wise loss functions, would
be very valuable in the ﬁeld of medical image segmentation.
Bounding box network In further development of the pipeline, a lot of time would be
saved if the ﬁrst step was performed by a region detection network, instead of the U-net.
This way the ﬁrst step is simpliﬁed, and the focus could be put on the diﬃcult multi-class
segmentation task in the second step.
CGPS data The performance on the CGPS data could be drastically improved if examples
from the data set were included in the training set. To be able to do this, the created
annotations should be evaluated by a medical professional, to ensure a high quality. If the
size of the training set is increased, the pipeline could potentially be used as a diagnostic
tool in the clinic or for research for future cardiac CT scans.
==PAGE:82==
List of Figures
1.1
Schematic representation of pipeline. The ﬁrst region network generates a
bounding box around the heart based on a binary segmentation. The second
network uses to cropped data to create ﬁne-grain multi-class segmentation
of seven heart structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Systemic and pulmonary circulation. Red colored areas mark oxygenated
blood, while blue colored areas mark deoxygenated blood. Arrows indicate
the direction of the blood ﬂow [22] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Anatomical structures of the heart.
Red colored areas mark oxygenated
blood, while blue colored areas mark deoxygenated blood. Arrows indicate
the direction of the blood ﬂow [36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
CT scanning system [5]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Hounsﬁeld values scale [14]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Directions in a cardiac CT scan. Blue slice shows the axial plane, red shows
the sagittal plane and green shows the coronal plane . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1
Rendered surface model of manual annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Axial view of low resolution (left) and high resolution CT scan (right) . . .
22
4.3
Example of CT images from MM-WHS dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Example of CT images showing inconsistencies between anatomical struc-
tures and annotations regarding the left atrium (marked with red arrows) .
25
4.5
Example of CT images from the CGPS study. The colors represent the same
heart structures as in Figure 4.3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1
Preprocessing of the image data. The z-dimension of 300 is a random exam-
ple, since this dimension varies. First step pads in the z-direction to obtain
a cubic image volume, which is then downsampled to input dimensions. 2D
slices are then extracted from the data volume in diﬀerent directions (sagit-
tal, coronal and axial, from left to right) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Transformations for data augmentation viewed in axial direction. a) Original
image b) Intensity manipulation c) Rotation d) Shear e) B-spline with 5
knots and std. 15 f) B-spline with 10 knots and std. 10
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Diagram of pipeline. The upper section shows how the region network cre-
ates a bounding box around the heart. The lower section shows how the
segmentation network creates a ﬁne-grained segmentation using the cropped
data. Both parts slices the image volume into three diﬀerent dataset based
on the directionality (axial, sagittal, coronal) as input for the networks. The
fusion of the three results creates the ﬁnal output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:83==
LIST OF FIGURES
73
5.4
Region network architecture, modiﬁed from [29]. Each grey box corresponds
to a multi-channel feature map. The number of channels is denoted on top
of the box, and the dimensions of each map is listed at the lower left edge.
White boxes represent copied feature maps, and the arrows denote diﬀerent
operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Segmentation network architecture with contextual input, modiﬁed from
[29, 41], used for setup CNN C and CNN D. The leftmost contracting path
uses the previous training image and segmentation as input, while the other
contracting path (to the right) uses the current training image as input.
Each grey box corresponds to a multi-channel feature map. The number of
channels is denoted on top of the box, and the dimensions of each map are
listed at the lower left edge. White boxes represent copied feature maps,
and the arrows denote diﬀerent operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.1
Graphs of accuracy and loss for training and validation of the three direc-
tional region networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Probability maps from each directional network. High probability of be-
ing object class (heart) is represented with white, and low probability is
represented with black. Red arrows indicate regions of signiﬁcance . . . . .
46
6.3
The left image shows the input image, and the right image shows the diﬀer-
ence between ground truth (red) and prediction (blue). Light blue represents
the overlay between the two segmentations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Bounding box detection results. Red square is the estimated bounding box,
the blue box is the true bounding box
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.5
Graphs of loss for training and validation of the six segmentation networks
49
6.6
Probability map from an axial slices in test image 2. White indicates high
probability for the speciﬁc class, whereas black indicates low probability. In
(b), each shade of grey represents a label class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.7
Example of heart segmentation with (right) and without (left) post processing 54
6.8
Created segmentations (bottom row) and ground truth label maps (top row)
of the ﬁve test images. Note that the myocardium class is not visible these
images, and that aorta is only visible in some of the images . . . . . . . . .
55
6.9
Axial slices from test image 2. Red lines mark the ground truth, blue lines
mark the prediction. The yellow arrows indicate signiﬁcant areas in each slice 56
6.10 The triangulated surface of the right ventricle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.11 The diﬀerence between generated surfaces of each heart structure and ground
truth of test image 2. From the top left corner: LV, RV, LA, RA, MYO, AO,
PA. In general, green is around 0 mm diﬀerence, red is when predictions have
overestimated the structure, blue is when the structure is underestimated.
The color bar to the left of each structure shows the numerical diﬀerence in
mm. Figures are generated in Sumatra [24]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.12 Boxplot of Dice coeﬃcients for the 30 CGPS images for each heart structure
predicted with normal U-net and with contextual input network
. . . . . .
60
==PAGE:84==
74
LIST OF FIGURES
6.13 Generated segmentations from CGPS data using contextual input network.
Top row shows the three worst segmentations, and the bottom row shows
the three best.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.1
Papillary muscles present in the left ventricle. The ground truth segmenta-
tions are outlined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:85==
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of the six best performing MICCAI contributions based on deep
learning. ROI: Region of Interest. CNN: Convolutional Neural Network.
MP: Multi-planar. SSM: Statistical Shape Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.1
Hounsﬁeld values of diﬀerent heart structures. For each image volume, the
mean value within the heart structure is found, and the mean, min, max
and std across all 20 annotated images is found for each structure . . . . . .
23
4.2
Settings for the CCTA examinations for the CGPS study [11] . . . . . . . .
26
6.1
Statistics and measures of performance for the ﬁve test images
. . . . . . .
45
6.2
Average Dice coeﬃcient across all heart structures in all images of the train-
ing (78 images), validation (2 images) and test set (5 images) . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Average Dice coeﬃcient for each heart structure over the ﬁve test images,
for each of the four network set ups (see Section 5.3.3, with and without
connected component analysis (CCA) post processing. Dice is computed
for the full 3D label volume of each test image. The average column is the
average Dice coeﬃcient for all heart structures, not including whole heart
segmentation (WHS). Best performance for each heart structure is marked
with bold
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.4
Dice coeﬃcients for each test image from setup D + CCA . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.5
Average absolute distance from ground truth to the predicted surface, across
all ﬁve test volumes for each heart structure. The last column shows the
overall average diﬀerence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.6
Average Dice coeﬃcient for each heart structure for the 30 CGPS cardiac CT
scans for each of the setups. Highest dice coeﬃcient for each heart structure
is marked with bold
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.1
Average Dice coeﬃcients for each heart structure for the three best perform-
ing participants from the MM-WHS challenge [18] and the results from this
project. Best performing approach for each heart structure is marked with
bold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
==PAGE:86==
76
LIST OF TABLES
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean,
Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard, Manjunath Kud-
lur, Josh Levenberg, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek G Murray, Benoit Steiner,
Paul Tucker, Vijay Vasudevan, Pete Warden, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, Xiaoqiang
Zheng, Google Brain, Implementation Osdi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng
Chen, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoﬀrey Irv-
ing, Michael Isard, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore,
Derek G Murray, Benoit Steiner, Paul Tucker, Vijay Vasudevan, Pete Warden, Martin
Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous systems. OSDI, 16:265–283, 2016.
[2] M. R. Avendi, Arash Kheradvar, and Hamid Jafarkhani. A combined deep-learning
and deformable-model approach to fully automatic segmentation of the left ventricle
in cardiac MRI. Medical Image Analysis, 30:108–119, 2016.
[3] Christian F. Baumgartner, Lisa M. Koch, Marc Pollefeys, and Ender Konukoglu. An
exploration of 2D and 3D deep learning techniques for cardiac MR image segmentation.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2018.
[4] Richard Beare, Bradley Lowekamp, and Ziv Yaniv. Image Segmentation, Registration
and Characterization in R with SimpleITK. Journal of Statistical Software, 86(8):1–35,
2018.
[5] Daniel Boxer. CT scan, 2018.
[6] Patrick Ferdinand Christ, Mohamed Ezzeldin A. Elshaer, Florian Ettlinger, Sunil
Tatavarty, Marc Bickel, Patrick Bilic, Markus Rempﬂer, Marco Armbruster, Felix
Hofmann, Melvin D’Anastasi, Wieland H. Sommer, Seyed Ahmad Ahmadi, and Bjo-
ern H. Menze. Automatic liver and lesion segmentation in CT using cascaded fully
convolutional neural networks and 3D conditional random ﬁelds. In Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2016.
[7] Özgün Çiçek, Ahmed Abdulkadir, Soeren S. Lienkamp, Thomas Brox, and Olaf Ron-
neberger. 3D U-net: Learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2016.
[8] Rafał Dankowski, Artur Baszko, Michael Sutherland, Ludwik Firek, Piotr Kamłucki,
Katarzyna Wróblewska, Andrzej Szyszka, Adam Groothuis, and Tomasz Siminiak.
==PAGE:88==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
3D heart model printing for preparation of percutaneous structural interventions: De-
scription of the technology and case report. Kardiologia Polska, 2014.
[9] Andriy Fedorov,
Reinhard Beichel,
Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer,
Julien Finet,
Jean Christophe Fillion-Robin, Sonia Pujol, Christian Bauer, Dominique Jennings,
Fiona Fennessy, Milan Sonka, John Buatti, Stephen Aylward, James V. Miller, Steve
Pieper, and Ron Kikinis. 3D Slicer as an image computing platform for the Quanti-
tative Imaging Network. Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 2012.
[10] Huazhu Fu, Yanwu Xu, Damon Wing Kee Wong, and Jiang Liu. Retinal vessel seg-
mentation via deep learning network and fully-connected conditional random ﬁelds.
In Proceedings - International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, 2016.
[11] Andreas Fuchs, Mads R. Mejdahl, J. Tobias Kühl, Zara R. Stisen, Emma Julia P.
Nilsson, Lars V. Køber, Børge G. Nordestgaard, and Klaus F. Kofoed. Normal values of
left ventricularmass and cardiac chamber volumes assessed by 320-detector computed
tomography angiography in the Copenhagen General Population Study.
European
Heart Journal Cardiovascular Imaging, 2016.
[12] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feed-
forward neural networks. Aistats, 2010.
[13] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville.
The Deep Learning Book.
Nature, 2016.
[14] Mikael Jensen and Jens Wilhjelm. CT scanning. DTU Elektro, 2018.
[15] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[16] Kitware Inc. Simple ITK.
[17] Alejandro Lopez-Perez, Rafael Sebastian, and Jose M. Ferrero. Three-dimensional
cardiac computational modelling: methods, features and applications, 2015.
[18] MICCAI. Multi-Modality Whole Heart Segmentation challenge, 2017.
[19] Fausto Milletari, Nassir Navab, and Seyed Ahmad Ahmadi. V-Net: Fully convolutional
neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation. Proceedings - 2016 4th
International Conference on 3D Vision, 3DV 2016, pages 565–571, 2016.
[20] Paul D. Morris, Andrew Narracott, Hendrik Von Tengg-Kobligk, Daniel Alejan-
dro Silva Soto, Sarah Hsiao, Angela Lungu, Paul Evans, Neil W. Bressloﬀ, Patri-
cia V. Lawford, D. Rodney Hose, and Julian P. Gunn. Computational ﬂuid dynamics
modelling in cardiovascular medicine. Heart, 2016.
[21] Aliasghar Mortazi, Jeremy Burt, and Ulas Bagci. Multi-planar deep segmentation
networks for cardiac substructures from MRI and CT. In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 2018.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[22] New Health Advisor.
What Is the Diﬀerence between Pulmonary Circulation and
Systemic Circulation?, 2018.
[23] Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press, 2015.
[24] R.R. Paulsen and R. Larsen. Anatomically plausible surface alignment and reconstruc-
tion. In Theory and Practice of Computer Graphics 2010, TPCG 2010 - Eurographics
UK Chapter Proceedings, 2010.
[25] Christian Payer, Darko Štern, Horst Bischof, and Martin Urschler.
Regressing
heatmaps for multiple landmark localization using CNNs. In Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, 2016.
[26] Christian Payer, Darko Štern, Horst Bischof, and Martin Urschler. Multi-label whole
heart segmentation using CNNs and anatomical label conﬁgurations. In Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, 2018.
[27] Python Software Foundation. Python.
[28] Blaine Rister, Darvin Yi, Kaushik Shivakumar, Tomomi Nobashi, and Daniel L Rubin.
CT organ segmentation using GPU data augmentation, unsupervised labels and IOU
loss. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11226, 2018.
[29] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Networks
for Biomedical Image Segmentation. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 9351:234–
241, 2015.
[30] Jakob M. Slipsager. Statistical Shape Clustering of the Left Atrial Appendage. Tech-
nical report, Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[31] Nitish Srivastava, Geoﬀery Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov. Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overﬁtting.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2014.
[32] Carole H. Sudre, Wenqi Li, Tom Vercauteren, Sebastien Ourselin, and M. Jorge Car-
doso. Generalised dice overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced
segmentations. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2017.
[33] Abdel Aziz Taha and Allan Hanbury. Metrics for evaluating 3D medical image seg-
mentation: Analysis, selection, and tool. BMC Medical Imaging, 2015.
[34] Jonathan Tompson, Ross Goroshin, Arjun Jain, Yann LeCun, and Christoph Bregler.
Eﬃcient object localization using Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015.
[35] Qianqian Tong, Munan Ning, Weixin Si, Xiangyun Liao, and Jing Qin. 3D deeply-
supervised U-net based whole heart segmentation.
In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 2018.
==PAGE:90==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] Cinnamon VanPutte, Jennifer Regan, and Andrew Russo.
Seeley’s Essentials of
Anatomy and Physiology. McGraw Hill, 9th edition, 2011.
[37] C. Wang and Ö. Smedby. Automatic whole heart segmentation using deep learning
and shape context. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2018.
[38] World Health Organization. Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), 2017.
[39] Xin Yang, Cheng Bian, Lequan Yu, Dong Ni, and Pheng Ann Heng. 3D convolutional
networks for fully automatic ﬁne-grained whole heart partition. In Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2018.
[40] Xin Yang, Cheng Bian, Lequan Yu, Dong Ni, and Pheng Ann Heng. Hybrid loss
guided convolutional networks for whole heart parsing. In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 2018.
[41] Qiao Zheng, Herve Delingette, Nicolas Duchateau, and Nicholas Ayache. 3D Con-
sistent & Robust Segmentation of Cardiac Images by Deep Learning with Spatial
Propagation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 0062(c):1–12, 2018.
[42] Xiahai Zhuang. Challenges and Methodologies of Fully Automatic Whole Heart Seg-
mentation: A Review. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 4(3):371–408, 2013.
