==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
35 ECTS-points
26-02-2020
Metagenomic analysis of protein families
in pigs reared with and without antibiotics
Author:
Alexander Damm Strøm-Hansen
Supervisors:
Mikael Lenz Strube & Katrine Wegener Tams
The Technical University of Denmark 2020
==PAGE:2==
Project aim
Background: Antibiotic (AB) use in livestock has long been a hot topic, and with
good reason. Excess and unnecessary use of ABs can greatly increase the risk of
pathogens developing antimicrobial resistance (AMR). However, AMR is not the only
drawback of AB use. During treatment, commensal bacteria are killed as well, leading
to changes in the composition of the microbiome. As the microbiome is a vastly com-
plex system, consisting of trillions of interconnected microorganisms linked to various
metabolic processes, such changes can disturb its natural function. An investigation
of the correlation between ABs and changes to the microbiome, can help to further
improve our understanding of the effect of ABs.
Problem: The effect of ABs on the protein composition of the pig microbiome is
not well documented. While there is general consensus on the impact ABs can have
on the microbial diversity, its clinical consequences and its link to AMR gene accu-
mulation, changes in the composition of protein groups, are not yet accounted for.
Hypothesis: Due to the changes ABs can have on the microbial composition of
the microbiome, it is believed that the abundance of protein groups involved with
metabolism, AMR and infection is affected as well.
Aim: The aim of this thesis is to analyse a shotgun metagenomic dataset of 32
fecal samples. The samples originate from piglets raised with or without ABs. The
purpose is to compare the quantified protein composition of the microbiome, between
the treated and untreated piglets. The workflow manager Snakemake will be used
as a platform to construct a quantitative metagenomic pipeline. The purpose of the
pipeline is to process the sequenced metagenomic data, in order to extract relevant
protein abundance information.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Antibiotics (ABs) are frequently used in pig farming as disease control. One of the
known consequences thereof, is the occurrence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR).
However, this is not the only concern as ABs can also disrupt the natural microbial
composition of the microbiome.
As a consequence, it was hypothesized that the
microbial protein composition would be disturbed too. Thus, the purpose of this
study was to investigate differences in the protein composition of the microbiome
between piglets reared with and without ABs.
In addition, the thesis sought to
compare these differences between suckling and weaning piglets, in order to determine
if diet transition has an effect on the outcome.
To elucidate this, a metagenomic quantification study was conducted to find the abun-
dance of protein groups in a metagenomic dataset. The dataset consisted of sequenced
reads and assembled contigs, originating from shotgun metagenomic sequencing of fe-
cal samples. The fecal samples were derived from AB treated and untreated piglets,
sampled doing suckling and weaning stages. The provided data was processed by a
protein quantitative metagenomic pipeline. The main workflow consisted of binning,
gene annotation, mapping, gene quantification, normalization and assignment to the
Cluster of Orthologous groups database. After successful data processing, relevant
statistical analyses were performed to compare the abundance of protein groups in
treated and untreated samples.
The results demonstrated an accumulation of AMR genes, accompanied by an increase
of the mobilome in AB treated suckling piglets. No AMR gene accumulation was
found in weaning piglets. The microbiome of suckling piglets proved to be the most
susceptible to an overall disturbance.
In addition, an increase of proteins linked
to bacterial infection was discovered in treated piglets.
No protein changes were
related to affect host metabolism, however, an increase in proteins linked to microbial
metabolism was observed in treated suckling piglets.
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
Antibiotika (AB) bruges ofte i grise landbrug til sygdomsbehandling. En kendt kon-
sekvens deraf, er en stigning i antallet af antibiotikaresistens (ABR) gener. Deru-
dover, kan AB behandling forstyrre den naturlige mikrobielle sammensætning i mikro-
biomet.
Hypotesen var derfor, at den samlede mikrobielle proteinsammensætning
også ville blive påvirket. Formålet med studiet var derfor, at undersøge forskelle i
mikrobiomets protein sammensætning, mellem ubehandlede grise, og grise behandlet
med AB. Derudover, blev de førnævnte proteinforandringer også undersøgt i grise
under amning og grise under fravænning, for at fastslå om en diætforandring har
betydning for udfaldet.
Et kvantifikationsstudie blev gennemført, for at finde mængden af proteingrupper i et
metagenomisk datasæt. Datasættet bestod af sekventerede reads og deres tilsvarende
contigs, med oprindelse fra en shotgun metagenomisk sekventering af fæces prøver.
Fæces prøverne kom fra AB behandlede og ubehandlede grise, hvor prøvetagningen
var foretaget både under amning og fravænning. Dataene blev behandlet med en
kvantitativ metagenomisk pipeline.
Hoveddelen af workflowet bestod af binning,
gen-annotering, mapping, gen-kvantificering, normalisering og protein tilknytning til
Cluster of Orthologous groups databasen. Derefter, blev der foretaget en statistisk
analyse af dataene med det formål at sammenligne abundansen af proteingrupper
mellem behandlede og ubehandlede prøver.
Resultaterne viste en akkumulering af AMR-gener, ledsaget af en forøgelse af mo-
bilomet i behandlede grise under amning. Ingen forøgelse af AMR-gener blev ob-
serveret i grise under fravænning. En forøgelse af proteingrupper relateret til påbeg-
yndende infektion blev observeret, men ingen forandring i proteingrupper relateret
til en påvirkning værts metabolisme blev fundet.
Derudover, blev der observeret
en forøgelse af proteiner relateret til mikrobiel metabolisme i grise under amning.
Generelt viste det sig at mikrobiomet i grise under amning var mest påvirkeligt.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The work done in this thesis, is the final chapter of my studies at DTU. From being
granted a B.Sc. in Human Life Science, to now studying Pharmaceutical Design &
Engineering and concluding the journey here at the Department of Bioengineering.
In that regard, I would like to thank my supervisors Mikael Lenz Strube and Katrine
Wegener Tams, for their excellent guidance throughout the last 6 months, and for
never being shy of answering a late Sunday e-mail. In addition, I would like to thank
the science team at the Department of Bioengineering, for additional guidance. I also
want to thank ”Jesper Hansen” farms in Sønderborg and the University of Cambridge,
for providing the data used in this thesis. Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude
to my girlfriend, Camilla, for putting up with me.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Project aim
i
Abstract
ii
Resumé
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
Abbreviations
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The pig microbiome
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Accumulation of antimicrobial resistance genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Hypotheses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory of Methods
8
2.1
Metagenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Shotgun metagenomic sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Post-processing of quantified genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Materials & Methods
24
3.1
Fecal sampling of pigs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Pipeline & Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
35
4.1
Read filtering following quality control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Distribution of hypothetical proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Statistical analysis of COGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Differential abundance of AMR proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Relative enzyme composition over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Discussion
49
==PAGE:7==
Contents
vi
5.1
Evaluation of data pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Treated samples were linked to a decrease in HPs . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
The composition of digestive enzymes changed during weaning
. . . .
50
5.4
Treatment doing weaning showed limited effect . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Tetracycline & β-lactam AMR genes increased
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
The abundance of metabolizing proteins increased in suckling piglets .
53
5.7
Lost effect due to sample mixing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.8
Future research & considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusion
56
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
AB
AntiBiotic
AMR
AntiMicrobial Resistance
ANOVA
ANalysis Of VAriance
BAM
Binary Alignment Map
BC
Bonferroni Correction Species
BHC
Benjamini-Hochberg Correction
BWA
Burrows-Wheeler Alignment
BWT
Burrows-Wheeler Transform
COG
Cluster of Orthologous Groups
DHPS
DiHydroPteroate Synthase
FAA
Fasta Amino Acid
FC
Fold Change
GFF
General Feature Format
Hi-C
High-throughput Chromosome Conformation Capture
HP
Hypothetical Protein
PBP
Penicillin-Binding Protein
PEP
PhosphoEnolPyruvate
PTS
PhosphoTransferase System
RWA
Raised Without Antibiotics
S1
Scenario 1
S2
Scenario 2
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
viii
SAM
Sequence Alignment Map
TP
TimePoint
TPM
Trancripts Per Kilobase Million
UTI
Urinary Tract Infection
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
The pig microbiome
The pig microbiome is a vastly complex system, consisting of trillions of intercon-
nected microorganisms. These microorganisms span throughout the gastrointestinal
tract of the mammal in great diversity and include bacteria, archaea, viruses and
fungi [1]. The function of the microbiome is dependent on a series of microbially
synthesized protein groups, responsible for processes such as metabolism of proteins,
lipids and carbohydrates, but also synthesis of essential amino acids and vitamins
[2]. More specifically, the microbiota is thought to play an important role in bile
salt recycling, fatty acid production, cellulose digestion, metabolism of undigested
carbohydrates, and recovery of nutrients, which are all involved in gut health. How-
ever, a proper balance of these processes, is dependent on the state of the microbial
composition [3].
The microbial composition can be affected by numerous factors, such as the diet of
the sow, pathogen exposure, the microbiome of the sow and in-feed growth promoters
(see figure 1.1). Furthermore, the diet of the piglet is also thought to change the
microbiome and consequently, the composition of digestive enzymes [4].
Enzymes involved with volatile fatty acid production, carbohydrate metabolism and
cellulose decomposition are all a product of the complex microbial machinery [3].
According to a study by Guevarra et al. [5], the most abundant enzyme families in
suckling piglets were assigned to galactose and lactose utilization, which correlates
with lactose and galactose being the primary sugars in porcine milk. This contrasted
to the enzyme composition of weaning piglets, where most abundant enzyme groups
in the gut microbiota were predominated by glycosyl transferases, cellobiohydrolases,
pectin lyases, mannose metabolism and xylose utilization. The abundance of these
enzymes is linked to the carbohydrate rich diet that weaning piglets are exposed to,
which includes wheat, oats and plant sources [6].
==PAGE:11==
1.1 The pig microbiome
2
FACTORS 
AFFECTING 
THE 
MICROBIOME
DIET OF THE SOW
DIET OF THE 
PIGLET
MICROBIOME 
OF THE SOW
ANTIBIOTIC 
TREATMENT
IN-FEED GROWTH 
PROMOTERS
PATHOGEN 
EXPOSURE
Figure 1.1: Factors affecting the microbiome (figure inspired by Niederwerder [4]).
The adaption of the microbiome following diet transition, is a natural and essential
process of weaning. However, in the case of infection and consequently the admin-
istration of antibiotics (ABs), an unnatural disturbance of the microbiome can be a
side effect thereof. This includes the accumulation of antimicrobial resistance (AMR)
[4].
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Accumulation of antimicrobial resistance genes
3
1.2
Accumulation of antimicrobial resistance genes
AB use in pigs is an important part of health management in pig farming. ABs are
not only used for the sake of animal health and well-being, but also for general disease
control and growth performance [3]. However, due to the increase in world-wide AMR
and a general public concern for treatment failure of multi-drug resistant bacteria,
increased AB control is highly desired. Efforts are being made to decrease the use
of ABs and prioritize its applications. Several countries (including Denmark) have
even adopted a ”Raised Without Antibiotics” (RWA) concept. Products may only be
sold under the term RWA, if the pigs have not received ABs neither by feed, water
or injections [7]. While RWA pigs are beneficial for preventing AMR, the impact
on animal health and well-being should also be taken into account. Excluding ABs
completely can have negative effects on animal welfare, as it increases the risk of
mortality from treatable diseases with the accompanied pain thereof. Thus, ABs can
be a necessity in case of infection [7–9].
1.2.1
Resistance mechanisms and genes
During AB administration, as AB susceptible pathogenic bacteria are eliminated,
resistant strains are given a potential for multiplication. The way these strains me-
diate their resistance, is highly dependent on the classes of administered antibiotics.
Five common antibiotic classes used in pig farming are tetracyclines, macrolides,
lincosamides, aminoglycosides and β-lactams [10], all exercising different resistance
mechanisms.
1.2.1.1
Tetracyclines
Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum ABs, meaning that they are capable of affecting a
wide range of different bacteria. The AB works by hindering aminoacyl-tRNA from
binding to the ribosomal acceptor. Specifically, tetracyclines prevent association of
the 30S ribosomal subunit with tRNA, inhibiting tRNA from binding, and thus pre-
venting the prokaryotic cell from producing proteins and consequently replicating
[11].
Resistance to tetracyclines (known as tet genes) often occur as a gene in a
plasmid or a transposon. Common mechanisms of resistance associated genes include
efflux pumps (tetA, tetB, tetC and tetD), ribosomal protection mechanisms (tetM,
tetO, tetQ, tetS, tetT and tetW) or tet repressors (tetR) [12]. Efflux pumps work
as transmembrane pumps, whose purpose is to pump out unwanted proteins, in this
case tetracycline. Ribosomal protection is often presented in the form of cytoplasmic
proteins that bind to the ribosome, causing an alteration of its structure and pre-
venting tetracyclines from eliciting their inhibitory effects. Tet repressors normally
repress resistance genes, but in the presence of tetracycline they bind the AB instead,
thus indirectly inducing resistance [13, 14].
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Accumulation of antimicrobial resistance genes
4
1.2.1.2
Macrolides
As opposed to tetracyclines, macrolides elicit their effects primarily on Gram-positive
bacteria. However, much like tetracyclines, macrolides inhibit biosynthesis by bind-
ing to the ribosomal subunit. Specifically, within the nascent peptide exit tunnel
of the 50S subunit. This obstructs the exit tunnel, preventing further formation of
the nascent polypeptide chain. Macrolide resistance occurs in three ways. In the
first mechanism, methylation of the macrolide binding site (encoded by gene ermB)
modifies the ribosome structure, thus reducing binding affinity and preventing pro-
tein synthesis inhibition. The second mechanism is a drug efflux pump, disposing
of macrolides by altering the membrane permeability or increasing efflux expression.
Efflux pump alteration is encoded by gene family macB. The last resistance mecha-
nism is mediated by a mutation in nucleotide A2058, which is thought to have high
importance in macrolide resistance, due to conformational changes [15, 16].
1.2.1.3
Lincosamides
Lincosamides express their resistance mostly on Gram-positive prokaryotes.
The
mechanism is mediated by binding to the 23S RNA of 50S subunit, inhibiting pep-
tidyltransferase reactions by prematurely dissociate peptidyl-tRNA from the ribo-
some. Resistance to lincosamides is similar to that of macrolides [17].
1.2.1.4
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides work by binding to the small 16S rRNA of the 30S subunit, caus-
ing misreading of mRNA and eventually disrupting protein synthesis [18].
Resis-
tance arise when site specific mutations occur, or by genes encoding aminoglycoside-
modifying enzymes. Binding site resistance is a product of mutations in the rrs or
rpsL genes, while adenylyltransferase and phosphoryltransferase are encoded by aadA
and strA/strB, causing resistance by phosporylation and adenylylation, respectively
[19].
1.2.1.5 β-lactams
The mode of action for β-lactams are different to the aforementioned ABs. While
these classes all targeted the ribosome, β-lactams target the cell wall. The peptido-
glycan is an essential part of the bacterial cell wall, and acts as a protective layer. The
conformation of peptidoglycan originates from peptide cross-linkages. This process is
mediated by the enzymatic activity of transpeptidases, also referred to as Penicillin-
binding proteins (PBP). β-lactams act by disguising themselves as D-alanine residues,
thus binding the active site of PBP and inhibiting enzymatic activity; consequently
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Accumulation of antimicrobial resistance genes
5
preventing cross-linking. The lack of peptidoglycan makes the cell prone to lysis [20].
Resistance to most β-lactams occur by the expression of β-lactamases, which break
the structure of penicillin (bla genes). A less common resistance mechanism is the
alteration of PBP, which lowers the binding affinity of penicillins [21].
As resistant strains develop in the microbiome, their AMR genes can be shared among
other bacteria with the aid of mobile genetic elements, thus further spreading resis-
tance.
1.2.2
Mobility of AMR genes
AMR genes can be transferred between bacterial strains, either by vertical evolution
or horizontal transmission. Vertical gene transfer happens during cell division, where
the descendant cells inherit the AMR properties.
Horizontal gene transfer occurs
between bacteria, where the AMR gene pool is exchanged. Transferable genetic ele-
ments such as plasmids and transposons enables the spread of these resistance genes
[3, 22]. Another form of horizontal gene transfer is by bacteriophage (phage) trans-
duction. A prophage is the genome of a bacteriophage, which is integrated in the
bacterial DNA. When a phage injects its DNA into the bacterial cell, the phage can
either engage a lytic cycle, or transfer its genome into the bacterial chromosome or
plasmid, creating a prophage. If the latter is chosen, viral genes of the phage is left
in the bacteria, without causing harm to the cell. Sometimes, the phage will leave
AMR genes in its host, increasing the survival rate of the bacteria [23, 24]. A study
by Allen et al. [25] discovered an increase in phage integrase-encoding genes of the
swine microbiome following chlortetracycline and penicillin treatment, suggesting an
increase in phage DNA transfer to bacterial cells. Thus, dissemination of resistance
mechanisms can participate in shaping the microbial composition.
Besides AMR gene accumulation, AB use has the potential to affect the natural
microbial composition of the microbiome, but the consequences thereof are yet to be
fully explored.
1.2.3
Disturbance of the microbiome
Aberration of the microbiota caused by AB treatment, can disrupt its natural func-
tion, leading to imbalances in the microbial composition; consequently affecting
metabolism and gut health. Since ABs are eradicating both pathogens and commen-
sal bacteria due to their broad-spectrum activity, the symbiosis of the gut microbiota
is impaired. As secondary metabolites of some organisms are neccesary to other col-
onizers, a disturbance can affect this relationship. In mammals, AB-induced changes
of the microbial composition can affect both macronutrient and micronutrient uti-
lization. Tetracycline treatment is thought to reduce microbial B12 utilization, thus
increasing the abundance of the vitamin in the gut [26, 27]. In addition, a study
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Accumulation of antimicrobial resistance genes
6
by Pi et al. [28], discovered an increase in Escherichia coli prevalence in pig feces
after two weeks of β-lactam administration. The effect thereof, was reduced nitrogen
utilization of the host.
Moreover, during microbial depletion caused by ABs, the
bioavailability of copper has been reported to decrease [26]. As copper is important
for host processes, the effects hereof can be damaging.
Thus, as the gut microbial composition is an active part of metabolism, AB-induced
microbial changes affect metabolism and absorption pathways.
However, these effects are not just limited to ”unfavorable” imbalances. In humans,
dysbiosis of the microbiota is linked to diseases such as intestinal inflammation and
rheumatoid arthritis. In pigs, a common cause of diarrhea is an AB induced increase
of bacteria such as Clostridium difficile. While secondary bile acids can inhibit the
growth of this bacterium, bile acid producing bacteria (such as Lachnospiraceae and
Ruminococcaceae) can be killed doing AB treatment, enabling growth of the pathogen
[27, 29].
Some of the previously reported effects ABs can induce on the pig microbiome and
the associated health consequences, are listed from figure 1.2.
INCREASED INFECTION SUSCEPTIBILITY
- REDUCTION OF BACTERIAL COMPETITORS
- ALTERATION OF MICROBIAL DIVERSITY
- AFFECT HOST-MICROBE CONNECTION
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
- DEVELOPMENT OF RESISTANT BACTERIA
- TRANSFER OF RESISTANCE GENES 
- NEW MUTATIONS
WEAKENING OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
- INHIBITED IMMUNE FUNCTION
- INCREASED INFLAMMATION
- REDUCED IMMUNOGLOBIN EXPRESSION
METABOLIC DISRUPTION
- ALTERATION OF GENE EXPRESSION
- CHANGES IN METABOLISM
- CHANGES IN MICROBIAL PROFILE
THE EFFECT OF 
ANTIBIOTICS ON 
THE MICROBIOME
Figure 1.2: Effect of antibiotics on the pig microbiome and its consequences
(adapted from Zeineldin et al. [3]).
In addition to the aforementioned, the microbiome is also linked to the immune system
in mammals [27]. A study by Schokker et al. [30] showed differences in host gene
expression of immune-related processes such as TNF/cytokine activity, cell migration
and cell adhesion processes, after one dose of ABs in the pre-weaning period. The
==PAGE:16==
1.3 Hypotheses
7
effect lasted for a prolonged period, suggesting that AB treatment in early life may
shape microbial composition and alter host gene expression. This was suggested to be
due to the absence of a diverse microbiome in subjects exposed to ABs, thus lacking
microbial stimuli; consequently influencing immune development. In relation to that,
it was reported that pre-weaned piglets are at even greater risk of infection due to
their unstable microbiota. Diarrhea is just one of many consequences of an infection,
which is also the number one reason of mortality among piglets [31].
1.3
Hypotheses
Various metagenomic studies have investigated the pig microbiome [3]. These studies
mainly focus on differences in the microbial composition, nutrient bioavailability,
prevalence of nutrients and host gene expression following AB treatment.
While
many consequences of AB treatment are known, the proteins responsible for these
processes are still to be investigated. Since there is consensus that AB treatment
can alter the microbial composition [3, 26], consequently affecting gut health, it is
believed that the abundance of proteins involved with gut symbiotic processes is also
changed. Thus, due to the disturbance ABs cause to the microbial composition and
its link to AMR accumulation, the following is hypothesized for the microbiome of
piglets treated with ABs:
• Changes to protein groups involved with microbial metabolism.
• Changes to protein groups affecting host metabolism.
• Changes to protein groups linked to host infection.
• Increased disruption of protein groups in suckling piglets (as opposed to weaning
piglets).
• Accumulation of AMR genes, accompanied by an increased mobilome.
In addition, it is expected that diet transition during weaning will decrease the abun-
dance of lactase enzymes and increase the abundance of enzymes linked to metabolism
of plant-based food, oats and wheat. Hence, this will be determined too.
These hypotheses will be investigated through a comprehensive metagenomic study,
with the purpose of identifying and quantifying protein groups in the microbiome.
The dataset consists of fecal samples from both AB treated piglets and RWA piglets,
provided by ”Jesper Hansen” farms in Sønderborg, which will be processed by an ap-
propriate metagenomics pipeline mediating protein quantification. Lastly, the quan-
tified proteins from the samples will be compared between the two groups of piglets.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory of Methods
2.1
Metagenomics
Metagenomics is the study and analysis of the metagenome from an environmental
sample, where the metagenome refers to all genetic material present in the sample.
The main advantage of a metagenomic analysis is the possibility of accessing all
microbes of the sample, without having to culture or isolate each organism. Put in
order words, a metagenomic analysis allows the analyst to investigate the collective
microbial genomes and all the genes possessed of an environmental sample [32].
In order to start analysing the metagenome, it needs to be sequenced. Two popu-
lar sequencing options of the metagenome include shotgun metagenomic sequencing
and 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The purpose of the study determines the choice of
method.
16S rRNA gene sequencing is a classic technique for identification and classification
of prokaryotes. It enables the analyst to perform a taxonomic analysis of the di-
versity of microbial communities relatively fast and inexpensively.
As 16S rRNA
sequences are essential for the prokaryotes’ ability to translate mRNA, these genes
are ubiquitous. The genes contain both conserved and variable regions, making them
perfect targets as genomic markers, as the variable regions can identify the specific
prokaryote. Though this method makes for a great tool in identifying prokaryotic
species, it is unable to provide information regarding the genes of the prokaryote
[33]. In contrast, the technique referred to as shotgun metagenomic sequencing is the
process of shearing all DNA in the sample, sequencing it and then assembling the
pieces accordingly [34]. This approach gives insight into the entire genomic pool of
the sample. Hence, shotgun metagenomic sequencing is appropriate when a protein
abundance determination of a collection of microorganisms is desired.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Metagenomics
9
DNA ISOLATION
Hi-C &
FRAGMENTATION
SEQUENCING
QUALITY CONTROL 
& ASSEMBLY
BINNING
TCAGGACTAGCTCAGCAAGT
GTAACCGTGTCAGTAAGTAG
GTGTCCAACCGGTAACCGTA
ATGTCTCTAGTCAGTAAGTA
GTACTGACTAGGTTCCGACA
Figure 2.1: The figure depicts the main steps of a general shotgun metagenomics
strategy. The purpose of the illustration is to give an overview of the
process, from environmental sampling to gene quantification and taxo-
nomic classification.
From figure 2.1 is depicted the main steps of a gene quantitative metagenomics work-
flow strategy, based around shotgun metagenomic sequencing data. The endgame
is to produce quantified gene data from metagenomes, which can then be compared
across samples. The process is initiated by sample collecting from the environment,
which is first sequenced and then bioinformatically processed. The final result is a
total annotation and quantification of all genetic material of the metagenome [35, 36].
The purpose and theory behind every step (and steps in-between) will be thoroughly
outlined in this chapter.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Shotgun metagenomic sequencing
10
2.2
Shotgun metagenomic sequencing
The first step of the workflow, is to sequence the obtained metagenomic samples. The
purpose is to generate a digitized version of the metagenome, in order to bioinfor-
matically process the DNA. However, the samples must be prepared first.
2.2.1
Hi-C & DNA isolation
High-throughput Chromosome Conformation Capture (Hi-C) is a way of connecting
DNA within a cell, to later optimise the assembly process (assembling the digitized
DNA fragments).
Hi-C crosslinks DNA within the cell. In this case, the chromosome and the plasmid
of the prokaryotic cell is linked, as can be observed from figure 2.2.
CROSS-LINKING 
DNA
CELL LYSIS
ILLUMINA SEQUENCING
BIOTIN LABELLING
PROXIMITY LIGATION AND 
BIOTIN REMOVAL FROM ENDS
Ligation
Chromosome
Plasmid 1
Plasmid 2
Chromosome
Plasmid 1
Plasmid 2
Crosslink
BiotindCTP
-
Crosslink
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the Hi-C process (Iain Kean, Cambridge University).
After crosslinking with formaldehyde, the cell undergoes lysis and the DNA is cut
with restriction enzymes. The ends are filled with biotin and are then ligated so that
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Shotgun metagenomic sequencing
11
chromosomes and their corresponding plasmids are still in connection. Lastly, biotin
is removed from the unbound ends [37].
Next, the Hi-C treated DNA is extracted and isolated from the sample.
In this
process, RNase is used to remove all RNA from the sample. This is followed by the
addition of phenol-chloroform, which separates nucleic acids from lipids and proteins,
thus isolating DNA [38]. Now sequencing can begin.
2.2.2
Sequencing
Sequencing allows the researcher to identify the DNA sequence of a sample, by hav-
ing the DNA digitized. The most common method to obtain this, is with Illumina
sequencing. Figure 2.3 simplistically illustrates the sequencing process from start to
finish.
FRAGMENTED DNA
ADAPTORS
LIBRARY PREPARATION
CLUSTER FORMATION
SEQUENCING
ADAPTORS
IDENTIFICATION
CCGGCTTAG…...
Figure 2.3: The Illumina sequencing process.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Shotgun metagenomic sequencing
12
2.2.2.1
Library preparation
First, the DNA is fragmented either biologically or physically.
This is to ensure
appropriate fragment lengths. Fragmentation is neccesary due to technical limitations
of the sequencer, as long fragments can yield inaccurate results [39, 40]. Secondly,
adaptors and indices are attached to the fragments. The indices makes it possible to
distinguish and identify reads from each cluster.
2.2.2.2
Cluster formation
The next step, is the generation of clusters by bridge amplification of the fragments.
Inside a glass flow cell, fragments attach to oligonucleotides coating the bottom of
the flow cell, by matching the adaptor to a complementary oligonucleotide. Once
attached, polymerases create a complementary strand.
The initial strand is then
washed off, leaving the reverse strand locked to the flow cell. The adaptor on the
top end of the newly created strand, is attached to an adjacent matching oligo, by
bending the strand. Once again, polymerases attach to the strand, thus creating a
complementary strand. This results in double stranded DNA, that is now heated so
that the strands separate. This enables the strands to each attach to a complementary
oligo, leaving the forward and the reverse strand. The next step, clonal amplification,
repeats this process thousands of times. This is to ensure integrity of the results, as it
enables the researcher to identify errors, if the clones of forward and reverse strands
are dissimilar.
2.2.2.3
Sequencing by synthesis & identification
Finally, the reverse strands are washed off and sequencing can begin. One by one,
fluorescently tagged nucleotides are added to the strand, emitting the light of one of
four colors that enables the machine to identify exactly what base has just been added.
The read product is washed away, and the appropriate index primer is attached,
generated and washed off. The strand then bends, forming a bridge, and attaches
to the appropriate adjacent oligo.
The next index primer, now in the other end
of the fragment, is read similar to the first and washed off. Polymerases create a
complementary strand, leaving a double stranded bridge that is denatured to form
two single strands. The original forward strand is washed away and the remaining
reverse strand is sequenced similar to the forward strand. The final result, is millions
of paired-end reads [38, 41].
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Shotgun metagenomic sequencing
13
2.2.2.4
Paired-end reads
FRAGMENT SIZE
INSERT SIZE
ADAPTER 1
ADAPTER 2
INSERT
READ 1
READ 2
INNER DISTANCE
Figure 2.4: Illustration of how paired-end reads relate to fragments.
When performing paired-end sequencing, reads are generated from both ends of the
fragment. The adaptors on both ends of the fragment, determine where the sequenc-
ing must start. While fragments can be longer than the sum of lengths from both
reads, the space in between (referred to as inner distance in figure 2.4) is ”lost”. How-
ever, during paired-end sequencing, the inner distance is associated to the reads, as
the reads are related to each other, and because the average fragment size is known.
This is especially helpful during assembly, as it is much easier to identify repeat re-
gions on the genome, when a fragment overlapping it can be identified [42, 43]. In
addition, during gene quantification (see section 2.3.7), counting fragments instead of
reads provides additional accuracy. As an example, given a multi-gene-overlapping
fragment, it is easier to assign the fragment to the right gene, due to the decreased
ambiguity provided by the paired-end information. After sequencing, the paired-end
reads are stored in a FASTQ-file.
2.2.2.5
FASTQ-format
A FASTQ-file contains all the reads from the sequencing. In the case of paired-end
sequencing, two FASTQ-files will be produced, one for the forward reads and one
for the reverse reads. Due to the huge size of the files, they will usually be GZip
compressed.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
14
@<Sequence identifier>
<Read sequence>
+<Optionally sequence identifier and description>
<Quality scores>
Figure 2.5: Representation of the FASTQ-format.
From figure 2.5, a representation of the FASTQ-format can be observed. The first
line contains a unique identifier for the read. In paired-end files, these identifiers are
used to pair both reads from each file. The next line is the actual sequence, followed
by a line that optionally contains the identifier again and any description. The last
line encodes quality scores, corresponding to each nucleotide in the read sequence
line. There will always be the same number of quality scores as nucleotides [44, 45].
Though a FASTQ-file contains all the information of genomes in a sample, the se-
quencing data by itself is a messy mixture of fragmented microbial genomes that needs
to be processed. In order to do so, a bioinformatics pipeline must be constructed.
2.3
Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
A quantitative metagenomics pipeline must be designed to ”translate” the raw reads
into something manageable, ultimately producing gene abundance data fit for inter-
pretation. Such a pipeline, is mediated by a wide range of bioinformatic tools and
scripts. Tools that each are specifically designed to serve a single purpose (multi-
tools do exist). It is up to the bioinformatician to combine the tools in a way that
is appropriate for the analysis. But first, a fitting environment in which the pipeline
will be created must be chosen.
2.3.1
Pipeline framework
Bioinformatic pipelines can be constructed with a variety of platforms. Among the
most traditional is writing a bash script in a text editor. However, newer platforms
are available, which serve to automate and optimise the piping process. Among those,
are the python-based workflow manager, Snakemake. The platform is appropriate for
this kind of analysis, as it enables reproducibility and scalability in regards to sample
size and workstation. It does so by using ”rules” as building blocks for the pipeline
[46].
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
15
2.3.1.1
Rules
The workflow of a snakefile (python-based script, in which a Snakemake workflow is
designed), is based around the use of ”rules”. Each rule must consist of an input,
an output and a shell command that uses the input to generate the desired output.
The shell command can be anything from a bash script, to a python script, to the
execution of a bioinformatic tool.
At the top of the snakefile is a ”target rule”. This rule contains all the desired out-
puts from the other rules. When executing the snakefile, Snakemake will select the
first rule in the script as the target rule. During script execution, Snakemake checks
whether or not the desired output files from all the other rules have in fact been
created. This is crucial, as output files can be used as input files to subsequent rules.
When initializing a workflow, Snakemake will optimize the order in which rules are
executed. This process is dependent on the output files and when they are used as
inputs to other rules, and doesn’t necessarily reflect the order of the rules in the
script. When dealing with multiple samples, rules can run in parallel of each other,
provided the workflow is executed on multiple cores [47].
2.3.1.2
Scalability
Snakemake can be executed on a single-core processor, a quad-core processor or a
computer cluster (and anything in between), without having to modify the snake-
file. If a multi-core processor is provided, jobs can run in parallel. If the snakefile
is executed on a cluster, the number of threads, memory and wall-time can be de-
fined for each rule in the snakefile, which can then run as separate jobs on separate
cores (and nodes). This can save a lot of time, when running numerous huge samples.
As the quantity of samples can vary from study to study, sample scaling is convenient.
Sample scalability is possible as Snakemake uses wildcards, a form of variable entry
names which can be scaled according to the number of samples. The names of the
wildcards are accessed directly from a customizable configuration file, that withholds
information regarding sample locations and names. The configuration file is generated
from a custom-made python script that identifies FASTA-files and FASTQ-files in a
specified folder, and additionally separates forward and reverse reads. Thus, when a
snakefile is executed, the input size and names are automatically processed, without
the need for manually adjusting the snakefile [46].
The first job of the pipeline is to evaluate the quality of the sequenced reads.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
16
2.3.2
Quality control
Initially, the reads from the FASTQ-files must be quality controlled and trimmed
accordingly, to ensure their integrity. During the quality control, unwanted DNA,
such as host DNA is removed. Furthermore, the reads are trimmed, if reads with low
quality are detected. Various quality control tools exist. Among them is the novel
quality control tool, Fastp [48].
Fastp is an all-in-one quality control and pre-processing tool that supports paired-
end data. The tool offers various sequence evaluation techniques such as, adaptor
trimming, base correction, duplication evaluation, read quality control and over-
represented sequence analysis, with the purpose of improving the quality of reads
[48]. A benchmark study by Chen et al. [48], revealed that Fastp was one of the top
scoring quality control tools, both in speed and accuracy.
Once the reads have been quality controlled, they are ready for further processing.
As reads are mere fragments of what was once complete genomes, a technique known
as sequence assembly can bring them closer to their original sequence.
2.3.3
De novo assembly
Like a puzzle, the reads must be assembled into contiguous sequences (contigs). A
contig is a sequence of reads, representing a piece of an unfinished genome [49].
Two common ways to perform assembly is either by de novo assembly or reference
genome based assembly.
The latter utilizes a reference database, from which the
contigs can be constructed. De novo assembly relies on algorithms to find consensus
between reads and is not depended on a database. While metagenomic data harbor
various microorganisms (some which are yet to be documented in a database), it is
appropriate to use this method [50].
A popular de novo assembly tool is MetaSPAdes [51]. MetaSPAdes constructs a de
Bruijn graph, in order to find overlapping read sequences. From the de Bruijn graph
illustration of figure 2.6, it can be observed how the graph is built. All reads are
divided in 1-base shifted k-mers (in this example 7-mers), from which a graph is
formed. The collection of k-mers is examined and overlapping k-mers between reads
(the green box) are then used to connect the reads.
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
17
READ 1
ATGGAAGTCGCG
ATGGAAG
TGGAAGT
GGAAGTC
GAAGTCG
AAGTCGC
AGTCGCG
GAGGAAGTCCTT
AGGAAGT
GGAAGTC
GAAGTCC
AAGTCCT
READ 2
AGTCCTT
GAGGAAG
ATGGAAG
TGGAAGT
GGAAGTC
GAAGTCG
AAGTCGC
AGTCGCG
ATGGAAG
AGGAAGT
GAAGTCC
AAGTCCT
AGTCCTT
Figure 2.6: Example of a simplified de Bruijn graph. The orange boxes represent
read 1 7-mers, while the blue boxes represent read 2 7-mers. The green
box is an overlapping 7-mer.
MetaSPAdes will first construct individual de Bruijn graphs for all reads, then connect
the reads to form an assembly graph and finally find paths in the graph that represent
long fragments [51]. The final result is a series of contigs stored in a FASTA-file.
2.3.3.1
FASTA-format
After assembly, the contigs will be represented in FASTA-format. This file format is
quite common in bioinformatics and is used for various data representations.
>Sequence identifier (e.g. contig name or protein)
<Read sequence (nucleotides or amino acids)>
Figure 2.7: Representation of the FASTA-format.
In figure 2.7 an illustration of a FASTA-format is shown. The first line contains the
identifier, which must be unique. The line will always start with a ”>”, followed
by the identifier, which makes it easy to distinguish between sequences. The next
line contains the actual sequence. Depending on the specific file, the sequence can
be represented as nucleotides or amino acids. Contig files are commonly stored in
nucleotide format [52].
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
18
While contigs are mere parts of a complete genome, binning will further group them
together.
2.3.4
Binning
The purpose of binning is to sort the contigs into groups of individual genomes. There
can be thousands of contigs derived from a metagenomic assembly, with no way of
knowing which genome they belong to prior to binning.
Binning can be approached in two ways. Either by the use of databases of already
sequenced genomes, which aids in grouping the contigs into their appropriate genome,
or by looking at the specific composition of the contigs which is not dependent of a
database. The latter requires relatively high quality data, as low quality reads and
contamination can greatly affect the result [32, 34]. However, for a proper quality
controlled metagenomic sample with the potential of harboring many un-annotated
genomes, composition based binning is ideal in order to get the most bins.
Common binning tools include MetaBAT, MetaCluster and Maxbin [53]. MaxBin [54]
is a metagenomic clustering tool, used to cluster contigs into bins and distinguishes
itself from the rest, as it also utilizes the contig coverage in its algorithm. During
clustering, the abundance of reads are taken into account, which aids Maxbin in
grouping the contigs.
Besides contig coverage, Maxbin uses the genomic features of tetranucleotide frequen-
cies in its algorithm. The frequencies of tetranucleotides in the contigs are compared
across contigs, to reveal how likely it is that the contigs belong to the same genome.
To estimate the number of genomes in the samples, Maxbins utilizes the gene pre-
diction tool FragGeneScan [55] to predict genes and then the sequence similarity tool
HMMER3 [56] to locate 107 single-copy marker genes in the predicted genes [54].
Single-copy marker genes are genes that are present in almost all microorganisms at
a single copy. Thus, identifying the quantity of these genes can provide the quantity
of the total bins [57].
Maxbin utilizes an algorithm referred to as an expectation-maximization algorithm,
which consists of five steps.
1. Estimation of tetranucleotide frequencies and coverage levels, for all contigs.
2. Initialization of genomes.
3. Probability calculation of a sequence belonging to a genome.
4. Calculate new tetranucleotide frequencies and coverage levels.
5. Run step 3 and 4 again, until unanimous confidence in the binning.
After binning, the individual bins must be annotated.
CheckM [58] is commonly
used for taxonomic assignment and quality control of the generated bins. Checkm
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
19
will assess all the bin-files and annotate them with a predicted taxonomy. The anno-
tation can range from order down to species, in regards to how well documented the
bin is. CheckM uses a reference database to annotate its bins, using lineage-specific
marker sets (set of collocating marker genes) in collaboration with the tool pplacer
for phylogenetic placement [58].
To further understand the contents of the now annotated genomes, the genes must
be analysed.
2.3.5
Gene annotation
Gene annotation covers the process of identifying gene specific locations on the
genome. This includes locating coding regions on the genome, as well as functional
prediction of the genes, with the purpose of assigning meaningful descriptions to the
genes [59].
Prokka [60] is a wrapper for a wide range of tools with the purpose of performing
gene annotation, and is commonly used in metagenomic pipelines. For annotation of
protein coding genes, which is of interest in this workflow, Prokka uses Prodigal to
locate coding sequences and provide the coordinates of candidate genes (non-coding
regions are also located, as these regions can then be excluded for faster processing).
Then Prokka looks through various databases in hierarchical order (from small to
large), with the purpose of assigning biological function to the predicted genes. If a
coding sequence is located within a gene, but the gene is not in any of the databases,
the protein will be assigned with a ”Hypothetical protein” label. The output of Prokka
is a GFF (General Feature Format) file, containing all the gene annotation information
[60, 61]. After gene annotation, the next step is to find the abundance/depth of the
predicted genes. Due to the fact that the genes are predicted from assembled contig
files (bins), the quantitative information that the FASTQ-files withhold are not yet
associated with the bins. This can be accomplished through a mapping procedure.
2.3.6
Mapping
The mapping procedure is in its essence, to gain information regarding where all the
reads belong on the assembled genomes. As a metagenomic sample consists of many
of the same microorganisms, lots of similar reads are expected to map at the same re-
gions on the genomes. This will provide quantitative information on the given region.
There are two ways to approach mapping. One is to map the reads from the FASTQ-
files directly to the predicted genes, while the other is to map the reads to the bins,
and then count the genes from the resultant alignment [62]. The former gives direct
information on how many reads map to each gene, however there are downsides to
this approach. For instance, reads that are in between genes will be hard to place,
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Quantitative metagenomics pipeline
20
when the genes are mapped out of context from the rest of the genome. Thus, due
to the gene/bin context that mapping to the bins gives, it is the ideal approach.
Several alignment tools are available.
Among some of the popular are Burrows-
Wheeler Alignment (BWA), SOAP and Bowtie. According to a benchmark study
performed by Hatem et al. [63], both Bowtie and BWA shared similar effects, slightly
outperforming SOAP using a read length > 100bp, with BWA mapping slightly more
reads than the two.
Hence, BWA [64] is currently the most optimal tool to use.
For paired-end data, BWA works by locating all positions of all the mapped reads
on the reference sequence, then sorts them according to their coordinates, and then
performs a scanning to pair the corresponding reads. Due to the huge amounts of
data when dealing with metagenomic samples, BWA performs batch searching of
256K read pairs. To relieve memory usage, BWA uses an algorithm called Burrows-
Wheeler transform (BWT). BWT compresses strings by rearranging them into blocks
of similar characters, making them easier to compress [64].
The output of BWA is an alignment file in the format of SAM (Sequence Alignment
Map) or BAM (Binary Alignment Map). These files can be interpreted with SAM-
tools, which is a tool used for streamlining and filtering the data of the resulting files
[65].
After gene annotation and mapping, quantification of the annotated genes can be
performed.
2.3.7
Quantification of genes
Gene quantification is the process of determining the abundance of each gene in a
sample. For such a feat, the counting tool Featurecounts [66] is ideal. Featurecounts
is a tool used for read counting of genomic features and allows for flexible gene
counting and additional read mapping control. Featurecounts takes as input a GFF
file generated with Prokka, with a corresponding alignment file, such as BAM or
SAM (generated with BWA). The alignment file contains information on how many
reads mapped to the bins and where. Thus, the alignment file describes start and
stop coordinates for the reads, but also the name of the reference bin to which they
mapped. The GFF file contains information on genomic features, and where in the
bins they are located. Featurecounts then compares mapping location of the reads on
the reference bin with the region of which the genomic feature spans. The final result
is a count-matrix containing quantitative gene information of the entire metagenome
[66].
==PAGE:30==
2.4 Post-processing of quantified genes
21
2.4
Post-processing of quantified genes
After the abundance of the genes in the metagenome is accounted for, it needs to be
processed. Due to the varying sample sizes, normalization must first be ensued.
2.4.1
Read normalization
An essential part of comparing gene abundances within a sample is to normalize for
the gene length.
As a longer gene has a higher probability of having more reads
mapped to it, it is important to take that into consideration. In addition, due to
potential variations in sample size, unwanted bias can occur.
For a comparative
metagenomic pipeline, it is essential to normalize for the gene depth too, to enable
inter-sample comparison.
There are various normalization methods available, each with its own purpose. Among
the most common are RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase Million), FPKM (Fragments Per
Kilobase Million) and TPM (Transcripts Per Kilobase Million). TPM normalization
is most suited for inter-sample comparison, as it allows for a one to one comparison
between samples, disregarding sample size. TPM normalization can be divided into
three steps.
1. Dividing the fragments by the length of each gene in kilobases. The result is
reads per kilobase (RPK).
2. Next, the RPK values are added together and divided by a million. That leaves
a scaling factor.
3. All RPK values are then divided by the scaling factor, resulting in TPM values
for all genes.
The sum of all TPM values will always equal to one million for all samples. Thus,
it is feasible to compare gene composition across samples, without having to take
sample size into account [67]. However, due to the vast amount of generated data, it is
practice to group the genes/proteins to minimize the data quantity. This will ease the
process of comparing protein abundance between samples and in communicating the
results. One such categorisation method, is grouping by the Cluster of Orthologous
Groups (COG) database.
2.4.2
Cluster of Orthologous Groups
The COG database consists of thousands of COGs, which was created by group-
ing orthologs, as well as separated paralogs into clusters of similar function. More
than 5.700 COGs are currently identified [68]. Orthologous genes, are genes from
different species, originating from a common ancestral gene and has evolved by spe-
ciation events. Orthologs usually retain their function, though the genetic sequence
can differ. Paralogs on the other hand, are created by duplication events within the
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Post-processing of quantified genes
22
same species, and doesn’t necessarily keep the same function [69]. In addition, an
even broader grouping method is available, referred to as COG classes. This method
groups COGs in categories according to one of 25 possible classes [68]. In addition to
COG clustering, proteins can also be distributed in enzyme groups according to their
EC-number. EC-numbers (Enzyme Commission number) are a classification system
of enzymes, based on their catalytic reactions and is developed by the International
Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology [70].
Thus, by grouping proteins in orthologous groups and enzyme groups, it is possible
to categorize similar proteins, narrowing the amount of data to be analysed.
As the generated output of a metagenomic sample can be immense, a statistical
analysis can be conducted to identify significance.
2.4.3
P-value adjustment
When performing a statistical analysis, considering the probability values (p-values),
can aid in picking out data of significance. A traditional p-value threshold is α = 0.05.
However, when doing multi-hypothesis testing, the p-value tends to inflate. This is
a problem when dealing with big data, where thousands of statistical hypotheses are
tested, thus increasing the risk of getting a false positive. Luckily, several adjustment
techniques are available, that can aid in either correcting the p-values or adjusting
the level of significance.
2.4.3.1
Bonferroni correction
Bonferroni correction (BC), also referred to as the adjusted significance level, is a
statistical correction of an inflated type 1 error. A type 1 error, is the false rejection
of the null hypothesis.
Bonferroni correction, where α is the original significance level and n is the number
of hypotheses:
αadjusted = α/n
When increasing the number of tests performed, the risk of committing a type 1 error
increases. On the contrary, when adjusting the p-value with BC, the risk of a type
2 error increases (failing to reject the null hypothesis) [71]. Thus, BC can be very
stringent when the dataset is very big, as the adjusted α becomes very low [72].
==PAGE:32==
2.4 Post-processing of quantified genes
23
2.4.3.2
Benjamini-Hochberg correction
A less conservative way of correcting p-values is with Benjamini-Hochberg correction
(BHC). While BC only takes into account the number of hypotheses, BHC ranks all
p-values in ascending order (1, 2, 3.. etc.) and incorporates that into the calculation:
Pvalueadjusted = Pvalue ∗n/k
Where n is the number of hypotheses and k is the corresponding rank. Here, the
p-values are adjusted, as opposed to the cut-off. In addition, instead of adjusting
the false positive rate, as BC does, BHC controls the false discovery rate. The false
discovery rate is the amount of false positives expected from rejected null hypotheses,
whereas the false positive rate is the chance of falsely rejecting at least one hypothesis
[72, 73].
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Materials & Methods
3.1
Fecal sampling of pigs
The pig data in this study originates from ”Jesper Hansen” farms in Sønderborg.
Eight different piglets have been closely monitored from their birth, to slaughter. All
piglets are equipped with an ear tag from their birth. If the piglet at any point is
exposed to ABs, the tag is removed. Piglets with remaining ear tags at the date of
their slaughter, can be sold as RWA.
The piglets are all born approximately 12 days before the first fecal sample collection
(day 12). The piglets are sampled three more times, at days 32, 55 and 160 after
birth (these will be referred to as ”timepoint (TP)” 1 through 4, respectively). At the
first timepoint (TP1), the suckling piglets are in a farrowing unit, where they are fed
with milk from the sow. At TP2 and TP3, they are placed in a weaning unit, where
they transition from liquid to solid foods. At the last timepoint, the piglets have
been placed in a slaughter unit. This resulted in a total of 32 metagenomic samples.
Doing the process, clinical observations and the specific administered ABs were also
noted.
Sample ID
Timepoint 1
(Day 12)
Treatment status
Timepoint 2
(Day 32)
Treatment status
Timepoint 3
(Day 55)
Treatment status
Timepoint 4
(Day 160)
Treatment status
T1
Treated
Treated
Treated
Treated
U1
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U2
Untreated
Treated
Treated
Treated
U3
Untreated
Treated
Treated
Treated
T2
Treated
Treated
Treated
Treated
U4
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U5
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U6
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Table 3.1: Scenario 1: Table describing the samples. First column is the ID of the
sample (T = treated at first timepoint, U = untreated at first timepoint),
the consequent columns describe the respective timepoints, days from
birth at which the sample was collected and current treatment status.
The reported data is observed from table 3.1. A ”Treated” status means the piglet
have had its ear tag removed, due to AB treatment. It is assumed that the piglets are
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Fecal sampling of pigs
25
only subjected to one course of treatment, and that the piglets are not in treatment
for the consequent timepoints, after the first reported treatment. Due to time inter-
vals between sampling dates, it is not known for how long the piglet has been treated.
An ”Untreated” status, means that the piglet is still tagged. An ”Untreated” status
for all timepoints are RWA piglets.
CLASSES OF ADMINISTERED ANTIBIOTICS
SUCKLING PIGS
WEANING PIGS 
ANTIBIOTIC CLASS
TETRACYCLINES:
-
GROUP: PROTEIN SYNTHESIS INHIBITOR
-
RESISTANCE: EFFLUX PUMP + 
RIBOSOME PROTECTION
-
RESISTANCE GENES: tet
MACROLIDES:
-
GROUP: PROTEIN SYNTHESIS INHIBITOR
-
RESISTANCE: METHYLATION + EFFLUX 
PUMP + A2058 MUTATION
-
RESISTANCE GENES: erm(B) + mac(B)
β-LACTAMS:
-
GROUP: CELL WALL INHIBITOR
-
RESISTANCE: β-LACTAMASE + PBP 
ALTERATION
-
RESISTANCE GENES: bla
(OXYTETRACYCLINE)
(PENICILLINS INCL. 
AMOXICILLIN)
AMINOGLYCOSIDES:
-
GROUP: PROTEIN SYNTHESIS INHIBITOR
-
RESISTANCE: BINDING SITE MUTATIONS
-
+ MODIFYING ENZYMES
-
RESISTANCE GENES: rrs + aadA + str
(DIHYDRO-
STREPTOMYCIN)
LINCOSAMIDES:
-
GROUP: PROTEIN SYNTHESIS INHIBITOR
-
RESISTANCE: METHYLATION + EFFLUX 
PUMP + A2058 MUTATION
-
RESISTANCE GENES: erm + mef
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
Figure 3.1: Table describing the classes of ABs used in suckling piglets and wean-
ing piglets.
For some AB classes, sub-classes were also reported (in
parentheses).
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
26
Due to sampling errors at the farm, it is not known exactly what AB(s) each treated
piglet was administered. What is known however, is that two suckling piglets (TP1)
were administered either tetracyclines, macrolides, β-lactams or lincosamides (or a
combination). And that two weaning piglets (TP2) were administered tetracyclines,
macrolides, β-lactams or aminoglycosides (or a combination). The classes of ABs
administered at the specified timepoints are described in figure 3.1.
An alternative scenario where the pigs are only assumed treated if they received
antibiotics during suckling (TP1) was proposed. The purpose of this proposition was
to compare this alternative interpretation of the data, with the originally reported
data, to identify the impact of AB administration during weaning. The alternative
scenario will be referred to as scenario 2 (S2) and can be observed from table 3.2.
The original scenario (table 3.1) will be referred to as S1.
Sample ID
Timepoint 1
(Day 12)
Treatment status
Timepoint 2
(Day 32)
Treatment status
Timepoint 3
(Day 55)
Treatment status
Timepoint 4
(Day 160)
Treatment status
T1
Treated
Treated
Treated
Treated
U1
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U2
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U3
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
T2
Treated
Treated
Treated
Treated
U4
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U5
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
U6
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Untreated
Table 3.2: Scenario 2: Table describing the samples. First column is the ID of the
sample (T = treated at first timepoint, U = untreated at first timepoint),
the consequent columns describe the respective timepoints, days from
birth at which the sample was collected and current treatment status.
3.2
Pipeline & Tools
3.2.1
Shotgun metagenomic sequencing & assembly
DNA from the fecal samples was purified and isolated using the Illumina Nextera
DNA Flex Library Prep Kit [74]. Next, Hi-C was performed on the isolated DNA.
The Hi-C treated DNA was sonicated to induce shearing, thus preparing it for se-
quencing. Paired-end sequencing was performed on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 system,
with an average read length of ~150 bp. After sequencing, the reads were quality con-
trolled and processed appropriately prior to assembly. The reads were assembled with
a de novo approach, using the assembly tool MetaSPAdes.
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
27
INITIALIZATION
BINNING
QUANTIFICATION
QUALITY CONTROL
- FASTP -
FASTQ FASTA
- SEQTK -
BINNING
- MAXBIN -
BIN ANNOTATION
- CHECKM -
RENAME & MERGE
- SCRIPT 1 -
MAPPING
- BWA -
GENE ANNOTATION
- PROKKA -
GENE COUNTING
- FEATURECOUNTS -
PULL DATA
- SCRIPT 2 -
PLOTTING
- KRONA -
RENAME FAA
- SCRIPT 3 -
TRIMMED 
READS
FORWARD
READS
REVERSE 
READS
TRIMMED 
READS 
(FASTA)
CONTIGS
BINS
ANNOTATED
BINS
PROCESSED
BINS
ALIGNMENT
GENES
QUANTIFIED
GENES
COGS
Figure 3.2: Flowchart describing the quantitative metagenomic pipeline from ini-
tials input to final outputs. Since sequencing and assembly was per-
formed prior to this study, these steps are not a part of the pipeline.
The first line of the colored boxes describe a function while the second
line represents a tool name or script number. Grey boxes are input data
for the following tool.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
28
NOTE: The aforementioned fecal sampling, DNA preparation, Hi-C, sequencing and
assembly was performed at The University of Cambridge and is not a part of this
thesis.
For the following bioinformatics work, 64 FASTQ-files (with host DNA removed with
Bowtie2 [75] and adapters trimmed at Cambridge) and 32 FASTA-files (containing
contigs) were used. All files were obtained from The University of Cambridge.
A flowchart representing the steps of the metagenomic pipeline used in this thesis,
is depicted from figure 3.2.
The pipeline was designed in the workflow manager,
Snakemake, to enable sample scaling and optimised cluster utilization. The steps
of the pipeline was influenced by previous literature (as described in the previous
chapter), with optimized tools and custom scripts tailored to fit the purpose of this
study. The settings and parameters for the tools, and the purpose of the custom
scripts, will be outlined in the following.
3.2.2
Qualiy control - Fastp
Quality control was performed with Fastp [48]. This included base correction, dupli-
cation evaluation, read quality control and over-represented sequence analysis, which
is default for the tool. Adaptor trimming was excluded with -A, as adaptors were
already removed from the raw reads. The input is the raw FASTQ-files (containing
forward and reverse reads).
Used parameters:
-i:
Set input of first read.
-I:
Set input of second read.
-o:
Set output of first read.
-O:
Set output of second read.
-A:
Disable adaptor trimming.
-h:
Set html-file output name.
3.2.3
FASTQ to FASTA - Seqtk
Next, Seqtk was used to convert FASTQ-format to FASTA-format [76]. This step is
neccesary, as the following tool, Maxbin, requires a FASTA-format input. The input
for the tool is the quality controlled FASTQ-files.
Used parameters:
-a:
Tells seqtk to file convert.
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
29
3.2.4
Binning - MaxBin
Maxbin was used for binning of the contigs. According to Wu et al [77], short contigs
have a risk of producing skewed tetranucleotides and a contig cut-off threshold of
1000 bp is thus optimal for Maxbin. This cut-off was used. The input for Maxbin is
FASTA converted FASTQ-files and contig containing FASTA-files.
Used parameters:
-contig:
Specifies the contig filename.
-out:
Specifies the common file ID of the outputs.
-reads:
Specifies the filename of the first read-containing fasta-file.
-reads2:
Specifies the filename of the second read-containing fasta-file
-plotmarker:
Generates a pdf file for the visualization of gene markers.
-min_contig
_length:
Sets minimum contig length used for binning.
3.2.5
Bin annotation - CheckM
For annotation of the bins, Checkm was used [58]. The command -lineage_wf is used
to generate a table of taxonomic names for the bins. The input of Checkm is all the
bins in FASTA-format.
Used parameters:
-lineage_wf:
Predefined taxonomy assessment workflow.
-x:
Specifies input file format.
-tree_qa:
Assessment of phylogenetic markers of the bins.
-f:
Directs output to file (instead of terminal output).
3.2.6
Rename & Merge - Script-1
The purpose of this custom python script is to rename the filename of the bins, and
their containing contig-headers. Maxbin will automatically name the bins accord-
ing to the name of the input file(s). This name is just an ID. Checkm generates a
taxonomy-file, which relates the bin IDs to the actual taxonomic names. The script
will look for the IDs in the taxonomy-file and rename the bin filename and its con-
taining headers with the corresponding taxonomic name. By renaming the bins, it is
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
30
easier to backtrack when analyzing from what microorganism a given gene originates
from. As fasta-headers must remain unique, every header is assigned a unique num-
ber.
In addition, the script merges all the bins. Contigs that were either too short or were
unable to be placed in a bin, is merged with the bins.
3.2.7
Gene annotation - Prokka
Annotation of the genes from the bins was performed with Prokka [60]. The input
of Prokka is the merged bin file. The command --kingdom was set to ”bacteria” and
”archaea” (Prokka doesn’t support multi-exon genes), hence fungal and viral DNA
was not predicted. tRNA and rRNA search was turned off with --norrna and --notrna.
Used parameters:
--outdir:
Sets the desired output directory.
--prefix:
Specifies the filename(s) of the output.
--force:
When running multiple files as wildcards in Snakemake, Prokka
produces an error when it has to create the output directory for
the subsequent files.
The force command forces Prokka to run
anyways.
--kingdom:
Specify database.
--norrna:
Turns off search for ribosomal RNA.
--notrna:
Turns off search for transfer RNA.
--cpus:
Set number of CPUs.
3.2.8
Rename FAA - Script-2
This custom python script is designed to rename the headers of the predicted genes
of the FAA (Fasta Amino Acid) file. The script will open the corresponding GFF3-
file, containing all relevant feature information. The header of the FAA-file is then
renamed, so that it contains information regarding taxonomy, COG and protein func-
tion.
The purpose of this is to be able to identify the sequences from which the genes/COGs
originate.
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
31
3.2.9
Mapping - BWA
BWA mem [64] was used for mapping. After mapping, the output was piped to BWA
index, which indexes the alignment files. The input of BWA is the quality controlled
FASTQ-files and the merged bins.
Used parameters:
index:
Enables BWA index function.
-t:
Sets the amount of threads.
mem:
Specifies the algorithm. Mem is used for longer sequences.
3.2.10
Alignment processing - SAMtools
SAMtools [65] was used to process the output of BWA and convert it to a sorted and
filtered BAM-file. The input is a SAM-file from BWA.
Used parameters:
view:
Tells SAMtools to interact with the provided input.
sort:
Sorts alignment file by leftmost coordinates.
-Sb:
Converts from SAM to BAM format.
-F4:
Checks for given values in the 4th column.
0 values represent
unmapped reads; F4 will filter these out.
3.2.11
Gene quantification - Featurecounts
Featurecounts [66] is used to quantify genes. The command -t was set to ”CDS” and
-g was set to ”ID”. The input is a BAM-file and a GFF3-file (Prokka output).
Featurecounts enables the use of paired-end reads (-p), thus counting fragments in-
stead of reads. Furthermore, Featurecounts also gives the option of including multi-
overlapping (-O) and multi-mapping reads (-M). Multi-overlapping reads are reads
that span over more than one gene (when counting meta-features). When paired-end
data is enabled, only one gene is counted. Multi-mapping reads, are reads that map
at more than one location [66]. These options were all used.
Used parameters:
-F
Specify input format.
-p
Enable paired-end reads.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
32
-M
Allow multi-mapping.
-O
Allow multi-overlapping.
-t
Specify feature type.
-g
Specify attribute type.
-T
Number of threads.
-R
Summarizing file format.
-a
GTF/GFF input file.
-o
Specify output file.
3.2.12
Pull data - Script-3
This custom python script serves to collect and group data from the Featurecounts
output file (count-matrix-file).
The script opens the GFF3-file, count-matrix-file,
COG-functions-file and COG-classes-file (COG-functions-file and COG-classes-file are
both acquired from NCBI [78]). All gene-IDs from the count-matrix-file is associated
with gene-IDs from the GFF3-file. A dictionary is constructed, storing gene-ID as a
key with a list of values (taxonomy, COG-ID, EC-number, function) from the GFF3-
file. Now, gene-IDs from the dictionary are compared to gene-IDs from the count-
matrix-file. For each gene-ID, the corresponding aligned fragments (normalized for
gene length) are now appended to the dictionary. Next, TPM values are calculated
and appended. The contents of the dictionary is written to ”alignment_summary”.
Now, a dictionary containing all EC-numbers (Acquired from ExPASy [79], 2019
edition) and their function is constructed. Normalized fragments and TPMs are ap-
pended accordingly and the contents of the dictionary is written to ”EC_for_krona”.
The COG-functions and COG-classes files are now opened. Data from the files are
extracted and put in two new dictionaries.
COGs are compared to the new dictionaries. If the IDs match, they are written to
their appropriate file (COG_features, COG_for_krona and Letter_features files).
The following are the output files of the script.
Alignment_summary A summary file that show the taxonomy, COG ID, frag-
ment count, TPM and protein function in relation to the
gene ID.
COG_features
In this file, all genes are grouped into their respective
COGs. The file contains the number of genes in the COGs,
fragment count, TPM and protein function in regards to
COG ID. As the table is sorted according to TPM, it pro-
vides a quick overview of COGs with the highest relative
abundance of aligned fragments.
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
33
Letter_features
The file contains gene count, fragment count, TPM and
COG classes. All COGs have been assigned a class appro-
priate to their main function. The table gives a general
overview of the entire TPM distribution and abundance
in the analysed sample. In the bottom of the file, is pro-
vided a total of gene count, fragment count and number of
multi-functional proteins (proteins assigned to more than
one class).
COG_for_krona
Required input file for Krona plots, containing abundance
information of COGs. Krona requires an abundance file
format, with each column representing TPM abundance,
main group and subgroup(s).
EC_for_krona
Required input file for Krona plots, containing enzyme
abundance. Krona requires an abundance file format, with
two columns, one representing TPM abundance and one
representing enzyme class.
3.2.13
Plotting - Krona
Krona [80] is a tool used to visualize data, by generating an interactive pie chart. The
input is the abundance files generated with script-3 (EC_for_krona and COG_for_krona).
Used parameters:
-o
Specify output file.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Pipeline & Tools
34
3.2.14
Pipeline overview
Tool
Function
Input
Output
Fastp
Quality control
FASTQ-files
Trimmed FASTQ-files
Seqtk
Converter
Trimmed FASTQ-files
FASTQ-files (fasta)
Maxbin
Binning
FASTQ (fasta) + FASTA files
Bin-files
Checkm
Taxonomic assignment
Bin-files
Taxonomy-file
Script-1
Rename & Merge bins
Bin-files + Taxonomy-file
Annotated bins-file
Prokka
Gene annotation
Annotated bins-file
GGF3-file + FFN-file
Script-2
Rename headers
GFF3-file + FAA-file
Renamed FAA-file
BWA
Mapping
Annotated bins-file + FASTQ-files
SAM-file
SAMtools
BAM processing
SAM-file
sorted BAM-file
Featurecounts
Gene counting
Sorted BAM-file + GFF3-file
Count-matrix-file
Script-3
Pull data
Count-matrix-file + GFF3-file
Data-files
Krona
Plotting
Data-files
Plot-file
Table 3.3: Overview of all the tools and scripts used in the pipeline (ordered). The
first column is the tool/script name, the second column describe its func-
tion, the third and fourth columns are input and output file-formats,
respectively.
All tools and scripts used in the pipeline of the snakefile is observed from table 3.3.
The snakefile was executed on the cluster service ”Computerome”, which provides
nodes of up to 32 CPUs with 1TB of memory, making it suitable for high throughput
computing. All samples were processed.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Read filtering following quality control
14.8
14
13.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
U2-3
U3-3
U5-3
U5-2
U5-1
T1-3
U4-2
U4-4
U1-2
U4-1
U1-4
T1-2
U3-2
U6-1
T1-4
T2-1
U2-1
T1-1
U3-1
U5-4
U1-1
U3-4
T2-2
U2-2
U2-4
U6-2
T2-4
T2-3
U1-3
U6-4
U6-3
U4-3
FILTERED READS (%)
SAMPLE-TIMEPOINT
Figure 4.1: Descending bar plot illustrating the percentage of reads filtered from
each sample, and their respective timepoints.
Each sample is repre-
sented by its own color, for an easy follow up on the additional time-
points.
The percent of filtered reads following the fastp quality control, can be observed from
figure 4.1. Most of the samples are only filtered slightly, however for samples U2-3,
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Distribution of hypothetical proteins
36
U3-3 and U5-3 the percentage of filtered reads are quite high, ranging from 13.5 to
14.8 percent.
4.2
Distribution of hypothetical proteins
7372.3
67.6
65.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
T1-2
U3-2
U4-2
T2-2
U4-4
U6-1
U3-4
U3-1
U1-2
U5-2
U2-2
U5-4
U4-3
T1-4
U1-4
T2-3
U1-3
U3-3
U5-3
U2-4
U2-3
U6-3
U1-1
T2-4
U6-4
T1-3
U2-1
U5-1
U4-1
U6-2
T2-1
T1-1
HYPOTHETICAL PROTEINS (%)
SAMPLE-TIMEPOINT
Figure 4.2: Descending bar plot illustrating the percentage of hypothetical proteins
in the entire metagenome, for each sample and its respective timepoint.
All samples are represented by their own color, for an easy follow up on
the additional timepoints.
From figure 4.2 is observed the percentage of hypothetical proteins (HPs) predicted
from each sample, ranging from ~40% up to 73%. The samples with the four biggest
shares of HPs range from 65.1% to 73%. All of these samples are from TP2. The
samples with the two lowest percentages, both ~40%, are from TP1 of T1 and T2.
From the 6 lowest percentages, 5 are from TP1.
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
37
4.3
Statistical analysis of COGs
After COG assignment of all the proteins from all the samples, 2440 COGs were
represented in the entire dataset. To sum up, each of all the 2440 COGs are assigned
8 TPM values (one for each piglet), for all 4 timepoints.
Due to fluctuations in
HPs between the samples, a re-normalization of TPMs was performed only for the
COGs. As samples with few HPs will have more assigned TPM values to the COGs,
and vice versa, HP quantity can play a big role in how the data is presented. The
re-normalization was performed to give a visualization of the distribution of COG
classes. The re-normalization was performed exactly as in section 2.4.1, but only for
the COGs. It should be kept in mind though, that re-normalization then treats the
total of COGs as the total predicted genome (taking HPs out of the equation), which
is not in line with reality. Thus, any significant findings were critically reviewed and
compared to the original dataset, to determine if significance was justified.
4.3.1
Differential abundance of COG classes
The COGs were grouped according to the date of their sampling (TP1, TP2, TP3
and TP4). Each timepoint was split in two groups, one for the treated and one for
the untreated samples. Then, all the COGs were assigned to their corresponding
functional COG classes. The classes are very broad, and are used to get an overall
idea of how dataset looks.
Next, the log2 fold change (FC) between treated and untreated samples was calcu-
lated for both S1 and S2 (see section for the scenarios 3.1), to identify significant
changes. The result, is the generated plots from figures 4.3 and 4.4, which show the
re-normalized log2FC of 22 COG classes for S1 and S2, respectively.
Three classes have been excluded (from the initial 25) from the plot, due to very low
abundance giving an inflated FC: A - RNA processing and modification, B - Chro-
matin structure and dynamics, Z - Cytoskeleton.
Welch’s two-tailed t-test was performed on the COG classes to determine significance
(for all the statistical analyses, a pre-adjusted α of 0.05 was used). A BC (bonferroni
correction) adjusted level of α = 0.002 (n = 25) was determined.
Observing TP1 from the plots of figures 4.3 and 4.4 (keep in mind, that TP1 is
the same for both scenarios), it is clear that there is a spike in COG class X of ~1,5
log2FC, almost corresponding to a FC of 3. This class is related to COGs representing
proteins associated with prophages and transposons. The p-value for this class was
0.1, but 0.001 without re-normalization (same FC), thus significant.
For TP1 and TP4 in the plot for S2 (figure 4.4), class W shows a fluctuation of ~0.5
log2FC and ~0.8 log2FC, respectively. The p-values for the two timepoints when they
are not re-normalized, are both significant (0.007 and 0.002, respectively). This class
is attributed to extracellular structures. By diving into the COGs of the class, the
observed spikes are associated with a P pilus assembly protein of chaperone PapD
(COG3121).
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
38
Timepoint 3
Timepoint 4
Timepoint 1
Timepoint 2
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
Differential Abundance − Log2FC (Treated/Untreated)
COG Class
C: Energy production and conversion
D: Cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning
E: Amino acid transport and metabolism
F: Nucleotide transport and metabolism
G: Carbohydrate transport and metabolism
H: Coenzyme transport and metabolism
I: Lipid transport and metabolism
J: Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis
K: Transcription
L: Replication, recombination and repair
M: Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis
N: Cell motility
O: Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones
P: Inorganic ion transport and metabolism
Q: Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism
R: General function prediction only
S: Function unknown
T: Signal transduction mechanisms
U: Intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport
V: Defense mechanisms
W: Extracellular structures
X: Mobilome: prophages, transposons
Figure 4.3: Differential abundance plot for timepoint one to four, for scenario 1 of
the re-normalized dataset. The x-axis represents the log2 fold change
with respect to treated/untreated. The y-axis represents 22 letters as-
sociated with the corresponding COG classes in the legend.
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
39
Timepoint 3
Timepoint 4
Timepoint 1
Timepoint 2
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
X
W
V
U
T
S
R
Q
P
O
N
M
L
K
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
Differential Abundance − Log2FC (Treated/Untreated)
COG Class
C: Energy production and conversion
D: Cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning
E: Amino acid transport and metabolism
F: Nucleotide transport and metabolism
G: Carbohydrate transport and metabolism
H: Coenzyme transport and metabolism
I: Lipid transport and metabolism
J: Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis
K: Transcription
L: Replication, recombination and repair
M: Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis
N: Cell motility
O: Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones
P: Inorganic ion transport and metabolism
Q: Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism
R: General function prediction only
S: Function unknown
T: Signal transduction mechanisms
U: Intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport
V: Defense mechanisms
W: Extracellular structures
X: Mobilome: prophages, transposons
Figure 4.4: Differential abundance plot for timepoint one to four, for scenario 2 of
the re-normalized dataset. The x-axis represents the log2 fold chance
with respect to treated/untreated. The y-axis represents 22 letters as-
sociated with the corresponding COG classes in the legend.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
40
4.3.2
Time series plots generated from a two-way ANOVA
TPM
0
500
1000
1500
T2
T1
U3
U1
U2
U5
U6
U4
COG: 0294
TPM
COG: 4766
0
50
100
150
U2
U1
U3
T1
COG: 2015
0
50
100
150
T2
U1
U5
U4
T1
Timepoint
1
2
3
4
Timepoint
1
2
3
4
U1
T2
T1
UT
T
U3
U2
U5
U4
U6
COG: 1299
0
500
1000
1500
UT
T
UT
T
UT
T
S1
S1
S2
S2
U4
U6
U5
T2
U2
U6
U3
Figure 4.5: Time series plots for the 4 lowest scoring interaction p-values for S1
COGs and S2 COGs, for the original dataset. The y- and x-axes repre-
sent TPM value and timepoint, respectively. All 8 samples and their 4
timepoints are included. Red and black dots/lines represent treated or
untreated samples, respectively. Sample IDs are labeled at TP1. From
the top right corner, COG ID and scenario can be observed.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
41
With the COGs still grouped according to treatment status and timepoint, a two-way
ANOVA (Analysis of variance) was conducted. The purpose of the analysis was to
find COGs with the most significant interactions, providing information regarding
the correlation between treatment status and timepoint. A cut-off of α = 0.00002
(BC corrected with n = 2440) was used for the interaction p-values.
16 significant interaction p-values were yielded for S1, following the ANOVA. For S2,
8 were yielded. An ANOVA was also conducted for the re-normalized dataset for
both scenarios. Only one was found for the S1 (an uncharacterized protein) and two
for S2. One COG (Dihydropteroate synthase) was the same for the original dataset,
while the other was an uncharacterized protein. No further significance was found
when correcting with Benjamini-Hochberg correction (BHC).
Two COGs from each scenario of the original dataset were chosen for further analysis.
The selected COGs were the ones with the lowest scoring p-values, that still man-
aged to be well-documented, while providing a good representation of the remaining
significant COGs. The COGs were plotted as time series, and can be observed from
figure 4.5, while the corresponding results from the ANOVA is observed from table
4.1.
Scenario
COG-ID
Function
Time
P-value
Treatment
P-value
Interaction
P-value
TP1
FC
S1
2015
Metallo-β-lactamase
0.00018
0.03
0.000017
2.9
4766
Ethanolamine utilization
0.0000015
0.12
0.000018
2.8
S2
0294
Dihydropteroate synthase
0.00029
0.0012
0.0000031
4
1299
Phosphotransferase system
0.00000098
0.00071
0.0000013
3.5
Table 4.1: Data table of the ANOVA results. The first column describes the sce-
nario. The second and third columns list the COG-ID and its function,
respectively. The next columns represent p-values for Time, Treatment
and Interaction, respectively. The last column is the fold change at TP1.
Looking at the plots for both scenarios, TP1 immediately stands out. In this time-
point, both of the treated piglets have greater TPM values than the 6 untreated
piglets, for all 4 plots. For the following timepoints, the differentiation seems to de-
cline. However, at TP2 a positive fluctuation is observed from the untreated sample,
U6, for all 4 COGs. No piglets treated at TP2 show any observed effect.
When comparing S1 and S2, both scenarios share a similar trend when observing the
time series plots. However, when observing the interaction and treatment p-values
from the ANOVA table 4.1, both samples from S2 have markedly lower p-values for
both effect groups. For both scenarios, time p-values are generally very low, with two
significant hits (for α = 0.00002). However, no significant effect for the treatment
p-values was observed for the selected COGs.
Since there seems to be a general consensus, that the highest treatment effect happens
at TP1, a further investigation of this particular timepoint was conducted.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
42
4.3.3
Effect and fold change of COGs at TP1
COG2861
COG2225
COG0006
HPs
COG0054
COG1984
COG4172
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−6
−4
−2
2
4
6
0
−Log10 P−value
Log2FC
COG2084
COG3054
Figure 4.6: Volcano plot for all original COGs. Y- and x-axes represent -log10 of the
p-values and the log2FC, respectively. The lower the p-value, the higher
up in the plot it is located. A shift to the right or left from the middle,
indicates a FC in favor of treated or untreated COGs, respectively.
”HPs” indicates hypothetical proteins. Red and green points represent
insignificant and significant COGs, respectively.
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Statistical analysis of COGs
43
Welch’s two-tailed t-test was performed on all the COGs of TP1, so that the most
significant hits could be picked out. With a BC adjusted α-value of 0.00002 (n =
2440), only one significant COG (2861 - an uncharacterized protein) was yielded.
BHC provided no further results. Thus, a manual p-value of 0.00006 was selected,
while keeping in mind that the adjusted α is slightly higher than optimal.
This
yielded 9 results. In addition, the FC was calculated so that a volcano plot could be
constructed. The log2 of the FC values and the negative log10 of the p-values was
calculated to improve visualization. The plot is seen from figure 4.6.
The point ”HPs” represents the hypothetical proteins. As can be observed, the log2FC
is negative as expected, since the untreated samples have more HPs. All 8 of the
significant COGs, have a positive FC.
Some of the functionally annotated COGs were selected for further analysis and can
be seen from table 4.2. The function of the COGs were involved with malate synthase,
riboflavin synthase and an ABC-type microcin C transport system. All of the COGs
have a FC ≥2, indicating at least a doubling of the TPM values.
COG ID
Function
P-value
Fold change
2225
Malate synthase
0.000013
3.2
0054
Riboflavin synthase
0.000052
2.38
4172
ABC-type microcin C transport system
0.000056
2
Table 4.2: Table describing function, p-value and FC for the selected COG IDs. The
first column lists the selected COGs from the volcano plot. The following
columns describe the COG function, its p-value and the FC.
To follow up on the effect of re-normalization, the same t-test was performed for this
dataset using the same significance level (α = 0.00006). The same uncharacterized
COG (2861) was found. In order to get 9 significant COGs, the level of significance
would have to be manually adjusted to 0.001, which was decided being too high to
proceed with.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Differential abundance of AMR proteins
44
4.4
Differential abundance of AMR proteins
Timepoint 3
Timepoint 4
Timepoint 1
Timepoint 2
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
Differential Abundance − Log2FC (Treated/Untreated)
Resistance mechanism
A: Tetracycline ribosomal protection
B: Tetracycline efflux pump
C: Tetracyline repressor
D: Lincosamide resistance
E: Aminoglycoside resistance
F: Beta−lactamase
G: Macrolide efflux pump
H: Multidrug efflux pump
*
*
*
*
Figure 4.7: Differential abundance plot for timepoint one to four, for S1 of AMR
mechanisms. The x-axis represents the log2FC with respect to treat-
ed/untreated. The y-axis represents the letters associated with the cor-
responding resistance protein group in the legend. An ”*” indicates a
significant effect.
==PAGE:54==
4.4 Differential abundance of AMR proteins
45
Timepoint 3
Timepoint 4
Timepoint 1
Timepoint 2
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
Differential Abundance − Log2FC (Treated/Untreated)
Resistance mechanism
A: Tetracycline ribosomal protection
B: Tetracycline efflux pump
C: Tetracyline repressor
D: Lincosamide resistance
E: Aminoglycoside resistance
F: Beta−lactamase
G: Macrolide efflux pump
H: Multidrug efflux pump
*
*
*
*
Figure 4.8: Differential abundance plot for timepoint one to four, for S2 of AMR
mechanisms. The x-axis represents the log2FC with respect to treat-
ed/untreated. The y-axis represents the letters associated with the cor-
responding resistance protein group in the legend. An ”*” indicates a
significant effect.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Differential abundance of AMR proteins
46
Due to the lack of COGs representing broad AMR mechanisms and the desire to
pinpoint single AMR genes, 24 AMR genes were extracted from the data, manually
grouped into 8 categories and plotted. For the following plots (figures 4.7 and 4.8), it
should be kept in mind that TP1 is the same for both plots/scenarios, as the scenarios
do not differentiate at this timepoint.
Differential abundance plots for the AMR mechanisms of S1 are illustrated from fig-
ure 4.7. From TP1 is observed four big positive spikes (tetracycline efflux pump,
tetracycline repressor, aminoglycoside resistance and β-lactamase), all with a log2FC
of over 3.8 (corresponding to a FC of 14). The p-value of these spikes are 0.000084,
0.0000094, 0.063 and 0.0000004, respectively. With a BC adjusted α of 0.00625 (as n
= 8) following a Welch’s two-tailed t-test, all but the aminoglycoside resistance pro-
teins are significant. A smaller positive shift is observed from multidrug efflux pump
proteins, with a log2FC of 1.7 and a significant p-value of 0.00056. From TP2 is
observed a log2FC of 1.7 for lincosamide resistance proteins, but with an insignificant
p-value of 0.041. From TP4 is observed a negative shift of β-lactamase and multidrug
efflux pump proteins with a log2FC of 0.22 and 0.39, respectively. The p-values for
these observations however, are not significant.
For the TP2 plot of figure 4.8 (S2) is observed a similar pattern to that of the TP2
plot from figure 4.7. TP4 is also similar between the two plots. However, for TP3
a negative abundance shift is observed for lincosamide resistance proteins, aminogly-
coside resistance proteins and β-lactamase proteins. This is in contrast, to the the
slightly positive shifts observed from the TP3 plot of figure 4.7. However, none of
these are significant.
When diving into the genes making up the resistance mechanism groups, the tetra-
cycline efflux pump group was associated with genes tetA, tetB and tetC. All the
genes had a significant effect, for α = 0.002 (BC adjusted with n = 24) at TP1. In
addition, tetD was also found (in a transposon), but was not significant. However,
the tetracycline repressor gene tetR showed significance and had a fold chance of 45.
None of the ribosomal protection protein encoding genes tetM, tetO, tetQ and tetW
were found in TP1. The β-lactamase genes were all attributed to the TEM class A
gene, which was also significant. The multidrug efflux pump was associated with the
AcrA-AcrB-AcrZ-TolC efflux protein complex. The genes AcrA, AcrB, AcrZ genes
of the complex were significant, but TolC was not.
==PAGE:56==
4.5 Relative enzyme composition over time
47
4.5
Relative enzyme composition over time
16.6%
45.2%
20.8%
12.7%
4.8%
17.7%
25.4%
32.6%
16.9%
7.5%
17%
27.9%
32.4%
16.7%
6%
19%
12.1%
38.4%
20.4%
10.1%
Timepoint 3
Timepoint 4
Timepoint 1
Timepoint 2
EnzymeClass
Cellulase
D−xylose reductase
L−rhamnose 1−dehydrogenase
Lactase
Pectin lyase
Figure 4.9: Percent-wise abundance of metabolising enzymes of all pigs (treated
and untreated) from TP1 to TP4. From the legend is described the
specific enzymes, which are all represented by a color.
Pie charts for the relative distribution of the enzymes cellulase (EC:3.2.1.4), pectin
lyase (EC:4.2.2.10), D-xylose reductase (EC:1.1.1.307), L-rhamnose 1-dehydrogenase
(EC:1.1.1.173) and lactase (EC:3.2.1.108) for all four timepoints, are observed from
figure 4.9.
EC:”ID” is the specific Enzyme Commission number.
The pie charts
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Relative enzyme composition over time
48
were constructed by calculating the distribution of the 5 enzymes in all samples of
the four timepoints (mixing treated and untreated samples). Following Welch’s two-
tailed t-test with an α = 0.01 (BC adjusted with n = 5), all but the pectin lyases
are significant from TP1 to TP4. Lactase is clearly experiencing a negative shift in
abundance from TP1 to TP4, going from 45,2% to just 12,1% in TP4. The rest of
the enzymes all show positive shifts in abundance, with L-rhamnose 1-dehydrogenase
being the most abundant of them all.
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Evaluation of data pre-processing
When looking at the proportion of filtered reads from the bar plot of figure 4.1, the 3
samples with the highest read filtering are all from TP3 (U2-3, U3-3 and U5-3). The
read filtering in these cases are due to low base quality, which is most likely caused
by sequencing errors at this specific timepoint. Filtering of low base quality is mainly
conducted by looking at the quality scores of the FASTQ-files (see section 2.2.2.5).
If a high fraction of the quality scores for a read scored low, the read is excluded
from the file [48]. Despite the high amount of filtered reads from these samples, no
observations suggesting a negative effect on the validity of the data was detected for
this specific timepoint.
5.2
Treated samples were linked to a decrease in HPs
As observed from the HP distribution from the bar plot of figure 4.2, samples with
the least amount of HPs, belonged to T1-1 and T2-1 (treated at TP1). This could
be reasoned by a more sensitive microbiome at this stage. The effect of ABs on a
sensitive microbiome, could decrease an already relatively homogeneous population
into even lesser diversity. Hence, fewer (perhaps less documented) bacterial species,
can contribute their gene pool to the analysis. If the majority of bacteria and their
corresponding genes have an approved nomenclature, the quantity of HPs drop. In
contrast, as the diversity increases, so does the amount of HPs; consequently increas-
ing the occurrence of undocumented proteins.
In relation to that, re-normalization seemed to reduce the overall observed effect, as
no effect was observed for the ANOVA or for the t-test results of TP1. This makes
sense, as re-normalization is not representative for the whole genome.
When observing the volcano plot from figure 4.6, the way in which the data accumu-
lates, is a direct consequence of HP quantity. Upon first glance of the plot, a skew to
the right is observed. This is due to the way proteins are grouped into COGs. As low
HP samples have a higher quantity of functionally annotated proteins, more proteins
can be grouped in the COGs. There is no way of knowing, how the remaining HPs
would accumulate, had they been functionally annotated. Normalization methods
addressing this do exist. An example is the normalization tool MUsiCC [81], which
finds the average genomic copy number, by normalizing the relative gene abundance
==PAGE:59==
5.3 The composition of digestive enzymes changed during weaning
50
by the median of the number of universal single-copy genes. Thus, providing a nor-
malization in regards to the number of genomes in the sample [35].
5.3
The composition of digestive enzymes changed
during weaning
The time p-values from the ANOVA (table 4.1) are generally very low. One signif-
icant event that could affect this, is the transition from liquid to solid foods. The
shift from farrowing units to weaning units and consequently a change in diet was
expected to alter the microbiome, as new substrates are introduced for the microbes
to ferment. As is observed from the pie charts of figure 4.9, great enzymatic changes
take place over time (for all piglets). The fact that the relative lactase abundance
diminishes rapidly, is in support of the initial expectation of a change in metabolis-
ing enzymes due to diet transition. As the pig is slowly being weaned from milk,
the lactase abundance is decreased, as lactose and galactose utilizing bacteria are no
longer in growth favor. Furthermore, the significant changes happening from TP1 to
TP2, indicates a rapid enzymatic shift, following the suckling phase. In addition, an
increase in cellulase suggests that the bacterial community is adapting to an increase
in plant-based substrates. Whereas an increase of rhamnose and xylose utilizing en-
zymes, suggests an introduction to oats or wheat. These findings are also in support
of the initial hypothesis, and the study by Guevarra et al. [5] mentioned in section
1.1.
5.4
Treatment doing weaning showed limited effect
When assessing the two scenarios (S1 and S2), which were supposed to compare the
effects of AB treatment in the weaning stages, limited effect was observed. From
the ANOVA (table 4.1), it could be concluded that the p-values for treatment and
interaction were lower for S2 than for S1. However, the ANOVA generated double
the amount of significant hits for the interaction p-values for S1. This suggests, that
while S1 has more significant hits, S2 has stronger evidence against rejecting the null
hypothesis for fewer hits. For the AMR protein analysis (plots from figures 4.7 and
4.8), no significance was found for either scenario for TP2-TP4. However, as S1 gen-
erated more significant hits following the ANOVA, treatment during weaning does
seem to have some effect, though limited, as the difference between the two scenarios
was not significant.
==PAGE:60==
5.5 Tetracycline & β-lactam AMR genes increased
51
5.5
Tetracycline & β-lactam AMR genes increased
The evidence for accumulation of AMR proteins and their encoding genes for tetra-
cyclines and β-lactams is strong, and is in support of the initial hypothesis of in-
creased AMR genes following AB treatment. The observations from the bar plots
of figures 4.7 and 4.8 clearly demonstrate a rise in AMR genes for tetracycline (a
45-fold increase for tetR) and β-lactams, including an accumulation of genes related
to multidrug effux pumps. In addition, an interaction effect for a COG representing
metallo-β-lactamases was discovered following the ANOVA. Metallo-β-lactamases are
also linked to β-lactam resistance, but utilizing zinc for activity [82].
The uncertainty regarding the exact administered antibiotics for suckling piglets can
thus be resolved when observing the predominant abundance of these AMR proteins
in treated piglets. According to the findings, neither macrolides, aminoglycosides or
lincosamides were administered at any point. However, it could be speculated if these
ABs simply do not cause AMR to the same extent.
Even though antibiotics were administered at TP2, no significant change in AMR
proteins or genes was observed.
This suggests that AMR accumulation is not as
prevalent during weaning. As effects were observed from TP1, but not from TP2,
could suggest that the increased abundance of AMR genes is rapidly diminished,
given that only 20 days have passed from TP1 to TP2.
Another perspective is provided from a study by Pollock et al. [83]. In their re-
search, they discovered no rise in AMR genes following AB administration. Their
reasoning for not observing significant changes in AMR genes, was that the genes are
”integrated” into the pig microbiome, due to historical use of AMs. Thus, the rate
of AMR genes is already high, making it harder to spot significant changes. This
could explain why no AMR genes were discovered for the weaning pigs in this study.
However, while tetracyclines were used in their study (as in this), the ABs were ad-
ministered as in-feed growth promoters. This could suggest, that the higher doses of
antibiotics administered during medical treatment (as in this study) contribute to an
increase of the overall AMR gene accumulation.
5.5.1
The mobility of AMR genes increased
The 3-fold increase of proteins linked to prophages and transposons, observed from
plots of figures 4.3 and 4.4 of TP1, supports the hypothesis of an increased mobilome
when treated with ABs. This is also consistent with the study by Allen et al. [25]
mentioned in section 1.2. It also matches the observed increase of AMR proteins at
TP1. As the AMR protein abundance and transposon/prophage abundance are both
increasing, it could suggest that many of the AMR genes are located on transposons
(activity mediated by transposase) and/or in prophage DNA.
The fact that the effect disappears with the consequent timepoints, suggests a high
impact on the mobilome only for suckling pigs. This further supports the hypothesis
of a microbiome more susceptible to change in the very early stages of the piglets life.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 Tetracycline & β-lactam AMR genes increased
52
5.5.2
Multidrug resistance increased
A 2-fold increase of an ABC-type microcin C transport system (component YejF)
was observed in sucklings piglets. Bacterial ABC transporter systems are linked to
multidrug resistance, exporting antibiotics and toxins from the cell. The YejF gene is
part of 5 component operon, encoding the transport system. The system is associated
with bacteria such as Salmonella and Escherichia [84]. An increase of the transport
system in treated piglets, is possibly associated with AMR in the two bacteria. From
the provided clinical data (not listed in this thesis) it was observed that diarrhea
was reported for piglet samples T1 and T2, at TP2. As enteropathogenic salmonella
is linked to diarrhea in piglets [85], could suggest that from TP1 an infection has
been on the rise, as a result of AB treatment for another infection. The treatment
has perhaps resulted in the accumulation of AMR genes for the salmonella bacteria,
hence diarrhea was observed at TP2, due to an increase of the pathogenic bacteria.
However, as described in section 1.1, multiple factors can affect the microbiome.
When observing an effect, there is no way of being certain that the effect is solely
contributed to AB use. 8 samples (per timepoint) might not be enough to confidently
establish significant changes. With only two AB treated piglets in the suckling stage,
there is a chance that other factors than just AB treatment, might be affecting these
samples as well. For instance, since the piglets have been AB treated, they have
been suffering from an infection. As infections can also alter the microbiome, it can’t
with certainly be established, if the observed effects are in fact due to an AB induced
microbiome disturbance, or just an infection.
5.5.3
AB use was linked to recurring infection
For TP1 and TP4 of the differential abundance plot from figure 4.4 (S2), a significant
hit of a P pili (chaperone papD) associated protein was discovered, with FCs of ~1.4
and ~1.8, respectively. P pili are linked to uropathogenic Escherichia coli mediated
urinary tract infections (UTI). The expression of P pili in these bacteria is involved
with host receptor binding in the kidney. The role of chaperone papD is to stop
degradation of pili subunits, while mediating correct protein folding [86, 87].
As
significance was found both for TP1 and TP4 for this protein, it could be speculated
that the veterinarian had initially administered ABs for the treatment of the infection.
Then, due to an AB mediated disturbance of the natural microbiome composition,
the pig has become more susceptible to infection. The aberration could cause the host
immune system to be compromised as a consequence of AB use, increasing infection
susceptibility. This would support the notion of long-term immunodeficiency related
to AB use, proposed by Schokker et al. [30] mentioned in section 1.2.3.
In addition, a study by Rich et al. [88], investigating UTI relapse in females, discov-
ered a correlation between trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole administration and later
recurrence of UTI. Though trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole was not administered in
this study, this discovery suggests that tetracyclines or penicillins could contribute
==PAGE:62==
5.6 The abundance of metabolizing proteins increased in suckling piglets
53
to the same effect. Moreover, a study by Looft et al. [89] discovered a 100-fold rise
in Escherichia coli following AB administration in humans, that was linked to an
increase in genes related to energy production, pilus production and transposition,
which supports the observed data.
5.6
The abundance of metabolizing proteins
increased in suckling piglets
From the time series plots (figure 4.5), it is clear that there are the most fluctuations
at TP1. This can also be observed from TP1 of the differential abundance plots (fig-
ures 4.3 and 4.4). This supports the hypothesis that the microbiome is more prone
to change when the piglet is still suckling. This effect could be contributed to a less
established microbiome at this stage, as the piglet has yet to be introduced to solid
foods. The fact that no significance was observed from TP2, suggests that the mi-
crobiome is rapidly returning to its initial state.
As a result of the ANOVA (table 4.1) and the t-test analysis for TP1 of the COGs
(table 4.2), significant change was observed for proteins involved in metabolism and
synthesis in bacteria, in suckling piglets:
5.6.1
Ethanolamine utilization
EutQ, a protein associated with ethanolamine utilization, presented a FC of ~2.8
at TP1. EutQ is part of the ethanolamine utilization (eut) operon. Ethanolamine
is an important carbon/nitrogen source of bacteria that are able to catabolise it.
Furthermore, EutQ is thought to be essential for ethanolamine utilization in an anoxic
environment [90]. The protein is commonly found in bacteria such as Escherichia coli
and Salmonella enterica [91], which suggests an increase of these bacterial species.
An increase of Escherichia coli is in support of the study by Pi et al. [28], mentioned
in section 1.2.3, where an increase in Escherichia coli was observed following β-lactam
treatment. Furthermore, a study by Sintsova et al. [92], proved a relation between
uropathogenic Escherichia coli ethanolamine utilization and UTI, which is in support
of the discovered increase of UTI associated P pili.
5.6.2
The phosphotransferase system
In addition, a protein linked to the phosphotransferase system (PTS) increased signif-
icantly, with a FC of ~3.5 at TP1. The PTS is a major carbohydrate-uptake system
in bacteria. It mediates phosphorylation and transport of numerous carbohydrates,
using phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) as its energy source [93].
==PAGE:63==
5.7 Lost effect due to sample mixing
54
5.6.3
Dihydropteroate synthase
Moreover, a COG representing a dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) enzyme increased
with a FC of ~4 at TP1. The DHPS enzyme catalyses dihydropteroate production,
which is an important substrate in folate synthesis in bacteria. The folate synthesis
pathway is involved with amino acid synthesis which is an essential process in bacteria
[94].
5.6.4
Malate synthase
Furthermore, a 3.2-fold increase of malate synthase was found at TP1 for the treated
piglets. Malate synthase is involved with the glyoxylate pathway, related to the tri-
carboxylic acid cycle and allows respiration when only two substrates are available.
The enzyme mediates the synthesis of CoA, which is a coenzyme involved in the ox-
idation of fatty acids and malate (malic acid), from acetyl-CoA and glyoxylate. The
endgame is to produce carbohydrates. The pathway allows the bacteria to survive
during nutrient deprivation, when simple sugars are not available. By skipping the
decarboxylation steps of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, the cell can then use C2 com-
pounds such as ethanol and acetate, which can then be used as carbon sources in the
gluconeogenesis pathway [95].
5.6.5
Riboflavin synthase
Additionally, a 2.38-fold increase of riboflavin synthase was found at TP1 for the
treated piglets. The enzyme is used to synthesize riboflavin (vitamin B2) through
the riboflavin biosynthetic pathway (RBP). Riboflavin is an essential vitamin in mi-
crobial symbiotic reactions.
Animal cells are unable to synthesise riboflavin, and
are highly dependent on riboflavin production from microorganisms or from the diet.
In animals, riboflavin is used as a precursor for flavin electron carriers involved in
carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism [96]. Some microorganisms are unable to
take up riboflavin, and thus synthesize them through the RBP. A 2.38-fold increase
in these enzymes, suggests that a positive shift in riboflavin producing bacteria has
occurred following treatment [97].
5.7
Lost effect due to sample mixing
No change in abundance of proteins affecting host metabolism was discovered, though
hypothesized. One reason could be that this mechanism is more complex, than can
be measured from a few protein groups. Another reason could be due to the normal-
ization, which seemed to produce some bias in regards to quantity of HPs. It could
also be because this study mixes the metagenomes of piglets. As the microbiome is
quite unique for each individual [98], there is a good chance that some of the expected
outcomes are not as profound, since the gene composition could ”cancel each other
==PAGE:64==
5.8 Future research & considerations
55
out”. However, without studies of the exact same experimental setup, no one-to-one
comparison can be drawn between this study and prior literature, to further elucidate
this.
5.8
Future research & considerations
Additional analysis might shed light upon how the bacterial taxonomy is related to
the observed protein changes. This could aid in elucidating the proposed increase
of Salmonella and Escherichia coli bacteria in the treated piglets. Some of the foot
work is already done, as the proposed pipeline does provide taxonomic assignment
to the bins (but was not analysed, due to time restrictions). In addition, it could be
interesting to investigate a similar dataset, but with more frequent sampling. As most
of the effect is revolved around TP1, closer sampling dates could provide additional
information on the short term effects. In addition, a bigger dataset could increase the
reliability of the discoveries. Moreover, alternative normalization methods should be
explored, to address the issue of varying HPs between samples. Lastly, it might be
interesting to investigate the importance of the microbiome of the sow in regards to
the microbiome of its offspring. This data is available, but was not analysed due to
time restrictions.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The protein composition of suckling piglets was more affected by ABs, than the
protein composition of weaning piglets, confirming the hypothesis of an increased
disruption of proteins groups at this stage. Moreover, the protein composition of the
microbiome rapidly returned to its initial state, as no significant effects were observed
from TP2. AMR protein accumulation associated with tetracyclines and β-lactams
was observed in suckling piglets, accompanied by an increase of a multidrug efflux
pump protein, confirming the hypothesis of an increase in AMR genes following AB
treatment. These findings were linked to an increased abundance of proteins linked to
prophages and transposons for the same timepoint, suggesting an increased mobilome,
confirming this hypothesis.
No changes to proteins affecting host metabolism was observed, thus rejecting this
hypothesis.
A multidrug transport system related to a multidrug resistant Salmonella strain was
discovered and linked to diarrhea in the treated piglets. This confirms the hypotheses
of changes to proteins linked to host infection. In addition, an increase of proteins
linked to a recurring UTI was observed, suggesting that ABs negatively impact the
immune development.
Moreover, the hypothesis of a change in proteins related to microbial metabolism
was confirmed, as an increase in proteins linked to ethanolamine utilization, PEP
utilization, folate synthesis, glucose synthesis and riboflavin synthesis was observed.
Lastly, the composition of metabolising enzymes changed during weaning, showing
a substantial decrease in lactase abundance and an increase in cellulase, D-xylose
reductase and L-rhamnose 1-dehydrogenase abundance, confirming this expectation.
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
1.
Sekirov, I., Russell, S. L., Antunes, L. C. M. & Finlay, B. B. Gut Microbiota in
Health and Disease. Physiological Reviews 90, 859–904. issn: 0031-9333 (July
2010).
2.
Quan, J. et al. A global comparison of the microbiome compositions of three
gut locations in commercial pigs with extreme feed conversion ratios. Scientific
Reports 8, 4536. issn: 2045-2322 (December 2018).
3.
Zeineldin, M., Aldridge, B. & Lowe, J. Antimicrobial effects on swine gastroin-
testinal microbiota and their accompanying antibiotic resistome 2019. doi:10.
3389/fmicb.2019.01035.
4.
Niederwerder, M. C. Role of the microbiome in swine respiratory disease. Vet-
erinary Microbiology 209, 97–106. issn: 0378-1135 (September 2017).
5.
Guevarra, R. B. et al. The dynamics of the piglet gut microbiome during the
weaning transition in association with health and nutrition. Journal of Animal
Science and Biotechnology 9, 54. issn: 2049-1891 (December 2018).
6.
Lamendella, R., Santo Domingo, J. W., Ghosh, S., Martinson, J. & Oerther,
D. B. Comparative fecal metagenomics unveils unique functional capacity of the
swine gut 2011. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-103.
7.
Singer, R. S. et al. Raising Animals Without Antibiotics: U.S. Producer and
Veterinarian Experiences and Opinions. Frontiers in Veterinary Science 6. issn:
2297-1769. doi:10.3389/fvets.2019.00452. https://www.frontiersin.org/
article/10.3389/fvets.2019.00452/full (December 2019).
8.
Rovira, P. et al. Characterization of the Microbial Resistome in Conventional and
“Raised Without Antibiotics” Beef and Dairy Production Systems. Frontiers in
Microbiology 10. issn: 1664302X. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2019.01980 (September
2019).
9.
Jensen, H. M. Health management with reduced antibiotic use-experiences of a
Danish pig vet. Animal Biotechnology 17, 189–194. issn: 10495398 (December
2006).
10.
Lekagul, A., Tangcharoensathien, V. & Yeung, S. Patterns of antibiotic use in
global pig production: A systematic review June 2019. doi:10.1016/j.vas.2019.
100058.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
58
11.
Chopra, I. & Roberts, M. Tetracycline Antibiotics: Mode of Action, Applica-
tions, Molecular Biology, and Epidemiology of Bacterial Resistance. Microbiol-
ogy and Molecular Biology Reviews 65, 232–260. issn: 1092-2172 (June 2001).
12.
Connell, S. R., Tracz, D. M., Nierhaus, K. H. & Taylor, D. E. Ribosomal Protec-
tion Proteins and Their Mechanism of Tetracycline Resistance December 2003.
doi:10.1128/AAC.47.12.3675-3681.2003.
13.
Saenger, W., Orth, P., Kisker, C., Hillen, W. & Hinrichs, W. The Tetracycline
Repressor—A Paradigm for a Biological Switch. Angewandte Chemie Interna-
tional Edition 39, 2042–2052. issn: 1433-7851 (June 2000).
14.
Eisen, D. P. in Kucers the Use of Antibiotics: A Clinical Review of Antibacterial,
Antifungal, Antiparasitic, and Antiviral Drugs, Seventh Edition 1195–1203 (CRC
Press, January 2017). isbn: 9781498747967. doi:10.1201/9781315152110.
15.
Dinos, G. P. The macrolide antibiotic renaissance 2017. doi:10.1111/bph.13936.
16.
Kanoh, S. & Rubin, B. K. Mechanisms of action and clinical application of
macrolides as immunomodulatory medications 2010. doi:10.1128/CMR.00078-
09.
17.
Kulczycka-Mierzejewska, K., Trylska, J. & Sadlej, J. Quantum mechanical stud-
ies of lincosamides. Journal of Molecular Modeling 18, 2727–2740. issn: 16102940
(June 2012).
18.
Chulluncuy, R., Espiche, C., Nakamoto, J. A., Fabbretti, A. & Milón, P. Confor-
mational response of 30S-bound IF3 to A-site binders streptomycin and kanamycin.
Antibiotics 5. issn: 20796382. doi:10.3390/antibiotics5040038 (December
2016).
19.
Tsai, Y. K. et al. A suitable streptomycin-resistant mutant for constructing
unmarked in-frame gene deletions using rpsL as a counter-selection marker. PLoS
ONE 9. issn: 19326203. doi:10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0109258 (September
2014).
20.
Lobanovska, M. & Pilla, G. Penicillin’s discovery and antibiotic resistance:
Lessons for the future? Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 90, 135–145. issn:
00440086 (March 2017).
21.
Van Hoek, A. H. et al. Acquired antibiotic resistance genes: An overview 2011.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00203.
22.
Vikram, A. et al. Impact of ”raised without antibiotics” beef cattle production
practices on occurrences of antimicrobial resistance. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 83. issn: 10985336. doi:10.1128/AEM.01682-17 (November 2017).
23.
Fortier, L. C. & Sekulovic, O. Importance of prophages to evolution and viru-
lence of bacterial pathogens. Virulence 4, 354–365. issn: 21505608 (2013).
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
59
24.
Colavecchio, A., Cadieux, B., Lo, A. & Goodridge, L. D. Bacteriophages con-
tribute to the spread of antibiotic resistance genes among foodborne pathogens of
the Enterobacteriaceae family - A review June 2017. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.
01108.
25.
Allen, H. K. et al. Antibiotics in feed induce prophages in swine fecal micro-
biomes. mBio 2. issn: 21507511. doi:10 . 1128 / mBio . 00260 - 11 (November
2011).
26.
Mu, C. & Zhu, W. Antibiotic effects on gut microbiota, metabolism, and beyond.
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 103, 9277–9285 (2019).
27.
Zhang, S. & Chen, D. C. Facing a new challenge: the adverse effects of an-
tibiotics on gut microbiota and host immunity May 2019. doi:10.1097/CM9.
0000000000000245.
28.
Pi, Y., Gao, K., Peng, Y., Mu, C. L. & Zhu, W. Y. Antibiotic-induced alter-
ations of the gut microbiota and microbial fermentation in protein parallel the
changes in host nitrogen metabolism of growing pigs. Animal 13, 262–272. issn:
1751732X (February 2019).
29.
Steele, J., Feng, H., Parry, N. & Tzipori, S. Piglet Models of Acute or Chronic
Clostridium difficile Illness. The Journal of Infectious Diseases 201, 428–434.
issn: 0022-1899 (February 2010).
30.
Schokker, D. et al. Long-Lasting Effects of Early-Life Antibiotic Treatment and
Routine Animal Handling on Gut Microbiota Composition and Immune System
in Pigs. PLOS ONE 10 (ed Loh, G.) e0116523. issn: 1932-6203 (February 2015).
31.
Yang, Q. et al. Structure and Function of the Fecal Microbiota in Diarrheic
Neonatal Piglets. Frontiers in microbiology 8, 502. issn: 1664-302X (2017).
32.
Thomas, T., Gilbert, J. & Meyer, F. Metagenomics - a guide from sampling to
data analysis. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2. issn: 2042-5783.
doi:10.1186/2042-5783-2-3 (December 2012).
33.
Janda, J. M. & Abbott, S. L. 16S rRNA gene sequencing for bacterial identifi-
cation in the diagnostic laboratory: Pluses, perils, and pitfalls September 2007.
doi:10.1128/JCM.01228-07.
34.
Quince, C., Walker, A. W., Simpson, J. T., Loman, N. J. & Segata, N. Shotgun
metagenomics, from sampling to analysis September 2017. doi:10.1038/nbt.
3935.
35.
Nayfach, S. & Pollard, K. S. Toward Accurate and Quantitative Comparative
Metagenomics August 2016. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.007.
36.
Brown, J. ATLAS Documentation Release 2.0 tech. rep. (2020).
37.
Van Berkum, N. L. et al. Hi-C: A method to study the three-dimensional archi-
tecture of genomes. Journal of Visualized Experiments. issn: 1940087X. doi:10.
3791/1869 (2010).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
60
38.
Illumina. An introduction to Next-Generation Sequencing Technology tech. rep.
(). www.illumina.com/technology/next-generation-sequencing.html.
39.
Sambrook, J. & Russell, D. W. Fragmentation of DNA by Sonication. Cold
Spring Harbor Protocols 2006, pdb.prot4538–pdb.prot4538 (September 2006).
40.
Tan, G., Opitz, L., Schlapbach, R. & Rehrauer, H. Long fragments achieve
lower base quality in Illumina paired-end sequencing. Scientific Reports 9. issn:
20452322. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-39076-7 (December 2019).
41.
Illumina Sequencing (for Dummies) -An overview on how our samples are
sequenced. – kscbioinformatics https : / / kscbioinformatics . wordpress .
com / 2017 / 02 / 13 / illumina - sequencing - for - dummies - samples - are -
sequenced/.
42.
Paired-End vs. Single-Read Sequencing Technology https://www.illumina.
com/science/technology/next-generation-sequencing/plan-experiments/
paired-end-vs-single-read.html.
43.
De Novo Genome Assembly for Illumina Data - Bioinformatics Documentation
https://www.melbournebioinformatics.org.au/tutorials/tutorials/
assembly/assembly-protocol/.
44.
Cock, P. J., Fields, C. J., Goto, N., Heuer, M. L. & Rice, P. M. The Sanger
FASTQ file format for sequences with quality scores, and the Solexa/Illumina
FASTQ variants. Nucleic Acids Research 38, 1767–1771. issn: 03051048 (De-
cember 2009).
45.
File Format Guide https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/submitformats/
#pairedend-fastq.
46.
Koster, J. & Rahmann, S. Snakemake–a scalable bioinformatics workflow engine.
Bioinformatics 28, 2520–2522. issn: 1367-4803 (October 2012).
47.
Basics: An example workflow — Snakemake 5.9.1+0.g138720f.dirty documen-
tation https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/basics.
html.
48.
Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y. & Gu, J. fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ
preprocessor. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 34, i884–i890. issn: 1367-4811
(September 2018).
49.
Assembly Information https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/basics/.
50.
Khan, A. R., Pervez, M. T., Babar, M. E., Naveed, N. & Shoaib, M. A Com-
prehensive Study of De Novo Genome Assemblers: Current Challenges and Fu-
ture Prospective. Evolutionary Bioinformatics 14. issn: 11769343. doi:10.1177/
1176934318758650 (February 2018).
51.
Nurk, S., Meleshko, D., Korobeynikov, A. & Pevzner, P. A. MetaSPAdes: A new
versatile metagenomic assembler. Genome Research 27, 824–834. issn: 15495469
(May 2017).
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
61
52.
BLAST TOPICS https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?CMD=Web&
PAGE_TYPE=BlastDocs&DOC_TYPE=BlastHelp.
53.
Sedlar, K., Kupkova, K. & Provaznik, I. Bioinformatics strategies for taxonomy
independent binning and visualization of sequences in shotgun metagenomics
January 2017. doi:10.1016/j.csbj.2016.11.005.
54.
Wu, Y.-W., Simmons, B. A. & Singer, S. W. MaxBin 2.0: an automated binning
algorithm to recover genomes from multiple metagenomic datasets. Bioinfor-
matics 32, 605–607. issn: 1367-4803 (February 2016).
55.
Rho, M., Tang, H. & Ye, Y. FragGeneScan: Predicting genes in short and error-
prone reads. Nucleic Acids Research 38. issn: 03051048. doi:10.1093/nar/
gkq747 (November 2010).
56.
Finn, R. D., Clements, J. & Eddy, S. R. HMMER web server: Interactive se-
quence similarity searching. Nucleic Acids Research 39. issn: 03051048. doi:10.
1093/nar/gkr367 (July 2011).
57.
Single-Copy Genes as Molecular Markers for Phylogenomic Studies in Seed
Plants https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5414570/.
58.
Parks, D. H., Imelfort, M., Skennerton, C. T., Hugenholtz, P. & Tyson, G. W.
CheckM: Assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates,
single cells, and metagenomes. Genome Research 25, 1043–1055. issn: 15495469
(July 2015).
59.
Koonin, E. V. & Galperin, M. Y. Genome Annotation and Analysis (2003).
60.
Seemann, T. Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics 30,
2068–2069. issn: 1367-4803 (July 2014).
61.
What is Gene Annotation in Bioinformatics? http://www.biolyse.ca/what-
is-gene-annotation-in-bioinformatics/.
62.
Gweon, H. S. et al. The impact of sequencing depth on the inferred taxonomic
composition and AMR gene content of metagenomic samples. Environmental
Microbiome 14, 7. issn: 2524-6372 (December 2019).
63.
Hatem, A., Bozdaǧ, D., Toland, A. E. & Çatalyürek, Ü. V. Benchmarking short
sequence mapping tools. BMC Bioinformatics 14, 184. issn: 14712105 (June
2013).
64.
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-
Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 26, 589–95. issn: 1367-
4811 (March 2010).
65.
Li, H. et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformat-
ics 25, 2078–2079. issn: 13674803 (August 2009).
66.
Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose
program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30,
923–930. issn: 1367-4803 (April 2014).
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
62
67.
TPM - Array Suite Wiki http://www.arrayserver.com/wiki/index.php?
title=TPM.
68.
Galperin, M. Y., Makarova, K. S., Wolf, Y. I. & Koonin, E. V. Expanded Mi-
crobial genome coverage and improved protein family annotation in the COG
database. Nucleic Acids Research 43, D261–D269. issn: 13624962 (January
2015).
69.
Jensen, R. A. Orthologs and paralogs - We need to get it right (multiple letters)
[1] 2001. doi:10.1186/gb-2001-2-8-interactions1002.
70.
Hu, Q. N. et al. Assignment of EC Numbers to Enzymatic Reactions with Re-
action Difference Fingerprints. PLoS ONE 7. issn: 19326203. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0052901 (December 2012).
71.
Armstrong, R. A. When to use the Bonferroni correction. Ophthalmic and Phys-
iological Optics 34, 502–508. issn: 02755408 (September 2014).
72.
Jafari, M. & Ansari-Pour, N. Why, when and how to adjust your P values? Cell
Journal 20, 604–607. issn: 22285814 (2019).
73.
Wang, B., Shi, Z., Weber, G. F. & Kennedy, M. A. Introduction of a new critical
p value correction method for statistical significance analysis of metabonomics
data. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 405, 8419–8429. issn: 1618-2642
(October 2013).
74.
Library Prep and Array Kit Selector https://www.illumina.com/library-
prep-array-kit-selector.html?tags=web%3Akey-use%2Fmetagenomics#
kit-nextera-dna-flex-library-prep-kit-specifications.
75.
Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2.
Nature Methods 9, 357–359. issn: 15487091 (April 2012).
76.
seqtk/README.md at master · lh3/seqtk · GitHub https://github.com/
lh3/seqtk/blob/master/README.md.
77.
Wu, Y. W., Tang, Y. H., Tringe, S. G., Simmons, B. A. & Singer, S. W. MaxBin:
An automated binning method to recover individual genomes from metagenomes
using an expectation-maximization algorithm. Microbiome 2. issn: 20492618.
doi:10.1186/2049-2618-2-26 (March 2014).
78.
COGs - Clusters of Orthologous Groups https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
COG/.
79.
ExPASy - ENZYME https://enzyme.expasy.org/.
80.
Home · marbl/Krona Wiki https://github.com/marbl/Krona/wiki.
81.
Manor, O. & Borenstein, E. MUSiCC: A marker genes based framework for
metagenomic normalization and accurate profiling of gene abundances in the
microbiome. Genome Biology 16, 53. issn: 1474760X (March 2015).
82.
Bebrone, C. Metallo-β-lactamases (classification, activity, genetic organization,
structure, zinc coordination) and their superfamily December 2007. doi:10.1016/
j.bcp.2007.05.021.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
63
83.
Pollock, J. et al. Resistance to change: AMR gene dynamics on a commercial
pig farm with high antimicrobial usage. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-58659-3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-58659-3.
84.
Wang, Z. et al. The ABC transporter YejABEF is required for resistance to
antimicrobial peptides and the virulence of Brucella melitensis. Scientific Reports
6. issn: 20452322. doi:10.1038/srep31876 (August 2016).
85.
D. L. Hank Harris. Intestinal Salmonellosis in Pigs - Digestive System - Veteri-
nary Manual https://www.msdvetmanual.com/digestive-system/intestinal-
diseases-in-pigs/intestinal-salmonellosis-in-pigs.
86.
Sarowar, S., Hu, O. J., Werneburg, G. T., Thanassi, D. G. & Li, H. The Es-
cherichia coli P and type 1 pilus assembly chaperones PapD and FimC are
monomeric in solution. Journal of Bacteriology 198, 2360–2369. issn: 10985530
(2016).
87.
Sauer, F. G. et al. Structural basis of chaperone function and pilus biogenesis.
Science 285, 1058–1061. issn: 00368075 (August 1999).
88.
Rich, S. N. et al. Associations between antibiotic prescriptions and recurrent
urinary tract infections in female college students. Epidemiology and Infection
147. issn: 14694409. doi:10.1017/S0950268818003369 (2019).
89.
Looft, T. et al. In-feed antibiotic effects on the swine intestinal microbiome.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
109, 1691–1696. issn: 00278424 (January 2012).
90.
Kaval, K. G. & Garsin, D. A. Ethanolamine utilization in bacteria January 2018.
doi:10.1128/mBio.00066-18.
91.
Moore, T. C. & Escalante-Semerena, J. C. The EutQ and EutP proteins are
novel acetate kinases involved in ethanolamine catabolism: Physiological im-
plications for the function of the ethanolamine metabolosome in Salmonella
enterica. Molecular Microbiology 99, 497–511. issn: 13652958 (February 2016).
92.
Sintsova, A., Smith, S., Subashchandrabose, S. & Mobley, H. L. Role of ethanolamine
utilization genes in host colonization during urinary tract infection. Infection and
Immunity 86. issn: 10985522. doi:10.1128/IAI.00542-17 (March 2018).
93.
Saier, M. H. The Bacterial Phosphotransferase System: New Frontiers 50 Years
after Its Discovery July 2015. doi:10.1159/000381215.
94.
Yun, M. K. et al. Catalysis and sulfa drug resistance in dihydropteroate synthase.
Science 335, 1110–1114. issn: 10959203 (March 2012).
95.
Quartararo, C. E. & Blanchard, J. S. Kinetic and chemical mechanism of malate
synthase from mycobacterium tuberculosis. Biochemistry 50, 6879–6887. issn:
00062960 (August 2011).
96.
Thakur, K., Tomar, S. K. & De, S. Lactic acid bacteria as a cell factory for
riboflavin production July 2016. doi:10.1111/1751-7915.12335.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
64
97.
García-Angulo, V. A. Overlapping riboflavin supply pathways in bacteria. Crit-
ical Reviews in Microbiology 43, 196–209. issn: 1040-841X (March 2017).
98.
Gilbert, J. A. Our unique microbial identity. Genome Biology 16. issn: 1474760X.
doi:10.1186/s13059-015-0664-7 (May 2015).
==PAGE:74==
