==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master’s thesis
Heart Segmentation Using
Deep Learning
Andreas Høyby Ellegaard
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Project title
Heart Segmentation Using Deep Learning
Authors
Andreas Høyby Ellegaard (s134632), student, MSc Programme, Biomedical Engineering
Supervisors
Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen, Associate Professor at Image Analysis and Computer Graphics,
DTU Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Kristine Aavild Juhl, PhD Student at Image Analysis and Computer Graphics, DTU Depart-
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Marie Sand Traberg, Associate Professor at DTU Department of Health Technology
Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor MSO, Head of Section at Image Analysis and Computer
Graphics, DTU Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Vedrana Andersen Dahl, Associate Professor at Image Analysis and Computer Graphics, DTU
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Anders Nymark Christensen, Assistant Professor at Image Analysis and Computer Graphics,
DTU Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Project period
September 2018-January 2019
ECTS
30 points
Field
Cardiac Computed Tomography, Deep Learning, Semantic Segmentation
Type
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In the ﬁeld of medical imaging, a lot of research is focusing on cardiology, as cardio-
vascular disease is the leading cause of death worldwide. In an attempt to extract
indices of cardiac function and morphology, clinical personnel conduct manual seg-
mentation of three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) images. How-
ever this process is very time-consuming, onerous, and often suﬀer from low inter-
and intra-expert reproductivity. This thesis proposes an automation multi-label
whole heart segmentation pipeline to produce robust and accurate segmentations
of cardiac CT images using deep learning.
The pipeline, developed around the
Multi-Modal Whole Heart Segmentation (MM-WHS) challenge 2017, utilize two
3D convolutional neural networks with U-Net architecture. The ﬁrst U-Net detects
the whole heart region of interest, which is then used for generation of data with less
inﬂuence of surrounding tissue. The second U-Net performs multi-label segmen-
tation of the hearts. The ﬁnal segmentations are acquired after post-processing,
using connected component analysis for smaller corrections and ﬁne-tuning. The
proposed pipeline shows a high similarity between expert segmentations and our
predicted segmentations, and it outperforms the previous work by the MM-WHS
challenge participants.
The thesis explores model generalization by including another cardiac CT dataset
from the Copenhagen General Population Study and through deep learning reg-
ularization methods.
Here, both data augmentation, dropout, and inclusion of
additional clinical image data show the desired eﬀect by increasing segmentation
performance on the test images.
Supporting research within computational ﬂuid dynamic modeling and blood
ﬂow simulation in the heart, iso-surfaces of the heart substructures are also created
from the predicted segmentation volumes.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), at the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU Compute, in
fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. in Biomedical Engineering.
The thesis presents work done during the fall semester 2018.
The thesis deals with automatic multi-label segmentation of cardiac CT images
from two diﬀerent datasets using deep learning. In extension, it deals with con-
version of the segmentation into iso-surfaces aiding computational ﬂuid dynamics
modeling used for simulation of blood ﬂow in the heart.
The thesis is written under supervision of Associate Professor Rasmus Reinhold
Paulsen from DTU Compute.
The following co-supervisor assisted the supervi-
sion: PhD student Kristine Aavild Juhl, Professor MSO Anders Bjorholm Dahl,
Associate Professor Vedrana Andersen Dahl, Assistant Professor Anders Nymark
Christensen all from DTU Compute, and Associate Professor Marie Sand Traberg
from Department of Health Technology, DTU. Therefore, the thesis is written in
active voice, where "We" indicates the team behind.
Lyngby, 31-January-2019
Andreas Høyby Ellegaard
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, we would like to gratefully acknowledge our supervisor Rasmus
R. Paulsen and our co-supervisors Kristine Aa. Juhl, Marie S. Traberg, Anders B.
Dahl, Vedrana A. Dahl, Anders N. Christensen at DTU Compute. You have all
been indispensable sources of support, guidance, and constructive criticism during
all phases of the project work.
Also, we would like to thank PhD student at
DTU Compute, Jeppe Thagaard, for additional insight in deep learning subjects of
diﬀerent kinds, and PhD student at the Department of Health Technology, Rasmus
Hvid, for constructive feedback on creation of segmentation iso-surfaces.
A big thanks must also be given to the organizers of the Multi-Modality Whole
Heart Segmentation challenge 2017, and the Department of Cardiology at Rigshos-
pitalet for providing the data creating the foundation of the project work.
Finally, we would like to thank the other Master students in the supervision-
group Joseﬁne V. Sundgaard, Linnea R. Gätke, Line Marcussen, and Christian K.
Eschen for great inputs to the discussion of various thesis topics.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Clinical Background
7
2.1
The Heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Cardiovascular Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Computed Tomography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Cardiac CT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Technical Background
13
3.1
Segmentation in Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Data
15
4.1
MM-WHS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Data Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
CGPS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.1
Data Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Methods
23
5.1
Creation of Ground Truth for CGPS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Segmentation Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.1
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5.2.2
Loading & Resampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.3
Network Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.3.1
Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.3.2
Region of Interest U-Net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.3.3
Segmentation U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.4
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Evaluation of Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.1
Evaluation of Training & Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3.2
Evaluation of Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Iso-surface of Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Results
35
6.1
Creation of Ground Truth for CGPS Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Region of Interest U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.1
MM-WHS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2.2
CGPS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Segmentation U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3.1
MM-WHS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3.2
CGPS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3.3
Joined Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.5
Iso-surface of Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Discussion
53
7.1
Segmentation Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Comparison to Previous Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.3
Usability in Research & Clinic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8
Conclusion
59
9
Future Work
61
A Appendix
63
A.1 ROI U-Net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.1.1
CGPS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Segmentation U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2.1
CGPS Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2.2
Joined Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Explanation
AO
Ascending aorta
API
Application programming interface
CT
Computed tomography
CFD
Computational ﬂuid dynamics
CLAHE
Contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization
CNN
Convolutional neural network
FCN
Fully convolutional network
CGPS
Copenhagen General Population Study
GPU
Graphics processing unit
HU
Hounsﬁeld units
ITK
Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit
LA
Left atrium blood cavity
LV
Left ventricle blood cavity
MICCAI
International conference on Medical Image Com-
puting and Computer Assisted Intervention
MY
Myocardium of the left ventricle
MM-WHS
Multi-Modal Whole-Heart Segmentation
PA
Pulmonary artery
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
RA
Right atrium blood cavity
ROI
Region of interest
RV
Right ventricle blood cavity
SSM
Statistical shape model
STACOM
International workshop in Statistical Atlases and
Computational Models of the Heart
WH
Whole heart
2D
Two dimensional
3D
Thee dimensional
==PAGE:12==
x
Abbreviations
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cardiovascular disease is globally the leading cause of death, with ischaemic heart
disease and stroke accounting for 26% of all deaths in 2016 [1]. In an attempt to
reduce this number, a lot of research has been focusing on cardiology and espe-
cially diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular disease. Here, three-dimensional
(3D) cardiac imaging has become a fundamental tool for analysis of cardiovascular
structures. These non-invasive medical imaging techniques, including cardiac com-
puted tomography (CT) and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), oﬀer great
contrast and add indispensable knowledge about heart anatomy. To fully facilitate
the anatomical information contained within the images, accurate extraction and
perception of information play an important role.
Delineation of cardiac structures on 3D images, i.e. across multiple image slices
and frames, makes it possible to extract indices of morphology and function, such
as chamber volume, cardiac output, and myocardial wall thickness, and thereby
permit cardiac examination. This delineation of image pixels or voxels, also called
segmentation, is commonly conducted manually by the clinical personnel and is
a time-consuming and cumbersome process. Moreover, it is prone to intra- and
inter-subject variability.
This engenders motivation for development of a faster
and more objective and accurate segmentation.
The latter has shown to be a
challenging problem, despite the decent resolution and soft tissue contrast of the
medical images. This is due to great geometric complexity and high anatomical
variation of a heart in constant motion.
The problem is especially conspicuous
in cases of pathological nature, where substructures of the heart might deviate
radically in shape, from how a healthy heart appears.[2, 3]
This chapter describes the previous work within automatic segmentation of car-
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
diac images. It hereby covers some of the state-of-the-art solutions to the challenges
behind segmentation and leads us through the motivation behind the project work
to the overall aim of the thesis.
1.1
Previous Work
The challenges associated with manual image segmentation have in previous years
been attempted bypassed through semi-automatic or fully automatic approaches.
They are commonly divided into two kinds: Image-driven approaches with no or
little prior knowledge and model-driven approaches with strong prior knowledge.
In general, the image-driven techniques are evolved around pixel or voxel intensity
diﬀerences and they include e.g. thresholding, clustering, pixel or voxel classiﬁca-
tion, and active contour or surface. Here, the quality of the training data with
respect to image resolution and contrast is a signiﬁcant factor in arriving at good
segmentation results. The model-driven techniques are based on statistical infor-
mation, e.g. from cardiac atlases or statistical shape models (SSMs), drawn from
annotated training data containing information on averages and variations of car-
diac structures. The model-driven methods are strong segmentation-tools as they
are capable of preserving anatomical spatial knowledge while segmenting the heart.
Nevertheless, they come with limitations since they build on prior models trained
on a ﬁnite dataset, which are inadequate in capturing all possible non-pathological
and pathological shapes of hearts. Also, the ﬁtting procedure involving non-rigid
registration can be computationally demanding and prone to local minima. [2, 3]
State-of-the-art cardiac image segmentation methods also include an increas-
ingly popular ﬁeld within machine learning, namely segmentation using deep learn-
ing.
Here, the convolutional neural network (CNN) has proven favorable when
applied to medical images in two or three dimensions covering large amounts of
data. The CNN consists of a series of layers of nonlinear processing units used to
extract features in image inputs and produces outputs used for e.g. segmentation.[4]
To strengthen research within medical image segmentation and development of
clinical applications, many challenges on the topic are organized. One of them is the
Multi-Modal Whole-Heart Segmentation (MM-WHS) challenge 2017 [5]. Clinical
cardiac images from the two modalities CT and MRI were provided as a founda-
tion for benchmarking various whole-heart segmentation algorithms. Nine papers
were accepted in the challenge and out of these, six approaches were based on deep
learning [6–11]. All six segmentation algorithms had the basic architecture in com-
mon; they built on the U-Net presented in [12]. This architecture covers a fully
convolutional network (FCN) consisting of a contracting and an expansive path in
a symmetric U-shape, allowing skip-connections to connect opposing convolutional
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Previous Work
3
layers. The skip-connections are used to combine information on appearance from a
shallow, ﬁne layer with information on semantics from a deep, coarse layer. Trained
end-to-end on a small dataset, the U-Net can achieve state-of-the-art semantic seg-
mentation, where each pixel or voxel is assigned to a class label. To accomplish
robust and generalized segmentations, the network relies on heavy use of augmen-
tation on a small training set, i.e. generation of additional data through diﬀerent
geometric transformations such as rotation, scaling, skewing, elastic deformation,
etc.
The cardiac CT and MRI images from the MM-WHS challenge were scans ac-
quired in 3D, however, the segmentation can be conducted in 2D as in [6] and
[7]. Common for these approaches is that they utilized complementary information
from image slices from the three diﬀerent orthogonal planes (axial, coronal, and
sagittal) using three separate U-Nets. Afterwards, they combined the probability
map outputs from the three U-Nets to achieve the ﬁnal segmentation of the 3D
image volume. Wang et al. [7] further attempted to integrate a statistical shape
context model into the deep learning process indicating increased segmentation ac-
curacy of most substructures compared to their plain CNN. Another approach to
enforcing 3D consistency using 2D segmentation is utilizing a spatial propagation
technique as in [13]. For this technique, the segmentations are propagated across
the image slices from top through bottom, i.e. the prediction of the current seg-
mentation depends on the segmentation of the previous slice. Consequently, the 2D
methods might still fall short on capturing the spatial coherence of the 3D image
volumes.
Four of the participants of the MM-WHS Challenge 2017 based their work on
segmentation using 3D variations of U-Net [8–11]. 3D methods face some limita-
tions compared to 2D methods including a drastic reduction in training images, as
2D methods use all the 2D image slices separately, while in 3D the images are used
as volumes. Furthermore, 3D methods require signiﬁcantly more graphics process-
ing unit (GPU) memory, and downsampling of the images are often a necessity.
Exploiting parameters from pre-trained 3D networks (transfer learning), Yang et
al. [10, 11] tried to circumvent the limited training data issue. As whole heart
segmentation includes segmentation of several substructures of diﬀerent sizes, class
imbalance can emerge and bias the training towards major classes, especially back-
ground. Yang et al. [10, 11] dealt with this problem by using a hybrid loss function
in the network to treat all classes equally. The proposed hybrid loss function were
adopted in a so called deep supervision mechanism, and thus they shortened the
backpropagation path of gradient ﬂow using stratiﬁed side-paths in their network
to avoid the vanishing gradient problem described in [14]. On top of that, they
constructed the U-Nets such that multi GPU (simultaneous use of several GPUs)
could be utilized to speed up the training time. In [8] and [9], the segmentation
tasks were solved using two 3D CNNs: The ﬁrst one localized a region of interest
(ROI) around the heart to eliminate most of the unnecessary background data,
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
and the second one performed the multi-label segmentation. Exploiting that the
challenge covered both CT and MRI data, Tong et al. [8] achieved decent results
using fusions of the provided CT and MRI images for their segmentation. When
considering both results on CT and MRI, Payer et al. [9] enter an overall ﬁrst
ranking in the MM-WHS challenge 2017. Here, the localization U-Net performed
landmark localization using heatmap regression to obtain the center of a bounding
box around all heart substructures. The ROI was then deﬁned such that it covered
all substructures in the image. Afterwards, the segmentation was performed using
a three-stage architecture: 1) a U-Net generated intermediate label predictions, 2)
the network transformed the predictions to positions of other labels (allowing the
network to learn feasible anatomical label conﬁgurations), and 3) the intermedi-
ate predictions from the U-Net were multiplied with the transformed predictions
resulting in the ﬁnal combined label predictions.
In Table 1.1, an overview of a selection of diﬀerent state-of-the-art segmentation
methods is given.
Based on previous work within segmentation of cardiac CT
images using deep learning, our goal is to investigate and test underlying methods
behind 3D segmentation networks, which further translates into the speciﬁc aim of
the thesis given in next section.
1.2
Aim of Thesis
In this thesis, the overall aim is to develop an automated pipeline for multi-label
whole heart segmentation of cardiac CT images using 3D deep learning networks.
The segmentation pipeline is developed using a dataset of cardiac CT images and
corresponding ground truth labels from the MM-WHS challenge 2017 held in con-
junction with STACOM1 and MICCAI2 2017. Thus, the proposed segmentation
approach is comparable to state-of-the-art cardiac segmentation methods using
deep learning.
The project will further include investigation on generalization of such a model
based on inclusion of another cardiac CT dataset obtained from the Copenhagen
General Population Study (CGPS) [15], and through deep learning regularization
methods.
Ultimately, the segmentation results should be converted into iso-surfaces that
can further be fed into a pipeline for computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) modeling
used for simulation of blood ﬂow in the heart.
1International workshop in Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart.
2International conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Aim of Thesis
5
Table 1.1: Deep learning cardiac segmentation methods overview.
Reference
Segmentation method
Architecture
Modality
Notes
Mortazi et al. [6]
Multi-planar CNN
2D U-Net
CT, MRI
One CNN for each plane –
axial, coronal and sagittal
Wang et al. [7]
Multi-planar CNN
Three steps: (1) Scout segm. with 3
orthogonal U-Nets (avg. the outcome)
(2) Shape context estimation
(3) Shape context guided U-Net
2D U-Net
CT, MRI
One CNN for each plane –
axial, coronal and sagittal
Tong et al. [8]
Two CNNs: One for ROI detection
and one for segmentation
3D U-Net
CT, MRI
Used the multimodal MRI
and CT images as a fusion
Payer et al. [9]
Two CNNs: One for ROI detection
and one for segmentation
3D U-net
CT, MRI
Used ITK for augmentation
Yang et al. [10]
CNN
Transfer learning
Deep supervision mechanism
3D U-Net
CT, MRI
Used hybrid loss function to address
class imbalance problem.
Pre-processed volumes using CLAHE
Used multi GPU
Yang et al. [11]
CNN
Transfer learning
Deep supervision mechanism
3D U-Net
CT, MRI
Used hybrid loss function to address
class imbalance problem.
Uses multi GPU
Zheng et al. [13]
Spatial propagation
Two CNNs: One for ROI detection
and one for segmentation
2D U-Net
MRI
Not participant in MM-WHS
challenge 2017
Note: CNN: Convolutional Neural Network, CLAHE: Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization, ITK: The Insight Segmenta-
tion and Registration Toolkit, ROI: Region Of Interest.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Clinical Background
In this chapter, the theory behind the clinical aspects of the thesis is covered. That
includes underlying concepts behind the function of the heart and the diseases it
can develop and a background for understanding the medical cardiac CT images.
2.1
The Heart
The engine of the human cardiovascular system is the heart, which main function is
to sustain a continuous ﬂow of blood throughout the body. Hence, the heart works
as a pump, and can be separated into a right and a left side both consisting of an
atrium and a ventricle. An overview of the internal anatomy of the heart can be
seen in Fig. 2.1.
The four overall functions of the heart are the following:
1. Generate blood pressure. This is ensured through repetitive contraction of
the heart resulting in motion of blood through the vessels.
2. Routing blood.
Correct oxygenation to body tissue and removal of waste
products from body tissue is established by the hearts’ separation of the
pulmonary and systemic systems.
3. Ensuring one-way blood ﬂow. The heart valves avoid back-ﬂow of the blood
during contraction and thereby provide one-way blood ﬂow.
==PAGE:20==
8
Clinical Background
4. Regulating blood supply. The metabolic needs of the body are diﬀerent during
rest, exercise and change in body position. The supply of blood is therefore
regulated by heart rate and contraction force.
The route of the blood ﬂow through the heart is as follows: 1 The right atrium
receives deoxygenated blood from the body through inferior and superior vena cava
and coronary sinus. The blood ﬂows from the right atrium into the right ventricle
during ventricle relaxation (diastole) and an atrial contraction ﬁnishes the right
ventricle ﬁlling.
2 Contraction of the right ventricle forces closing of the tricuspid
valve and opening of the pulmonary valve.
3 The blood is now pumped through
the pulmonary arteries 4 into the pulmonary circulation, where carbon dioxide
is released to the lungs, and oxygen is taken up.
5
+
6
Blood is afterwards
returned to the left atrium through the pulmonary veins.
7
The blood passes
from the left atrium to the left ventricle.
8 Contraction of the latter forces closing
of the bicuspid valve and opening of the aortic valve, and blood ﬂows through the
ascending aorta and aortic arch into the circulatory system.
Here, oxygen and
nutrients are distributed via the blood to all tissues of the body (except the lungs,
which are supplied by pulmonary vessels). Carbon dioxide and other waste products
are then brought back to the right atrium of the heart, to complete a circle of the
cardiovascular system. [16]
2.1.1
Cardiovascular Disease
Disease in the heart and the blood vessels causes a reduced distribution of the vital
blood ﬂow from the heart to all the tissues of the body and back to the heart again.
It includes several conditions associated with narrowing or complete occlusion of
the blood vessels, that will often lead to ischaemic heart disease or stroke accounting
for 26% of all deaths worldwide [1]. The two main contributors are brieﬂy described
below.
Ischaemic Heart Disease
Ischaemic heart disease, also known as coronary
artery disease, describes impairment of coronary blood ﬂow, i.e. reduced or non-
existing supply of blood to the heart itself. This can lead to a variety of diﬀerent
disorders including myocardial ischemia (lack of oxygen to the cardiac muscle),
heart attack, and sudden death. The most frequent cause of ischaemic heart dis-
ease is atherosclerosis, which denotes the formation of plaque inside the arteries,
in this case, the vessels carrying blood to the heart. Plaque consists of lipids and
cholesterol among other things, and increased levels of those in the blood can lead
to the development of either stable plaques, which obstruct blood ﬂow, or unstable
plaques, which can rupture and cause thrombus formation. [17]
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The Heart
9
Figure 2.1: Internal anatomy of the heart cut in a coronal plane. The white arrows
indicate the direction of the blood ﬂow. Blue and red color of substructures resemble
deoxygenated and oxygenated blood ﬂow, respectively. The ﬁgure is adapted from [16].
==PAGE:22==
10
Clinical Background
Stroke
The deﬁnition of stroke is a syndrome of acute focal neurological deﬁcit
as a result of a vascular disorder that injures the tissue of the brain. Two types
of stroke exist: Ischemic and hemorrhagic. Ischemic stroke, accounting for 87% of
all strokes, covers a reduced blood supply and inadequate blood ﬂow in the brain
caused by a blood clot in an artery supplying the brain. Hemorrhagic stroke is
caused by bleeding into the brain tissue from a blood vessel rupture. [17]
2.2
Computed Tomography
Computed tomography is a scanning modality originating from planar X-ray imag-
ing. X-rays are electromagnetic radiation (photons) created in an X-ray tube when
electrons, emitted from a heated ﬁlament, hit a tungsten anode. The X-ray beams
travel through the patient, and while some beams are attenuated or scattered inside
the patient, others continue and are detected on the opposite side of the patient.
This results in a 2D projection of the patient resembling a distribution of X-ray at-
tenuation. In CT, the distribution of X-ray attenuation is resolved in 3D, utilizing
a set of 2D projections obtained when rotating the X-ray tube around the patient
lying on a bed in the center of the scanner. The projections can then be recon-
structed into a single axial image, also called a slice, showing a cross-section of the
patient. Thus, the contrast in the image slice describes how the X-rays are attenu-
ated in the body of the patient. The attenuation is approximately proportional to
the density of the tissue being imaged. This means that high attenuation e.g. seen
in compact high-density bone achieves high intensity in the image, whereas lower
attenuation seen for softer tissue with lower density results in lower image intensity.
The speciﬁc intensity values are quantiﬁed using Hounsﬁeld units (HU), where the
HU scale is expressed relative to the attenuation of water at room temperature.
Hence, the HU value of water is 0, and the HU value of air is -1000. When the
desired region of a patient is imaged, the axial 2D slices can be combined into a 3D
image volume. [18]
2.2.1
Cardiac CT
Modern CT scanners (cf. Fig. 2.2a) obtain a series of slices at the same time.
Thereby, a whole heart CT scanning can be performed in under 30 seconds. How-
ever, cardiac CT scannings often encounter challenges related to motion of the
patient and especially of the dynamic working heart. The challenges are rooted in
the fact that the heart solely consists of soft tissue with some of it resembling the
same attenuation and thereby the same intensity in the image. This makes it hard
to separate some structures from others. Diﬀerent solutions to these issues exist,
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Computed Tomography
11
one of them being enhancement of image contrast using intravenous contrast ﬂuid
with higher attenuation properties. The CT image is typically acquired, when the
contrast agent reaches the aortic arch, i.e. the imaging is automatically initiated
when a certain attenuation in that region is achieved. An example of a contrast
enhances cardiac CT image is shown in Fig. 2.3. The ﬁgure shows how the contrast
is enhanced between the left and the right side of the heart, where the contrast ﬂuid
is present in left atrium and ventricle. The ﬁgure also includes a colorbar showing
correspondence between image values and HU values. The HU values of the heart
with contrast enhanced tissue (muscle and blood) are approx. within the range of
100 to 600 HU. The CT images shown in axial view are commonly visualized using
the head-ﬁrst-supine convention, i.e. one should imagine standing at the feet of the
patient and looking up through the bottom of the heart (cf. Fig 2.4).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: (a) A cardiac CT scanner [19]. (b) Cardiac CT scan region indicated by
the dashed lines [20].
==PAGE:24==
12
Clinical Background
Figure 2.3:
Contrast enhanced cardiac CT image: An axial 2D slice with colorbar
resembling Hounsﬁeld units (HU) of image intensities. The rigth and left side of the heart
are indicated by the arrows and the circle highlight the spine of the patient.
Figure 2.4: Orientation overview. The axial image slices are viewed according to the
head-ﬁrst-supine (HFS) viewing convention. Illustation modiﬁed from [21]
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Technical Background
The focus in this project lies on semantic segmentation of cardiac CT images using
deep leaning. Within medical imaging, where images are acquired in 3D and con-
tribute with large amounts of data, the favorable choice of network design is the
CNN.The reader of this thesis is expected to know the basic concepts behind CNNs
as e.g. convolution and pooling operations, forward and backward propagation,
loss functions and gradient descent, and is referred to [22] otherwise. However, this
chapter will cover some of the important aspects behind deep learning networks,
and more speciﬁcally how they are generalized for segmentation of medical images.
3.1
Segmentation in Deep Learning
A general deep learning challenge is developing models that resemble high perfor-
mance on previously unseen inputs, and not only on the images on which the model
was trained. The term generalization describes exactly this capability. The error
made by the trained model on unseen test images is the generalization error (a.k.a.
the test error), and the aim for every deep learning model is simultaneously bring-
ing down the training error and the gap between training and test error. Hence,
it is desired to obtain a model that does not underﬁt (model unable to obtain a
suﬃciently low error on the training set) or overﬁt (model ﬁtting too closely to the
training data and can not generalize). The modiﬁcation made to a learning algo-
rithm intended to reduce its generalization error but not its training error is called
regularization. In the following, two strong regularization methods used during the
work are described.
==PAGE:26==
14
Technical Background
3.1.1
Data Augmentation
When training a CNN for heart segmentation, it is desirable to use a large num-
ber of medical images with corresponding ground truth labels. This enhances the
algorithm performance on previously unseen test images, i.e. it enhances the gen-
eralization of the segmentation model. However, a common problem is that the
quantity of medical images with proper labeling is often limited. This problem can
to a certain extent be circumvented through the creation of additional training data
imitating variation in the original data. This process is called data augmentation
and can include several operations such as noise injection, intensity variation or geo-
metric transformations of diﬀerent kinds. When augmenting the data set, it is very
important to avoid creating additional data that is not representative of how the
original data would appear in the clinic. This would consequently allow the model
to learn erroneous segmentation, i.e. training with that kind of augmented data
would make more damage to the performance of the network than good. However,
data augmentation is essential to achieve the desired invariance and robustness of
the network, when it is performed with the latter in mind. [22]
3.1.2
Dropout
A powerful method of regularizing against overﬁtting and at the same being time
computationally inexpensive is the dropout method.
It can be thought of as a
bagging method, where exponentially many neural networks are trained and the
resulting models combined in the evaluation process of the test images. The gen-
eral idea in this concept is that diﬀerent models will commonly not make all the
same errors on a given test set. When using dropout a single neural network is
transformed to an ensemble of sub-networks that are composed by stochastically
removing hidden units (by zeroing the activation) from the base network.
The
rate at which the hidden units are retained, also called retaining probability, is a
hyperparameter set before the training begins. [22, 23]
The standard type of dropout described in [24] is known to work well in fully
connected networks, but its eﬀect in CNNs is not well studied. In [25] however, it
is shown that some reduction in test error is seen when applying standard dropout
to convolutional layers. In more recent work by Tompson et al. [26], a new type of
dropout for CNNs is proposed. It is called spatial dropout and works by removing
entire feature maps instead of just a fraction of the hidden units. The underlying
theory here is that in fully convolutional networks, feature map activations are
strongly correlated and that zeroing a proportion of the activations within a feature
map does not prevent overﬁtting. Instead, the new spatial dropout method was
found to improve performance, especially on a small training dataset.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Data
In this chapter, the clinical data used in this work is introduced. The data is an
essential part of the work, as it forms the basis for the training of the deep learning
segmentation model. Data from two databases is used and they will be presented
individually in the following sections.
4.1
MM-WHS Data
The segmentation pipeline is developed around the Multi-Modal Whole-Heart Seg-
mentation (MM-WHS) challenge 2017 [5] being a part of the international workshop
STACOM held in conjunction with the international conference MICCAI 2017. The
aim of the challenge was to highlight diﬀerent whole heart segmentation algorithms
as well as cover the subject of general cardiac image segmentation, registration,
and modeling, and to raise discussions for further technical development and clini-
cal deployment. [2, 27, 28]
The challenge dataset provided for training and testing consisted of 60 cardiac
CT scans and 60 cardiac MRI scans acquired at multiple sites in real clinical envi-
ronments for patients including a wide range of cardiac diseases as well as healthy
controls. Thus, the resulting dataset contains various image quality with respect
to motion artifacts, noise, etc., which is representative of the challenges met in a
real clinical environment.
This thesis solely focused on the CT data. The CT data was acquired at Shang-
==PAGE:28==
16
Data
hai Shuguang Hospital, China, using routine cardiac CT angiography (cf. CT scan-
ner in Fig. 2.2a). These scans cover the whole heart from the aortic arch to the
upper abdominal (cf. Fig. 2.2b). All image slices were acquired in axial view with
an inplane resolution of about 0.78 × 0.78 mm and an average slice thickness of
1.6 mm. The size is typically 512 × 512 pixels in the axial plane and varies in size
along the axial axis with an average of 274. A prior institutional ethics approval
and anonymization were conducted for all the clinical data.
The dataset was originally divided into 20 CT images for training and 40 CT
images for testing. However, since a manual segmentation (ground truth labeling)
performed by cardiac experts was only provided for the training set and not for the
test set, only the 20 images with corresponding ground truth labels were used for
setting up our segmentation pipeline. The ground truth label maps included the
seven whole heart substructures (cf. Fig. 4.1):
1. Left ventricle blood cavity (LV)
2. Right ventricle blood cavity (RV)
3. Left atrium blood cavity (LA)
4. Right atrium blood cavity (RA)
5. Myocardium of the left ven-
tri-
cle (MY)
6. Ascending aorta (AO)
7. Pulmonary artery (PA)
Figure 4.1: Volumetric ground truth la-
bel model (partially transparent to visual-
ize the LV).
The images were all contrast enhanced using an intravenous contrast ﬂuid. That
is seen from viewing LA, LV, and AO in Fig. 4.2 showing an example of one of the
volumetric cardiac CT scans. The ﬁgure shows slices from the three diﬀerent views
(axial, coronal and sagittal) in the ﬁrst column and their corresponding ground
truth labels visualized on top of the CT images in the second column. A spatial
overview of the example image and the corresponding closed surface label model is
given in Fig. 4.3.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 MM-WHS Data
17
(a) Axial view
(b) Axial view w. labels
(c) Coronal view
(d) Coronal view w. labels
(e) Sagittal view
(f) Sagittal view w. labels
Figure 4.2: CT image slices with crosshairs (indicating intersection between the slices)
and their corresponding manually segmented ground truth labels (red: AO, light red: LV,
green: LA, light blue: RV, purple: RA, dark blue: PA, yellow: MY).
==PAGE:30==
18
Data
(a) Orthogonal image slices
(b) Surface label model
Figure 4.3: Spatial overview of (a) the three orthogonal CT image slices (red: axial,
yellow: sagittal, green: coronal) and (b) the manually segmented ground truth labels
integrated with the orthogonal image slices.
4.1.1
Data Review
One of the challenges an automatic segmentation pipeline is confronted with is the
variations of the images to be segmented.
Variation in image data is a crucial
part of training a segmentation model as it makes the model more generalized and
robust towards the variety of image features it is presented in the clinic. These
diﬀerent features can generally cover image resolution, scanner ﬁeld of view, image
contrast, etc. They emerge from the variety of diﬀerent scanners and scan settings
used worldwide. The data used during the thesis is reviewed with respect to those
aspects.
Large variations were found within the dataset from the MM-WHS challenge
2017 trough visual examination. In Fig. 4.4 three example images from the CT
dataset is seen together with the corresponding manually segmented ground truth
label map.
The ﬁrst diﬀerence one might discover is the size of the heart.
In
Fig. 4.4 (a) the heart covers a great amount of the image slice pixels, while the
area of the heart in Fig. 4.4 (e) is approximately four times smaller (even though
the slices show the same anatomical region of the two hearts). This is a result of
the ﬁeld of view used during acquisition of the CT images. Another aspect of the
diﬀerence between the images is the level of noise. As an example of this, the image
in Fig. 4.4 (c) appears more noisy compared to the image in Fig. 4.4 (e). That
is evident when inspecting LA (green segment) in the two cases: In image (c) the
HU pixel values vary within the substructure, wherein image (e) they appear more
==PAGE:31==
4.2 CGPS Data
19
homogeneous. This aspect can make it harder to detect boundaries between the
individual substructures of the heart. Another factor is the contrast agent used
during acquisition, which might be more evident and create more contrast in some
cases, while not so much in others.
A visual inspection of the corresponding ground truth labels revealed inequali-
ties between the manual segmentations. When comparing the LA substructure in
Fig. 4.4 (b) and (d) it is seen that the green LA label in (d) includes more of the
pulmonary vein region compared to the label in (b) (indicated by the red circles).
Also in image (b), the red AO label covers the total region of the AO substructure,
while in image (d), the AO label contains a notch marked by the red arrow.
4.2
CGPS Data
Aiming towards a more generalized segmentation pipeline, a dataset from the
Copenhagen General Population Study (CGPS) [15] was included in the work.
The CGPS is an ongoing Danish cross-sectional population study covering geno-
typic and phenotypic data registration in relation to a wide range of health-related
conditions. As a part of the CGPS, the participants were oﬀered a research car-
diac computed tomography angiography examination at Rigshospitalet, University
Hospital of Copenhagen. From February 2010 and three years ahead, 4295 par-
ticipants (men/women: 47%/53%) underwent the examination. Inclusion criteria
for the CT scan were ≥40 years of age and normal kidney function, while ex-
clusion criteria were any of the following: (1) cardiovascular disease (self-reported
previous myocardial infarction, coronary bypass, percutaneous coronary interven-
tion, or stroke), (2) hypertension, (3) hypercholesterolaemia, (4) participants taking
cardiovascular prescription medication including diuretics, statins, or aspirin, (5)
overweight, (6) diabetes mellitus, (7) chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and
(8) electrocardiogram abnormalities [29].
30 randomly sampled cardiac CT scans from the CGPS were included in the
work of this thesis. These images resemble variations, however, the scans were all
acquired at the same scanner type (a 320 MDCT Aquilion One manufactured by
Toshiba Medical Systems) under the same clinical protocol, limiting the variations
to a certain extent. The scans were acquired in axial view with inplane resolution
of 0.43 × 0.43 mm and a slice thickness of 0.25 mm. The image matrix size is 512
× 512 × 512/560/640, and all images were contrast enhanced using an intravenous
contrast ﬂuid.
==PAGE:32==
20
Data
(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
Figure 4.4: Three diﬀerent axial CT image slices from the MM-WHS challenge and their
corresponding manually segmented ground truth labels (red: AO, light red: LV, green:
LA, light blue: RV, purple: RA, dark blue: PA, yellow: MY). The red circles highlight
the pulmonary vein inlet region to the LA and the red arrow indicate a notch in the AO
label.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 CGPS Data
21
The cardiac CT scans from the CGPS came without manually segmented ground
truth labels. These have therefore been created during this work (this process is
described in detail in Sec. 5.1).
4.2.1
Data Review
In Fig. 4.5 six example images from the CGPS CT dataset are seen. The general
quality of the images is high, however, visual inspection indicates that some of the
images appear somewhat noisy, especially (a), (c), and (e). This can be a result
of high spatial resolution along the axial plane (i.e. the low slice thickness), since
the noise is inversely proportional to the slice thickness (fewer photons available for
each slice). Also, for this dataset a variation in scanner ﬁeld of view is seen.
==PAGE:34==
22
Data
(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
Figure 4.5: Six diﬀerent axial CT image slices from the CGPS dataset.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Methods
This chapter describes the method behind creation of a ground truth segmentations
for the CGPS dataset.
It afterwards presents an overview of the segmentation
pipeline and the underlying methods used during the development. It also covers
the procedure behind evaluation of the whole heart segmentation, and how iso-
surfaces of the ﬁnal segmentations are obtained.
5.1
Creation of Ground Truth for CGPS Data
The CGPS dataset contained only CT scan images and no ground truth label
maps for training of the segmentation CNN. To aid the segmentation pipeline and
generalize the model towards segmentation of a broader diversity of cardiac images,
ground truth labels belonging to the CGPS images needed to be created. First of
all, as a manual segmentation of the images would be too time-consuming, another
approach needed consideration. Secondly, manual segmentation is a diﬃcult task
without the proper knowledge and experience as a clinical specialist would have it.
It was therefore chosen to use the best performing segmentation model trained on
the MM-WHS dataset to obtain predictions on the labels as a starting point. The
30 CGPS CT images were fed into the model and the resulting predictions then
served as a start guess for the ground truth labels. Fine-tuning of the predicted
segmentations was conducted manually using 3D Slicer [30], an open source software
platform for medical image informatics, image processing, and three-dimensional
visualization. The overall process included the following steps:
==PAGE:36==
24
Methods
1. Loading in predicted segments together with the corresponding CT image.
2. Correcting obvious mistakes in the predictions, i.e.:
• Holes were ﬁlled with the proper label value.
• Misplaced segments inside other segments are switched to the right value.
• False components (eg.
components outside the heart segments) were
removed.
3. Finalizing correction process by conducting a build in joint smoothing across
all segments to level out smaller irregularities.
It should be noted, that the creation of ground truth labels for the CGPS
dataset was conducted at an earlier stage of the thesis work, i.e. before the post-
processing algorithm (included in the segmentation pipeline) was developed. This
means that the initially predicted segmentations were obtained without the use
of post-processing, which of cause would have eased the manual ﬁne-tuning just
described.
5.2
Segmentation Pipeline
The segmentation pipeline covers a six-step procedure from the raw input image
to ﬁnal multiclass label map. The ﬂow of the overall pipeline is shown in Fig. 5.1
based on an example image. It is further summarized below and described in detail
in the following sections.
1. Initially, the raw training images and ground truth labels are augmented
to increase the amount of data (cf. Sec. 5.2.1) and afterwards loaded and
resampled.
2. A ROI U-Net is trained using the downsampled training data. Further, the
trained network model is tested on downsampled training and test data to
output a binary segmentation of the total dataset.
3. The third step includes detection of ROIs and cropping on the complete orig-
inal dataset using the binary segmentations.
4. The cropped images and ground truth labels are augmented (same procedure
as in step one), loaded and resampled to size 128×128×128 before being fed
to the segmentation U-Net.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Segmentation Pipeline
25
5. The ﬁfth step covers training of the segmentation U-Net on the training
dataset. The resulting multiclass segmentation maps are achieved when ap-
plying the trained 3D model on the test dataset.
6. The ﬁnal step consists of resampling of the segmented label maps to ﬁt the
size of the original dataset and a post-processing using topological information
about the heart.
Figure 5.1: Flow diagram of proposed segmentation pipeline based on an example image.
Numbers indicate the pixel size of the image and label map
5.2.1
Data Augmentation
We performed data augmentation using SimpleITK [31]. SimpleITK is built on top
of the National Library of Medicine Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit
(ITK), a powerful toolkit for image analysis. SimpleITK allows the analysis to be
performed in the programming language Python. The toolkit supports both 2D
and 3D images, making it very useful in the data augmentation purpose of our
work.
==PAGE:38==
26
Methods
The data augmentation was conducted in 3D and consists of two geometric
transformations: Rotation, and non-linear transformation using B-spline basis func-
tions. The rotation was a rigid Euler transformation with rotation in radians around
a ﬁxed center. Here, the images and labels were rotated π/6 radians (= 30 degrees)
around the axial axis. The B-spline random deformation is based on a linear com-
bination of non-linear basis functions, which main characteristic is that they have
only local support. That is, a change in the coeﬃcient of one B-spline basis function
only aﬀects the local neighborhood. The SimpleITK implementation of B-spline
random elastic deformation utilizes two deformation-related inputs: It creates a
deformation ﬁeld using a number of controlpoints and varies the position of con-
trolpoints by sampling randomly from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and
a standard deformation. We chose to use ﬁve controlpoint and a standard defor-
mation of 15 voxels. Examples of resulting transformations can be seen in Fig.
5.2, where the image center slice of the original and transformed images are shown
together with the corresponding ground truth labels.
As more data augmentation would potentially lead to higher generalization of
the given network, two amounts of augmentation were investigated:
• One batch of augmentation would triple the amount of data. The resulting
training dataset would consist of the original, the clockwise rotated, and the
B-spline transformed data.
• Two batches of augmentation would increase the amount of data ﬁvefold.
The resulting training dataset would consist of the original, the clockwise
and counterclockwise rotated, and two times the B-spline transformed data.
5.2.2
Loading & Resampling
As GPU memory is a major bottleneck when performing segmentation of images
in 3D, downsampling of the original sized images was conducted. Therefore, the
images and labels were downsampled to 128 pixels along all three axes. This size
was found to be the largest allowable size without exhausting the GPU memory
during training and testing of the networks. The resampling was performed us-
ing SimpleITK with a nearest neighbor interpolation method. This interpolation
method ensured that no new labels were introduced that were not in the original
segmentation. Prior to feeding the images to the respective network for training,
the images were clamped into a HU range of [-1000;1000] and afterwards normal-
ized into a range of [-1;1]. The clamping directs attention to the CT HU values
covering the typical range seen in cardiac imaging from air (HU = -1000) through
soft tissue to compact bone (HU ∼1000). CT scanners often set voxels outside
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Segmentation Pipeline
27
Figure 5.2: Original and transformed images with their corresponding transformed label
map below them.
the ﬁeld of view, to a speciﬁc value, e.g. -3000, however, these values were of no
interest in our segmentation framework. The subsequent normalization served the
purpose of aiding a good initialization of the network weights.
5.2.3
Network Implementation
Segmentation of the heart substructures can be a diﬃcult task for a deep CNN
when conducted on raw scan images of great variation with respect to the anatom-
ical ﬁeld of view. This is mainly due to a common problem in cardiac images,
namely class-imbalance between the heart and the background including air and
surrounding tissue. If the background voxels cover a majority of voxels in the im-
age, the class-imbalance can indicate good performance of the network (i.e. high
similarity between ground truth and prediction), even though the network predicts
all voxels to be belonging to the background. To get rid of the majority of back-
ground with little importance in relation to the task at hand, both a ROI U-Net
and a segmentation U-Net were included in the pipeline.
The two U-Nets were implemented in Keras [32], which is a high-level neural
networks API written in Python running with a TensorFlow [33] backend. The
==PAGE:40==
28
Methods
ROI U-Net and the segmentation U-Net only deviate implementation-wise in the
use of loss function and the number of classes to be predicted (more implementation
details for the two U-Nets are given in their respective subsections). However, the
overall architecture of the two U-Nets is shared and described in detail in Sec.
5.2.3.1.
For all training of networks during this project, the training dataset was further
spilt into a training and a validation set in a 0.9/0.1 ratio, for the purpose of using
the validation set for hyperparameter tuning. More speciﬁcally, 10% of the original
training data was set apart for validation and evaluated using diﬀerent performance
metrics obtained at the end of each epoch. The remaining 90% was shuﬄed prior
to training in each epoch. As various deﬁnitions of an epoch exist, the deﬁnition
in the thesis is that an epoch covers forward propagation, backward propagation
and parameter update across all training images. Furthermore, it is noted that all
training and testing of models was conducted on an NVIDIA Titan X 12 GB RAM
GPU.
Weight initialization in the networks was conducted using the default Keras
kernel initializer: The Glorot uniform initializer. This initializer draws samples
from a uniform distribution U:
U
"
−
s
6
(N + M),
s
6
(N + M)
#
,
(5.1)
where N is the number of input units in the weight tensor and M is the number of
output units in the weight tensor. All biases were initialized with zeros.
5.2.3.1
Network Architecture
The architecture of the proposed U-Nets (seen in Fig. 5.3) is similar in structure
to the original U-Net in [12]. However, the proposed networks were constructed
to handle 3D inputs and utilize volumetric kernels. This ensured that the spatial
anatomical information within correspondence between images and ground truth
labels were taken into consideration during training of the segmentation models.
The architecture allows the input to be reduced to a large set of low-dimensional
feature maps, which were then expanded into a multi-label volume of the resulting
whole heart segmentation. This process was conducted over a contracting path
covering the network layers from the beginning of the U-structure to the bottom
and an expansive path covering the layers from the bottom to the end.
The contracting path consists of repeated sections of two 3 × 3 × 3 convolutions
with strides of 1 along each spatial dimension and padding such that the resulting
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Segmentation Pipeline
29
output has the same dimensions as the input.
Each convolution is followed by
ReLu activation and every second convolution is followed by a dropout layer and
a 2 × 2 × 2 max pooling operation with strides of 1. For every repeated section of
two convolutions, the number of feature maps is doubled in the ﬁrst convolution
(with the exception of the very ﬁrst, where the number of feature maps is increased
from 1 to 64). The dimension of the image is halved along each axis for every
max pooling operation, and the contracting path ends with an image dimension of
8 × 8 × 8 and 1024 feature maps in the bottom of the U-Net.
The expansive path includes repeated sections of a transposed 2 × 2 × 2 con-
volution with strides of 2 and two 3 × 3 × 3 convolutions. Also, in the expansive
path, all convolutions are with padding such that the resulting output has the same
dimensions as the input. Again, the regular convolutions are followed by a ReLu
activation. For every transposed convolution the number of feature maps is halved
and the size of the image doubled along each axis. The last convolution in the
expansive path is a 1×1×1 convolution with softmax activation and same padding
as for the other convolutional layers. This convolution outputs eight probability
maps of size 128 × 128 × 128. These depict the probability of a voxel belonging to
each of the eight classes. The resulting label map is then obtained by picking the
class with the highest probability in each of the eight probability maps.
An important part of the U-Net architecture is the use of skipconnetions illus-
trated by the horizontal grey arrows in Fig. 5.3. These skipconnections combine
high-resolution features from the contracting path with coarse features from the
expanding path. This process is conducted by copying the feature maps from the
innermost layers of the contracting path and concatenate those with the matching
counterpart, i.e. the resulting feature maps from the respective transposed convo-
lutions in the expansive path. Hereby it is ensured that the network learning is
based on both local and global structures of the input.
5.2.3.2
Region of Interest U-Net
The ROI U-Net uses Adam optimization with a learning rate of 10−4 and a high
momentum with β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999. The network deals with binary classiﬁ-
cation of the image voxels, and therefore uses the build in binary crossentropy loss
function in Keras, given as
C(yi, ˆyi) = −1
N
N
X
i
[yi ln ˆyi + (1 −yi) ln(1 −ˆyi)]
,
(5.2)
where yi is the ground truth segmentation, ˆyi is the obtained probability for each
class from the output segmentation and N is the number of voxels.
==PAGE:42==
30
Methods
Figure 5.3: Architecture of the proposed 3D U-Net network. A blue box corresponds
to a feature map. Numbers on top of a feature map refer to the number of channels and
numbers to the lower left of each layer indicate the size of the image and label map of that
speciﬁc depth. A white box represents a copied feature map. The illustration is inspired
by [12].
Choosing a batch size of one was necessary to avoid exhaustion of the GPU. A
beneﬁt of the Adam optimizer is likewise small memory requirement, which also
spoke for that choice of optimizer for the 3D network [34]. Furthermore, it was cho-
sen to use spatial dropout for the ROI U-Net, based on the arguments presented in
Sec. 3.1.2. To train and test the segmentation U-Net with the cropped ROI dataset,
a binary segmentation of the heart was needed for the total dataset. Therefore, the
ROI U-Net was trained on the training set, and the resulting model was tested on
the total dataset. As the two datasets (MM-WHS and CGPS) contain a diﬀerent
number of images and ground truth labels, and since these were acquired under dif-
ferent circumstances, the corresponding ROI datasets were obtained individually.
The processes are described in the following two paragraphs.
Training & Testing on MM-WHS Data
The total MM-WHS dataset contain-
ing 20 images with corresponding ground truth labels was split into 15 images for
training/validation and 5 images for testing. Initially, three segmentation models
were trained using respectively no data augmentation, one batch of augmentation,
and two batches of augmentation. The model with the best training performance
was afterward used for testing to obtain the binary segmentations.
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Segmentation Pipeline
31
Training & Testing on CGPS Data
The total CGPS dataset counting 30
images with corresponding ground truth labels was split into 25 images for train-
ing/validation and 5 images for testing.
As it was the case for the MM-WHS
dataset, three models were trained to investigate the same amounts of augmen-
tation. Again, the model obtaining the best training performance was chosen for
testing.
The binary segmentations obtained for the two datasets were further used for
detection of a bounding box (the ROI) around the heart.
This was conducted
using a 3D bounding box approach, where the smallest volume including non-zero
values belonging to the heart was obtained. Using the indices of the bounding box
corners, the original images and labels were cropped to include only the ROI now
encapsulating the whole heart. Thus, the ROI dataset was created.
5.2.3.3
Segmentation U-Net
The multi-label segmentation was conducted by the segmentation U-Net.
This
network predicted the labels for each voxel within the images from the previously
obtained ROI dataset. The segmentation U-Net also utilized a batch size of one
and Adam optimization with a learning rate of 10−4 and a high momentum with
β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999. Since the segmentation task this time was not binary,
the training was optimized using the categorical cross-entropy loss function. This
loss function allows for multi-label classiﬁcation with more than two labels, as in
this case where eight labels should be predicted. A separate loss was calculated
for each class label c per observation i and the result is summed over classes and
voxels, i.e.
C(yi,c, ˆyi,c) = −1
N
M
X
c
N
X
i
yi,c ln ˆyi,c
,
(5.3)
where yi,c is the ground truth segmentation, ˆyi,c is the predicted probability of
observation i being of class c, and M is the number of classes.
To obtain the best possible model for multi-label whole heart segmentation
of cardiac CT images, several diﬀerent models were trained and tested. The MM-
WHS dataset was used as a foundation for the development of the pipeline. Working
towards a more generalized segmentation model, the CGPS dataset was separately
investigated and further included in a joined dataset enabling a larger set of real
clinical images for training. More speciﬁc descriptions of how training and testing
were conducted for the segmentation models are found in the following paragraphs.
==PAGE:44==
32
Methods
Training & Testing on MM-WHS Data
Six segmentation models were trained
using the ROI dataset originating from the MM-WHS challenge 2017 (containing
15 images for training/validation and 5 images for testing). The training of these
six models diﬀered with respect to data augmentation (A) and type of dropout (D).
The settings for the six models were:
1. No A, no D
2. No A, standard D
3. No A, spatial D
4. Two batches of A, no D
5. Two batches of A, standard D
6. Two batches of A, spatial D
Based on our experimental knowledge, the best performing models were achieved
using a relatively low rate of dropout: 10% for the standard dropout implementation
and 5% for the spatial. The models were trained across 100 epochs.
Training & Testing on CGPS Data
To show the pipeline performance on the
CGPS dataset, a separate segmentation study using only this data was conducted.
Using the same six diﬀerent settings as for the MM-WHS data, six diﬀerent models
were trained on the ROI dataset originating from the CGPS (containing 25 images
for training and 5 images for testing). However, one batch of data augmentation
was used instead of two, based on our experience on a suitable amount of data
for the segmentation task. It should be noted that the quantitative performance
measures for the resulting models of this dataset were not directly comparable to
the performance of the MM-WHS dataset and the joined dataset, since the test
images were not the same.
Training & Testing on Joined Dataset
Aiming for a more generalized seg-
mentation model, the total pool of 30 CGPS ROI images was added to the 15
MM-WHS training images. This tripled the training dataset (without the use of
data augmentation) now counting 45 real clinical images with corresponding labels.
Again, six models were trained using the same settings as in for the MM-WHS data,
however, one batch of augmentation was used instead of two, based on our acquired
knowledge. The resulting models were then tested on the ﬁve MM-WHS test im-
ages. This allowed for comparison with the models trained solely on MM-WHS
data.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Evaluation of Performance
33
5.2.4
Post-processing
The post-processing part of the segmentation pipeline took care of minor mistakes
in the proposed segmentation in relation to following the knowledge on the topology
of the heart. The main idea was to use the fact that the seven substructures of
the heart consist of a single component. If segments in the proposed segmentation
consisted of more than one component, only the proper segment should be kept in
the label map. The ﬂow of the post-processing is as follows:
1. For each segment, all connected components were located using connected
component analysis.
2. Under the assumption that the U-Net correctly obtained the proper segment
as the largest connected component, only the latter was kept while the rest
were given NaN-values.
3. When all components have been analyzed using step 1. and 2., the holes
(consisting of NaN-values) were ﬁlled with the values of the nearest neighbor
voxels having valid label values.
However, one exception to the above-mentioned idea was seen: Sometimes the
PA segment consisted of more than one component, if the course of the pulmonary
arteries extends beyond the scanner ﬁeld of view and returns back into the ﬁeld of
view. Therefore, this speciﬁc segment was analyzed separately allowing more than
one component and only removing small components below a certain size.
5.3
Evaluation of Performance
5.3.1
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The training and validation of the ROI U-Net and segmentation U-Net models
was evaluated using performance metrics commonly used within the ﬁeld of image
segmentation to observe training and validation performance for CNNs in general.
The metrics include Dice coeﬃcient (representing the similarity between ground
truth and predicted segmentation), and binary and categorical cross-entropy loss
for the two respective network types.
In all training and validation cases, the
Dice coeﬃcient and cross-entropy loss were obtained for the binary whole heart
segmentation.
==PAGE:46==
34
Methods
5.3.2
Evaluation of Segmentation
The performance of the segmentation pipeline on the test images was evaluated
using qualitative and quantitative comparison between the ground truth segmen-
tation and the proposed segmentation. The qualitative comparison was a visual
inspection of the resulting segmentations, to form an overview of the diﬀerences
and view the proposed segmentation together with the images. The quantitative
evaluation of test performance built on the Dice coeﬃcient. This metric was also
used for evaluation during the training and validation phase, however, for the test-
ing phase it was calculated for each individual substructure of the heart. Hence the
metric was calculated on boolean data using the deﬁnition of true positive (TP),
false positive (FP), and false negative (FN) as follows:
Dice =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
,
(5.4)
where TP indicates intersection of segment between ground truth and proposed
segmentation, and FP and FN indicate miss-match in one way or the other. A
complete overlap between ground truth and prediction would result in a Dice coef-
ﬁcient of 1, where a complete miss-match would result in a Dice of 0. A resampling
of the predicted labels the original resolution of the test images and ground truth
labels was conducted prior to calculating the Dice.
The segment-wise Dice coeﬃcient was also used during the MM-WHS challenge
2017 to compare the performance of the individual challenge submissions. This
allowed us to compare our work with the challenge participants.
5.4
Iso-surface of Segmentation
A sub-goal of the thesis was to aid the work on another department of DTU,
the Department of Health Technology, by delivering iso-surfaces of the proposed
whole heart segmentations. These iso-surfaces should be a part of their pipeline
for CFD modeling for simulation of blood ﬂow in the heart. The ﬁnal multi-class
segmentations achieving the best performance were therefore converted into iso-
surfaces using the segmentation module of 3D Slicer (3D Slicer utilizes a Marching
Cubes algorithm to convert the segmented volumes into triangular surface meshes).
The surfaces were afterwards smoothed in 3D Slicer using Laplace smoothing to
level out the angular surface resulting from the downsampling conducted in the
resampling step of the segmentation pipeline. The quality and usefulness of the iso-
surfaces were assessed by the PhD student at the Department of Health Technology
working with the CFD modeling.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Results
The results achieved during this thesis are presented in this chapter. They include
visualizations of the predicted ground truth segmentations of the CGPS dataset
before and after a manual ﬁne tuning. Further, the chapter contains an evaluation of
the training and validation performances and the resulting segmentations obtained
for the diﬀerent datasets applied to the ROI U-Net and the Segmentation U-Net.
Finally, an example of post-processing outcome and an example of the iso-surfaces
created from the segmented label volumes are presented.
6.1
Creation of Ground Truth for CGPS Data
A model trained on the MM-WHS dataset was used for prediction of segmenta-
tions on the cardiac images from the CGPS dataset. Examples of the predicted
segmentations are shown in the top row of Fig. 6.1. The ﬁgure shows some of the
worse predictions, however, all predictions needed some level of ﬁne-tuning. The
bottom row of Fig. 6.1 then shows the ﬁnal ground truth label volumes for the
CGPS dataset after ﬁne-tuning. As seen from these ground truth volumes, obvi-
ous mistakes in the form of misplaced segments inside other segments and false
components belonging to tissue outside the heart are removed. Furthermore, the
individual segments have been smoothed so smaller irregularities are leveled out.
To get an overview of how the ground truth segmentations appear on top of
the CT images, three examples are shown in Fig. 6.2. The ground truth labels are
generally good. They however also come with minor faults and defects, as it was the
==PAGE:48==
36
Results
Figure 6.1: Top row: Labels maps for the CGPS images predicted from the segmenta-
tion U-Net trained using the MM-WHS dataset. Bottom row: Final ground truth label
maps.
case for the MM-WHS label maps. The image in Fig. 6.2 (a) reveals that the label
not always continually follows the segment boundary (this is highlighted by the red
circle). Some of the label maps also include higher detail with respect to capturing
papillary muscle of the left ventricle myocardium than other. The papillary muscle
of the myocardium appears darker (as it has has a lower HU value) on the images
compared to the cavity of the left ventricle, since the latter contains the high-density
contrast ﬂuid. This is evident from a comparison of the areas in image (b) and (c)
indicated by the red arrows. Together, these factors make it more diﬃcult for the
networks to learn accurate determination of the boundaries of the heart regions to
be segmented.
6.2
Region of Interest U-Net
6.2.1
MM-WHS Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The training performance on the ROI
U-Net was investigated with respect to the amount of data augmentation. The
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Region of Interest U-Net
37
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.2: CT image slices from the CGPS and their corresponding segmented ground
truth labels created as a part of this thesis. Label colors indicate: red: AO, light red:
LV, green: LA, light blue: RV, purple: RA, dark blue: PA, yellow: MY. The red circle
highlights missing label belonging to LA and the red arrows indicate varying amount of
detail capturing the papillary muscle of MY.
resulting training and validation performance metrics are shown as the curves in
Fig. 6.3. The curves generally indicate that data augmentation of the training
set has a positive eﬀect on the network performance. The highest Dice coeﬃcients
(for both training and validation) were seen for the training set with two batches
of augmentation. As the slope of the performance curve for the validation is close
to zero at 50 epochs, and hence the learning stops, this seems to be the proper
quantity of epochs to train for. This is also supported by a slight tendency towards
overﬁtting indicated by the small increase in validation loss from around 50 epochs.
The original training set counting 15 images and labels is therefore increased using
two batches of data augmentation resulting in a ﬁvefold increase of data. Thus, 75
images are used for training and validation across the 50 epochs.
Evaluation of Segmentation
The binary whole heart segmentations are eval-
uated visually in this section. Examples of the segmentations are seen in Fig. 6.4.
From the 2D view in the top row of Fig. 6.4, is is seen that the binary segmen-
tations are following the outline of the hearts. However, as it is evident from the
segmentation in the middel column of the ﬁgure, a small component outside the
heart (belonging to the ribs) is also included in the segmentation.
The binary segmentations were further used for the ROI detection on the orig-
inal data. Examples of the detected ROIs on original images and corresponding
ground truth labels are shown in Fig. 6.5. From this ﬁgure, it is evident that
the ROIs contain all the heart substructures for these example image slices and
corresponding label slices. The same was observed throughout the image and label
volumes for the complete dataset.
==PAGE:50==
38
Results
Figure 6.3: Training and validation performances from training of the ROI U-Net on
the MM-WHS dataset using three diﬀerent setting for augmentation (A): No A, one batch
of A, and two batches of A. Performance measures are Dice coeﬃcient and binary cross-
entropy loss.
==PAGE:51==
6.2 Region of Interest U-Net
39
Figure 6.4: Examples of binary whole heart segmentations (red). Top row: Segmenta-
tions shown on axial 2D image slices. Bottom row: Segmentations shown i 3D.
6.2.2
CGPS Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The eﬀect of data augmentation is
smaller for the CGPS dataset than for the MM-WHS dataset. That is evident from
the training and validation performance curves (cf. Fig. A.1 in the appendix).
Nonetheless, the validation Dice is slightly elevated for the two curves representing
augmentation. The diﬀerence between these two is hard to detect, and in combi-
nation with the tendency towards overﬁtting from approximately 50 epochs seen
from the validation loss, the best method seems to be a use of one batch of data
augmentation and 50 epochs of training. Hence, in the process of creating a ROI
dataset, the original training set counting 25 images and labels was tripled using
augmentation to obtain 75 images for training and validation.
The resulting binary segmentations were, following the same procedure as for the
MM-WHS dataset, used for the ROI detection on the original data, and afterwards
accordingly cropped to obtain the ﬁnal CGPS ROI dataset.
==PAGE:52==
40
Results
Figure 6.5: Examples of detected ROIs (red boxes) on the original images and corre-
sponding ground truth labels.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Segmentation U-Net
41
6.3
Segmentation U-Net
6.3.1
MM-WHS Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The performance measures during train-
ing and validation of the segmentation U-Net is shown in Fig.
6.6 for the six
investigated segmentation methods. In all six cases, the learning improves radi-
cally within the ﬁrst 25 epochs of training. The eﬀect of data augmentation is
clearly visible, since the training and validation curves representing the augmenta-
tion methods increases fast compared to the three methods without augmentation.
The slope of the augmentation curves decreases around 15-20 epochs. Here, the
augmentation models saturate at a validation Dice above 0.96 and a loss just below
0.1. The curves representing no data augmentation are delayed in comparison, and
they never reach the same training or validation performance.
A closer look into the use of dropout indicates that the eﬀect of dropout is largest
when no augmentation is conducted. Here, the standard and spatial dropout models
(yellow and green curves) outperform the model not including dropout (blue curve),
when looking at the validation performance across 100 epochs. The two individual
dropout models are harder to separate. The eﬀect of dropout is also seen from the
validation loss curves of the models not utilizing augmentation: Without dropout,
the model seems to overﬁt to the training data (indicated by the decrease in loss
followed by increase starting around 60 epochs of training), but with dropout, the
overﬁtting is avoided. The same tendency is not seen for the models utilizing data
augmentation.
From viewing the training and validation performance for these
models, the variation in use of dropout seems to have little or no inﬂuence. These
models also imply some overﬁtting.
The number of images included in the training of the diﬀerent models as well
as the resulting training time is denoted in Table 6.1. The two batches of data
augmentation result in 75 images for training and validation instead of 15 for the
original training set. As previously seen, this aﬀects the training and validation
performance but also have a large impact on the time it takes to complete the
training of the given network. The training time increases approximately 6 hours
when applying the augmented dataset. The use of dropout results in a minimal
increase in training time.
Evaluation of Segmentation
The trained models were all tested on the ﬁve test
images in approximately 37 seconds. The further post-processing of the predicted
segmentations took on avg. 189 seconds. Hence, the total time from inputting the
test images to acquiring the ﬁnal predicted segmentations is below 5 minutes.
==PAGE:54==
42
Results
Figure 6.6: Training and validation performances on MM-WHS ROI dataset during 100
epochs of training for six methods with or without augmentation (A) and dropout (D).
Performance measures are Dice coeﬃcient and categorical cross-entropy loss.
Table 6.1: Number of images included in training and corresponding training time (in
[hours:minutes]) of six diﬀerent segmentation models trained on the MM-WHS dataset.
Method
Images
Training time
No A, no D
15
1:28
No A, stand. D
15
1:30
No A, spat. D
15
1:30
2Bs A, no D
75
7:24
2Bs A, stand. D
75
7:29
2Bs A, spat. D
75
7:32
==PAGE:55==
6.3 Segmentation U-Net
43
The mean Dice performance across the ﬁve predicted segmentations are summed
up for the six diﬀerent segmentation models in Table 6.2. In accordance with what
we saw from the training and validation performances, the three augmentation
methods outperform the methods without augmentation on average. Among the
two models using augmentation and dropout, the performance diﬀerence is small.
Looking at the performance on individual heart segments, the top performing model
is in some cases the one using standard dropout and in other cases the one using
spatial dropout. Nonetheless, from an overall assessment of the test performance,
the best performing model is the one utilizing two batches of data augmentation
and spatial dropout achieving a Dice coeﬃcient of 0.921.
Table 6.2: Mean performance of the pipeline across test images using six methods with-
out augmentation (A) or two batches (Bs) of A and dropout (D). The performance is
measured in Dice coeﬃcient (in pct.), and is given for the whole heart (WH) and the
seven substructures, where mean across the seven substructures are denoted in the last
column.
Method
WH
MY
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
No A, no D
93.2
86.5
88.1
91.1
88.7
89.6
92.8
74.0
87.3
No A, stand. D
93.6
85.6
90.8
92.3
87.7
89.1
94.1
84.1
89.1
No A, spat. D
94.8
88.0
92.2
92.6
90.6
91.4
95.8
84.6
90.7
2Bs A, no D
94.9
89.3
92.1
92.5
92.7
91.8
88.8
88.2
90.8
2Bs A, stand. D
95.5
89.9
93.3
93.0
92.4
92.0
92.3
87.1
91.4
2Bs A, spat. D
95.7
89.4
94.3
92.6
92.1
91.9
96.3
87.8
92.1
Segmentation results on the ﬁve test images for the best performing model can
be seen for the center slices in Fig.
6.7 and for the complete volumes in Fig.
6.8.
The ﬁrst two columns of Fig.
6.7 shows center slices of the ground truth
segmentation next to the predicted segmentation, both on top of the test images.
The overall impression is that the predicted labels come close to the ground truth
labels. It is evident that the segmentation model has predicted the labels from
a downsampled training set, resulting in a less smooth label surface.
A closer
look at the fourth image from the top indicates that the segmentation model had
some trouble segmenting the ascending aorta (red label), which does not match
the light grey area of the ascending aorta on the corresponding image. Also, the
left ventricle (light red label) does not match that of the corresponding ground
truth label. The third column of Fig. 6.7 gives a more precise indication of the
overlap between the outline of the ground truth and the prediction label. Here it
is evident that the prediction (red) come close to the ground truth (black), but
deviates from time to time, especially for the outline of the myocardium of the left
ventricle (corresponding to the substructure indicated by yellow).
The same general tendencies apply to the label map volumes on Fig. 6.8. This
ﬁgure also suggests that the level of detail is slightly higher for the ground truth
segmentations. That is particularly evident from the pulmonary arteries (dark blue
label), for which more of the small branches are segmented in the ground truth.
==PAGE:56==
44
Results
Figure 6.7: Segmentation results on MM-WHS test images. From left to right the three
columns represent ground truth (GT) on test image, predicted segmentation on test image,
and label outline overlay (black = GT and red = Pred.). Label colors indicate: red: AO,
light red: LV, green: LA, light blue: RV, purple: RA, yellow: MY.
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Segmentation U-Net
45
Figure 6.8: Ground truth (GT) segmentation and predicted segmentation results on the
ﬁve test images. Label colors indicate: red: AO, light red: LV, green: LA, light blue: RV,
purple: RA, dark blue: PA, yellow: MY.
==PAGE:58==
46
Results
The quantitative evaluation of the segmentation performance on the ﬁve test
images is given in Table 6.3. The Dice coeﬃcients indicate that the segmentation
model performed well, especially on test image 5 with a mean Dice coeﬃcient of
0.948 across all the seven substructures. The image causing the biggest problems
was image 3, for which the model segmentation achieved a Dice of 0.907.
The
overall mean is 0.921 with a standard deviation of 0.015, indicating a low uncer-
tainty between the images. Looking at the individual segments to be labeled, the
performance is highest for the ascending aorta and the left atrium with a mean
Dice of 0.963 and 0.943, respectively. These segments are less complex with respect
to shape compared to the myocardium and the pulmonary arteries, for which the
performance is lowest with a mean Dice of 0.894 and 0.878, respectively. The whole
heart segment (WH), for which the seven substructures are considered as one, is
also a simple task for the segmentation model, with an overall Dice of 0.957.
Table 6.3: Segmentation performance for the best performing MM-WHS dataset model
on the individual test images. Performance is given in dice coeﬃcient (in pct.) for the
whole heart (WH) and the seven substructures. An Image-mean across the seven sub-
structures is given in the last column and substructure-mean in the last row.
Img#
WH
MYO
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
1
95.7
88.5
96.1
96.9
91.9
89.7
97.5
84.1
92.1
2
95.5
88.6
95.1
88.6
92.4
93.1
96.7
89.5
92.0
3
96.0
84.2
89.0
95.9
91.3
91.6
97.6
85.2
90.7
4
94.6
93.9
94.0
86.9
91.2
91.1
92.1
85.7
90.7
5
96.7
91.8
97.4
94.7
93.6
93.8
97.5
94.6
94.8
Mean
95.7
89.4
94.3
92.6
92.1
91.9
96.3
87.8
92.1
6.3.2
CGPS Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The training and validation performance
of the six models trained on the CGPS ROI dataset (cf. Fig. A.2 in the appendix)
indicate that data augmentation does not have the same notable increase in perfor-
mance as it was the case for the MM-WHS models. Nevertheless, the augmentation
does seem to slightly speed up the learning and convergence, but at the expense of
overﬁtting comparatively. Still, the training and validation Dice indicate a small
advantage for the models utilizing augmentation.
The mean training time for the models trained without data augmentation (25
training images and labels) was 2 hours and 38 min. The mean training time for the
models trained with 1 batch of data augmentation (75 training images and labels)
was 7 hours and 47 min.
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Segmentation U-Net
47
Evaluation of Segmentation
The mean performance across the ﬁve CGPS test
images are summed up for the six diﬀerent segmentation models in Table 6.4. For
this dataset, the best performing model over all segments turns out to be the one
utilizing one batch of augmentation and standard dropout, although the margin
of superiority is small.
The best and worst segmentation performances for this
model among the ﬁve test images are seen for the segmented 2D center slices in
Fig. 6.9 and for the volumes in Fig. 6.10. The image segmentation achieving the
best performance has a Dice of 0.951, and the worst has a Dice of 0.935.
From Fig. 6.9 it is seen that the ground truth and predicted segmentations
are very similar. With the exception of the down-scaling related issue, where the
surface appearing less smooth for the predicted segmentation, it is hard to tell
the diﬀerence. Figure 6.10 reveals that the reason that the bottom segmentation
achieves the worst performance might lie in the segmentation of the pulmonary
arteries. Here it is seen, that the predicted segmentation does not segment the
additional part of the PA, which is only present in the ground truth segmentation.
Table 6.4: Mean performance of the pipeline across CGPS test images using six methods
without augmentation (A) or two batches (Bs) of A and dropout (D). The performance
is measured in Dice coeﬃcient (in pct.), and is given for the whole heart (WH) and the
seven substructures, where mean across the seven substructures are denoted in the last
column.
Method
WH
MY
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
No A, no D
96.3
91.0
95.2
96.8
94.6
94.6
96.0
87.3
93.6
No A, stand. D
96.6
91.1
95.4
96.6
94.4
94.9
95.9
86.6
93.5
No A, spat. D
96.2
90.2
93.4
96.3
94.9
94.6
95.1
86.7
93.0
1B A, no D
96.8
92.0
95.4
97.0
95.2
95.3
96.3
87.7
94.1
1B A, stand. D
96.8
92.3
95.5
97.2
95.2
95.6
96.3
87.8
94.3
1B A, spat. D
96.8
91.9
95.8
97.1
95.0
95.4
96.4
88.1
94.2
6.3.3
Joined Data
Evaluation of Training & Validation
Training and validation performances
of the joined dataset (cf. Fig. A.3 in the appendix) imply that an increased amount
of training data results in a faster network learning and a faster saturation, as it
was the case for the two separate datasets. The data augmentation also seems to
indicate a marginally better training and validation performance after 100 epochs
of training but at the expense of overﬁtting slightly emerging around epoch 50.
Regarding the use of dropout, the absence or type do not imply any large diﬀerence.
The mean training time for the models trained without augmentation (45 train-
ing images) was 4 hours and 47 min. The mean training time for the models trained
with 1 batch of augmentation (135 training images) was 14 hours and 42 min.
==PAGE:60==
48
Results
Figure 6.9: 2D axial images with ground truth (GT) and predicted segmentation, and
label outline overlay (black = GT and red = Pred.) on CGPS test images. Top row:
Best performance. Bottom row: worst performance.
Figure 6.10: Ground truth (GT) and predicted segmentation on CGPS test images.
Top row: Best performance. Bottom row: worst performance.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Segmentation U-Net
49
Evaluation of Segmentation
Among the six trained models using the joined
dataset, the best performing model on the test data is the one utilizing spatial
dropout and no data augmentation (cf. Table 6.5). The resulting mean performance
for this model is a Dice coeﬃcient of 0.921, i.e. it achieves the same Dice as the
best performing MM-WHS dataset model. The Dice coeﬃcient achieved for the
ﬁve individual test images is seen in Table 6.6. Here, it is seen that the image
segmentation achieving the best performance has a Dice of 0.934 (image 1), and
the worst has a Dice of 0.902 (image 3). Overall, the model achieves a Dice of
0.921 and a standard deviation of 0.011. The best and worst segmentations for this
model among the ﬁve test images are seen for the 2D center slices in Fig. 6.11 and
for the volumes in Fig. 6.12.
The top row segmentation (achieving best Dice among the ﬁve test images)
seen in Fig 6.11 and 6.12 shows predicted labels very close to the ground truth
labels. When quantitatively comparing this segmentation to the segmentation of
the same image acquired from the MM-WHS model (cf. image 1 in Table 6.3), the
joined model achieves the best mean segmentation. The bottom row segmentation
(achieving worst Dice among the ﬁve test images) seen in Fig 6.11 and 6.12 also
shows a high similarity between ground truth and predicted segmentation, resulting
in a Dice of 0.902 although being the worst segmentation.
Table 6.5: Mean performance of the pipeline across MM-WHS test images using the
joined dataset and six methods without augmentation (A) or two batches (Bs) of A and
dropout (D). The performance is measured in Dice coeﬃcient (in pct.), and is given for the
whole heart (WH) and the seven substructures, where mean across the seven substructures
are denoted in the last column.
Method
WH
MY
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
No A, no D
95.4
87.8
93.4
93.8
92.0
90.8
95.9
85.3
91.3
No A, stand. D
95.6
89.9
93.9
93.3
92.6
90.7
96.6
85.0
91.7
No A, spat. D
95.6
89.9
93.6
94.2
91.7
92.0
96.6
86.7
92.1
1B A, no D
95.5
89.6
93.1
93.4
92.4
90.7
95.7
86.7
91.7
1B A, stand. D
95.7
90.3
93.6
93.9
92.4
91.3
95.5
85.7
91.8
1B A, spat. D
95.6
89.9
93.9
93.3
92.6
90.7
96.6
85.0
91.7
The combined training time for the best performing ROI model and segmenta-
tion model trained on the joined dataset was 8 hours and 43 minutes.
==PAGE:62==
50
Results
Figure 6.11: 2D axial images with ground truth (GT) and predicted segmentation, and
label outline overlay (black = GT and red = Pred.) on MM-WHS test images obtained
using joined dataset. Top row: Best performance. Bottom row: worst performance.
Figure 6.12: Ground truth (GT) and predicted segmentation on MM-WHS test im-
ages obtained using joined dataset. Top row: Best performance. Bottom row: worst
performance.
==PAGE:63==
6.4 Post-processing
51
Table 6.6: Segmentation performance for the best performing joined dataset model on
the individual test images. Performance is given in Dice coeﬃcient (in pct.) for the whole
heart (WH) and the seven substructures. An Image-mean across the seven substructures
is given in the last column and substructure-mean in the last row.
Img#
WH
MYO
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
1
96.3
89.6
95.3
97.3
93.2
92.1
97.2
89.2
93.4
2
95.1
90.0
95.1
92.2
91.9
93.3
96.5
88.1
92.4
3
95.9
85.6
88.8
96.5
91.3
91.4
97.6
79.9
90.2
4
94.5
94.3
91.8
91.2
91.7
92.6
94.6
85.1
91.6
5
96.2
89.9
97.2
94.1
90.7
90.7
97.3
91.2
93.0
Mean
95.6
89.9
93.6
94.2
91.7
92.0
96.6
86.7
92.1
6.4
Post-processing
An example of what the post-processing achieves is seen in Fig. 6.13. Here, left
image shows an axial image slice (superior part of the heart) with corresponding
predicted labels before application of post-processing. As seen, the AO label (red)
contains miss-classiﬁed regions of RV (light blue) and RA (purple). These voxel
regions have been replaced with AO voxels after post-processing in the right image.
Figure 6.13: Examples of predicted labels on axial image slice with and without post-
processing (PP). The colors indicate: Red: AO, dark blue: PA, light blue: RV, purple:
RA. The red arrows point towards miss-classiﬁed voxel-segments, which after PP have
been correctly classiﬁed.
==PAGE:64==
52
Results
6.5
Iso-surface of Segmentation
The predicted segmentation volumes of the ﬁve test images were converted into
iso-surfaces. An example of the surface contour on top of the corresponding image
is seen in Fig. 6.14(a). This shows how the surface contour follows the underlying
heart segments in the image. The 3D visualization of the surface mesh of all heart
segments is shown in Fig. 6.14(b). A zoomed region is also shown to visualize the
triangular mesh that the iso-surfaces consist of.
The respective PhD student at the Department of Health Technology, DTU,
found that the quality of iso-surfaces was ﬁne and ready for implementation in
their CFD pipeline for blood ﬂow simulation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.14: (a) CT image slices and the corresponding surface contour for the seg-
mented labels. (b) 3D surface mesh with zoomed region to visualize the triangular mesh.
Colors indicate: red: AO, light red: LV, green: LA, light blue: RV, purple: RA, dark
blue: PA, yellow: MY.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Discussion
The results presented in Chapter 6 and important aspects of the corresponding un-
derlying methods are discussed in this chapter. The segmentation pipeline evidently
showed a capability of automatically obtaining multi-label whole heart segmenta-
tions from cardiac CT images. As the pipeline could be designed in various ways,
the decisions made in the development process are discussed. Further, our work is
held up against previous work and ﬁnally, our methods are considered in relation
to their usability in research and in the clinic.
7.1
Segmentation Pipeline
The backbone of the segmentation pipeline can be narrowed down to the choice of
architecture for the deep learning network to carry out the segmentation. Based
on state-of-the-art within semantic segmentation in medical imaging, the natural
choice would fall upon the U-Net architecture. This architecture has proven itself
across various tasks concerning image segmentation, however many derivations of
this architecture could be chosen. Initially, we decided to establish a network capa-
ble of performing the segmentation in 3D (instead of 2D), since this would in theory
result in a good spatial understanding of the content within the cardiac CT images
acquired as volumes. However, this design choice also meant that the resolution of
the input images needed a radical downscaling to avoid resource exhaustion of the
GPU on which the networks were trained. Inevitably this aﬀected the precision
and accuracy of the segmentation, as learning is established on less sharp bound-
aries of the individual segments. A GPU with more memory capable of handling
==PAGE:66==
54
Discussion
larger image inputs, and optimally completely avoid a downscaling of the images,
would presumably solve the downscaling issue and hence allow better segmenta-
tions. However, a more sustainable solution would be to consider other network
architectures that are less computationally demanding.
One could for instance
exploit architectures utilizing the depthwise separable convolution, an operation
requiring much fewer parameter calculations compared to the regular convolution
operation. The depthwise separable convolution operation has been adopted in re-
sent network designs, also for semantic segmentation of images as in [35], however
not yet in 3D segmentation of medical images.
The 3D implementation of our networks also caused a drastic reduction in train-
ing images, compared to using 2D networks, where all slices can be used as separate
inputs. The proposed networks were therefore sought regularized using data aug-
mentation and dropout.
Data augmentation was conducted using rotation and
B-spline transformation, as these transformation methods led to the most natural
increase of images resembling potential clinical images. Other methods were consid-
ered, like ﬂipping and scaling, however, these methods can introduce anatomically
incorrect images and thereby reduce the regularization instead of increasing it. The
data augmentation could be conducted on the ﬂy, i.e. while training the models.
This means creating augmented images and labels and delete them after training
to reduce the need for large storage capacity. This would on the downside also in-
crease the training time. We chose, however, to implement the augmentation as a
separate step. This was the preferable way to do it in our work, since storage of the
increased datasets was not an issue, and since the augmented datasets were after-
wards available for training of several models to be compared. The results obtained
for the MM-WHS dataset proves that the proposed data augmentation increases
the resulting model performance. The quantitative evaluation showed that the best
MM-WHS model utilizing two bathes of augmentation achieved the same similar-
ity between ground truth and predicted segmentation as the joined data model,
for which additional real clinical images are utilized. Thus, the data augmentation
method shows itself to be eﬀective in creating images resembling possible features
of new clinical images.
The integration of dropout layers in the network is a part of the architectural
design. As indicated in the overview of the proposed network architecture (cf. Fig.
5.3), dropout layers were inserted after every second convolutional layer in both the
contracting and expanding path of the U-Net. This amount of dropout layers gave
the best performing networks, based on our experience as other constellations were
tried. However, as the results implied, the eﬀect of dropout was neither very pow-
erful for the training and validation performance, nor from the test performance.
Anyhow, a small enhancement of the test performance was seen in most cases, and
dropout very rarely led to a deterioration of the performance.
The pipeline was developed using the MM-WHS challenge dataset, as this was
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Comparison to Previous Work
55
the only dataset for which a ground truth segmentation created by cardiac spe-
cialists was provided. However, the size of this dataset was very limited making it
diﬃcult to develop a highly generalized segmentation model. The original CGPS
dataset, counting 4295 CT scans, had a lot more potential with respect to describ-
ing the large diversity in anatomical appearance of hearts. The major downside to
this dataset was the non-existing ground truth segmentations to use when training
a model with higher generalization. The main reason for the lack of ground truth
segmentation lies within some of the motivation behind this thesis; that manual
segmentation is a time-consuming and cumbersome process. Until automatic, ro-
bust, and clinically credible multi-label segmentation algorithms exist, a ground
truth segmentation can be obtained as proposed in this thesis.
In continuation of the above, the pipeline achieved great segmentation results
on the CGPS dataset with the self-made ground truth labels. Yet, the results could
be aﬀected by a bias introduced when creating the ground truth labels, since they
were initially predicted by a similar model trained on the MM-WHS dataset. This
bias could potentially improve the training and testing performance of the CGPS
segmentation model. The additional ﬁne-tuning of the predictions, cautiously tak-
ing care any of miss-match between image and predicted label, should on the other
hand counterbalance this possible bias to some extent.
In an attempt to obtain a more generalized model we fused the two datasets
into one, the joined dataset. The top-performing model developed on this dataset
did not outperform the top performing model trained on the MM-WHS dataset
with respect to the mean Dice coeﬃcient, as a mean Dice of 0.921 was achieved
for both models. Nevertheless, the training time of the joined dataset model was
reduced by 37.5% compared to the training time of the MM-WHS model. Optimiz-
ing on training time of the segmentation networks was not a thesis goal in itself, as
we aimed for the best possible segmentation model. Nevertheless, as a drawback
of using deep learning algorithms for segmentation is the time-consuming training
process, it is always desirable to obtain a quickly trained model. This is especially
advantageous in cases like in this work, where several models are trained for com-
parison.
The expectation of achieving a more generalized model when utilizing
data from both datasets in the training phase, cannot be conﬁrmed based on our
results alone, since this would require testing of the models on a third previously
unseen test dataset.
7.2
Comparison to Previous Work
The MM-WHS challenge 2017 was closed for participation before the work of our
thesis began.
Nevertheless, as the proposed pipeline was developed using data
==PAGE:68==
56
Discussion
from the challenge, a fair assumption on comparable performance can be made.
Before digging into the comparison between our proposed segmentation pipeline
and previous work conducted by the challenge contenders, it should explicitly be
noted that the test dataset on which the performances are evaluated is diﬀerent.
As described in Sec. 4.1, the challenge test dataset consisted of 40 cardiac CT
scans. However, only the images were made available for the public and not the
ground truth segmentations.
Therefore, our work was evaluated based on ﬁve
test images from the original training dataset alone.
A more accurate measure
of test performance of our network could be achieved by using for example a k-
fold cross-validation. This would reﬂect test performance across images from the
entire dataset and hence overﬁtting to the test dataset could to a certain extent
be avoided. However, this approach would require k times the training and testing
time, and was for this reason not included in the project. Therefore, the comparison
builds on the assumption that the chosen test set is comparable to the test set of
the MM-WHS challenge.
Table 7.1 shows the performance leader board of the participants in the MM-
WHS challenge 2017 together with our best performing proposed models: The
MM-WHS dataset model (Proposed A) and the joined dataset model (Proposed
B). The performance obtained by one of the nine accepted challenge participants
was stated as "not applicable", and hence only the remaining eight are listed in the
table. The Dice performances are indicated for the binary whole heart segmentation
(WH), the seven individual heart substructures, and for a mean across the seven
substructures. The names of the research groups corresponding to a given leader
board performance are not stated in the challenge results web-page [36]. The groups
denoted in the table are therefore based on information stated in the individual
challenge articles, and otherwise the groups are denoted as unknown.
For comparison, our model based solely on the MM-WHS challenge data (Pro-
posed A) achieves the best performance for the binary WH segmentation with a
margin of 4.9% down to Payer et al.[9] achieving the best performance among the
challenge participants. Both of the proposed models outperform the models from
the challenge participants when evaluated across the individual heart subsections.
Here, the general tendency for all segmentation methods is that the performances
are highest for the ascending aorta and the left atrium. These segments are anatom-
ically simpler in shape, particularly compared to the pulmonary arteries and the
myocardium of the left ventricle, for which the performances are in general lowest.
The top two challenge participants Payer et al.
and Yang et al.
both use
3D implementations of U-Net in their segmentation methods. This supported the
choice of utilizing a volumetric implementation of our proposed network.
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Usability in Research & Clinic
57
Table 7.1: MM-WHS challenge leader board with Dice performance (in pct.) for seg-
mentation of the binary whole heart (WH), the seven heart substructures, and a mean
across the seven substructures. Performance for the two best models proposed in this
thesis is indicated as Proposed A (MM-WHS model) and Proposed B (joined model).
Group/Model
WH
MY
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
Payer et al. [9]
90.8
88.1
92.9
91.8
88.8
90.9
93.3
84.0
90.0
Yang et al. [10]
89.0
85.6
93.0
92.3
87.1
85.7
89.4
83.5
88.0
Unknown 1
87.9
85.1
91.6
90.4
83.6
88.3
90.7
78.4
86.8
Unknown 2
87.0
84.6
88.4
90.1
83.7
85.6
91.4
80.0
86.3
Wang et al. [7]
86.6
87.4
90.8
90.8
85.5
80.6
83.5
67.7
83.8
Tong et al. [8]
84.9
83.7
88.9
89.3
81.2
81.0
86.8
69.8
83.0
Unknown 3
83.8
81.5
84.5
88.0
79.9
84.9
83.9
73.7
82.3
Unknown 4
62.3
53.3
72.0
59.3
51.5
70.6
60.1
63.7
61.5
Proposed A
95.7
89.4
94.3
92.6
92.1
91.9
96.3
87.8
92.1
Proposed B
95.6
89.9
93.6
94.2
91.7
92.0
96.6
86.7
92.1
7.3
Usability in Research & Clinic
The proposed work oﬀers a solution towards overcoming the large time-consumption
and low inter- and intra-expert reproductivity associated with manual segmenta-
tion. As time is an extremely valuable resource in the clinic, the importance of
time-saving applications is clear. A lot of time can be saved on heart segmentation
if an automatic segmentation pipeline is implemented in the workﬂow. As indi-
cated in the results in Chapter 6, the proposed models are tested on ﬁve whole
heart images in approximately 37 seconds. Including the post-processing, a pre-
dicted segmentation of a single cardiac image can be produced in less than a minute
when the desirable segmentation model is already trained. It might be too early
to consider completely replacing the segmentation work performed by clinicians,
with our proposed segmentation models. Yet, utilizing the models for predictions
to be ﬁne-tuned can save the clinical personnel a signiﬁcant amount of time com-
pared to manually performing the segmentations from the bottom. Furthermore,
the automatic segmentation would possibly enhance the inter- and intra-expert
reproductivity. The latter is, however, not proven in this work.
With the faults and defects that are incorporated in the manual expert seg-
mentations of the CT images (cf. the data review Chapter 4), it can be diﬃcult
to obtain a perfect segmentation of the cardiac images. This is due partly to the
errors learned by the network, but also the shortcomings that are present in the
test dataset. These errors are hard to completely avoid, however, the development
of automatic segmentation methods as the one presented in this work might aid
the process of correcting them over time.
A separate aim of this thesis was to create iso-surfaces from our predicted seg-
mentations to support research in blood ﬂow simulation conducted at the Depart-
==PAGE:70==
58
Discussion
ment of Health Technology at DTU. The biophysical simulations can in combination
with computational models increase the comprehension, diagnosis, and treatment
of complex diseases such as cardiac arrhythmias.
However, the simulations are
not possible without the proper models, and this is where our surface models are
needed.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
This thesis succeeded in accommodating the overall aim of developing an automatic
pipeline for multi-label whole heart segmentation of cardiac CT images using 3D
deep learning networks. The pipeline was developed around the MM-WHS chal-
lenge dataset and included two U-Nets. The ﬁrst one, employed to detect the whole
heart region of interest, managed to do just that as a basis for creating ROI datasets
alleviating the impact of surrounding tissues. The second U-Net conducted the
multi-label segmentation of the hearts. Supported by a ﬁne-tuning post-processing
step, the segmentation models indicated state-of-the-art performance with high sim-
ilarity between a ground truth segmentation provided by experts and the proposed
segmentation, achieving a mean Dice coeﬃcient of 0.921 across the testset.
The work contained investigation on model generalization through the inclusion
of another cardiac CT dataset originating from the CGPS. Our pipeline showed
great segmentation performances on this separate dataset. Furthermore, a join-
ing of the two datasets led to the same high segmentation performance for the
MM-WHS test set with a reduced training time of the model. Diﬀerent regulariza-
tion methods including data augmentation and dropout were also explored towards
achieving higher generalization of our models. Here, it was found that data aug-
mentation was eﬀective for both separate datasets, but had less eﬀect on the joined
dataset.
Implementation of dropout layers in the networks further indicated a
generally enhanced model performance.
It is estimated that our developed pipeline could successfully be implemented in
a real-life application within research and in the clinic to ease workﬂow and reduce
the inter- and intra-variability in heart segmentations. This already translates in
concrete to the fact that we converted our proposed segmentations into iso-surfaces
==PAGE:72==
60
Conclusion
to be included in a CFD modeling pipeline concerned with blood ﬂow simulation
in the heart at the Department of Health Technology at DTU.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 9
Future Work
This chapter describes some of the concepts and ideas that could potentially in-
crease the performance of the proposed pipeline, and enhance the already achieved
state-of-the-art results.
Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization
A common issue when
dealing with segmentation of cardiac CT image volumes can be low soft tissue con-
trast, even when the images are contrast enhanced using contrast ﬂuid. This makes
it diﬃcult to distinguish between diﬀerent heart substructures with the same or al-
most the same voxel intensities. A further enhancement of the local contrast can be
conducted using a method called contrast limited adaptive histogram equalization
(CLAHE) [37], also utilized by Yang et al. [10]. Here, the histogram equalization
refers to a non-linear mapping of intensities using the cumulative distribution func-
tion and hence spreading out the most frequent image intensities across the entire
grey-level range. The term adaptive refer to the use of a contextual region, i.e.
histogram equalization is performed for several sub-histograms resulting in local
contrast enhancement of the image. Further, the term contrast limited refers to a
clipping of the histogram at a predeﬁned limit and a redistribution of the image
intensities exceeding the clip limit. This method could be implemented as an image
pre-processing step.
Utilize Cardiac Topological Information in CNN
The segmentation pipeline
uses a post-processing step to correct for any minor miss-labeling errors not consis-
tent with the topology of the heart, that might occur during segmentation. Another
interesting approach would be to utilize topological information about the heart in
==PAGE:74==
62
Future Work
the training process of the CNN, using cardiac atlases. Thus, incorporating prior
knowledge on the spatial probability patterns of various tissue types of a typical
heart.
Baysian Optimization of CNN Hyperparameters
Optimization of the hy-
perparameters of our proposed networks, such as the number of epochs, type of
activation function, type and rate of dropout, etc. was conducted through a man-
ual optimization approach, where diﬀerent parameter settings were investigated
through individual tuning.
However, this approach was not very eﬃcient as it
required lots of repetitive training cycles of the networks and since the individual
hyperparameters are often dependent on each other. Therefore, more reﬁned meth-
ods for optimization of hyperparameters are developed. One of the more promising
is the Bayesian optimization [38], where so-called Gaussian process models pre-
dict how well a particular setting of hyperparameters will do, and then use this
knowledge in the hyperparameter tuning.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
ROI U-Net
A.1.1
CGPS Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The training and validation perfor-
mances on the ROI U-Net were investigated with respect to the amount of data
augmentation. The resulting training performance metrics are shown in Fig. A.1
for the CGPS dataset.
==PAGE:76==
64
Appendix
Figure A.1: Training and validation performance measures from training of the ROI
U-Net on the CGPS dataset using three diﬀerent setting for augmentation (A): No A,
1 batch of A, and 2 batches of A. Performance measures are Dice coeﬃcient and binary
cross-entropy loss.
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Segmentation U-Net
65
A.2
Segmentation U-Net
A.2.1
CGPS Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The training and validation perfor-
mances on the segmentation U-Net were investigated with respect to the amount of
data augmentation and dropout type. The resulting training performance metrics
are shown in Fig. A.2 for the CGPS dataset.
Figure A.2: Training and validation performance measures on CGPS ROI dataset during
100 epochs of training for six methods with or without augmentation (A) and dropout
(D). Performance measures are Dice coeﬃcient and categorical cross-entropy loss.
==PAGE:78==
66
Appendix
Evaluation of Segmentation
In continuation of the evaluation of segmentation
performances for the CGPS dataset model provided in Sec. 6.3.2, the quantitative
Dice performances across the ﬁve individual CGPS test images are given in Ta-
ble A.1. The table shows a high similarity between ground truth and proposed
segmentation for all test images with a mean Dice coeﬃcient of 0.943. With the
exception of the pulmonary arteries segment, all Dice coeﬃcients for the individual
heart segments are on average above 0.92.
Table A.1: Segmentation performance for the best performing CGPS dataset model on
the individual test images. Performance is given in Dice coeﬃcient (in pct.) for the whole
heart (WH) and the seven substructures. An Image-mean across the seven substructures
is given in the last column and substructure-mean in the last row.
Img#
WH
MYO
LA
LV
RA
RV
AO
PA
Mean
1
96.7
92.3
95.9
98.0
95.1
96.3
96.0
84.5
94.0
2
97.1
94.0
94.8
97.3
96.2
95.9
96.4
88.3
94.7
3
96.9
92.8
94.2
97.6
95.5
96.0
96.5
86.3
94.1
4
96.8
93.7
96.9
97.2
94.7
93.7
96.8
92.8
95.1
5
96.4
88.8
95.7
96.0
94.2
96.2
95.9
87.3
93.5
Mean
96.8
92.3
95.5
97.2
95.2
95.6
96.3
87.8
94.3
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Segmentation U-Net
67
A.2.2
Joined Dataset
Evaluation of Training & Validation
The resulting training and validation
performances on the segmentation U-Net are shown in Fig.
A.3 for the joined
dataset.
Figure A.3: Training and validation performance measures on the joined ROI dataset
during 100 epochs of training for six methods with or without augmentation (A) and
dropout (D). Performance measures are Dice coeﬃcient and categorical cross-entropy loss.
==PAGE:80==
68
Appendix
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1] “World Health Organization: The Top 10 Causes of Death.” http://www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/the-top-10-causes-of-death.
Ac-
cessed: 2018-09-06.
[2] X. Zhuang, “Challenges and methodologies of fully automatic whole heart seg-
mentation: a review,” Journal of healthcare engineering, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 371–
407, 2013.
[3] P. Peng, K. Lekadir, A. Gooya, L. Shao, S. E. Petersen, and A. F. Frangi, “A
review of heart chamber segmentation for structural and functional analysis
using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging,” Magnetic Resonance Materials in
Physics, Biology and Medicine, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 155–195, 2016.
[4] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for se-
mantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3431–3440, 2015.
[5] “MICCAI2017 - Multi-Modal Heart Segmentation Challenge.” http://www.
sdspeople.fudan.edu.cn/zhuangxiahai/0/mmwhs/. Accessed: 2018-09-03.
[6] A. Mortazi, J. Burt, and U. Bagci, “Multi-planar deep segmentation networks
for cardiac substructures from mri and ct,” in International Workshop on Sta-
tistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart, pp. 199–206, Springer,
2017.
[7] C. Wang and Ö. Smedby, “Automatic whole heart segmentation using deep
learning and shape context,” in International Workshop on Statistical Atlases
and Computational Models of the Heart, pp. 242–249, Springer, 2017.
[8] Q. Tong, M. Ning, W. Si, X. Liao, and J. Qin, “3d deeply-supervised u-net
based whole heart segmentation,” in International Workshop on Statistical At-
lases and Computational Models of the Heart, pp. 224–232, Springer, 2017.
==PAGE:82==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] C. Payer, D. Štern, H. Bischof, and M. Urschler, “Multi-label whole heart
segmentation using cnns and anatomical label conﬁgurations,” in Interna-
tional Workshop on Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart,
pp. 190–198, Springer, 2017.
[10] X. Yang, C. Bian, L. Yu, D. Ni, and P.-A. Heng, “Hybrid loss guided convolu-
tional networks for whole heart parsing,” in International Workshop on Statis-
tical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart, pp. 215–223, Springer,
2017.
[11] X. Yang, C. Bian, L. Yu, D. Ni, and P.-A. Heng, “3d convolutional networks for
fully automatic ﬁne-grained whole heart partition,” in International Workshop
on Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart, pp. 181–189,
Springer, 2017.
[12] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention, pp. 234–241, Springer,
2015.
[13] Q. Zheng, H. Delingette, N. Duchateau, and N. Ayache, “3d consistent & robust
segmentation of cardiac images by deep learning with spatial propagation,”
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2018.
[14] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feedfor-
ward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics, pp. 249–256, 2010.
[15] B. G. Nordestgaard, T. M. Palmer, M. Benn, J. Zacho, A. Tybjærg-Hansen,
G. D. Smith, and N. J. Timpson, “The eﬀect of elevated body mass index on
ischemic heart disease risk: causal estimates from a mendelian randomisation
approach,” PLoS medicine, vol. 9, no. 5, p. e1001212, 2012.
[16] C. L. VanPutte, J. L. Regan, and A. F. Russo, Seeley’s essentials of anatomy
& physiology, vol. 7. McGraw-Hill, 2013.
[17] C. Porth, Essentials of pathophysiology: concepts of altered health states. Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011.
[18] D. Dance, S. Christoﬁdes, A. Maidment, I. McLean, and K. Ng, “Diagnostic
radiology physics,” International Atomic Energy Agency, 2014.
[19] “Cardiovascular
CT
Scanner.”
http://www.24x7mag.com/2014/02/
cardiovascular-ct-scanner/. Accessed: 2018-09-20.
[20] “Cardiovascular Scan Rigion.” https://www.innerbody.com/image/cardov.
html. Accessed: 2018-09-20.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[21] “Head-ﬁrst-supine
Orientation.”
https://itk.org/Wiki/Proposals:
Orientation. Accessed: 2018-10-22.
[22] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, Deep learning, vol. 1.
MIT press Cambridge, 2016.
[23] H. Wu and X. Gu, “Towards dropout training for convolutional neural net-
works,” Neural Networks, vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[24] G. E. Hinton, N. Srivastava, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature de-
tectors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.0580, 2012.
[25] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting,” The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958, 2014.
[26] J. Tompson, R. Goroshin, A. Jain, Y. LeCun, and C. Bregler, “Eﬃcient ob-
ject localization using convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 648–656, 2015.
[27] X. Zhuang and J. Shen, “Multi-scale patch and multi-modality atlases for whole
heart segmentation of mri,” Medical image analysis, vol. 31, pp. 77–87, 2016.
[28] X. Zhuang, K. S. Rhode, R. S. Razavi, D. J. Hawkes, and S. Ourselin, “A
registration-based propagation framework for automatic whole heart segmen-
tation of cardiac mri,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 29, no. 9,
pp. 1612–1625, 2010.
[29] A. Fuchs, M. R. Mejdahl, J. T. Kühl, Z. R. Stisen, E. J. P. Nilsson, L. V. Køber,
B. G. Nordestgaard, and K. F. Kofoed, “Normal values of left ventricular mass
and cardiac chamber volumes assessed by 320-detector computed tomography
angiography in the copenhagen general population study,” European Heart
Journal-Cardiovascular Imaging, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 1009–1017, 2016.
[30] R. Kikinis, S. D. Pieper, and K. G. Vosburgh, “3d slicer: a platform for subject-
speciﬁc image analysis, visualization, and clinical support,” in Intraoperative
imaging and image-guided therapy, pp. 277–289, Springer, 2014.
[31] B. C. Lowekamp, D. T. Chen, L. Ibáñez, and D. Blezek, “The design of sim-
pleitk,” Frontiers in neuroinformatics, vol. 7, p. 45, 2013.
[32] F. Chollet et al., “Keras.” https://keras.io, 2015.
[33] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Cor-
rado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp,
G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg,
D. Mané, R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens,
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan,
F. Viégas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and
X. Zheng, “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous sys-
tems,” 2015. Software available from tensorﬂow.org.
[34] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[35] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroﬀ, and H. Adam, “Encoder-
decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02611, 2018.
[36] “MICCAI2017
-
Multi-Modal
Heart
Segmentation
Challenge
(leader
board).” http://www.sdspeople.fudan.edu.cn/zhuangxiahai/0/mmwhs17/
result.html. Accessed: 2019-01-16.
[37] S. M. Pizer, R. E. Johnston, J. P. Ericksen, B. C. Yankaskas, and K. E. Muller,
“Contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization: speed and eﬀectiveness,” in
Visualization in Biomedical Computing, 1990., Proceedings of the First Con-
ference on, pp. 337–345, IEEE, 1990.
[38] R. P. Adams, J. Snoek, and H. Larochelle, “Practical bayesian optimization of
machine learning algorithms,” NIPS Proceedings, 2012.
