==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring New Musical Rules for
Cochlear Implant Listeners
Michelle Herlufsen (s144098)
Supervisor: Jeremy Marozeau
March 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Hearing Systems
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3950
www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Music appreciation and perception is usually reported to be poor in cochlear implant
(CI) recipients. Thus, an incentive to explore new musical rules for CI users exist, in-
order to improve the musical listening experience.
In this study experiments were conducted on 28 participants, containing both CI users
and a control group of normal hearing listeners. Different musical parameters have been
varied and responses from the test subjects has been collected. The responses were in
the form of judged musicality based on their own preference. Distinctive observations
for CI users, which would vary from the control group, has been the aim of each musical
parameter test. This could then give reason to investigate the phenomenon further for
later studies. The musical parameters that have been explored were tempo variations,
different levels of rhythmical complexity, the use of the pentatonic scale, removal of
overtones, a move towards higher pitch notes, tone duration variations and at last,
different levels of loudness variations.
The ability to form boundaries in music was
furthermore explored for both hearing groups.
CI recipients have shown to form boundaries as normal hearing listeners, where strong
peaks of musical tension followed by a sharp decrease occurred at the end of each agreed
section.
A seemingly preference towards 120 BPM have been observed for both hearing groups,
and relative lower ratings for musicality were observed for high and slow tempo (40 and
180 BPM). Normal hearing listeners showed a significant preference towards original
pieces with no added rhythmic complexities (’swing’), however CI users did not show
any significant preference toward the original piece, nor to the music pieces with added
’swing’
The use of a pentatonic scale did not show a significant preference for CI users, hence this
study gives less incentive to work further with the pentatonic scale. Sad low pitch music
has shown to be preferred with higher pitch notes, however not with a significant effect.
A significant disfavoring towards simplified music, in the extreme case of removing all
the overtones, were observed for both hearing groups.
No significant effect was observed for tone duration for CI users. Normal hearing listeners
in contrast preferred sad music with longer tones.
Loudness variations from 0-30 dB, in steps of 10 dB, showed no significant effect for CI
users, however for normal hearing listeners the 0 dB variation were significantly rated
highest on the musicality score.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Hearing System Group (department of Health
Technology) at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master Science degree in Engineering Acoustics. The study has been
completed in the period of six months (26-8-2019 to 26-2-2020) corresponding to 35
ECTS point.
Supervisor: Jeremy Marozeau
, February 26, 2020
Michelle Herlufsen (s144098)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank all the test subjects who participated in this
master thesis project. Especially, the cochlear implant recipients, since many have come
from far away to help this research project. Without their contribution, it would not
have been possible to do the master thesis project as planned. All of them have been
extremely kind and very positive minded people, which has made it even more fun to run
this project. I would furthermore like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisor
Jeremy Marozeau, which have been giving me the freedom and motivation to form
this project. A special thanks to Rikke Skovhøj for helping me with the audiometric
measurements.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
• CI = Cochlear implant
• CIL = Cochlear implant listeners
• NHL = Normal hearing listeners
• dB HL = Decibels in hearing level
• BM = Bimodal
• BL = Bilateral
• DLC = Difference limen for change
• DLF = Difference limen for frequency
• BPM = Beats per minute
• SD = Standard deviation
• F0 = The fundamental frequency
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Cochlear Implant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Importance of Music . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Music Perception by CI recipients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Methods
13
2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Apparatus and Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Part 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Part 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Results
23
3.1
Results of Segmentation and Judgement of Intended Emotions . . . . . .
23
3.2
Judgement of Intended Emotion Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Results on Musicality Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Discussion
37
4.1
Segmentation and Judgement of Intended Emotions . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
The Use of the Pentatonic scale and Removing Harmonics
. . . . . . . .
40
5
Conclusion
45
A An Appendix
47
A.1 Experimental Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Alternative Segmentation Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
A.3 Pentatonic Scale and Sine Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this chapter, first the cochlear implant (CI) and important terms within this topic will
be introduced. It is important to know the basics of the cochlear implant to make sense
of the differences that are observed in music perception and appreciation for cochlear
implant listeners (CIL) compared to normal hearing listeners (NHL). An introduction
to music and it’s fundamental aspects is given together with a review which includes the
current knowledge and substantive findings on the topic of cochlear implant recipients’
music perception. The research objectives of this master thesis project are given at the
end of this chapter.
1.1
The Cochlear Implant
Different types of hearing loss exist. The most optimal treatment to obtain normal hear-
ing, or at least close to normal hearing, can vary across the different types of hearing loss.
Sensorineural hearing loss involves complications in the inner ear, which could include
the loss of function of the inner hair cells (IHC). The IHC transduce mechanical move-
ment of the basilar membrane into neural activity. Hence, most, if not all information
about sounds is conveyed via the IHCs (Moore, 2012). If the IHCs are damaged enough,
it is not of much help to amplify the sound, thus the conventional hearing aid will gain
limited benefit, if any at all. Therefore, another solution should be used, and in this case,
the cochlear implant may be the best choice of them all, knowing as well that damage to
the IHC is irreversible. The CI bypasses non-working parts of the inner ear such as the
IHCs and creates a sensation of sound by electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve.
This is done by the use of an array of electrodes that are implanted within the cochlear.
This is not an easy procedure, and it is with great difficulty that the array of electrodes
are inserted around the spiral shaped cochlear. It has been a great challenge to reach the
most apical regions for a long time. However, state of the art enables the last electrode
in the array to take the total of two turns (Boyd, 2011), where the cochlear has about 2 3
4
turns in total (Gelfand, 2017). However many CI systems uses electrode arrays that are
around 1-1.5 turns from the basal (Boyd, 2011; Looi, Gfeller, and Driscoll, 2012). The
low frequencies are resolved at the innermost part of the cochlear (the apical region).
Thus, many CI recipients can have a clear loss of hearing in the low frequency area,
unless the CI user has low frequency residual hearing. Reservation of residual hearing is
possible following a cochlear implantation (Di Nardo et al., 2007; Gantz, Turner, Gfeller,
and Lowder, 2005). Another option could be in case of bimodal (BM) hearing, where one
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Figure
1.1:
A
schema
of
a
implemented
CI
in
a
human
being.
Taken
from
(https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/cochlear-implant)
ear has a CI and the other ear has another hearing loss solution, such as a conventional
hearing aid. Bilateral (BL) hearing is when both ears are of cochlear implants. These
two groups can obtain different hearing experiences according to a study (Erdem and
Çiprut, 2019). One bimodal study (El Fata, James, Laborde, and Fraysse, 2009) found
that bimodal stimulation provides better perception of particularly melody recognition,
compared to CI alone when low-frequency residual hearing was better than 85 dB HL.
However, studies that hypothesized a better pitch perception for bimodal CI users due
to better spectral resolution at low frequencies, compared to bilateral CI users, found no
statistically significant difference between the two groups (Cullington and Zeng, 2011
and Looi and Radford, 2011). Even in case of better pitch perception for the bimodal
users, it might not be observed with statistical significance since the reality of musical
tasks usually reflect more diverse skills which for example can be gained from musical
training (Looi et al., 2012).
Another division within CI recipients is determined by the time the deafness appear.
Pre-lingual deafness is deafness that occurs before a child develops speech and language.
Post-lingual deafness is when the deafness appear after the development of speech and
language. This could be in case of diseases such as meningitis (Bille and Ovesen, 2014).
These two groups are also important to note when conducting experiments with CI re-
cipients, since plausible differences between the two groups could be observed for their
music appreciation or experience.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 The Importance of Music
3
1.2
The Importance of Music
Music is a worldwide phenomenon. It is seen across every country and culture, which
already suggest its importance for all human beings. The archaeologically oldest con-
firmed musical instrument is as old as 45,000 years. It was a bone flute with five evenly
distanced bore holes. Rattles, flutes, whistles and percussion instruments made of bones
and ivory, as old as 30,000 years old have been found as well (Thaut, 2015). One of the
discussions that evolutionary musicologist are still concerned with, is whether musicality
is due to natural selection or sorely a product of culture (van der Schyff and Schiavio,
2017). Whether it is one or the other, it has with no doubt been found that music
activity is central for human well-being across the world. Music anthropology has over-
whelmingly many examples demonstrating how music expresses emotions and events in
preliterate cultures (van der Schyff and Schiavio, 2017). Something that still exist today.
Joy, happiness, sadness and loss are all something that can be expressed through music
and seen in rituals of life such as funerals, marriage, social events etc. There is a certain
way music can control moods and communicate feelings which has also made music used
as a tool to treat people with depression or discouragement (Parriott, 1969). Therefore,
a great motivation to improve evidently impoverished music perception exists.
1.3
Music Perception by CI recipients
Cochlear implant recipients’ speech intelligibility have increased greatly within the last
couple of decades. CI users can enjoy a good speech understanding, even to a point where
they are able to have a conversation over the phone where no lipreading is available (Rey
et al., 2016). Unfortunately CI users still suffer from poor music perception, and many
CI recipients do not enjoy listening to music, and appraisal ratings tend to be much
lower for CIL compared to NHL (Gfeller, Knutson, Woodworth, Witt, and DeBus, 1998;
Mirza, Douglas, Lindsey, Hildreth, and Hawthorne, 2003; McDermott, 2004). Mirza et
al. surveyed 35 CI recipients regarding their music enjoyment. On a self-assessment
scale, ranging from 0 to 10 (10 being the highest enjoyment of music), 8.7 was the
average rating prior to hearing loss, in contrast to 2.6 after implantation. 69% of the
respondents furthermore told that they were disappointed of the music that is perceived
through their CI.
Two general approaches can be made to solve this problem: (Prevoteau, Chen, and
Lalwani, 2018):
1. Improve the software and hardware of the CI device with the aim of increase CI
users ability to perceive music. As it is for now, most improvements have been
aimed to increase the speech understanding, thus there has been less focus on
music perception.
2. Focus on music itself and re-engineering it with the primary goal of enhancing the
music enjoyment for CI users.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Sound perception using CI (with electric stimulation) is different than of that which
is experienced through acoustic stimulation.
The cochlear contains auditory filters
which are non-linear and level-dependent with continuous center-frequencies, whereas
the sound processor in a CI has a limited number of wide filter bands and with fixed
center-frequencies (Looi et al., 2012). Thus, there are aspects of music that CI users
have scanty ability to perceive, like resolved harmonics. However, other aspects such as
rhythmic discrimination are shown to be well preserved (Prevoteau et al., 2018).
As the frequency allocation for CI recipients are not made to convey music but rather
on understanding speech, musical scales are not reproduced accurately. Looking at the
activation pattern for the different electrodes (seen in Figure 1.2) should by a first impres-
sion accentuate the salient challenges that lie within music perception for CI recipients.
Further explanation of this figure is given later in this chapter.
Figure 1.2: Average electrical excitation diagram of the different piano notes, as a function
of fundamental frequency (given in Hz on bottom axis, and as piano key on top axis). Color
gradient represents strong activation by the red colors, and no activation by a blue color. Taken
from Marozeau, Simon, and Innes-Brown, 2014
Following sections will give an overview from published papers, of what is known
about CI users ability to perceive music and tendencies observed for CI users’ music
appreciation.
It can be convenient to divide the musical features into three categories: spectral, tem-
poral and spectral-temporal elements.
1.3.1
The Spectral Part
This category includes the musical elements such as pitch, melody and harmony. This is
said to be very poorly perceived by CI recipients compared to NHL (Looi, McDermott,
McKay, and Hickson, 2004). Western music requires the listener to distinguish pitch
changes as small as one semitone, which corresponds to around 6% change of the funda-
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Music Perception by CI recipients
5
mental frequency. Unfortunately, studies have shown that CI recipients need a change
of around 25% in fundamental pitch, which is more than a minor third, to discriminate
the change and direction of pitch (Marozeau and Lamping, 2019).
Notes on every instrument consist of a fundamental frequency F0 and a series of suc-
cessively higher frequencies called harmonics or overtones. The perception of musical
pitch is typically ruled by the lowest partial present (F0). The wide filters for CI users
can avert the lower harmonics to be fully resolved, thus CI users can find it difficult
to derive accurate harmonics and make reliable pitch judgements. Even in the case of
the individual harmonic components fall into different filters, the CIL will only be able
to determine which filter each components have passed, as the corresponding electrodes
will be activated (cf. Figure 1.2). Note the fixed center frequency of each filter for CI
users, which is in contrast to the original cochlear where the precise position of the signal
within the auditory filter can be determine, hence the exact frequency of the resolved
component can be determined (Looi et al., 2012). Additionally, since music is of com-
plex sounds, multiple electrodes are activated simultaneously, hence there is chance of
channel interactions and decreased electrode independence.
The lowest frequency band, corresponding to electrode 22 in Figure 1.2, ranges from
frequencies of 188 and 313 Hz (exact numbers are for Cochlear© cochlear implants, and
can vary from brand to brand), which means that any note below one octave from the
middle C are not perceived by its fundamental frequency. Only an activation caused by
the overtones will be present in this case. Thus, an increase in note for lower pitch keys
will not necessarily be registered as an increase in position of electrodes. This can dis-
rupt the pitch perception for lower pitch notes. Could it be that the listening experience
for a CI user would improve as each individual key would be moved upwards, towards
higher pitch notes?
1.3.1.1
The Use of the Pentatonic Scale and Removing Harmonics
The study by Marozeau et. al (Marozeau, Simon, and Innes-Brown, 2014), shows that
the pentatonic scale, which consist of the notes: C D E G A, has the advantage of
activating one electrode at a time incrementally for each note. Since small changes in
frequency can be essential for the melody recognition in western music, perhaps basing
the notes on a different scale, which are more suited for CI users, could improve the
listening experience. Western music that is formed on the chromatic scale is essentially
based on a healthy non-implanted ear’s frequency resolution.
Fern et. al (Fearn, 2001) used three CI recipients in a psychophysical experiment to
see what the level difference between difference limen for change (DLC) and difference
limen for frequency (DLF) were, using complex sound (piano) and simple stimuli (pure
tones). DLF requires the person to identify the direction of the pitch, whereas DLC
(also sometimes referred as the Just Noticeable Difference, JND) does not require the
direction of the pitch, only a detection of change in pitch is required.
The results showed that the DLC was better (lower) when the CILs were exposed to piano
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
stimuli compared to pure tones, especially for the low frequencies. At low frequencies the
pure tone will only stimulate up to three low frequency electrodes, where the number
of electrodes per octave is less. However, for a piano stimuli, many more electrodes
will be activated due to higher harmonics (seen as well in Marozeau et al., 2014). The
number of electrodes per octave in the higher frequency area, are higher than for the low
frequency area. Thus, the harmonics have most likely been the reason for an better DLC
for piano, since the stimulation pattern is changed more for smaller frequency changes
than the stimulation pattern for pure tones.
The results from the DLF, where the CILs were asked to indicate the direction of the
pitch difference, showed that the CILs were much better at discriminating the pure
tones. This was true for the whole frequency range tested (200 - 3200 Hz). One test
subject noted that around 400 Hz, almost all frequency changes sounded as it was in
the opposite direction, which is exactly what would be expected, referring to Figure 1.2.
Lower pitch notes (for complex stimuli such as piano) causes ambiguity for the perceived
pitch for CIL.
Could it be that CI recipients would prefer music composed on more simplistic music,
removing some or all overtones? This is a question that will be explored in this master
thesis.
1.3.2
The Temporal Part
This category involves both rhythm and tempo. CI recipient have shown to have similar
abilities to recognize temporal aspects of music as NHL (Prevoteau et al., 2018, Looi
et al., 2012). Tempo is a measure usually given in beats per minute (BPM) which is
the rate at which the beat flows, and it can be seen as the ’pulse’ of the music. Tempo
works separately from rhythm and should not be confused. Rhythm is the arrangement of
sounds as they move through time. A time pattern created by notes as music unfolds over
time. Tempo is the speed at which the rhythmic pattern unfolds. Tempo and rhythm
can only coexist within a certain range of tempo. A too fast tempo would perceptually
group the musical events together. A too slow tempo would create a discontinuity and
it would not be perceived as musical rhythms anymore (Tan, Pfordresher, and Harré,
2017). A study (Deutsch, 2013) has shown that individual people, when simply asked
Figure 1.3: Schema of the musical tempo given in beats per minute (BPM), delineating the
boundaries of which note events rhythms are heard as rhythmic. The frequencies of common
repetitive motor activities for humans (heartbeat, two types of applause and walking) are also
illustrated.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Music Perception by CI recipients
7
to tap at a rate which were comfortable for them (a spontaneous tempo), obtained
intervals ranging from 380 to 880 ms. In which the most representative beat period was
around 600 ms (corresponding to 100 BPM). However, Moelants et. Al, have shown a
series of experiments which suggest that the spontaneous tempo, as well as a preferred
tempo (by three individual laboratory experiments), lies slightly higher, around 120
BPM (Moelants, 2002). Interestingly, this rate is similar to the rate of which people
walk.
The mean period for normal walking is said to be 117 BPM for adult males
(Murray, Drought, and Kory, 1964). Two types of applause also exist: a fast spontaneous
applause and one applause which is slow and rhythmically synchronized. Between the
two, roughly a doubling of frequency was found, 237 and 122 BPM. The latter applause,
which is again a typical repeated motor action for humans, is remarkably close to the
suggested preferred and spontaneous tempo value of 120 BPM.
CILs, in contrast to NHLs, have shown a significant increase in music appreciation as
the tempo of the music was increased (Vannson, Innes-Brown, and Marozeau, 2015), see
Figure 1.4. For all three different listening configurations (monaural, diotic and dichotic)
and increase in like ratings occurred when tempo was increased (33 point increase toward
likeness was obtained by an increase of 100 BPM). In the study, the slow and fast tempo
were corresponding to emotionally identified sad and happy pieces respectively. Both
CIL groups, BM and BL users, were surprisingly precise at judging the intended emotion
for each music piece. For the monaural listening condition (sound in only one ear), which
is the listening condition that will be used later in this project, results showed following:
music pieces identified correctly as ’happy’ ranged from 87% to 97% and the correctly
identified ’sad’ songs ranged from 78% to 81%, depending on the listening group, BM
and BL respectively. It is still unconfirmed whether the CILs disliked the slow tempo
pieces sorely on the emotional aspect, or if it was due to what faster tempi offer.
A faster tempo would elicit more musical information, thus that could be one of the
reasons for the increased music appreciation amongst CI user. Faster tempo might as
well introduce more rhythmic complexity, which might be more appreciating among CIL.
At last, since CI recipients have very poor pitch perception, tempo might be the primary
perceptual dimension CILs use, thus making them judge the music piece according to
this dimension (Vannson et al., 2015).
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: Average like or dislike ratings for the CI users (BM, panel a and BL, panel b).
Taken from (Vannson, Innes-Brown, and Marozeau, 2015). Ratings ranged from 1 (like) to
100 (dislike).
1.3.3
The Spectral-Temporal Part
This category includes timbre, which is the aspect of music that enable one to distin-
guish between the different instruments even when played with the same loudness and
pitch. Existing literature concurs that CI users have great difficulty with timbre per-
ception (Marozeau and Lamping, 2019; Gfeller et al., 1998). This can maybe explain
why Looi et al. showed that music involving multiple instruments sounded less pleasant
compared to single instruments amongst CIL (Looi, McDermott, McKay, and Hickson,
2007). However, it should be noted, that studies have also shown that with a musical
training program, timbre perception can be improved along with increased music appre-
ciation for CI users (Looi et al., 2012).
Studies investigating instrument identification have shown that CI users rely mostly on
temporal cues in identifying instruments, with percussive instruments identified more
frequently correct than non-percussive instruments (Marozeau and Lamping, 2019). Fur-
thermore, a study that investigated the cognitive response and engagement of music for
both NHL and CIL with six different musical works, showed that both groups gave
higher rating of enjoyment, interest and musicality for the percussion pieces than the
others (Au, Marozeau, Innes-Brown, et al., 2012).
Since studies have pointed towards a preference towards percussion instruments for CIL,
it could be interesting to observe whether overlap between notes is involved in this pref-
erence. What would happen if the instrument is fixed, but the tone duration of all notes
are changed? If a piano is playing, would staccato be preferred compared to using more
of the right pedal (sustain pedal)? Whether the amount of overlap between notes will
change the musical experience for CI users is examined in this master thesis.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Music Perception by CI recipients
9
1.3.4
Segmentation, Perceptual Organization in Music
Language consist of well-defined beginnings and endings. Text and speech are not per-
ceived as uncorrelated individual words, but rather as an organization of words which
combined composes sentences, meaning and context.
Within these sentences (units)
topics and emotions can be introduced. Music can be view as a way for humans to
communicate as well. Hereby, a sequence of musical tones are not just heard as unre-
lated events, but organized into metrical, rhythmic, melodic harmonic units (Krumhansl,
2001), similarly to language, which can be formed into sentences/paragraphs/chapters.
This principle of perceptual organization, also known as segmentation, has been in-
vestigated in music in previous studies. Different influences that contributes towards
grouping of sounded events together can be of complex matter. For example, two in-
fluences may work simultaneously to converge toward the same grouping.
In other
cases, they might work towards different grouping, and one will predominate over the
other (Krumhansl, 2001). Different musical characteristics have shown to contribute
to a perceived segmentation in music, hence rules can be made to predict boundaries
(end of each unit). Silences and long pauses are one of them, together with changes
in musical parameters, such as dynamics, pitch organization or timbre (Deliege, 1987).
Furthermore, a repetition of previously heard material can also lead to the formation of
boundaries. Deliége et al. also showed that musicians’ responses were more consistence
at forming boundaries where the rules applied, than for those of non-musicians.
No studies have been found which investigate CI users ability to segregate music and
whether this perceptual aspect of music will differ from NHLs. Some of the musical
parameters that are known to form boundaries in music, are also known to be scanty for
CI users, e.g. timbre perception. Thus, their perception of musical segmentation might
differ than what is normally observed for NHL.
In another study done by Krumhansl (Krumhansl, 1996), NHL were asked to indicate the
end of each major section (known as large-scale segmentation) of Mozarts Piano Sonata
K282. This data was collected together with musical tension, rated by the listeners
throughout the music piece. As could be seen by comparison of large-scale segmentation
and musical tension, high peaks of tension followed by a rapid decrease occurred the
same places as the strongest section ends. Smaller peaks of tension appeared where
weaker section ends tended to be. Thus, tension and section-endings are showing to
be connected. Spangmose Pedersen, Hjortkjær, and Marozeau, 2019 have studied the
rating of musical tension for both CIL and NHL using Mozart’s piano sonata K282 as
well. Different modifications were furthermore created, where one musical feature of
the sonata was altered: intensity, tempo, rhythm and tonality. The results shows that
CIL rate the overall musical tension in a similar way to NHL. However, the modified
versions showed that, while the tension rating for NHLs were highly effected by a change
in tonality, CILs were not. CI users showed to rely mostly on rhythm and intensity cues
to judge the musical tension. This was an outcome to expect due to CI users’ weak
ability to discriminate pitch and poor melody recognition. Taken all this into account
and using the Mozart Sonata K282 as well to investigate music segmentation for both
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
groups, one could assume to see similar segmentation across the two groups (NHL and
CIL) since the overall musical tension rating showed to be similar.
The results showed that removing the intensity cues had a ’neutralization’ effect, mean-
ing the musical tension rated along the musical pieces was not varying as much as the
original piece. The effect was seen for CIL and also NHL, although the effect was less
outspoken for NHL. Since the neutralization effect was clear for CIL, loudness seems to
be one of the cue CIL highly rely on for musical tension. This leads to another question,
could large intensity variation be of significant matter when listening to music?
1.4
Research Objectives
It can be concluded from the literature survey that music perception is still very scanty
for CIL, and the poorly perceived spectral part of music can explain a huge part of this.
It was mentioned that the use of a pentatonic scale, which should activate the electrodes
in a more orderly manner, needs further investigation.
It is hypothesised that the use of a pentatonic scale would improve the musical experi-
ence for CIL (1)
Pure tones in contrast to complex stimuli, gave CI users a better ability to discriminate
frequencies. Higher harmonics gave rise to ambiguity of changed pitch.
It is therefore hypothesised, that a removal of overtones will improve the musical expe-
rience for CIL (2).
It is furthermore hypothesised, moving the notes towards a higher pitch be preferred by
CI users (3).
CI users have shown to rate sad music pieces significantly lower than happy pieces. This
could may be due to the tempo since more musical information is conveyed for faster
tempo but a further investigation connecting tempo and music appreciation is needed.
It is hypothesised that, indifferent of the emotion conveyed of a music piece, CIL would
prefer faster tempi (4).
It is furthermore hypothesised, that a modified music piece, which will give rise to more
rhythmical complexity (more groove), will improve the musical experience for CI users
(5).
Could it be that less overlap between each note would help the listening experience? It
is hypothesised that music with more overlap between the notes would be less preferred
in comparison to music with lesser overlap (6).
CIL are seen to heavily rely on loudness cues for the perceived musical tension.
It is therefore, hypothesized that music with larger loudness variations would be pre-
ferred for CIL (7).
The research objectives of this study is first and foremost to validate above mentioned
hypothesis. This is done by conducting psychophysical experiments. As mentioned be-
fore, one way to improve the music appreciation for CI recipients, is to re-engineer the
==PAGE:23==
1.4 Research Objectives
11
music or the signal processing itself. Thus, it is important to understand in depth how
CI user perceive music, and furthermore how the different dimensions in music will ef-
fect CI users’ music enjoyment on an average. This experiment is made very general to
enable test of many musical parameters, thus the goal is to detect distinctive differences
between the different changes in musical features, which then could provide incitement
to further work and investigation.
It should be noted here, that music is multifaceted, and not only does music experi-
ence encompasses the acoustic stimuli, hearing ability and CI sound processing, but also
on complicated subject measures. This includes personality, and psycho-social factors
that relates to expectations, motivation and an emotional response. Thus, creating a
psycho-physical experiment that will validate the above listed hypotheses can be of great
difficulty and results should be taken with care.
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
In this chapter, the methodology used in this master thesis is explained. In short, a
psycho-physical experiment was created, in-order to validate the seven previous stated
hypotheses regarding musical rules for CI users, cf. section 1.4. The experiment required
actual CI test subjects, and additionally normal hearing listeners, that were used as a
control group.
The whole experiment was divided into two parts. The first part would explore the
listeners’ abilities to segregate music and convey emotions from music. This part took
roughly 15 minutes to finish for each participant.
The second part collected musical rating scores as five different musical parameters were
changed. This part of the experiment took 60-90 minutes to finish for each test subject.
2.1
Participants
A total of 28 participants were involved in this study. 14 were NHL (seven females, seven
males, age range 16-59, average age± SD of 38 ± 17). Four of them were musicians (in
this study a musician is defined as a person who has played an instrument for 5 years or
more). All NHL had a hearing threshold below 30 dB HL in the frequency range 0.125
- 8 kHz. The threshold of 30 dB instead of the usual 20 dB, is an attempt to obtain an
average age that is closer to what the CI test subjects. Several CI participants in this
experiment have been of an age where a natural loss of high frequencies (>20 dB HL)
for normal hearing listeners would occur.
14 CI recipients were tested in this study (11 females, 3 males, age range 21-78, average
age ± SD of 59 ± 16). 5 of the test subject was pre-lingually deaf, however only one was
implanted early in life (age of 2). Furthermore, one of the CIL were musicians. The CIL
had different CI brands, hence the sound processing and number of electrodes could differ
from each CI patient. The recruitment of the CI users was conducted through DTU’s
Hearing Systems data base NOAH and through facebook CI groups. Local networks
were used for NHL.
2.2
Apparatus and Procedure
Each participant were first given a paper that explained the experimental procedure.
Furthermore, each test subject would fill-in a questionnaire which would record external
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Methods
factors such as; age, gender, musical training and music listening habits. In case of CIL
further questions were added: hardware of device, pre- or postlingual deafness and year
of implementation.
All experiments were carried out in a doubled-walled acoustically shielded listening booth
(PSY 1) in building 354, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Kongens Lyn-
gby, Denmark. A computer was setup to run a user interface program on MATLAB,
known as Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs). The GUIs were made during this project
and an illustration of the interface is seen in Figure 2.1.
For NHL, each listener was seated in front of the computer with HD650 Sennheiser
headphones on, where the stimuli would come out to only one channel ( monaural
listening configuration).
This was done to create a scenario that was similar to of
those with CI, which would be presented with the music in only one ear, since some
CI recipients were only implemented in one ear (BM users).
The headphones were
connected to a 120V Rail Headphone Monitoring Amplifier, which then was connected
to a FIREFACE UCX sound card. The headphone were calibrated to a rms value of 65
dB SPL, hence far above 30 dB HL.
For CIL, connecting an audio cable directly to their CI processor was a first priority (cf.
the left picture in Figure 2.2). Thus, possible residual hearing, which as mentioned in
chapter 1 can influence the hearing experience, would be fully excluded from the music
perception. The signal processing in the CI processor is independent of whether the
sound is recorded through the microphone or sent through the audio-cable. The audio
cable was connected to a sound-card FIREFACE UXC, which was then connected to a
laptop. This laptop ran the MATLAB GUI program as well, and the test subject would
give his/her responses using either the touchscreen or touchpad.
The loudness level of the stimulus were chosen by the individual CI test subject. Stimulus
Figure 2.1: A screenshot of the user interface program in MATLAB (a GUI), also referred as
a ’task’, which enabled the test subject to give his/hers rating for each music piece (Part 2).
This task is inspired by the principles of a MUSHRA test.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Apparatus and Procedure
15
sensation level measures, a method used in a clinical context (Allen, Hall, and Jeng,
1990), was not optimal in this case, due to the limited dynamic range CI users have. It
was important to ensure that an amplitude variation of 30 dB could be detected by each
individual CI test subject. Thus, the CIL varied the sound until a music piece, which
varied 30 dB, was audible in the whole range. The level of the stimuli should as well be
comfortable for each CIL to prevent any annoyance.
In some cases, the audio-cable setup was not possible, since the audio cables varies across
brands and CI processor. As a plan B, the CI test subject was presented the stimuli
by a Dynaudio Acoustics BM6 nearfield loudspeaker located 0.7 meter in front of the
subject. The loudspeaker was connected to a BeoLab amplifier from Bang & Olufsen.
The amplifier was further connected to the same FIREFACE UCX sound card used for
the NHL setup.
Similarly, the level of the stimulus were chosen by the individual CI test subject, to
ensure a full cover of their dynamic range and as well a comfortable level.
Possible residual hearing from the CIL was important to exclude from the experiment.
Thus, an audiogram was made for each CI test subject in the clinic room in building 354
to validate the amount of residual hearing for each subject. In case of a profound hearing
loss, corresponding to a hearing threshold elevated by at least 90 dB within the whole
frequency range of 0,125-8 kHz, no actions were needed. In case of some residual hearing
(a hearing threshold elevated less than 90 dB for some of the frequencies, ranging from
0.125 - 8 kHz), an ear plug was inserted to minimize the amount of sound coming into
the ear canal.
The skeleton of the experiment is illustrated in Figure 2.3. The experiment is divided
into two parts, where the second part forms the largest part. This part is testing five
different musical parameters, which in conclusion either will or will not support the
above listed hypothesis, mentioned in section 1.4.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Methods
Figure 2.2: Left figure: picture showing the audio-cable directly connected to the CI. Right
figure: picture showing how the CIL would adjust the level from the sound-card before starting
the test
Figure 2.3: Schema of the musical experiment used in this experiment. The first part contains
two minor parts. The second part tested five different musical parameters. Data collection
(seen in the right column) is in the form of scores ranging from 0-100 (taken from sliders seen
in Figure 2.1)
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Part 1
17
2.3
Part 1
In this part of the experiment, the abilities to segregate music and convey emotions for
each test subject are explored.
2.3.1
Stimuli
The musical stimulus were chosen from 56 musical excerpts that conveyed the intended
emotions; happiness, sadness, threat and peacefulness. All pieces were composed by
professional musicians (Vieillard et al., 2008). For this part of the experiment eight of
them were used, where four of them were composed to convey sadness, and the remaining
four were composed to convey happiness. All pieces were lyric-free piano pieces. Some
of the files that were received, had missing parts at the end, hence additional editing
were made in case of missing ending notes.
Additionally, a 3 minute recording of Mozart’s Piano Sonata No. 4, E♭major, K282
performed by a experienced pianist was used to examine the test subjects’ abilities to
segregate music.
A sampling rate of 48,000 was used for all music pieces.
No further modifications of the stimulus were made for this first part of the experiment.
2.3.2
Detailed Procedure
The listener was asked to rate the eight piano pieces from a scale from 0 (sad) - 100
(happy). The eight stimuli were presented in a random order for each listener.
The listener was then introduced to the Mozart sonata K282, in which the listener was
asked to imagine the music as a piece of text and notice any paragraph endings. The
test subject would then listen to the same sonata once again, and this time instructed
to press a button at the end of each paragraph.
2.4
Part 2
The purpose of the second part of the experiment, was to validate the seven previous
mentioned hypothesises (see section 1.4). This was done by a MUSHRA inspired test,
where a hidden reference (original piano piece) and several modified versions of the
original piece were presented. The listeners were then asked to rate each of the stimuli
on a scale from 0 - 100, thus gave a comparison between the stimuli determined by their
musical preference (see. Figure 2.1).
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Methods
2.4.1
Stimuli
The musical stimulus were chosen from the 56 musical excerpts, as mentioned in sub-
section 2.3.1. Adjustments of the original music pieces were essential to examine the
different hypotheses. All modifications were done in the software programs: LMMS,
MuseScore 3, Ableton and MATLAB. Different modifications were needed for each mu-
sical parameter.
2.4.2
Detailed Procedure
The part consisted of 21 ’MUSHRA’ tasks. An example of a task is seen in Figure 2.1.
Each task would contain pieces in which variations of the specific musical parameter
is changed. For example, when the musical parameter of tone duration (less and more
overlap) is investigated, four GUIs (tasks) were made. Each task had a hidden reference
(original music piece) and several modification of the original music piece. The modifi-
cations in this case would be a change in duration for each played note. All the different
modification for each musical parameter test is described below (subsection 2.4.2). Both
the order of the stimulus for each task and the 21 tasks in total were randomized. For
each stimulus, the test subject were instructed to rate the musicality based on their own
preference (not the finger skills of the pianist) for each music piece on a scale from 0-
100. These ratings would be collected for each task and person, see fourth column in
Figure 2.3.
Piano clips with varying tempo
Four different music pieces (to see which one, cf. Table A.1) were used to examine music
preference with varying tempo. Each stimuli was modified into exactly five different
tempo values. The tempo values are given in beats per minute (BPM) and categorized
into five groups: lento at 40 BPM, andante at 80 BPM, allegretto at 120 BPM, Vivace
at 150 and finally Presto which are at 180 BPM.
Piano clips with more rhythmical complexity (swing)
Modifications were made in-order to include more ’swing’ for four different piano clip.
To add more swing, music pieces composed of many eight notes were selected. The beats
on 2 and 4 were added with a certain delay, as an attempt to include more swing for
each piece. The amount of delay would vary from a minor to a major delay, in steps of
four: 1/12, 2/12, 3/5 and 1/1 measures.
The added swing would be most optimal at an delay of 2/12. In the case of a greater
delay (such as 3/5 measures) the swing would disappear and very complex/arrhythmical
music would appear, which would be assumed to be less favorable for both groups.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Part 2
19
Piano Clips using the pentatonic scale, pure tones and higher pitches
A total of five piano clips (tasks) were used for this part. All modifications were done
in MATLAB. Three conditions were desired to explore:
1. Moving all notes half and a full octave upwards. Moving the notes half an octave is
referred as condition 6, and moving the notes a full octave is labeled as 12, which
states the number of semitones the piece is moved upwards
2. Simplifying each note by removing the higher harmonics. This condition is referred
as Sine
3. Using the pentatonic scale instead of the chromatic scale. This condition is referred
as Penta
To test all three conditions, six modified versions on top of the original piano clip were
made for each of the five music pieces. Hence, a total of seven versions of the same music
piece would be present for each task in this part:
1. The original music piece (’ori’)
2. Notes moved half an octave up (’6’)
3. Notes moved half an octave + removal of overtones (’6 Sine’)
4. Notes moved a full octave up (’12’)
5. Notes moved a full octave up + removal of overtones (’12 Sine’)
6. Notes moved a full octave up + pentatonic scale (’12 Penta’)
7. Notes moved a full octave up + pentatonic scale + removal of overtones (’12 Penta
Sine’)
The modification which converted the piano pieces into the pentatonic scale was made
in MATLAB with the help of Jeremy Marozeau. Notes that were closets to the center
frequency of each filter band in a CI were chosen, thus most of these notes were on the
pentatonic scale. Note that the center frequencies are based on data from Cochlear©.
In case of a note not being on the pentatonic scale, the nearest note on the pentatonic
scale was chosen. A list of chosen notes, which all were on the pentatonic scale and had
the purpose of activating one electrode at a time incrementally, was obtain. Each note
in the original piano piece, which are all from the chromatic scale, was then changed
into the nearest note from the list obtain (specifically chosen notes from the pentatonic
scale).
Piano clips with varying overlap
To vary the overlap, essentially the duration of all notes in the music piece were adjusted
equally with a certain amount. The longer duration for each note, automatically more
overlap would occur for each music piece. However, the amount of overlap would vary
from each music piece since the combination of notes would vary from piece to piece and
measure to measure.
Following modification of either an extension (+) or shortening (-) of the tones for each
piece were as follow (given in fractions of beats): -15/192 (’M2’), -5/192 (’M1’), original
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Methods
duration (’Orig’), +5/192 (’P1’), +15/192 (’P2’) and +30/192 (’P3’). This means that
the M2 modification is played with most staccato (the least overlap between tones), and
P3 is the modification with the longest duration for each tone (most overlap).
Some tones, which were already short in duration, could not be shorted with -15/192
since that would completely eliminate the note from the music piece, and thereby chang-
ing the melody/rhythm of the piece. Therefore, in those cases, the short tones were
shorten as much as possible, thus only having a duration of 1/192 (the minimum dura-
tion possible in LMMS), and the remaining tones were still shorten with -15/192.
Piano clips with different loudness variations
The unmodified music pieces are all composed of notes that shares the same velocity,
hence no loudness variation are present. However, overall loudness adjustments were
made in this part of the test. This was done for four piano clips. Each piece were put
into four different conditions, where the dynamic range were set to: 0 (original), 10, 20
and 30 dB.
The overall adjustments of level changes were set fairly simple in MATLAB and with
the best attempt to adjust the loudness in a ’natural’ way with the music, however in
a very simplistic way. On the flip side, this method would not correspond to how a
professional pianist would adjust the loudness of the music piece (varying the applied
force when playing each key).
2.5
Statistical Analysis
The slider positions for all 21 tasks were encoded with integer values between 0-100
(lowest and highest score of musicality respectively). These numbers were then ana-
lyzed using JMP 14.1 through a linear mixed model. The scores was set as a continuous
variable. When each parameter was analyzed, the fixed effects were the modification
configuration and hearing group (CI and NH). Subject and piano clips were set as ran-
dom effects. Two and three way interactions were then included. In case of a significant
effect (p < 5%), a further Student T-test analysis were made, to investigate which mod-
ifications that were significant different from each other.
To ensure the normality (a Gaussian distribution) of the residuals (residuals are the
deviation of the observed data points from the predicted values), all scores were RAU-
transformed (Ractional Arcsine Unit) using MATLAB. The RAU transformation re-
quires scores giving from 0-1, thus the scores, which in this experiment ranges from
0-100, were divided by 100. A MATLAB function was then used, which conducted the
RAU transformation (MATLAB function taken from: Vallabha, 2016 (accessed February
17, 2020)). Thus, all statistical tests done in this master thesis had normally distributed
residuals.
An alternative way to view the results is by the ranking order. For each task, for example
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Statistical Analysis
21
the tempo variations, the scores were sorted in such a way, that the tempo that each test
subject gave the highest score, is referred as the Best, the second highest score as 2nd
Best, the lowest score as Last and second lowest as 2nd Last. Subsequently, averages
across the ranking for the four or five tasks were calculated. This would give percent-
ages of how many, on average, allocated the Best, 2nd Best, 2nd Last and Last score for
each of the modifications. Since each average is only taking from four to maximum five
points, error bars are excluded from these graphs. This method could also be done for
each task (given agreement averages for each task, and not across the four/five tasks)
To summarize, 21 tasks (MUSHRA inspired GUIs, seen in Figure 2.1) were made. Four
(and in one case five) tasks are each testing a specific musical parameter by having stim-
ulus (4-7 per task) where each contain a small variation of this musical parameter. The
resulting scores giving from each group (CIL and NHL) for each modification (stimuli)
across the four to five tasks will then be compared and analyzed using JMP and the
scores sorted by their ranking order (best to last).
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Results
In this chapter, results from the segmentation, judgement of intended emotion and
preferred musical piano clips from several modified versions are all presented.
3.1
Results of Segmentation and Judgement
of Intended Emotions
Responses from every non-musicians who participated in this experiment have been used
in this part of the results section (regarding segmentation of music). The exact time for
each click, click-time, (listener’s judgement of an ’end of each paragraph’) was registered
for each test subject. The time for the first beat of each measure is know, and hereby
each click-time was approximated to the nearest first beat of all measures. Hence, both
a early or delayed response should be taken account for by this method. Note that the
segmentation results are sorely rough approximations with single measures as discrete
points.
As Figure 3.1 shows, an overall agreement (of 90 −100%) among NHL for four segment
endings, occurring at measure 9, 16, 24 and 31-21. Measure 31-32 with respectively 60
and 40% each, ends up being a sum of 100%. The last chord played at measure 31 lasted
several beats, thus making the rough estimate of section endings some of the responses
closets to the first beat of 31 and some, with later reaction time, closer to a something
that would correspond to a first beat 32.
The highly agreed segmentation endings are all occurring at the same time as the musi-
cal tension has a drastic drop (cf. the blue line in Figure 3.1).
The results of segmentation for CIL are seen in Figure 3.2. Furthermore, the agreements
of section endings for either NHL and CIL as a function of measures, seen in the same
graph, is given in Figure A.1. CIL has two section endings which obtains a large agree-
ment (93 −100%), which are observed at measure 9 and 24, similarly to NHL. Overall,
the trend of section endings occurring at deep decreases of tension are also observed for
CIL.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Results
Figure 3.1: The red line represents the percentage of agreement of section ends for each measure,
all judged by NHL non-musicians. Averaged tension ratings are as well giving for NHL (blue
line). Horizontal double arrows outline the 4 parts of the piece (A1, B1, A2, B2). The musical
tension graphs are taken from (Spangmose Pedersen, Hjortkjær, and Marozeau, 2019)
Figure 3.2: The red line represents the percentage of agreement of section ends for each measure,
all judged by non musicians CIL. Averaged tension ratings are as well giving for CIL (blue line).
Horizontal double arrows outline the 4 parts of the piece (A1, B1, A2, B2). The musical tension
graphs are taken from (Spangmose Pedersen, Hjortkjær, and Marozeau, 2019)
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Judgement of Intended Emotion Results
25
3.2
Judgement of Intended Emotion Results
Every test subject’s rating have been used for these results. The piano clips that were
used in this experiment, were either composed as ’happy’ or ’sad’. Thus, it is possible to
calculate the percentage of correct identified emotions for all the stimuli. Each stimuli
that was rated with a value above 50 on the slider is identified with the emotion ’happy’
and every rating below 50 is identified with the emotion ’sad’. The results are shown
below, cf. Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Percentage of stimuli correctly identified as happy or sad for the two groups, normal
hearing listeners and cochlear implant listeners.
Composed intention
NHL
CIL
Happy
100%
89%
Sad
84%
80%
3.3
Results on Musicality Preferences
In this section, results comparing the responses on musicality scores for different modi-
fications for the two groups, CI and NH listeners, are presented. This section is divided
according to the five different musical parameters tested; tempo, tone duration, new
scale, rhythmic complexity and loudness variations.
3.3.1
Tempo Variations
Results from the tempo variations, made on the four music pieces (G01, G09, T01 and
T11), are given in this section. Figure 3.3 shows the average ratings for the two groups,
CI and NH listeners. A significant effect of BPM is obtained (F(4,11) = 4.0, p = 0.029)
for NHL and (F(4,7)=4.5, p = 0.042) for CIL.
A BPM of 120 clearly secure the highest average score for NHL. Furthermore, BPM
values of respectively 40 and 180 receives significant worse ratings compared to the rest
of the tempi.
The average seen for CI subjects is shown to be more ’flat’, with the mean of 120 BPM
being only slightly higher than the rest. Statistic analysis shows that the interaction
between BPM and hearing conditions (NH and CI) is not significant, but close to signif-
icant (F(4,12) = 2.5, p = 0.097).
The only condition, a BPM of 40, is rated significantly lower than the rest of the tempos
for CIL.
Figure 3.4, represents the overall standard deviation (SD) for both groups, as well as the
SD for each individual test subject across the four tasks. NHLs roughly show to have a
SD twice the size of CI subjects.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Results
Figure 3.3: The blue and red line represent an average rating for five different tempi (40, 80,
120, 150 and 180 BPM) for NHL and CIL respectively. Averages are based on four different
music pieces, where each includes the five different tempo modification. Error bars represents
the standard error.
Figure 3.4: The dotted lines with stars corresponds to the SD for each individual test subject
across the four tasks (light blue being for each NHL and orange for each CIL). The solid lines
with squares corresponds to the mean SD for all NHL and all CIL, blue and red respectively.
An investigation of whether an age effect among NHL could occur is conducted, cf.
Figure 3.5. Dividing age into two groups; young (<47 years of age) and elder (>47
years of age), no significant effect is observed between age and ratings (F(4,48)=0.11,
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Results on Musicality Preferences
27
p = 0.98). The mean SD across the four tasks for the two age groups are 26.0 and 25.3
points for young and old respectively.
Additionally, no significant effect was seen between musicians and non-musicians among
NHL (F(4.10)=0.7, p = 0.60).
The SDs for four musicians compared to ten non-
musicians, are very similar with a mean SD of 25.1 and 24.7 respectively.
Figure 3.5: Average scores across five different tempi, giving for younger and elder test subjects
(only NHL), presented by the blue and red line respectively. Error bars represents the standard
error.
Figure 3.6: The tempo modification rated with the highest (solid blue), second highest (striped
blue) and lowest (solid red) score by the two separated groups, CIL and NHL (left and right
respectively).
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Results
From Figure 3.6 the largest agreement for the highest score (’Best’) tempo modifica-
tion is 120 BPM for both CI and NH listeners (30% and 38% respectively). Furthermore,
a tendency to give the lowest ranking (’Last’) to the slowest and fastest tempo (a BPM
of 40 and 180) above chance level, is also seen for both groups.
3.3.2
Results on Rhythmic Complexity
Figure 3.7: The average scores for both hearing groups, CIL (red line) and NHL (blue line) for
all four tasks. Error bars represent the standard error.
Results taking from four tasks, where each task had a music pieces with varying rhyth-
mical complexity (by adding a certain delay on 2nd and 4th beat), are shown in this
subsection. The overall average from the results are shown in Figure 3.7. Here it is
seen for both groups, that the delay of 3/5 beats are giving the lowest score. This is
also clearly seen in the ranking graph, cf. Figure 3.8. Statistical analysis also shows
that for both individual groups, rhythmic complexity has a significant effect: NHL
(F(4,14)=13.8, p = 0.0009) and CIL (F(4,16)=4.1, p = 0.017). A significant effect be-
tween the two hearing groups are also present (F(4,22)=5.2, p = 0.004). No significant
effect between the different tasks are seen for either group (p = 0.50/0.41 for NHL/CIL),
thus an average across the four tasks should be adequate.
A clear and significant preference toward the hidden reference (the original music piece
with zero delay) is seen for NHL. This trend is less evident and not significant for CIL
as the ’Best’ and ’2nd Best’ scores are allocated more equally between the four delays;
0, 1/12, 2/12 and 1/1 (around chance level), see Figure 3.8.
A delay from <1 will create rhythmic complexity, however the delay of 1 measure (’1/1’)
will more likely tend to give the same amount of rhythmical complexity as the original
piece, however obtaining a change in note position. This note conversion can be argued
that is difficult to register for CIL and if this condition is removed completely from the
rating system, it is possible that they are now allocated to the original version. Thus, a
removal of the last modification (delay = 1/1) is done and plotted in Figure 3.9. It turns
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Results on Musicality Preferences
29
out, only around half of the values from 1/1 went to the original piece, thus the results
from CI are still different compared to NHL with only an agreement for the original
piece to obtain the best score of 40% compared to almost 70% agreement amongst the
NHL.
Figure 3.8: The scores in ranked order for both CIL (left sub-figure) and NHL (right sub-figure).
The dotted line represents the chance level.
Figure 3.9: The scores in ranked order for both CIL (left sub-figure) and NHL (right sub-
figure), in case of removing the fifth modification of a delay of 1/1 measure. The dotted line
represents the chance level.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Results
3.3.3
The use of the Pentatonic Scale and Removing
Harmonics
Figure 3.10: The overall rating average for the two groups, CIL and NHL, for the five different
music pieces and its modifications regarding the use of a pentatonic scale and removal of
harmonics.
In this subsection, the results regarding the use of the pentatonic scale, the removal of
harmonics and moving towards higher pitch notes, are investigated. A significant effect
exist between the different piano clips, so it should be noted that averages across all five
tasks does not show the full story.
There is a significant difference between the two groups CI and NH listeners (F(6,90) =
13.3, p = 0.001), however as can clearly be seen from the averages in Figure 3.10 and
Figure 3.12, an evident agreement occurs for both groups; lower ratings are given to the
pure tone (sine) modifications.
In Figure 3.11, where the order given by CI test subjects for each task are shown, an
interesting trend is seen: the original piece obtains the highest rank for the tasks with
happy music, however for the sad pieces (T01 and T08), the original piece is not the
dominating favorite anymore. However, it should be noted that even for the happy pieces
(G01 and G08), the original pieces were not significantly different than the modifications
’6’,’12’ or ’12 Penta’.
Only for G05, ’original’ and ’6’ is significantly different than
’12’ and ’12 Penta’. Note here that obviously, in all cases, the sine modifications are
significantly rated worse than the complex sounds, thus giving an overall significant
effect for the different modifications for all five tasks (F(6,72) = 2.9/8.1/8.6/7.7/7.1
with p = 0.0142/<0.0001/<0.0001/<0.0001/<0.0001 for the pieces G01, G05, G08, T01
and T07 respectively).
For NHL, the original piece is mostly agreed to be allocated the highest or at least the
second highest score (with an agreement from 40-60%). In all five cases, ’12 Penta’ has
been significantly different to the original, ’6’ and ’12’. This is not the case for CIL in
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Results on Musicality Preferences
31
four out of five cases. The individual task rankings for NHL are shown in the appendix,
cf. Figure A.2.
Figure 3.11: The ranking scores for each tasks, giving in percentage of agreement among CI
users. ’S’ stands for Sine and ’P’ stands for Penta.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Results
Figure 3.12: The average ranking for the different modification for both CI users (top figure)
and NH listeners (bottom figure), on an average for all five music pieces. The blue lines repre-
sent the top ranked modifications, and the red lines represent the worse ranked modifications.
Black dotted line corresponds to chance level.
3.3.4
Tone Duration Modifications
Seen in Figure 3.13, yet another ’flat’ response from CIL is observed for the averages of
each modification. The SD among CI test subjects is as before, roughly half the size of
NHL (mean SD = 11 for CI users and a mean SD = 22 for NHL across the four tasks).
A tendency to rate the shorter tones (giving less overlap) with lower scores, is seen for
both NHL and CIL. However, as statistic analysis shows, the tone duration modification
and musicality preference is more complex. It turns out that NHLs have a clear and
significant preference towards longer tones for the sad music pieces, T06 and T08 (F(5,65)
= 4.1, p = 0.003 and F(5,65)= 6.0, p = 0.0001). No significant effect on tone duration
is seen for the task with music piece G03, however tone duration is significant for the
task using G01. However in this case, it is the original and +5/192 that obtains the
highest score. This shows that the results are best analysed task by task. Rankings of
the different tasks for NHLs are given in Figure 3.14.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Results on Musicality Preferences
33
Figure 3.13: The average scores for both NHL (blue line) and CIL (red line), for all four tasks
of tone duration modifications. Error bars represents the given standard error
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Results
Figure 3.14: The ranking score for each task, given by each sub-figure, for NHL. Tone duration
addition/subtraction is given as: M2 = -15/192, M1 = -5/192, Orig = Original piece, P1 =
+5/192, P2 = +15/192 and P3 = +30/192.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Results on Musicality Preferences
35
Figure 3.15: The ranking score for each task, given by each sub-figure, for CIL. Tone duration
addition/subtraction is given as: M2 = -15/192, M1 = -5/192, Orig = Original piece, P1 =
+5/192, P2 = +15/192 and P3 = +30/192.
As can be seen and re-confirmed from Figure 3.14, is that the two sad music pieces
have a clear preference towards highest overlap (longer tones). The happy music pieces
(G01 and G03) are seen to get highest and second highest scores around the original
and M1 or P1 modifications. An interesting score is the longest tone duration for G03,
which obtains the highest score with an agreement of almost 60%, and P2 then receives
no best score, with 0% agreement. The results for CI users, seen in Figure 3.15, shows
much less agreement in contrast to the NHLs. Especially for the sad pieces, no clear
higher scores are allocated to the longer tones. However, for T08, a tendency to rate
the shortest tone duration modifications (M2 and M1) with the lowest score is present,
and seen for G01 and G03 as well. No significant effect on tone duration is observed for
three out of the four tasks for CIL (F(5,65) = 1.3/0.4/1.8 with p = 0.27/0.80/0.12 for
G03/T06/T08 respectively). G01 has a significant effect of F(5,65)=2.9 p = 0.019, only
showing that M2 is rated significantly lower than P3.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Results
3.3.5
Loudness Variations
Results for four loudness variation (0, 10, 20 and 30 dB) for four individual music pieces
are shown in this subsection.
An evident preference towards the original piece (no
loudness variation) can be observed for NHL, seen in Figure 3.16. Statistical analysis
supports this view (F(3,30) = 17, p = 0.0001), where 0 dB variation is significant
different than 10 dB, and 10 dB is significantly different than 20 and 30 dB. For CI
users, there is no but close to a significant effect (F(3,10)= 17.0, p = 0.107), and from
the ranking order in Figure 3.17 it is shown that all four loudness variations are around
chance level. However, an agreement of around 35%, which is above chance level, is seen
to rate the 30 dB with the lowest score.
Figure 3.16: The loudness variation average scores (across all four task) for both hearing
groups, CIL (red line) and NHL (blue line). Error bars represent the standard error.
Figure 3.17: The ranking order for both NHL (right sub-figure) and CIL (left sub-figure), as
an average across the four loudness tasks.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
In this chapter, the results from this master thesis’ experiment seen in previous chapter,
chapter 3, are discussed primarily in regard to the hypotheses and theory that are already
described in chapter 1.
4.1
Segmentation and Judgement of
Intended Emotions
Only the responses from non-musicians were used to compare the two groups regarding
the segmentation of music. As previous stated, Deliége et al. showed that musicians’
responses were more consistence at forming boundaries, than for those of non-musicians.
Thus, to exclude any dispensable variation between the two groups, since the NH group
includes four musicians, compared to only one musician for the CI group, data regarding
segmentation from musicians were disregarded.
As the segmentation results for NHL shows in Figure 3.1, the largely agreed section
ends (at measure 9, 16, 24 and 31-32), which can be seen as the major segment ends,
corresponds to strong peaks of tension followed by a rapid decrease. Thus, Krumhansl et.
al supports the results and method used in this experiment so far. As Figure 3.1 shows,
measure 9 and 24 are both at the end of part A, thus not surprising that agreements of
100% are seen for both section ends. The same goes for the end of part B (measure 16
and 31/32).
The CI users have shown to form strong boundaries corresponding to the tension ratings,
similarly to NH listeners. This is as expected, since tension ratings are known to be
correlated to boundary forming, and Spangmose et. Al showed that the tension ratings
for CI users were highly similar to those of NH.
The major boundary at measure 16 for NH listeners (with a 90% agreement) has only
achieved an agreement of 62% for CI users, however the subsequent measure (17) contains
close to the remaining CI test subjects, with an agreement of 31%. However, this latency
is not observed for NHL. A small hesitation could cause a response delay, thus measure
16 shows that a possible hesitating was introduced for only CI users.
However, the
tension ratings at measure 16 to 17 are rapidly decreased simultaneously for the two
groups. Since no delay is observed for the rated tension ratings, it is quiet strange a
delay would occur in the segmentation part. This could simply be due to a unintended
response delay for the CI user. In comparison to the end of measure 9 and 24, the end
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Discussion
of measure 16 did not have relative long pauses. Long pauses can offer a more natural
round-off feeling, which will not lead to an additional delay or hesitation.
It should be noted that this test was only of music with a single instrument (piano).
If multiple instruments were included and timbre had a larger impact on segmentation,
maybe more differences would be observed, in contrast to this case.
The intended emotions were judge correctly for the majority of the CI users’ responses
(see Table 3.1). The percentages of correct answers were of much similarity with Vannson
et. Al. This also suggest that no unwanted confusions for the test subjects were present
regarding the sliders and experimental setup.
4.1.1
Tempo Variations
The graph, which shows the overall mean of the ratings for NHL and CIL (seen in
Figure 3.3, shows a more ’flat’ response for CI users. However, the overall mean of
preference scales should be taken with care. Averages, in this case, does not necessarily
display the full story. This would only be the case if a preference scale was completely
linear, meaning that a score of 50 is as ’double as good’ as a score of 25 and so fourth.
The flat response can be explained from the mean SD from each group. The SD, which
can be seen as a measure of how ”actively” the test subject is using the preference scale
(0-100) for each task, is seen to be double as high for NHL compared to CIL. Hence that
NHL tend to use more of the preference scale for each tempo task. This relative small
SD for CI test subjects can explain the flat response in Figure 3.3. However, this is not
expected, since temporal features of music is known to be preserved for CI recipients
and they are able to achieve comparable perceptual performance as NH listeners in this
aspect of music.
Perhaps being more trained in music, thus being more confident with music, would
give an arise to a larger individual SD for each task? This could explain the lower SD
for CI test subjects, since they could be afflicted by lower confidence regarding music
judgement. As mentioned in chapter 1, many post-lingual subjects indicate themselves
that the music perception is not as refined nor enjoyable as pre-implantation. However,
the average SD calculations for four musicians (NHL) showed to be particularly close to
the average SD for the NH non-musicians with only an increased average SD of 1.5%.
Thus, the confidential level is difficult to use as an argument for the lower SD for CIL.
CI participants obtains roughly an average age which is 20 years more than of the NH
test subjects. However, no age effect was observed for NHL alone when splitting the ages
into two groups; younger and elder than 47 years. The mean SD was only 2.8% higher
for the younger group. Thus, this provides no further incentive to suggest a possible age
effect causing contrasting SD values between the two groups, NHL and CIL.
Despite a ’flat’ average across the five tempo values for CI users, statistical analysis
did show that 40 BPM was rated significantly lower than the rest of the tempos. As
Vannson et. Al shows together with Tan et. Al, a slow tempo, especially below 60 BPM,
should be expected to be rated with low scores, due to the creation of discontinuity.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Segmentation and Judgement of Intended Emotions
39
This expectation is confirmed from both groups, seen in Figure 3.6. 55% of the NHLs
and 43% of the CI users, allocated the music piece with a BPM of 40 with the lowest
score on average. These agreements are much higher than chance level.
The least number of participants, for both groups, have assigned the lowest score to
the tempo of 120 BPM of all the five tempi. Additionally, the tempo value with the
highest score and highest agreement for both groups are also seen to be the tempo of 120
BPM. This suggests that a preferred tempo of 120 BPM for both groups is present. The
preferred 120 BPM for NHL is not surprising, since this is already supported by Moelants
et. Al. However, the preferred 120 BPM for CIL brings new information. The results
from Vannson et. Al did not show a preference towards music pieces with a tempo of
120 BPM (allegreto), but showed an increased likeness towards even faster music pieces,
vivace and presto (>133 BPM). However, it is important to note that in Vannson et. Al,
the variation of tempo was not given for fixed music pieces, thus the explanation of the
likeness variation in the study, was more likely due to the musical style and rhythmic
complexity of each individual music piece. This master thesis project can only reject
that an increase on sorely tempo gives rise to an increase personal preference for CI users.
This study also do not reject any of the suggested explanations given in Vannson et. Al
for its results. This tempo parameter test does not reject that CI user would appreciate
more rhythmic complexity, which was the case for the faster tempo music in Vannson
et. Al. This suggestion is further investigated and discussed later in this chapter (in
subsequent subsection). Another explanation for the increased likeness, was that the
faster the tempo the more musical information is conveyed. The musical information
in this study is fixed for all five tempo variations, since the same four music piece was
used for all five tempo variations. However, musical information per time unit would
differ for each tempo variation, and this study only suggest that musical information per
time unit does not seem to increase the preference for CI users, if going roughly above
120 BPM. Moreover, knowing about the previous link both Tanal et. Al and Moelants
et. Al have made between a spontaneous/preferred tempo and typical repeated motor
actions (such as walking and clapping), it is not surprising that CI participants showed
a preference towards 120 BPM as well. Obviously, CI users repetitive motoric do not
change before and after implantation.
4.1.2
Rhytmic Complexity
Whether CI users would appreciate music with more rhythmic complexity was investi-
gated and results are shown in subsection 3.3.2. Already looking at the average scores in
Figure 3.7, it is clear that NHL tend to prefer the original piece, and statistical analysis
also showed that the original piece received significantly better scores than the rest of
the modifications. This was not the case for CIL, where only the 3/5 condition obtained
significant lower scores. Despite having removed the 1/1 delay condition, CIL did not
turn out to have an equally strong preference towards the original music piece. Looking
at the sum of the highest and second highest scores, no clear preference for CIL is given
by the results. Since no strong preference towards the original piece in comparison to
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Discussion
the control group (NHL), this might be a small indicator that CI users do use level of
rhythmical complexity as a music appreciation factor. Despite the effect not being clear
or significant, the results are still different than NHL, which then does not reject the
hypothesis.
The fact that both groups allocated a lowest ranking to the delay of 3/5 is to be expected
since CIL perceives rhythmic cues as good as NHL, thus able to detect arrhythmical
pieces. That the scores from CI results obtains no clear preference can be due to too
many modification pieces for each task. The delay of ’1/12’ can be argued to be un-
necessary and has cause nothing but a spread in ranking results which then hinder no
clear ”winner” for the modifications. The delay of ’1/12’ is exactly in the middle of the
delays ’0’ and ’2/12’, which then makes it difficult to categorize it either as ’swing’ or ’no
swing’, thus taken the last ’votes’, which could call out the significant difference between
the original and ’swing’ piece. Furthermore, adding one more modification introduces
more uncertainty and unclear results from each test subject, as it means more pieces to
compare between. Small changes as well makes it more difficult to allocate scores and
might disrupt consistent results. Removing ’1/12’, thus only modify versions with the
delays of ’0’, ’2/12’ and 3/5’, could have made the results more clear of what the CI
users would prefer.
4.2
The Use of the Pentatonic scale and
Removing Harmonics
A hypothesis stating that CI users would gain an increased music appreciation in case
of simplified music, which removes the overtones, is rejected in this study. A clear ten-
dency to rate the sine modifications with a minimum score is observed for all pieces. The
ratings has been significantly worse than for those with complex sounds in all five tasks.
A smaller simplification of music, such as removing only few of the highest overtones
from the signal, is still open for debate, and can be investigated further.
It is seen that for NHL, the very least preferred music piece was the 12 Penta + sine
modification, with an agreement of 50% for being the ’Last’ compared to the other sine
modifications, which shares an agreement of 16 and 23%. On the other hand, the results
for CIL, does not show this clear disfavor towards ”12 Penta + sine”, but rather on all
three sine modifications. This shows that CI users’ ratings were more dominated by the
timbre than the notes.
It should be mentioned that the limitation of familiarity could have influenced the ex-
periment. The experimental procedure given for each test subject, stated that the music
would be piano pieces. Thus, removing the harmonics, will remove the signature of
a piano. Despite of CI users having reduced timbre perception, this has still been a
dramatic spectral change, that these modifications are no longer related to something
familiar regarding piano. Thus, familiarity could be the reason for the low scores.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 The Use of the Pentatonic scale and Removing Harmonics
41
The other hypothesis, which suggested that CI recipients would appreciate music based
on the pentatonic scale more than of the chromatic scale, is not supported by any signifi-
cant level in this project. No significant effect or clear preference towards the pentatonic
scale was observed for all five tasks. In contrast to NHL, which significantly rated ’12
Penta’ worse than the ’original’, ’6’ and ’12’, this was not the case for CI users. It is
already known that CIL do not perceive pitch as great as NHL, so this results is not
surprising. However, it is unfortunate that the pentatonic scale did not help increase
their judged musicality, by activating the electrodes in a more orderly way. It should
be noted that the pentatonic scale used was based on center frequencies from users with
the brand of Cochlear. This might explain less consistent results, since five test subjects
were of other brands.
An interesting observation from Figure 3.11, is that the original pieces had the highest
agreement for the ’Best’ score for all three tasks containing happy piano clips, but this
tendency changed for the sad music. Here, the order showed no clear preference towards
the original piece anymore. The sad music pieces are played around 1-2 octave below the
notes in the happy pieces (for the right hand). Thus, the notion of a impoverished pitch
perception especially one octave below middle C (illustrated in Figure 1.2) could explain
the seemingly higher preference towards higher note pitches in sad (low pitch) music.
The preference towards faster music pieces in Vannson et Al., could maybe be due to
lower pitches for slower tempo pieces compared to fast tempi pieces? The composition
of the pieces used in Vannson et. Al, are not known, but should be investigated.
It should be noted that none of the other modifications (’6’, ’12’, or ’12 Penta’) for the
sad pieces showed any significant increase in ratings compared to the original piece. But
this would probably be different if less options for each task were giving. Having too
many options to rate for each task, creates more uncertainty among the ratings since
each test subject have more comparisons to make, thus less likely to ensure that the
orders/scores are correctly given. Furthermore, including too many options in general
makes it more difficult to obtain any significant effect, since the ’votes’ will be divided
and spread out, leaving the obvious choices further away.
Note that a pentatonic scale was only modified with an inclusion of higher pitch (moving
the notes 12 semitones upwards). Perhaps playing the notes in this higher pitch range
have overruled the effect that the pentatonic scale could have on the original piece (at
least for the happy pieces). If a follow up test is made in the future, simply having two
choices such that ’original’ and ’pentatonic scale’ (excluding higher pitch adjustment)
would be optimal. This would ensure that moving the keys upwards does not overrule
the effect that the new scale itself has.
Additionally, for more clear results regarding the pentatonic scale, the removal of har-
monics and pentatonic scale used as parameters should be kept separately and not in
the same task. The pure tones might have had such a dominating factor that other small
changes in listening experiences, which could be the case of using the pentatonic scale,
was not giving much attention for the test subject. The aim of this experiment was
however, also to get a quick overview of the many different parameters, and distinctive
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Discussion
indications from the results, is only aimed to give motivation for further investigation.
Hence, these results show no distinctive indication that a pentatonic scale is preferred
by CI users. This simply mean there is less incentive to work with the pentatonic scale
in the future, since no significant or eye opening results have been proven so far.
4.2.1
Overlap
It can be seen for NHLs, in Figure 3.14 that longer tone duration were allocated most of
the highest scores, and the modifications with staccato had for all four tasks the largest
agreement for lowest score. Notice, that for both happy pieces (G01 and G03), the
longest duration (+30/192) also obtained a high agreement of lowest score with roughly
30% in both cases. This is higher than chance level. This is what to expect for the
happy pieces, since an overwhelming overlap of tones would occur for such long tones.
This would cause smearing and is expected to be rated low.
A high and consistent preference towards longer tones for sad songs is also as expected,
since less tones in each measure are present for sad song, hence less overlap occurs for
sad songs with the same long tone duration. Pedal is also usually used a lot for sad and
slow piano pieces.
No significant effect was seen for three out of the four tasks for CI users. For G01, a
significant effect was observed, showing that the shortest duration of -15/192 was signif-
icant different than the longest tone duration +30/192. Most of the ’Best’ ratings are
around chance level for CI listeners. Thus, these results does not support the hypoth-
esis that staccato (less overlap) would be preferred for CI recipients. Interestingly, the
lowest ranking are in three out of four cases, seen to be mostly located at the staccato
modifications and no obvious disfavoring towards the longest tones are observed. This
is not as expected.
As mentioned before, this test can be limited by familiarity, which means most test sub-
ject would give ratings according to what they associate and are already familiar with
regarding piano music. One way to have tackled the problem of familiarity, would be
to use electronic music with unconventional tones. Piano is a well-known and common
instrument, and hence using this instrument would most likely enhance unfortunate ef-
fect of familiarity. It is also still unclear how the signal processing of these different
tone duration are processed in CIs. A simulation of these duration changes should be
made in-order to gain more knowledge in this perspective. This is outside this master
project’s goal.
4.2.2
Loudness Variations
NHL gave clear results that an absent of loudness variations across the four tasks was
preferred. The 0 dB variation obtained the highest score of all four tasks. A 30 dB
variation was significantly giving the lowest score of them all. Both the highest score
==PAGE:55==
4.2 The Use of the Pentatonic scale and Removing Harmonics
43
and lowest score is seen clearly to be agreed on, much above the chance level (seen in
Figure 3.17). However CI users shows no clear significant effect, and the ranking of the
different loudness variations are also around chance level. However the 30 dB loudness
variations shows to be rated as the lowest for 35%, which is above chance level.
Much effort was put to make sure that every individual CI test subject could perceive
the loudness variation of 0-30 dB. So an explanation for chance level results that is due
to CI users not registering the loudness variations is unlikely. Much effort was also put
to make sure that the levels were comfortable for them.
It should be noted that the loudness variations were made by ourselves and not by
professional musicians on real instruments. Thus, loudness variations might not have
been put in the most ’natural’ optimal places. The loudness variations were also made
very simplistic and with exaggeration. This could also explain the clear dislike towards
the large loudness variations for NHL. If the loudness variations were made too simplistic,
then a preference towards larger loudness variations would be difficult to obtain, even
in the case of CI users heavily relying on loudness cues (Spangmose Pedersen et al.,
2019). In conclusion, the results do not support the stated hypothesis that CI users
would prefer music with loudness variations.
Individual data analysis for each test subject should be made in-order to see if one can
gain more information about these results, and whether patterns are to be detected.
4.2.3
Improvements And Further Work
As whether CI users prefer more rhythmic complex music, turn out to be of no signif-
icant effect. This is much due to the modification choice, where a step in-between the
original and ’swing’ adjustment was given, hindering any significant results to appear.
For experiments like this, that should only identify interesting and distinctive results,
less modification for each task should be used. As more modifications is included per
task, the more uncertainty/randomization is occurring for each test subject’s results,
since more comparisons has to be made. Less modification per task, could have helped
the subject to have lesser pieces to compare between, thus given more consistence results
and a higher chance for significant differences. CIL did not show a significant prefer-
ence towards the original pieces, in contrast to the NHL, thus no rejection of the stated
hypothesis (that CIL rely more on rhythmic complexity) can be made. This should be
investigated further.
Using another instrument, a more uncommon one is also an idea for improvements. This
could have made sure that familiarity would influence the results less. However, psycho-
social factors such as expectations and familiarity also influences the musical experience
in real life situations, and perhaps justifying familiarity to be included in this experi-
ment.
As seen, a simplification of music such as removing all overtones, has significantly reduced
the musicality ratings based on CI users own preferences. Indicating that simplifications
of music will not improve the listening experience for CI users. Lesser degrees of simpli-
fications, such as removing fewer overtones is still unknown whether it will improve or
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Discussion
disrupt CI listeners listening experience, and can still be investigated further. Further-
more should an investigation of whether an effect of CI brand and place of note pitch be
investigated. The first center frequency for the most apical electrode differ from brand
to brand, thus the first registered F0 in a CI differ. Investigating the pentatonic scale, it
could be interesting to see whether test subjects using the brand Cochlear differed from
the rest of the listeners’ responses (since the center frequencies used were of data from
Cochlear).
A CI simulation of the different tone duration should be made in-order to understand
the large spread of preference among CI users and tone duration. Perhaps an individ-
ual analysis of the present data would gain information. Further investigation of the
individual data should be made after this project.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In summary, CI users groups sounded events together, and as expected they did it in
the same manners as NH listeners. The forming of boundaries were followed by rapid
tension drops. This was expected, as tension ratings in Spangmose et. Al are shown to
be of a high degree of similarity between CI and NH listeners. This study shows that
CI users tend to follow the same rules as NHL, when boundaries in music are formed.
The seven hypothesis previously mentioned (see section 1.4) is now stated, and a con-
clusion of whether the data supports or reject following hypothesis is given:
The use of a pentatonic scale would improve the musical experience for CIL (1). This
hypothesis is not supported. No significant effect, nor increase in judged musicality was
observed for pieces using the pentatonic scale. However more individual analysis should
be made, in-order to see if differences in brands occur.
A removal of overtones will improve the musical experience for CIL (2). This hypothesis
is rejected. A complete simplification of the piano pieces by removing the overtones re-
sulted in significantly worse musicality ratings, hence such large simplifications of music
is clearly disfavored by CIL.
Moving notes towards a higher pitch is preferred by CI users (3). This hypothesis is
not validated, however not rejected either. An interesting finding shows that for the sad
music pieces, which are played in lower pitch notes, did show an overall agreement to
rate the higher pitch version with higher scores.
Indifferent of the emotion conveyed of a music piece, CIL would prefer faster tempi (4).
A BPM of 40 was rated significant worse than music containing other tempi (80, 120,
150 and 180 BPM). For NH test subjects, both the BPM of 180 together with 40, was
rated significantly lower than the rest. Investigating each CILs’ score ranking, it turned
out that a BPM of 180 obtained around double as many lowest scores than the BPM
80-150, which was also observed for NHL. Furthermore did the BPM of 120 obtain the
highest score with the largest agreement (30%) among CI listeners. A tendency also
seen for NHL. Thus, the results show the CIL clings towards the already known sponta-
neous and preferred tempo value (120 BPM) that normal hearing listeners have shown
to obtain.
Additional rhythmical complexity (more ’groove’), will improve the musical experience for
CI users (5). No significant effect in this project was observed to prefer more musical
’groove’. However, CI users responses were different than those of NHL. NHL signifi-
cantly judged the original pieces with higher musicality. This could be a small indicator
that CI listeners might rely more on rhythmical complexity as a appreciation factor, at
least more than NHL. This should be investigated further, as limitation of this experi-
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Conclusion
mental setup could be the reason for less conclusive results.
Less overlap between the notes would be preferred for CIL (6). No significant preference
nor tendency to prefer pieces with less overlap between notes are seen. Even in three out
of four cases, a high agreement (35-50%) to rate piano played with staccato (meaning
less overlap) with the lowest scores are observed. This is not as expected, however might
be related to the limitation of familiarity.
Music with larger loudness variations would be preferred for CIL (7). Despite Spang-
mose et. Al showing a ’neutralization’ effect for musical tension ratings when loudness
cues has been removed, no significant preference towards larger loudness variations were
observed. Even a greater agreement (of 35%) to rate the largest loudness variation with
the lowest score occurred. Individual analysis of the responses should be made in respect
to brand and user.
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Experimental Overview
Musical Parameter
Number of Tasks
(and use of piano clips)
Number of Intervals/Sliders
per task
Tempo
4 (G01, G09, T01, T11)
5
Loudness
4 (G01, G02, G06, T11)
4
New Scale+Pure tones
5 (G01, G05, G08, T01, T07)
7
Rhythmical Complexity
4 (G02, G09, G10, T11)
5
Overlap
4 (G01, G03, T06, T08)
6
Table A.1: An overview of the experiment used in this project: The five different parameter
tests (left column). The number of tasks and used piano clips for each test (middle column).
Number of parameter intervals (sliders) per task (right column).
A.2
Alternative Segmentation Plot
Figure A.1: Agreement in percentage of the different section endings approximated to each
measure’s first beat. Blue dotted line is the agreement among CIL, black line is the agreement
among NHL (all non-musicians).
==PAGE:60==
48
A An Appendix
A.3
Pentatonic Scale and Sine Results
The ranking order for NHL for each task is giving in this appendix section, see Figure A.2.
Figure A.2: The ranking scores for each tasks, giving in percentage of agreement among NHL.
’S’ stands for Sine and ’P’ stands for Penta.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
Allen, J. B., Hall, J., & Jeng, P. (1990). Loudness growth in 1/2-octave bands (lgob)—a
procedure for the assessment of loudness. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 88(2), 745–753.
Au, A., Marozeau, J., Innes-Brown, H., et al. (2012). Music for the cochlear implant:
Audience response to six commissioned compositions. In Seminars in hearing (Vol-
ume 33, 04, pages 335–345). Thieme Medical Publishers.
Bille, J. & Ovesen, T. (2014). Cochlear implant after bacterial meningitis. Pediatrics
International, 56(3), 400–405.
Boyd, P. J. (2011). Potential benefits from deeply inserted cochlear implant electrodes.
Ear and hearing, 32(4), 411–427.
Cullington, H. E. & Zeng, F.-G. (2011). Comparison of bimodal and bilateral cochlear
implant users on speech recognition with competing talker, music perception, af-
fective prosody discrimination and talker identification. Ear and hearing, 32(1),
16.
Deliege, I. (1987). Grouping conditions in listening to music: An approach to lerdahl
& jackendoff’s grouping preference rules. Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary
Journal, 4(4), 325–359.
Deutsch, D. (2013). Psychology of music. Elsevier.
Di Nardo, W., Cantore, I., Melillo, P., Cianfrone, F., Scorpecci, A., & Paludetti, G.
(2007). Residual hearing in cochlear implant patients. European Archives of Oto-
rhino-laryngology, 264(8), 855–860.
El Fata, F., James, C. J., Laborde, M.-L., & Fraysse, B. (2009). How much residual
hearing is ‘useful’for music perception with cochlear implants? Audiology and Neu-
rotology, 14(Suppl. 1), 14–21.
Erdem, B. K. & Çiprut, A. (2019). Evaluation of speech, spatial perception and hearing
quality in unilateral, bimodal and bilateral cochlear implant users. Turkish archives
of otorhinolaryngology, 57(3), 149.
Fearn, R. A. (2001). Music and pitch perception of cochlear implant recipients (PhD
thesis, University of New South Wales PhD thesis, School of Physics).
Gantz, B. J., Turner, C., Gfeller, K. E., & Lowder, M. W. (2005). Preservation of hear-
ing in cochlear implant surgery: Advantages of combined electrical and acoustical
speech processing. The Laryngoscope, 115(5), 796–802.
Gelfand, S. A. (2017). Hearing: An introduction to psychological and physiological acous-
tics. CRC Press.
==PAGE:62==
50
Bibliography
Gfeller, K., Knutson, J. F., Woodworth, G., Witt, S., & DeBus, B. (1998). Timbral recog-
nition and appraisal by adult cochlear implant users and normal-hearing adults.
JOURNAL-AMERICAN ACADEMY OF AUDIOLOGY, 9, 1–19.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1996). A perceptual analysis of mozart’s piano sonata k. 282: Segmen-
tation, tension, and musical ideas. Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal,
13(3), 401–432.
Krumhansl, C. L. (2001). Cognitive foundations of musical pitch. Oxford University
Press.
Looi, V., Gfeller, K., & Driscoll, V. D. (2012). Music appreciation and training for
cochlear implant recipients: A review. In Seminars in hearing (Volume 33, 04,
pages 307–334). Thieme Medical Publishers.
Looi, V., McDermott, H., McKay, C., & Hickson, L. (2004). Pitch discrimination and
melody recognition by cochlear implant users. In International congress series
(Volume 1273, pages 197–200). Elsevier.
Looi, V., McDermott, H., McKay, C., & Hickson, L. (2007). Comparisons of quality
ratings for music by cochlear implant and hearing aid users. Ear and hearing,
28(2), 59S–61S.
Looi, V. & Radford, C. J. (2011). A comparison of the speech recognition and pitch rank-
ing abilities of children using a unilateral cochlear implant, bimodal stimulation
or bilateral hearing aids. International journal of pediatric otorhinolaryngology,
75(4), 472–482.
Marozeau, J. & Lamping, W. (2019). Timbre perception with cochlear implants. In
Timbre: Acoustics, perception, and cognition (pages 273–293). Springer.
Marozeau, J., Simon, N., & Innes-Brown, H. (2014). Cochlear implants can talk but
cannot sing in tune. Acoustics Australia, 42(2).
McDermott, H. J. (2004). Music perception with cochlear implants: A review. Trends in
amplification, 8(2), 49–82.
Mirza, S., Douglas, S., Lindsey, P., Hildreth, T., & Hawthorne, M. (2003). Appreciation
of music in adult patients with cochlear implants: A patient questionnaire. Cochlear
Implants International, 4(2), 85–95.
Moelants, D. (2002). Preferred tempo reconsidered. In Proceedings of the 7th interna-
tional conference on music perception and cognition (Volume 2002, pages 1–4).
Sydney.
Moore, B. C. (2012). An introduction to the psychology of hearing. Brill.
Murray, M. P., Drought, A. B., & Kory, R. C. (1964). Walking patterns of normal men.
JBJS, 46(2), 335–360.
Parriott, S. (1969). Music as therapy. American Journal of Nursing, 69(8), 1723–1726.
Prevoteau, C., Chen, S. Y., & Lalwani, A. K. (2018). Music enjoyment with cochlear
implantation. Auris Nasus Larynx, 45(5), 895–902.
Rey, P., Cochard, N., Rizzoli, M., Laborde, M.-L., Tartayre, M., Mondain, M., & Deguine,
O. (2016). Technical aids for speech understanding in cochlear implanted adults
using cell-phones. European annals of otorhinolaryngology, head and neck diseases,
133(4), 253–256.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
51
Spangmose Pedersen, S., Hjortkjær, J., & Marozeau, J. (2019). Perception of musical
tension in cochlear implant listeners. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 13, 987.
Tan, S.-L., Pfordresher, P., & Harré, R. (2017). Psychology of music: From sound to
significance. Routledge.
Thaut, M. H. (2015). Music as therapy in early history. In Progress in brain research
(Volume 217, pages 143–158). Elsevier.
Vallabha, G. (2016 (accessed February 17, 2020)). Rau transformation using matlab.
https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/16139-calculate-rationalized-
arcsine-transform.
van der Schyff, D. & Schiavio, A. (2017). Evolutionary musicology meets embodied
cognition: Biocultural coevolution and the enactive origins of human musicality.
Frontiers in neuroscience, 11, 519.
Vannson, N., Innes-Brown, H., & Marozeau, J. (2015). Dichotic listening can improve
perceived clarity of music in cochlear implant users. Trends in hearing, 19.
Vieillard, S., Peretz, I., Gosselin, N., Khalfa, S., Gagnon, L., & Bouchard, B. (2008).
Happy, sad, scary and peaceful musical excerpts for research on emotions. Cogni-
tion & Emotion, 22(4), 720–752.
==PAGE:64==
