==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Mekanik
Investigation of mechanical,
biotribological and biocompatibility
properties of tough hydrogels
Irene Rivas Palacios, s173595
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Investigation of mechanical, biotribological and biocompatibility properties of tough
hydrogels.
Submission date:
26th of February 2020
ECTS points:
35
Author:
Irene Rivas Palacios, s173595
s173595@student.dtu.dk
Supervisor:
Associate Professor Prof. Seunghwan Lee
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 425, room 022
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
seele@mek.dtu.dk
Co-supervisor:
Postdoc. Rubén del Campo Muga
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 425, room 026
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
rdcm@mek.dtu.dk
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Nils Koppels Allé, building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 1960
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Hydrogels are materials that have received signiﬁcant attention in biomedical applica-
tions due to their ﬂexibility, high water content, and biocompatibility. Tough hydrogels
are supposed to bear a mechanical improvement compared to regular hydrogels. As a
matter of fact, several publications on tough hydrogels have claimed positive results in
terms of mechanical and tribological properties, for applications on load bearing sur-
faces. In this project, the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel synthesised at Prof. Jeong-Yun
Sun’s laboratory, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National
University, Korea, is investigated in relation with its mechanical, tribological proper-
ties and biocompatibility in aqueous environment with an ultimate aim of using it as
a cushioning layer for prosthetic joint implants. It has been found that these proper-
ties, as well as the mechanical integrity of the material have a strong dependence on
hydration conditions and time. The structural deterioration of the hydrogel as well as
the weakening of its mechanical properties were observed in water. It was hypothesised
that this was due to the loss of Ca2+ ions in water, which function as cross-linker for
alginates within the network structure. A high concentration solution of calcium chlo-
ride has been demonstrated to suppress the degradation process to some extent and has
given promising results regarding tribological properties. Even though this approach
does not meet the requirements for biomedical applications per se, this study shows the
mechanism of the deterioration of this particular type of tough hydrogel and thus it is
helpful to ﬁnd a path to a future, biocompatible solution.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
1.1
Project framework: Current materials for prosthetic joint replacement
implants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Aim and Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Background and Literature Review
11
2.1
Tough hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Biomedical applications of tough hydrogels . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Tribology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Biocompatibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Mechanical characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Experimental
23
3.1
Principles of experimental methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Absorbance spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3
Texture Proﬁle Analysis (TPA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.4
Pin-on-Disk (PoD) tribometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Material characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
Hydration experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM)
. . . . .
29
3.2.3
Absorbance spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Mechanical characterisation. TPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Preliminary tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
Secondary Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
PoD tribometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.1
Experiments in PBS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.2
Experiments in PEG 1% and PAA 1% solutions . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.3
Experiment in a calcium chloride 4M solution . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.5
Biocompatibility experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5.1
Direct contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5.2
Indirect contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5.3
Extracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Results and Discussion
45
4.1
Material characterisation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.1
Hydration experiment 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.2
Hydration experiment 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.3
Hydration experiment 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.4
Hydration experiment 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.5
Absorbance spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:5==
4.1.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
TPA Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.1
Preliminary tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.2
Secondary Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3
PoD tribometry results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.3.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.4
Biocompatibility results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4.1
Direct contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4.2
Indirect contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.4.3
Extracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5
Conclusion and Future Work
80
References
82
A TPA additional results
86
B PoD tribometry additional experiments
99
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
A/S
Aktieselskab or stock company
AU
Absorbance Units
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
CoCr
Cobalt Chromium
COF
Coeﬃcient Of Friction
DMEM
Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium
DN
Double-Network
EDX
Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy
ECM
Extracellular Matrix
ESEM
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy
F127
Copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide)-poly(propylene oxide)-poly(ethylene oxide)
FTIR
Fourier-transform Infrared
GIMP
GNU Image Manipulation Program
GNU
GNU is Not Unix
HG
Hydrogel
IL
Ionic Liquid
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
kPa
Kilopascal
kDa
Kilodalton
L929
Normal ﬁbroblast cell line
MC3T3
Normal osteoblast cell line
MEM
Minimum Essential Medium
MPa
Megapascal
MTA
Microculture Tetrazolium Assay
MTT
3 - [4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl]- 2,5 - diphenyltetrazolium bromide
MW
Molecular Weight
N
Newton
NADP
Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate
NADPH
Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate Hydrogen
PAA
Poly (acrylic) acid
PAAm
Polyacrylamide
Pa
Pascal
==PAGE:7==
PAMPS
Poly(2-acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonic acid)
PBS
Phosphate Buﬀered Saline
PDMS
Polydimethylsiloxane
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PMMA
Polymethylmethacrylate
PMPC
Poly(2-methacryloyloxyethyl) phosphorylcholine
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope
SS
Stainless Steel
THR
Total Hip Replacement
TN
Triple-Network
TPA
Texture Proﬁle Analysis
UHMWPE
Ultra-High Molecular Weight Polyethylene
UV
Ultra-Violet
WST-8
[2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H
-tetrazolium, monosodium salt
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
1. Introduction
1
Introduction
1.1
Project framework: Current materials for prosthetic
joint replacement implants
Natural cartilage is present in human joints and is responsible for joint mobility and
lubrication. Its avascular nature makes it diﬃcult for it to self-heal in case of damage,
thus when severely damaged, a total joint replacement might be necessary.
When synthetic materials are considered for substitution of natural materials in human
joints, they are limited to those that can withstand cyclic loadings. Important mechan-
ical properties of these materials include yield stress, creep resistance, and wear rate
[1]. These properties have to be as close as possible to those of natural tissues. In Table
1, the most common synthetic biomaterials for joint replacement are summarised.
Metals
Polymers
Ceramics
Titanium alloys
Polymethylmethacrylate
(PMMA)
Alumina (Al2O3)
Cobalt Chromium
(CoCr) alloys
Ultra-high molecular weight
polyethylene (UHMWPE)
Zirconia (ZrO2)
Stainless Steel
Table 1: Most common synthetic biomaterials used in joint replacements [1].
Metallic materials are used for joint replacement due to their fatigue resistance and
especially to their wear resistance.
However, their stiﬀness, rigidity, and strength
exceed those of the human tissue. Among them, titanium alloys are the lightest and
they have the best corrosion resistance. On the other hand, they are softer than cobalt
chromium (CoCr) alloys and have poorer wear and frictional properties. Thus, they
are currently used in parts that interface with bone tissue only, like plates or screws.
Cobalt chromium alloys are the strongest and the hardest materials used in implants.
In particular, due to its high wear resistance, they are used as load bearing surfaces,
such as the femoral head in artiﬁcial hip joint implants.
Ceramics have a superior wear resistance when compared to metal and polymer bearing
surfaces. Also, ceramic surfaces are hydrophilic, which reduces friction. Nonetheless,
ceramics are intrinsically brittle and diﬃcult to manufacture.
Among polymers, polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) is used for ﬁxation, as an interface
between an implant component and the bone tissue. This application requires that the
material has the appropriate mechanical properties so that it can be molded into shape
and cured in vivo. This is known as bone cementing.
7
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
1. Introduction
Ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) is widely used for articulating
bearing surfaces. It has a low coeﬃcient of friction (COF) and low wear rates. How-
ever, UHMWPE presents a problem when pairing with metals. Taking a Total Hip
Replacement (THR) as an example of load bearing joint (see Figure 1), if the plastic
liner in the acetabular cup is made of UHMWPE and the femoral head is made of
metal or ceramic, it will cause wear on the polymer surface and wear particles will be
produced. This wear debris from UHMWPE has been widely demonstrated to lead to
local inﬂammatory response generating osteolysis (bone loss) and aseptic loosening [2].
Figure 1: Total Hip Replacement components [3].
UHMWPE-metal pairing has been widely used in hip implants. However, as mentioned
above, there is a concern about the wear debris produced by the contact of UHMWPE
and metallic or ceramic materials in the acetabular head, and its eﬀect on the sur-
rounding tissue. In addition, metal-metal bearing couples have been also used in THR.
This pairing produces lower wear rates compared to metal-polymer. However, metallic
materials create metallic wear particles, which have been demonstrated to be toxic
for human tissue and as UHMWPE wear particles, they can also elicit inﬂammation [2].
The production of wear debris and the consequent human tissue reaction to such
debris is the biggest issue that aﬀects the longevity of total joint replacements. It has
a negative eﬀect on long-term performance of joint replacement prostheses [4].
Therefore, a new conﬁguration of materials for joint replacement has to be designed.
In the case of the hip joint, articular cartilage surrounds the femoral head. A relevant
characteristic of natural cartilage under loading is that it has two diﬀerent mechanisms
of lubrication: boundary and biphasic lubrication. Given the important role of the
cartilage in load bearing applications, a logical step would be to place a layer around
the interior of the acetabular cup that mimics the function of the cartilage and its dual
mechanism of lubrication.
Many synthetic elastomeric materials have been studied
to be candidates for this compliant layer. Buggy et al. [5] investigated thin layers of
elastomer in the acetabular cup that displayed low coeﬃcients of friction but did not
involve a dual mechanism as the natural cartilage.
8
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
1. Introduction
Following this line of reasoning, this project proposes tough hydrogels as materials
for the compliant layer in prosthetic joint implants.
Due to their biocompatibility,
their double lubrication mechanism similar to that of the natural cartilage and their
apparently good mechanical properties, tough hydrogels are good candidates for this
application.
9
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
1. Introduction
1.2
Aim and Purpose
This project investigates the mechanical, biotribological and biocompatibility prop-
erties of a so-called tough hydrogel, with the potential of using it as a cushioning
layer to dampen the external loads in prosthetics joint implants. The tough hydrogel
subject of this project is composed of a double network of polyacrylamide (PAAm)
(synthetic polymer) and alginate (natural polymer).
This material was synthesised
at Prof.
Jeong-Yun Sun’s Laboratory, Department of Materials Science and Engi-
neering, Seoul National University, Korea [6] and was delivered to us as a collaboration.
In general, tough hydrogels are expected to bear an improvement compared to regular
hydrogels when it comes to mechanical behaviour.
Mechanical properties such as
elastic modulus, fracture toughness and fracture energy in a dry state and in ambient
conditions are the focus of the research by Prof. Sun’s group [6]. However, little is
known about their mechanical properties in aqueous environment to date.
Given that an ultimate goal of the application of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel from
our perspective is in biological ﬂuids, for instance, synovial ﬂuid, it is necessary to
investigate the material’s mechanical properties in varying states of hydration. Since
hydrogels are extremely hydrophilic, they absorb water into their structure and their
mechanical properties are likely to be altered signiﬁcantly.
Also relevant for the
intended application is to investigate the biocompatibility of the though hydrogel.
In addition, when considering the application of a liner for the bearings of joint replace-
ment implants, it is of great importance to comprehend the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel
behaviour regarding friction, lubrication and wear. In other words, it is necessary to
investigate its tribological properties.
10
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
2
Background and Literature Review
2.1
Tough hydrogels
Hydrogels are materials constituted by a three-dimensional network of hydrophilic
polymers. For a material to be a hydrogel, its water content should be at least 10%
of its weight.
Hydrogels can retain water while maintaining their structure due to
cross-linking of individual polymer chains [7]. Cross-linking, either physical or chemi-
cal, facilitates insolubility in water and provides mechanical strength to the material [6].
Properties like their ﬂexibility and conductivity make hydrogels ideal to be used in
ﬁelds like optics or soft electronics.
They are used as electro-sensors, transducers
or capacitors [7]. In addition, due to their biocompatibility, high water content and
ﬂexibility, very similar to natural tissues, hydrogels are also widely used in biomedical
applications. These applications include contact lenses [8], drug delivery devices [9],
scaﬀolds in tissue engineering [10], or bio-sensors [11].
One of the limitations of these materials is their low mechanical properties. For exam-
ple, their fracture toughness is of about 10 J/m2 as compared to 1000 J/m2 for natural
cartilage [6]. This aspect makes them unfeasible to use as load-bearing parts. How-
ever, it has been shown that mechanical properties can be improved in several ways [10].
One strategy to toughen hydrogels reviewed by Sun et al. is the dual cross-link method.
In this approach, tough hydrogels are synthesised from polymers forming both ionically
and covalently cross-linked networks, creating what is called a double-network (DN)
hydrogel. The example in Figure 2 shows three diﬀerent chain structures from three
diﬀerent hydrogels: (a) an ionic cross-linked alginate hydrogel, (b) a covalently cross-
linked polyacrylamide hydrogel and (c) a combination of both with covalent cross-links
between them.
Figure 2: a) Alginate ionic cross-links (red). b) Polyacrylamide covalent cross-links
(green). c) DN hydrogel alginate and polyacrylamide, covalent cross-links (blue) [6].
This combination introduces energy-dissipating mechanisms. In a DN hydrogel with
ionic and covalent bonds, when tension is applied, the ionic cross-links break ﬁrst and
dissipate energy. These bonds can re-form after a time interval and could withstand
11
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
more cycles of loading. Therefore, the toughness of the material is increased compared
to a single network hydrogel [6].
The schematics shown in Figure 2 correspond to the study carried out by Sun et al.
who, apart from proposing this type of hydrogel toughening, synthesised the DN tough
hydrogel by mixing the ionically cross-linked alginate and the covalently cross-linked
polyacrylamide (PAAm-Alginate).
The DN hydrogel was submitted to tensile load
cycles in a tensile test machine in order to obtain its elastic modulus, fracture toughness,
fracture energy, and presence of hysteresis. The results were compared to those of single-
network hydrogels, alginate and polyacrylamide separately. These tests were carried out
in air and at room temperature. The results showed that the DN hydrogel had a higher
elastic modulus compared to single-network hydrogels. An example of the tensile test
experiment carried out and the curves stress-stretch obtained are shown in Figure 3.
In the study they used λ as a measure of the stretch, being λ=1 the distance between
clamps when the hydrogel was not stretch.
Figure 3: Example of tensile test schematics and resulted stress vs. stretch curve in
Sun et al. study [6].
This particular tough hydrogel composed of ionically cross-linked alginate and cova-
lently cross-linked polyacrylamide is the subject of this project.
12
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
2.1.1
Biomedical applications of tough hydrogels
As mentioned in the previous section, hydrogels in general are broadly used in
biomedicine.
In particular, tough hydrogels are found in several biomedical appli-
cations.
This section explains several of these applications which are of particular
interest for this project.
Tissue engineering is one of those applications. It combines cells, scaﬀold, and growth
factors to create organs or artiﬁcial tissues.
Hydrogels resemble the extracellular
matrix (ECM) in biological tissues [10]. Therefore, tough hydrogels have been used
as scaﬀolds that provide mechanical support for the cells. When designing a material
for a scaﬀold, some requirements have to be met. One of them is that they have to
be biocompatible, which means that materials should not produce adverse eﬀects in
contact with cells.
Another one is that scaﬀolds need to include suitable bulk and
surface properties, for cell-anchorage purposes.
Cells have to be able to migrate,
proliferate and diﬀerentiate in the scaﬀold for tissue regeneration to take place. Their
degradability and processability are also important factors [1].
Another application where tough hydrogels can be found is in tissue adhesives. Tissue
adhesives are used in suture-less wound closure. Li et al. [12] in their work on tough
adhesives for wet surfaces, studied a PAAm-Alginate hydrogel. This hydrogel could
adhere to the natural tissue via physical penetration of polymer chains. It exhibited
properties of strong adhesion and large deformability.
Lastly, tribological properties of tough hydrogels render these materials suitable for
recreating human body joints.
Since human joints, in particular cartilage, have a
gel-like structure and have a coeﬃcient of friction of 10−3, gel materials are perfect
candidates for designing low frictional artiﬁcial joints. However, many of the current
materials do not replicate both the biphasic and boundary lubrication of natural
cartilage. In their work, Milner et al. [13] introduced into a DN hydrogel of Poly(2-
acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS) and polyacrylamide (PAAm), a
third network of poly(2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine) (PMPC) creating a
triple-network (TN) hydrogel in order to achieve the double-mechanism lubrication
mentioned above.
13
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
Figure 4: Coeﬃcient of friction for the
DN and PMPC TN hydrogels at diﬀer-
ent sliding speeds [13].
The results conﬁrmed that their
tough hydrogel experienced a re-
duction in friction and an increase
in yield stress.
Their results are
summarised in Figure 4, where
each point is the average COF for
6 independently synthesised sam-
ples, and the error bars represent
standard deviations.
Statistical
analysis was performed for each
sample at a given speed, where
*means p < 0.05, **means p <
0.01, ***means p < 0.001, and
any points without stars are p >
.05 [13].
In other studies on the application of tough hydrogels as replacement joint implants,
their manufacturability was the motivation of the experiments. Arafune et al. [14]
claimed that industrial utilisation of hydrogels appears to be complicated since water
evaporates easily and gels de-swell and change properties. Thus, they investigated the
substitution of water with an ionic liquid (IL) in a DN hydrogel (PAMPS and PAAm)
and its eﬀect on tribological and mechanical properties. One of the outcomes of the
study was that the coeﬃcient of friction increased after the substitution of water (see
Figure 5). The coeﬃcient of friction of the DN hydrogel was 0.01-0.02 while for the
IL-substituted hydrogel was 0.04-0.05. This increase was due to the increase in polymer
adhesion on the glass surface. Polymer adhesion increased due to the substitution of
water with the IL.
Figure 5: Sliding speed dependence of the coeﬃcient of friction for DN hydrogel (black)
and for IL-substituted hydrogel gel (red) under an applied load of 0.98 N using a glass
ball as counterface [14].
14
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
Finally, Arjmandi et al. [15] in their work, investigated the tribological properties of
a PAAm-Alginate DN hydrogel as potential candidate for cartilage replacement. They
studied the friction and wear performance of the hydrogel with diﬀerent parameters such
as load, speed, and lubrication. This experiment was conducted under reciprocating
sliding motion. The average COF of the hydrogel under bovine serum lubrication was
0.03, which is fairly close to native cartilage tissue. In Figure 6, the results of their
study are shown. Additionally, it was found that the applied load and lubrication had
a greater impact in the wear rate that the speed.
Figure 6: (a) Variation in mass loss percentage of PAAm-Alginate hydrogel with respect
to applied pressure in dry and lubricated conditions. (b) Comparison between average
COF under various loads and lubrication conditions [15].
Based on these studies, it can be said that tough hydrogels bear great potential in the
biomedical ﬁeld and especially in load bearing applications. However, in these studies,
there was neither investigation nor description of the behaviour of the hydrogel as
inﬂuenced by lubrication or hydration. They do not present a hydration time control
during tribological experiments and thus further investigation in this regard needs to
be carried out.
15
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
2.2
Tribology
Tribology is the study of the science and engineering of interacting surfaces in relative
motion and includes the study and application of the principles of friction, lubrication
and wear [16].
Friction is a force deﬁned as the resistance that a body confronts when in relative
motion with another body. According to Amontons’ ﬁrst law, the force of friction is
linearly proportional to the applied load. This proportional relation is the coeﬃcient
of friction [17]. Wear is deﬁned as the progressive loss of material from the surface of a
body as a result of the relative motion against another body [17]. Wear is related to the
decreased function of a component and the adverse eﬀects of wear particles. Wear can
be divided into ﬁve types depending on the particle’s formation mechanism: adhesive,
abrasive, fatigue, corrosive and erosive. Lubrication is the process or technique that
decreases frictional force and wear between the two surfaces in contact. A lubricant
introduces a layer of material between the bodies reducing the total contact surface
[18]. An important property of lubricants is their viscosity, which is a measure of the
resistance to ﬂow of a ﬂuid which is being deformed by either shear stress or tensile
stress [19].
There are four regimes of lubrication considered in engineering: boundary lubrica-
tion, mixed lubrication, elasto-hydrodynamic lubrication, and hydrodynamic lubrica-
tion. The frictional properties of the contact surfaces when lubrication occurs depend
on the applied load, the sliding velocity of the opposing surfaces, and the dynamic vis-
cosity of the lubricant. The Stribeck curve shown in Figure 7 describes the variation in
friction between two liquid-lubricated surfaces as a function of a dimensionless param-
eter, the so-called Hersey number, µN/P where µ(N · s · m−2) is the dynamic viscosity,
N(m/s) the sliding velocity and P(N/m) is the applied load.
Figure 7: Stribeck curve describing lubrication regimes [20].
16
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
• Boundary lubrication: Direct contact occurs between the asperities of the oppos-
ing surfaces and the load is supported by them. The thickness of a boundary
lubricant layer between surfaces is not enough to keep them separated, it is less
than surface roughness. Forces of friction are high in this regime and may cause
plastic deformation in the surfaces [19].
• Mixed lubrication: Transition regime where the load is supported both by the liq-
uid lubricant and the asperities in the opposing surfaces. The ﬂuid ﬁlm thickness
is slightly higher than the surface roughness [19].
• Elasto-hydrodynamic lubrication: There is high local pressure in the ﬂuid ﬁlm
that creates an elastic deformation in the opposing surfaces.
Thus, the load
bearing area increases and the viscous resistance of the lubricant becomes capable
of supporting the load [19].
• Hydrodynamic lubrication or ﬂuid-ﬁlm lubrication: The ﬂuid ﬁlm thickness is
suﬃcient to separate the opposing surfaces. The load is supported by the pressure
within the ﬂuid. This regime usually occurs at high speeds and low loads [17].
These lubrication regimes are considered in engineering systems. However, natural load
bearing systems are rather diﬀerent. The lubrication mechanism of natural synovial
joints is a combination of several modes, and it shares some with engineering systems.
But other mechanism examples are weeping lubrication, boosted lubrication or biphasic
lubrication [19]. In particular, natural cartilage under load creates both boundary and
biphasic lubrication. Boundary lubricants form molecules on the surface of the cartilage
and create a protective layer. Biphasic lubrication is characterised by the load-induced
pressurisation of the interstitial ﬂuid present in joints that helps support this load [13].
Thus, the load is shared between solid and liquid (synovial ﬂuid) phases of a cartilage.
17
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
2.3
Biocompatibility
A deﬁnition of biocompatibility, according to Williams [21] is "Biocompatibillity is
the ability of a material to perform with an appropriate host response in a speciﬁc
application". The biocompatibility of a material can be tested using in vivo or in vitro
assays. The consequences of the substances produced by the material in contact with
living cells are the general goal of in vitro biocompatibility experiments. Speciﬁcally,
whether these substances or chemicals create a negative response in the cells or damage
cellular structures.
The products secreted by a material that can be potentially
harmful to cells are called toxicants.
Biological evaluation of medical devices is brought together under ISO 10993 standard.
It describes diﬀerent methodologies for in vitro biocompatibility assays. In the present
work, the relevant methodology is In Vitro tests for Cytotoxcity, ISO 10993-5. Cell
cytotoxicity refers to the ability of certain chemicals to destroy living cells. It is the
property that some materials have of being toxic to cells. It can be caused by chemical
stimuli, exposure to other cells, or physical/environmental conditions [22]. Examples of
perturbations that take place when cells are exposed to toxicants are: alteration of lo-
cal pH, disturb cell membrane, tissue inﬂammation, necrosis and apoptosis (cell death).
ISO 10993-5 groups the tests whether they are qualitative or quantitative. The rele-
vant assay in this project is Microculture Tetrazolium Assay (MTA), which lays in the
quantitative group.
Figure 8: Chemical reaction of metabolism of MTT to a formazan salt by viable cells.
[23].
MTA
is
a
colorimetric
assay
that
uses
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl]-2,5-
diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) compound.
Upon exposure to L929 (mouse
ﬁbroblasts) cells, MTT is reduced enzymatically or through reaction with nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+/NADPH) (reaction shown in Figure 8). A
bright blue formazan product forms with intensity proportional to the number of viable
cells present. The presence of this product is determined by monitoring absorbance in
the range of 500-600 nm.
A
similar
assay
uses
[2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-
disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, monosodium salt (WST-8) instead of MTT. WST-8 is
18
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
reduced by NADPH to produce a formazan product. The reaction is shown in Figure
9.
Figure 9: Chemical reaction of metabolism of WST-8 to a formazan salt by viable cells.
[24].
This product can be determined by monitoring absorbance in the range 430–550 nm.
The absorbance of formazan is proportional to the NADPH concentration [24]. An
example of a WST-8 assay experiment is shown in Figure 10. A 96-well plate is used,
where the number of living cells increases towards the right side as the increased inten-
sity of the orange colour shows.
Figure 10: Schematic of a WST-8 assay plate [24].
In short, what is measured with these assays is the metabolic activity of the cells, i.e.
the biochemical reactions occurring within them that produce or consume energy.
19
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
2.4
Mechanical characterisation
In material science, mechanical characterisation involves processes by which the prop-
erties of a certain material are tested and deﬁned. The purpose is to understand the
material structure and how it behaves when used in technological applications. Mechan-
ical properties are the ones related to load bearing, and they are crucial for materials
processing and design. The most commonly studied properties are listed and explained
hereafter.
• Elasticity: An object’s ability to recover its original shape when an applied load
ceases. This property depends partly on the geometry of the object and partly on
an intrinsic property of its material called Elastic modulus or Young’s modulus,
E (Pa). In other words, the Young’s modulus measures how stiﬀa material is.
Stiﬀness is deﬁned as the resistance to deformation that an object oﬀers when
load is applied.
• Strength: An object’s ability to withstand load before permanent deformation.
The material intrinsic property that deﬁnes an object’s strength is called Yield
Strength, σy (Pa). Materials with high yield strength are hard to deform perma-
nently even though their stiﬀness (E) is low.
• Toughness: The resistance of a material to the propagation of a crack.
The
intrinsic property of the material this time is Fracture Toughness, K1c(Pa·m1/2).
A material with low fracture toughness would be called brittle.
Most engineering objects carry loads that create stress. Stress is deﬁned by the force
per unit area of a material. Thus, stress is deﬁned by Equation 1:
σ = F
A
(1)
where:
σ = stress in MPa.
F = the force applied in Newtons (N).
A = the surface area in mm2.
The way materials react to this stress depends on their intrinsic properties. The re-
sponse to an applied stress is called strain, and it is a measurement of how much the
material stretches or compresses depending on the nature of the stress. For a tensile
stress, strain is deﬁned by Equation 2.
ε = δL
L0
(2)
where:
20
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
ε = strain is dimensionless.
δL = extension in mm.
L0 = initial length in mm.
Mechanical properties can be obtained by the relationship between stress and strain.
This is usually acquired by submitting a material to a tension or compression test. A
steadily increasing tensile or compression force is applied to a sample and the deﬂection
is measured [25]. Thus, a stress vs. strain curve is obtained. These curves are speciﬁc
for each material, some examples are shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Stress vs. strain curves for ceramics, metals, and polymers [4].
Usually, two diﬀerent behaviours can be distinguished in stress-strain curves:
the
elastic and the plastic. In the elastic region the material recovers its original shape
when load is removed, the relationship between stress and strain is linear and the
Young’s Modulus, E can be obtained calculating the slope of the curve.
The limit
between elastic and plastic behaviour is the yield strength, σy. Figure 11 also shows
the diﬀerence in yield strength between a metal (300 MPa) and a polymer (50 MPa).
Mechanical properties of hydrogels
Due to its large content of water, hydrogels have commonly poor mechanical properties.
It is particularly the case when compared with engineering materials.
Since their
behaviour is not that of a solid nor a liquid material, but something in between, it is a
challenge to mechanically characterise hydrogels.
Hydrogels are composed of hydrophilic polymer networks and their mechanical proper-
ties are dependent on the nature of these networks and their bonds or cross-links. Bond
strength under applied mechanical loading will diﬀerentiate one material from another.
21
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
2. Background and Literature Review
Figure 12: (a) Single-network covalently bonded gel. (b) Double-network covalently
bonded gel and (c) Network with divalent ions forming local bridges between adjacent
chains [26].
Depending on the type of cross-links, hydrogels are often classiﬁed in physical and
chemical. Chemical hydrogels consist of polymer networks that are covalently cross-
linked.
Physical hydrogels are composed of networks that are cross-linked via any
other type of bond that is not covalent (ionic, dipole-dipole...). As an example, Figure
12 shows (a) a single-network and (b) a double-network polymer gels with covalent
cross-links at intersection points of the polymer chains. Figure 12 (c) shows a network
with divalent ions forming bridges between polymer chains.
As explained in Section 2.1, there are strategies to toughen hydrogels, one of which
involves mixing these two types of cross-linking, creating what is called a double-
network (DN) hydrogel. As the research carried out by Sun et al. [6] demonstrated, by
combining networks that are covalently cross-linked with networks that are ionically
cross-linked an energy-dissipating mechanism is introduced. When tension is applied
to a DN hydrogel, the ionic cross-links break ﬁrst and dissipate energy, but the covalent
bonds remain. The ionic bonds can re-form after a time interval and hydrogel could
withstand more cycles of loading.
Furthermore, equally relevant for the mechanical behaviour of hydrogels is their
material microstructure. Hydrogels are porous materials in which air is replaced by
water.
Therefore, the pore size and the hydration behaviour will aﬀect mechanical
properties. Due to their ﬂexibility and high water content, conventional techniques like
tensile test or compression test are sometimes not suitable for characterising hydrogels
and so other techniques are required. In this project, a technique called Texture Proﬁle
Analysis (TPA) is chosen to study the mechanical properties of the PAAm-Alginate
hydrogel and will be explained in the following section.
22
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3
Experimental
3.1
Principles of experimental methods
In the present section, the theoretical principles of the technologies used for the exper-
iments in this project and their relevance for the same are explained.
3.1.1
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
As mentioned in the previous section, the microstructure of a hydrogel is of importance
for its mechanical properties, therefore, in order to investigate the microstructure of
the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel subject of this project, a type of Scanning Electron Mi-
croscopy (SEM) was used. SEM is a technique that inspects microscopic structure by
scanning surfaces of materials with electron beams. It creates images by shooting an
electron beam that scans over the surface area of a specimen [27]. SEM has the possi-
bility to scan at high magniﬁcation, up to 1,000,000x and a resolution down to 1 nm.
It also has a long working distance, which allows for the creation of three-dimensional
images. A schematic of an SEM instrument is shown in Figure 13, where its main parts
are designated.
Figure 13: An example of SEM schematic [28].
The drawbacks of using an SEM are the requirement of a vacuum environment
(necessary to control the electron beam) to perform the measurements and that can
only scan conductive materials, therefore non-conductive specimens usually need a
metallic coating.
23
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
In this project, the necessity of keeping the hydrogel in hydrated conditions makes con-
ventional SEM unsuitable for its characterisation. Thus, an Environmental Scanning
Electron Microscope (ESEM) is proposed. The ESEM is diﬀerent from the conven-
tional SEM instrument in that a pumping system maintains a pressure of gas, which is
typically water, in the specimen chamber. Therefore, it is possible to maintain samples
at high relative humidity [29]. Also, ESEM employs less voltage than a regular SEM
so possible damage in the cross-linked network of the hydrogel can be avoided.
3.1.2
Absorbance spectroscopy
Absorbance spectroscopy is based on the absorption of light by solutions at diﬀerent
wavelengths. This technique is used in this project to study the presence of particles
in solution when solutions have been in contact with the hydrogel.
Figure 14: Absorbance schematics.
Absorbance spectroscopy relies on
the
absorption
characteristics
of
materials to identify and quantify
speciﬁc substances. The instrument
used for this technique is called
spectrometer and it is based on
passing a generated beam of light
at a sample and detecting the in-
tensity of the radiation that goes
through it. The energy that is then transmitted is used to calculate the absorption [30].
When measuring absorbance, the light that enters the sample will have an intensity (I0)
and the light that leaves the sample will have a diﬀerent, lower intensity (I) (see Figure
14). Given both intensities, absorbance (A) can be calculated according to Equation 3.
A = log10
I0
I
(3)
where:
A = Absorbance in Absorbance Units (AU).
I0 = Intensity of light entering the sample in Js−1m2.
I = Intensity of light leaving the sample in Js−1m2.
3.1.3
Texture Proﬁle Analysis (TPA)
In this project, the necessity of measuring the mechanical properties of the hydrogel
in an aqueous environment limits the use of many conventional techniques. Texture
Proﬁle Analysis (TPA) is a fast and reproducible method that can be carried out in
this particular condition.
It is a technique originally designed to test the physical
24
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
and mechanical properties of food, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals. It consists of a
two-cycle compression test that aims to simulate consecutive chews [31]. Properties
like hardness, spreadability, adhesiveness or tensile strength can be measured.
The instrument used in this technique is called texture analyser, and the one used
in this project is shown in Figure 15 (a). There are many parameters that deﬁne a
texture analyser’s functionality. Basically, its input parameters are force applied, probe
type and size, test speed, distance of compression or percentage of strain. The output
parameters are explained down below. In Figure 15 (b), an example of a force vs.
time curve from a texture analysis is shown. The two compression cycles made by the
machine are represented by the positive peaks.
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: (a) Texture analyser from Stable Micro Systems.
(b) Texture analyser
output plot [32].
The output parameters that can be obtained and that are shown in the graph in Figure
15 (b) are, among others:
• Hardness: The maximum force in the ﬁrst cycle, F2 in N.
• Cohesiveness: The area under the second cycle divided by area under the ﬁrst
one, A2/A1, measured in J.
• Adhesiveness: The area under the negative curve, A3 in J. If the material is too
stiﬀthis area will be zero.
25
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.1.4
Pin-on-Disk (PoD) tribometry
Due to the intended application of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel as a liner for the bear-
ings of joint replacement implants, its tribological properties need to be investigated.
To do so, an instrument called tribometer is used. The functioning of tribometers is
based on measuring the normal force or weight of an object and the force resisting
relative tangential motion between it and a counterface. In PoD type of tribometer is
used and it is shown in Figure 16.
Figure 16:
Pin-on-Disk tribometer
(Anton Paar, Switzerland) [33].
In general,
tribometers consist of
a stationary ﬂat or spherical pin
attached
to
a
stiﬀ
elastic
arm.
The pin is weighted down onto a
mobile disc under a known weight.
The disc is made of the material
investigated and it is rotated or
moved in a linear mode at a known
speed.
The elastic arm ensures
a nearly ﬁxed contact point and
a
stable
position
in
the
friction
track
formed
by
the
pin
sliding
on the disc.
The kinetic friction
coeﬃcient is determined during the
test
by
measuring
the
deﬂection
of
the
elastic
arm
or
measur-
ing the friction force by friction
force sensors placed in the arm.
[33].
26
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.2
Material characterisation
This section schematically describes the experiments that were executed in order to
understand the structure of the PAA-Alginate hydrogel and its behaviour regarding
hydration. Further explanation about their motivation and results will follow in Sec-
tion 4.1. Hydration experiments, ESEM, and absorbance spectroscopy experiments are
explained hereafter.
3.2.1
Hydration experiments
The cross-linked hydrophilic polymer chains that form the tridimensional network of
the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel allow it to absorb big amounts of water in its cavities,
and as a consequence, the structure swells. Thus, to have quantitative and qualitative
data of this behaviour, various hydration experiments were executed.
1. Hydration experiment 1: Hydration in distilled water. Samples of hydrogel of
diﬀerent sizes are submerged in distilled water for a long period of time and their
weight and dimension are tracked.
a. Materials
Three samples of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel were cut from the original batch
"As received". It was decided to cut the samples in three diﬀerent sizes to see
how the surface area of the hydrogel in contact with water aﬀected during the
absorption. The sizes of the samples were from the smallest to the biggest: 5
mm x 5 mm x 5 mm, 20 mm x 20 mm x 5 mm, and 40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm;
samples denominated S, M and L respectively.
b. Methods
The three samples were introduced in a container that was ﬁlled with enough
distilled water to cover them. The experiment was designed with the following
measuring time points: before samples were introduced in the container and 3,
6, 24, 48, 96, 168, 240 and 336 hours after immersion in distilled water. At the
beginning of the experiment the frequency of the measurements was higher to
record the ﬁrst changes and when the samples showed stability, the frequency
decreased. For quantitative analysis, the samples were taken out of the container
at each time of measure, they were placed in a plate, dried from external water
with pressurized nitrogen ﬂow, weighted in an electronic scale and measured
with a ruler. For qualitative analysis, the samples were also taken out of the
container, placed in a plate and pictures were taken at diﬀerent times.
2. Hydration experiment 2:
Dehydration.
A sample was hydrated for a long
period of time in distilled water. After this period, the water was removed, and
27
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
the sample was observed in process of dehydration. Qualitative data was collected.
a. Materials
A piece of the original batch "As received" of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel was
taken. The size of the sample was 80 mm x 80 mm x 5 mm.
b. Methods
The sample was introduced in a container that was ﬁlled with enough distilled
water to cover it. It was left to hydration for two months. After that, the water
was removed, and the container was left open for two weeks. Pictures were taken
in these two moments of time, after water was removed and after two weeks of
dehydration.
3. Hydration experiment 3:
Hydration in calcium chloride solutions.
Samples
were hydrated in diﬀerent concentrations of calcium chloride solution and their
swelling behaviour over time was followed. Alginate is one of the networks that
constitute the hydrogel, its polymeric chains are ionically cross-linked by calcium
ions and a calcium chloride solution provides the hydrogel with a continuous
source of calcium ions. Calcium chloride solutions with diﬀerent concentrations
were tested to ﬁnd the one that had the lowest swelling eﬀect in the hydrogel
compared to that of water. Qualitative data was collected.
a. Materials
Six samples of hydrogel were cut from the original batch "As received". They
were cut into cubic pieces of 10 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm.
b. Methods
The samples were introduced into six diﬀerent containers and ﬁlled with solutions
of calcium chloride 1M, 2M, 3M, 4M, 5M, and distilled water.
Samples were
totally submerged in solutions.
Pictures were collected at the following time
points: right after submerging in solution, and after 3, 24 and 96 hours.
4. Hydration experiment 4: Re-hydration in a calcium chloride 4M solution of a
dehydrated sample from Hydration experiment 2. Qualitative data of a sample
of hydrogel that was ﬁrst hydrated, then dehydrated and then re-hydrated in
calcium chloride 4M solution was collected.
a. Materials
The piece of the original batch "As received" of the hydrogel that was taken for
Hydration experiment 2 was the specimen for this experiment. After Hydration
28
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
experiment 2 when it was already dehydrated, it was cut in a piece of 40 mm
x 30 mm. When the hydrogel experienced dehydration, it became a thin layer
with a thickness of less than 1 mm.
b. Methods
After hydration-dehydration cycles, the sample was cut and introduced in a con-
tainer with an aqueous solution of calcium chloride 4M. The sample was left to
hydrate for three days. Pictures were collected in the following time points: before
soaking in solution, after 24 hours in solution and after 96 hours in solution.
3.2.2
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM)
To analyse the microstructure of a hydrated sample of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel,
the ESEM technique was chosen. This particular kind of SEM is used for this project
because it employs less voltage than a conventional SEM, so possible damage in the
cross-linked network of the hydrogel can be avoided. Moreover, it allows keeping the
specimens in relative humidity so the hydrogel can be tested in a hydrated state.
The images were taken in collaboration with DTU Nano-Lab with associate professor
Mériem Er-Raﬁk, research technician Marie Karen Tracy Hong Lin and laboratory
technician Berit Wenzell.
a. Materials
A sample of the hydrogel was ﬁrst hydrated for two months and then cut into a cubic
piece of about 2 mm x 3 mm x 5 mm.
b. Methods
The sample was analysed with a beam voltage of 15 kV and a pressure of 300 Pa. The
image was analysed afterwards with the image edition software GIMP.
3.2.3
Absorbance spectroscopy
After hydration experiments, it is believed that the material weakens and degrades over
time of exposure to water. Therefore, this technique was used to study and conﬁrm
the presence of particles in solution before and after contact with the hydrogel. The
organic compounds have characteristic absorbances in the UV range related to internal
energy transitions and the intensity of the absorbance is related to the concentration
of them in solution.
Therefore, if any particles of the hydrogel were released upon
hydration, diﬀerences in absorbance would be spotted when comparing solutions before
and after contact with the hydrogel.
a. Materials
Two hydrogel samples were cut from the original batch "As received" into cubic pieces
of about 10 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm. In order to conﬁrm the presence of some particles in
solution, two solutions were prepared for the measurement: Distilled water and calcium
29
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
chloride 4M in distilled water. Therefore, a total of four specimens are prepared for the
experiment:
• Distilled water.
• Distilled water after 7 days in contact with the hydrogel.
• Calcium chloride 4M solution.
• Calcium chloride 4M solution after 7 days in contact with the hydrogel.
b. Methods
Specimens were analysed with the Chirascan Circular Dichroism Spectrometer (Applied
Photophysics), which is shown in Figure 17. Three milliliters of each solution were place
in a quartz cubic cuvette with a path length of 1 cm for each measurement. Three
measurements of each sample were taken and an average for each was calculated. The
wavelength range analysed was between 230 and 330 nm. The wavelength steps were
0.5 nm.
Figure 17: Spectrometer Chirascan (Applied Photophysics) [34].
30
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.3
Mechanical characterisation. TPA
Conventional mechanical characterisation techniques such as tensile test are not suitable
for the conditions of this project. The aim is to test the hydrogel in hydrated conditions,
and the clamping system that a tensile test machine employs is not suitable for it.
Therefore, to investigate the mechanical properties of the hydrogel such as Young’s
Modulus and hardness, a TPA was carried out and samples of the PAAm-Alginate
hydrogel in diﬀerent hydration conditions were analysed. The specimens were subjected
to a two-cycle test of compression force, in a 5N texture analyser from Stable Micro
Systems. Figure 18 shows the instrument measuring one of the hydrogel samples.
Figure 18: Actual experiment. Texture analyser on a hydrogel specimen.
Three test parameters were considered: loading-unloading speed, probe type and size,
and strain percentage. The speed was set to 1 mm/s for every experiment. The probe
used was a ﬂat cylinder, its size changed depending on the size of the sample tested.
Finally, strain percentage was also varied as a function of the sample conditions, as it
is explained further on.
3.3.1
Preliminary tests
In an early stage of the project, two preliminary tests were carried out. The results
of these gave information about the behaviour of the hydrogel, so further tests
(described in Section 3.3.2) could be designed.
There were two relevant tests in
this preliminary phase of the project and the subjects were samples of hydrogel in
two opposite stages of hydration.
For the ﬁrst sample, the ﬁrst measurement was
taken before it had any contact with water.
With this ﬁrst measurement, it was
31
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
expected to have a reference on the behaviour of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel in
ambient conditions.
Since mechanical properties are dependent on the hydration
state, further measurements were performed on the sample after soaking it in distilled
water. Nevertheless, every measurement was taken in ambient, i.e. the hydration cycle
was interrupted and hydrogel specimen was taken out of the container where it was
being hydrated. In contrast, the second sample was tested after hydration for a pe-
riod of 30 days and it was tested when this hydration cycle had ﬁnished, i.e. in ambient.
a. Materials
For these preliminary tests, the two samples were tested and prepared as follows:
1. Sample 1 (S1) was cut from the original batch "As received" into a cubic piece of
40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm.
2. Sample 2 (S2) was cut from the original batch "As received" into a cubic piece of
50 mm x 50 mm x 5 mm and immersed in distilled water for 30 days. After this
hydration and consequent swelling, the sample was cut again into a cubic piece
of 40 mm x 40 mm x 10 mm.
b. Methods
The parameters of the test were changed as a function of the specimen measured each
time.
1. S1 was analysed with a maximum strain of 50% and a 25 mm diameter cylindrical
probe. Tests were performed at the following time points: before the sample had
any contact with water, i.e. before immersion in distilled water and 1, 3, 6, 24,
48, 96, 168 and 264 hours after immersion. The sample was taken out from the
distilled water container at each time point and tested in ambient.
2. For S2, ﬁve measurements were taken with diﬀerent maximum strain: 50%, 60%,
70%, 80% and 90%. A 25 mm diameter cylindrical probe was used. S2 was tested
at one time point when the sample had already experienced a hydration cycle
in distilled water for 30 days. Like for S1, this experiment was carried out in
ambient.
3.3.2
Secondary Tests
The analysis of the results of preliminary tests (shown in Section 4.2.1) gave an
understanding of the hydration behaviour of the hydrogel and better-outlined tests
could be designed. This resulted in two experiments using diﬀerent aqueous solutions
to hydrate the hydrogel and in this case, both hydration and performance of the
measurements were executed in the aqueous solution, i.e. the hydration cycle of the
samples was not interrupted, as happened in the preliminary tests.
32
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
a. Materials
Two samples of hydrogel were prepared for these tests.
1. Sample 3 (S3) was cut from the original batch "As received" into a cubic piece of
30 mm x 30 mm x 5 mm.
2. Sample 4 (S4) was cut from the original batch "As received" into a cubic piece of
30 mm x 30 mm x 5 mm.
The solutions chosen for the secondary tests were Phosphate Buﬀered Saline (PBS) and
a high concentration calcium chloride solution.
1. Phosphate Buﬀered Saline (PBS): S3 was hydrated in PBS, which is a buﬀer solu-
tion containing sodium chloride (NaCl) 137 mM, sodium phosphate (Na2HPO4)
10 mM, potassium chloride (KCl) 2.7 mM and potassium phosphate (KH2PO4)
1.8 mM. It helps to maintain a constant pH at ca. 7.4. The ion concentrations of
the solution match those of the human body, which is why it is commonly used
in biological research [35], and also considered for this project.
2. A solution of calcium chloride, CaCl2 4M: Alginate is one of the networks that
constitute the hydrogel. Its polymeric chains are ionically cross-linked by calcium
ions. A calcium chloride solution provides the hydrogel with a continuous source
of calcium ions. S4 was hydrated with this solution.
b. Methods
For both samples, the size of the probe used was 18 mm of diameter and at each time
point, ﬁve measurements were taken with diﬀerent maximum strains: 50%, 60%, 70%,
80%, and 90%. Measurement time points were diﬀerent for each sample.
1. For S3, hydrated and measured in PBS, measurements were taken right after
being immersed, after 3 hours of hydration and after 24 hours of hydration.
2. For S4, hydrated and measured in the calcium chloride 4M solution, measurements
were taken right after immersion and after 1, 3, 6 and 24 hours.
33
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.4
PoD tribometry
In order to investigate the tribological properties of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel, a PoD
tribometer (Anton Paar, Switzerland) was used. In this work, a linear reciprocating
mode was employed for the sliding contacts. The actual set-up is shown in Figure 19.
Figure 19: Pin-on-Disk experiment set-up.
Diﬀerent approaches were taken regarding tribology experiments. Here, the experi-
ments are described depending on the solution in which the hydrogel specimen was
immersed, hydrated and measured.
Additionally to the diﬀerent solutions, other instrument parameters are adjusted and
changed as a function of the experiment in each case. These parameters are: material
and geometry of the pin, speed, load, and number of cycles. Parameters, materials, and
methods for each experiment are explained hereafter.
34
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.4.1
Experiments in PBS
A summary of the parameters used in the experiments carried out in PBS is shown in
Table 2.
Solution
Counterpart
Speed (mm/s)
Load (N)
Number
of cycles
PBS
Steel ball
18 mm diam.
50
0.2
500
Hydrogel
5 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm
Table 2: Parameters used in PoD tribometry experiments carried out in PBS.
a. Materials
Two hydrogel samples were cut from the original batch "As received" into cubic pieces
of 30 mm x 35 mm x 5 mm and ﬁxed inside the cup by two clamps screwed into the
cup. The set-up is shown in Figure 20.
Figure 20: Hydrogel specimen ﬁxed inside the tribometer cup.
The samples were immersed and tested in PBS, which is a buﬀer solution that helps
to maintain a constant pH at ca. 7.4, as explained in the previous section.
For the experiment with a steel ball as counterpart, the ball was glued to one of the
cylindrical supports designed for the tribometer, as shown in Figure 21. The pin was
cleaned and hydrophilised before each experiment by means of nitrogen plasma cleaner
(Harrick Plasma) for 2 minutes, at 29.6 watts.
35
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
Figure 21: Steel ball glued to cylinder. Pin for PoD tribometry experiment.
For the experiment with a hydrogel pin, a cubic piece of 5 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm
of hydrogel was cut from the original batch "As received".
The sample was glued
to a plastic support chosen for the experiment, and this support was glued to the
cylindrical support of the tribometer. A high strength 2-component epoxy adhesive
(Dana Lim A/S) was used for the purpose.
The pin is shown in Figure 22.
Prior
to each measurement, the pin was hydrated for one hour.
It is expected from the
hydrogel to have better friction properties when it is hydrated compared to the state
"As received" which is fairly dry, therefore, some level of hydration is induced to the
pin by immersing it in PBS before the experiment.
Figure 22: A hydrogel pin for PoD tribometry experiment.
b. Methods
After ﬁxing the specimen inside the cup as shown in Figure 20, the cup was ﬁlled with
25 ml of PBS. The hydration cycle was not interrupted to perform the tests, i.e. the
specimen was not taken out of the cup until the experiment was complete. Each test
was performed for 500 linear reciprocal cycles, at a speed of 50 mm/s and with 0.2 N
of load in the following time points:
• Right after PBS was poured into the cup.
• After 3 hours of hydration in PBS.
36
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
• After 24 hours of hydration in PBS. Before this measurement, 20 ml of PBS were
poured into the cup to compensate for the amount absorbed by the specimen,
making sure it was fully immersed.
Experiments with both pins were conducted with the mentioned parameters. After
each run, the cup was closed with Paraﬁlm M All-Purpose, Paraﬃn Wax Film to avoid
evaporation. In the case of the hydrogel pin, after each run, it was kept in PBS the
same way as the specimen, therefore, it also experienced swelling.
3.4.2
Experiments in PEG 1% and PAA 1% solutions
Two experiments were performed with diﬀerent solutions (PEG 1% and PAA 1%) but
the same conditions. A summary of the parameters used in these experiments is shown
in Table 3.
Solution
Counterpart
Speed (mm/s)
Load (N)
Number
of cycles
PEG 1% or
PAA 1%
Hydrogel
5 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm
50
0.2
500
Table 3: Parameters used in PoD tribometry experiments carried out in solutions of
PEG 1% and PAA 1%.
a. Materials
A solution of Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 1%, 4 kDa. PEG is a polymer with the chem-
ical formula HO −(CH2CH2OH)n −H. It is a hydrophilic molecule, electrostatically
neutral and possesses hydrogen bond acceptors. It is used as a lubricant for various
surfaces in aqueous and non-aqueous environments [1]. In this case, PBS was used as
the solvent.
A solution of Poly(acrylic) acid (PAA) 1%, 5.1 kDa. It is a polymer with the chemical
formula CH2 = CHCOOH. It is an anionic polymer, thus it is negatively charged.
It has been demonstrated by Røn and Lee [36] in their study that negatively charged
PAA or PAA-based copolymers adsorb and lubricate materials like alumina surfaces,
in neutral aqueous environment, via electrostatic attraction. In this case, PBS was
used as the solvent.
Hydrogel samples were cut from the original batch "As received" into a cubic piece of
30 mm x 35 mm x 5 mm and ﬁxed inside the cup by two clamps screwed into the cup,
in the same way as the ﬁrst experiment in PBS (set-up shown in Figure 20).
For the hydrogel pin, the same set-up shown in Figure 22 and used in the experiment
in PBS was chosen.
37
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
b. Methods
After ﬁxing the specimen inside the cup, it was ﬁlled with 20 ml of the solution. As for
the previous experiment, the hydration cycle was not interrupted to perform the tests,
i.e. the specimen was not taken out of the cup until the experiment was complete. Each
test was performed for 500 linear reciprocal cycles, at a speed of 50 mm/s and with 0.2
N of load at the following time points.
• Right after solution was poured into the cup.
• After 3 hours of hydration in the solution. Before this measurement, 5 ml of
solution were poured into the cup to compensate for the amount absorbed by the
specimen, making sure it was fully immersed in solution.
• After 24 hours of hydration in the solution. Before this measurement, 10 ml of
solution were poured into the cup to compensate for the amount absorbed by the
specimen.
As in the previous experiment, after each run, the cup was closed with Paraﬁlm M
All-Purpose, Paraﬃn Wax Film to avoid evaporation and the hydrogel pin was kept
in the solution the same way as the specimen and therefore, it also experienced swelling.
The absorption of water and consequent swelling had an eﬀect on the structure of
the hydrogel, making it soft and unstable, its mechanical integrity was signiﬁcantly
compromised. Because of this phenomenon, experiments beyond 24 hours of hydration
were not possible to perform in PBS, PEG 1%, and PAA 1% solutions.
38
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.4.3
Experiment in a calcium chloride 4M solution
A summary of the parameters used in the experiments carried out with a calcium
chloride 4M solution is shown in Table 4.
Solution
Counterpart
Speed (mm/s)
Load (N)
Number
of cycles
Calcium
chloride 4M
Steel ball
18 mm diam.
50
0.2
500
5
50
0.5
10
50
1
500
5
500
69000
10
500
Hydrogel
5 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm
50
0.2
500
5
50
0.5
10
50
1
500
5
10
Table 4: Parameters used in PoD tribometry experiments carried out in a calcium
chloride 4M solution.
a. Materials
A solution of calcium chloride, CaCl2 4M.
Hydrogel samples were cut from the original batch "As received" into a cubic piece
of 30 mm x 35 mm x 5 mm and ﬁxed inside the cup, in the same way as previous
experiments (see Figure 20).
For the steel ball and the hydrogel pin, the same set-ups shown in Figure 21 and
Figure 22 were used.
b. Methods
After ﬁxing the specimen inside the cup, it was ﬁlled with 25 ml of the solution of
calcium chloride 4M. As in the previous experiments, the hydration cycle was not
interrupted to perform the tests, i.e. the specimen was not taken out of the cup until
the experiment was complete. Experiments with a combination of parameters (shown
in Table 4) were performed at several time points: right after solution was poured into
the cup and after 3, 24 and 96 hours of hydration in the solution (not every time point
for every combination of parameters, see results in Section 4.3)
As for previous experiments, the cup was closed with Paraﬁlm M All-Purpose, Paraﬃn
39
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
Wax Film to avoid evaporation and in the case of the tests carried out with the
hydrogel pin, after each run, both specimen and pin were kept in the solution.
Since the specimen was kept stable without noticeable swelling under this condition,
it was possible to perform experiments for a longer period of hydration, compared to
the previous PoD tribometry experiments. Additionally, a long-term experiment for 24
hours or 69000 reciprocal cycles was performed.
40
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3.5
Biocompatibility experiments
Lastly, since the intended application of the hydrogel involves contact with human
ﬂuids, biocompatibility tests were necessary.
Thus, the biocompatibility of the
PAAm-Alginate hydrogel was evaluated through cytotoxicity assays with L929 and
MC3T3 cells, mouse ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts, respectively.
To study potential cytotoxicity of the hydrogel, the metabolic activity of these cells
exposed to the material was examined by colorimetric techniques using WST-8, a
derivate of MTT. After exposing the cells to the hydrogel, WST-8 reacts with the
living cells producing an orange formazan product, which is soluble in cell media.
The quantiﬁcation of this product was carried out by spectrophotometry at 450 nm.
Metabolic activities were calculated as a percentage, using the values of the control
cells as 100%.
Based on literature, it was decided to perform three diﬀerent schemes, depending on
the state of the hydrogel. As mentioned earlier in this report, the hydrogel stability is
inﬂuenced by the time of hydration, therefore these schemes will be the following:
1. Cells cultured in direct contact with hydrogel. The hydrogel was hydrated and
it still maintained its stability. Two approaches were used: cells seeded on top
of hydrogels, will be referred to as Cells on hydrogel and hydrogels put on top of
cells will be referred to as Hydrogel on cells. See schematics in Figure 23.
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: Direct contact scheme. (a) Cells on hydrogel. (b) Hydrogel on cells.
2. Cells cultured in indirect contact with hydrogel. Here, the hydrogel samples expe-
rienced high pressure and temperature up to the point where and their stability
was compromised and they lost their solid status. The cells were treated with
diﬀerent concentrations of the liquid hydrogel obtained.
Figure 24: Indirect contact scheme, decreasing concentrations of liquid hydrogel.
41
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
3. Cells cultured with extracts. Hydrogel samples in two states of hydration (hy-
drated for two weeks and for six weeks) were incubated for 24 hours with complete
media in order to produce extracts. It is believed that the material degrades over
time of exposure to water and products of this degradation are released to the
media, creating what is denoted as extracts. Thus, this scheme will be referred
to as Extracts. See schematics in Figure 25.
Figure 25: Extracts scheme
3.5.1
Direct contact
a. Materials
• Cells preparation. L929 ﬁbroblasts were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle
Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum and 1% peni-
cillin/streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were subcultured several times
before performing the tests.
• Sample preparation. After hydration with distilled water for 2 weeks of a 50 mm
x 100 mm x 5 mm sample, it was cut into cubic pieces of 15 mm x 15 mm x
5 mm and around 1 g. These samples were immersed in sterile PBS (2 ml of
PBS per gram of hydrogel) and sterilised by exposition to UV light for 2 hours.
After sterilization, PBS was changed for culture media and samples were kept in
incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 24 hours.
b. Methods
Cells on Hydrogel and Hydrogel on cells experiments were both carried out using 12-
wells plates. For each condition, three replicates were made.
• Cells on hydrogel: for this experiment, the bottom of the wells were covered
with hydrogel samples and cells were seeded on top at a concentration of 20000
cells/cm2. Control cells were seeded at the same concentration directly on the
wells. Both blanks of medium and hydrogel with medium were seeded as well.
Cytotoxicity assays were done after 24 and 72 hours of incubation at 37°C and
5% CO2.
42
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
• Hydrogel on cells: In this experiment, cells were seeded at a concentration of 20000
cells/cm2 and incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 24 hours. After this time, the
cells were attached to the bottom of the wells. Media was removed, samples of
hydrogel were placed on top of the cell layer and fresh media was added. Control
cells only experienced change of media.
Blanks of both the hydrogel and the
media were made too. Cytotoxicity assays were done after 24 and 72 hours of
incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2.
3.5.2
Indirect contact
a. Materials
• Cells preparation. L929 ﬁbroblasts were cultured in DMEM supplemented with
10% Fetal Bovine Serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
MC3T3 osteoblasts were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium (Alpha modi-
ﬁcation MEM) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, 1% glutamine and
1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Both types of cells were sub-
cultured several times before performing the tests.
• Samples preparation. Samples of hydrogel that were hydrated for six weeks, were
autoclaved at 121°C and 1.5 bar. These conditions sterilised the hydrogel but
broke its structure, producing an aqueous solution with the hydrogel components
in suspension. Sequential solutions of total media with this liquid hydrogel were
prepared. From 50% of hydrogel and diluting it with media in a rate of 1:1 media
until 0.05%. Therefore, concentrations were, in percentage: 50, 25, 12.5, 6.25,
3.12, 1.6, 0.8, 0.4, 0.2, 0.1 and 0 as control.
b. Methods
Cells L929 and MC3T3 were seeded in 48-wells plates at 20000 cells/cm2 and incubated
for 24 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2. After this time media was removed and changed for
the diﬀerent solutions of liquid hydrogel. For control cells, media is changed for fresh
media, four replicates were done per condition. Cytotoxicity assays were done after 24
hours of incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2.
3.5.3
Extracts
a. Materials
• Cells preparation. As for indirect contact scheme, L929 ﬁbroblasts were cultured
in DMEM and MC3T3 osteoblasts were cultured Alpha modiﬁcation MEM.
• Samples preparation. Two types of samples were used in this scheme depending
on the time of hydration that the hydrogel had experienced. After hydration
with distilled water for either two weeks or six weeks of a 50 mm x 100 mm x 15
mm sample, it was cut into cubic pieces of 15 mm x 15 mm x 15 mm and around
1.5 g. These samples were immersed in sterile PBS (2 ml of PBS per gram of
43
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
3. Experimental
hydrogel) and sterilised by exposition to UV light for 1 hour. PBS was changed
for culture media and samples were kept in incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2 for
24 hours. The extracts were ﬁltered with 5 µm and 0.22 µm cellulose ﬁlters from
samples hydrated for two or six weeks respectively.
b. Methods
The cells were seeded at a concentration of 20000 cells/cm2 and incubated for 24
hours at 37°C and 5% CO2. After this time the cells were attached to the bottom
of the wells, the media was removed and the extracts were added. For the control
cells, the media was changed for fresh media and three replicates were done per
condition. Cytotoxicity assays were done after 24 and 72 hours of incubation at
37°C and 5% CO2.
44
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
4
Results and Discussion
In this section, the results of the experiments described in Section 3 are presented. In
addition, observations, hypothesis, and discussion about results are explained.
4.1
Material characterisation results
Material characterisation includes the results for hydration experiments, ESEM and
absorbance spectroscopy.
4.1.1
Hydration experiment 1
In Hydration experiment 1, three samples of hydrogel of diﬀerent sizes (samples S, M
and L) were submerged in distilled water and their weight and dimension were traced in
time. Qualitative and quantitative data was collected. The time points of measurements
are the following:
• Time -1: Before the samples had any contact with water.
• Time 3: After time -1, the samples were immersed in a distilled water container
and measurement was taken after 3 hours of hydration.
• Time 6: After 6 hours of hydration.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration.
• Time 48: After 48 hours of hydration.
• Time 96: After 96 hours of hydration.
• Time 168: After 168 hours of hydration.
• Time 240: After 264 hours of hydration.
• Time 336: After 336 hours of hydration.
Pictures of the samples were taken in time points described above. In Figure 26, the
pictures of the three samples at time points -1 and 168 are shown.
Data collected
beyond this time point was not reliable because of the detriment of the samples. While
the samples absorb water, they lose their regular shape and they become softer, their
mechanical integrity is severally compromised.
45
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 26: Hydration experiment 1. (a), (b) and (c) samples S, M and L before contact
with water. (d), (e) and (f) samples S, M and L after 168 h of hydration.
The size increase in each sample is easily noticeable, S increased from 5 mm x 5 mm
x 5 mm to 25 mm x 25 mm x 13 mm, sample M from 20 mm x 20 mm x 5 mm to 75
mm x 80 mm x 13 mm and sample L from 40 mm x 40 mm x 5 mm to 180 mm x 180
mm x 13 mm. As an example of the mentioned detriment, in Figure 26 (f), where the
biggest sample is shown, cracks in its body can be spotted. These cracks were caused
by the handling of the sample. Consequently, the size increase was diﬃcult to analyse
since the samples split into several parts due to these cracks.
In addition, the percentage of weight increase was calculated measuring the weight of
the samples in the time points and relating them to their initial weight. The weight
increase in percentage is plotted against time of hydration and shown in Figure 27, for
each sample.
46
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 27: Percentage of weight increase along time of hydration for samples S, M and
L.
Hydration time (h)
0
3
6
24
48
96
168
240
336
S weight increase (%)
0
409
883
1626
2682
3537
3509
3501
3523
M weight increase (%)
0
104
249
677
1384
2642
3487
3763
3894
L weight increase (%)
0
60
186
555
1200
2544
3445
3847
4065
Table 5: Data of percentage of weight increase along time for samples S, M and L.
In the graph shown in Figure 27, it is noticeable that the three samples follow a similar
trend and two states can be diﬀerentiated: A steep increase from time 0 to time 168,
and a stabilisation afterwards, where the weight increase experiences a plateau.
From the Table 5, where the ﬁgures are shown, it can be noticed that the sharpest
increase in weight occurs during the ﬁrst 24 hours of hydration. For example, sample S
experiences an increase of 409% of weight in 3 hours of hydration and 883% in 6 hours.
Sample M increased 104% in 3 hours and 249% in 6 hours, while sample L increased
60% in 3 hours and 186% in 6 hours. It is observed that due to its hydrophilic nature,
the hydrogel absorbs water rapidly upon contact with it, but once it has reached a
saturated state and cannot absorb more water into its structure, the absorption and
consequent weight increase stabilises. When hydrogel reaches this point, it is denoted
fully hydrated.
47
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
ESEM results
The image of a sample that was hydrated for two months, therefore fully hydrated, and
taken with ESEM technique is shown in Figure 28.
Figure 28: ESEM picture of a sample of PAAm-Alginate hydrogel hydrated for two
months in distilled water.
The hydrogel in hydrated state has a porous structure. It is clear that pores involve
a great part of the volume of the sample. From the picture, it can be said that the
pore size average is around 10-20 µm and they represent about a third of the space
captured. This picture gives an idea of how much of the hydrogel microstructure is
occupied by water when it has absorbed it for a long period of time and matches the
results of the hydration experiment presented above.
The outcome of these experiments was used to decide the next steps in the research. The
high amount of water absorbed by the hydrogel and the size increase were surprising.
At the same time, it was remarkable the loss of the structural integrity as well as the
diﬃculty of the manipulation when the samples were completely swollen.
4.1.2
Hydration experiment 2
In Hydration experiment 2, ﬁrst, a hydration cycle was performed to a piece of the
original batch "As received" of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel (of size 80 mm x 80 mm x
5 mm) for two months, and a dehydration cycle for two weeks followed. After observing
the loss of integrity with increasing hydration time mentioned in the previous experi-
ment, the purpose was to ﬁnd out if this phenomenon was reversible. It was expected
that once the water was removed, the hydrogel would come back to a state similar to
the original. In this case, only qualitative data was collected in the two moments of
time. Pictures are shown in Figure 29.
48
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 29: Hydration experiment 2. (a) Shows the sample after two months of hydra-
tion. (b) and (c) show the same sample after two weeks of dehydration.
As in Hydration experiment 1, it was observed that when hydrogel is extensively
hydrated, it becomes softer and loses structural integrity.
Cracks in its body were
spotted, and its manipulation became diﬃcult. After dehydration most of the original
volume is lost, leaving a thin sheet of material (see Figure 29 (c)).
After analysing the results in Hydration experiments 1 and 2, a hypothesis was
conceived. When the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel is in contact with water, the alginate
network is disintegrated in it due to the fact that Ca2+ ions, which function as
the network cross-links, are dispersed into water because of the gradient in Ca2+
concentration across the inside of the hydrogel and the surrounding environment. This
causes the loss of alginate and the dissolution of the hydrogel. In Hydration experiment
2, the sample experienced ﬁrst a long-term hydration in water, then a dehydration in
ambient conditions. The volume of material is considerably lower after these two cycles
of hydration/dehydration than it was for the original sample. This loss of volume is
believed to have occurred due to loss of water. If the hypothesis is valid, the alginate
is lost in the ﬁrst cycle of hydration and the hydrogel is composed of polyacrylamide
and water only. The polyacrylamide is cross-linked via covalent bonds, alginates are
cross-linked via physical interaction as mediated by Ca2+ (electrostatic attraction).
Thus, compared to the polyacrilamide, the network within the alginate is intrinsically
weaker. The hydration amount, as well as the size of the hydrogel, becomes larger,
but the overall mechanical integrity of the hydrogel becomes much weaker because the
hydrogel structure is dominated by water.
As one way to verify the hypothesis that loss of Ca2+ is responsible for the mechanical
weakening of the hydrogel in water, it was decided to submerge the hydrogel in a calcium
chloride solution. It was assumed that if a continuous supply of Ca2+ ions was provided
to the hydrogel during hydration, the loss of alginate network may be retarded. Hence,
49
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Hydration experiments 3 and 4 were carried out.
4.1.3
Hydration experiment 3
In Hydration experiment 3, samples of hydrogel cut from the original batch were hy-
drated in diﬀerent solutions and their swelling behaviour over time was controlled.
Qualitative data was acquired at the following time points:
• Time 0: right after soaking in solution.
• Time 3: After 3 hours of hydration in solution.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration in solution.
• Time 96: After 96 hours of hydration in solution.
Solutions used were: distilled water, and solutions of calcium chloride 1M, 2M, 3M, 4M
and 5M. These diﬀerent concentrations of the calcium chloride solution were tested in
order to ﬁnd out which one had the lowest swelling eﬀect in the hydrogel. Figure 30
shows the swelling behaviour observed in the samples after 96 hours of hydration.
50
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 30: Hydration experiment 3. Pictures of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel samples
in times 0 and 96 in six diﬀerent solutions.
The six samples were of the same size in time 0 (see Figure 30 (a), (b), (c), (g), (h), (i)).
But after 96 hours immersed in solutions, their diﬀerence in size is easily noticeable,
especially comparing the sample in water with the rest. The sample that experienced
the lowest swelling was the one immersed in a calcium chloride 5M solution but it shrank
in height while it swelled in width (see Figure 30 (i) and (l)) Therefore, it was decided
that calcium chloride 4M solution was the one that best kept the original dimension of
the hydrogel sample and therefore it was used in further experiments.
51
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
4.1.4
Hydration experiment 4
As explained above, a calcium chloride 4M solution was chosen in order to verify the
hypothesis that loss of Ca2+ was responsible for the mechanical weakening of the hy-
drogel in water. In Hydration experiment 4 the aim was to ﬁnd out if the hydrogel
could recover its composition after being dehydrated (from Hydration experiment 2),
by re-hydrating it in the calcium chloride 4M solution. Therefore, the sample, after
being used for Hydration experiment 2 was cut and immersed in a calcium chloride 4M
solution for three days. Qualitative data was collected at the following time points:
• Time -1: Before soaking in solution.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of re-hydration.
• Time 96: After 96 hours of re-hydration.
Figure 31: Hydration experiment 4. (a) Dehydrated sample from Hydration experiment
2. (b) After 24 hours of re-hydration with calcium chloride 4M solution. (c) After 96
hours of re-hydration with calcium chloride 4M solution.
In the ﬁrst 24 hours of re-hydration, a minor increase in thickness can be spotted, this
is shown in Figure 31 (a) and (b). However, after 72 hours (Figure 31 (c)) no further
increase is observed. It is clear that the recovery expected did not occur, the supply of
Ca2+ is not suﬃcient to recover the structure of the hydrogel sample.
4.1.5
Absorbance spectroscopy
As explained in Section 4.1.2, the hypothesis conceived was that the hydrogel disin-
tegrates when it is hydrated in water, therefore, it is assumed that products of this
disintegration would be present in solution after contact for seven days. To conﬁrm
this, the absorbance spectroscopy experiment was performed.
Absorbances of four
solutions were measured: distilled water, distilled water after contact with hydrogel
for seven days, calcium chloride 4M solution and calcium chloride 4M solution after
contact with hydrogel for seven days.
In general, the UV spectra of polysaccharides have an intense peak at 190-230 nm
which results from some speciﬁc electron transitions. In this experiment, ﬁrstly, calcium
52
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
chloride 4M solution showed an intense peak at similar wavelengths, therefore to detect
derivatives of alginate, the measurements were further focused on a small shoulder that
appears around 260-280 nm (range shown in Figure 32).
Figure 32: Absorbance spectroscopy for water and calcium chloride 4M solution after
contact with hydrogel for 7 days.
To calculate the curve shown in Figure 32, the absorbance measurements of distilled
water and calcium chloride 4M solution before contact with hydrogel were taken as
background for the solutions after contact with the hydrogel.
The higher intensity
in distilled water compared to that in calcium chloride 4M solution in this range of
wavelengths suggested a higher content of derivatives of alginate in the solution.
4.1.6
Discussion
After analysing the results in Hydration experiment 1 and 2, the hypothesis explained
in Section 4.1.2 was conceived, i.e. when the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel is in contact
with water, the alginate network is disintegrated in it due to that Ca2+ ions, which
function as the network cross-links, are dispersed into water because of the gradient in
Ca2+ concentration. This causes the loss of alginate and the dissolution of the hydrogel.
In order to verify the hypothesis that loss of Ca2+ is responsible for the structural
disintegration of the hydrogel in water, it was decided to use a calcium chloride
solution for the following hydration experiments. Therefore, Hydration experiments 3
and 4 were carried out. Hydration experiment 3 showed a noticeable lower swelling
in a sample hydrated in calcium chloride 4M solution compared to a sample in
53
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
water. Furthermore, it was noticed that the manipulation of the sample hydrated in
calcium chloride solutions was easier than that of the one hydrated in water. It was
less soft and its state was closer to solid than to liquid, which supported the hypothesis.
Hydration experiment 4 demonstrates that supplying calcium ions to a sample that
has experienced a hydration and dehydration cycles, is not enough to recover its
original composition because the majority of the alginate component is already lost
and material cannot recover only with the cross-linker.
After these experiments, it can be conﬁrmed that the structure of the PAAm-Alginate
hydrogel has a high dependence on the hydration condition and time. It was observed
that in a high swelling state, the hydrogel is diﬃcult to handle without causing critical
damage to its structure.
In short, the hydrogel in contact with water is gradually
disintegrated and the debris is dispersed into water.
This phenomenon causes the
weakening of its structural integrity in the ﬁrst stages of hydration.
Also, after
hydration experiments, it could be conﬁrmed that the loss of mechanical integrity is
not reversible when removing the water. After a drying cycle, the hydrogel becomes
a thin layer with cracks and holes. With the ESEM technique, it could be conﬁrmed
that the structure of the hydrogel after long hydration is highly porous and that water
constitutes a great part of the structure. Finally, it was also conﬁrmed that debris is
released from the hydrogel into water after seven days of hydration. However, further
investigation needs to be carried out for a better understanding of the nature of the
debris.
Lastly, positive results in terms of the swelling and degradation upon hydration were
obtained with the high concentration solution of calcium chloride employed. However,
the solution is far away from the condition that meets biomedical applications, and it
is not certain whether the mechanical integrity of the hydrogel can be sustained in any
other way.
54
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
4.2
TPA Results
This section includes the results obtained in the TPA experiments, both preliminary
and secondary tests.
4.2.1
Preliminary tests
In an early stage of the project, two preliminary tests were carried out to two diﬀerent
samples: sample 1 (S1) and sample 2 (S2). Materials and methods of experiments are
further explained in Section 3.3.1.
Firstly, an experiment was performed on S1. Measurements were performed in ambient
i.e. the sample was taken out of the container where it was hydrating to perform each
measurement. The measurements were taken at the following time points:
• Time -1, S1(-1): Before the sample had any contact with water.
• Time 1, S1(1): After S1(-1), the sample was immersed in a distilled water con-
tainer and measurement was taken after 1 hour of hydration.
• Time 3, S1(3): After 3 hours of hydration.
• Time 6, S1(6): After 6 hours of hydration.
• Time 24, S1(24): After 24 hours of hydration.
• Time 48, S1(48): After 48 hours of hydration.
• Time 96, S1(96): After 96 hours of hydration.
• Time 168, S1(168): After 168 hours of hydration.
• Time 264, S1(264): After 264 hours of hydration.
In Figure 33, the plot force vs. test time shows the cycle of the texture analysis for
measurement S1(-1). The curves for the rest of the measurements can be found in
Appendix A.1. The two compression cycles are ﬁrstly represented by the two positive
peaks of force.
As explained in Section 3.1.3, the hardness of the specimen is the
maximum force in the ﬁrst peak, which in this case is 34.4 N.
55
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 33: Texture analysis cycle for Sample 1 at time 0.
The negative peaks shown in the plot are the forces that the specimen applied against
the probe when it lifted after each compression cycle. The area under this curve is
the adhesiveness of the specimen. Measurement S1(-1) was taken before the sample
had any contact with water and its surface is sticky in ambient. Thus, these peaks are
present in the curve.
Furthermore, directly from the texture analyser, the curve that relates force applied
with distance of compression can be obtained, as shown in Figure 34 for measurement
S1(-1).
56
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 34: Force vs. distance curve for texture analysis of sample 1 before contact with
water.
The curve represents the force applied during the ﬁrst compression cycle (increasing
behaviour) and the release of this force (decreasing behaviour).
The sample had a
thickness of 4.5 mm and, since maximum strain set for the analysis is 50%, maximum
distance of compression is 2.25 mm. At this last point, the maximum force is 34.4 N, the
same value calculated from the graph shown in Figure 33. This curve can be converted
to a stress vs. strain curve, and in doing so, the Young’s Modulus of the specimen can
be calculated. Knowing that stress is force divided by section area (calculated from
the size of the probe) and that strain is the percentage of thickness of the specimen
compressed, the stress vs. strain curve can be obtained (see Figure 35).
57
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 35: Stress vs. strain curve of sample 1 before any contact with water.
Young’s Modulus can be calculated from the slope of the linear region of this stress vs.
strain curve (blue line in Figure 35) converting the strain percentage to the unit. In this
example, Young’s Modulus is 173 kPa and maximum stress is 71.3 kPa. This calculation
is carried out for every time point of measurement, and a relationship between Young’s
Modulus and the time of hydration is determined, as shown in Figure 36.
58
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 36: Young’s Modulus vs. hydration time of sample 1, hydrated
in distilled water.
It is noticeable that the Young’s Modulus of the sample is rapidly decreasing over the
time of hydration.
It is especially remarkable that the Young’s Modulus decreased
from 173 kPa to 18.7 kPa within the ﬁrst hour of hydration. In S1(3) the Young’s
Modulus increased to 27.1 kPa but then it experiences a continuous decrease until the
last measurement S1(264) when it reaches 0.85 kPa.
Secondly, an experiment was performed on sample 2, the sample is fully hydrated, due
to the 30 days hydration in distilled water that it experienced before the experiment.
In this case, measurement was performed only at one time point after the 30 days. Five
measurements were taken with diﬀerent maximum strain: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80% and
90%. All the results presented below are for the measurement at maximum strain of
50% (force vs. time curves of the rest of the measurements can be found in Appendix
A.2). The same process of calculation carried out for the results with sample 1 was
done for sample 2, thus, in Figure 37 the stress vs. strain curve resulting from this
analysis is shown.
59
==PAGE:61==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 37: Stress vs. strain curve for sample 2, hydrated for 30 days.
It is noticeable in the graph that the stress scale is much lower than that of sample
1, shown in Figure 35. As a matter of fact, maximum stress is 2.7 kPa and Young’s
Modulus is 4.2 kPa. If the experiments on these two samples with the same conditions
(50% strain) are presented in the same plot, the graph appears as shown in Figure 38.
60
==PAGE:62==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 38: Comparison of stress vs. strain curves between before contact with water
and after 30 days of hydration.
It is easily noticeable a substantial decrease in maximum stress, and therefore, strength
that occurred after soaking the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel in water for 30 days. While
in dry conditions the hydrogel reaches a maximum stress of 71.3 kPa, when it has been
hydrated in water for 30 days, this maximum stress decreased down to 2.7 kPa which
represents a decrease of 96.2% of compressive strength. Also, a decrease in elasticity is
noticeable, as mentioned before, Young’s Modulus for the ﬁrst sample before contact
with water was 173 kPa and for the second sample was 4.2 kPa.
4.2.2
Secondary Tests
After preliminary tests, when the hydration behaviour of the hydrogel was better
understood, two tests were further carried out.
Two samples, sample 3 (S3) and
sample 4 (S4) were tested. Sample 3 was tested in PBS and sample 4 was tested in
a calcium chloride 4M solution. In this case, both hydration and performance of the
measurements were executed in the solution, i.e. the hydration cycle of the samples
was not interrupted, as happened in the preliminary tests.
Firstly, based on the results from sample 1 in the preliminary tests regarding the Young’s
Modulus (see Figure 36), it was understood that the important window of time for the
hydrogel in terms of loss of elasticity as well as hardness and stability from hydration
is the ﬁrst 24 hours. Thus, for this experiment, sample 3 was immersed in PBS and
analysed in the following time points:
61
==PAGE:63==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
• Time 0, S3(0): Sample was immersed in a PBS container and right after, mea-
surement was taken.
• Time 3, S3(3): After 3 hours of hydration.
• Time 24, S3(24): After 24 hours of hydration.
Five tests were performed at each time point with increasing maximum strains: 50%,
60%, 70%, 80%, and 90%. The results explained here are from the test performed with
50% of maximum strain (force vs. time plots for the rest of the measurements can be
found in Appendix A.3). The same process of calculation as in preliminary tests was
carried out and plots are shown in Figure 39.
(a)
(b)
Figure 39: (a) Young’s Modulus vs.
time of hydration and (b) Stress vs.
time of
hydration for sample 3.
Young’s Modulus in time 0 is 43.2 kPa.
After 3 hours of hydration, the modulus
decreased down to 18.7 kPa and after 24 hours of hydration was 7.7 kPa.
The
maximum stress followed a similar trend being 24.8 kPa at time 0, 10.3 kPa at time 3
and 4.1 kPa at time 24. Both Young’s Modulus and stress decreased rapidly from time
0 to time 3 but the decrease to 24 hours is less abrupt. This behaviour was similar to
the results in the preliminary tests and matched what was observed in the hydration
experiments, i.e. when the hydrogel starts absorbing water into its structure, it starts
losing its physical and mechanical integrity. With the data acquired and presented
here, this can be conﬁrmed quantitatively.
Secondly, after carrying out all the experiments in distilled water or PBS and the
analyses presented above, the hypothesis explained before in previous sections was
conceived, i.e. when the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel is in contact with water, the alginate
network is disintegrated in it due to that Ca2+ ions, which function as the network
cross-links, are dispersed into water. Therefore, it is assumed that if the hydrogel is
62
==PAGE:64==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
continuously supplied with Ca2+ ions during hydration time, the alginate loss may be
retarded.
This hypothesis was supported by the results of Hydration experiment 3
(see Section 4.1.3). Here, the hydrogel experienced lower swelling in calcium chloride
solutions compared to that in distilled water and its physical stability was best kept
with calcium chloride 4M solution. This led to thinking that mechanical properties
might be diﬀerent when the hydrogel is hydrated in an aqueous solution rich in Ca2+
ions.
Thus, it was decided to use the solution of calcium chloride 4M to hydrate sample 4
and further perform the TPA experiments. The sample was immersed in the solution
of calcium chloride 4M and analysed with no interruption of the hydration process at
the following time points:
• Time 0, S4(0): Right after immersion in solution.
• Time 1, S4(1): After 1 hour of hydration
• Time 3, S4(3): After 3 hours of hydration
• Time 6, S4(6): After 6 hours of hydration
• Time 24, S4(24): After 24 hours of hydration
On this occasion, the frequency of the measurements the ﬁrst 24 hours was higher
because the behaviour of the hydrogel in this solution was unknown. As for previous
experiment, ﬁve tests were performed at each time point with increasing maximum
strains: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, and 90%. The results explained here are from the test
performed with 50% of maximum strain (the rest of the results are shown in Appendix
A.4).
(a)
(b)
Figure 40: (a) Young’s Modulus over time of hydration and (b) Stress over time of
hydration for a sample of hydrogel in calcium chloride 4M solution.
63
==PAGE:65==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
The curves shown in Figure 40 show the increase both in maximum stress and Young’s
Modulus that the hydrogel experienced in the three ﬁrst hours of hydration. Young’s
Modulus was 123 kPa at time 0 and increased to 287 kPa at time 3. However, Young’s
Modulus decreased after this point and at 24 hours of hydration, it was 107 kPa.
Similarly, stress at time 0 is 57.5 kPa and at time 3 reached 157.8 kPa, and ﬁnally, it
decreased down to 62.5 kPa.
Comparing both experiments (in PBS and in calcium chloride 4M solution) a large
diﬀerence in the strength of the samples was found, as shown in Figure 41. Clearly,
the compression strength of the hydrated hydrogel was superior by immersing it in a
solution of calcium chloride 4M compared to PBS and moreover, it increased in the
ﬁrst hours while in PBS decreased. However, the strength seems to worsen over time
of exposure.
Figure 41: Stress over time of hydration for both samples of hydrogel in PBS and
calcium chloride 4M solution.
4.2.3
Discussion
In the TPA experiments performed in PBS, the hydrogel experienced a decrease
of strength and elasticity with increasing time of hydration.
In summary, if the
experiment is carried out in PBS, maximum stress lay within a range of 5-25 kPa
with a decreasing trend over time of hydration. Professor Sun et al. [6] submitted the
hydrogel to tensile stress experiments in ambient conditions and obtained a maximum
stress of 50-250 kPa as a function of polyacrylamide content. Comparing these values,
it is clear that the hydrogel in wet conditions has a worse mechanical behaviour.
The calcium chloride 4M solution was chosen to hydrate the hydrogel and perform
the TPA experiment and thus verify the hypothesis explained before in this section.
64
==PAGE:66==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
When experiments were carried out in this solution, the mechanical behaviour of the
hydrogel was diﬀerent compared to the one observed in PBS. The initial strength of the
hydrogel, when ﬁrst exposed to the calcium chloride 4M solution doubles the strength
than that of the sample measured in PBS and then in the ﬁrst 3 hours of hydration, the
initial value increased three times. However, a decrease is observed after 24 hours of
hydration. This behaviour could be explained due to the gradient of Ca2+ ions between
the calcium chloride 4M solution and the hydrogel. The moment when the hydrogel is
ﬁrst put in contact with the calcium chloride 4M solution, the concentration of Ca2+
ions inside the hydrogel is lower than in the surrounding solution. After some time, the
ions react with the alginate network, and their concentration inside the hydrogel in-
creases. This increases the stiﬀness of the hydrogel, although after a period of time, an
equilibrium in Ca2+ ions concentration is assumed to happen and the stiﬀness decreases
This suggests that Ca2+ could help to keep the stiﬀness longer time even though the
damages in the structure keep appearing at a slower rate. However, the utilisation
of a solution with high concentration of calcium for the hydrogel hydration makes
it unfeasible for using it inside the human body. These results further support the
hypothesis explained previously. The loss of stability and the mechanical weakening of
the hydrogel is caused by the dispersion of Ca2+ into water.
65
==PAGE:67==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
4.3
PoD tribometry results
In this section, the results of the PoD tribometry experiments performed and described
before in Section 3.4 are shown and discussed.
In summary, these experiments were conducted with four diﬀerent additives, namely
PBS, PEG 1%, PAA 1%, and calcium chloride 4M solution. Hydration of the hydrogel,
as well as performance of the tests occurred in the solutions without interruption
of the hydration process.
PBS was the ﬁrst logical choice taking into account the
potential application of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel as a cushion layer for prosthetic
joint implants. Since this layer would be in contact with biological ﬂuids and PBS ﬁts
this purpose. After experiments in PBS, both PEG and PAA were chosen as potential
additives to reduce the friction forces in the PBS experiments. These polymers have
been used in literature as lubricants for various surfaces [1], [36].
Firstly, experiments in PBS were carried out using either a stainless steel (SS) ball or a
hydrogel sample (HG) as a counterpart. After ﬁxing the hydrogel specimen inside the
cup, the cup was ﬁlled with PBS. These PoD tribometry experiments were performed
for 500 linear reciprocal cycles, at a speed of 50 mm/s and with a load of 0.2 N. With
these parameters, measurements in three time points were taken:
• Time 0: Right after immersion of the specimen in PBS.
• Time 3: After 3 hours of hydration.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration.
Figure 42 shows the plot COF vs. hydration time of these experiments for both sliding
pairs. Values of COF were averaged from positive and negative peak values given by
the reciprocating motion of the experiments. The error bars represent the standard
deviation of the mean values. The data analysis process is summarised in Appendix B.
66
==PAGE:68==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 42: COF vs. time of hydration for sliding pairs of stainless steel/hydrogel and
hydrogel/hydrogel, in PBS.
Worth noticing is that for time 0, both sliding pairs had similar COF around 0.2,
but for time 3, the pair hydrogel/hydrogel showed a decrease of COF down to 0.125,
meanwhile, the pair stainless steel/hydrogel encountered a minor increase of COF up
to 0.22. At 24 hours of hydration, both pairings showed an increase compared to time
3: for hydrogel/hydrogel pair, the COF was 0.17 and for stainless steel/hydrogel pair
it was 0.32.
It is also appreciable that the pair of stainless steel/hydrogel resulted
in higher COF at any point in time.
Even though the average values showed this
trend, taking into account the deviation, it can be said that the measurements
at the ﬁrst contact with the solution (time 0) resulted in a similar COF that was
between 0.077 and 0.323 and after three hours, the COFs were between 0.014 and 0.236.
Secondly, after the experiments in PBS, solutions of PEG 1% and PAA 1% were used.
Experiments with these solutions were performed with the same parameters as the
experiments in PBS but in these two cases, only hydrogel as counterpart was used. As
for the previous experiment, time points for measurements were:
• Time 0: Right after immersion of the specimen in PBS.
• Time 3: After 3 hours of hydration.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration.
In Figure 43, a plot comparing the COFs acquired in the three solutions of PBS, PEG
1% and PAA 1% using the same counterpart (hydrogel) is shown.
67
==PAGE:69==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 43: COF vs.
time of hydration for sliding pair hydrogel/hydrogel in three
diﬀerent solutions.
The solutions of PEG 1% and PAA 1% were used for PoD tribometry experiments
with the purpose of decreasing the COF compared to the results obtained for PBS.
Figure 43 shows that at time 0, both PEG 1% and PAA 1% caused a reduction in the
COF. However, as hydration time increased, this trend did not continue. The COF
using PAA 1% was even higher than that of PBS for hydration times of 3 hours and
24 hours.
Further measurements in these solutions (PBS, PEG 1% and PAA 1%) beyond 24
hours of the specimen hydration were not possible to perform since the samples became
too soft and the preparation of the tribometer was not reliable. The elastic arm of the
instrument has to be in a horizontal position while the pin touches the specimen, and
this could not be achieved with hydrogel specimen being too soft.
Finally, tribology experiments in a calcium chloride 4M solution were carried out.
As explained before in the project, it is assumed that when hydrogel has contact
with water, the alginate network disintegrates due to the dispersion of Ca2+ ions in
water. If the hydration of the hydrogel occurs in an aqueous solution rich in Ca2+
ions, this disintegration is retarded.
In Section 4.2.2 is shown that the mechanical
properties of the hydrogel are better when it is hydrated in a calcium chloride 4M
solution than when the hydration occurs in PBS. It was also of interest to test the
tribological properties of the hydrogel when hydrated with a solution rich in Ca2+ ions
and ﬁnd out if the solution had any eﬀect in the COF. Therefore, PoD experiments
were performed using a calcium chloride 4M solution with a combination of parameters
68
==PAGE:70==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
(further explained in Section 3.4.3).
First of all, experiments were carried out for 500 linear reciprocal cycles, at a speed
of 50 mm/s, with a load of 0.2 N for sliding pairs stainless steel/hydrogel and hydro-
gel/hydrogel. With these parameters, measurements in three time points were taken:
• Time 0: Right after immersion of the specimen in solution.
• Time 3: After 3 hours of hydration in the solution.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration in the solution.
As in PBS, the experiment was carried out with two counterparts, i.e. stainless steel
and hydrogel. Comparison between the two pairings is shown in the plot shown in
Figure 44.
Figure 44: COF vs. time of hydration for sliding pairs stainless steel/hydrogel and
hydrogel/hydrogel in a calcium chloride 4M solution.
At time 0, both pairings had similar COFs, it being 0.2 for the case of stainless
steel/hydrogel contact and 0.27 for the hydrogel/hydrogel contact. However, at time
3, stainless steel/hydrogel contact encountered a steep increase up to 0.73, while
the COF for hydrogel/hydrogel contact decreased down to 0.15.
At time 24, the
COF for stainless steel/hydrogel contact decreased again down to 0.4 and COF for
hydrogel/hydrogel contact increased up to 0.27.
As observed in previous results in
PBS experiments, the standard deviation of the mean values, represented by the error
bars in the plot, was large.
As an example, measurement in time 24 for stainless
steel/hydrogel contact gave a value of COF between 0.066 and 0.734 and COF of
69
==PAGE:71==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
hydrogel/hydrogel contact was between those values.
Comparison of COF for solutions PBS and calcium chloride 4M, with the same pairing
hydrogel/hydrogel, is shown in Figure 45.
Figure 45: COF over time of hydration for sliding pair hydrogel/hydrogel in PBS and
calcium chloride 4M solution.
A similar trend can be noticed for both solutions. From time 0 to time 3, the COF
decreased and from time 3 to time 24, COF increased. Also, in each measurement
COF in the calcium chloride 4M solution was higher than in PBS. But taking the error
into account, it could be said that in terms of friction coeﬃcient for hydrogel/hydrogel
contacts, there was no improvement by using a calcium chloride 4M solution compared
to using PBS.
Secondly, due to the physical stability encountered by the hydrogel specimen in the
experiments with the solution of calcium chloride 4M, it could be tested for a longer
period of hydration and with higher loads. Therefore, a load dependency experiment
was carried out, testing three diﬀerent loads 0.2 N, 1 N and 5 N. Experiments were per-
formed for 500 linear reciprocal cycles, at a speed of 50 mm/s. With these parameters,
measurements in four time points were taken:
• Time 0: Right after immersion of the specimen in solution.
• Time 3: After 3 hours of hydration in the solution.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration in the solution.
• Time 96: After 96 hours of hydration in the solution.
70
==PAGE:72==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
In Figure 46, the plot COF vs. time of hydration, result from this experiment is shown.
Figure 46: COF over time of hydration for sliding pair hydrogel/hydrogel in a calcium
chloride 4M solution for three loads: 0.2 N, 1 N and 5 N.
The lowest coeﬃcient of friction at any time point is obtained when the experiment is
carried out with the highest load of 5 N. Furthermore, it is the condition that gives
the most stable COF during hydration time, with a value of around 0.1.
In addition, hydrogel/hydrogel contact in calcium chloride 4M solution was tested with
the aim of investigating the potential speed dependence of the COF. Thus, experiments
in this solution, with 0.2 N of load were carried out at 0.5 mm/s, 5 mm/s and 50 mm/s
for 10, 50 and 500 reciprocal cycles respectively. With these parameters, measurements
in four time points were taken:
• Time 0: Right after immersion of the specimen in solution.
• Time 3: After 3 hours of hydration in the solution.
• Time 24: After 24 hours of hydration in the solution.
• Time 96: After 96 hours of hydration in the solution.
In Figure 47, the plot COF vs. hydration time, result from this experiment is shown.
71
==PAGE:73==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 47: COF over time of hydration for sliding pair hydrogel/hydrogel in a calcium
chloride 4M solution for three speeds: 0.5 mm/s, 5 mm/s and 50 mm/s.
As shown in Figure 47, at time 24, COF at 5 mm/s was signiﬁcantly lower than COF
at 50 mm/s and 0.5 mm/s but at time 96, the three speeds resulted in similar COF.
Taking errors into account, it can be concluded that there is no noticeable speed
dependence for hydrogel/hydrogel contact in calcium chloride 4M solution with 0.2 N
of load.
Finally, an additional experiment was performed using the calcium chloride 4M solution.
The purpose was to investigate the behaviour of hydrogel when it is subjected to a
long-term sliding, a 24-hour or 69000 cycles experiment. The counterpart used was the
stainless steel ball, speed was 50 mm/s, and load 5 N. Result is shown in Figure 48
where the plot COF vs. test time is represented.
72
==PAGE:74==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 48: COF over time of experiment for sliding pair stainless steel/hydrogel in a
calcium chloride 4M solution for 24 hours at 50 mm/s with 5 N of loading.
It can be noticed that COF in these conditions is stable during the sliding time and
of a value of 0.04. As for previous results, this value was the average between positive
and negative values of COF (process summarised in Appendix B) and in this case, the
standard deviation had a value of 0.007 (represented in grey in the plot). The COF
remained fairly stable during the 24 hours of the experiment, which is a promising fact
for further tribological experiments.
4.3.1
Discussion
In general, hydrogel/hydrogel contact was observed to have a lower COF than stainless
steel/hydrogel contact.
In fact, for a short-term experiment, the combination of
parameters that resulted in the lowest coeﬃcient of friction was a hydrogel/hydrogel
sliding pair in calcium chloride 4M solution, with 5 N of load at 50 mm/s, being its
average value in a range of 0.07-0.13. In several experiments, the COF was observed
to decrease in the ﬁrst three hours of hydration, this behaviour could be expected
since the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel before contact with any aqueous solution is fairly
dry and hydration of some extent is expected to give better tribological properties.
However, after a longer time of hydration, an equilibrium state between solution and
hydrogel is reached and the COF increased again.
The degradation of the hydrogel over time of hydration did not show changes in
the friction measurements even though the loss of material occurs at the surface.
Diﬀerent additives used with negative and neutral components (PAA 1% and PEG 1%
73
==PAGE:75==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
respectively), which could interact with the hydrogel surface, did not show inﬂuence.
However, due to the above-mentioned detriment of the mechanical integrity of the
hydrogel with increasing hydration, these results in short-term experiments were not
reproducible and further investigation needs to be carried out.
On the other hand, using a calcium chloride 4M solution in tribology experiments made
it possible to perform experiments with a longer time of hydration. Even though the
high content in Ca2+ ions in the solution did not represent a valuable improvement in
frictional properties for the hydrogel, it enhanced its structural stability. The integrity
of the hydrogel was kept stable for longer periods of hydration and even a long-term
tribological measurement could be carried out. Moreover, in this long-term experiment
at a speciﬁc condition, the lowest COF throughout this study (shown in Figure 48) was
observed. This result represents a promising starting point for further investigations.
74
==PAGE:76==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
4.4
Biocompatibility results
As mentioned in Section 3.5, biocompatibility experiments were carried out in three
diﬀerent schemes: direct contact of cells with hydrogel, indirect contact, and cells
cultured with hydrogel extracts. The results of each scheme are explained hereafter.
4.4.1
Direct contact
Two diﬀerent approaches of direct contact were carried out. As explained in Section
3.5, they were designated Cells on hydrogel and Hydrogel on cells.
The diﬀerence
between the execution of these two experiments is the moment when the cells were
seeded: either after or before inserting the hydrogel samples inside the wells.
For the experiment Cells on hydrogel it was observed by optical microscopy that, during
incubation time, cells were falling to the bottom of the wells.
The cells were not
attaching to the surface of the hydrogel samples and they fell by the edges. Thus, with
time, cells ended up underneath the hydrogel samples, a conﬁguration similar to the
one in the experiment Hydrogel on cells. Figure 49 shows metabolic activity after 24
and 72 hours of ﬁbroblasts in these two diﬀerent schemes.
Figure 49: Metabolic activity of ﬁbroblasts in direct contact scheme.
Note that "Control" are ﬁbroblasts seeded in the wells with no hydrogel, for the same
incubation time. According to the ISO 10993-5, the toxic limit is 70% of metabolic
activity.
75
==PAGE:77==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
The results for the Cells on hydrogel experiment showed an evolution on time. After
24 hours, metabolic activity was lower than the controls but it stayed in a safe range
above 70%. After 72 hours, however, metabolic activity decreased to the toxic range.
This conﬁrms that either the hydrogel is toxic for the cells or the hydrogel impedes the
correct exchange of nutrients and/or CO2, since after 72 hours, the cells are underneath
it. Results for the Hydrogel on cells experiment showed toxic levels both after 24 and
72 hours. This again suggests that either the hydrogel produces a toxic reaction in cells
or avoids correct exchange between the cells and the media of nutrients and/or CO2.
4.4.2
Indirect contact
As explained in Section 3.5, in this scheme the cells were put in contact with solutions of
liquid hydrogel at diﬀerent concentrations. Figures 50 and 51 show metabolic activity
results for ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts respectively, after 24 hours of incubation.
Figure 50: Metabolic activity of ﬁbroblasts in indirect contact scheme.
76
==PAGE:78==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 51: Metabolic activity of osteoblasts in indirect contact scheme.
Note that the horizontal line in both graphs shows the above-mentioned toxic limit of
70% metabolic activity. behaviour of both types of cells was similar and a meaningful
decrease of metabolic activity was observed when the content of the liquid hydrogel
was 25%. A more striking decrease was noticed for 50% hydrogel content where the
metabolic activity, for both cells, dropped below the toxic limit.
4.4.3
Extracts
In this last scheme, cells were seeded in extracts, i.e. culture media with products of
degradation of the hydrogel over time of hydration. Figure 52 shows the results on the
metabolic activity of the cells incubated for 24 and 72 hours in contact with extracts
of the hydrogel in two diﬀerent stages of degradation: two and six weeks of hydration.
77
==PAGE:79==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
Figure 52: Metabolic activity of ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts in Extracts scheme.
After two weeks of hydration, hydrogel was stable and extracts were easy to ﬁlter, i.e.
there was a low concentration of particles in solution. As it is shown in Figure 52,
the biocompatibility of cells incubated for 24 and 72 hours with these extracts did not
show toxicity. Metabolic activity was lower than the controls but in a clear safe range
of 70% or higher. This result could be similar to the metabolic activity seen for 12%
of hydrogel content in the indirect contact scheme (see ﬁgure 50). However, when the
hydrogel was hydrated for six weeks, the metabolic activity of the cells dropped to the
toxic limit for a 24 hours exposure, and below it for a 72 hours exposure. This result
suggested that the concentration of hydrogel was between 25% and 50% in this case.
4.4.4
Discussion
The biocompatibility of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel was evaluated through diﬀerent
schemes that involved diﬀerent ways of contact with cells.
Cytotoxicity tests were
performed with osteoblasts and ﬁbroblasts for 24 hours and 72 hours of incubation
time.
The hydrogel degraded in particles when it is hydrated in water for a long
time, and the purpose of these tests was to embrace all the possibilities to obtain a
global evaluation. Cells were evaluated in direct contact with the hydrogel, after total
degradation of the hydrogel (indirect contact) and in contact with extracts.
The direct contact was evaluated seeding the cells on top of the hydrogel and placing
the hydrogel on top of the cells. The metabolic activity of the cells under the hydrogel
decreased comparing with control cells.
It suggested that the hydrogel created a
physical barrier between the cells and the media, avoiding a correct exchange of oxygen
and nutrients. When the cells were seeded on the top of the hydrogel, they showed
78
==PAGE:80==
Master thesis
4. Results and Discussion
good metabolic activity for 24 hours of incubation but bad metabolic activity after 72
hours but the cells did not attach on the hydrogel surface and they fell to the bottom
of the wells. This suggested no bioactivity with the hydrogel.
In the case of extracts produced by the incubation of culture media with hydrogel
that had experienced hydration but was not completely disintegrated yet, the results
showed regular metabolic activity and it indicated that the hydrogel is biocompatible.
However, when extracts were obtained incubating media with hydrogel in process
of disintegration, it showed toxicity for 72 hours of contact with cells.
Similarly,
when hydrogel had disintegrated completely and was mixed with media in diﬀerent
concentrations, ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts cells showed toxicity when the content
was between 25% and 50%. It can be said that the proliferation of osteoblasts and
ﬁbroblasts was decreased when the hydrogel released components after full hydration
in higher content than 50 %.
Analysing the experiments, if a direct contact cells-hydrogel is considered (Figure
49), it is not possible to conﬁrm the toxicity of the hydrogel resulted for an exposure
of 72-hours. The low metabolic activity in this experiment can be explained due to
the barrier between cells and media that the hydrogel creates, avoiding the correct
exchange of oxygen and nutrients.
When the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel stability is severally damaged because of a pro-
longed hydration, its components dissolve in the media. When cells are exposed to
these components for 72 hours, metabolic activity is below the safety limit of toxicity.
However, it cannot be conﬁrmed what component of the hydrogel elicits this toxicity.
79
==PAGE:81==
Master thesis
5. Conclusion and Future Work
5
Conclusion and Future Work
Tough hydrogels have acquired high expectations in the engineering ﬁeld, and they
are potential candidates in biomedical applications. Hydrogels in general have been
used successfully in applications like bio-sensors [11] or drug delivery devices [9].
Also in a recent study by Liu et al.
[10], they are suggested for applications that
involve a long-term exposure to human ﬂuids like scaﬀolds in tissue engineering or
contact lenses. However, the studies mentioned above do not consider wet conditions.
This project is fairly distinct from many previous biomedical applications in that the
ultimate goal is to use tough hydrogels as a cushioning layer to dampen the external
loads in prosthetic joint implants, and thus, a full understanding of the structural and
mechanical behaviour in hydrated state is essential. To the end, a hydrogel made of
PAAm-Alginate with a double-network structure was employed in this study.
In terms of tribology, some studies like the one carried out by Arjmandi et al. [15]
have addressed the positive tribological properties from this material in water but
they lack of a systematic control and observation in variation of hydration conditions.
Unfortunately, their positive results are not exactly reproduced in this project but
showed a number of restrictions.
In general, a systematic and gradual degradation of the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel in
water was observed. The weakening of structural integrity of the hydrogel and the loss
of its mechanical properties in the ﬁrst stages of hydration was conﬁrmed throughout
the study.
The hypothesis conceived to explain this behaviour was that when the
PAAm-Alginate hydrogel is in contact with water, the alginate network is disintegrated
in it due to the fact that Ca2+ ions, which function as the network cross-links, are
dispersed into water because of the gradient in Ca2+ concentration across the inside of
the hydrogel and the surrounding environment. This causes the loss of alginate and
the dissolution of the hydrogel.
To conﬁrm this hypothesis, a high concentration solution of calcium chloride was
used. It is an artiﬁcial condition that does not meet the requirements for biomedical
applications but that was found to have positive results in terms of degradation
rate. Even though it did not involve an improvement in the tribological properties,
it enhanced the mechanical integrity of the hydrogel, allowing the performance of
long-term tribological experiments.
Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the
mechanical properties of the hydrogel upon hydration with the calcium chloride
solution were considerably better than upon hydration with water or PBS.
In short, the value of this study is to ﬁnd out and establish the current limits of the
mechanical and tribological application of PAAm-Alginate hydrogels in conditions
where a long-term exposure to water is required.
80
==PAGE:82==
Master thesis
5. Conclusion and Future Work
Finally, as future work, further study on the degradation mechanism would be of help
to ﬁnd out direct evidence for the hypothesis conceived. For that purpose, techniques
like FTIR or EDX can be used.
Moreover, further tribology experiments could be
performed with the purpose of obtaining more reliable and reproducible experiments.
If we manage to ﬁnd a condition that gives a similar eﬀect of keeping high concentration
of Ca2+ ions and is highly biocompatible, a reliable use of PAAm-Alginate hydrogels
as cushioning layer for the bearings in orthopaedic implants would also be possible.
81
==PAGE:83==
Master thesis
References
References
[1] B.D. Ratner and A. S. Hoﬀman. Biomaterials Science. An Introduction to Mate-
rials in Medicine. Elsevier, 2014.
[2] C. I. Alabre A. M. Kaufman and H. E. Rubash. Human macrophage response to
uhmwpe, tialv, cocr, and alumina particles: Analysis of multiple cytokines using
protein arrays. Wiley InterScience, 2007.
[3] M. J. Pearcy A.Unsworth and E. F. T. White. Frictional properties of artiﬁcial
hip joints. Engineering in Medicine, 1988.
[4] H. ShercliﬀM. Ashby and D. Cebon. Materials. Engineering Science, Processing
and Design. Elsevier, 2007.
[5] M. Buggy F.P. Quigley and C. Birkinshaw. Selection of elastomeric materials for
compliant-layered total hip arthroplasty. Engineering in Medicine, 2002.
[6] X. Zhao J. Sun and W. R. K. Illeperuma. Highly stretchable and tough hydrogels.
Nature. International Journal of Science, 2012.
[7] S. Biswas. Emerging Concepts in Analysis and Applications of Hydrogels. Inte-
chOpen, 2018.
[8] C. Maldonado and N. Efron. Hydrogel lenses-materials and manufacture: A review.
Optometry in Practice, 2003.
[9] Y. Gupta A. Vashist and S. Ahmad.
Recent advances in hydrogel based drug
delivery systems for the human body. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2014.
[10] W. He Y. Liu and Z. Zhang. Recent dvelopments in tough hydrogels for biomedical
applications. MDPI, Gels, 2018.
[11] Y. Shi L. Li and L. Pan. Rational design and applications of conducting polymer
hydrogels as electrochemical biosensors. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2015.
[12] A.D. Celiz J. Li and J. Yang. Tough adhesives for diverse wet surfaces. Science,
2017.
[13] M. Parkes P. E. Milner and J. L. Puetzer. A low friction, biphasic and boundary
lubricating hydrogel for cartilage replacement. Acta Biomaterialia, 2005.
[14] F. Muto H. Arafune and T. Kamijo. Tribological properties of double-network gels
substituted by ionic liquids. MDPI, Lubricants, 2018.
[15] M. Ramezani M. Arjmandi and A. Nand.
Tribological characterization of
polyacrylamide-alginate hybrid hydrogels as potential candidate for cartilage re-
placement. Key Engineering Materials, 2018.
82
==PAGE:84==
Master thesis
References
[16] S. Aﬀatato and L. Grillini. Bio-Tribocorrosion in Biomaterials and Medical Im-
plants, pages 1 – 22a. Yu Yan in Woodhead Publishing, 2013.
[17] I. Hutchings and P. Shipway. Tribology, pages 37 – 77. Butterworth-Heinemann,
2017.
[18] J. Fisher Z. M. Jin and M. Stone. Biotribology, pages 32 – 40. Elsevier, 2006.
[19] S. Lee. Lecture notes. overview of conventional engineering tribology. session 1,
week 1, 2017.
[20] W. Chong and J. Ng. An atomic-scale approach for biodiesel boundary lubricity
characterisation. International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 2016.
[21] D.F. Williams. On the mechanisms of biocompatibility. Biomaterials, pages 2941–
2953. Elsevier, 2008.
[22] T. A. Çelik. Cytotoxicity, pages 3 – 6. IntechOpen, 2018.
[23] Sigma Aldrich. Protocol guide: Mtt assay for cell viability and proliferation, 2020.
[24] D. Pakotiprapha K. Chamchoy and P. Pumirat. Application of wst-8 based colori-
metric nad(p)h detection for quantitative dehydrogenase assays. BMC Biochem-
istry, 2019.
[25] D. Roylance. Mechanical properties of materials. MIT 2008, 2008.
[26] M.L. Oyen. Mechanical characterisation of hydrogel materials. International Ma-
terials Reviews. Taylor and Francis Online, 2014.
[27] Y. Leng. Materials characterization. Introduction to Microscopic and Spectroscopic
Methods. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2008.
[28] DTU Center of Electron Nanoscopy. Lecture slides on sem, 2016.
[29] J.E. McGregor and A.M. Donald. The application of esem to biological samples.
Journal of Physics. Conference series 241, 2010.
[30] E. Klantsataya and A. Bachhuka. Comprehensive Nanoscience and Nanotechnol-
ogy, pages 105 – 125. Elsevier, 2019.
[31] T.K. Trinh and S. Glasgow. On the texture proﬁle analysis, 2012.
[32] Ta.xtplusc texture analyser. https://www.stablemicrosystems.com/TAXTplus.
html. Accessed: 20-01-2020.
[33] L. W. McKeen. Fatigue and Tribological Properties of Plastics and Elastomers
(Second Edition), pages 1 – 23. William Andrew Publishing, 2010.
83
==PAGE:85==
Master thesis
References
[34] Chirascan — circular dichroism spectrometer. https://www.photophysics.com/
systems/chirascan-systems/chirascan/system-information/. Accessed: 20-
01-2020.
[35] Medicago. Phosphate buﬀered saline. speciﬁcation sheet, 2010.
[36] T. Røn and S. Lee. Reduction in friction and wear of alumina surfaces as assisted
with surface- adsorbing polymers in aqueous solutions. Wear, 368–369, 296–303,
2016.
84
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
A
TPA additional results
In this appendix, additional results and previous experiments not included in the body
of this report, but that were carried out and helped in the characterization of the
PAAm-Alginate hydrogel are shown.
A.1 Experiment on sample 1 (S1)
Additional results in sample 1 of preliminary tests, shown previously in this report.
The parameters in this experiment were:
• Probe diameter: 25 mm.
• Loading/unloading speed: 1 mm/s.
• Maximum strain: 50%.
Figure 53: Cycles of TPA at diﬀerent time points in hydration of sample 1 of preliminary
tests.
A.2 Experiment on sample 2 (S2)
Additional results in sample 2 of preliminary tests, shown previously in this report.
The parameters in this experiment were:
• Probe diameter: 25 mm.
86
==PAGE:88==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
• Loading/unloading speed: 1 mm/s.
• Maximum strain: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80% and 90%.
Figure 54: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 2.
A.3 Experiment on sample 3 (S3)
Additional results in sample 3 of secondary tests, shown previously in this report. The
parameters in this experiment were:
• Probe diameter: 18 mm.
• Loading/unloading speed: 1 mm/s.
• Maximum strain: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80% and 90%.
87
==PAGE:89==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 55: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 3 at time 0, before
contact with water.
Figure 56: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 3 after 3 hours of
hydration.
88
==PAGE:90==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 57: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 3 after 24 hours
of hydration.
A.4 Experiment on sample 4 (S4)
Additional results in sample 4 of secondary tests, shown previously in this report. The
parameters in this experiment were:
• Probe diameter: 18 mm.
• Loading/unloading speed: 1 mm/s.
• Maximum strain: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80% and 90%.
89
==PAGE:91==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 58: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 4 at time 0, before
contact with water.
Figure 59: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 4 after 1 hour of
hydration.
90
==PAGE:92==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 60: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 4 after 3 hours of
hydration.
Figure 61: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 4 after 6 hours of
hydration.
91
==PAGE:93==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 62: Cycles of TPA with diﬀerent maximum strains for sample 4 after 24 hours
of hydration.
A.5 Experiment on sample hydrated with 5 ml of distilled
water
Previous experiment on a sample hydrated with only 5 ml of distilled water. It was
measured in ambient and water after the hydration cycle had ﬁnished (when hydrogel
had absorbed the 5ml of distilled water).
• Probe diameter: 25 mm.
• Loading/unloading speed: 1 mm/s.
• Maximum strain: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80% and 90%.
92
==PAGE:94==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 63: Cycles of texture analysis with 50% maximum strain on sample hydrated
with 5 ml of water. Comparison between measurements in ambient and in water.
Figure 64: Cycles of texture analysis with 60% maximum strain on sample hydrated
with 5 ml of water. Comparison between measurements in ambient and in water.
93
==PAGE:95==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 65: Cycles of texture analysis with 70% maximum strain on sample hydrated
with 5 ml of water. Comparison between measurements in ambient and in water.
Figure 66: Cycles of texture analysis with 80% maximum strain on sample hydrated
with 5 ml of water. Comparison between measurements in ambient and in water.
94
==PAGE:96==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 67: Cycles of texture analysis with 90% maximum strain on sample hydrated
with 5 ml of water. Comparison between measurements in ambient and in water.
A.6 Experiment on sample after hydration/dehydration cycles
This sample was used for Hydration experiment 2, explained in this report. The sample
had experienced hydration for two months in a container with distilled water. After
this time the water was removed and a piece of the sample was cut to perform the TPA
experiment. It was carried out after three days and after seven days, and measured in
water.
• Probe diameter: 25 mm.
• Loading/unloading speed: 1 mm/s.
• Maximum strain: 50%, 60%, 70%, 80% and 90%.
95
==PAGE:97==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 68: Cycles of texture analysis with 50% maximum strain on sample after hydra-
tion/dehydration cycles. Comparison between measurements after 3 days and 7 days
of dehydration.
Figure 69: Cycles of texture analysis with 60% maximum strain on sample after hydra-
tion/dehydration cycles. Comparison between measurements after 3 days and 7 days
of dehydration.
96
==PAGE:98==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 70: Cycles of texture analysis with 70% maximum strain on sample after hydra-
tion/dehydration cycles. Comparison between measurements after 3 days and 7 days
of dehydration.
Figure 71: Cycles of texture analysis with 80% maximum strain on sample after hydra-
tion/dehydration cycles. Comparison between measurements after 3 days and 7 days
of dehydration.
97
==PAGE:99==
Master thesis
A. TPA additional results
Figure 72: Cycles of texture analysis with 90% maximum strain on sample after hydra-
tion/dehydration cycles. Comparison between measurements after 3 days and 7 days
of dehydration.
98
==PAGE:100==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
B
PoD tribometry additional experiments
In this appendix, additional experiments with the PoD tribometer that were performed
in the ﬁrst stage of the project and that were of help to understand the behaviour of
the PAAm-Alginate hydrogel are included. First, a schematic of how the data was
processed after the experiment with the tribometer is shown.
The data was analysed and ﬁltered to obtain an averaged value of the COF. A summary
of the process is shown in Figure 73.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 73: Process of data ﬁltering to obtain a COF value. (a) Tribometer information.
(b) Raw data plotted. (c) Data ﬁltered. (d) Curve result.
99
==PAGE:101==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
B.1 Experiment on sample "As received"
This experiment was carried out using a sample of the hydrogel in state "As received"
from the original batch and performed in ambient.
The parameters in this experiment were:
• Pin: CoCr cylinder
• Hydration: 0%
• Speed: 0.25 mm/s, 0.5 mm/s, 1 mm/s, 10 mm/s, 50 mm/s and 100 mm/s.
Figure 74: COF vs. time graphs of PoD experiment on a sample "As received".
100
==PAGE:102==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 75: COF vs. time graphs of PoD experiment on a sample "As received" (cont.).
B.2 Experiment on sample hydrated with 5 ml of distilled
water
PoD on a sample hydrated with 5 ml of distilled water. It was measured in ambient
after the hydrogel had absorbed the water.
• Pin: CoCr cylinder
• Hydration: 0%
• Speed: 0.25 mm/s, 0.5 mm/s, 1 mm/s, 10 mm/s and 100 mm/s.
Figure 76: COF vs. time graphs of PoD experiment on sample hydrated with 5 ml of
water.
101
==PAGE:103==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 77: COF vs. time graphs of PoD experiment on sample hydrated with 5 ml of
water (cont).
B.3 Experiment on sample after hydration/dehydration cycles
This sample was used for Hydration experiment 2, explained in this report. The sample
had experienced hydration for two months in a container with distilled water. After
this time the water was removed and a piece of the sample was cut to perform the PoD
experiment. It was carried out soaking the sample in PBS.
• Pin: Stainless steel ball
• Measurement condition: Immersed in PBS
• Speed: 0.5 mm/s, 1 mm/s, 2.5 mm/s, 5 mm/s, 10 mm/s, 25 mm/s and 50 mm/s.
102
==PAGE:104==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 78: COF vs. time graphs of experiment on sample after hydration/dehydration
cycles.
103
==PAGE:105==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 79: COF vs. time graphs of experiment on sample after hydration/dehydration
cycles (cont.).
Figure 80: COF vs. time comparison between three previous samples.
B.4 Experiment on sample hydrated progressively during
experiment
The sample was ﬁrst measured "As received" and then PBS was added progressively
until 450% of the initial weight of the sample was added in volume of PBS, i.e. 450%
of hydration.
104
==PAGE:106==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Pin
Hydration (%)
Speed (mm/s)
Stainless steel
ball
0
1
60
1
90
1
150
1
10
210
1
10
270
10
50
330
10
20
390
10
50
450
50
Table 6: Parameters of PoD experiment on sample hydrated progressively during ex-
periment.
Figure 81: COF vs. time graphs for PoD experiment on a sample hydrated progressively
during experiment.
105
==PAGE:107==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 82: COF vs. time graphs for PoD experiment on a sample hydrated progressively
during experiment (cont.).
106
==PAGE:108==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 83: COF vs. time graphs for PoD experiment on a sample hydrated progressively
during experiment (cont.).
107
==PAGE:109==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 84: COF vs. time. Comparison of hydration percentages at speed 1 mm/s.
Figure 85: COF vs. time. Comparison of hydration percentages at speed 10 mm/s.
108
==PAGE:110==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 86: COF vs. time. Comparison of hydration percentages at speed 50 mm/s.
B.5 Experiment on PDMS sample as a reference
This PoD experiment was performed to a PDMS sample as a reference of a known mate-
rial. The sample was measured in three diﬀerent conditions: with hydrophobic surface
(no treatment), with hydrophilic surface via plasma cleaning and with hydrophilic sur-
face via F127 treatment. In hydrophobic state, it was also tested in a solution of PEG
1%.
Solution
Specimen surface
Counterpart
Speed(mm/s)
Load (N)
Cycles
PBS
Hydrophobic
Steel ball
18 mm diam
50
0.2
500
Hydrophilic via plasma
Hydrophilic via
F127 treatment
PEG 1%
Hydrophobic
Table 7: Parameters used in Pin-On-Disk experiments to a PDMS sample.
109
==PAGE:111==
Master thesis
B. PoD tribometry additional experiments
Figure 87: COF vs. time plot for PoD experiment on a PDMS sample measured in
PBS. Comparison of surface treatments on the specimen.
Figure 88: COF vs. time plot for PoD experiment on a PDMS sample measured in
PBS. Comparison of measurements in PBS and in PEG 1%.
110
