==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis (2019)
Biomedical Engineering
Coronary Artery Segmentation Using Deep
Learning
Master’s thesis
Author:
Linnea Ring Gätke
Kongens Lyngby 2019
Supervisors:
Ass. Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
Ph.d.-student Kristine Aavild Juhl
==PAGE:2==
Project title
Coronary Artery Segmentation Using Deep Learning
Authors
Linnea Ring Gätke (s132379), student, enrolled in M.Sc. Programme, Biomedical Engineering
Supervisors
Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
DTU
Kristine Aavild Juhl, Ph.d.-student, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU
Project period
September 2018-February 2019
ECTS
30 points
Field
Automatic Segmentation of Coronary Arteries, Computed Tomography Angiography, Deep Learning
Type
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Many people are dying from coronary artery diseases every year and atherosclerosis is one
of the major reasons for this. It is therefore important to treat patients with atherosclero-
sis at an early stage. To identify patients with coronary artery disease and optimize their
treatment, a method for assessing the extent of atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary
arteries is needed. Currently, the clinical assessment of low and intermediate risk patients
is based on the non-invasive method, cardiac computed tomography angiography (CTA),
along with patient’s symptoms and clinical examinations. Unfortunately, it is very time
consuming to visually assess the medical images. A valuable time that could be allocated
to other tasks if an automatic method for detecting and characterizing plaques was cre-
ated. One step towards this automatic method is to automatically obtain a reliable lumen
segmentation of the coronary arteries. The aim of this project was to study the potential
of deep learning for reliable lumen segmentation of the coronary arteries from CTA images.
In order to apply deep learning in this project, multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) of CTA
data was performed to obtain cross-sectional images of the coronary arteries. For semantic
segmentation of the vessel lumen in these MPR images, two diﬀerent convolutional neural
network structures were proposed. The ﬁrst neural network proposed was a U-net con-
sisting of a contracting path capturing context within an image and an expanding path
enabling precise localization of the lumen. The second network was a U-net with an ad-
ditional contracting path that takes in a contextual input. The contextual input aims at
improving the 3D consistency when segmenting subsequent images along a blood vessel.
The additional input consists of the previous image and the previous segmentation. The
eﬀect of using transfer learning for improving segmentation performance was also examined.
The U-net showed promising segmentation results with an average Dice coeﬃcient of 0.72.
However, the method was shown to obtain best results in images with no stenosis or only
smaller stenosis degree, while the algorithm had some diﬃculties segmenting images with
a large degree of stenosis. The U-net with contextual information gave poor results due
to propagation of a segmentation error through the image stack to be segmented. Finally,
transfer learning did not improve the overall performance of the U-net on the data set used
in this project.
In conclusion, it was shown that deep learning, in the form of the U-net, has potential
within the ﬁeld of coronary artery segmentation, however, there is a need for improvement
with respect to reliability and consistency of the lumen segmentation before deep learning
can be applied in clinical practice.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was submitted as the ﬁnal project of the Master of Science in Biomed-
ical Engineering programme at the Technical University of Denmark (Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet, DTU). The thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at DTU. The thesis presents work done in the period from Septem-
ber 2018 to January 2019.
The thesis deals with automatic lumen segmentation of the coronary arteries from com-
puted tomography angiography images.
The thesis was written under supervision of Associate Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
and Ph.d.-student Kristine Aavild Juhl from DTU Compute.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen at DTU Compute. Thank
you for great inputs and discussions during the ﬁrst part of the project. Also, I would
like to thank Kristine Aavild Juhl for valuable inputs at our weekly supervisions and for
always being very helpful whenever I needed it. Also thank you to Anders Bjorholm Dahl,
Vedrana Andersen Dahl and Anders Nymark Christensen for great supervision during the
last time of the project.
I would like to thank Line Marcussen for great collaboration on implementing some of the
methods used in this project. And also a great thanks should be given to the other Master
students under the supervision of Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen, for great discussions and a
positive environment during the period of the project.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and my boyfriend, Michael. Thank you for all the
support, especially during the last month of the project. Thank you, Michael, for numerous
late-night discussions about diﬀerent aspects of the thesis and valuable inputs about my
work. I am very lucky to have you and I really appreciate everything you have done for
me.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State-of-the-art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Clinical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Anatomy of the heart and the circulatory system . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Atherosclerosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Coronary artery disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Computed Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Deep learning background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Batch normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Spatial dropout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Data
19
3.1
Rotterdam Coronary Artery Algorithm Evaluation Framework
. . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Data from centerline extraction challenge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Data from stenosis detection and lumen segmentation challenge . . .
21
4
Methods
25
4.1
Multiplanar reconstruction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Isotropic resampling of CTA data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Preprocessing of centerline coordinates (CL data set) . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.3
Preprocessing of lumen outline coordinates (SD data set)
. . . . . .
26
4.1.4
Obtaining cross-sectional images with multiplanar reconstruction . .
28
4.2
Label map generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Label map generation for the CL data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Label map generation for the SD data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Network architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.1
2D U-net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.2
2D U-net with contextual information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.3
Data split into training, validation and test sets . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Results and Analysis
43
5.1
Segmentation of CL data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Segmentation of CL data with U-net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2
Segmentation of CL data with contextual U-net . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5.2
Segmentation of SD data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.1
Segmentation of SD data with U-net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.2
Segmentation of SD data with contextual U-net . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2.3
Eﬀect of pretraining with CL data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2.4
Comparing segmentation of diseased and healthy vessels . . . . . . .
65
6
Discussion
69
6.1
Principal ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.2
Strengths
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3.1
Data quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3.2
Worst lumen segmentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3.3
Problems with contextual U-net
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.3.4
Network hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.4
Comparison with other studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.5
Clinical and research use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7
Conclusion
79
Appendix
84
A Appendix
85
A
Training, validation and test split of data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Bibliography
87
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Many people are dying from coronary artery diseases every year and atherosclerosis is one
of the major reasons for this [4]. Atherosclerosis is a potentially dangerous disease due
to the risk of plaque rupture, which can lead to thrombosis and occlusion of the coronary
arteries and hence cuts oﬀthe blood supply to some areas of the heart. The lack of blood
supply can cause tissue death to a degree where the function of the heart diminishes. It is
therefore important to treat patients with atherosclerosis at an early stage. When assessing
atherosclerosis, it is important to detect plaques and evaluate the amount of narrowing of
the vessel due to the plaques, but also the composition of the plaque is important, because
the composition indicates the risk of plaque rupture. The extend and composition can
be assessed in medical images of the coronary arteries and the medical images can then
be used both as a diagnostic tool as well as for planning the best possible treatment for
the patient. Manually assessing the medical images is a very time consuming task and it
is therefore of interest to be able to detect and characterize plaques automatically from
medical images.
1.1
State-of-the-art
For several decades invasive conventional coronary angiography has served as the standard
imaging modality for diagnosing coronary artery disease, however, non-invasive computed
tomography angiography (CTA) has rapidly emerged and is now used widely in clinical
practice to assess coronary arteries [12]. CTA is used to assess atherosclerosis. One method
for detecting atherosclerotic plaques and stenoses is to segment the vessel lumen from CTA
images and assess the diameter of it. If there are large variations in diameter, it could be
an indicator of stenosis [25]. Several attempts of coronary artery segmentation as well as
detection and quantiﬁcation of coronary artery stenosis have been made in previous years
[12].
The publishers of the Rotterdam Coronary Artery Challenge [12] have suggested a stan-
dardized evaluation framework for lumen segmentation of coronary arteries. Several au-
tomatic methods for segmenting the coronary arteries in the available CTA images from
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
the challenge have been suggested [13, 14, 16]. In the challenge, segmentation performance
on diseased and healthy vessel segments are recorded separately. Diseased vessel segments
are segments containing at least one signiﬁcant stenosis (i.e. ≥50% diameter reduction)
and healthy segments are deﬁned as having no disease or only non-signiﬁcant stenoses (i.e.
< 50%) [12]. Among the challenge submissions, the best performance on lumen segmen-
tation was obtained by Lugauer et al., who proposed a model based on Markov Random
Fields to obtain the segmentation [14]. They achieved Dice coeﬃcients of 0.76 and 0.75 on
diseased and healthy vessels, respectively. The second best performing algorithm submit-
ted to the challenge was suggested by another research group lead by Lugauer [13]. In this
work, Lugauer et al. proposes a method that ﬁrst estimates lumen boundary probabilities
in multi-planar reconstructed (MPR) images across the blood vessels and then automati-
cally identiﬁes calciﬁed plaque and excludes the voxels belonging to calcium from further
analysis. The calcium detection is achieved by analysis of lumen and boundary likelihood
curves estimated along equiangular spokes in the MPR images. These curves are diﬀerent
depending on whether or not calciﬁed plaque is present. The automatic removal of calcium
voxels was performed based on their observation that voxels belonging to calciﬁed plaque
are easily confused with lumen voxels due to overlapping intensity values. To obtain the
ﬁnal lumen segmentation, a surface optimization algorithm is utilized. They achieved Dice
coeﬃcients of 0.74 and 0.73 on diseased and healthy vessels, respectively. The third ranked
submission is by Mohr et al. [16], who suggest a method that ﬁrst excludes calcium voxels
using the Bayesian information criterion, and then classiﬁes remaining voxels using k-means
clustering followed by the expectation-maximization algorithm to obtain probabilities of a
voxel being vessel lumen or vessel wall. To obtain the ﬁnal lumen segmentation, a level-set
approach is used. They obtained Dice coeﬃcients of 0.70 and 0.73 on diseased and healthy
vessel segments, respectively.
In comparison to the performances of these three studies with automatic algorithms for
lumen segmentation, three manual annotations have been made independently by three
experts [12]. These manual annotations have been combined and used as the reference
standard in the challenge. If the individual manual annotations are compared with the
reference standard, Dice coeﬃcients of 0.79/0.81, 0.76/0.77 and 0.65/0.72 are obtained by
the three experts for diseased/healthy vessels. Hence, it seems that the presented automatic
algorithms perform better than one of the experts and comparable or close to the manual
segmentations of the two other experts on this data set.
Despite the fact that deep learning is widely used within the ﬁeld of image segmentation
of medical images, none of the algorithms submitted to the lumen segmentation challenge
utilize deep learning. Among the segmentation tasks, that deep learning have been used for
are: heart segmentation [29], cell segmentation [22] and melanoma segmentation [15]. Thus,
it is interesting to see how a deep neural network would perform on the task of segmenting
the coronary arteries from the CTA images from the lumen segmentation challenge.
Outside the challenge an example of coronary artery segmentation using deep learning have
been found. Hong et al. [9] have implemented a convolutional neural network (CNN) for
==PAGE:13==
1.1 State-of-the-art
3
segmentation of the vessel lumen of the coronary arteries in CTA images. The data used
in this study is a diﬀerent data set than the one available in the Rotterdam Coronary
Artery Challenge and comes from 50 patients who have undergone CTA for assessment of
coronary artery disease. Their method consists of three networks trained independently on
axial, coronal and sagittal slices of straightened curved planar reformation images of the
coronary arteries. Using a probabilistic method with Adaptive Boosting, the information
from the three image views are combined to obtain a ﬁnal segmentation mask. A luminal
Dice coeﬃcient of 0.63 was obtained on the data used in the study. These results can not be
compared directly to the results from the Rotterdam Coronary Artery Challenge, however,
the obtained Dice coeﬃcient is a bit lower than the Dice coeﬃcients obtained by [13, 14]
and [16] in the challenge and hence the method by Hong et al. does not seem to perform
as well. However, only one network architecture is proposed by Hong et al. in [9] and
since the network structure in general can have large inﬂuence on the outcome of a neural
network, it would be interesting to examine whether other network architectures might
show better results on the lumen segmentation task. In this project two other network
structures for lumen segmentation will be evaluated.
The U-net architecture proposed by Ronneberger et al.
[22] is a widely used network
architecture used for semantic segmentation and have shown good results on several image
segmentation tasks. In the original work by Ronneberger et al. [22] they achieve high
segmentation performance in two very diﬀerent cell segmentation tasks.
Good results
have also been obtained with U-net inspired network architectures on tasks like melanoma
segmentation [11] and heart segmentation [18]. In this project it will be examined whether
the U-net structure might also be useful for segmentation of coronary arteries.
In the
U-net [22], independent 2D images are given as input to the network, however, a stack of
MPR images extracted across coronary arteries are not independent and 3D context should
ideally be taken into account. A U-net processing 3D images directly would be a possible
solution to this issue, however, it would be very computationally demanding and it might
require a large downsampling of the images to make it work in practice.
To avoid the computational demand of processing 3D images directly, Zheng et al. [29]
have proposed a method for semantic segmentation that processes 2D images (from a 3D
volume) but still takes 3D context into account. They propose a network structure similar
to the U-net structure with a contracting and expanding part of the network. In addition
to this U-net-like structure an extra contracting path is added to the network structure.
This additional contracting path takes a contextual input in the form of the previous
image in the image stack along with the segmentation obtained for this previous image, in
an attempt to obtain spatial consistency of the segmentation. The network is applied to
magnetic resonance images for cardiac segmentation but in this project it will be examined
whether this network architecture is useful for segmentation of coronary arteries in CTA
images as well.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
1.2
Aim of thesis
In this project, deep learning will be utilized to segment the lumen of coronary arteries
from CTA images. Two diﬀerent data sets from the Rotterdam Coronary Artery Challenge
will be used with diﬀerent level of details in the reference images.
More speciﬁc, the project will involve the following aspects:
• Multiplanar reconstruction of CTA data across the coronary arteries and generation
of reference images in the same format
• Lumen segmentation using the U-net structure from [22]
• Lumen segmentation taking spatial consistency into account with inspiration from
[29]
• Exploration of whether pretraining with a data set with less detailed lumen reference
images, will help the segmentation of a data set with more detailed lumen reference
images
These methods are believed to produce a robust segmentation algorithm for coronary artery
segmentation in CTA images. Such an algorithm could potentially be used to develop a
robust and reliable segmentation tool.
This tool could eventually be expanded with a
plaque characterization feature which together with the segmentation feature could assist
in diagnosis and treatment planning of patients with coronary artery disease.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Clinical background
2.1.1
Anatomy of the heart and the circulatory system
The purpose of the heart is to pump blood throughout the body to supply oxygen and
nutrients to all its tissues. The heart is divided into a left and a right side, and each of
the sides has two chambers: an atria and a ventricle. The right side of the heart receives
blood from the body, which has a high concentration of carbon dioxide and other waste
products, and pumps it through the pulmonary circulation. In the pulmonary system,
the blood passes through the lung capillaries where the carbon dioxide diﬀuses from the
blood into the lungs and receives oxygen via diﬀusion from the lungs into the blood. The
oxygenated blood then passes on to the left side of the heart. From the left side of the heart,
the oxygenated blood is pumped via aorta throughout the systemic circulation that leads
the blood throughout the body, where oxygen and nutrients are absorbed by the tissues
and carbon dioxide and other waste products are transferred to the blood and then carried
back to the right side of the heart. In both sides of the heart, the blood ﬁrst reaches the
atria from where it is passed onto the ventricle which pumps the blood throughout either
the pulmonary or systemic circulation [28]. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.1.
2.1.1.1
Coronary arteries
The heart tissue, like all other tissues, requires perfusion of oxygenated blood to keep
functioning.
The blood supply to the heart is provided by a set of arteries called the
coronary arteries. Many of the coronary arteries lie on the surface of the heart and branches
oﬀaorta right above the point where aorta leaves the heart. An illustration of the coronary
arteries can be seen in Fig. 2.2. The left and right coronary arteries are responsible for
blood perfusion of the left and the right side of the heart, respectively. The right coronary
artery (RCA) usually has a smaller diameter than the left coronary artery (LCA), because
the right side of the heart is smaller than the left and hence requires less blood supply.
Two major branches of the left coronary artery are the left anterior descending (LAD)
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the heart and the circulatory system. Figure from [28].
artery and the left circumﬂex artery (LCX). The coronary arteries branches several times
in order to supply all the muscle tissue of the heart (the myocardium) with oxygen. Most
of the myocardium receives blood from more than one branch of the coronary arteries and
furthermore connections between branches of an artery or connections between branches
of diﬀerent arteries exists. Also, connections between arterioles and capillaries exist. This
means, that if an artery is occluded, the tissue area supplied by that artery may still receive
some blood from other branches or from connections [28].
The American Heart Association (AHA) has deﬁned a classiﬁcation system of the coronary
arteries in which the arteries are divided into 17 segments. The division of the coronary
arteries into these 17 segments can be seen in Fig. 2.2.
2.1.2
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is one of the leading causes of coronary artery disease (CAD), stroke and
peripheral artery disease. Atherosclerosis is a condition in which parts of the artery wall
thickens due to accumulation of fatty materials. This accumulation is called plaque forma-
tion. Usually, atherosclerosis aﬀects large and medium-sized arteries which include aorta
and the coronary arteries. The condition can begin in the late teens but does usually not
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Clinical background
7
cause symptoms for decades.
Figure 2.2: The 17 segments of the coronary arteries as deﬁned by the American Heart
Association classiﬁcation. Ao: aorta, RCA: right coronary artery, LCA: left
coronary artery, LM: left main branch, LAD: left anterior descending artery
and LCX: left circumﬂex artery. Figure from [8].
The plaques associated with atherosclerosis are of three diﬀerent types: fatty streaks, ﬁ-
brous atheromatous plaques and complicated lesions. The fatty streaks consist of smooth
muscle cells ﬁlled with cholesterol and macrophages. A macrophage is a type of cell in-
volved in the immune system where it removes harmful substances (e.g. cholesterol) from
the bloodstream by a process called phagocytosis. The fatty streaks appear as thin yel-
low lines along the major arteries. The fatty streaks does not cause symptoms but can
evolve into ﬁbrous atheromatous plaques over time. The ﬁbrous atheromatous plaques
and complicated lesions are the types of plaque responsible for the clinically signiﬁcant
manifestations of atherosclerosis. The ﬁbrous atheromatous plaques are characterized by
accumulation of intracellular and extracellular lipids, proliferation of vascular smooth mus-
cle cells, scar tissue formation and calciﬁcation. The ﬁbrous atheromatous plaques initially
appears as an elevated thickening of the vessel wall. They have a core of extracellular lipid
which is covered by a ﬁbrous cap of smooth muscle and connective tissue. An example of
a ﬁbrous plaque can be seen in Fig. 2.3. When the ﬁbrous plaques increase in size, they
cause a reduction of the lumen of the artery and they may eventually occlude the artery
or predispose to thrombus formation (which also reduces or occludes the lumen). The
narrowing of the lumen will cause a signiﬁcant reduction in the blood ﬂow. Finally the
complicated lesions develops when the ﬁbrous plaques breaks open which produces hemor-
rhage, ulceration and scar tissue deposits. Thrombosis is the most important complication
of atherosclerosis and is caused by turbulence and slowing of the blood in areas around
plaques as well as ulceration of the plaque.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
Figure 2.3: Fully developed ﬁbrous atheromatic plaque with a core containing lipid-ﬁlled
macrophages and debris from necrotic smooth muscle cells. The ﬁbrous cap
is primarily made of smooth muscle cells inﬁltrated with macrophages. The
ﬁbrous plaque is encapsulated by a layer of endothelial cells. Figure from
[19].
Usually there is no sign of atherosclerosis and no symptoms are present until the plaques
severely narrows or fully occludes an artery. Thus, many people are not aware that they
have the disease until a medical emergency (e.g. a heart attack or stroke) occurs. The signs
and symptoms caused by atherosclerosis depend on the extent of vessel obstruction and
which vessels are involved. Some of the eﬀects caused by plaques are narrowing of the vessel
and thereby ischemia (restriction of the blood perfusion of tissues, in such a way that the
oxygen supply to the tissue is insuﬃcient), thrombosis and emboli formation due to damage
of the vessel endothelium and sudden vessel occlusion due to plaque hemorrhage or plaque
rupture. In medium-sized arteries, such as the coronary arteries, ischemia and infarction
due to vessel occlusion usually causes the complications, while thrombus formation and
weakening of the vessel wall is a more important complication in larger arteries, such as
aorta. Atherosclerosis can aﬀect any organ or tissue, but some arteries are more commonly
aﬀected. Among these are the coronary arteries.
Atherosclerotic plaque can be stable or unstable. The stable plaque obstructs blood ﬂow to
some extent, while the unstable plaque in addition to obstruction of blood ﬂow is vulnerable
and is at risk of rupturing, which leads to thrombus formation. Stable plaques are typically
associated with stable angina, while unstable plaques usually are involved in unstable
angina and myocardial infarction (MI). In Fig. 2.4 possible developments of atherosclerotic
plaques are illustrated and corresponding conditions are indicated.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Clinical background
9
Some factors play a major role when it comes to the vulnerability of plaques. These includes
the size of the lipid-rich core of the plaque, lack of stabilizing smooth muscle cells, presence
of inﬂammation with plaque degradation, and stability and thickness of the ﬁbrous cap.
If a plaque has a thin ﬁbrous cap encapsulating a large lipid core, it is at high risk of
rupturing [19].
Figure 2.4: Illustration of possible development of atherosclerotic plaque. A: Stable ﬁxed
plaque in stable angina.
B: Unstable plaque with plaque disruption and
platelet aggregation in the acute coronary syndromes. Figure from [19].
2.1.3
Coronary artery disease
Heart disease caused by decreased blood ﬂow in the coronary arteries is called coronary
artery disease (CAD). These diseases can cause various disorders, including ischemia, con-
duction defects, heart failure and sudden cardiac death. Atherosclerosis is the most com-
mon cause of CAD and it can aﬀect one or all of the major coronary arteries and the
branches of these.
CAD can be divided into two broader disorder categories: chronic ischemic heart disease
and acute coronary syndrome. The chronic ischemic heart disease is caused by vasospasm of
the coronary arteries or stable atherosclerotic plaques in these arteries. The acute coronary
syndromes includes unstable angina and MI which is caused by acute disruption of plaque,
platelet aggregation and thrombus formation [19].
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
2.1.3.1
Chronic ischemic heart disease
Chronic ischemic heart disease is classiﬁed into three diﬀerent types: chronic stable angina,
silent myocardial ischemia and vasospastic angina.
Chronic stable angina is most often associated with stenosis or occlusion of a coronary
artery (as seen in part A of Fig. 2.4), which causes an imbalance between the metabolic
needs in part of the myocardium and the coronary blood ﬂow supplying this part of the
myocardium. The symptom of stable angina is a sudden chest pain or pressure sensation
due to transient ischemia of the myocardium. For half of the persons with CAD, stable
angina is the initial manifestation of ischemic heart disease. The symptoms are provoked
by physical activity and emotional stress and alleviates within a few minutes of rest or by
use of medication, such as nitroglycerin. If relief is not obtained within 5-10 minutes, it is
a sign of severe ischemia.
The silent myocardial ischemia is also due to an imbalance between blood ﬂow and metabolic
needs of the myocardium. However, as opposed to the chronic stable angina, no symptoms
present.
Vasospastic angina is caused by spasms of the coronary arteries. For this type of chronic
ischemic heart disease, chest pain usually occurs during rest or very limited physical activity
as well as at night time [19].
The diagnosis of chronic ischemic heart disease is based on patient’s symptoms, diﬀerent
clinical examinations and sometimes conventional invasive coronary angiography that is
however associated with a signiﬁcant risk of complications. In patients with a lower risk
of having ischemic heart disease, the ﬁrst test will typically be computed tomography
angiography (CTA). CTA can be used to determine the presence of CAD and assess the
extent of it [21].
2.1.3.2
Acute coronary syndrome
Acute coronary syndrome represents diﬀerent acute ischemic heart diseases.
These are
unstable angina and acute MI classiﬁed depending on whether the ST-segment of the elec-
trocardiogram (ECG) is elevated. The acute MI is divided into non-ST-segment elevation
MI (NSTEMI) and ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI).
Unstable angina and NSTEMI are clinical syndromes of myocardial ischemia which ranges
from angina to MI. It is caused by partly or fully occlusion of an artery, due to plaque
disruption and following thrombosis (as seen in part B of Fig. 2.4). The blood clot may
dissolve partially and form again later, which may cause another incident of angina.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Clinical background
11
STEMI is a consequence of atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries which causes necrosis
(cell death) of the myocardial tissue. The extent of infarction depends on the aﬀected
arteries and the severity of blood ﬂow restriction. The acute ST-segment elevation MI can
cause severe and irreversible impairment of the heart function [19].
2.1.4
Computed Tomography
In a Computed Tomography (CT) scanner, x-rays are send through the patient and projec-
tions of the tissues within the patient are obtained from several angles by moving the x-ray
source around the body and capturing the projections from diﬀerent angles at detectors on
the opposite side of the patient. CT scanners have digital detectors whose signals are send
directly to a computer where they are used for reconstructing one or several cross-sectional
slices of the human body. In Fig. 2.5 an example of a CT scanner and the geometry of the
x-ray tube and detectors within a CT scanner is illustrated.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: (a) Example of CT scanner. Figure from [1]. (b) Example of the geometry
of a CT scanner showing the rotating x-ray tube and detectors around the
patient. Figure from [20].
Many diﬀerent CT systems are available.
Among these the multiple-row detector CT
(MDCT). A MDCT scanner has several rows of detectors (in comparison to a traditional
CT scanner that has one row of detectors). The multiple rows of detectors are used to
collect x-ray data from a ’thick’ x-ray fan-beam. In this way, several 1D projections are
obtained at the same time. If the x-ray source and detectors are far enough apart, the
data collected from the parallel rows of detectors will correspond to approximately parallel
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
planes and several slices can thereby be obtained at the same time. As the x-ray source
rotates rapidly around the patient, 3D imaging is obtained very quick [20]. In Fig. 2.6 an
example of a slice from a CT scan of the heart is seen.
Figure 2.6: Example of one slice of a CT scan of the heart.
2.1.4.1
Cardiac CTA
A cardiac CT angiography (CTA) is a CT scan of the heart in which intravenous contrast
agents are administered to enhance the lumen of the coronary arteries in the obtained CT
images. These CT images make it possible to assess the lumen of the coronary arteries
as well as evaluate the presence, the extent and the type (calciﬁed or non-calciﬁed) of
a coronary plaque. Cardiac CTA is a non-invasive method and is an alternative to the
invasive conventional coronary angiography (CCA) which have been used as the standard
reference method for diagnosing coronary artery disease for decades [24]. Cardiac CTA has
rapidly emerged as a diagnostic tool in clinical practice. One of the reasons for this is that
it is non-invasive [12].
2.2
Deep learning background
In this thesis, semantic segmentation of images extracted across blood vessels is performed.
Semantic segmentation is the process of assigning a class label to each pixel in an image.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Convolutional neural networks
13
In this project the segmentation is binary and segments the images into vessel lumen
and non-lumen. Semantic segmentation using deep learning can be achieved using fully
convolutional neural networks (FCNN), which consist of convolutional and max pooling
layers. An introduction to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is given in this section,
however, the reader is expected to have basic knowledge of key concepts within neural
networks such as the structure of fully connected feedforward networks, backpropagation,
rectiﬁed linear units (ReLu) and softmax activation functions, cross-entropy loss function
and dropout. If these concepts are new or need refreshment, the reader is encouraged to
read [17] before continuing.
2.3
Convolutional neural networks
Convolutional neural networks are widely used in image analysis and are usually preferred
over standard neural networks with fully connected layers when it comes to image analysis.
The reason for this is, that CNNs take the spatial structure of the image into account. The
basic concepts of CNNs involve local receptive ﬁelds, shared weights and pooling.
If the input to a CNN is an image with two dimensions, each hidden layer in the network
will also be two-dimensional. The local receptive ﬁeld is a small area of the input, for
example a 5 × 5 area of pixels in the image, which will be the input to one neuron in a
hidden layer. The size of the receptive ﬁeld is determined by the size of the convolutional
kernel, e.g. if a 5 × 5 convolutional kernel is used, the local receptive ﬁeld is 5 × 5. The
convolutional kernel is the array of weights learned at the connection between the local
receptive ﬁelds and the hidden neurons. For each hidden layer, the weights and bias learned
are the same for all hidden neurons in the hidden layer. This means that the neurons in a
hidden layer have shared weights and bias.
The local receptive ﬁeld is slided along both dimensions of the image until all pixels have
been covered and all inputs to the neurons in a hidden layer have been calculated. If the
local receptive ﬁeld is moved with a stride of one, it means that it is slided one pixel at a
time (either to the right or downwards, if starting in the upper left corner) and hence the
local receptive ﬁelds have an overlap. Strides larger than one are also sometimes used [17],
however in this project only strides of 1 will be used. The concept of local receptive ﬁelds
is illustrated in Fig. 2.7, where the local receptive ﬁeld is a 5 × 5 area of the input pixels
and the stride is one pixel. If no zero padding of the input image is used, the hidden layer
will be smaller than the input layer. For a kernel of 5×5, two pixels are lost on all borders
of the image. Each connection between a pixel in the receptive ﬁeld and the hidden neuron
learns a weight.
The shared weights and bias means that each neuron a hidden layer detects the same
feature at diﬀerent locations in the input image. This feature could for example be to
detect a horizontal edge in each of the local receptive ﬁelds. It could be of interest to
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: Illustrations of the concept of receptive ﬁeld and generation of hidden layers
in CNNs. Figures from [17].
detect horizontal edges all over the image and hence it makes sense to use the shared
weight over the whole image.
Since speciﬁc features are detected with a convolutional
kernel, the hidden layer is also called a feature map. The shared weights and shared bias
deﬁne each feature map.
The input to each hidden neuron is given as the convolution of the receptive ﬁeld and the
convolutional kernel with a bias added. If I is the input image, W is the convolutional
kernel (the shared weights) and b is the shared bias, the output feature map is obtained
by:
S(i, j) = σ((I ∗W)(i, j) + b) = σ
 X
m
X
n
(I(i + m, j + n)W(m, n)) + b
!
,
(2.1)
where m and n are the dimensions of W, σ is the activation function and and * is the
two-dimensional convolution operation [7].
In image analysis, it is usually necessary to detect more than one feature in an image.
Therefore, a complete convolutional layer usually consists of several feature maps obtained
by learning diﬀerent kernels (one for each feature map).
In addition to the convolutional layers, CNNs also often contain pooling layers, these are
usually applied after convolutional layers. The pooling layers are a way of downsampling
and the reasoning behind pooling is that once we know that a speciﬁc feature is found in
the original input, the exact location of it is not as important as its relative location to
other features. A pooling layer might for example summarize a region of 2 × 2 neurons in
the output of the previous (convolutional) layer as one value in the pooled layer. A typical
type of pooling is max pooling, which outputs the maximum activation from a small area
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Convolutional neural networks
15
of a feature map. For example, if a 2 × 2 max pooling kernel is used, the operation will
output the maximum value among the four values in the 2 × 2 area of the feature map.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2.8, where a stride of 2 is used such that there is no overlap of
the max pooling kernels. Max pooling is applied to each feature map separately [17].
Figure 2.8: Illustration of 2 × 2 max pooling with stride 2 of one feature map. Figure
from [17].
In CNN for semantic segmentation, transposed convolutions are often used. The transposed
convolution is a way of upsampling a set of feature maps and hence a way to increase the
size of the feature maps. However, instead of using a predeﬁned method for upsampling,
the purpose of the transposed convolution is to learn a method for upsampling the feature
maps. The transposed convolution is used in the expanding path of networks for semantic
segmentation to restore the original image size at the end of the network, so each pixel can
be classiﬁed at the output of the network [26].
Each layer in a CNN is a 3D array of size h × w × d, where h and w are the height and
width and d is the number of feature maps. If an image is given as input to a CNN, the
ﬁrst layer is the input image and thus h and w are the width and height of the image in
pixels and d is the number of color channels, which for gray scale images is one. If there
are multiple input feature maps, the convolutional kernel will be a 3D array with the third
dimension equal to the number of input feature maps. To obtain the input activation of
the following hidden neuron, this 3D array will be convolved with a 3D local receptive ﬁeld
that spans across all the input feature maps. The output activation of each hidden neuron
in a feature map is obtained by adding a the input activation and bias and applying an
activation function [17].
An often used network structure for semantic segmentation includes a contracting and
expanding part of the network (sometimes also called encoding and decoding paths) in
which repeated sections of convolutional and pooling layers makes up the contracting path,
while the encoding part is made up by repeated sections of transposed convolutions and
convolutional layers. An example of this network architecture is the U-net proposed by
Ronneberger et al. [22]. By having a ﬁnal convolutional layer ending with the same width
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
and height as the input, a segmentation mask can be obtained. The ﬁnal output of a
FCNN is usually a number of feature maps with the same size as the input image, with
pixelwise probabilities of each pixel belonging to a certain class. The number of feature
maps at the output corresponds to the number of classes in the image. Hence, for a binary
segmentation task two feature maps makes up the output [22].
2.4
Batch normalization
Batch normalization is a technique widely adopted in deep neural networks (DNNs). It
enables faster and more stable training of the DNNs. Batch normalization aims at stabi-
lizing the distribution of the inputs to a given layer of the network during training [23].
This normalization is made for each minibatch B = {xi, . . . , xm}, where m is the size of
the minibatch. Hence, the values of the activation x over a mini batch are fed as inputs to
the batch normalization transform. Batch normalization is achieved by adding additional
layers to the network that sets the mean and variance of the distribution of each activation
to zero and one, respectively. The minibatch mean µB and variance σ2
B are given as:
µB = 1
m
m
X
i=1
xi
(2.2)
σ2
B = 1
m
m
X
i=1
(xi −µB)2
(2.3)
Each activation xi is batch normalized in the following way:
ˆxi = xi −µB
p
σ2
B + ϵ
,
(2.4)
where ϵ is a constant added for numerical stability. Finally, the batch normalized inputs are
scaled and shifted with the trainable parameters γ and β that are learned during training
along with the weights and biases of the network. The output yi of the batch normalization
transform for a speciﬁc activation xi is given as:
yi = γˆxi + β
(2.5)
Batch normalization is applied to each activation independently [10]. Batch normalization
is usually applied before the activation function of the previous layer.
The eﬀect of it
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Spatial dropout
17
is, that the optimization landscape becomes smoother which makes the behaviour of the
gradients more predictable and stable and thus allows for faster and more stable training
[23].
2.5
Spatial dropout
Spatial dropout works in the same way as regular dropout, however, entire 2D feature
maps are dropped out instead of individual hidden neurons. The problem with regular
dropout in relation to CNNs is that this method drops out hidden neurons in a feature
map independently, however, in CNNs hidden neurons within a feature map are often
strongly correlated and hence these strong correlations might be broken by the independent
dropouts made by regular dropout [27]. Spatial dropout will promote the independence
between the feature maps in a convolutional layer [3].
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Data
3.1
Rotterdam Coronary Artery Algorithm Evaluation
Framework
The Rotterdam Coronary Artery Algorithm Evaluation Framework consists of two publicly
available challenge frameworks [2]; one for coronary artery centerline extraction algorithms
[24] and one for coronary artery stenoses detection and quantiﬁcation algorithms and lumen
segmentation algorithms [12].
The goal of the frameworks is to evaluate and compare
diﬀerent algorithms for image analysis of the coronary arteries in cardiac CTA.
For the centerline extraction framework, the goal is to compare algorithms for centerline
extraction of the coronary arteries in CTA images. However, in this thesis the data available
for this challenge will be used to segment the coronary arteries. The data set contains little
detail about the precise outline of the lumen, but a good estimate in the form of a circular
lumen deﬁned by given centerlines and lumen radii is used to create an estimate for a
lumen segmentation task.
For the stenoses detection and quantiﬁcation and lumen segmentation framework the goal
is to compare algorithms for automatic detection and quantiﬁcation of stenoses in CTA
images as well as compare algorithms for automatic lumen segmentation of the coronary
arteries in CTA images. The data available for these challenges is in this thesis used for
lumen segmentation of the coronary arteries. The lumen outlines in this data are more
detailed than the data from the centerline extraction framework.
In the following sections, the two datasets used in this thesis will be described. All handling
of data and the processing of it described in these sections have been performed by the
research group behind the challenges [12, 24].
==PAGE:30==
20
Data
3.1.1
Data from centerline extraction challenge
The data collection from the centerline extraction framework [24] is used in this thesis. The
data collection consists of 32 CTA data sets. For 8 of the CTA images associated reference
standard centerlines and corresponding radii of the coronary arteries are available, this data
set serves as a training set in the challenge. For the remaining 24 data sets no reference
standard is available, since it is meant as a testing set for the challenge. The 32 data sets
have been obtained from two diﬀerent CT scanners. The mean voxel size of the CTA data
sets is 0.32 × 0.32 × 0.4 mm3. The data have been obtained from patients who underwent
cardiac CTA examination. In Fig. 3.1 two examples of slices of the CTA volume from this
data set are shown.
Figure 3.1: Examples of slices of the CTA volume from the centerline extraction data
set. The images are from two diﬀerent patients.
The references have been obtained by three trained observers independently pointing out
centerline points along the vessels. The observers have also speciﬁed the radius of the vessel
lumen at least every 5 mm. The centerline is deﬁned as the curve passing through the center
of gravity of the vessel lumen in each cross-section. If the vessel is partly indistinguishable
from the background at some cross-sections along the vessel, e.g. due to occlusion or image
artifacts, the centerline has been smoothly interpolated. The radius is deﬁned such that
the area enclosed by a circle with the given radius matches the actual area of the lumen.
In each CTA data four vessels have been annotated. These four vessels always include the
right coronary artery (RCA), the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the circumﬂex
artery (LCX) along with one of the large side-branches of these main coronary arteries.
The fourth vessel annotated varies from data set to data set.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Rotterdam Coronary Artery Algorithm Evaluation Framework
21
The centerline paths of the three observers have been combined as a weighted average of the
annotated centerlines from the three observers. After creating a weighted average centerline
curve, the observers have compared their annotations to this average centerline and were
asked to adjust possible annotation errors. These corrected annotations are then used to
create the ﬁnal reference standard centerlines by again calculating a weighted average and
then resampling the centerlines equidistantly with distance 0.03 mm. The radius at each
of the equidistantly sampled points has been obtained by connecting each of the points of
the reference centerline with one annotated point in each of the centerlines from the three
observers. The radii denoted by the observers in the connected points have been averaged
and this average serves as the reference radii for the reference centerline point.
To ensure representative training and test sets, the presence of calcium and the image
quality have been assessed and divided into three groups based on presence of calcium
(absent, modest and severe) and three groups based on image quality (poor, moderate and
good). Based on these classiﬁcations, the data sets were distributed equally in the training
and test sets [24]. In this thesis, this data set is referred to as the CL (centerline) data set.
3.1.2
Data from stenosis detection and lumen segmentation chal-
lenge
The data collection from the stenosis detection and quantiﬁcation and lumen segmentation
framework [12] is also used in this thesis. This data collection consists of 48 CTA data
sets. For 18 of the CTA images, associated reference standards for lumen segmentation are
available. The reference standard for lumen segmentation only includes annotations of a
few vessel segments in each data set. For the remaining 30 data sets no reference standard
is available, since it is meant as a testing set for the challenge. The 48 data sets have been
obtained from diﬀerent vendors and diﬀerent medical centres and are all from symptomatic
patients. The patients were chosen to be representative of the population undergoing CTA
examination for coronary artery disease (CAD). Data from patients with previous history
of a list of diﬀerent complications related to CT scanning (e.g. inability of holding a breath
for 15 seconds) and data with motion artifacts were excluded and is thereby not a part of
the challenge data set. In Fig. 3.2, two examples of slices of the CTA volume from this
data set are shown. In this report, this data set is referred to as the SD (stenosis detection)
data set.
The references for lumen segmentation were obtained by three trained observers indepen-
dently segmenting selected vessel segments in the CTA data. All segments with signiﬁcant
stenosis (≥50% luminal narrowing) and three randomly selected segments (one from each
of the main arteries) were segmented for each patient.
Segments with fully occlusion
according to the CTA stenoses detection and quantiﬁcation reference standard were ex-
cluded. The observers independently drew lumen contours in six composite MPR images
and these longitudinal lumen contours were then used to create cross-sectional contours of
==PAGE:32==
22
Data
Figure 3.2: Examples of slices of the CTA volume from the stenosis detection data set.
The images are from two diﬀerent patients.
the lumen. The cross-sectional contours were manually corrected by all three observers if
annotation errors were found. The result is a set of lumen contours outlining the lumen
in a cross-sectional view along the vessel segments. The lumen contours annotated by the
three observers are all found at the challenge website, however, in this thesis the lumen
outlines created by Observer3 is used as the reference for lumen segmentation, since his
annotations obtain the highest Dice coeﬃcients when evaluated on the test set.
In addition to the lumen segmentation references, references for stenosis detection and
quantiﬁcation have been created by three trained observers independently grading the CTA
data sets. For annotating, the axial source images along with MPR and composite MPR
views were used to evaluate the presence of obstructions in coronary arteries. Obstructions
were deﬁned as plaques with ≥20% luminal narrowing.
For each of the plaques that
were visually assessed to have ≥20% luminal narrowing, the observers were to report the
location and type (non-calciﬁed, calciﬁed or mixed) of the plaque, as well as the degree
of stenosis (normal (no plaque/stenosis), mild (plaque with 20-49% stenosis), moderate
(plaque with 50-69% stenosis), severe (plaque with 70-99% stenosis) or occluded (complete
occlusion of lumen)). A unique reference standard was created following the procedure
seen in Fig. 3.3.
Along with the CTA images and reference standards for lumen segmentation and stenosis
detection and quantiﬁcation, centerline coordinates along the centerlines of the coronary
arteries for each data set is available. For each centerline coordinate, a plaque type and
stenosis grade are given.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Rotterdam Coronary Artery Algorithm Evaluation Framework
23
Figure 3.3: Procedure for generating CTA stenosis detection and quantiﬁcation reference
standard. The categories of stenoses are normal, mild, moderate, severe and
occluded.
Being oﬀby 1 category would for example mean that the 3rd
observer estimates a stenosis as mild, while the 2 other observers categorizes
it as either normal or moderate. Being 2 categories oﬀwould as an example
mean that the 3rd observer estimates a stenosis as mild, while the 2 other
observers categorizes it as severe. Figure from [12].
==PAGE:34==
24
Data
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Methods
4.1
Multiplanar reconstruction
In this project images extracted across the coronary arteries in CTA images are used as
input in the neural networks implemented.
These cross-sectional images are extracted
using the method multiplanar reconstruction (MPR). This method is described in Sec.
4.1.4.
Before extracting images across slices of the CTA data, isotropic resampling of
the CTA data is made such that the voxel dimensions are the same in the x, y and z
directions of the CTA data. This is described in Sec. 4.1.1. In order to extract the cross-
sectional images of the coronary arteries, a centerline of the vessel along which the MPR
images should be extracted is needed. For the CL data, reference centerline coordinates
are available but need a bit of preprocessing before being used (described in Sec. 4.1.2).
For the SD data coordinates of lumen outlines are available as the reference for lumen
segmentation. From these lumen outlines centerline coordinates along the vessel segments
are estimated, as described in Sec. 4.1.3. With these centerlines for the CL and SD data,
MPR can be made to obtain cross-sectional images from the CTA data from each of the
two data sets. This is described in Sec. 4.1.4.
4.1.1
Isotropic resampling of CTA data
The voxel dimensions varies in diﬀerent directions of a CTA volume, across scanners and
between patients, thus isotropic resampling is made in order to get isotropic data. This is
important when extracting MPR images to avoid distortions due to anisotropic voxels. The
CTA data from both the CL data and SD data are resampled to have isotropic voxels, i.e.
voxels with the same dimensions in both x, y and z-direction. Furthermore, all available
data is resampled to have the same voxel size. The CTA data is resampled to have voxel
dimensions corresponding to the overall smallest voxel dimension for all the available data.
The smallest voxel dimension is 0.25 mm, thus all data sets are resampled to have voxel
size 0.25mm x 0.25mm x 0.25mm.
The isotropic CTA data is obtained using trilinear
interpolation.
==PAGE:36==
26
Methods
4.1.2
Preprocessing of centerline coordinates (CL data set)
For the CL data, reference centerline coordinates are available. These centerline coordinates
are scaled such that the voxel spacing is taken into account. That is, the coordinates are
converted from the world (scanner) coordinate system to the voxel coordinate system but
without forcing the coordinates within speciﬁc voxels. The conversion is given as
coordvoxel = coordworld
s
−s
2,
(4.1)
where s = 0.25mm is the voxel spacing. The origin of the scanner coordinate system and
voxel coordinate system is the same and no correction is made with respect to this.
4.1.3
Preprocessing of lumen outline coordinates (SD data set)
To be able to extract relevant MPR images from the SD data, coordinates along the cen-
terline of the vessel segments with lumen outlines (the reference for lumen segmentation)
are needed. The centerline coordinates are estimated from the given lumen outlines. The
coordinates of several points along the lumen outlines are available for a number of vessel
segments for each patient. The lumen outline coordinates are scaled such that the voxel
spacing and origin of scanner coordinate system is taken into account. That is, the coor-
dinates are converted from the world (scanner) coordinate system to the voxel coordinate
system, but without forcing the coordinates within speciﬁc voxels. The conversion is given
as
coordvoxel = coordworld + o
s
−s
2,
(4.2)
where s = 0.25mm is the voxel spacing and o is the origin of the scanner coordinate system.
The center of mass (COM) for each lumen outline is calculated as the average of all points
deﬁning one outline. The lumen outlines for one segment and the corresponding calculated
COMs can be seen in Fig. 4.1(a). For each vessel segment, a smoothing spline is ﬁtted
to each of the x, y and z coordinates of the COMs for that segment. The new obtained
coordinates represents a smoothed path along the COMs of the lumen outlines. This ﬁtted
path is sampled equidistantly using spline interpolation with a distance of 1 voxel size
(0.25 mm) between each sampled point. The lumen outlines along with the equidistantly
sampled points along the smoothed centerline path are seen in Fig. 4.1(b).
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Multiplanar reconstruction
27
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) Example of lumen outline coordinates for one vessel segment along with
the center of mass (blue ’*’) for each lumen outline. (b) Example of lumen
outline coordinates for one vessel segment together with sampled points along
a spline ﬁtted to the centerline path deﬁned by the centres of masses.
Prior to ﬁtting the smoothed spline to the COMs of each segment, a data analysis of
the lumen outlines was made. This revealed that in some segments, intersecting lumen
outlines has been drawn by the observer. An example of this is shown in 4.2. In the case of
intersecting lumen outlines, one of these two intersecting outlines was removed. It was also
noted that the order of lumen outlines did not always correspond to the order of the actual
positions of the lumen outlines along the vessel segment. Sometimes, the last annotated
lumen outline in a lumen outline set for one vessel segment, actually corresponded to being
the ﬁrst lumen outline along the vessel. When ﬁtting the smoothed spline, this would give
rise to a wrong centerline path, because the smoothing spline would have to ﬁt a path
from one end of the vessel to the other end without any coordinates in between. These
wrongly placed lumen outlines were discarded prior to ﬁtting the smoothed spline. Lastly,
the initial data analysis showed that some lumen outlines had a COM which was a clear
outlier from the other COMs and hence such lumen outlines were also removed prior to
ﬁtting the spline.
==PAGE:38==
28
Methods
Figure 4.2: Example of intersecting lumen outlines. The one not aligned with the others
is removed.
4.1.4
Obtaining cross-sectional images with multiplanar recon-
struction
Multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) have been implemented to extract images across the
coronary arteries in the CTA data.
First a 2D grid of size 208x208 is deﬁned with a pixelspacing of 0.289 compared to the
CTA data (corresponding to 0.07 mm). Hence, this 2D grid has an area of 15x15mm. This
is the area desired to sample in the CTA data to obtain images across the blood vessels.
This grid is initially deﬁned with coordinates in the x-y plane placed at z=0. For each
of the equidistantly sampled points along the spline ﬁtted centerline of a vessel segment
a plane is extracted. This plane will contain the desired MPR image of the blood vessel
and it will be deﬁned by its normal vector. The normal vector is computed as the vector
pointing from the sample point of interest to the next sample point along the centerline
path:
ˆn0(i) = p(i + 1) −p(i)
(4.3)
For the ﬁrst sampled point of a vessel segment, the in-plane vectors deﬁning the x and y
directions of the sampled MPR image are generated randomly as two orthogonal vectors
to the normal vector of the plane, hence this set of unit vectors is an orthonormal basis.
In order to control the in-plane rotation of the sampled MPR images along the vessel
segment, the in-plane vectors of the MPR plane are determined using one of the in-plane
vectors of the previously sampled MPR image. In this way, the images will be aligned such
that sudden rotation of an extracted MPR image compared to the previous MPR image
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Multiplanar reconstruction
29
extracted does not occur. The two orthogonal in-plane vectors ˆn1 and ˆn2 are determined
as:
ˆn1(i) = ˆn0(i) × ˆn2(i −1)
(4.4)
ˆn2(i) = ˆn1(i) × ˆn0(i),
(4.5)
where × is the cross product, ˆn0 is the normal vector to the plane and i is the index of the
sample point at which a MPR image is to be extracted.
The rotation matrix, R, that rotates the grid in the x-y plane at z=0 into the desired plane
for the sampled point of interest, i, is given by:
R(i) =


ˆn0(i)
ˆn1(i)
ˆn2(i)


(4.6)
where ˆn0(i), ˆn1(i) and ˆn2(i) are the unit row vectors deﬁning the plane to sample the MPR
image from.
To extract the MPR image, the described 2D grid is rotated into the sampling plane and
translated to have center at the sample point of interest, corresponding to the center point
of the vessel. To sample one MPR image, the sampling coordinates, cMP Rplane, deﬁning
the coordinates to sample within the CTA volume to obtain a MPR image across the vessel
are calculated. The MPR grid consisting of the coordinates cMP Rplane are calculated as
cMP Rplane = cxyplane · R + ccenter,
(4.7)
where cxyplane are the 3D coordinates of the grid in the x-y plane with z=0 and ccenter
is the sample point of interest representing the centerline coordinate of the vessel being
sampled. The MPR image is extracted by trilinear interpolation of the CTA data at the
grid coordinates deﬁned by cMP Rplane.
In Figs. 4.3 the centerline of a vessel is shown along with two extracted MPR areas and
the resulting MPR images.
==PAGE:40==
30
Methods
Figure 4.3: Upper: Center coordinates of one vessel along with two examples of extracted
MPR slices. The red and green areas shows the areas which are sampled from
the CTA data. Lower: The resulting images extracted from the CTA data.
The coloured boundary indicates which of the two areas along the vessel,
each image is extracted from.
4.2
Label map generation
In order to be able to use the two described data sets for lumen segmentation of the coronary
arteries, generation of binary label map data with a reference lumen segmentation have to
be generated from the reference standards given for the two data sets.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Label map generation
31
4.2.1
Label map generation for the CL data set
For the CL data, centerline coordinates and corresponding lumen radii are given for 4
vessels for each patient. A label volume with the same dimensions as the CTA data is
created by creating a sphere around each centerline coordinate and labelling this volume
as vessel lumen. For each centerline coordinate, the sphere has a radius corresponding to
the radius given for that speciﬁc centerline coordinate. In Fig. 4.4(a) the label maps for
four available vessels for one patient is shown with all spheres visualized. It is seen that
with all the spheres, the vessel has a quite smooth surface. In Fig. 4.4(b) every 80th sphere
along a vessel is shown to illustrate the concept of the spheres.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: (a) Illustration of generated label maps for the four available vessels for one
patient. All spheres are shown. (b) Illustration of how a label map for the
vessels of the CL data have been generated. Every 80th sphere along the
vessel is shown.
From a biological perspective, it is a valid assumption that a vessel is circular, however,
this method for creating the label maps will not result in perfect lumen segmentation,
but gives a good estimate of the vessel lumen in this data set. The lumen segmentation
will not be perfect, since details about curvatures of the lumen, e.g. if plaque/stenosis is
present, will not be a part of the generated label map. However, since the vessel lumen
is often approximately circular this method gives a good estimate of the lumen for the
lumen segmentation. Furthermore, since the diameter of the vessel lumen (or variations in
diameter) might indicate the presence of stenosis in the coronary arteries, an approximately
lumen segmentation will also be useful to detect stenoses.
==PAGE:42==
32
Methods
When an MPR image is extracted from the CTA data, a label MPR image is also extracted
from the same position within the generated label volume. In this way, a reference image
for segmentation is extracted for each extracted MPR image and can be used as training
data for the neural network. In Fig. 4.5, two examples of MPR images and corresponding
reference images are seen. Reference images, in which more than the centered vessel is
marked as lumen, occurs if the vessel bends and the image area extracted with the MPR
method crosses the vessel at more than one point along the vessel. This is the case for the
image shown in the bottom of Fig. 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Examples of MPR images (left), corresponding extracted reference images
(middle) and the reference images overlaid on the MPR images (right).
4.2.2
Label map generation for the SD data set
For the SD data, coordinates of lumen outlines along 3-7 vessel segments for each patient
are available. For an example of lumen outlines for one vessel segment see Fig. 4.1(a).
In Fig. 4.1(b) the lumen outlines along with the points sampled along the spline-ﬁtted
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Label map generation
33
centerline are seen. Recall, that the points on the spline-ﬁtted centerline are the positions
at which MPR images are extracted, and therefore a reference image for each sampled
point along the ﬁtted spline should be created. This is achieved by projecting the two
closest lumen outlines onto the MPR plane for each sampled point and weighting the two
lumen outlines, depending on the distance from their center of mass to the sampled point.
An example of the projection of two lumen outlines onto a speciﬁc MPR plane is seen in
Fig. 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Left: Illustration of a sample point of interest and its two closest lumen
outlines.
Right: The projection of the two lumen outline onto the MPR
plane.
The estimated lumen outline for the MPR plane is now obtained as a weighted average
of the two projections. To obtain the weighted average, the distances from the COM to
the border of the lumen outlines are determined by measuring the distance along spokes
extracted every half degree all the way around the image. this is done for both projected
lumen outlines, hence giving two sets of distance values d1(θ) and d2(θ), where θ is the
angle. To be exact, the distance sets are found from the polar representation of the label
image. The two distance sets obtained from the projected lumen outlines are weighted
according to the distances from the sample point of interest to the COMs of the two
closest lumen outlines. This implies, that the distance from the sample point of interest to
the lumen border at a given angle (θ) in the generated reference image is given as:
d(θ) = d1(θ)(1 −t) + d2(θ)t,
(4.8)
==PAGE:44==
34
Methods
where t is the distance from the sampled point of interest to the closest lumen outline’s
COM, where the distance between the two closest lumen outline center coordinates is
scaled to one. Hence, the projection of the closest lumen outline is weighted higher than
the projection of the second closest lumen outline. d1 is the length from the center to the
border of the projection of the closest lumen outline at a given angle θ and d2 is the length
from the center to the border of the projection of the second closest lumen outline at a
given angle θ.
An example of a weighting of two projected lumen outlines is seen in Fig. 4.7. The left
lumen outline is closest to the sampled point of interest and is weighted higher than the
lumen outline in the middle, which is the second closest lumen outline. The distance to
the closest lumen outline is t=0.44. Recall, that d1(θ) and d2(θ) are found by measuring
the size of the lumen from spokes extracted every half degree all the way around the
image. These spokes can be seen in their polar representation in the bottom row of Fig
4.7. Each polar representation is obtained from the label image shown above it. d1 and
d2 corresponds to the length of the white area along the extracted spokes in the ﬁrst two
polar representations. The polar representation to the right is obtained by weighting d1
and d2 according to Eq. 4.8. The ﬁnal weighted label image is obtained by converting the
polar representation to the image seen to the right in the top row in Fig. 4.7.
This procedure is followed for each of the sampled points along the vessel segment centerline
and in this way reference images are obtained for each extracted MPR image. In Fig. 4.8
two examples of MPR images and corresponding reference images are seen.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Label map generation
35
Figure 4.7: Generation of label map from the two projections. The two ﬁrst top images
shows the lumen projections of the two closest lumen outlines. The left image
shows the projection of the closest lumen outline, while the middle image
shows the second closest lumen outline. To the right the ﬁnal label image at
that position is seen. The lumen of this label image is obtained by weighting
d1 and d2 measured along spokes every half degree all the way around the
images. d1 and d2 corresponds to the length of the white area along each
extracted spoke (each angle) and they are shown in the polar representations
in the bottom row.
==PAGE:46==
36
Methods
Figure 4.8: Examples of MPR images (left), corresponding extracted reference images
(middle) and MPR image with overlay of the reference mask (right).
4.3
Network architectures
4.3.1
2D U-net
To perform semantic segmentation of the vessel lumen in the MPR images obtained across
the blood vessels, a FCNN is implemented using TensorFlow [3]. The architecture of the
network is similar to the U-net structure described by Ronneberger et al. in [22]. The
U-net structure implemented in this thesis can be seen in Fig. 4.9. This structure takes
an input image and reduces it to a large set of low-dimensional feature maps, which are
then expanded to ﬁnally yield two feature maps containing the probabilities of each of the
two classes. These probability maps can then be converted, by thresholding, into a binary
label image with the resulting segmentation.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Network architectures
37
Figure 4.9: U-net structure for semantic segmentation of images of coronary arteries.
The numbers to the left of the white and blue blocks indicate the size of the
feature maps in the corresponding section of the network, the number above
each block is the number of feature maps. 3x3 Conv: convolutional layer with
kernel size 3x3, ZP: zero padding, BN: batch normalization, ReLu: rectiﬁed
linear unit. Figure inspired by [22].
The network consist of a contracting and an expanding path. The contracting path consists
of repeated sections of two consecutive convolutional layers both of which uses a kernel
size of 3x3 and zero padding. Each of these layers are followed by batch normalization
and a ReLu activation function. After the two convolutions of a section, a max pooling
operation with stride 2 is performed. The number of feature maps is doubled in the ﬁrst
of the two convolutions, except in the very ﬁrst convolution of the input image, where the
number of feature maps is increased from 1 to 64. The dimensions of the feature maps
are reduced during max pooling. At the end of the contracting path (at the bottom of
Fig. 4.9), there are 1024 feature maps of size 13x13. The contracting path is followed
by the expanding path consisting of repeated sections, that starts with a 2x2 transposed
convolution, followed by two consecutive convolutional layers both of which uses a kernel
size of 3x3 and zero padding. Each of these layers are followed by batch normalization
and a ReLu activation function. For each transposed convolution, the number of feature
maps is halved and the dimensions doubled. At the ﬁnal layer of the network, a softmax
activation function is applied resulting in a pixelwise probability distribution of the output.
==PAGE:48==
38
Methods
The output is then thresholded, such that a binary segmentation mask is obtained. The
contracting and expansive path together forms the U-structure of the network. In order
for the network to learn based on both local and global structures of the input image, skip
connections are used to combine high resolution features from the contracting path with
the upsampled output from the expansive path [22]. In the expansive path feature maps
from the contracting and expansive path are concatenated through skip connections, seen
as horizontal arrows in Fig. 4.9.
The implemented network is diﬀerent from the original U-net suggested in [22], in the way
that zero-padding is introduced in the convolutional layers to be able to work with smaller
images.
4.3.1.1
Network training and evaluation
During training, the neural networks was optimized with a binary cross-entropy loss func-
tion and an Adam optimizer. Exponential decay rates of β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999 were used
in the optimizer for the 1st and 2nd moments of the gradient, respectively. The training
process aims at minimizing the cross-entropy loss given as
C = −1
N
N
X
i=1
[yi ln(byi) + (1 −yi) ln(1 −byi)],
(4.9)
where yi is the true pixel value given in the reference image (1 if lumen and 0 if non-lumen).
byi is the U-net estimated probability of being lumen and N is the number of pixels in the
image.
The segmentation task is a binary pixelwise classiﬁcation task. However, the two classes
vessel lumen and non-lumen are not equally represented in the images, thus there is a large
class imbalance, because the non-lumen pixels are more numerous than the vessel lumen
pixels. In order for the network to be able to learn how to segment these images despite
this large class imbalance, weight maps based on the reference images are calculated and
used to weight the loss, such that misclassifying the minority class gives a high penalty. For
each training image, the ratio between the number of pixels belonging to the vessel lumen
class and the total number of pixels in the image is computed. Each class is then given a
weight deﬁned as the calculated ’ratio’ for the majority class (usually the non-lumen class)
and one minus ’ratio’ for the minority class (usually the vessel lumen class). These weights
are put into an array with the same size as the image, such that the non-lumen weight is
at positions of non-lumen pixels and the vessel lumen weight is at positions of vessel lumen
pixels. For each pixel the loss is multiplied with the corresponding weight from the weight
map and the contribution to the summed loss will therefore depend on the desired class
label of each pixel. This will result in a large penalty if the minority class is misclassiﬁed
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Network architectures
39
and a smaller penalty if the majority class is misclassiﬁed. In this way the calculated loss
will be very large if the minority class is misclassiﬁed and since the network is trying to
minimize the loss, the network will get better at classifying the lumen pixels correctly.
The weight initialization used in the network is a Xavier initializer with uniform distribution
[6].
For the baseline network, a batchsize of 8 images was chosen and the networks were trained
for 100 epochs, where an epoch is deﬁned such that the network has learned once from
each of the available training images during an epoch.
At the beginning of each epoch the order of the training images is randomly permuted such
that the batches varies from epoch to epoch.
The performance of the network was evaluated with the Dice coeﬃcient, which can be
calculated from true positives (TP - correctly classiﬁed vessel lumen pixels), false positives
(FP - non-lumen pixels classiﬁed as vessel lumen) and false negatives (FN - vessel lumen
pixels classiﬁed as non-lumen).
The Dice coeﬃcient is given as
DSC =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(4.10)
The network has been tested for diﬀerent learning rates (described below in Sec. 4.3.1.2).
Exponential decaying learning rates have been used, in each case the mentioned learning
rate is the initial learning rate and the learning rate decays during training in the following
way
LR(gstep) = LR(0)λgstep/dstep,
(4.11)
where LR(gstep) is the learning rate at a given global step gstep. The global step increases
with one for each iteration of the training. An iteration is one update of the network.
LR(0) is the starting learning rate, λ = 0.99 is the decay rate, dstep = 10000 is the number
of steps needed for one full decay to occur.
4.3.1.2
Network variations
Diﬀerent variations of the baseline network described in Sec. 4.3.1 have been tested. The
diﬀerent variations tested are:
==PAGE:50==
40
Methods
• Diﬀerent learning rates: The baseline network described in Sec. 4.3.1 has been
tested for four diﬀerent initial learning rates: 10−3, 10−4, 10−5 and 10−6.
• Regular dropout: A variation of the baseline network in which dropout layers with
20% dropout are added after each ReLu activation function in the network, is also
tested.
• Spatial dropout: A variation of the baseline network in which spatial dropout is
used after each ReLu activation function in the network, is also tested. The spatial
dropout rate is 20%.
• Data augmentation: The baseline network is tested with both the data available
along with data augmentation of the training data. The data augmentation consists
of rotation and horizontal ﬂips of the images, such that a eight times larger training
set is used for training the network. The data augmentation is described in Sec. 4.4.
4.3.2
2D U-net with contextual information
In order to take 3D context into account when segmenting 2D images of the vessel lumen,
a 2D segmentation network utilizing contextual information has been implemented. The
main body of this network has the same network architecture as the 2D U-net described
above and in addition, an extra contracting path is added to the network architecture, as
seen in Fig. 4.10. The additional contracting path takes as inputs, the previous image
I(i −1) and the one-hot encoded segmentation mask S(i −1) obtained for this image. In
this way contextual information is taken into account when segmenting the vessel lumen.
The additional contracting path consists of the same sections as the original contracting
path. At the bottom of the network, information extracted in the two contracting paths
are combined such that the information from both paths are processed together in the
expansive path.
The architecture of the network is inspired by the network structure
proposed by Zheng et al. in [29].
Initially, S(i)∀i will be a null mask and for a given I(i), S(i −1) will only be available
if I(i −1) previously has been fed to the network. Notice, that this is only a problem in
the ﬁrst epoch, since S(i)∀i will be known from the beginning of the second epoch and
onwards. The exception is the ﬁrst image of an image stack (the top slice) since no previous
segmentation mask is available. Hence, for a top slice the previous image will be always a
null mask and the previous segmentation mask will always be a null mask.
For the 2D U-net with contextual information, a batch size of one is used, and hence no
batch normalization is applied.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Network architectures
41
Figure 4.10: U-net structure with contextual input for semantic segmentation of images
of coronary arteries. The numbers to the left of the white and blue blocks
indicate the size of the feature maps in the corresponding section of the
network, the number above each block is the number of feature maps. 3x3
Conv: convolutional layer with kernel size 3x3, ZP: zero padding, ReLu:
rectiﬁed linear unit. Figure inspired by [29].
4.3.3
Data split into training, validation and test sets
The data from both data sets are each split into a training, validation and testing set.
The training set is used to train the neural network, the validation data set is used to
evaluate the performance of the network after each epoch of training and based on the
results obtained on the validation data set hyper parameters of the network are tuned.
Finally, the test set is used to evaluate the performance of the network on an unseen data
set after it has been trained and adjusted using the validation data set.
The SD data is randomly divided into a training, validation and test set. The training set
consists of data from as close to 80% of the patients as possible with the restriction that
the number of patients should be an integer. The validation and test sets consist of as close
to 10% as possible (under the same restriction as before) for both the validation and test
set. This corresponds to data from fourteen patients for the training set and two patients
in each of the validation and testing sets. The exact division of the data sets can be seen
in Table A.1 in Appendix A.
==PAGE:52==
42
Methods
The CL data was also randomly divided into a training, validation and test set consisting of
data from as close to 80% of the patients as possible for the training set and as close to 10%
as possible for both the validation and test set (under the same restriction as mentioned
above). The training set consists of data from six patients and the test and validation sets
consist of data from one patient each. The exact division of the data sets can be seen in
Table A.2 in Appendix A.
4.4
Data augmentation
To train a more robust network, data augmentation of the CL data is made. In addition
to the original images, seven diﬀerent variations of each image is created. These variations
are obtained by 90, 180 and 270 degree rotations of the image. The original and each of
the rotated images are also mirrored around the horizontal axis. In Fig. 4.11 the eight
variations of one test image are shown.
Figure 4.11: Data augmentation on the CL data set. The original image is seen in the
upper left corner. The three other images in the upper row are the original
image rotated 90, 180 and 270 degrees. In the bottom row the original and
the rotated images are mirrored around the horizontal axis.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Results and Analysis
5.1
Segmentation of CL data
In this section the segmentation results obtained on the CL data are presented. Section
5.1.1 contains the results from training a U-net for coronary artery segmentation on the
CL data. Section 5.1.2 includes the results from training a U-net with contextual inputs
on the same data set.
5.1.1
Segmentation of CL data with U-net
The results of training the baseline U-net, (described in Sec. 4.3.1), with four diﬀerent
learning rates (LRs): 10−3, 10−4, 10−5 and 10−6 are shown in Table 5.1. The network has
been trained for 100 epochs with a batchsize of 8. The values shown are the average Dice
coeﬃcient of the training, validation and test data sets, respectively. It is seen that the
highest validation Dice is obtained with LR of 10−4, however, the results obtained with
LRs of 10−3 and 10−5 are very similar. The model with a LR of 10−6 gives the worst
results among the tested LRs.
Table 5.1: Results of training network on CL data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent learning
rates (LRs) with no dropout and and a batchsize of 8.
CL data: average Dice coeﬃcients
Train Dice
Valid Dice
Test Dice
LR of 10−3
0.95
0.83
0.86
LR of 10−4
0.96
0.84
0.87
LR of 10−5
0.97
0.83
0.86
LR of 10−6
0.90
0.80
0.84
The validation curves during training of the networks with four diﬀerent learning rates are
shown in Fig. 5.1. It is seen that with a learning rate of 10−6 (blue curve in the left part of
==PAGE:54==
44
Results and Analysis
Fig. 5.1) the loss is decreasing slower than for the three other learning rate but eventually
reaches approximately the same level. However, the Dice validation curve for the model
with a LR of 10−6 lies lower than for the other three networks. It looks like it might not
have converged yet, however, training the network for 150 epochs with a learning rate of
10−6 was also tested and did not improve the results. The loss validation curves for the
networks trained with the other three learning rates have approximately the same course,
especially after 50 epochs, where they all seem to have converged to a minimum. Actually,
it seems that all three validation loss curves have a small incline after 25-50 epochs. The
Dice validation curves for learning rates of 10−5 and 10−5 settles at approximately the
same level, while the curve for the LR of 10−3 have larger ﬂuctuations, which may indicate
that the learning rate is too high. Based on the results in Table 5.1 and Fig. 5.1, a LR of
10−4 is used to train other variations of the baseline U-net.
Figure 5.1: Validation curves for networks trained on the CL data for 100 epochs with
a batchsize of 8. No dropout was utilized during training. The validation
curves are shown for four diﬀerent learning rates.
Table 5.2 shows the average training, validation and test Dice coeﬃcient for ﬁve diﬀerent
versions of the U-net. The networks have been trained for 100 epochs. The ﬁrst network
is the baseline U-net described in 4.3.1. The second network is the U-net trained with a
batchsize of 16 instead of 8. The third network is the U-net in which spatial dropout of
20% have been added after each ReLu activation function. The fourth network is the U-
net in which regular dropout of 20% have been added after each ReLu activation function.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal network was trained with a batchsize of 16 and with eight times as
much training data. The additional training data was obtained by data augmentation as
described in Sec.
4.4.
It is seen that the U-net trained with a larger amount of data
obtained by data augmentation performs slightly better on the training, validation and
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Segmentation of CL data
45
test sets based on the Dice coeﬃcient.
Table 5.2: Results of training networks on CL data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent hyper-
parameters. Data aug = data augmentation.
CL data: average Dice coeﬃcients
Train Dice
Valid Dice
Test Dice
No dropout, batchsize= 8
0.96
0.84
0.87
No dropout, batchsize= 16
0.96
0.84
0.87
Spatial dropout (20%), batchsize= 8
0.95
0.83
0.87
Regular dropout (20%), batchsize= 8
0.94
0.83
0.84
No dropout, data aug, batchsize= 16
0.97
0.85
0.88
For the networks summarized in Tab. 5.2, the validation curves can be seen in Fig. 5.2.
Based on the loss curves after 100 epochs, the network with regular dropout (green curve)
reaches the lowest loss among all the curves. Also, it seems that it might not have converged
yet, and could potentially beneﬁt from training for more than 100 epochs. However, this
have been tested by training the network for 150 epochs and it did not improve the result.
The loss curves for the baseline U-nets with batchsize 8 and 16 as well as the U-net
with spatial dropout follow approximately the same course and seem to have reached
convergence. Notice, that it seems that all three validation loss curves have a small incline
after 25-50 epochs. According to the loss curve, the network trained with data augmented
data seems to be increasing a bit. However, this incline is not seen as a decrease in its Dice
validation curve. Furthermore, the average Dice validation curve for the network trained
with data augmented data performs slightly better than the other networks and has a
more steady course. The validation curves for the average Dice coeﬃcients for the U-net
with batchsize 8 and 16 along with the U-net with spatial dropout follow approximately
the same course and seems to have reached convergence after 100 epochs. The U-net with
regular dropout has a quite ﬂuctuating course and reaches its maximum Dice value a few
epochs before the 100 epochs. This again indicates that this network might beneﬁt from
training for more epochs in order to reach convergence. This have also been tested by
training the U-net with regular dropout for 150 epochs and no improvement was seen. It
still ﬂuctuated more than the others and did not reach a higher average Dice coeﬃcient.
From these results, the best model is the network trained with no dropout, a LR of 10−4,
a batch size of 16 and with data augmentation. In Fig. 5.3 and 5.4 a few examples of test
image predictions are shown. Fig. 5.3 shows four test images on which low Dice coeﬃcients
were obtained. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients of 0.39, 0.58, 0.58 and
0.61, respectively. The ﬁrst row shows the test images. The second row shows the test
images with an overlayed mask showing the binary ground truth reference.
The third
row shows the segmentation actually obtained on the images. The fourth row shows the
correctly predicted lumen pixels (true positives) in green, the non-lumen pixels incorrectly
classiﬁed as lumen pixels (false positives) in red and the lumen pixels incorrectly classiﬁed
as non-lumen (false negatives) in purple. In the leftmost image, the ground truth reference
==PAGE:56==
46
Results and Analysis
contains two areas indicated as vessel lumen, however, the network only detects one of
them, and therefore a small Dice coeﬃcient is obtained. In the second image from the left,
the network detects two vessel-like structures, however, in the reference image only the
centered vessel is marked. The two rightmost images are examples of images in which the
network either underestimates or overestimates the size of the vessel lumen.
Figure 5.2: Loss and Dice validation curves for 5 diﬀerent versions of the network trained
on the CL data for 100 epochs.
Method 1: No dropout, batchsize og 8.
Method 2: No dropout, batchsize of 16. Method 3: spatial dropout 20%,
batchsize of 8. Method 4: Regular dropout 20%, batchsize of 8. Method 5:
Data augmentation, batchsize og 16, no dropout.
The four images shown in Fig. 5.4 are examples of test images, on which the network
achieves nearly perfect Dice coeﬃcients. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.97, 0.97, 0.97 and 0.98, respectively. It is seen that these are in general vessel with
large contrast between vessel and non-vessel pixels and are vessels with medium or large
diameter.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Segmentation of CL data
47
Figure 5.3: Four examples among the 20 images from the test set with lowest Dice co-
eﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients of
0.39, 0.58, 0.58 and 0.61, respectively. The network was trained on the data
augmented CL data for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8.
No dropout was utilized during training.
==PAGE:58==
48
Results and Analysis
Figure 5.4: Four examples among the 20 images from the test set with highest Dice
coeﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.97, 0.97, 0.97 and 0.98, respectively. The network was trained on the
data augmented CL data for 100 epochs with a learning rate of 10−4 and a
batchsize of 8. No dropout was utilized during training.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Segmentation of CL data
49
5.1.2
Segmentation of CL data with contextual U-net
In this section the results obtained on the CL data with the contextual U-net are presented.
Furthermore, the results will also be compared to the results obtained with the baseline
U-net.
The contextual U-net has been trained for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4. The training and
validation curves for the loss and Dice coeﬃcient are shown in Fig. 5.5. After approximately
40 epochs the loss increases. The training loss is lower and seems to be converging at a small
number close to 0.. The training Dice curve is smooth and increasing for approximately
70 epochs, after which it seems to have converged a little over 0.9. The validation Dice
curve increases for approximately 40 epochs and then it seems to reach convergence, even
though it still have quite large ﬂuctuations. Actually, it seems that the overall trend of the
validation Dice after 40 epochs is slightly decreasing.
Figure 5.5: Training and validation curves for loss and Dice during 100 epochs for a
contextual U-net trained on the CL data.
The results of training the contextual network on the CL data for 100 epochs with a LR of
10−4 are seen in Table 5.3. A large drop in average Dice coeﬃcient is seen when evaluating
the network on the test set.
Table 5.3: Results of training contextual U-net on CL data for 100 epochs.
CL data: average Dice coeﬃcients
Train Dice
Valid Dice
Test Dice
Contextual U-net
0.92
0.85
0.52
==PAGE:60==
50
Results and Analysis
The average Dice coeﬃcient obtained on the test set is very low, which called for taking a
close look at the individual Dice coeﬃcients. Figure 5.6 shows a histogram over the Dice
coeﬃcients obtained for the individual images of the test set. It is seen that a signiﬁcant
proportion of the images have a Dice coeﬃcient very close to 0, while the rest of the images
obtain Dice coeﬃcients above 0.6.
Figure 5.6: Normalized histogram over the Dice coeﬃcients obtained for the test images
from the CL data set. These Dice coeﬃcients are obtained with the contextual
U-net trained on the training images from the CL data set.
The test set in the CL data consist of data from one patient, and thus for four vessels. The
results on the four individual vessels of the test set are summarized as an average test Dice
per vessel in Table 5.4. The average Dice coeﬃcients for each vessel are shown for both
the contextual U-net and the baseline U-net. For the baseline U-net, high Dice coeﬃcients
are obtained for all four vessels. For the contextual U-net, however, high Dice coeﬃcients
are only obtained on vessel 2 and 3. In particular, vessel 1 stands out with an average
Dice of 0.07. Vessel 4 has a smaller Dice coeﬃcient compared to what is obtained with the
baseline U-net.
Table 5.4: Dice coeﬃcients obtained for individual vessels of the test set from the CL
data set. The network was trained for 100 epochs.
Average Test Dice
Contextual U-net
Baseline U-net
Vessel 1
0.07
0.87
Vessel 2
0.84
0.86
Vessel 3
0.84
0.88
Vessel 4
0.64
0.87
In Fig. 5.7, the Dice coeﬃcients for each of the images along the four vessels of the test
set are plotted. In the ﬁgure, image 0 is the ﬁrst image in the image stack that makes up
a vessel, image 1 is the next image in the image stack and so on. It is seen that for vessel
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Segmentation of CL data
51
1 and 4 the Dice coeﬃcients suddenly drops to being very close to zero. After the drop,
the Dice coeﬃcient stays close at zero for the rest of the vessel. A Dice coeﬃcient of zero
corresponds to a segmentation consisting of only non-lumen pixels.
Figure 5.7: Dice coeﬃcient of each image in the four vessels of the test set. Image 0
is the ﬁrst image in the image stack that makes up a vessel, image 1 is the
next image in the image stack and so on. Results from regular U-net and
contextual U-net are shown.
To get an idea about what happens at these sudden drops in the Dice coeﬃcient, images
just before and after the drop are visualized along with their reference images and the
segmentations obtained for the images. For vessel 1, every sixth image in the area around
the drop are visualized in Fig. 5.8. It is seen that the image segmentations gradually
decreases in size and eventually becomes a segmentation mask with only non-lumen pixels.
The same pattern is seen for the drop in Dice coeﬃcient for vessel 4. This is illustrated in
Fig. 5.9.
==PAGE:62==
52
Results and Analysis
Figure 5.8: The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth (ref-
erences) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image 14,
20, 26, 32, 38 and 44 of vessel 1. These images are from the range in the
vessel, where the Dice coeﬃcient gradually decline to zero, as seen in Fig.
5.7.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Segmentation of CL data
53
Figure 5.9: The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth (ref-
erences) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image 130,
136, 142, 148, 154 and 160 of vessel 4. These images are from the range in
the vessel where the Dice coeﬃcient decline to zero, as seen in Fig. 5.7.
==PAGE:64==
54
Results and Analysis
5.2
Segmentation of SD data
In this section the segmentation results obtained on the SD data are presented. Section
5.2.1 includes the results of training the U-net for coronary artery segmentation on the SD
data. Sec. 5.2.2 includes the results of training the U-net with contextual inputs on the
same data set. Finally, in Sec. 5.2.3 the eﬀect of pretraining the U-net on the CL data
set are shown. The pretrained model is used as the initial model for training a U-net on
the SD data set. Due to a problem with the annotated lumen outlines in relation to the
preprocessing method used for obtaining the MPR and reference images from the SD data
set, a few images in the test set have been removed from the analysis of the results. The
reason for this will be discussed in 6.3.1.
5.2.1
Segmentation of SD data with U-net
The baseline U-net trained on the SD data with four diﬀerent LRs have been tested.
The networks have been trained for 100 epochs with a batchsize of 8. The average Dice
coeﬃcients on the training, validation and test set are shown in Table 5.5. A large diﬀerence
is seen between the results obtained on the validation set compared to the test set. The
average Dice coeﬃcient on the test set is much lower than the validation Dice coeﬃcient.
With all learning rates, the results on the validation set are very similar. On the test set,
the three largest learning rates achieve very similar results. However, the U-net with a LR
of 10−4 achieves a slightly better result than with the other two learning rates. Notice that
Table 5.5 shows trends similar to those in Table 5.1 (on the CL data). Furthermore, the
analysis of the validation curves for the loss and the Dice coeﬃcients for the four diﬀerent
LRs on the SD data showed the same trends as the validation curves on the CL data (Fig.
5.1) and hence validations curves for SD data are omitted.
Table 5.5: Results of training network on SD data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent learning
rates with no dropout and a batchsize of 8.
SD data
Train Dice
Valid Dice
Test Dice
LR of 10−3
0.94
0.81
0.71
LR of 10−4
0.94
0.80
0.72
LR of 10−5
0.97
0.78
0.70
LR of 10−6
0.86
0.79
0.66
Based on the ﬁndings in Table 5.5 and the not shown validation curves, a LR of 10−4 is
used when training variations of the U-net on the SD data. Notice, that the choice of a LR
of 10−4 is not only based on Table 5.5 but also the Dice validation curves which showed
that LR 10−4 and 10−3 seems to ﬂuctuate around the same value, hence it might be a
coincidence that 10−3 has higher Dice value than 10−4.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
55
Table 5.6 shows the average training, validation and test Dice for four diﬀerent versions
of the U-net. The networks have been trained for 100 epochs. The ﬁrst network is the
baseline U-net described in 4.3.1. The second network is the U-net trained with a batchsize
of 16 instead of 8. The third network is the U-net in which spatial dropout of 20% have
been added after each ReLu activation function. The fourth network is the U-net in which
regular dropout of 20% have been added after each ReLu activation function. It is seen
that the baseline U-net trained without dropout and with a batchsize of 8 performs slightly
better on the test set than the other networks based on the Dice coeﬃcient. However, the
performances of the U-net with a batchsize of 16 and the U-net with spatial dropout are
very close to the performance of the baseline U-net with a batchsize of 8. Notice, that
based on validation and training one would probably have chosen either no dropout and a
batchsize of 16 or regular dropout (20%) and a batchsize of 8. It should be mentioned that
an attempt was made of training the U-net with additional data obtained by the same data
augmentation methods as described for the CL data. However, the memory requirement
was too large for the GPU on which the network was trained, thus the network could not
be trained. It would have been interesting to see whether the performance of the U-net
on the SD data set could have been improved with data augmentation, however, due to
limited time for this project, it was not possible since a large refactoring of the implemented
network would be needed.
Table 5.6: Results of training network on SD data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent hyperpa-
rameters.
SD data: average Dice coeﬃcients
Train Dice
Valid Dice
Test Dice
No dropout, batchsize= 8
0.94
0.80
0.72
No dropout, batchsize= 16
0.96
0.79
0.71
Spatial dropout (20%), batchsize= 8
0.95
0.79
0.71
Regular dropout (20%), batchsize= 8
0.92
0.81
0.69
In the following the baseline U-net with a batchsize of 8 and a LR of 10−4 will be used
to illustrate good and bad segmentations. In Figs. 5.10 and 5.11 a few examples of test
image predictions are shown. In Fig. 5.10 four examples of test images on which low Dice
coeﬃcients are obtained are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients of
0.21, 0.26, 0.28 and 0.34, respectively. The ﬁrst row shows the test images. The second row
shows the test images with an overlayed mask showing the binary ground truth reference.
The third row shows the segmentation actually obtained on the images. Finally, the fourth
row shows the correctly predicted lumen pixels (true positives) in green, the non-lumen
pixels incorrectly classiﬁed as lumen pixels (false positives) in red and the lumen pixels
incorrectly classiﬁed as non-lumen (false negatives) in purple. In the three leftmost images,
the reference lumen is very small and the networks overestimates the size of the lumen.
In the rightmost image, a calciﬁed plaque is present (the brightest part of the image). As
seen in the second row, this plaque is not part of the vessel lumen. However, the network
have diﬃculties in distinguishing the actual vessel lumen and the calciﬁed plaque and thus
segments parts of both the actual lumen and the plaque. It detects a large part of the
==PAGE:66==
56
Results and Analysis
plaque as lumen, as can be seen in the bottom row as the red area. As opposed to this,
only a small part of the actual lumen is segmented. The purple area indicates false negative
pixel classiﬁcation and is rather large.
The four images shown in Fig. 5.11 are examples of test images on which the network
achieves very high Dice coeﬃcients. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.94, 0.94, 0.95 and 0.95, respectively. It is seen that these are in general vessels that
appears as the brightest spots in the images.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
57
Figure 5.10: Four examples among the 30 images from the test set with lowest dice
coeﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.21, 0.26, 0.28 and 0.34, respectively. The network was trained on the
SD data for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8. No dropout
was utilized during training.
==PAGE:68==
58
Results and Analysis
Figure 5.11: Four examples among the 20 images from the test set with highest Dice
coeﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.94, 0.94, 0.95 and 0.95, respectively. The network was trained on the
SD data for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8. No dropout
was utilized during training.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
59
5.2.2
Segmentation of SD data with contextual U-net
In this section the results obtained on the SD data set with the contextual U-net are
presented. Also, the results are compared to the results obtained with the baseline U-net
on the same data set.
The contextual U-net has been trained for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4. The training
and validation curves for the loss and the Dice coeﬃcient are shown in Fig. 5.12. The
validation loss ﬂuctuates a lot and does not seem to have a clear direction. For the Dice
coeﬃcient curves it should be noted that the validation curve reaches a higher level than
the training curve.
Figure 5.12: Training and validation curves for loss and Dice during 100 epochs for a
contextual U-net trained on the SD data.
The result of training the contextual network on the SD data for 100 epochs with a LR of
10−4 are seen in Table 5.7. An increase in Dice coeﬃcient is seen from the training to the
validation data set. The average Dice coeﬃcient obtained on the test data set is very low
compared to the validation set.
Table 5.7: Results of training contextual U-net on SD data for 100 epochs.
SD data: average Dice coeﬃcients
Train Dice
Valid Dice
Test Dice
Contextual U-net
0.65
0.80
0.53
Since the average Dice coeﬃcient obtained on the test set is very low, a closer look is taken
at the individual Dice coeﬃcients. Figure 5.13 shows a histogram over the Dice coeﬃcients
==PAGE:70==
60
Results and Analysis
obtained for the individual images. It is seen that the Dice coeﬃcients vary a lot and
are spread almost over the whole Dice scale. The majority of the images achieves Dice
coeﬃcients between 0.3 and 0.7.
Figure 5.13: Normalized histogram over the Dice coeﬃcients obtained for the test im-
ages from the SD data set. These Dice coeﬃcients are obtained with the
contextual U-net trained on the training images from the SD data set.
The test set of the SD data set consists of data from two patients with images from ﬁve
and four vessel segments, respectively. The results on the nine individual vessel segments
of the test set are summarized as an average test Dice per vessel in Table 5.8. In addition
to this, the average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on the test segments with the baseline U-net
trained with a LR of 10−4 and batchsize of 8 are presented.
It is seen that the baseline U-net in general performs signiﬁcantly better than the contextual
U-net. Only on one segment, patient 09 segment 13, does the contextual U-net segment
the vessel better than the U-net.
If averaging the results of the diseased and healthy
vessel segments separately, it seen that both networks are better at segmenting the healthy
vessel segments compared to the diseased vessel segments. The average Dice coeﬃcients
on diseased (D) and healthy (H) vessel segments are for the contextual U-net D: 0.52 and
H: 0.56. For the U-net the results are D: 0.66 and H: 0.74.
In Fig. 5.14, the Dice coeﬃcients for each of the images along the nine vessel segments of
the test set are plotted for both the contextual and baseline U-nets. It is seen that the
baseline U-net generally performs better than the contextual U-net. The Dice coeﬃcients
obtained with the two diﬀerent networks often follow the same pattern but with a margin
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
61
Table 5.8: Dice coeﬃcients obtained for individual vessel segments of the test set from
the SD data set. The network was trained for 100 epochs. Results from the
contextual U-net and the baseline U-net are shown.
D: Diseased (≥50%
stenosis), H: Healthy (no disease or only non signiﬁcant stenosis (< 50%))
Average Test Dice
Contextual U-net
U-net
Patient 09, segment 02 (D)
0.52
0.61
Patient 09, segment 06 (D)
0.57
0.74
Patient 09, segment 09 (H)
0.62
0.82
Patient 09, segment 13 (H)
0.87
0.83
Patient 09, segment 17 (H)
0.43
0.68
Patient 11, segment 07 (H)
0.51
0.74
Patient 11, segment 11 (D)
0.47
0.62
Patient 11, segment 12 (H)
0.39
0.55
Patient 11, segment 16 (H)
0.56
0.79
between them. An example of this is clearly seen in segment 02 of patient 09, where both
Dice curves drops in the middle of the vessel. For patient 09 segment 06, the two Dice
curves are very similar, however the curve for the baseline U-net lies a bit higher than the
curve for the contextual U-net. This means that the two networks often have problems
segmenting the same images.
The large drop in Dice coeﬃcient in patient 09 segment 02, suggests that something happens
in the images, which makes it diﬃcult for the networks to segment properly.
For this
reason, images just before and to the bottom of the ﬁrst drop are visualized along with
their reference images and their segmentations. Every sixth image from the beginning of
the vessel segment to the end of the drop is visualized. These are shown in Fig. 5.15. It is
seen that the ground truth lumen area decreases, while the segmentation does not follow.
The lumen is thereby overestimated, which results in a low Dice coeﬃcient. Notice, that
the lumen in image 1 is overestimated by the contextual U-net. This initial overestimation
is a general feature of the contextual U-net and is the reason why the Dice Coeﬃcient in
most cases is initially lower for the contextual U-net compared to the baseline U-net.
In Fig. 5.16, a few images from patient 09 segment 13 are shown. Also, the reference
images and segmentations of the images are shown. This segment is the only segment at
which the contextual U-net performs better than the baseline U-net. The images of this
segment are very similar and have very bright lumen area. The size of the ground truth
does not vary much. It is seen that the network starts out with a quite large segmentation
of image 1, however, it quickly adjusts the lumen size of the segmentations to be very close
to the ground truth.
==PAGE:72==
62
Results and Analysis
Figure 5.14: Dice coeﬃcient of each image in the nine vessels segments of the test set.
Image number 0 is the ﬁrst image in the image stack that makes up a vessel
segment, image number 1 is the next image in the image stack and so on.
Results from baseline U-net and contextual U-net are shown.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
63
Figure 5.15: The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth
(references) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image
1, 7, 13, 19, 25 and 31 of vessel segment 02 for patient 09. These images
are from the range in the vessel segment where the Dice coeﬃcient drops a
lot, as seen in Fig. 5.14.
==PAGE:74==
64
Results and Analysis
Figure 5.16: The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth
(references) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image
0, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 of vessel segment 13 for patient 09.
These images
are from the beginning of the vessel segment, where the Dice coeﬃcient
gradually increases towards convergence at around 0.9, as seen in Fig. 5.14.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
65
5.2.3
Eﬀect of pretraining with CL data
In this section, the result of using transfer learning is presented.
The baseline U-net
described in Sec. 4.3.1 have been trained on images from the CL data set for 40 epochs.
Afterwards, this pretrained model is used as the initial model for training a network on
the images from the SD data set for 70 epochs. In Fig. 5.17 the validation loss and Dice
curves are seen during training for the same network with and without pretraining. It is
seen that for the pretrained network the loss value starts out lower than for the network
without pretraining, however, after a few epochs the loss curves for the two networks
reaches approximately the same level. Furthermore, after a few epochs, the loss for both
networks increases a little during the training. The Dice curve for the pretrained network
starts out at a higher level than for the network without pretraining. For approximately
the ﬁrst 20 epochs of training, the pretrained networks has the highest validation Dice
coeﬃcient.
After 20 epochs the Dice validation curves for the two networks seems to
ﬂuctuate around the same Dice and follows approximately the same course maybe with a
tendency to decrease a little after 30 epochs.
Figure 5.17: Loss and Dice validation curves for the baseline network trained on the SD
data and the same network but initial weights obtained by pretraining the
network for 40 epochs on the CL data.
5.2.4
Comparing segmentation of diseased and healthy vessels
In this section the obtained network performance is based on the test set of the SD data
set where the utilized network is a U-net trained without dropout for 100 epochs with a
batchsize of 8 and a LR of 10−4.
==PAGE:76==
66
Results and Analysis
In Table 5.8, the average Dice coeﬃcients on the individual vessel segments of the test set
are shown. The U-net obtained Dice coeﬃcients of 0.66 and 0.74 on diseased and healthy
vessels, respectively. Each image in the vessel segments is associated with a stenosis grade
and a plaque type. In Tables 5.9 and 5.10 the average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on the
images within each category of stenosis grade and plaque type are shown.
According to the results based on stenosis grade shown in Table 5.9, the network segments
images with healthy vessel or with mild stenosis quite well, while more diﬃculty is seen
when segmenting the images with moderate stenosis. No images with severe stenosis or
fully occlusion are available in the test set. In general, it is seen that the larger stenosis,
the harder it is for the network to segment the vessel lumen correctly.
Table 5.9: Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on images in the test set with stenosis grades
healthy, mild, moderate, severe and occluded. In the test set, the severe and
occluded categories are not represented.
The results are from the baseline
U-net trained for 100 epochs with a batchsize of 8 and a LR of 10−4.
Stenosis grade
Average Test Dice
Healthy
0.73
Mild
0.72
Moderate
0.59
Severe
N/A
Occluded
N/A
The results based on plaque type, seen in Fig. 5.10, shows that the network is best at
segmenting images with no plaque or mixed plaque (plaque with < 50% calcium). The Dice
coeﬃcients for images with soft plaque (without calcium) and calciﬁed plaque (plaque with
≥50%) indicate that the network sometimes have diﬃculties distinguishing the plaques
and the lumen.
Table 5.10: Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on images in the test set with plaque types:
no plaque, soft plaque, calciﬁed plaque and mixed plaque. The results are
obtained with the baseline U-net trained for 100 epochs with a batchsize of
8 and a LR of 10−4.
Plaque type
Average Test Dice
No plaque
0.73
Soft plaque
0.68
Calciﬁed plaque
0.64
Mixed plaque
0.73
In Fig. 5.18, one image from each of the four plaque type classes are shown along with
the corresponding reference annotations and the obtained segmentations. Especially the
segmentation of the image containing calciﬁed plaque stands out. Both lumen and the
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Segmentation of SD data
67
calciﬁed plaque is segmented as lumen, which results in a low Dice coeﬃcient. This is in
general a problem in many of the images with calciﬁed plaque. For the image with soft
plaque, the segmentation does not capture the shape of the reference annotation. The
ground truth has a triangular shape, while the segmentation looks more like a square
with rounded corners. The images with no plaque and with mixed plaque are quite well
segmented.
==PAGE:78==
68
Results and Analysis
Figure 5.18: Four example images from the test set, one image with each of the four
plaque types; no plaque, soft plaque, calciﬁed plaque and mixed plaque.
The ﬁrst row shows the MPR images, the second row shows the images
overlayed with the reference lumen annotations, the third row is the image
overlayed with the obtained segmentation and the bottom row is the image
overlayed with the true positives (green), false positives (red) and false
negatives (purple). The network was trained on the SD data for 100 epochs
with LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8.
No dropout was utilized during
training.
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Principal ﬁndings
Two methods for segmentation of the coronary arteries were suggested in this thesis; the
baseline U-net and the contextual U-net. It was seen that among the two methods, the
baseline U-net resulted in best segmentations results. It was also shown that pretraining
a model with the CL data and using transfer learning did not improve the segmentation
results on the SD data set.
6.2
Strengths
In this project, a thorough analysis of the potential of using deep neural networks for
coronary artery segmentation have been made. The analysis includes the testing of two
diﬀerent neural network structures, which have both been assessed on two diﬀerent data
sets. Several diﬀerent hyper-parameters and adjustments of the neural networks have been
evaluated to create a good model for the lumen segmentation task.
Consistency of the two neural network structures was observed.
The contextual U-net
did not perform very well on any of the two data sets. However, on both data sets the
baseline U-net achieved good segmentation results. The baseline U-net showed the ability of
segmenting vessels with less than 50% stenosis with a relatively high average Dice coeﬃcent
of 0.74. This shows that deep learning has potential within the ﬁeld of coronary artery
segmentation in CTA images. For training deep neural networks a very large amount of
data is typically needed. Although the models trained in this project were trained on a
relatively small amount of data, a good performance was obtained. If a larger data set was
available for training, the U-net is expected to perform even better.
The data used in this project have been assessed by the research group behind the Rotter-
dam Coronary Artery Framework and images of non-diagnostic quality have been excluded
==PAGE:80==
70
Discussion
from the publicly available data set. Also, the patient selection was chosen to be representa-
tive of the population of patients undergoing CTA examination for coronary artery disease.
This implies that the data is suitable for reliable assessment of the coronary arteries.
6.3
Limitations
6.3.1
Data quality
The inter-observer variability of the lumen annotations of the SD data set seems to be quite
high. This is based on the performance of the three observers’ annotations when evaluated
on the test set of the lumen segmentation challenge. The obtained Dice coeﬃcients can
be seen in Table 6.1. This inter-observer variability indicates that there is an uncertainty
regarding what actually is lumen in the images and hence it gives rise to non-ideal lumen
annotations. The non-ideal lumen annotations has probably led to non ideal lumen outlines
in the reference images. An example where the lumen annotations seems to be a bit oﬀis
in leftmost column of Fig. 5.10. The inter-observer variability of the lumen annotations
also shows that even for a human it is hard to detect the exact outline of the lumen of the
coronary arteries in CTA images.
In this project, the applied annotations were from only one of the observers (the one with
the best average Dice coeﬃcient on the challenge test set). This is a problem since the
network will learn the biases of this particular observer. Hence, it might have been better
to use an average between the annotations made by the three observers as the reference
lumen outline. However, if the observers strongly disagrees in some regions of a vessel,
this might not be a very good approach. Ideally, an average of annotations from a large
number of observers could give a good estimate of the actual lumen outline.
Table 6.1: Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on diseased and healthy vessel segments of
the SD data set. The results for the three manual observers on the test set
are shown.
Average Dice coeﬃcient
Diseased
Healthy
Observer 3
0.79
0.81
Observer 1
0.76
0.77
Observer 2
0.65
0.72
In general the SD data set contains a lot more healthy vessels than diseased vessels and
even within the diseased vessels the number of MPR images containing plaque is often
smaller than the number of images showing healthy vessel. This means that the network
is trained with an overweight of images of healthy vessels, which might be the reason why
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Limitations
71
diﬃculties are seen when segmenting images with plaque. Diﬃculties were especially seen
in images with calciﬁed plaques. In Fig. 5.18 it was seen that the network has a tendency
to segment calciﬁed plaque as lumen. This is probably because the calciﬁed plaques shows
as very bright spots in the images. In images with no plaque or soft plaque, the lumen is
usually the brightest spot in the image. However, in the images with calciﬁed plaque this is
not the case, since the calciﬁed plaque appears brighter than the vessel lumen. This makes
it very diﬃcult for the network to segment the images with calciﬁed plaque correctly.
The method used for generating reference images for the SD data set included projection of
the annotated lumen outlines. This could also give rise to poor reference images in regions
of a vessel where the centerline path changes a lot over a short distance. For example if the
vessel bends a lot the projections might not be very good because the plane projected onto
is skewed compared to the plane of the lumen outline. This might result in a too small or
wrongly placed projection, which does not outline the actual lumen very well.
The split of the SD data set into training, validation and test sets was performed randomly.
However, when taking a closer look at the vessel segments of the validation set, it is found
that all vessel segments are healthy with no signiﬁcant stenoses. This might explain some
of the large diﬀerence in average Dice coeﬃcient between the validation and test set, which
was seen for the SD data set (see Table 5.6. However, it should be noted that some of the
diﬀerence probably comes from the fact that validation data is used to ﬁt hyperparameters
and hence the network is indirectly ﬁtted to the validation data. To get a better idea of
the performance of a network, the training, validation and test set should have the same
distribution of vessels with diﬀerent stenosis grades and plaque types. Another option is to
perform cross-validation during training, such that the network is trained and validated on
all images available for training, but still it would be important to have all types of plaque
and all stenosis grades represented in both training and test sets.
As mentioned in Sec. 4.1.3 some of the available lumen outlines were removed because they
could cause problems when ﬁtting the smoothing spline to obtain the vessel centerline path.
During the analysis of the ﬁnal network results, it was discovered that some problematic
MPR images had been generated in the test set of the SD data set during preprocessing.
The problem was caused by the fact that the coordinates of the lumen outlines of one of
the test segments were not in order. Instead, what appeared to be the last lumen outline
actually was in the middle of the segment. This caused the last part of the spline ﬁtted
centerline to be next to the actual vessels and hence the projections of lumen outlines onto
the MPR plane led to a wrong ground truth for these MPR images. The MPR images in
the test set that were aﬀect by this were removed from the data analysis. The removal
of these MPR images gave a slightly better average Dice coeﬃcient. However, it should
be noted that training and validation sets could have similar problems, which will be an
even bigger problem, since the network then might have tried to learn to segment images
with incorrect reference images. This could can potentially have led to a lower overall
performance. Whether this is an actual problem has not yet been checked.
==PAGE:82==
72
Discussion
In order to avoid the problem with lumen outlines not being in the correct index order, the
distance from the COM for a given lumen outline to the COM of all lumen rings could be
calculated. These distances could then be used to test that the two nearest lumen outlines
with respect to the COM corresponds to lumen outline, which are said to be neighbors
according to the index. If this is not the case the lumen outline could be removed or the
order of the lumen outlines could be rearranged, such that the lumen outlines appear in
order. Notice, that this method assumes that the lumen outlines are somewhat uniformly
distanced, otherwise, the two nearest neighbors might be on one side of the given lumen
outline. Under this assumption it would actually be possible to reorder the lumen rings
based on their COMs.
6.3.2
Worst lumen segmentations
As seen in Fig. 5.3, some of the worst Dice coeﬃcients obtained on the CL data were on
images in which more than one vessel is visible. Sometimes one vessel is detected where
two should have been detected and sometimes two vessels are detected where only one
should have been detected. This problem probably arises because the reference data only
includes annotations of four vessels although the coronary arteries constitutes more than
four vessels. If two coronary arteries lie very close in some regions or if a vessel bends a lot,
the MPR images extracted will contain two visible vessels. However, the reference images
will not always contain annotations of all visible vessels. This inconsistency in the training
data makes it diﬃcult for the network to learn when to segment more than one vessels. It
seems that the network have learned that a vessel is always present in the center of the
image, but sometimes additional vessels are also segmented.
In Figs.
5.10 some of the worst segmentations of the SD data were shown.
It was
seen that the network often overestimates the vessel lumen in images with very small
ground truth lumen. A reason for the overestimation of the vessels with very small lu-
men might originate from the way the class imbalance problem have been solved. The
smaller an area the lumen covers in the reference images, the larger is the penalty in
the cross-entropy loss function if misclassifying lumen pixels. This is because the weight
for lumen pixels is Nnon−lumen/(Nlumen + Nnon−lumen) and the weight for non-lumen
pixels is Nlumen/(Nlumen + Nnon−lumen), where N is the number of pixels within the
class denoted in the subscript. This means that the network learns that it is very ex-
pensive to misclassify lumen pixels, while the penalty is very small if misclassifying non-
lumen pixel, i.e. making false positive predictions. This could be a reason why the net-
work often overestimates the size of the vessel lumen, especially, for small vessels where
Nlumen << Nnon−lumen.
This could potentially be solved by making a more smooth
weight map for weighting the loss. This map could have largest weight in the center of a
vessels where it is Nnon−lumen/(Nlumen + Nnon−lumen) and these weights should then de-
crease a little before the annotated lumen boundary and then continue to decrease towards
Nlumen/(Nlumen +Nnon−lumen) on the other side of the annotated lumen boundary, hence
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Limitations
73
making margins around the annotated lumen boundary within which the uncertainty of
correct annotations is taking into account.
As described above, the quality of the reference images might also inﬂuence the segmenta-
tion performance.
6.3.3
Problems with contextual U-net
For both data sets, the contextual U-net gave quite poor segmentation results. For the CL
data set, the reason for the low average Dice coeﬃcient showed to be, that more than 35%
of the images had a Dice coeﬃcient very close to zero, because null masks were obtained as
the predicted segmentation mask. In Fig. 5.7 it was shown that the Dice coeﬃcients in two
of the four test vessels suddenly drops towards zero. After this drop, the rest of the images
in the vessel also obtain dice coeﬃcients close to zero. It is hard to say what goes wrong,
but it indicates that the network propagates segmentation errors through an image stack.
In Figs. 5.8 and 5.9 it was seen that that the sequence of images where the Dice suddenly
drops rapidly towards zero consists of very similar images and ground truth annotations.
Hence, sudden changes in these images or in ground truth does not seem to be the reason
for the sudden drop in Dice coeﬃcient. It is seen that the obtained segmentations for these
sequences gradually decreases in size and eventually becomes a null mask. This indicates
that the segmentation error is propagated along the vessel.
The implemented contextual U-net is unidirectional in the sense that the contextual input
only comes from the image before the input image. One way to solve the problem with
errors propagating through an image stack could be to take bidirectional inputs in as the
contextual input. The bidirectional input could consist of the images both before and after
the input image along with the corresponding segmentation mask before. This might help
the network to adapt to changes in vessel lumen size. Furthermore, it might help reduce
the initial overestimation, since the ﬁrst image segmentation can use information from the
second image.
On the SD data, null masks obtained as the predicted segmentations were not the problem.
The curves of the Dice coeﬃcients along each of the vessel segments in Fig. 5.14 showed
that the U-net and contextual U-net often have problems segmenting the same images, but
that the Dice coeﬃcients obtained with the contextual U-net in general were lower than
the ones obtained with the baseline U-net. The contextual U-net only performed better on
one segment. This was a healthy segment with no stenoses and very clear contrast between
lumen and non-lumen. Also the diameter and shape of the vessel was almost the same
along the whole vessel segment. Thus, this indicates that the contextual U-net might have
a positive eﬀect when segmenting vessels with almost no variations. However, in order to
be useful in clinical practice or for further research, it is necessary that the algorithm can
segment both healthy and diseased vessels.
==PAGE:84==
74
Discussion
It was noticed that the contextual U-net always predicts the very ﬁrst image to have a
lumen with large diameter and then gradually tries to adapt to the actual size of the
lumen. This could caused by the fact that when the network is segmenting the ﬁrst image
in an image stack, the contextual input consists of two null-masks. This is very diﬀerent
from what all other images gets as contextual input and it might cause problems for the
network. If the actual lumen size is small, the ﬁrst images in the vessel segment will obtain
low Dice coeﬃcients, because the network overestimates the size of the vessel. The Dice
coeﬃcient then gradually increases (as the segmentation is adjusted) until the network
approximately reaches the correct size of the lumen segmentation. This eﬀect is seen for
most of the Dice curves in Fig. 5.14 obtained with the contextual U-net. This again shows
that the contextual U-net to some extent propagates segmentation errors through an image
stack, at least in the initial part of the image stack.
6.3.4
Network hyperparameters
In the neural networks evaluated in this project, the number of epochs for training the
models have been ﬁxed. However, a method for obtaining a more optimal model could be
to store the model after each epoch and then choose the model that obtains the highest
average Dice coeﬃcient on the validation set. In Table 6.2 the maximum Dice coeﬃcient
obtained on both data sets for each of the diﬀerent learning rates are shown. Also, the
epoch, after which the maximum Dice is obtained, is given. According to this the best
model on the SD data set would be with either a learning rate of 10−3 or 10−4 after 38 or
29 epochs respectively. The best model on the CL data would be with a learning rate of
10−4 or 10−5 after 64 or 54 epochs, respectively. Hence, the optimal learning rate seems to
be the same for this model with non ﬁxed epochs as it was with ﬁxed epochs. This method
with non-ﬁxed epochs could also decrease the time needed to ﬁt a model by stopping the
training if the maximum Dice has not been changed for e.g. 10 epochs.
Table 6.2: Maximum Dice coeﬃcients on the validation set obtained during training for
each of the four learning rates evaluated. Max Dice is the maximum Dice
coeﬃcient obtained on the validation set during training. Epoch is the number
of epochs of training after which the maximum Dice is obtained. The results
are shown for both the SD and CL data set.
Dice coeﬃcients
SD: Max Dice
SD: Epoch
CL: Max Dice
CL: Epoch
LR 10−3
0.83
38
0.83
92
LR 10−4
0.83
29
0.84
64
LR 10−5
0.81
30
0.84
54
LR 10−6
0.81
84
0.81
75
==PAGE:85==
6.4 Comparison with other studies
75
6.4
Comparison with other studies
With the baseline U-net implemented in this project, Dice coeﬃcients of 0.66 and 0.74 were
achieved on diseased and healthy vessels, respectively. The segmentation results obtained
on the diseased vessel segments are quite poor, but on vessel segments with stenosis < 50%
the performance is comparable to some of the best submissions to the lumen segmentation
challenge of the Rotterdam Coronary Artery Framework. In Table 6.3 the average Dice
coeﬃcients obtained by the research groups with the three best performing algorithms
submitted to the lumen segmentation challenge are summarized.
The methods proposed by Mohr et al. [16] and the two research groups led by Lugauer
[14, 13] all make use of initial calcium exclusion before classifying remaining voxels. Since
it was found that the U-net implemented in this project has diﬃculties with segmenting
images with calciﬁed plaque, a calcium exclusion method would probably also prove useful
before training the U-net. If creating a method for detecting calciﬁed plaque, the voxels
with calcium could be included in the segmentation mask. Hence, the segmentation task
turns into a multiclass problem. These multilabel segmentation masks could be used in a
U-net being able to classify three classes (non-lumen, lumen and calciﬁed plaque). This
could possibly improve the segmentation results on the diseased vessels if the network
learns to distinguish calcium pixels from lumen pixels.
Another option is to make an
algorithm for calcium detection to identify images with calciﬁed plaque. An independent
network speciﬁcally for segmenting images with calciﬁed plaque could then be trained. And
in addition to this, a network could be trained on the remaining images for segmenting
images without plaque or with soft or mixed plaque.
Table 6.3: Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on diseased and healthy vessel segments
of the SD data set. The results of the research groups with the three best
challenge submissions.
Average Dice coeﬃcient
Diseased
Healthy
Lugauer et al.
0.76
0.75
Lugauer et al.
0.74
0.73
Mohr et al.
0.70
0.73
It is important to emphasize that the test set used in this project consists of data from
only two patients, while the challenge submissions have been evaluated on data from 30
test patients. For this reason, the performances obtained in this thesis can not be directly
compared to the performances obtained in the lumen segmentation challenge. The valida-
tion and test sets are very small and thus it is questionable whether they give a correct
estimate of the performance of the network proposed. Also, the resolution of the 2D MPR
images on which the challenge submissions are evaluated is not mentioned in the evaluation
framework by Kirisli et al. [12]. Finally, the challenge submissions are only evaluated at
==PAGE:86==
76
Discussion
the positions of the lumen outlines, while interpolated lumen outlines between the actually
annotated lumen outlines have been utilized in this project. As described above, the pro-
jection method for obtaining the interpolated lumen outline does not always give a good
results. Hence, it might be that if only evaluated at the positions of the annotated lumen
outlines, the method proposed in this thesis might obtain higher performance.
Hong et al. [9] have proposed a CNN for coronary artery segmentation. Their work is
not part of the lumen segmentation challenge and is performed on a diﬀerent data set.
They obtained an average Dice coeﬃcient of 0.63 on their segmentations. As the U-net
proposed in this thesis obtains a higher average Dice coeﬃcient of 0.72 on the test set, it
indicates that the U-net structure seems to be a better choice for this segmentation task
compared to the network architecture proposed in [9]. One reason for this could be that
the U-net is a deeper neural network with more feature maps in each convolutional layer
and more convolutional layers in general. Hong et al. also suggested a network structure
with a contracting and an expanding path, however, the contracting and expanding paths
of the U-net proposed in this thesis contains more convolutional and max pooling layers
than the network proposed by Hong et al. However, it is also important to note that the
results cannot be directly compared, since the performance is evaluated on two diﬀerent
data sets, which could also be the real reason for the observed diﬀerence.
6.5
Clinical and research use
The coronary artery segmentations obtained with the U-net are not good enough for being
used in clinical practice. However, it has been showed that neural networks have potential
within this ﬁeld.
A reliable automatic lumen segmentation algorithm would be a very valuable tool for
assessing the coronary arteries in patients with low or intermediate risk of coronary artery
disease very quickly. It would especially be of interest if the algorithm was also able to
determine the degree of stenosis and the type of plaque. The stenosis degree can most likely
be derived from the segmentation of the coronary arteries and subsequent comparison with
an expected lumen diameter. The plaque type can probably not be determined from the
segmentation alone and would thus require another method for classifying the plaque type.
The segmentation could however be used to detect positions of plaque and in that way give
an indication of which area of the CTA images to examine.
Since it was seen that the lumen segmentation generally is more diﬃcult in areas with large
stenoses, this method for assesment of stenoses is generally only useful in patients with
low or intermediate risk of coronary artery disease. However, coronary artery assessment
using CTA is in important alternative to the invasive coronary angiography in patients
with low risk, because the invasive coronary angiography is associated with high risk of
complications.
==PAGE:87==
6.6 Future work
77
Another potential use of lumen segmentations is for mathematical ﬂow simulations of the
blood ﬂow in the coronary arteries. Such ﬂow simulations can be used to assess the impact
of a stenosis on the blood ﬂow. This is important because some types of blood ﬂow are
associated with a higher risk of thrombosis and acceleration of atherosclerotic plaques.
Although CTA has some limitations when it comes to the assessment of the coronary
arteries, it is a valuable tool for assessing low and intermediate risk patients. It would
especially be a valuable assessment method if stenoses and plaque could be automatically
detected and quantiﬁed in the CTA images.
6.6
Future work
Although good segmentations results were obtained on vessel segments with a smaller
degree of stenosis, there is still room for improvement of the lumen segmentation algorithm.
Especially vessels segments with a large degree of stenosis showed to be diﬃcult for the
U-net to segment, maybe this is caused by fewer examples of large plagues in the training
data set.
Since it was found that the U-net implemented in this project shows diﬃculties of segment-
ing the lumen in images with calciﬁed plaque, a calcium exclusion method as proposed in
[13, 14] and [16] would probably prove useful before training the U-net. For ideas on how
to utilize the information of pixels with calcium, see Sec. 6.4.
The contextual U-net did not result in useful lumen segmentation, however, it is suggested
that an expansion of the networks’ contextual input might improve the segmentation re-
sults. The contextual input could consist of the images both before and after the input
image in the image stack. Also it could be examined whether a diﬀerent initialization of
segmentation masks would improve the segmentation. A suggestion for initialization of the
segmentation masks, used in the contextual input, could be to ﬁrst segment the images
independently with either a threshold method, or by predicting the segmentation mask for
each image with the baseline U-net model. These estimated lumen segmentations could
then be used as the contextual input along with the images before and after an input image.
In this sense the contextual input would be bidirectional, which might potentially elimi-
nate the problem with segmentation errors propagating through an image stack. When it
comes to the ﬁrst image in an image stack, the contextual input could instead of being a
null image and a null mask, consist of the image itself and the estimated segmentation of
itself.
As the images in an image stack with cross-sectional images of a coronary artery segment
are not fully independent, a CNN combined with a recurrent neural network (RNN) could
potentially improve the segmentation performance. It has previously been shown by Chen
et al. that bidirectional LSTMs (a type of RNNs) could be used for successful 3D image
==PAGE:88==
78
Discussion
segmentation by taking contextual information in the form of previous and subsequent
image slices into account [5]. In a recurrent neural network contextual information is taken
into account, as a RNN treats the images as a sequence. The RNN works by having some
memory of what it have previously seen.
In addition to the lumen segmentation task,
it would also be of interest to combine the segmentation algorithm with detection and
classiﬁcation of the plaque type and stenosis grade. Also for the classiﬁcation task, a CNN
combined with a RNN could be used for classifying plaque types and stenosis degrees. Zreik
et al. have proposed a method for characterizing plaque and stenosis in CTA images of the
coronary arteries using a RNN. Again, the RNN would have the advantage of memory of
what it has previously seen. For classiﬁcation task several other options are also available.
The U-net could be extended to be a multitask network, in which both lumen segmentation
and classiﬁcation of plaque type and stenosis grade are made. Another network that follows
well from the lumen segmentation made in this project could be a classiﬁcation network
that takes an image and its segmentation mask as input and based on this classiﬁes each
image.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to investigate the usability of deep learning for coronary artery
segmentation in CTA images. Multiplanar reconstruction was successfully implemented to
obtain cross-sectional images of the blood vessels to be used as input images in two diﬀerent
neural network structures. A U-net and a contextual U-net architecture were evaluated on
two diﬀerent data sets and an analysis of diﬀerent hyperparameters and dropout methods
were conducted. This analysis showed a very little diﬀerence in performance when varying
the learning rate and when applying spatial dropout compared to no dropout. Using regular
dropout did not show as good results as with no or spatial dropout. On the CL data, data
augmentation was utilized which resulted in a more stable performance on the validation
set.
It was also shown that transfer learning with a neural network pretrained on a simpliﬁed
lumen segmentation data set did not improve the overall performance of the network when
it subsequently was trained on a data set with more detailed lumen outlines. However, the
network with transfer learning did start out with a lower cross-entropy loss and a higher
validation Dice coeﬃcient than a network without any pretraining.
The U-net showed promising segmentation results with Dice coeﬃcients of 0.66 and 0.74
on diseased (≥50% stenosis) and healthy (< 50% stenosis) vessel segments, respectively.
Hence the proposed network architecture works best on vessels with no plaque or only a
small amount of plaque. The contextual U-net gave poor segmentation results and seemed
to propagate an error through the network.
In conclusion, it was shown that deep learning, in the form of the U-net, has potential
within the ﬁeld of coronary artery segmentation, however, there is a need for improvement
with respect to reliability and consistency of the lumen segmentation before deep learning
can be applied in clinical practice.
==PAGE:90==
List of Figures
2.1
Illustration of the heart and the circulatory system. Figure from [28].
. . .
6
2.2
The 17 segments of the coronary arteries as deﬁned by the American Heart
Association classiﬁcation. Ao: aorta, RCA: right coronary artery, LCA: left
coronary artery, LM: left main branch, LAD: left anterior descending artery
and LCX: left circumﬂex artery. Figure from [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Fully developed ﬁbrous atheromatic plaque with a core containing lipid-ﬁlled
macrophages and debris from necrotic smooth muscle cells. The ﬁbrous cap
is primarily made of smooth muscle cells inﬁltrated with macrophages. The
ﬁbrous plaque is encapsulated by a layer of endothelial cells. Figure from [19].
8
2.4
Illustration of possible development of atherosclerotic plaque.
A: Stable
ﬁxed plaque in stable angina. B: Unstable plaque with plaque disruption
and platelet aggregation in the acute coronary syndromes. Figure from [19].
9
2.5
(a) Example of CT scanner. Figure from [1]. (b) Example of the geometry
of a CT scanner showing the rotating x-ray tube and detectors around the
patient. Figure from [20].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Example of one slice of a CT scan of the heart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7
Illustrations of the concept of receptive ﬁeld and generation of hidden layers
in CNNs. Figures from [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Illustration of 2 × 2 max pooling with stride 2 of one feature map. Figure
from [17].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Examples of slices of the CTA volume from the centerline extraction data
set. The images are from two diﬀerent patients. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Examples of slices of the CTA volume from the stenosis detection data set.
The images are from two diﬀerent patients.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Procedure for generating CTA stenosis detection and quantiﬁcation reference
standard. The categories of stenoses are normal, mild, moderate, severe and
occluded. Being oﬀby 1 category would for example mean that the 3rd
observer estimates a stenosis as mild, while the 2 other observers categorizes
it as either normal or moderate. Being 2 categories oﬀwould as an example
mean that the 3rd observer estimates a stenosis as mild, while the 2 other
observers categorizes it as severe. Figure from [12]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
(a) Example of lumen outline coordinates for one vessel segment along with
the center of mass (blue ’*’) for each lumen outline. (b) Example of lumen
outline coordinates for one vessel segment together with sampled points
along a spline ﬁtted to the centerline path deﬁned by the centres of masses.
27
==PAGE:91==
LIST OF FIGURES
81
4.2
Example of intersecting lumen outlines. The one not aligned with the others
is removed.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Upper: Center coordinates of one vessel along with two examples of ex-
tracted MPR slices. The red and green areas shows the areas which are
sampled from the CTA data. Lower: The resulting images extracted from
the CTA data. The coloured boundary indicates which of the two areas
along the vessel, each image is extracted from.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
(a) Illustration of generated label maps for the four available vessels for one
patient. All spheres are shown. (b) Illustration of how a label map for the
vessels of the CL data have been generated. Every 80th sphere along the
vessel is shown.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Examples of MPR images (left), corresponding extracted reference images
(middle) and the reference images overlaid on the MPR images (right). . . .
32
4.6
Left: Illustration of a sample point of interest and its two closest lumen
outlines. Right: The projection of the two lumen outline onto the MPR plane. 33
4.7
Generation of label map from the two projections. The two ﬁrst top images
shows the lumen projections of the two closest lumen outlines.
The left
image shows the projection of the closest lumen outline, while the middle
image shows the second closest lumen outline. To the right the ﬁnal label
image at that position is seen. The lumen of this label image is obtained
by weighting d1 and d2 measured along spokes every half degree all the way
around the images. d1 and d2 corresponds to the length of the white area
along each extracted spoke (each angle) and they are shown in the polar
representations in the bottom row. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.8
Examples of MPR images (left), corresponding extracted reference images
(middle) and MPR image with overlay of the reference mask (right). . . . .
36
4.9
U-net structure for semantic segmentation of images of coronary arteries.
The numbers to the left of the white and blue blocks indicate the size of the
feature maps in the corresponding section of the network, the number above
each block is the number of feature maps. 3x3 Conv: convolutional layer
with kernel size 3x3, ZP: zero padding, BN: batch normalization, ReLu:
rectiﬁed linear unit. Figure inspired by [22]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.10 U-net structure with contextual input for semantic segmentation of images
of coronary arteries. The numbers to the left of the white and blue blocks
indicate the size of the feature maps in the corresponding section of the
network, the number above each block is the number of feature maps. 3x3
Conv: convolutional layer with kernel size 3x3, ZP: zero padding, ReLu:
rectiﬁed linear unit. Figure inspired by [29]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.11 Data augmentation on the CL data set. The original image is seen in the
upper left corner. The three other images in the upper row are the original
image rotated 90, 180 and 270 degrees. In the bottom row the original and
the rotated images are mirrored around the horizontal axis. . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:92==
82
LIST OF FIGURES
5.1
Validation curves for networks trained on the CL data for 100 epochs with
a batchsize of 8. No dropout was utilized during training. The validation
curves are shown for four diﬀerent learning rates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Loss and Dice validation curves for 5 diﬀerent versions of the network trained
on the CL data for 100 epochs. Method 1: No dropout, batchsize og 8.
Method 2: No dropout, batchsize of 16. Method 3: spatial dropout 20%,
batchsize of 8. Method 4: Regular dropout 20%, batchsize of 8. Method 5:
Data augmentation, batchsize og 16, no dropout. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Four examples among the 20 images from the test set with lowest Dice
coeﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.39, 0.58, 0.58 and 0.61, respectively. The network was trained on the
data augmented CL data for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4 and a batchsize
of 8. No dropout was utilized during training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Four examples among the 20 images from the test set with highest Dice
coeﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.97, 0.97, 0.97 and 0.98, respectively. The network was trained on the
data augmented CL data for 100 epochs with a learning rate of 10−4 and a
batchsize of 8. No dropout was utilized during training. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Training and validation curves for loss and Dice during 100 epochs for a
contextual U-net trained on the CL data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.6
Normalized histogram over the Dice coeﬃcients obtained for the test im-
ages from the CL data set. These Dice coeﬃcients are obtained with the
contextual U-net trained on the training images from the CL data set. . . .
50
5.7
Dice coeﬃcient of each image in the four vessels of the test set. Image 0
is the ﬁrst image in the image stack that makes up a vessel, image 1 is the
next image in the image stack and so on. Results from regular U-net and
contextual U-net are shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.8
The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth
(references) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image
14, 20, 26, 32, 38 and 44 of vessel 1. These images are from the range in the
vessel, where the Dice coeﬃcient gradually decline to zero, as seen in Fig. 5.7. 52
5.9
The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth
(references) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image
130, 136, 142, 148, 154 and 160 of vessel 4. These images are from the range
in the vessel where the Dice coeﬃcient decline to zero, as seen in Fig. 5.7. .
53
5.10 Four examples among the 30 images from the test set with lowest dice co-
eﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients of
0.21, 0.26, 0.28 and 0.34, respectively. The network was trained on the SD
data for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8. No dropout
was utilized during training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:93==
LIST OF FIGURES
83
5.11 Four examples among the 20 images from the test set with highest Dice
coeﬃcients are shown. From left to right the images have Dice coeﬃcients
of 0.94, 0.94, 0.95 and 0.95, respectively. The network was trained on the
SD data for 100 epochs with a LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8. No dropout
was utilized during training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.12 Training and validation curves for loss and Dice during 100 epochs for a
contextual U-net trained on the SD data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.13 Normalized histogram over the Dice coeﬃcients obtained for the test im-
ages from the SD data set. These Dice coeﬃcients are obtained with the
contextual U-net trained on the training images from the SD data set. . . .
60
5.14 Dice coeﬃcient of each image in the nine vessels segments of the test set.
Image number 0 is the ﬁrst image in the image stack that makes up a vessel
segment, image number 1 is the next image in the image stack and so on.
Results from baseline U-net and contextual U-net are shown.
. . . . . . . .
62
5.15 The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth
(references) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image
1, 7, 13, 19, 25 and 31 of vessel segment 02 for patient 09. These images are
from the range in the vessel segment where the Dice coeﬃcient drops a lot,
as seen in Fig. 5.14.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.16 The top row shows the images, the second row shows the ground truth
(references) and the third row shows the estimated segmentations for image
0, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 of vessel segment 13 for patient 09. These images are
from the beginning of the vessel segment, where the Dice coeﬃcient gradually
increases towards convergence at around 0.9, as seen in Fig. 5.14. . . . . . .
64
5.17 Loss and Dice validation curves for the baseline network trained on the SD
data and the same network but initial weights obtained by pretraining the
network for 40 epochs on the CL data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.18 Four example images from the test set, one image with each of the four
plaque types; no plaque, soft plaque, calciﬁed plaque and mixed plaque.
The ﬁrst row shows the MPR images, the second row shows the images
overlayed with the reference lumen annotations, the third row is the image
overlayed with the obtained segmentation and the bottom row is the im-
age overlayed with the true positives (green), false positives (red) and false
negatives (purple). The network was trained on the SD data for 100 epochs
with LR of 10−4 and a batchsize of 8. No dropout was utilized during training. 68
==PAGE:94==
List of Tables
5.1
Results of training network on CL data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent learning
rates (LRs) with no dropout and and a batchsize of 8. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Results of training networks on CL data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent hy-
perparameters. Data aug = data augmentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Results of training contextual U-net on CL data for 100 epochs. . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Dice coeﬃcients obtained for individual vessels of the test set from the CL
data set. The network was trained for 100 epochs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Results of training network on SD data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent learning
rates with no dropout and a batchsize of 8.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.6
Results of training network on SD data for 100 epochs with diﬀerent hyper-
parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.7
Results of training contextual U-net on SD data for 100 epochs. . . . . . . .
59
5.8
Dice coeﬃcients obtained for individual vessel segments of the test set from
the SD data set. The network was trained for 100 epochs. Results from the
contextual U-net and the baseline U-net are shown. D: Diseased (≥50%
stenosis), H: Healthy (no disease or only non signiﬁcant stenosis (< 50%)) .
61
5.9
Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on images in the test set with stenosis
grades healthy, mild, moderate, severe and occluded. In the test set, the
severe and occluded categories are not represented. The results are from the
baseline U-net trained for 100 epochs with a batchsize of 8 and a LR of 10−4. 66
5.10 Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on images in the test set with plaque
types: no plaque, soft plaque, calciﬁed plaque and mixed plaque. The results
are obtained with the baseline U-net trained for 100 epochs with a batchsize
of 8 and a LR of 10−4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.1
Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on diseased and healthy vessel segments
of the SD data set. The results for the three manual observers on the test
set are shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.2
Maximum Dice coeﬃcients on the validation set obtained during training
for each of the four learning rates evaluated. Max Dice is the maximum
Dice coeﬃcient obtained on the validation set during training. Epoch is the
number of epochs of training after which the maximum Dice is obtained.
The results are shown for both the SD and CL data set. . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.3
Average Dice coeﬃcients obtained on diseased and healthy vessel segments
of the SD data set. The results of the research groups with the three best
challenge submissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.1 Data split of SD data in to training, validation and test set. . . . . . . . . .
85
A.2 Data split of CL data in to training, validation and test set. . . . . . . . . .
85
==PAGE:95==
Appendix A
Appendix
A
Training, validation and test split of data sets
In Table A.1 the split of the available SD data sets described in 3.1.2 into a training,
validation and test set is shown.
Patients
Training
00, 01, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
Validation
02, 03
Test
09, 11
Table A.1: Data split of SD data in to training, validation and test set.
Patients
Training
00, 02, 03, 04, 06, 07
Validation
05
Test
01
Table A.2: Data split of CL data in to training, validation and test set.
==PAGE:96==
86
Appendix
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1] BUPA
Web
Page.
https://www.bupa.co.uk/health-information/your-
appointment/ctscan.
[2] Rotterdam Data Web Page. http://Coronary.Bigr.Nl/Stenoses/About.Php.
[3] Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S
Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Good-
fellow, Andrew Harp, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz,
Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dan Man, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner,
Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fer-
nanda Vi, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu,
and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow : Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous
Distributed Systems. 2015.
[4] Emelia J. Benjamin, Salim S. Virani, Clifton W. Callaway, Alanna M. Chamber-
lain, Alexander R. Chang, Susan Cheng, Stephanie E. Chiuve, Mary Cushman,
Francesca N. Delling, Rajat Deo, Sarah D. De Ferranti, Jane F. Ferguson, Myr-
iam Fornage, Cathleen Gillespie, Carmen R. Isasi, Monik C. Jiménez, Lori Chaf-
ﬁn Jordan, Suzanne E. Judd, Daniel Lackland, Judith H. Lichtman, Lynda Lis-
abeth, Simin Liu, Chris T. Longenecker, Pamela L. Lutsey, Jason S. MacKey,
David B. Matchar, Kunihiro Matsushita, Michael E. Mussolino, Khurram Nasir, Mar-
tin O’Flaherty, Latha P. Palaniappan, Ambarish Pandey, Dilip K. Pandey, Mathew J.
Reeves, Matthew D. Ritchey, Carlos J. Rodriguez, Gregory A. Roth, Wayne D. Rosa-
mond, Uchechukwu K.A. Sampson, Gary M. Satou, Svati H. Shah, Nicole L. Spartano,
David L. Tirschwell, Connie W. Tsao, Jenifer H. Voeks, Joshua Z. Willey, John T.
Wilkins, Jason H.Y. Wu, Heather M. Alger, Sally S. Wong, and Paul Muntner. Heart
disease and stroke statistics - 2018 update: A report from the American Heart Asso-
ciation, volume 137. 2018.
[5] Jianxu Chen, Lin Yang, Danny Z Chen, and Mark Alber. Combining Fully Convolu-
tional and Recurrent Neural Networks for 3D Biomedical Image Segmentation. (Ii),
2016.
[6] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feed-
forward neural networks. 9:249–256, 2010.
[7] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning, 2016.
==PAGE:98==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] Jesse Habets, Renee B A Van Den Brink, Ruben Uijlings, Anje M. Spijkerboer, Willem
P Th M Mali, Steven A J Chamuleau, and Ricardo P J Budde. Coronary artery
assessment by multidetector computed tomography in patients with prosthetic heart
valves. European Radiology, 22(6):1278–1286, 2012.
[9] Y. Hong, Y-M. Hong, Y. Jang, S. Kim, B. Jeon, S. Jung, S. Ha, D. Han, H. Shim, and
H. J. Chang. CORONARY LUMINAL AND WALL MASK PREDICTION USING
CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORK. pages 1049–1052, 2017.
[10] Sergey Ioﬀe and Christian Szegedy. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network
Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. 2015.
[11] Hongda Jiang, Virgina Tech, and Z Eric. Skin Lesion Segmentation with Improved
C-UNet Networks. 72, 2018.
[12] H. A. Kirişli, M. Schaap, C. T. Metz, A. S. Dharampal, W. B. Meijboom, S. L. Pa-
padopoulou, A. Dedic, K. Nieman, M. A. de Graaf, M. F.L. Meijs, M. J. Cramer,
A. Broersen, S. Cetin, A. Eslami, L. Flórez-Valencia, K. L. Lor, B. Matuszewski,
I. Melki, B. Mohr, I. Öksüz, R. Shahzad, C. Wang, P. H. Kitslaar, G. Unal, A. Ka-
touzian, M. Orkisz, C. M. Chen, F. Precioso, L. Najman, S. Masood, D. Ünay, L. van
Vliet, R. Moreno, R. Goldenberg, E. Vuçini, G. P. Krestin, W. J. Niessen, and T. Van
Walsum. Standardized evaluation framework for evaluating coronary artery steno-
sis detection, stenosis quantiﬁcation and lumen segmentation algorithms in computed
tomography angiography. Medical Image Analysis, 17(8):859–876, 2013.
[13] Felix Lugauer, Jingdan Zhang, Yefeng Zheng, Joachim Hornegger, and B. Michael
Kelm. Improving accuracy in coronary lumen segmentation via explicit calcium ex-
clusion, learning-based ray detection and surface optimization. page 90343U, 2014.
[14] Felix Lugauer, Yefeng Zheng, Joachim Hornegger, and B. Michael Kelm.
Precise
lumen segmentation in coronary computed tomography angiography. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 8848:137–147, 2014.
[15] Matt Berseth. ISIC 2017: Skin Lesion Analysis Towards Melanoma Detection. Arxiv,
pages 1–4, 2017.
[16] B. Mohr, S. Masood, and C. Plakas.
Accurate Lumen Segmentation and Stenosis
Detection and Quantiﬁcation in Coronary CTA. Proceedings of 3D Cardiovascular
Imaging: a MICCAI Segmentation Challenge Workshop, 2012.
[17] Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press, 2015.
[18] Christian Payer, Darko Stern, Horst Bischof, and Martin Urschler. Multi-Label Whole
Heart Segmentation Using CNNs and Anatomical Label Conﬁgurations. pages 1–8.
[19] Carol Mattson Porth. Essentials of Pathophysiology. Lisa McAllister, 4th editio edi-
tion, 2015.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
[20] Jerry L. Prince and Jonathan M. Links. Medical Imaging Signals and Systems. Pearson
Education, second edition, 2015.
[21] N. A. Ramjattan and A. N. Makaryus. Coronary CT Angiography, 2018.
[22] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Networks
for Biomedical Image Segmentation. pages 1–8.
[23] Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. How Does
Batch Normalization Help Optimization? (Nips), 2018.
[24] Michiel Schaap, Coert T. Metz, Theo van Walsum, Alina G. van der Giessen, Annick C.
Weustink, Nico R. Mollet, Christian Bauer, Hrvoje Bogunović, Carlos Castro, Xiang
Deng, Engin Dikici, Thomas O’Donnell, Michel Frenay, Ola Friman, Marcela Hernán-
dez Hoyos, Pieter H. Kitslaar, Karl Krissian, Caroline Kühnel, Miguel A. Luengo-Oroz,
Maciej Orkisz, Örjan Smedby, Martin Styner, Andrzej Szymczak, Hüseyin Tek, Chun-
liang Wang, Simon K. Warﬁeld, Sebastian Zambal, Yong Zhang, Gabriel P. Krestin,
and Wiro J. Niessen. Standardized evaluation methodology and reference database for
evaluating coronary artery centerline extraction algorithms. Medical Image Analysis,
13(5):701–714, 2009.
[25] Rahil Shahzad, Hortense Kirişli, Coert Metz, Hui Tang, Michiel Schaap, Lucas Van
Vliet, Wiro Niessen, and Theo Van Walsum. Automatic segmentation, detection and
quantiﬁcation of coronary artery stenoses on CTA. International Journal of Cardio-
vascular Imaging, 29(8):1847–1859, 2013.
[26] Naoki Shibuya. Up-sampling with Transposed Convolution.
[27] Jonathan Tompson, Ross Goroshin, Arjun Jain, Yann Lecun, and Christoph Bregler.
Eﬃcient Object Localization Using Convolutional Networks.
[28] Cinnamon L. VanPutte, Jennifer L. Regan, and Andrew F. Russo. Seeley’s Anatomy
& Physiology. McGraw-Hill, tenth edition, 2014.
[29] Qiao Zheng, Herve Delingette, Nicolas Duchateau, and Nicholas Ayache. 3D Consis-
tent &#x0026;amp; Robust Segmentation of Cardiac Images by Deep Learning with
Spatial Propagation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, pages 1–12, 2018.
