==PAGE:1==
Multi-Agent Programming in GOAL
Laura-Ariadna Stroe
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 5030 1027
s131185@student.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to implement a multi-agent system in accordance to the
Multi-Agent programming contest (MAPC). The scenario taken in consideration
here is the Agents in the City scenario, scenario used in the competition in 2015.
The agents are written in the GOAL programming language. GOAL is an agent-
oriented programming language which is used for developing cognitive agents
and it uses Prolog language as a base for representing knowledge.
The system is composed of 4 agents, each of a diﬀerent type with their speciﬁc
features; car, truck, motorcycle and drone. These agents must work together to
complete tasks and earn as many point as possible.
The results are positive but there is room for improvement in many aspects.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The present project was conducted over a period of 5 months, having started
on the 26th of August, under the supervision of Professor Jørgen Villadsen.
The thesis focuses on multi-agent systems, the GOAL agent-oriented program-
ming language and using this language to solve the Multi-Agent Programming
Contest 2015 scenario.
Lyngby, January 24, 2016
Laura-Ariadna Stroe
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Description and Learning Objectives
3
3
Multi-Agent Systems
5
3.1
Agent systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Multi-agent systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Agent and multi-agent systems applicability . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
The GOAL Agent Programming Language
9
4.1
GOAL platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
GOAL programming language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2.1
Agent Program Structure and syntax
. . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
15
5.1
Agents in the City scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1.1
Jobs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1.2
Items
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.3
Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.4
Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Setup
25
6.1
Dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Running the environment and the agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
7
Implementation
27
7.1
Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8
Results, evaluations, observations
35
9
Future Work
37
10 Conclusion
39
A
percepts.pl
41
B Vehicles.goal
45
C MAStest.mas2g
57
D eismassimconﬁg.xml
59
E 2015-complete-3sims.xml
61
F example-jobs-london.xml
65
G example-products.xml
67
H example-facilities-london.xml
69
I
Initial Plan and Timetable
73
I.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
I.2
Multi-Agent Programming Contest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
I.2.1
Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
I.2.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
I.3
Timetable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
To understand what a multi-agent system is we must ﬁrst understand what an
agent is.
An agent, or more precisely an intelligent agent is an autonomous entity, either
physical or virtual, that can (in a certain measure) interact with an environ-
ment, perceive the world around it and has the skills necessary to solve certain
problems.
Saying autonomous entity means that an agent is ﬂexible, adaptable, therefore
it is able to perceive its environment and adapt tot the changes produced in
this environment. But just responding to the environment is not enough. An
agent must also be able to diﬀerentiate between actions produced, meaning that
it shouldn’t respond to all the changes that happen but only to those that will
help in achieving its goal. Thus it should be goal-driven and react only when
it has the opportunity to get closer to achieving the goal, avoiding irrelevant
actions. A multi-agent system is a group of agents that can interact with each
other, communicate and coordinate to solve problems, their actions aﬀecting
the environment (objects and other agents in that environment).
An example of a multi agent system could be a group of physical agents that
have to explore a territory. In this case the agents must not only plan their
paths but also coordinate and collaborate so that they do not explore the same
place. Also they should be adaptive so that for example if an obstacle is found,
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
they could either remove it or if that is impossible, go around. In this case, for
an agent to perceive the environment around it, it needs sensors.
Of course there are a variety of examples that can be given here, and a good
and detailed example is the actual scenario for the multi-agent system contest,
on which this project is based.
The multi-agent programming contest is an annual competition whose aim is to
stimulate research in multi-agent systems development and programming. The
purpose is, as speciﬁed on their homepage [MAP], to identify key problems,
collect suitable benchmarks and gather test cases. These actions could not only
help testing platforms and multi-agent programming languages but also gives
the opportunity to identify the weak and strong aspects of already existing
systems.
It is called a competition because, to test the performance of the participating
systems, there are several games in which the systems are pitted against each
other. This way it will be easier to see what is the applicability of these systems,
and in what conditions some systems perform better than others.
The project starts with the problem description and the learning objectives, af-
terwards, in the multi-agent systems section there is a more detailed explanation
of multi-agent systems, their applicability and the stage of the research done in
this ﬁeld. This section is followed by one describing the programming languages
and the tools used, with emphasis on the agent-oriented programming language
GOAL used for the decisional and planning part. There is also a section describ-
ing the programming contest, with the scenario and the protocol, an analysis
on the agents and their possible actions, strategies. Further on there will be
sections describing how to setup the environment, the implementation, the re-
sults with evaluations and observations, ending with a conclusion and possible
improvements. The code can be found in the appendixes.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Problem Description and
Learning Objectives
As the tile suggests, the purpose of this project is to deﬁne, implement and eval-
uate a prototype of a multi-agent system using the agent programing language
GOAL, having in mind the multi-agent programming contest scenario.
The learning objectives are:
1. Learn, understand and use the GOAL programming language and the City
2015 scenario from the Multi-Agent Programming Contest. This implies
also improving existent Prolog knowledge and skills.
2. Apply the theory learned at the artiﬁcial intelligence courses such as
[02180] Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence, [02285] Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Multi-Agent Systems, [02284] Knowledge Based Systems and [02281]
Data Logic.
3. Create the agents, test, observe their strong and weak points and attempt
to improve them or suggest ways to improve them.
==PAGE:12==
4
Problem Description and Learning Objectives
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 3
Multi-Agent Systems
An introduction of the term agent and the concept of multi-agent systems was
given in the introduction section 1.
This chapter’s purpose is to give a more detailed explanation of what agent and
multi-agent systems are. For this, more deﬁnitions of an agent are given to make
it easier to further understand the concept of multi-agent systems.
3.1
Agent systems
Over time there have been many deﬁnitions of agents. In [RN95, p. 31] Russell
and Norvig deﬁne an agent as:
Anything that can be viewed as perceiving its environment through
sensors and acting upon that environment through eﬀectors.
Saying this would mean that, similar to humans who perceive their environment
through sensing organs and interact with it through hands and legs, agents can
perceive their environment through sensors such as cameras, or IR sensors and
other sensors, and interact with it via various motors.
Another deﬁnition is given by Hayes-Roth in [HR95, p. 329]:
==PAGE:14==
6
Multi-Agent Systems
Intelligent agents continuously perform three functions: perception
of dynamic conditions in the environment; action to aﬀect conditions
in the environment; and reasoning to interpret perceptions, solve
problems, draw inferences, and determine actions.
The ﬁrst deﬁnition can be applied to physical agents, for example agents that
are exploring an unknown physical environment, while the second one is appli-
cable in both the case of physical and virtual agents.
Since the focus of this project are software agents, two deﬁnitions strictly refer-
ring to agents as computer systems can be found in [Woo09, p. 1-2]:
An agent is a computer program capable of independent action on
behalf of its owner. Figures out what it has to do on itself, does not
have to be told.
An agent is a computer system situated in some environment, capa-
ble of autonomous action to meet its delegated objectives.
Here Wooldrige also establishes that for an agent to be intelligent it has to
be reactive (perceives but also responds to the changes in the environment),
proactive (takes action in order to achieve the goal), and social (collaborates,
interacts with other agents or objects in the environment in order to achieve the
goal).
When talking about agents it is important to know the structure of an agent.
Every agent has a mental state composed of a set of percepts, beliefs, an action
schema and a knowledge base.
With the help of its sensors, the agent perceives information regarding its en-
vironment. This information represents the percepts set of an agent. Since the
environment in which the agent is situated changes, the percepts also change.
The belief is an information regarding the environment which the agent considers
to be true, but is not necessary true, thus the need for a knowledge base. Unlike
the beliefs, the knowledge base contains information which is always true.
In order to achieve the goal, just thinking about how to do it is not enough
thus the need for an action schema. This schema consist of a set of possible
actions the agent can take. Each action has preconditions and postconditions.
By adding preconditions, we make sure that an agent does not try to perform
impossible actions, for example, a car can’t refuel if it is not at a gas station, and
by adding postconditions, we update the mental state thus avoiding deadlock
or loops.
==PAGE:15==
3.2 Multi-agent systems
7
3.2
Multi-agent systems
Now that the deﬁnition of an agent is clear, it is easy to deﬁne a multi-agent
system as a group of agents which interact with each other. A multi-agent sys-
tem is more complex than a simple agent-based system, and is more appropriate
to use in certain situations, like in the case of the city scenario on which this
project is based.
A multi-agent system doesn’t necessary mean that a group of agents work to-
gether to achieve a goal. If the agents share a common goal then they should
communicate, interact with each other and collaborate in order to reach their
goal. But there is also the interesting case in which agents have diﬀerent even
opposing goals [Woo09]. In this case the agents must either compete, like they
do in the multi-agent programming contest city scenario on which the project is
based, or work against each other, a good example here is the multi-agent mars
scenario in which some of the agents, also called saboteurs had the ability and
sole purpose to sabotage and destroy other agents.
In the city scenario, which will be explained in detail in 5, the purpose is earning
more points from making tasks than the opposing team, a peaceful competition,
while in the mars scenario the purpose is divide and conquer, gain territory and
destroy your opponents on the way there.
3.3
Agent and multi-agent systems applicability
The ﬁeld of agent and multi-agents system has been of interest for many years
now. Having agents deciding on how to act upon an environment, adapt their
knowledge base and goals according to certain factors, opens many possibilities.
While the ﬁrst step to do is to ﬁnd ways to represent information about an
environment, once those are set in place and the goals are decided (or added
during a process) an agent can decide on what actions to take. A more complex
version of this is the case of multi-agent systems, where agents have to either
collaborate in the decisional part or work against each other, in order to chose
the best course of action towards the either common or opposing goals.
While there is an applicability for multi-agents in games, creation of synthetic
worlds, these can also be useful for distributed problem solving.
One of the more recent projects involve using Multi-agent systems in medicine.
In this project [JLA16], the aim is to design a real-time, complex system which
==PAGE:16==
8
Multi-Agent Systems
uses the multi-agent coordination technology, hoping that it would improve
Remote Health-care Monitoring systems (RHMS).
More examples of applications of multi-agent systems can be found in [OSFM07].
Here the authors mention the problem for synchronizing coupled oscillators,
Flocking Theory, distributed formation control and other.
The explanations
they give for Flocking theory and distributed formation control are:
Flocks of mobile agents equipped with sensors and communications
devices can serve as mobile sensor networks for massive distributed
sensing in an environment.
Distributed Formation Control: Multi-vehicle systems are important
due to their applicability in commercial and military applications.
In conclusion, a lot of the problems that need consensus, collaboration are can-
didates for multi-agent systems.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 4
The GOAL Agent
Programming Language
GOAL is used for programming rational agents. Using GOAL one can structure
a set of actions, knowledge and rules to create a program that helps agents make
decisions and act upon and environment with the purpose of fulﬁlling a set of
goals. According to their beliefs and goals and of course following a set of rules
the agents decide what to do next.
4.1
GOAL platform
GOAL is available as a plug-in for eclipse and it is easy to setup. The plug-in
comes with a GOAL perspective and GOAL debugger. The GOAL perspective
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
In this picture, it is easy to see the windows:
1. In the script explorer, the opened projects can be seen. A .goal ﬁle is
an agent ﬁle (it contains the code speciﬁc for the agent), a .mod2g is a
module ﬁle, a .pl is a Prolog ﬁle (usually contains things related to the
knowledge schema) and a .mas2g is a MAS ﬁle. Here the environment,
and xmls are also added.
==PAGE:18==
10
The GOAL Agent Programming Language
Figure 4.1: GOAL perspective
2. The actual code in the ﬁles.
3. Overview of the modules and actions.
4. and 7. are the error, respectively console windows.
5. Open the GOAL debugger perspective 4.2. Pressing the debug button
automatically moves to this view.
6. Select the GOAL perspective.
The debugger perspective has many useful features and can be seen in 4.2:
The debugger contains the information about percepts, beliefs, goals, mails and
other at a certain point in the program. These features make it easier to see
exactly what the agents transmit and receive and how does the knowledge base
look like at any point during the program.
==PAGE:19==
4.2 GOAL programming language
11
Figure 4.2: GOAL debugger
4.2
GOAL programming language
GOAL is an intuitive agent-oriented programming language which uses basic
practical reasoning and common sense to program rational agents. Program-
ming a rational agent with this language implies manipulating the knowledge
and beliefs of an agent and structuring the decisional part in order to achieve
certain goals.
In GOAL rational agents have mental states, decision strategies and rules and
communication is possible at the knowledge level.
The mental state of an agent represents the knowledge schema and the goals.The
knowledge schema of an agent contains the information regarding what the agent
knows to be true regarding the environment it is situated in, what it believes
to be true and what are its goals. To represent this knowledge base and the
goals, the agents use a symbolic language, for example, information such as
“The apple is on the table ”, could be represented as on(apple,table). There
can be multiple goals at one point, therefore these goals are speciﬁed, without
specifying the means to achieve them.
During a program, multiple goals can be achieved but also new goals can be
added. When a goal is completed, the agent automatically drops it. This is
the default strategy in GOAL and it is called “blind commitment strategy ”as
==PAGE:20==
12
The GOAL Agent Programming Language
deﬁned in [CL00].
To work towards achieving a goal, and agent must have a set of actions and
action rules which it can use in the process of making decisions.
Based on
the action rules, knowledge base and goals, an agent chooses which action to
pick next. It is also possible to make abstract actions by grouping action rules
together in modules. This modules are reusable and help creating an hierarchical
structure of the program.
4.2.1
Agent Program Structure and syntax
Basically, an agent program consists of sections (most of which are optional)
grouped into modules. These modules can be:
• Initializing module init module { <sections> }.
In this module we
represent the knowledge base in separate sections:
– Knowledge section knowledge{ <knowledge> }. In this section we
represent what the agent knows to be true about its environment.
The information here can either be of the form on(apple,table),
sibling(X,Y):-father(Z,X), father(Z,Y) or in a seperate .pl
ﬁle which is afterwards imported using #import “<file_name>.pl”.
– Belief section beliefs{ <beliefs> }.
In this section, what the
agent believes to be true is represented in the form on(apple,table).
– Goals section goals{ <goals> }. In this section the goals that the
agent wants to achieve are added, either directly or by other ac-
tions during the program. The goals are written like, for example
on(apple,table).
– Actions speciﬁcation section actionspec{ <actions> }. The pos-
sible actions an agent can take are written here.
The structure
of an action is <action_name(optional_parameters)>{ <actions
pre and post conditions (both optional)> }. An example would
be:
goto(There){
pre{not(at(There))}.
post{at(There)}
}
• Main module main module { program { <sections> }} . In the main
module the strategy for selecting the actions is speciﬁed.
==PAGE:21==
4.2 GOAL programming language
13
• Event module event module { program { <sections> }} . In the events
module the rules for processing the percepts are speciﬁed. Here, according
to the percepts, new facts are added to the belief base.
• Other user deﬁned modules. This section is optional and it is used for
user deﬁned modules.
==PAGE:22==
14
The GOAL Agent Programming Language
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 5
Multi-Agent Programming
Contest
This chapter consists of a detailed explanation of the Multi-Agent Programming
Contest (MAPC) Agents in the City scenario and of the agents, with their
possible actions and their roles.
The deﬁnition and the motivation behind this competition can be found on the
MAPC webpage [MAP]:
The competition is an attempt to stimulate research in the area
of multi-agent system development and programming but identify-
ing key problems, collecting suitable benchmarks and gathering test
cases which require and enforce coordinated action that can serve
as milestones for testing multi-agent programming languages, plat-
forms and tools.
The environment can be found on the MAPC webpage, under software down-
loads, the version used in this project is massim-2015-0.6.2. This package con-
tains the documentation, the eismassim package which is the standard for agent-
environment interaction and maps the communication between the MASSim-
server and the agents, the scripts necessary for starting the MASSim -server
and the MASSim-monitor, a dummy team of javaagents which can be used to
test against the implemented team and the MASSim Web Server that is used in
==PAGE:24==
16
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
the competition, which is not relevant to the case in this project. A description
of how to setup the environment can be found in the next chapter, the Setup
section 6.
5.1
Agents in the City scenario
The Agents in the City scenario places the agents on the streets of a realistic
city. The map of the city, with the facilities and the types of agents can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.1.
The goal is simple, the agents must earn as much money as possible in a limited
Figure 5.1: Map of the city
time by completing jobs which reward money.
5.1.1
Jobs
The jobs that the agents can take have limited time for completion, and consist
of the acquisition, assembling and transportation of various goods. There are
two types of jobs:
==PAGE:25==
5.1 Agents in the City scenario
17
• priced - these jobs have a ﬁxed reward which is known from the start
• auctioned - these jobs do not have a ﬁxed reward. To accept this kind of
jobs the agents must bid and the bidding amount will be jobs reward if
completed in time.
It is important to know that the agents can pay for an action at any time,
even if they no longer have money, thus it is possible to have negative balance,
debt. The reward for completing a job is given at the end, therefore there is
no reward for partial completion of a job. It is all or nothing. By successfully
completing a job, it means that the team has delivered the required items before
that job expires. The job speciﬁes the location where the agents must deliver
the items. It is not necessary to deliver all required items at the same time, but
only after all the items for that job have been delivered and in due time, the
job is considered completed and the reward is given to the successful team.
For the case of actioned jobs, once the bidding has started, the agents have a
limited time to place their bid. The winner of the auction is the team with the
lower bid which must be lower than a certain threshold. The bidden money
constitute the reward for completing the job and the team has a limited number
of steps in which it has to complete the job. If a job is not completed in time
the team is ﬁned by a ﬁxed amount which is speciﬁed by the job.
For the case of priced jobs, a successful completion of the job rewards the agent’s
team with a ﬁxed sum of money, which is known from the start.
The agents decide which jobs to accept, and since the jobs have limited time for
completion, after accepting a job, it is up to the agents to plan their actions in
such a way that they will successfully ﬁnish it, therefore they must decide where
to get the resources from and how to navigate the map to get from one point of
interest (target facility) to another. Failing to complete an accepted job in due
time leads to being ﬁned, thus subtracting money from the team’s account.
Most of the jobs are being posted by the system but the teams can also post
jobs. The jobs posted by teams appear the same as the jobs posted by the
system, thus the teams can’t diﬀerentiate between them and can unknowingly
help the other team in completing their jobs. If a team fails a job, the items
which they have already delivered can be recovered from the storages.
5.1.2
Items
As said in the previous subsection, the jobs require the agents to acquire, as-
semble and transport goods. These goods can either be bought from certain
==PAGE:26==
18
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
facilities, crafted by the agent which holds the necessary tools, given to the
other agents in the same team, stored and recovered from the storage facilities
and dumped.
Crafting goods require the use of other goods which can be either prime matter
or tools. Since certain goods require certain tools to craft, the process of craft-
ing a good usually requires the collaboration of two or even more agents. For
example, one agent can have the resources while another has the necessary tool.
Each item has an ID and a volume therefore limiting the amount of items an
agent can carry or that can be stored in a storage facility.
5.1.3
Facilities
On the map 5.1 the bubbles represent the points of interest, the existing facili-
ties. These facilities have an unique ID and a set of coordinates. Each type of
facility is represented by a diﬀerent color. In this scenario there are 5 types of
facilities:
• shops - here the agents can buy items or tools. Since there are more shops,
the prices, item selection and stock may vary from shop to shop.
• storages - these facilities oﬀer the agents the possibility to temporarily
store items. An agent might want to store items if it has no more room,
or if they want to give the items to another agent. In this case, the other
agent can just come and pick up the item.
The capacity of a storage
facility and the price of storing an item may vary from facility to facility.
• charging stations - the agents can use these facilities to charge their bat-
tery. Each charging facility has a limited number of charging slots, thus
when more agents want to use the facility at the same time, they are
placed in a queue, and have to wait their turn to charge. Number of slots
and prices may vary from one charging station to another.
• workshops - to craft items, an agent must be in a workshop.
• dump locations - when an agent no longer needs some items, or when it
needs to free some space, it can go to a dump location and dump the
items.
==PAGE:27==
5.1 Agents in the City scenario
19
5.1.4
Agents
Each team consists of 4 types of agents; cars, trucks, motorcycles and drones.
Each type of agent diﬀers from the others through speed, how they navigate the
map (i.e cars have to follow streets while drones just ﬂy over from one point to
another), how much load they can carry (i.e a drone won’t be able to carry as
much load as a truck) the tools they can use to craft goods (each agent has a
set of tools that they can use) Each agent has a battery charge which decreases
at each step, therefore they need to take into account how much battery they
have left, where is the nearest charging station and when do they have to start
heading towards the charging facility so that their battery doesn’t die before
they get there. The team used in this project consists of an agent of each type,
thus a total of 4 agents. The program can be expanded further to consist of
more agents of each type.
The role speciﬁc features of the agents can be seen in table 5.1:
Table 5.1: Role attributes
Role
Speed
Routes
Battery
capacity
Load capacity
Tools
Car
3
roads
500
550
tool3
Drone
5
air
250
100
tool1
Motorcycle 4
roads
350
300
tool3
Truck
1
roads
1000
3000
tool2
5.1.4.1
Agent actions
All the agents have a set of actions they can perform. Depending on the action
and the role, an action can be performed if the agent fulﬁlls certain criteria. For
example, to charge the battery, an agent must be at a charging station. The
possible actions, with the parameters and description can be seen in table 5.2:
==PAGE:28==
20
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
Table 5.2: Actions and parameters
Action
Action Description
Parameters
Current
location
Cost
goto
Move an agent from
one place to another.
The target can be ei-
ther speciﬁed using the
ID or the coordinates
on the map at which it
is situated. Depending
on the distance and the
speed of the agent, it
may take several steps
to ﬁnish
facility=fac_id
or
lat=<x_coord>
lon=<y_coord>
anywhere
battery
charge
buy
Buys items. Must have
enough free capacity.
item=item_id
amount=<nr>
shop
money
give
Gives items to a team-
mate.
Requires a re-
ceive action from the
receiving agent.
agent=agent_id
item=item_id
amount=<nr>
any
but
at
the
same
location
with
the
receiver.
-
receive
Receives items from a
teammate.
Depen-
dent on the give action.
The agent must have
enough free capacity to
receive the items.
-
any
but
at
the
same
location
with
the
agent
giving
the item.
-
store
Store items at a stor-
age location and pay
the required money to
store them. Items can
be retrieved at a later
time.
Dependent on
the storage’s free ca-
pacity.
item=item_id
amount=<nr>
storage
money
retrieve
Retrieve items from a
storage facility.
item=item_id
amount=<nr>
storage
-
==PAGE:29==
5.1 Agents in the City scenario
21
retrieve_delivered Retrieve items previ-
ously delivered as part
of a job.
If the job
was completed and the
reward was paid, the
team posting the job
may retrieve the items
delivered by the other
team. In case of a can-
celed job or completed
by the enemy team, an
agent can retrieve the
items that were par-
tially delivered.
item=item_id
amount=<nr>
storage
-
dump
Get rid of units to free
space.
Must pay the
price.
The price de-
pends on the dump fa-
cility and can changes
according to items and
amount.
item=item_id
amount=<nr>
dump lo-
cation
money
assemble
manufacture a unit of
a speciﬁed item, can
be
helped
by
team-
mates with resources
and tools.
item=item_id
workshop
prime
mat-
ter
and
tools
assist_assemble
help a teammate man-
ufacture an item by
providing
resources
and
can
also
help
assembling it if it has
the necessary tools.
item=item_id
same
workshop
with
the
assem-
bling
agent
items
needed
for
craft
deliver_job
fully or partially de-
liver the items required
by a job.
job=job_id
storage
-
==PAGE:30==
22
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
charge
If the charging station
the agent is at has free
slots,
the agents en-
ters and charges im-
mediately otherwise it
is placed in a queue
and gets automatically
put in a charging slot
once its turn comes.
If
while
waiting
in
queue the agent per-
forms another action it
looses the spot in the
queue.
The agent is
automatically removed
from the charging sta-
tion once it is fully
charged.
Charging
may take several steps
and
the
cost
varies
from station to station.
-
charging
station
money
bid_for_job
Place a bid for an auc-
tioned job when the
bidding stage starts.
job=job_id
any
if mis-
sion
failed
money
will be
sub-
tracted
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Agents in the City scenario
23
post_job
Create a job oﬀering.
1.type=auction
max_price=<nr1>
ﬁne=<nr2>
ac-
tive_steps=<nr3>
auction_steps=<nr4>
storage=storage_id
item1=item_id1
amount1=<nr5>
item2=item_id2
amount2=<nr6>
...
or
2.
type=priced
price=<nr1>
ac-
tive_steps=<nr2>
storage=storage_id
item1=item_id1
amount1=<nr3>
item2=item_id2
amount2=<nr4> ...
any
-
continue
Continues
executing
the action.
-
any
depends
on
con-
text
skip
Agent doesn’t perform
any action or continues
executing ongoing ac-
tion.
-
any
depends
on
con-
text
abort
Cancel the execution of
any ongoing actions
-
-
-
As seen in the previous table 5.2 some actions require parameters. Every pa-
rameter has the form parameter_name=value.
In case of failure to execute an action, there are failure messages. These mes-
sages are of the form failed_<reason>. The possible failure messages are:
• failed_location - the agent is not in the location necessary to perform the
action
• failed_unknown_item - item ID does not correspond to any item.
• failed_unknown_agent - the agent ID does not exist.
• failed_unknown_job - job ID does not exist.
==PAGE:32==
24
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
• failed_unknown_facility - facility ID does not exist.
• failed_item_amount - the number of requested items is bigger than the
number of items available.
• failed_capacity - not enough free capacity.
• wrong_facility - agent tries to perform an action in a wrong facility, for
example it tries to charge at a workshop.
• failed_tools - agent doesn’t have the necessary tools to craft an item.
• failed_item_type - agent tries to craft an item which cannot be crafted.
• failed_job_status - for example an agent tried to complete a job which is
already completed by the other team.
• failed_job_type - for example the agent is trying to bid for a priced job.
• failed_counterpat - one of the agents required to perform an collaborative
action doesn’t do its part, for example the receiver agent doesn’t perform
a receive action when another agent gives it something.
• failed_wrong_param - wrong parameter format.
• failed_unknown_error - an error which is not among the ones speciﬁed
has occurred.
• failed - an agent tries to execute an unknown action.
• successful_partial - some items were partially delivered.
• useless - no items were delivered for a job.
• failed_random - a random failure rate of 1%.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 6
Setup
To run and test the environment and the agents there are several steps that need
to be taken ﬁrst; the packages must be installed and tested, the conﬁguration
ﬁles changed accordingly, the plug-ins installed.
6.1
Dependencies
The ﬁles needed for setting up the environment are:
• The Multi-agent programming contest package for the Agents in the City
scenario from 2015. The package is called massim-2015-0.6.2-bin.tar
and can be found on the MAPC web page [MAP] under downloads/Soft-
ware. The jar with the source code must be added to the GOAL project.
• Eclipse IDE for Java Developers can be found at [ECL].
• GOAL Plug-in for Eclipse can be downloaded from [GOA].
• The eismassimconfig.xml ﬁle must be placed in the GOAL project.
• If running on Windows, one must also install MSYS which can be found
at [MSY].
==PAGE:34==
26
Setup
6.2
Running the environment and the agents
To run the agents, ﬁrst the server must be started. The script needed to start
the server is called startServer.sh. After starting the server and choosing
the appropriate conﬁguration, the map must be started. The script is called
startMapMonitor.sh. All the scripts can be found in the massim-2015-0.6.2-bin.tar
package under massim/scripts. The ones that are started last are the agents.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 7
Implementation
This project consists of an agent ﬁle, called Vehicles.goal B, a Prolog ﬁle
percepts.pl which contains the percepts A, multi-agent system ﬁle MAStest.mas2g
C, xml ﬁle for the conﬁguration eismassimconfig.xml D,a xml ﬁle for the simu-
lation 2015-complete-3sims.xml E, a xml ﬁle containing the jobs speciﬁcation
F, a xml ﬁle containing the product speciﬁcation G and a xml ﬁle containing the
facilities speciﬁcations H. The last apendix is the initial project, the one made
when this project started I.
In the percepts.pl ﬁle the percepts are added according to the Prolog syntax
inFacility(Facility) :- percept(inFacilty(Facilty)). The purpose of
this ﬁle is to contain all the percepts necessary for running the Agents in The
City scenario. The list of percepts can be seen in 7.1 :
Table 7.1: Percepts
Percept
Description
auctionJob(Id,Storage,BeginStep,
EndStep,MaxBid, [item(ItemName,
Amount)])
The auction job with the Id, storage
where the items are to be turned in, the
amount of steps until it has to be ﬁn-
ished, the maximum bid and the list of
items with amounts that need to be de-
livered to consider the job complete.
==PAGE:36==
28
Implementation
pricedJob(Id,Storage,Begin,End,
Reward,[item(ItemNAme,Amount,
Delivered)])
Same as auctionJob, but for priced jobs
with an established reward.
bye
Percept specifying the end of the tour-
nament.
charge(Battery)
The current battery charge of an agent.
chargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,
ChRate,Price,Slots)
The charging station on the map with
name, coordinates, price and number of
charging slots.
deadline(Deadline)
The deadline for sending a valid action
message to the server.
dump(Name,Lat,Lon,Price)
Dump location with coordinates and
price.
entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role)
Agent in the simulation with coordi-
nates, name and allied team.
fPosition(QueuePos)
Agent’s position in queue for the facil-
ity.
id(Id)
Id of the simulation.
inFacility(Facility)
The facility in which the agent is, if it
is in one.
item(ItemName,Amount)
Item(s) carried by an agent.
jobPosted(Id)
Job that has been posted by the agent’s
team.
jobTaken(Id)
Job accepted or won by the agent’s
team.
lat(Lat)
Latitude of the agent on the map.
lon(Lon)
Longitude of the agent on the map.
load(Load)
Current load of agent.
lastAction(LastActionId)
The last action sent to the server.
lastActionParame(LastActParamId)
The parameter of the last action sent to
the server.
lastActionResult(LastActionRes)
The result of the last action sent to the
server. It can be a success or a failure.
money(Money)
How much money the team has.
product(ProdName,Volume,
[consumed(ItemName,Amount),
tool(ToolName,Amount)])
Product that can be crafted, and what
are the prime resources for it.
ranking(Rank)
The outcome of the simulation for the
agent’s team.
requestAction
Action requested by the server.
==PAGE:37==
29
role(RoleName,Speed,LoadCapacity,
BatteryCapacity, [tool])
The role of the agent, how much it can
carry, how much maximum battery can
it have and the tools it can use.
route([wp(SeqId,Lat,Lon)])
The route the agent is following.
routeLength(Lngth)
The calculated length of the route the
agent takes.
shop(ShopName,Lat,Lon,
[item(ItemName)])
Shop with name and location and the
items it holds.
shop(ShopNAme,Lat,Lon,
[availableItem(ItemName,Cost,
Amount,RestockInterval)])
Nearby shop .
simEnd
Notiﬁcation that the simulation has
ended sent from the server.
simStart
Notiﬁcation that the simulation has
started sent from the server.
step(Step)
Current step in the simulation.
steps(Steps)
Overall number of steps in the current
simulation.
storage(StorageName,Lat,Lon,Price,
TotalCap,UsedCap,
[item(ItemName,AmountStored,
AmountDel)])
Storage name with coordinates, total
capacity, used capacity and items, ei-
ther stored or delivered, since partial
delivery of items for a job is possible.
timestamp(Timestamp)
Moment in time when the last message
was sent by the server.
workshop(WorkshopName,Lat,Lon,
Price)
Workshop in the simulation with coor-
dinates and prices.
visibleCharginStation(Name,Lat,Lon,
ChRate,Price,Slots,Queuesize)
The nearest charging station with num-
ber of free slots and queue size.
Since the agents have the same action speciﬁcations module, there is only one
agent ﬁle Vehicles.goal, with diﬀerent user speciﬁed modules for handling the
diﬀerences between the agents. This ﬁle consists of:
• Initialization module called init module.
• Main Module main module.
• Event Module event module.
• Car Percepts module called carPercepts.
• Drone Percepts module dronePercepts.
==PAGE:38==
30
Implementation
• Motorcycle Percepts module motorPercepts.
• Truck Percepts module truckPercepts.
• A module for handling auctioned jobs foundauctionJob.
• A module for handling priced jobs foundpricedJob.
• A module for the execution of a job executeJob(Id) which takes the Id
of the job as a parameter.
• A module which handles crafting items. This module is called
craft
(ProductName,Amount ,Volume,Id,Storage) and it takes as parameters
the product that needs to be crafted, how many should be crafted, the
volume a product takes up, the Id of the job that it belongs to and the
storage where it should be delivered in case of successful completion.
• A module for searching an item, meaning, a module in which the agents
capable of carrying that item are selected and sent shopping. This module
is called searchItem(ItemName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage). in which
the parameters ar the same as the ones speciﬁed in craft( ProductName,
Amount,Volume,Id,Storage).
• A module in which the agents decide which shop is best to go at to buy
the resources. This module is called chooseShop(ItemName,Amount) with
the item name and the amount of items with that name needed.
• A module which handles the mailings, handleMail.
In the init module the knowledge, beliefs, goals and action speciﬁcations are
deﬁned. Since the percepts have been made in an external ﬁle, in the knowledge
section, the ﬁle consisting of 7.1 ﬁle is imported.
Basically all modules can
contain a belief, knowledge or goal section. In the belief section there are only
4 beliefs initially:
• doneAction speciﬁes an action has been completed.
• donePercepts speciﬁes that the percepts are loaded/up-to-date.
• doneMailing speciﬁes that the messages from the agents inbox are loaded/
up-to-date.
• ready.
In the goals section, there is nothing initially.
The goals are added as the
program progresses. In this section, example when a job is accepted, a goal to
==PAGE:39==
31
complete the accepted job will be added. The list of the actions, with their pre
and post conditions is added in the action spec section.
The actions speciﬁed in the actionspec section, are the actions explained in
5.2. Since there must exist some knowledge regarding the status of an action,
for example a goto(Location) action has to be done in one or more steps, the
post condition is set to doneAction, so that the program can continue, and the
agents won’t be stuck in a loop.
In the main module, the agents decide what actions to execute next.
Here
the agents can either check their goals, if any already set and choose the ac-
tions needed to achieve them or set their goals according to certain events
happening. For role speciﬁc actions, these have been separated into role spe-
ciﬁc modules, thus the modules carPercepts, dronePercepts, motorPercepts,
truckPercepts modules. Every time the program gets to this point, it checks if
any actions are executed at that moment, and if not, depending on the role the
agent has, it selects the role speciﬁc modules. The structure of the sentences
in the program sections of the modules is "if <some belief> then <execute
some actions>". A check to see if any jobs, either auctioned or priced have
been posted is made. Of course, to avoid accepting the same job more times,
or bidding for a job more times by a single agent, the agents must check to
see if the job has already been taken, or bid on. If there are jobs which have
been accepted, the agents will proceed to their execution, therefore go into the
executeJob(Id) module.
Since the main goal is to earn credits, and to do so the agents need to take
and complete tasks, then choosing the jobs they take and how they plan to
complete them holds an important role in the development. Since the moment
a job sent from the server becomes active, the program checks if the job posted
by the system is auctioned or priced. For handling these two types of jobs,
there are 2 separate modules, foundauctionJob and foundpricedJob. In the
foundpricedJob, ﬁrst the agents should check to see if the job has not been
posted for too long.
The minimum steps required to fulﬁll a job has been
approximated to 200 ,therefore the agents should have at least 200 steps left
until the deadline of the job. If a job of this type has been found, the agents
should check if other jobs of the same type have been posted. The strategy
decided upon is that the agents can accept only one job of each type, to avoid
trying to make more jobs at the same time, and end up not completing any.
Therefore the maximum number of jobs active at the same time are one auction
job and one priced. If there is another priced job posted at the same time, which
also has more than 200 steps until deadline, then the selection is made based
on the reward. Of course, the job with the higher reward will be selected. If
there is only one job, it should be accepted and a jobTaken(Id) is added to the
beliefs, and the goal updated.
==PAGE:40==
32
Implementation
At every iteration, the agents are checking their mails to see if a new message
has been sent. If a job has been accepted by any of them, thus the message
has been sent and received, the receivers insert the new information in their
knowledge base and remove it from their mailbox, to avoid adding the same
goals more than once.
In the case of an auction job posted by the system, in the foundauctionJob
module, the agents check if they have enough time to complete it, and then bid
on it. The bid is set to the Maximum possible value. If the job is won then it
is added.
Besides the deadline, there are other thing that could be taken into consider-
ation when choosing if a job should be accepted or not. The implementation
could be further improved by checking the important aspects of the jobs before
accepting them, for example what would the cost to complete this job be, ac-
cording to the items that need to be bought, the prime resources. The main
characteristic this project will focus on is deadline but the program can be ex-
tended to take into consideration the rewards as well, similar to the process
in the foundpricedJob(Id). If both characteristics can’t be fulﬁlled, the time
should have priority because, the reward won’t matter that much if the job can’t
be completed in time. Once a job is completed successfully, or failed it will be
dropped to avoid redoing it for no reward.
Another important point in this project is the need for recharging the battery.
If an agent remains stranded without battery, there is no way another agent
can recharge him, thus that agent will be completely disabled, and this would
result in making the successful completion of the jobs slower or even impossible
(due to the fact that depending on the role an agent can use one ore more types
of tools, which might be needed for assembling the products). These charging
action are important, and the agents should check their battery at every step.
For this, 4 functions have been deﬁned in the event module according to the
syntax #define <name> <conditions>. These functions can be seen in 7.1 :
Figure 7.1: Functions to check if the agents need charging
There are 4 functions to check if an agent having a particular role needs to
charge. The limits, represent 50% of their total capacity, since it might be the
case when they have to turn around thus making a detour and is best to avoid
low battery.
The values have been introduced directly but a function could
replace them to 50%. The actions that the agents need to execute when they
==PAGE:41==
33
need to charge are found in the modules for each role. These modules are called
from the main module. Here, according to the role of each agent, a diﬀerent
module is called as it can be seen in 7.2:
Figure 7.2: Code to select the role speciﬁc module
Since there are several charging facilities, in the present scenario there are 3, the
agent must decide which station to go to. In the role speciﬁc modules the agent
decides which charging facility it should go to. A sample code, for example the
one for the car agent can be seen in 7.3:
Figure 7.3: Code to select the charging station
This module checks if the agent is already in a charging facility, in which case
it will charge to maximum capacity. If the needChargeCar function deﬁned in
the event module is true, meaning that the agents have reached the established
limit, it proceeds to selecting the charging facility. Whenever a charging facility
is close to the agent, a percept like the visibleChargingStation is added,
therefore the existence of this percept must be checked. If a percept of this type
is found, then the next step would be heading towards the station, by calling
the goto action.The agent chooses the closest charging station it can see if any.
If there is no such station, the it goes towards a defaulted station. The process
of choosing of the station, in case the agent doesn’t see any, could be improved
by checking the distances to all the charging station on the map, and choosing
the one with the smallest distance. If a charging station would become visible
before the agent reaches the chosen station, then the agent will go to that one,
since it checks for visible stations at every step.
Since there is a check to see if the agent is in a charging station and the its
battery is not full, the agent will stay there until fully charged.
==PAGE:42==
34
Implementation
7.1
Strategies
When a new job has been accepted all the agents will know about it. They will
all try to complete the job individually, hoping that one of them will manage to
successfully complete it in time. Not all the agents can complete every mission,
for example if a quest requires items that have a big volume, the drone will
skip and wait for another job or to be called by another agent (in the case of
assembling items). The moment a job is completed by one of the agents, the job
will be dropped, therefore, those which were also on the job would start doing
other tasks.
From the beginning of the program until the end there will always be diﬀerences
in between auction jobs and priced jobs, therefore each type is handled a little
diﬀerent than the other. Also another important diﬀerence is in between crafted
items and bought ones.
In the executeJob module both types of jobs are
checked to see the kind of items they need, if the agents should buy or craft
them. The diﬀerence is visible in the structure of the product percept. An item
which needs to be bought will have an empty list where the resources should be.
According to the type of item needed the appropriate module will be selected.
If the item is to be assembled then the craft module will be called, otherwise,
the searchItem module.
At this point, in the craft module only the case in which the agent can use the
necessary tool for assembling the item is handled. This module can be extended
to handle the cases in which two or more agents need to collaborate. For the
case in which the agent can use the necessary tool, fact that can be seen from
the role speciﬁcation, exist several possibilities. The agent could have the item
and the tool, in which case, if not already at a workshop, it will go there and
assemble and turn in the quests afterwards, or it could already be in a workshop
in which case it just needs to assemble. When the agent tries to decide in which
workshop to go the ﬁrst thing it considers is be the price. This can become
more complex by deciding the workshop not only based on the price, but also,
given the time left until deadline, it could choose the closer one, no matter the
price.
If the agent is missing any of the resource items it will go shopping by calling
the chooseShop module. In this module the agent will choose which shop to go
to, taking in consideration the prices and the stock of those shops.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 8
Results, evaluations,
observations
According to the simulations done, this multi agent system program does works
but there is room for improvement. The separate modules have given positive
results in most of the simulations.
The implemented functions for charging,
choosing the job and the shops from where to buy items work and gave the
expected results. There are moments when the agents seem to not do anything,
sometimes they randomly skip their actions, and there is also the random failure
chance of 1% in executing an action.
The communication between agents is appropriate, the agents receive the mes-
sages, read them and and delete them after they have been read and the facts
from those messages saved to the knowledge base if that is the case.
In terms of improving the code for example, routes could be calculated, the
length of the routes can be known making the agents more ﬂexible when they
need to choose from more facilities. Since this feature has not been implemented,
if the facility an agent needs at one point is not in its visual then the agent
will head towards a default facility of that type, this might result in the agent
going the long way around and even avoiding possible facilities which are closer.
Not all the percepts and actions from the scenario have been used. There are
remaining actions and percepts which could be used to make the program even
more ﬂexible and complex.
==PAGE:44==
36
Results, evaluations, observations
The agent ﬁle Vehicles.goal is structured in many modules. These modules
could also be external, in separate mod2g documents. There were some errors
when trying to make them separately, the program did not recognize them
although they were in the same path and previously saved. The same happened
to the Prolog ﬁle. In the documentation the #import of the Prolog ﬁle should be
added in the knowledge section of a module. When trying that, an error occurs
saying that “# Can’t be used here ”. In the documentation it is also stated
that the GOAL plugin works best with Eclipse Luna. The project was made on
Eclipse Mars therefore it is possible that this have lead to some inconsistencies.
Most of the features have been implemented. The program can be optimized
further by adding the missing features and possibly improving the existing ones.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 9
Future Work
Since there are places in which the program can be improved, these improve-
ments can be done in future projects. Among the things that can be improved
are the speed, as in the number of steps required to do go through the whole
program once.
Another aspect that could be taken into consideration for future works, would be
improving the job selection. Right now this is made according to the deadline
ﬁrst and the reward as second priority.
Since the route and routeLength
percepts are already added to the knowledge base, one could use these in to
choose the route to take towards the places that need to be visited in order
to create/buy the necessary items for the completion of the jobs. This would
probably reduce a number of steps, thus ﬁnishing the jobs faster. If the jobs
are ﬁnished faster, there would be more time left to take and complete more
jobs until the simulation end, thus resulting in more money. Since the ﬁnal
goal of these agents is to earn as much money as possible until the end of the
simulation, reducing the number of steps would deﬁnitely improve the results.
The team was not tested against another team, therefore the results are only
based on their ability to choose and complete tasks, taking in consideration the
actions in between.
==PAGE:46==
38
Future Work
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
Comparing the initial plan with the result, it can be concluded that a big portion
of the learning objectives have been fulﬁlled. The initial plan with the timetable
can be seen in the appendix F. The timetable was not fully respected due to
unforeseen diﬃculties. Learning the GOAL tool and syntax took longer than
planed due to some conﬂicts between the information from the documentation
and the results in the Eclipse Plugin, in structure and syntax.
Besides some impediments in the learning of the GOAL language and the Im-
plementation of the scenario, the project was completed but of course with room
for improvement, as it can be seen in the Future Work chapter 9. The present
project could serve as a base for a more complex project in which everything is
optimized and tested in a real competition.
The GOAL platform, is easy to use. The debugger is complex and makes it
a lot easier to see mistakes, or where the program crashes and if everything is
updated. Since the language behind is Prolog, writing in this language is quite
intuitive.
The project was diﬃcult at times, some small mistakes took a lot more time
than they should, therefore the result is not exactly as planned, even if the
program is functional. More time would have helped but this project can be
continued in the future.
==PAGE:48==
40
Conclusion
==PAGE:49==
Appendix A
percepts.pl
%The job that is currently auctioned
auctionJob(Id,Storage,BeginStep,EndStep,MaxBid,[item(ItemName,Amount)]) :-
percept(auctionJob(Id,Storage,BeginStep,EndStep,MaxBid,[item(ItemName,Amount)]))
%Indicator that the tournament is over
bye:-percept(bye).
%The current battery charge of an agent
charge(Battery) :- percept(charge(Battery))
%Charging station
chargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots) :-
percept(chargingStation(Name,Lat, Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots))
%The deadline for sending a valid action message to the server
deadline(Deadline) :- percept(deadline(Deadline)).
%Dump facility
dump(Name,Lat,Long,Price) :- percept(dump(Name,Lat,Long,Price)).
%Agent(entity) in the simulation
entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role) :- percept(entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role)).
%Queue position that the agent occupies in the facility
fPosition(QueuePos) :- percept(fPosition(QueuePos)).
%Simulation identiﬁer
id(Id) :- percept(id(Id)).
%The facility that the agent is in. Can be none
inFacility(Facility) :- percept(inFacility(Facility)).
==PAGE:50==
42
percepts.pl
%Item carried by an agent
item(ItemName,Amount) :- percept(item(ItemName,Amount)).
%Job that has been posted by the agent’s team
jobPosted(Id) :- percept(jobPosted(Id)).
%Job that has been taken by the agent’s team (a won action)
jobTaken(Id) :- percept(jobTaken(Id)).
%Latitude of agent’s position - must be a double value
lat(Lat) :- percept(lat(Lat)).
%Longitude of the agent’s position - double value
lon(Lon) :- percept(lon(Lon)).
%Current load of an agent
load(Load) :- percept(load(Load)).
%Last action that was sent to the server
lastAction(LastActionId) :- percept(lastAction(LastActionId)).
%Parameter of the last action that was sent to the server
lastActionParam(LastActionParamId) :- percept(lastActionParam(LastActionParamId)).
%Outcome of the last action
lastActionResult(LastActionRes) :- percept(lastActionResult(LastActionRes)).
%Amount of money available to the vehicle’s team
money(Money) :- percept(money(Money)).
%Active job both teams can work on
pricedJob(Id,Storage,Begin,End,Reward,[item(ItemName,Amount)]) :-
percept(pricedJob(Id, Storage,Begin,End,Reward,[item(ItemName,Amount)])).
%Product in the simulation
product(ProdName,Volume,[consumed(ItemName,Amount),tool(ToolName,Amount)])
:- percept(product(ProdName,Volume,[consumed(ItemName,Amount),tool(ToolName,
Amount)])).
%The outcome of the simulation for the vehicle’s team
ranking(Rank) :- percept(ranking(Rank)).
%Action requested by the server
requestAction :- percept(requestAction).
%The agents role
role(RoleName,Speed,LoadCapacity,BatteryCapacity,[Tool]) :-
percept(role(RoleName,Speed, LoadCapacity,BatteryCapacity,[Tool])).
%The route the agent is following
route([wp(SeqId,Lat,Lon)]) :- percept(route([wp(SeqId,Lat,Lon)])).
%Calculated route’s length
routeLength(Lngth) :- percept(routeLength(Lngth)).
%Shop in the simulation
shop(ShopName,Lat,Lon,[item(ItemName)]) :- percept(shop(ShopName,Lat,Lon,
[item(ItemName)])).
%Nearby shop
shop(ShopName,Lat,Lon,[availableItem(ItemName,Cost,Amount,RestockInterval)])
:- percept(shop(ShopName,Lat,Lon,[availableItem(ItemName,Cost,Amount,RestockInterval)])).
==PAGE:51==
43
%Notiﬁcation of simulation end sent from the server
simEnd :- percept(simEnd).
%Notiﬁcation of simulation start sent from the server
simStart :- percept(simStart).
%Current step in the simulation
step(Step) :- percept(step(Step)).
%Overall number of steps in the current simulation
steps(Steps) :- percept(steps(Steps)).
%Storage facility
storage(StorageName,Lat,Lon,Price,TotalCapacity,UsedCapacity, [item(ItemName,
AmountStored, AmountDelivered)]) :-
percept(storage(StorageName,Lat,Lon,Price,TotalCapacity,UsedCapacity, [item(ItemName
,AmountStored,AmountDelivered)])).
%Moment in time when the last message was sent by the server
timestamp(Timestamp) :- percept(timestamp(Timestamp)).
%Workshop facility
workshop(WorkshopName,Lat,Lon,Price) :-
percept(workshop(WorkshopName,Lat,Lon,Price)).
%Charging station close to the agent
visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots,QueueSize) :-
percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots,QueueSize)).
==PAGE:52==
44
percepts.pl
==PAGE:53==
Appendix B
Vehicles.goal
%#import "common.mod2g".
init module
{
%
knowledge{
%contains rules allowing the agent to extract information form percepts
#import "percepts.pl".
%
}
beliefs
{
doneAction.
donePercepts.
doneMailing.
ready.
}
goals
{
%the goals are inserted along the way
}
actionspec
{
goto(Location)
{
pre{not(percept(inFacility(Location)))}
post{doneAction}
}
==PAGE:54==
46
Vehicles.goal
goto(Lat,Lon)
{
pre{not(percept(entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role)))}
post{doneAction}
}
charge
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
skip
{
pre {true}
post {doneAction}
}
buy(Items)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
give(Agent,Item,Amount)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
receive
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
store(Item,Amount)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
retrieve(Item,Amount)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
retrieve_delivered(Item,Amount)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
dump(Item,Amount)
{
==PAGE:55==
47
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
assemble(Item)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
assist_assemble(Assembler)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
deliver_job(Job)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
bid_for_job(Bid)
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
continue
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
abort
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
post_joba(Type,MaxPrice,Fine,ActiveSteps,AuctionSteps,Storage,[Item,
Amount])
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
post_jobp(Type,Price,ActiveSteps,Storage,[Item,Amount])
{
pre{true}
post{doneAction}
}
}
}
==PAGE:56==
48
Vehicles.goal
main module
{
program
{
if bel(doneAction)then
{
if bel(percept(auctionJob(Id,Storage,BeginStep,EndStep,Fine,MaxBid,[item(
ItemName,Amount)])),
not(jobTaken(Id)), not(jobBid(Id))) then foundauctionJob.
if bel(percept(pricedJob(Id1,Storage1,Begin1,End1,Reward1,[item(ItemName1
,Amount1)])), not(jobTaken(Id1))) then
foundpricedJob.
if bel(me(car)) then carPercepts.
if bel(me(drone)) then dronePercepts.
if bel(me(motor)) then motorPercepts.
if bel(me(truck)) then truckPercepts.
if bel(jobTaken(Id2)) then executeJob(Id2).
}
}
}
event module
{
program
{
#define needChargeCar bel(me(car),percept(charge(Battery)), Battery=<250)
.
#define needChargeDrone bel(me(drone),percept(charge(Battery)), Battery
=<125).
#define needChargeMotor bel(me(motor),percept(charge(Battery)), Battery
=<175).
#define needChargeTruck bel(me(truck), percept(charge(Battery)), Battery
=<500).
%
if bel(percept(step(Current) ),step ( Old ) ,!,Old \= Current )then
%
{
%
if bel ( Old==unknown )
%
then insert(not(step(Old)),not(donePercepts ),not(
doneMailing ),not( doneAction ),step(Current)).
%
if bel(integer(Old), Current>Old)
%
then insert(not(step(Old)), not(donePercepts), not(
doneMailing), not(doneAction),step(Current)).
%
}
if bel(not(donePercepts)) then insert(donePercepts).
if bel(not(doneMailing)) then handleMail + insert(doneMailing).
}
}
==PAGE:57==
49
module carPercepts
{
#import "percepts.pl".
program
{
if bel(percept(charge(Battery)), Battery<500) then
{
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging1"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging2"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging3"))) then charge.
}
if needChargeCar then
{
if bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots,
QueueSize)),
atom_concat("facility=",Name,VChStation)) then
goto(VChStation). % + charge.
if not(bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots
,QueueSize))))
then goto("facility=charging1"). % + charge.
}
}
}
module dronePercepts
{
#import "percepts.pl".
program
{
if bel(percept(charge(Battery)), Battery<250)
then
{
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging1"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging2"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging3"))) then charge.
}
if needChargeDrone then
{
if bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots,
QueueSize)),
atom_concat("facility=",Name,VChStation)) then
goto(VChStation). % + charge.
if not(bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots
,QueueSize)))) then
goto("facility=charging1"). % + charge.
==PAGE:58==
50
Vehicles.goal
}
}
}
module motorPercepts
{
#import "percepts.pl".
program {
if bel(percept(charge(Battery)), Battery<350)
then
{
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging1"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging2"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging3"))) then charge.
}
if needChargeMotor then
{
if bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots,
QueueSize)),
atom_concat("facility=",Name,VChStation)) then
goto(VChStation). % + charge.
if not(bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots
,QueueSize)))) then
goto("facility=charging3"). % + charge.
}
}
}
module truckPercepts
{
#import "percepts.pl".
program
{
if bel(percept(charge(Battery)), Battery<1000)
then
{
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging1"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging2"))) then charge.
if bel(percept(inFacility("charging3"))) then charge.
}
if needChargeTruck then
{
if bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots,
QueueSize)),
atom_concat("facility=",Name,VChStation)) then
==PAGE:59==
51
goto(VChStation). % + charge.
if not(bel(percept(visibleChargingStation(Name,Lat,Lon,ChRate,Price,Slots
,QueueSize)))) then
goto("facility=charging2"). % + charge.
}
}
}
module foundauctionJob
{
program
{
if bel(percept(auctionJob(Id,Storage,BeginStep,EndStep,Fine,MaxBid,[item(
ItemName,Amount)])),
percept(step(Current)), Current<EndStep, EndStep-Current>200,
atom_concat(" price=",MaxBid,Bid), atom_concat("job=",Id,Job),
atom_concat(Job,Bid,Fbid) ) then bid_for_job(Fbid) + insert(jobBid(Id)).
if not(bel(percept(jobTaken(Id)))) then insert(jobTaken(Id)) + adopt(
jobCompletedAu(Id)) +
allother.send(jobCompletedAu(Id))+ insert(not(DoneMailing)).
%
if bel(percept(jobTaken(Id))) then adopt(jobCompletedAu(Id)) +
%
allother.send(jobCompletedAu(Id)).
}
}
module foundpricedJob
{
program
{
if bel(percept(pricedJob(Id,Storage,Begin,End,Reward,[item(ItemName,
Amount)])),
percept(step(Current)), Current<End, End-Current>200) then
{
if bel(percept(pricedJob(Id1,Storage1,Begin1,End1,Reward1,[item(ItemName1
,Amount1)])),
percept(step(Current1)), Current1<End1, End1-Current1>200, Id1=not(Id))
then
{
if bel(Reward1>Reward) then
{
if not(bel(percept(jobTaken(Id1)))) then adopt(jobCompletedPr(Id1)) +
insert(jobTaken(Id1)) + allother.send(jobCompletedPr(Id1)) + insert(not(
DoneMailing)).
}
if bel(Reward>Reward1) then
{
if not(bel(percept(jobTaken(Id)))) then adopt(jobCompletedPr(Id)) +
insert(jobTaken(Id)) + allother.send(jobCompletedPr(Id)) + insert(not(
DoneMailing)).
==PAGE:60==
52
Vehicles.goal
}
}
if not(bel(percept(jobTaken(Id)))) then adopt(jobCompletedPr(Id)) +
insert(jobTaken(Id)) + allother.send(jobCompletedPr(Id)) + insert(not(
DoneMailing)).
}
}
}
module executeJob(Id)
{
program
{
if bel(percept(pricedJob(Id,Storage,Begin,End,Reward,[item(ItemName,
Amount)]))) then
{
if bel(percept(product(ItemName,Volume,[consumed(ItemName1,Amount1),tool(
ToolName,Amount2)])))
then craft(ItemName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage).
if bel(percept(product(ProdName,Volume,[])),
ProdName=ItemName) then searchItem(ProdName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage).
}
if bel(percept(auctionJob(Id,Storage,BeginStep,EndStep,Fine,MaxBid,[item(
ItemName,Amount)]))) then
{
if bel(percept(product(ItemName,Volume,[consumed(ItemName1,Amount1),tool(
ToolName,Amount2)])))
then craft(ItemName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage).
if bel(percept(product(ProdName,Volume,[])),
ProdName=ItemName) then searchItem(ProdName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage).
}
}
}
module craft(ProductName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage)
{
program
{
if bel(percept(product(ProductName,Volume,[consumed(ItemName1,Amount1),
tool(ToolName2,Amount2)]))) then
{
if bel(me(Me), percept( entity(Me,Team,Lat,Lon,Role)),
percept(role(Role,Speed,LoadCapacity,BatteryCapacity,[ToolName2]))) then
{
if bel(percept(item(ToolName2,Amount2))) then
{
==PAGE:61==
53
if bel(percept(item(ItemName1,Amount1))) then
{
if bel(percept(inFacility("facility=workshop1")),atom_concat("item=",
ProductName,Prod)) then
assemble(Prod).
if bel(percept(inFacility("facility=workshop2")),atom_concat("item=",
ProductName,Prod)) then
assemble(Prod).
forall bel(percept(workshop(WorkName1,Lat1,Lon1,Price1)),
percept(workshop(WorkName2,Lat2,Lon2,Price2)))
do
{
if bel(Price1<Price2, atom_concat("facility=",WorkName1,Work))
then goto(Work).
if bel(Price2<Price1, atom_concat("facility=",WorkName2,Work))
then goto(Work).
}
if not(bel(percept(workshop(WorkName,Lat,Lon,Price))))
then goto("facility=workshop1").
}
if not(bel(percept(item(ItemName1,Amount1)))) then chooseShop(ItemName1,
Amount1).
}
if not(bel(percept(item(ToolName2,Amount2)))) then chooseShop(ToolName2,
Amount2).
}
}
}
}
module searchItem(ItemName,Amount,Volume,Id,Storage)
{
program
{
if bel(percept(item(ItemName,Amount)),percept(inFacility(Storage)),
atom_concat("job=",Id,JobId),
jobTaken(Id)) then deliver_job(JobId) + delete(jobTaken(Id)).
if bel(percept(item(ItemName,Amount)),percept(inFacility(Storage)),
atom_concat("job=",Id,JobId),
jobTaken(Id)) then deliver_job(JobId) + delete(jobTaken(Id)).
if bel(percept(item(ItemName,Amount)),me(Me), atom_concat("facility=",
Storage,Stor)),
not(bel(percept(inFacility(Storage)))) then goto(Stor).
if not(bel(percept(item(ItemName,Amount)))) then
{
==PAGE:62==
54
Vehicles.goal
if bel(percept(load(Load)), percept(entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role)),
percept(role(Role,Speed,LoadCapacity,BatteryCapacity,[Tool])),
LoadCapacity-Load >= Volume*Amount)
then chooseShop(ItemName,Amount).
if bel(percept(load(Load)),entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role),
role(Role,Speed,LoadCapacity,BatteryCapacity,[Tool]), LoadCapacity-Load <
Volume*Amount,
LoadCapacity>= Volume*Amount) then
{
if bel(percept(dump(Name,Lat,Long,Price)),percept(inFacility(Name))) then
{
if bel(percept(item(ItemD1,AmountD1)), percept(item(ItemD2,AmountD2)),
ItemD1=not(ItemD2),
AmountD1=not(AmountD2), AmountD1>AmountD2) then dump(ItemD1,AmountD1/2).
}
if bel(percept(dump(Name,Lat,Long,Price)),atom_concat("facility=",Name,
Dump)) then goto(Dump).
}
if bel(percept(load(Load)),entity(Name,Team,Lat,Lon,Role),
role(Role,Speed,LoadCapacity,BatteryCapacity,[Tool]), LoadCapacity-Load <
Volume*Amount,
LoadCapacity < Volume*Amount) then skip.
}
}
}
module chooseShop(ItemName,Amount)
{
program
{
if bel(percept(inFacility("shop1")),atom_concat("item=",ItemName,BuyIt),
atom_concat(" amount=",Amount,BuyAm),
atom_concat(BuyIt,BuyAm,BuyTotal)) then buy(BuyTotal).
if bel(percept(inFacility("shop2")),atom_concat("item=",ItemName,BuyIt),
atom_concat(" amount=",Amount,BuyAm),
atom_concat(BuyIt,BuyAm,BuyTotal)) then buy(BuyTotal).
if bel(percept(inFacility("shop3")),atom_concat("item=",ItemName,BuyIt),
atom_concat(" amount=",Amount,BuyAm),
atom_concat(BuyIt,BuyAm,BuyTotal)) then buy(BuyTotal).
if bel(percept(shop(ShopName1,Lat,Lon,[availableItem(ItemName,Cost1,
Amount1,RestockInterval1)])),
atom_concat("facility=",ShopName1,Shop)) then goto(Shop).
forall bel(percept(shop(ShopName1,Lat,Lon,[availableItem(ItemName,Cost1,
Amount1,RestockInterval1)])),
==PAGE:63==
55
percept(shop(ShopName2,Lat,Lon,[availableItem(ItemName,Cost2,Amount2,
RestockInterval2)])))
do
{
if bel(Cost1<Cost2, Amount1 >= Amount, atom_concat("facility=",ShopName1,
Shop) ) then goto(Shop).
if bel(Cost2<Cost1, Amount2 >= Amount, atom_concat("facility=",ShopName2,
Shop) ) then goto(Shop).
if bel(Cost1<Cost2, Amount1 < Amount, atom_concat("facility=",ShopName2,
Shop) ) then goto(Shop).
if bel(Cost2<Cost2, Amount2 < Amount, atom_concat("facility=",ShopName1,
Shop) ) then goto(Shop).
}
if not(bel(percept(shop(ShopName,Lat,Lon,[availableItem(ItemName,Cost,
Amount,RestockInterval)]))))
then goto("facility=shop1").
}
}
module handleMail
{
program
{
if bel(received(agent(Agent),jobCompletedAu(Id)),me(Me), Agent=not(Me))
then
adopt(jobCompletedAu(Id))+ insert(jobTaken(Id)) + delete(received(agent(
Agent),jobCompletedAu(Id))).
if bel(received(agent(Agent),jobCompletedPr(Id)),me(Me), Agent=not(Me))
then
adopt(jobCompletedPr(Id))+ insert(jobTaken(Id)) + delete(received(agent(
Agent),jobCompletedPr(Id))).
}
}
==PAGE:64==
56
Vehicles.goal
==PAGE:65==
Appendix C
MAStest.mas2g
environment{
env="eismassim-2.6.jar".
}
agentfiles{
"Vehicles.goal".
}
launchpolicy{
when [type=city2015entityunknown]@env do launch *:Vehicles.
}
==PAGE:66==
58
MAStest.mas2g
==PAGE:67==
Appendix D
eismassimconﬁg.xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<interfaceConfig scenario="city2015" host="localhost"
port="12300" scheduling="yes" times="no" notifications="no"
queued="no" statisticsFile="no" statisticsShell="no"
submitStatistic="no">
<entities>
<entity name="car" username="a1" password="1" iilang="yes"
xml="yes"/>
<entity name="drone" username="a2" password="1" iilang="yes"
xml="yes"/>
<entity name="motor" username="a3" password="1" iilang="yes"
xml="yes"/>
<entity name="truck" username="a4" password="1" iilang="yes"
xml="yes"/>
</entities>
</interfaceConfig>
==PAGE:68==
60
eismassimconﬁg.xml
==PAGE:69==
Appendix E
2015-complete-3sims.xml
<<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE conf SYSTEM "helpers/2015/config.dtd" [
<!ENTITY products SYSTEM "helpers/2015/example-products.xml">
<!ENTITY facilitiesl SYSTEM "helpers/2015/example-facilities-london.xml">
<!ENTITY jobsl SYSTEM "helpers/2015/example-jobs-london.xml">
<!ATTLIST simulation
xmlstatisticsobserver CDATA ""
visualisationobserver CDATA ""
rmixmlobserverweb CDATA ""
statisticsobserver CDATA ""
>
]>
<conf>
<simulation-server><network-agent backlog="10" port="12300"/>
</simulation-server>
<match>
<simulation id="2015-tournament-sim1of3">
<configuration
maxNumberOfSteps="1000"
map="london"
seedcapital="500000"
==PAGE:70==
62
2015-complete-3sims.xml
interest="2"
minLon="-0.1978"
minLat="51.4647"
maxLon="-0.0354"
maxLat="51.5223"
proximity="0.0002"
cellSize="0.001" >
<roles>
<role name="Car" speed="3" loadCapacity="550" batteryCapacity="500">
<roads><road name="road"/></roads>
<tools>
<tool id="tool3"/>
</tools>
</role>
<role name="Drone" speed="5" loadCapacity="100" batteryCapacity="250">
<roads><road name="air"/><road name="road"/></roads>
<tools>
<tool id="tool1"/>
</tools>
</role>
<role name="Motorcycle" speed="4" loadCapacity="300" batteryCapacity="350
">
<roads><road name="road"/></roads>
<tools>
<tool id="tool3"/>
</tools>
</role>
<role name="Truck" speed="1" loadCapacity="3000" batteryCapacity="1000">
<roads><road name="road"/></roads>
<tools>
<tool id="tool2"/>
</tools>
</role>
</roles>
&products;
&facilitiesl;
&jobsl;
</configuration>
<agents>
<agent agentclass="massim.competition2015.MapSimulationAgent"
agentcreationclass=
"massim.competition2015.configuration.MapSimulationAgentParameter"
team="red">
==PAGE:71==
63
<configuration roleName="Car" lon="-0.1608" lat="51.5125"/>
</agent>
<agent agentclass="massim.competition2015.MapSimulationAgent"
agentcreationclass=
"massim.competition2015.configuration.MapSimulationAgentParameter"
team="red">
<configuration roleName="Drone" lon="-0.1758" lat="51.5052"/>
</agent>
<agent agentclass="massim.competition2015.MapSimulationAgent"
agentcreationclass=
"massim.competition2015.configuration.MapSimulationAgentParameter"
team="red">
<configuration roleName="Motorcycle" lon="-0.0793" lat="51.5109"/>
</agent>
<agent agentclass="massim.competition2015.MapSimulationAgent"
agentcreationclass=
"massim.competition2015.configuration.MapSimulationAgentParameter"
team="red">
<configuration roleName="Truck" lon="-0.1612" lat="51.4748"/>
</agent>
</agents>
</simulation>
==PAGE:72==
64
2015-complete-3sims.xml
==PAGE:73==
Appendix F
example-jobs-london.xml
<jobs>
<job id="job1"
type="auction"
firstStepAuction="10"
firstStepActive="20"
lastStepActive="1000"
fine="10000"
maxReward="20000"
storageId="storage1">
<products>
<product id="base1" amount="3"/>
</products>
</job>
<job id="job2"
type="priced"
firstStepActive="20"
lastStepActive="1000"
reward="10000"
storageId="storage1">
<products>
<product id="base3" amount="1"/>
</products>
</job>
==PAGE:74==
66
example-jobs-london.xml
<job id="job3"
type="auction"
firstStepAuction="30"
firstStepActive="40"
lastStepActive="700"
fine="10000"
maxReward="20000"
storageId="storage1">
<products>
<product id="tool3" amount="3"/>
</products>
</job>
</jobs>
==PAGE:75==
Appendix G
example-products.xml
<products>
<product id="material1" volume="10" userAssembled="true">
<requirements>
<product id="base1" amount="5" consumed="true"/>
<product id="tool1" amount="1" consumed="false"/>
</requirements>
</product>
<product id="material2" volume="20" userAssembled="true">
<requirements>
<product id="base1" amount="10" consumed="true"/>
<product id="tool3" amount="1" consumed="false"/>
</requirements>
</product>
<product id="material3" volume="100" userAssembled="true">
<requirements>
<product id="material1" amount="2" consumed="true"/>
<product id="base2" amount="2" consumed="true"/>
<product id="base3" amount="1" consumed="true"/>
<product id="tool1" amount="1" consumed="false"/>
<product id="tool2" amount="1" consumed="false"/>
<product id="tool3" amount="1" consumed="false"/>
</requirements>
</product>
<product id="base1" volume="10" userAssembled="false"/>
==PAGE:76==
68
example-products.xml
<product id="base2" volume="100" userAssembled="false"/>
<product id="base3" volume="500" userAssembled="false"/>
<product id="tool1" volume="10" userAssembled="false"/>
<product id="tool2" volume="100" userAssembled="false"/>
<product id="tool3" volume="30" userAssembled="true">
<requirements>
<product id="base1" amount="8" consumed="true"/>
</requirements>
</product>
</products>
==PAGE:77==
Appendix H
example-facilities-london.xml
<facilities>
<facility type="shop" id="shop1">
<location lon="-0.1368" lat="51.4872"/>
<products>
<product id="base1" cost="5" amount="500" restock="2" />
<product id="base2" cost="17" amount="50" restock="3"/>
<product id="base3" cost="241" amount="30" restock="4"/>
<product id="tool1" cost="51" amount="5" restock="5"/>
<product id="tool2" cost="139" amount="3" restock="0"/>
<product id="tool3" cost="120" amount="5" restock="1"/>
</products>
</facility>
<facility type="shop" id="shop2">
<location lon="-0.1090" lat="51.5053"/>
<products>
<product id="base1" cost="50" amount="500" restock="2" />
<product id="base2" cost="170" amount="50" restock="3"/>
<product id="base3" cost="2410" amount="30" restock="4"/>
<product id="tool1" cost="510" amount="5" restock="5"/>
<product id="tool2" cost="1390" amount="3" restock="0"/>
<product id="tool3" cost="120" amount="5" restock="1"/>
</products>
==PAGE:78==
70
example-facilities-london.xml
</facility>
<facility type="shop" id="shop3">
<location lon="-0.1345" lat="51.5129"/>
<products>
<product id="base1" cost="6" amount="500" restock="2" />
<product id="base2" cost="18" amount="50" restock="3"/>
<product id="base3" cost="242" amount="30" restock="4"/>
<product id="tool1" cost="52" amount="5" restock="5"/>
<product id="tool2" cost="140" amount="3" restock="0"/>
<product id="tool3" cost="120" amount="5" restock="1"/>
</products>
</facility>
<facility type="workshop" cost="300" id="workshop1">
<location lon="-0.1129" lat="51.5019"/>
</facility>
<facility type="workshop" cost="300" id="workshop2">
<location lon="-0.0822" lat="51.5183"/>
</facility>
<facility type="storage" cost="3" capacity="10000" id="storage1">
<location lon="-0.1021" lat="51.5178"/>
</facility>
<facility type="storage" cost="3" capacity="10000" id="storage2">
<location lon="-0.1394" lat="51.5045"/>
</facility>
<facility type="dump" cost="4" id="dump1">
<location lon="-0.0993" lat="51.5068"/>
</facility>
<facility type="dump" cost="5" id="dump2">
<location lon="-0.1668" lat="51.4923"/>
</facility>
<facility type="charging" cost="1" concurrent="2" id="charging1" rate="80
">
<location lon="-0.1337" lat="51.5080"/>
</facility>
<facility type="charging" cost="2" concurrent="1" id="charging2" rate="80
">
<location lon="-0.1155" lat="51.4892"/>
</facility>
==PAGE:79==
71
<facility type="charging" cost="2" concurrent="4" id="charging3" rate="50
">
<location lon="-0.1071" lat="51.5146"/>
</facility>
</facilities>
==PAGE:80==
72
example-facilities-london.xml
==PAGE:81==
Appendix I
Initial Plan and Timetable
I.1
Introduction
The title of the master thesis will be Multi-Agent Programming in GOAL. The
purpose of this project is to deﬁne, implement and evaluate a prototype of a
multi-agent system using the agent programing language GOAL, having in mind
the multi-agent programming contest scenario.
I.2
Multi-Agent Programming Contest
For the multi-agent programming contest in 2015 the action takes place in a
realistic city. The purpose of these agents is to gather as much money as possible
by doing various tasks.
I.2.1
Scenario
The tasks taken in consideration here are acquisition, assembling and trans-
portation of goods. There are two types of jobs, these are payed of auctioned.
==PAGE:82==
74
Initial Plan and Timetable
For the ﬁrst one, the reward is given to the team that completes the job ﬁrst,
while the auctioned jobs are given to the lowest bidder, and the reward is the
bid amount of money. If the jobs are not completed in time the team is ﬁned.
The teams have to decide which jobs they want to complete and plan their time,
resources and how to navigate from one point of interest to another on the map
accordingly. The teams consist of 4 types of agents; cars, trucks, motorcycles
and drones. These diﬀer in speed, accessibility, battery charge, volume of goods
they can carry and tools used to craft other goods. The goods can be bought,
crafted, stored, delivered, recovered, given to a teammate or dumped. Since an
agent can only handle a subset of the tools, crafting some goods may require the
collaboration of two or more agents. To navigate the map, the agents require
battery, therefore at each step they must take in consideration how much bat-
tery they have left and go the recharging stations accordingly. The tournament
points are given to the teams according to the money earned. To win the com-
petition a team must not only beat the other team but also surpass a certain
threshold. If a team has debt, points will be subtracted.
I.2.2
Scope
As it is said in the multi-agent programming contest description, the overall
purpose is to stimulate research in the area of multi-agent system development
and programming, therefore the major steps are: spacing
- Identifying Key Problems
- Collecting suitable benchmarks
- Gathering test cases
I.3
Timetable
The initial timetable decided upon in September 2015 had the following struc-
ture:
1. The ﬁrst step would be to understand the problem that needs to be solved,
set and get acquainted to the environment, put ideas in order ( decide what
should be done ﬁrst, and what will take most of the time to do ), make
a preliminary timetable and plan the structure of the project, decide and
get acquainted to the languages that will be used throughout the project.
==PAGE:83==
I.3 Timetable
75
This should take no more than a month because the other steps are more
diﬃcult and will require more time.
2. The second step would be to understand the given code for the agents, see
what happens in the demo, and how it is done. Since the java code for
this is accessible this should not take up too much time.
3. The third step would be to decide on the winning strategy. Research will
be done here to choose how to solve the given problem, implement it and
test it in order to improve on it.
4. Since there is no prior knowledge regarding the language that is going to be
used, the GOAL language, some time will be allocated to understanding,
learning and using this language.
5. When writing the report it must be taken into consideration that the stu-
dent did not work in LaTEX much before, only for small reports, therefore
writing the report might take more time than planned.
==PAGE:84==
76
Initial Plan and Timetable
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[CL00]
Cristiano Castelfranchi and Yves Lespérance. Intelligent agents vii.
agent theories, architectures, and languages. In 7th International
Workshop, ATAL-2000, pages 7–9, 2000.
[ECL]
Eclipse. http://www.eclipse.org/. Accessed: 2015-08-26.
[GOA]
Goal programming language. http://ii.tudelft.nl/trac/goal.
Accessed: 2015-08-26.
[HR95]
Barbara Hayes-Roth. An architecture for adaptive intelligent sys-
tems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 72(1):329–365, 1995.
[JLA16]
Afef Ben Jemmaa, Hela Ltiﬁ, and Mounir Ben Ayed. Multi-agent
architecture for visual intelligent remote healthcare monitoring sys-
tem. In Hybrid Intelligent Systems, pages 211–221. Springer, 2016.
[MAP]
Multi-agent programming contest. https://multiagentcontest.
org/. Accessed: 2015-08-26.
[MSY]
Msys. http://www.mingw.org/wiki/msys/. Accessed: 2015-08-26.
[OSFM07] Reza Olfati-Saber, Alex Fax, and Richard M Murray. Consensus
and cooperation in networked multi-agent systems. Proceedings of
the IEEE, 95(1):215–233, 2007.
[RN95]
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artiﬁcial intelligence: a modern
approach. 1995.
[VdHW08] Wiebe Van der Hoek and Michael Wooldridge. Multi-agent systems.
Foundations of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3:887–928, 2008.
==PAGE:86==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Woo09]
Michael Wooldridge. An introduction to multiagent systems. John
Wiley & Sons, 2009.
