==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
The data-science of sleep
Modeling patterns of human sleep based
on large-scale sensor data
Jesper
Bitsch
Østergaard
(s113730)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Sleep is something we do every day and our health strongly depends on a healthy sleep
pattern. It is therefore interesting to identify factors which influences our sleep and what
determines whether we are prone to have a healthy sleep pattern. With the introduction
of wearables it is possible to conduct large scale experiments and collect large amount
of data. This thesis will by utilizing data from Sony LifeLog conduct an experiment
where the data will be investigated an compared with results from smaller experiments.
Furthermore machine learning models will be trained to investigate the most important
features when predicting sleep duration and social jet lag.
The feature set will be
expanded with information about application usage before sleep. The result from this
study verifies the data quality of the Sony LifeLog sleep data after comparing it with
results from the literature. The terms which have been investigated are the social jet
lag and chronotype. The machine learning model report average sleep duration and
chronotype as the most important features when predicting social jet lag.
But also
factors as age, population and longitude have a predictive power. Besides longitude and
latitude, then are factors as amount of deep sleep and time since last usage among the
top features when predicting sleep duration.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis investigate sleep patterns and how sleep
data collected in a uncontrolled and large scale environment fits with what is already
know in the literature. Furthermore, it investigates which parameters that describes
how well we sleep. The analyse is based on several datasets from Sony Life Log.
The project has been completed in the period 22th of August 2016 to 22th of January
2017 and is rated as 30 ECTS points. Associate professor Sune Lehmann Jørgensen have
been supervisor for the project.
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2017
Jesper Bitsch Østergaard (s113730)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Sune Lehmann for his fantastic guidance and almost
weekly feedback throughout the thesis. I would also like to thank Vedran Sekara for his
guidance and help with technical and logistic issues at Sony Mobile in Lund. In relation
to that, I would thank Sony Mobile in Lund for the possibility to access their data and
use of their facilities. Lastly I would like to thank Kelton Minor which has provided
valuable information regarding the sleep theory and guidance regarding the scope of the
thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Structure of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Sleep: Chronotypes, social jet lag and zeitgebers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Exposure to light before bedtime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Consequences of bad sleep quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Reliability of detecting sleep with wrist worn activity trackers
. . . . . .
6
3
Spark
9
4
Datasets
11
4.1
Sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
User . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
App usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Motion activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Sleep investigation
29
5.1
Validation of the sleep dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Sleep patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Before bed usage of mobile devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Sleep prediction
49
6.1
Prediction: Sleep duration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Prediction: Social jet lag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7
Discussion
61
8
Conclusion
63
A
Population density
65
B
Description of app categories
67
C
Sleep logbook
69
D
Figures
71
D.1 Bedtime and wake up time distribution divided by gender
. . . . . . . .
71
D.2 Sleep onset by day in month for November and December . . . . . . . . .
72
D.3 Box plot of social jetlag
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
D.4 Distribution of chronotype from literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
D.5 Chronotype vs. age . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D.6 Distribution of social jet lag from literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
E
Shapefile: Find country based on coordinates
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Sleep is an important part in our daily life, it helps us function and it is proven that bad
sleep is correlated with a decrease in health [30]. Many factors influence how we sleep
and whether we are prone to have a healthy sleep pattern. Age, gender and BMI are
some of the user specific factors [28, 30]. But also external factors such as exposure to
daylight or artificial light before bed can have a significant negative impact on how we
sleep [33]. In fact, exposure from mobile devices can influence how we sleep [10]. And
with an increased usage of mobile devices throughout the day [5], this is something the
big companies are aware of. Like for example Apple which has implemented the function
Night Shift [4] which decreases the amount of blue light emitted from the screen. The
majority of sleep studies conducted so far has been conducted in closed environments or
with surveys. But as described in [22], the introduction of mobile sensing, has opened
new opportunities in relation to cheap and large scale experiments. Usage of mobile
sensing in uncontrolled and large scale environments raises questions about the validity
of the collected data. But as seen in [2, 32] the quality of sleep detection for activity
trackers are quite high.
This thesis will utilize data collected from Sony Lifelog [37] to investigate sleep
patterns in a large scale environment. Sony LifeLog tracks many different information’s
about the users such as application usage, physical activity, sleep and location updates.
The physical activity and sleep data are collected from Sony SmartBands while location
and application usage are collected from their phone via the LifeLog android application.
The data used for this thesis is due to company secrets a subset of the full dataset
available. The research questions behind this thesis are:
• Can sleep data collected from wearables in a uncontrolled and large scale environ-
ment be compared with known findings in the literature?
• Based on machine learning, which features predicts healthy sleep? Features are
based on knowledge from the sleep literature and information about mobile usage
before sleep.
1.1
Scope
The thesis will compare main findings from the literature with results from the Sony
Lifelog dataset, and use that to verify how accurate the measurements in the Sony sleep
dataset are. The thesis will amongst other, use the application usage as features in the
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
machine learning section. The features will be based on application usage before sleep
and are: Application usage last hour before sleep and time from last application usage
to sleep onset. The target values which will be predicted are social jet lag and sleep
duration. The outcome of this thesis is whether the Sony sleep dataset can be verified,
and which features that are important when predicting healthy sleep parameters.
1.2
Structure of the report
The structure of the report is as follows: Chapter 2 investigates the sleep research
area, and find the results which should be investigated in this thesis. Chapter 3 briefly
introduces Spark and PySpark. Chapter 4 introduces the used dataset, how they initially
has been cleaned and preliminary findings. Chapter 5 describes the verification of the
dataset and comparison whit what is known in the literature and investigate usage of
mobile devices before sleep. Chapter 6 contains the machine learning section which trains
models to predict sleep duration and social jet lag. Chapter 7 discusses the results and
Chapter 8 concludes this thesis.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
The following chapter introduces the most relevant theory used in this study.
The
first part will explain the main findings regarding sleep and introduces the concepts
of chronotypes, social jet lag and zeitgebers. These results will be compared with the
results which will be found in this study. The next part will look at how exposure to
light before bedtime can have an effect on the circadian rhythm. This will also include a
subsection which will look at what influence the usage of tablets/mobile phones before
bedtime has on sleep. This is followed by a section which looks at how bad sleep quality
influences our general health and what consequences it has. The investigation made
in these mentioned sections will lay the ground for generating the feature set in the
machine learning chapter. The last section in this chapter will investigate how reliable
actigraphy/wrist worn activity trackers are according to theory when detecting sleep.
2.1
Sleep: Chronotypes, social jet lag and
zeitgebers
Our daily life is organised by three different clocks [28]: the solar clock, social clock and
biological clock. When looking at our circadian rhythm it is usually synchronized to the
solar clock. [27]. Table 2.1 shows time cues for each of the clocks; these external factors
which influence our clocks are called zeitgebers, where the most influential is the light
[26, 27].
Solar clock
Social clock
Biological clock
Light
Work
Jet lag
Temperatures
School
Shift work
Social pressure
Daylight saving
Table 2.1: Time cues for the 3 types of clocks which organises our lives.[28].
Many factors influence how we sleep, when we sleep and for how long. In [28], the
following relevant factors are identified: age, gender, type of day (workday or free day)
and time spent outside. The results from the study showed that males on average sleep
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Literature review
17 minutes less than women on workdays and their mid-sleep (average midpoint between
falling asleep and wake up) is 10 minutes later. When looking at the age groups, [28]
showed that the group aged 21-30 slept 12 minutes later on workdays compared to the
two other groups (<21 and >30). But for free days, it was the age group <21 which
both had the longest sleep and slept up to 50 minute later than the other two groups.
This corresponds to the findings in [12, 14] which found a correlation between increased
age and tendency to morningness.
The preference in the timing of sleep is called chronotype, where the extremes are
eveningness (delayed sleep period) and morningness (advanced sleep period) [19]. The
distribution of chronotypes in a population depends both on genetic variation in clock
genes and environmental influences [43]. Based on [29], the study [43] uses the corrected
mid-sleep on free days (MSFsc) [29] to calculate the chronotype. In the Munich chrono-
type questionnaire (mctq) [41] used by [28], the chronotypes were instead divided into
7 different categories: extreme early, moderate early, slight early, normal, slight late,
moderate late and extreme late. The results from [28] showed that on workdays the
early chronotypes fell asleep almost 2 hours before the late chronotypes, but the differ-
ence in wake-up time was only 30 minutes. The results led to the conclusion that late
chronotypes suffered from sleep loss on workdays (sleep debt), but in the free days, it is
the early chronotypes who suffer. Other studies like [14, 40] show the same results. In
[29] it is shown that the average weekly sleep duration does not differ much between the
different chronotypes, since the late chronotypes compensate by sleeping in on free days.
The typical work schedule (starting early) fits the early chronotypes best, even though
the majority of the population are moderate to extreme late chronotypes [43]. The sleep
debt for late chronotypes results in lower sleep quality for that group [14, 40, 43].
Based on the fact that jet lag is comparable to how people with late chronotypes
sleep (shift sleep times during the week), [43] introduces the concept of social jet lag.
Social jet lag is quantified by calculating the absolute difference between mid-sleep on
workdays (MSW) and mid-sleep on free days (MSF) [43]. How we are influenced by jet
lag can be seen when we transition to daylight saving time (DST). The study in [20]
shows how the transition from DST and to DST impacts our sleep. It was found that we
slept around 20 minute longer in the winter period and our MSF correlated with dawn,
whereas during DST the MSF was scattered around 3:30. The increased sleep duration
during winter is also found in [21].
As described earlier in this section, many internal and external factors influence our
sleep. For many years, the lunar cycle has been considered a major factor of changes in
sleep quality [13, 31]. Even though it has been discussed for decades, it has not been
proven with certainty that the lunar cycle actually has an influence [13]. But there are
some studies [9, 31] which yield that there is a difference. The findings from [9, 31]
showed a 20 minute decrease in sleep duration between full moon and new moon; the
time before falling asleep to sleep increased by 5 minutes and the indication of sleep
quality decreased by up to 30%. However, it is important to bear in mind that neither
study was designed for the purpose of investigating the lunar cycle’s influence on sleep
quality. An interesting comment from [31] is that before we had electrical light, the moon
was a significant source of light compared to the industrialised society we have now. For
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Exposure to light before bedtime
5
periods around a full moon, the exposure to light before bedtime was significantly higher
compared to periods around a new moon. The next part of this chapter will look into
how exposure to light before bedtime can influence sleep.
2.2
Exposure to light before bedtime
Melatonin is a hormone known for having an effect on our sleep. In mammals, melatonin
levels are high during darkness at night and low during the day, and approximately follow
the circadian 24 hr. rhythm [33]. If we are exposed to light during the night, it can
suppress melatonin levels, but darkness cannot increase the levels [33]. The rhythm
of the melatonin follows the person’s circadian rhythm. It is shown that the rise in
melatonin levels occurs later for evening chronotype types compared to morning types,
even when it is corrected for their sleeping start time [12].
But it is not only natural light which has an impact on how and when we sleep. The
experiment in [18] showed that access to artificial light had an impact on how the par-
ticipants slept. The experiment involved two traditional hunter-gatherer communities,
where one of them had access to artificial light. The results showed that the community
which had access to artificial light fell asleep on average 43 minutes later than the other
community. The results also showed that the community without light were more likely
to follow the solar clock. The same result is shown in [27], where the experiment looked
at citizens in Germany. The citizens were divided into three groups depending on the
population in that area. The groups were: < 300.000, between 300.000 and 500.000 and
> 500.000. The results showed that bedtimes for the group living in lower populated
areas to a greater extent followed the solor clock. The hypothesis behind the results is
that when living in more populated areas, you are exposed to an increased amount of
artificial light, and thereby weakening the light zeitgeber.
We know that light before bedtime does have an influence, but how big an impact
does it have on our circadian rhythm? The results from [45] show that we are very
sensitive to light before bed. Low illumination (< 80 lx) showed small changes in the
melatonin concentrations compared to bright room light (> 500 lx), which completely
suppressed melatonin. In the experiment, the maximal melatonin phase shift was 3 hours,
which occurred for illumination above 500 lx. The half of the maximum phase shift (1.5
hours) could already be seen for illumination between 80 - 160 lx. As a comparison,
an Apple iPad with full brightness, and all white background and 25 centimetres’ view
distance delivers around 40 lx to the corneas [44].
2.2.1
Mobile/Tablet usage before bedtime
This section will look into what consequences using your tablet/mobile before bedtime
has.
A study where reading an e-book before bedtime was compared to reading a
printed book was conducted in [10].
The results from the study showed that when
reading the e-book before bedtime, the participants took 10 minutes longer to fall asleep.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Literature review
The 10 minutes extra was taken from the deep sleep state and added to the NREM2
state. The melatonin onset was delayed by up to 1.5 hours when reading on the e-book.
The participants who used the e-book in the evening were reported as sleepier in the
morning [42], but before bedtime they were more aware than the participants who read
the printed book. The same results regarding alertness in the evening can be seen in
[8], where the participants were exposed to either an LED screen or a non-LED screen
and had to perform a number of tasks. The LED screen emitted 3.32 times as much
light in the small wavelength area (Blue) than the non-LED. The results showed that
the participants were more aware when using the LED, and they had, for example, a
lower reaction time. The hypothesis behind the result is that we are most sensitive to
short wavelength light like blue and green [8, 11, 44], which is why we see the difference
between the two screens. But causality can still not be inferred.
2.3
Consequences of bad sleep quality
Many studies, such as [14, 23, 30], have linked a higher sleep quality with increased
health. The study conducted in [30] uses social jet lag as a parameter of sleep quality.
It showed that social jet lag was positive correlated with BMI for the overweight group
(BMI > 25). While for the normal group (BMI < 25), the social jet lag did not increase
with increased social jet lag.
Unlike [30], the study in [14] uses the chronotype as the definition of bad or good
sleep quality. They show that early chronotypes in general live a better/healthier life.
The late chronotypes have, for example, a higher caffeine intake and were more awake
during the nights. For the performance during the day, the results showed that the late
chronotypes in general had a worse performance and attention problems in school when
compared to the early chronotypes. The study in [23] took things a step further, and
linked the late chronotypes to increased alcohol intake. Moreover, the results from [23]
showed that neuroticism and psychoticism were negatively related to morningness =
early chronotypes.
2.4
Reliability of detecting sleep with wrist
worn activity trackers
The number of scientific publications that include activity-based sleep-wake monitoring
or actigraphy has increased the last two decades [32]. It is therefore of great interest to
investigate the reliability of data collected from activity trackers. The quality of the data
rely on several factors. Factors regarding the activity tracker are; the device type (type
of sensors) and the algorithm used to detect sleep/awake state [32]. Other factors such
as the type of population (elderly, people with health problems or poor sleep quality) can
also effect the quality of the data [32]. It is shown that the quality of the data from the
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Reliability of detecting sleep with wrist worn activity trackers
7
activity tracker for normal individuals have a reasonable validity and reliability [2, 32].
But for people with sleep disorders like insomnia, the reliability decreases [2, 32]. This
relates to one of the main problems for activity trackers which are to detect night waking
and general sleep quality [32]. But for detecting general sleep schedule and period the
reliability were high [2, 32]. The sleep onset latency is hard to detect [2], which means
that activities like reading or mobile usage in bed before sleep, will not be detected.
Many sleep studies rely on self reported information from questionnaires [15]. [15]
compares the data from activity trackers with data collected from a questionnaire. The
comparison showed poor or very weak agreement between the two data sources. Several
reasons to these discrepancies are being mentioned, but it is clear that there need some
more studies to validate the results.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Spark
The datasets used for this study have a volume which makes it nearly impossible to
do any calculations on it from your local computer. This is where Spark comes into
the picture. Spark [3] is an open source cluster computing framework written in Scala.
PySpark is a Spark framework built for Python. Since the author of this study has
most experience with Python, Pyspark was chosen. The choice meant that there was a
need to investigate potential performance issues due to the conversions between Scala
and Python. Spark is based on the data structure called resilient distributed dataset
(RDD) and a data abstraction called DataFrames (DF), which knows the structure of
the data. The performance between those two (RDD and DF) depends on the language.
For Python and PySpark, DataFrames is known as the fastest, but some blogs show
a different result [25]. In order to ensure that DataFrames actually is the fastest in
PySpark, a range of performance tests were performed. The test shown in Listing 3.1
loads a dataset into a DF and an RDD and gets the unique users from each of them.
The result from the test showed that the RDD took 39.3 seconds to perform the task,
whereas the DF took only 2.72 seconds to perform the task. Other tests, like getting a
unique element, were also performed, but all showed the same result: DataFrames are
significantly faster in PySpark, and it was therefore decided to work as much as possible
in DataFrames in this study.
1 pre_path = "../"
2 df_user = (sqlContext.read.format("com.databricks.spark.avro")
3
.load(pre_path+"DataScienceOfSleep/user/*/*.avro")
4
)
5
6 rdd_user = df_user.rdd
7
8 #Just count both so they are loaded
9 print rdd_user.count()
10 print df_user.count()
11
12 #test with RDD
13 %%time
14 unique_users = rdd_user.map(lambda x : x["useruuid"]).distinct().collect()
15 print len(unique_users)
16
17 #test with DF
18 %%time
19 unique_users = df_user.select("useruuid").distinct().collect()
20 print len(unique_users)
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Spark
Listing 3.1: Comparison between RDDs and DataFrames.
Due to the usage of Spark, most of the examples shown in the report will be based
on Python and PySpark.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Datasets
This study is based on five datasets, all of which have been provided by Sony Mobile.
The datasets are: User, Location, Sleep, App usage and Motion activity. The data is
collected from the 1st of October 2015 to the 31st of October 2016, so over a total
period of 1 year and 1 month. The source of the data is a subset of the Sony Lifelog
[37] database for the given period. In the following chapter, each of the datasets will
have their own section where they will be described more in depth. The description will
include:
• Which attributes are represented in the dataset, and which of them are included
in the study.
• Which attributes have been added for the purpose of this study?
• How the dataset initially has been cleaned.
• If needed, how the dataset has been transformed to another structure.
• Basic statistics and preliminary findings.
Besides the five datasets mentioned above, a sixth dataset from Sony Lifelog was also
investigated. The dataset was called Heart rate and contained information about a user’s
heart rate for a given time. However, it was found that this data collection was relatively
new so the number of measurements were limited. The dataset was therefore discarded
for this study. For future studies, however, this would be an interesting parameter to
add.
Besides the datasets which were provided by Sony, the study also made use of the
gridded population of the world dataset provided by NASA [24]. The dataset contains
worldwide information about population densities per km2. The given population den-
sities in the dataset are estimates, which means there are some uncertainties, but the
numbers will still give an indication of the population size in the area which is needed
for this study. The dataset was combined with the Location dataset and gave it a new
dimension. Code for getting population density for a given coordinate set can be seen
in Appendix A.
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Datasets
4.0.1
Privacy
No personal identifiers were used in the study and all digital traces were properly
anonymized. Data, further, was cleaned, analyzed, and modeled in house at the Sony
Mobile offices in Lund, Sweden.
4.1
Sleep
The dataset contains the registered sleep from the users’, and is the main dataset for
this study. The initial attributes can be seen in Table 4.1. The table indicates whether
the attributes have been used in this study.
Attribute name
Description
Used for the study
TimestampSeen
When the data is received at the
backend
No
Id
The id of the sleep entry in the
database. Due to the way the data
was collected there can be several
entries with the same id.
Yes
DeletedTime
When the entry has been deleted
and updated with a newer version.
Yes
Useruuid
The unique user id in the Sony
Lifelog
universe,
and
links
the
datasets together.
Yes
StartTime
Start time of the sleep entry
Yes
EndTime
End time of the sleep entry
Yes
SleepState
An array of sleeps states the user
is in. The states can either be 1 or
2. They are measured each minute.
The state is an indication of how
deeply a person is sleeping.
Yes
Devices
Any one of the following Sony
armbands:
SWR10, SWR12 and
SWR30
Yes
Table 4.1: Attributes in the sleep dataset.
Furthermore, the following attributes have been added:
==PAGE:23==
4.1 Sleep
13
• Weekday: The day of the week based on the StartTime. If the StartTime was
between 00.00 and 06.00, the weekday was adjusted with -1 day.
• SleepDuration: From when the user goes to bed to the when the user gets up
again.
• AdjustedSleepDuration: The actual time the user is asleep. The awake time is
subtracted.
• AverageSleepState: The average of the sleep state.
• TimesAwake: The number of times the user is awake during the sleep.
• AwakeTime: The time in seconds the user is awake.
• PDeepSleep: Percentage of the time where the user is in the deep sleep state.
• TimeBeforeFirstDeepSleep : The time before the first occurrence of deep sleep.
• TimebinKey: Based on the StartTime of the sleep entry, the following key was gen-
erated: {UserUUID}-{Year}-{Month}-{Day}-{Hour}-{Minute}. It will be used to
join the sleep entries with a location and app usage.
• Based on the findings in [9, 31] the moon phase was added so it could be taken
into account.
As described in Table 4.1, there was the possibility of several entries having the same
id. It was therefore necessary to filter out all the oldest entries and only keep the newest
entry for each id. The filtering was based on the attribute EndTime where the latest
entry was selected. Furthermore, entries with a DeletedTime different from None were
also removed, since there would be a newer entry in the dataset. The PySpark code for
this filtering can be seen in Listing 4.1.
1 #Load the dataset for the given period , and casts the end time to a
timestamp
2 df_sleep_raw = (sqlContext.read.format("com.databricks.spark.avro")\
3
.load(pre_path+"/sleepactivity/"+folder+"/*.avro"))\
4
.where("deleted_time == ''")\
5
.select("*", F.col("end_time").cast("timestamp").alias("lookup_time"))\
6
7 print "Data loaded"
8
9 #Make a dataframe with the newest entry for each of the id's
10 newest_ids = df_sleep_raw.select(F.col("id").alias("dummy_id"),"lookup_time"
)\
11
.groupBy(F.col("dummy_id"))\
12
.agg(F.max(F.col("lookup_time")))
13
14 print "Newest entries found"
15
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Datasets
16 #join the two dataframes
17 df_sleep_no_doublets = df_sleep_raw.join(newest_ids ,
18
(df_sleep_raw["lookup_time"] == newest_ids["max(lookup_time)"]) &
19
(df_sleep_raw["id"] == newest_ids["dummy_id"]))
20
21
22 print "Removed duplicates"
Listing 4.1: Removed duplicated sleep entries.
Each time a user woke up during a sleep, there was the possibility that the sleep
would be divided into two entries with no connection. To adjust for this situation, all
sleep entries which are less than 25 minutes apart will be merged into one single entry.
This limit was chosen based on the difference between sleep offset and next onset for the
test dataset with only Sony employees, which can be seen in Figure 4.1(a). Here, it can
be seen that there is a peak around the 25-minute limit. The 1-hour limit has also been
plotted since that was also a possibility. However, the 25-minute limit was chosen since
it captured the majority of the cases
(a) Difference between sleep offset and
next onset for differences lower than 24
hours. There are two peaks, one around
25 minutes and one around 1 hour. These
two captures the majority of the times
where a user wake up and fall asleep again.
The next is around 60.000 seconds or 16.6
hours, which is where most people go to
bed again. It thereby captures the daily
cycle where we sleep for 7.5 hours and is
awake for 16.5 hours.
(b) Sleep entries per month.
Highest
amount of registered sleep entries in the
summer period. Peak in October do to
the fact that it has entries for both 2015
and 2016. No clear reason to the higher
amount of registered entries in the sum-
mer period compared to the winter.
Figure 4.1: Differences between sleep offset and next onset and sleep entries per month.
To remove potential error measurements, the study will only use the sleeps with a
duration between 3 and 13 hours. The interval has been decided upon based on the
interval used in [30]. After cleaning the dataset, the number of registered sleep entries
per user can be seen in Figure 4.2(b). If we assume that there will be between 1-2
registered sleeps per user per day, it is a limited numbers of users which has registered
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Sleep
15
sleep for more than 2 months, and most users lay between 1 and 2 months of registered
sleep.
In Figure 4.2(a), a boxplot of the final sleep durations in the dataset has been plotted.
It can be seen that the median of sleep durations lays around 400 minutes, approximately
6.66 hours. To make sure that the distribution of sleep entries was distributed relatively
evenly throughout the year, the number of entries per month has been plotted in Fig-
ure 4.1(b). Here, it can be seen that the lowest number of registered sleep entries are in
November and December. October is high due to the fact that it occurs both for 2015
and 2016.
It is well known that we have 4 cycles in our sleep: NREM1, NREM2, NREM3 and
REM. In the last two cycles, NREM3 and REM, we are in a deeper state, which is
also why we have less movements during those cycles. According to theory [35], we are
on average in those two cycles around 45-50% percent of the time, and the REM state
itself is around 20-25%. If this is compared to the states from the Sony SmartBands,
which can either be 1 or 2, and is an indication of how deeply a person is sleeping. The
distribution of P deep sleep (state = 2) can be seen in Figure 4.3(a) and the mean P
deep sleep is 35%. If it is furthermore compared with the time before first occurrence
of deep which can be seen in Figure 4.3(b) and which has and mean on 22 minutes.
According to theory the REM and NREM3 states should occur around 90 minutes and
35-45 minutes respectively after sleep onset [36]. Those two numbers combined (P deep
sleep and time before sleep deep sleep) tells that there is no directly comparison with
the sleep states from Sony and the states known from the literature.
(a) Sleep durations in minutes.
Shows
that the median lies at 6.6 hours which
is below the recommended sleep duration
of 7 hours.
(b) Registered sleep entries per user. It
shows that the majority of the users have
registered between 10 and 50 nights of
sleep.
Figure 4.2: Box plot of sleep duration and distribution of registered sleep entries per
user.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Datasets
(a) Distribution of P deep sleep. Average
is 35%
(b) Time from sleep onset to first deep
sleep occurrence.
The mean is 22 min-
utes.
Figure 4.3: Distribution of deep sleep and time before first occurrence of deep sleep.
Neither of the two measurements can be compared with what is known in
the literature. The states from the Sony dataset can therefore not be used
as an approximation of the 4 known sleep states.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 User
17
4.2
User
The dataset provides personal information about a user and the available attributes can
be seen in Table 4.2. All users with registered sleep do also have an entry in the user
database. The attributes weight and height are entered manually by the user. It is not
all users who have entered these information’s, and the usage of those attributes will
therefore limit the size of the dataset.
Attribute name
Description
Used for the study
TimestampSeen
When the data is received at the
backend
No
Useruuid
The unique user id in the Sony
Lifelog
universe,
and
links
the
datasets together.
Yes
Username
The
user’s
username
in
Sony
Lifelog. Selected by the user.
Yes
Height
Height
measured
in
millimeters.
Manually entered by the user.
Yes
Weight
Weight in grams. Manually entered
by the user.
Yes
Gender
Gender. Manually entered by the
user
Yes
Birthday
Birthday of the user.
The infor-
mation is manually entered by the
user.
Yes
TimestampModified
When the data was modified
Yes
TimestampCreated
When the data was created
No
TimestampDeleted
When the data was deleted, if it was
deleted again.
No
MetricDistance
Prefer to use metric distance units.
No
DefaultStepLength
Step length. Manually entered by
the user.
No
DefaultRunningStepLength
Running step length. Manually en-
tered by the user.
No
Table 4.2: Attributes in the user dataset.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Datasets
Based on the provided data, the following two columns have also been added:
• BMI: Is based on the user’s height and weight and is calculated from Equation
(4.1). Since the number of users who have registered both Height and Weight is
limited, the usage of this attribute will decrease the size of the dataset.
BMI = Weight
Height2
(4.1)
• Age: Was calculated based on the time from the user’s birthday to the 23rd of
November 2016. Since the data lasts no more than a year, the user will have the
same age throughout the study.
Due to the way the data was collected, the dataset contained several entries for a
single user. Tt was chosen to only use the newest entry for each of the users. It was the
timestampModified which was used to find the newest entry.
After filtering out users with no registered or valid sleep, the dataset consists of
83.086 unique users. Of these, 57.770 are males, and 25.316 are females. A histogram
of the age distribution can be seen in Figure 4.4(a).
(a) Distribution of age in the user dataset
before removing outliers.
(b) Distribution
of
age
in
the
user
dataset after removing outliers.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of age before and after removing outliers. It can be seen that
after removing outliers, the distribution is normal distributed with peaks
around 25, 35, 42, 50 and 60. There is no clear resason for the peaks.
The plot in Figure 4.4 revealed some potential outliers, which was expected due to
the fact that all the personal information, such as gender, age, username, weight, height
and birthday, is manually entered by the users themselves. Therefore, this information
will rely on how accurate the user is and can potentially contain faulty information. The
basic statistic for each of the numeric attributes can be seen in Table 4.3.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 User
19
Attribute
Min
Max
Mean
Var
IQR
Range
N
Age (Years)
-22
116
39
140.33
17
18 - 75
1.643
Height (mm)
482
3.327
1.715.8
10.441
130
1.200 - 2.500
178
Weight (g)
0
200.034
75.695
309358815
21.000
40.000 - 200.034
416
BMI (kg/m2)
7.23
88.8
25.6
24.76
5.69
15 - 40
514
Table 4.3: Attributes in the sleep dataset.
Besides the basic statistics for the numeric attributes, Table 4.3 does also contain the
chosen valid intervals for this study and how many individuals which are not in those
intervals. The choices made are based on:
• Common sense regarding what is normal; for example, no one is above 3 metres
tall, and a BMI of 88.8 is quite high
• Number of users in the group. For example, the age range could have been larger
without conflicting with the common sense, but the limits were needed to ensure
enough users in each of the age groups.
• Legal rights: It is not allowed to collect process data for people below the age of
18, which is why the lower age limit was set to 18.
After filtering the dataset based on the parameters described in Table 4.3, the dataset
contained 80.335 unique users, 55.899 males and 24.436 females. The final distribution
of ages can be seen in Figure 4.4(b). Figure 4.4(b) reveals that the distribution of ages
in this study is somewhat normally distributed with some peaks. This also means that
the number of users with age around 18 and 75 is lower than, for example, the 40-years
age group. This is something to bear in mind since, as mentioned in the literature, how
we sleep strongly depends on our age.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Datasets
4.3
Location
The dataset contains the users’ registered locations during the given time period. When
using the information available in this dataset in combination with the sleep dataset, the
combined dataset will be reduced since not all users have allowed access to their locations.
This study will only make use of the users’ location during sleep. The attributes available
in the dataset are:
Attribute name
Description
Used for the study
TimestampSeen
When the data is received at the
backend
No
Id
Unique identifier for the record
Yes
Useruuid
The unique user id in the Sony
Lifelog
universe,
and
links
the
datasets together.
Yes
StartTime
When the recording of the location
started
Yes
EndTime
When the recording of the location
ended.
Yes
Name
Name of the local area or the city.
For example, Copenhagen
No
Area
Name of the National area. For ex-
ample, Sealand.
No
Country
The registered country
Yes
Region
For example, Europe
Yes
Latitude
The registered latitude
Yes
Longitude
The registered longitude
Yes
Altitude
Altitude of the location
Yes
Accuracy
How accurate is it
Yes
Devices
Devices during the activity
No
Table 4.4: Attributes in the location dataset.
All entries where there was no registered sleep for the given useruuid were removed.
After investigating the dataset, it was found that some of the entries had a negative
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Location
21
accuracy. Those entries were therefore removed from the study. As described in Chap-
ter 2, the amount of daylight can have an impact on sleep. The amount of daylight for
the given location at the given date was therefore added as an attribute. The algorithm
used and the python implementation can be seen in [39].
The country and region information should be available according to Table 4.4. How-
ever, after investigating the months individually, it became clear that entries after Febru-
ary 2016 only had a registered coordinate set and no description of country or region.
Therefore, there was a need for converting a coordinate set to a country and a region.
The solution should be somewhat efficient regarding performance and should not be con-
strained by rate limits due to the high number of sleep entries ( > 5.500.000). Therefore,
solutions like the Google Maps API for geocoding [16] were not an option. Instead, the
choice fell on converting the coordinate set using a shape file. After the first tests, it was
seen that there was room for performance improvements, since many of the coordinate
sets belonged to a small number of countries. It was therefore decided to check those
countries first before looping through all the other countries. The final code can be seen
in Appendix E.
4.3.1
Transformation of dataset
To make it possible to link a location to a sleep entry, a matrix with U*T rows was
created, where U is the number of unique users and T is the number of timebins for
the period. For this study, it was decided that the timebins should have a length of 5
minutes. For each of the timebins, the registered locations were found and the median
of the longitudes and latitudes were chosen. If there were no registered locations for
a given timebin, the nearest registered location was chosen. If the nearest registered
location was more than +/- 5 hours away, the given timebin was discarded. For each
row, a unique key was created, which could be used to join the sleep and location dataset.
The key created for each of the rows was:
{UserUUID}-{Year}-{Month}-{Day}-{Hour}-{Minute}
The concept behind this transformation can be seen in Figure 4.5. For each of the
timebins, the population density per km2 was also added, based on the median for the
given locations.
The distribution of users per country and sleep entries per countries after combining
the sleep and the location dataset can be seen in Figure 4.6
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Datasets
Figure 4.5: Concept behind the transformation of the location dataset.
(a) Sleep entries per country.
Top
countries are Japan, Germany, Taiwan,
United Kingdom, Russia, Spain and Swe-
den.
(b) Nationalities among users. Is based
on the country with most registered sleep
entries for the given user. Top countries
are Japan, Germany, Taiwan, United
Kingdom, Russia, China and Sweden.
Figure 4.6: Number of sleep entries per country and the distribution of nationalities.
==PAGE:33==
4.4 App usage
23
4.4
App usage
The app usage dataset contains the information about when and for how long a user
used a specific application. The attributes in the dataset can be seen in Table 4.5. This
study will only focus on actual app usage and not on screen on/off situations. This
is due to the fact that the on/off situations are not directly accessible in the dataset.
As with the location dataset, when using the information available in this dataset in
combination with the sleep dataset, the combined dataset will be reduced since not all
users have allowed access to their application usage.
Attribute name
Description
Used for the study
TimestampSeen
When the data is received at the
backend
No
Id
Unique identifier for the record
Yes
DeletedTime
If the record has been deleted
Yes
Useruuid
The unique user id in the Sony
Lifelog
universe,
and
links
the
datasets together.
Yes
StartTime
When the application was opened.
Yes
EndTime
When the application was closed.
Yes
PackageName
The package name of the applica-
tion.
Yes
ApplicationName
The name of the application
Yes
Category
The application category.
The
categories
are
Browsing,
Enter-
tainment,
Other,
Books,
Music,
Game, Camera/Album, Communi-
cation and Movie/TV
Yes
Genre
The application genre
Yes
Icon
The application icon
No
Devices
The devices used
No
Table 4.5: Attributes in the application usage dataset.
After filtering out entries where the user did not have a valid sleep registered, the
dataset contained 559.420.566 entries and 209.444 unique applications. After looking at
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Datasets
the applications, it was clear that some of the applications were background services and
therefore did not give any useful information about the user’s usage. All the apps which
were background services had the category N/A, which meant that the given category
was excluded from the study. Appendix B has a short description of the remaining
categories.
An attribute which is missing in the sleep dataset is whether an alarm clock was
used. It was therefore chosen to look into how many of the registered apps that were
alarm apps. The results were that 202 of the registered apps were classified as alarm
apps. This classification has been manually done, which means there might be a couple
of apps that have been missed. The main sorting criteria was to look for applications
with Alarm in the name and after that check that the app actually was an alarm clock.
The full list of alarm apps can be seen here [1].. This information was linked to the sleep
entries by looking at an interval of +/- 15 minutes from the sleep offset. If one of the
registered alarm apps was used in this interval, the ”used alarm clock” attribute was set
to True, otherwise it was set to False. Based on this, it was found that an alarm was
used for 42.665 of the sleep entries. Since the fraction of the sleep entries which used
an alarm was so low, it was decided to disregard the alarm attribute. The number is
surprisingly low, which could indicate:
• Missed some major alarm applications in the classification?
• Not all of the applications are registered when an alarm go on?
4.4.1
Transformation of dataset
As with the location dataset, there was a need for transforming the app dataset so it
could be merged with the sleep dataset. For this study, it was interesting to know the
following things:
• How much of a given period before bedtime they used their mobile device. For
example, if the period was 1 hour and they used the phone for 30 minutes in that
period, the result was 50%. The periods chosen for this project are 1, 2 and 3
hours.
• Time from last app activity to sleep onset. This number will have a maximum of
1 hour. If no app has been used the last hour before sleep onset, the number will
be None.
• The type of application is used. The types are the categories, which are defined
in Table 4.5. This information will be combined with the above points. This can
be interesting to know, since certain types of applications will expose the user to
a higher amount of light compared to others.
For generating percentage usage for a given period, it was decided to use 3 minute
intervals, which will be used to join the new dataset with the sleep dataset. In practice,
==PAGE:35==
4.4 App usage
25
this means: The given period will be divided into intervals of sizes 3 minutes. Each of
these intervals will be filled with the number of seconds a mobile device has been used.
These intervals will now look the size of the period back (1, 2 or 3 hours) and add the
usage of each of the sub intervals in that period. The sleep dataset can now be joined
by looking at the timebin key as with the location dataset. The downside of using this
interval approach is that the interval in worst case can be +- 1.5 minutes from the sleep
onset. This uncertainty has been accepted since a user probably will lie in his bed for
a short period before the SmartBand registers sleep (See Section 5.1 for comparison of
actual bedtimes vs. bedtimes from SmartBand). For an illustration, see Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Concept behind the transformation of the app dataset.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Datasets
4.5
Motion activity
The motion activity dataset contains the information about activities - such as walk,
run and transport - the users have performed. The attributes in the database can be
seen in Table 4.6.
Attribute name
Description
Used for the study
TimestampSeen
When the data is received at the
backend
No
Id
Unique identifier for the record
Yes
DeletedTime
If the record has been deleted
Yes
Useruuid
The unique user id in the Sony
Lifelog
universe,
and
links
the
datasets together.
Yes
StartTime
When the application were opened.
Yes
EndTime
When the application were closed.
Yes
StepCount
Step counts recorded during this ac-
tivity.
Yes
Floors
Integer array which defines floors
climbed or descended
No
Hits
Used when playing tennis
No
Tee
The total number of calories used
during this activity (Total Energy
Expenditure).
No
Aee
The activity related calories used
during this activity (Activity En-
ergy Expenditure).
No
Type
Can be:
Other,
transportation,
walking or running. This study will
only focus on entries with walking
and running type.
Yes
Distance
Total distance in mm.
Yes
Table 4.6: Attributes in the motion activity dataset.
As with the User dataset, there could be several items with the same id. Therefore,
==PAGE:37==
4.6 Summary
27
duplicates were removed based on the latest endTime and all items with a deleted-
Time specified were also removed. As specified in Table 4.6, this study will only focus
on activity types which are either Walking or Running.
4.5.1
Transformation of dataset
To merge this dataset to the sleep dataset, it was decided to sum the users’ activities
for each day, where the day was selected based on the startTime. These entries can
then be joined with the sleep dataset where the day key was calculated based on the
startTime for the sleep entry. If the hour of the startTime was below 12, one day was
subtracted from the time.
4.6
Summary
In this chapter, an overview of the used datasets has been given. It has been described
which types of attributes were available, whether the attribute would be used in the
study and how the data initially has been cleaned. It has also been described how the
location, app usage and activity dataset has been converted so it fits with the sleep
dataset. To give a better understanding of each of the datasets, basic statistics for each
of the datasets have also been shown.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Sleep investigation
This chapter will ivestigate and veriy the sleep dataset. The first part of this chapter
will look at the data quality for the sleep dataset. Section two will take some of the
main findings from the literature as a starting point and compare them to the data used
in this study. The next section will investigate usage of mobile devices before sleep,
including which types of users are using mobile devices before sleep and what influence
does it have.
5.1
Validation of the sleep dataset
As the data is collected in an uncontrolled environment, there was a need to verify it.
The following section will therefore look into the validity of the dataset. The first part
will look at the accuracy of the registered bedtimes. The next part will compare the data
received from each of the SmartBands and the last part will look into the distribution
of bedtimes for weekdays and weekends.
5.1.1
Accuracy of the registered bedtime
For the purpose of this part of the verification, a Sony SWR30 SmartBand was kindly
lent by Sony in Lund. This SmartBand was worn by the author of this thesis for a month,
from the 19th of December 2016 to the 19th of January 2017. The purpose of this was
to record the difference between the registered bedtimes and the actual bedtimes. Each
day the registered sleep from the SmartBand was compared with the actual bedtime.
The actual bedtime is a combination of when the author went to bed, corrected for
the approximated time before sleep onset. This also means that the actual bedtime
is a rough estimate. The logbook can be seen in Appendix C, where it can be seen
that the total number of nights registered is 13. The result showed that the difference
between what the author thought and the data from the SWR30 SmartBand ranged
from 1 minute to 4 minutes. It can also be seen that the average difference for sleep
offset (2.7 minutes) was a bit lower than for sleep onset (3 minutes). This might be due
to the fact that the author woke up by alarm clock alarm almost every day, which led
to an accurate time for waking up. The sleep onset is harder to define accurately for us,
since we cannot look at the watch and fall asleep at the same time. This also means
that it might be the author’s sleep onset time which is wrong and not the SWR30. But,
in general, the measurements looked accurate and at least as accurate as our own belief.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Sleep investigation
Next step was to investigate how much movement that was needed before the Smart-
Band classified your state as being awake. It was found that it all depended on two
things: The time and number of movements. If the number of movements are high but
for a short period, you will still sleep. If the number of movements are low but it is for
a longer period you will be awake. It was hard to find exact number of time/movements
before the SmartBand classified the user as awake.
Besides the sleep measurements, the SmartBand is also used for tracking physical
activity, so this measurement was also investigated to uncover potential errors in the
data collection. The results of the investigation were:
• The measurements of the steps you take compared to the actual steps is quite
accurate.
• Classification of walking or running works well.
• Movements with your arm/body can lead to increased step count.
The worst
example of this was approximately 1100 wrongly measured steps just by moving
the arm in a normal daily situation.
As the last bullet points above state: Some of the physical activity measurements
can be wrong and there is no straightforward way to remove them. Therefore, for this
study, the physical activity dataset has been discarded, and will not be included in the
following sections.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Validation of the sleep dataset
31
5.1.2
Validation of SmartBands
Based on the information from [32], this section will look at each of the SmartBands
and make sure the data received from them made sense. The way it was done was by
plotting the sleep entries for a month in a plot for each of the users. Each row was a
day in the month, and markers were coloured if there were registered sleep. A plot for
the SWR10 and the SWR12 SmartBand can be seen in Figure 5.1.
(a) Month of sleep for a person with
SWR10 SmartBand. Not much variation
in bedtimes.
(b) Month of sleep for a person with
SWR12 SmartBand. Higher variation in
bedtimes.
Figure 5.1: Sleep entries for one month for a user using the SWR12 and the SWR10
SmartBand. Green bars are weekends. The plots shows that the sleep on
and off-sets do not vary much for people wearing the SWR10 smartband.
After investigating the plots two things were clear:
• In general, users with a limited number of recorded sleep entries did not show a
meaningful pattern, and it was therefore decided to only use sleep entries where
there were at least 10 others registered for the given user in the corresponding
month.
• As can be seen in Figure 5.1(a), the user with the SWR10 SmartBand went to
bed more or less at the same time each night. The same pattern could be seen for
the majority of the users who used the SWR10 SmartBand. After investigating
whether there was a reason for that, it was found that the SWR10 had a function
called auto night mode [38]. The auto night mode made it possible for the users to
enter an approximated time for when they were going to go bed and wake up. The
SmartBand would then start and end the sleep around the specified time. This
meant that there were some uncertainties regarding the start and end times, and
it was therefore decided to remove all sleep entries which were registered with the
SWR10 SmartBand.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Sleep investigation
5.1.3
Validation of bedtimes
The last part of the validation was to look at the average sleep duration for each weekday
and what the distribution for the start and end time looked like.
(a) Sleep on and off-set for weekdays
(Monday to Friday)
(b) Sleep on and off-set for weekends
(Saturday and Sunday)
Figure 5.2: Sleep on and off-set by day type. It can be seen that for weekends, the
users go to bed later, and the sleep offset distribution is more narrow in
the weekdays compared to the weekends.
In Figure 5.2, the bedtimes and wake up time distributions for weekdays and week-
ends has been shown. It can be seen that at the weekends, the peak time for going to
bed is around 1 hour later than on weekdays. Furthermore, it can be seen that the wake
up time distribution for the weekdays is narrower compared to the distribution for the
weekends. In general, this fits perfect with the theory (and common sense), which is that
on workdays we go earlier to bed and, due to the social clock (work, school etc.), we need
to wake up more or less at the same time. At the weekends, we are not driven to the
same extent by the social clock in the morning, which will lead to a wider distribution.
In Appendix D.1, the same distributions have been divided according to gender. Here,
it can be seen that there is a limited difference between the genders. However, it can be
seen that the distribution of go to bed times for males is between 15-30 minutes later
than for females, but the distributions for the wake up times lie above each other. What
is clear for both of the genders is that there is a significant mode where most people go
to bed and wake up.
Figure 5.3(a) shows the difference between the average sleep duration per day and
the total average for all days. It can be seen that from Friday to Saturday and from
Saturday to Sunday, the average sleep duration is significantly different compared to the
rest of the days. Again, this fits perfectly with the theory regarding the accumulated
sleep debt during the week. Figure 5.3(b) shows the same plot, but instead of comparing
to the total average, it is averaged per individual. It can be seen that there is not a big
difference between those two, which would suggest that most of us sleep in similar ways.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Validation of the sleep dataset
33
(a) Average sleep duration per day com-
pared to the overall average. The error
bar is the SEM
(b) Distribution of registered sleep en-
tries per user
Figure 5.3: Individual average sleep duration per day compared to the individual av-
erage. The error bar is the SEM. The graphs shows that we sleep signifi-
cantly longer in the weekends, up to 20 minutes on average. There is no
significant change when controlling for the individual.
5.1.4
Summary
In this section the validity of the sleep dataset has been investigated. It has been shown
that the data from the SWR10 SmartBand had some inaccuracies regarding sleep onset
and offset, which meant that the data from the SWR10 was disregarded in this study.
It was shown that the general bedtimes made good sense compared to the literature
and general behaviour. It was also shown that the sleep duration at the weekends was
significantly longer, and for the rest of study there is therefore a need to divide between
weekdays and weekends. The activity recognition in the SmartBands had some potential
error measurements, so it was chosen to discard the activity dataset from this study.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Sleep investigation
5.2
Sleep patterns
This section will take some of the main findings from the sleep literature and compare
them with what can be seen with the provided dataset from Sony.
This is mainly
done due to the following two reasons: First of all to verify that even though the data is
collected in an uncontrolled environment, the results somewhat correspond to the results
from experiments conducted in a closed environment. Second of all, to investigate which
parameters and potential features could be interesting to use for the upcoming machine
learning chapter.
5.2.1
Chronotypes
As described in the literature, a user’s chronotype describes which preferences the user
has when it comes to sleep, where the extremes are eveningness (delayed sleep period)
and morningness (advanced sleep period). Several different measures have been used as
the definition of a chronotype, but this study will use the formula described in [29]. The
formula is:
MSFsc = MSF −0.5 ∗(SDF −(5 ∗SDW + 2 ∗SDF)/7)
(5.1)
where MSFsc is a measure for the chronotype, MSF is the average mid-sleep on free
days, SDF is sleep duration on free days and SDW is sleep duration on workdays. For
this study it was decided to use the weekdays (Monday to Friday) as workdays and the
weekends (Saturday and Sunday) as free days. For the calculation of MSF and MSW
there was a need for calculating the average of a list of datetimes. However, calculating
the mean of a list of datetimes is not as easy as a list of numbers. First of all, when
calculating the average of the datetimes, the year, month and day should be discarded
and it should only be the hours, minutes and seconds which should be taken into account.
This can be achieved by converting the hours, minutes and seconds to seconds, which
can be seen in Listing 5.1, where the variable time is a list of DateTimes.
1 time_list = map(lambda s : s.second + 60*(s.minute + 60*s.hour),times)
Listing 5.1: Python code for converting hours, minutes and seconds to seconds.
The next problem occurs when looking at sleep onset times. Some of those happen
after midnight, which in the real world is later than 23:59, but according to Listing 5.1,
it is the other way around. It was therefore chosen to add 86400 seconds (24 hours) to
all sleep onset times which were between midnight and noon. The final code for finding
the average for a list of datetimes can be seen in Listing 5.2.
1
def get_average_timestamp(times,adjust):
2
"""
3
Function which returns the average time for a list of datetimes. If
adjust == True, all dates with hour < 12
4
will be added additionally 24 hours.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Sleep patterns
35
5
"""
6
times = [data_func_from_string(x) for x in times]
7
if adjust:
8
time_list = map(lambda s : s.second + 60*(s.minute + 60*(s.hour
+24)) if s.hour < 12
9
else s.second + 60*(s.minute + 60*s.hour),
10
times)
11
else:
12
time_list = map(lambda s : s.second + 60*(s.minute + 60*s.hour),
13
times)
14
15
average = sum(time_list)/len(time_list)
16
bigmins , secs = divmod(average , 60)
17
hours, mins = divmod(bigmins , 60)
18
19
if hours >= 24:
20
hours = hours -24
21
22
return (hours, mins, secs)
Listing 5.2: Python code for finding the average of a list of datetimes.
For the purpose of this study, the chronotype was calculated in two different ways:
• Calculate an average chronotype based on all entries for a user during the whole
period
• Calculate the average chronotype for each month of the year, and thereby control
for potential differences in bedtimes throughout a year.
The next step for this study was to investigate how people’s sleep preferences (chrono-
type) change throughout the year. Here, it will be investigated what the average chrono-
type is for each month, from October 2015 to October 2016.
5.2.1.1
Results - chronotypes
The distribution of chronotypes based on (5.1) can be seen in Figure 5.4. Figure 5.4(a)
shows the chronotypes with data for the whole period. Figure 5.4(b) is the chronotype
based on the average for a person’s chronotype for each of the months. Figure 5.4(b)
shows that when controlling for differences between sleep throughout the year, the
chronotype is slightly higher than when you average over the whole period.
When comparing the result from this study with the result from [29](see Figure D.4),
it can be seen that the two distributions are very alike, and are centred around 4. If we
take a look at the distribution of chronotypes by age, the results from [29] show that
the distribution of chronotypes peaks in the early 20s, and declines from there. When
we reach an age of around 60, the distribution of chronotypes becomes more varied.
The corresponding graph for this study can be seen in Figure D.5. For the average
chronotype vs. age for both male and females see Figure D.5
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Sleep investigation
(a) Distribution of chronotypes (Average
for the whole period)
(b)
Distribution
of
chronotypes
(Monthly average)
Figure 5.4: The graphs shows a slight change when controlling for monthly sleep pat-
terns.
(a) Average chronotype for each of the
age groups divided by gender. The error
bars is the SEM.
(b) Chronotype vs. age from [29]. Figure
is taken directly from article and is solely
for comparison purpose.
Figure 5.5: Chronotype vs. age by gender.
Again, it can be seen that the results from this study match the results from [29],
with a peak in the early 20s and some uncertainties in the early 60s. If we divide the
same graph by gender, we get the result which can be seen in Figure 5.5(a). This shows
that up to an age of around 45, males in general sleep later than females. After the
age of 45, there is not a clear trend, and the two genders are almost equal. If we again
compare this with the result from [29], there are some clear similarities. Their result also
showed that males sleep later than females, but the interception between the two graphs
is around 60 for their study. Late chronotypes should, according to theory, accumulate
a larger sleep debt during the week. Figure 5.6 shows the distribution of average sleep
durations per weekday for late chronotypes vs. early chronotypes. It can be seen that
the late chronotypes sleep significantly longer at the weekends, both from Friday to
Saturday and from Saturday to Sunday, whereas the early chronotypes do not have the
same need for sleeping in on weekends, and it is only from Saturday to Sunday where
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Sleep patterns
37
the difference in the average sleep duration almost the same as for late chronotypes.
Even though the late chronotypes sleep longer at the weekends compared to their
average, the weekly average sleep duration should, according to [29], not vary signifi-
cantly between the different chronotypes. A box plot of the weekly sleep durations for
each of the chronotypes, ranging from 0 to 9, can be seen in Figure 5.7. It shows that
the median for the most extreme chronotypes (0-1 and 9) lies around 20 minutes below
the rest of the chronotypes. The opposite can be seen in [29], where it is the extreme
chronotypes who sleep a bit longer than the rest. However, the claim regarding most of
the chronotypes having the same average weekly sleep duration still stands.
As mentioned earlier in this section, there is a difference between the chronotype
distribution when you calculate it over the whole period instead of calculating it per
month and take the average of those values. In Figure 5.8 the average chronotype per
month for all user’s which lives in Europe can be seen. Here it can be seen that the
average chronotype ranges from 3.8 in September to 4.20 in December. The graph has
two peaks, December and July. The two months do not have very much in common, but
they have one thing: Vacation. Many has vacation in those two months, which most
likely will lead to longer sleep duration and thereby also later chronotype.
The longer sleep duration due to vacation can be seen in Figure 5.9 where Fig-
ure 5.9(a) shows the average sleep duration for November, which is a relative normal
month. Figure 5.9(b) shows the same just for December instead. It can be seen that the
sleep duration peaks each weekend both for November and December. Around Christ-
mas, however, we sleep for longer, which is what influences the average chronotype. It is
not only the sleep duration which influences the change in chronotype. We do actually
also go to bed a bit later during December and especially during the Christmas days.
The average sleep onset times for November and December can be seen in Appendix D.2.
(a) Sleep duration by day compared to
the total average for early chronotypes(<
2.8). The error bars are the SEM.
(b) Sleep duration by day compared to
the total average for late chronotypes(>
5). The error bars are the SEM.
Figure 5.6: Average sleep duration by weekday divided by early and late chronotypes.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Sleep investigation
Figure 5.7: Weekly sleep duration by chronotype.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Sleep patterns
39
Figure 5.8: Average chronotype per month. The error bar is the SEM. This shows
that the chronotype changes throughout the year, and have two peaks in
December an July. Those peaks corresponds to holiday season and later
bedtimes.
(a) Sleep duration by day in November.
(b) Sleep duration by day in December.
Figure 5.9: Average sleep duration by day for November and December. The peaks
are the weekends, but during Christmas the peak is longer and higher than
for a normal month.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Sleep investigation
5.2.2
Social jet lag
Social jet lag is, in the literature, defined as how healthy your sleep is, and is the
absolute difference between the mid-sleep for free days and the mid-sleep for workdays.
The social jet lag is interesting to look at since it is the closest definition of a healthy
sleep pattern which can be calculated based on the available information from the Sony
LifeLog datasets. As with the chronotype, social jet lag will be calculated for different
periods to explore patterns. The social jet lag will be calculated as:
• The absolute difference between the average mid-sleep for free days and the average
mid-sleep for workdays during the whole period. Where free days are weekends
and workdays are weekdays.
• Calculate the social jet lag for each month per user, and take the average and
thereby control for differences in sleep throughout the year.
The users will be divided into segments, where the average social jet lag for each of
the segments will be calculated and the patterns will be investigated and compared to
the findings from the literature. The chosen segments are:
• Chronotype
• Age
• Gender
• Country
5.2.2.1
Results - Social jet lag
The distribution of social jet lag for the whole period and for the average per month
can be seen in Figure 5.10 and the box plot can be seen in Appendix D.3. The average
for the total period is 2.146 seconds, whereas the average per month is 2.122 seconds.
So there is a small difference of 24 seconds between the two measurements, which can
indicate that we overall have the same sleep pattern throughout the year when looking
at differences in sleep duration on weekdays vs. on workdays. When comparing the two
distributions of social jet lag with what can be seen in [30](see Figure D.6), it can be
seen that both distributions are skewed towards positive social jet lag (sleep longer in
the weekends compared to weekdays) and they peak at around 45 minutes to an hour.
Even though the distributions for this study are skewed to the positive site, this study
has slightly more users with a negative social jet lag.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Sleep patterns
41
(a) Social jet lag distribution (Total pe-
riod). Mean = 0.594
(b) Social jet lag distribution(By month).
Mean = 0.5905
Figure 5.10: Social jet lag distribution for the total period and for per month. The
graphs shows that most users have a positive social jet lag = sleep longer
on free days.
In [43] the absolute social jet lag vs.
chronotype has been displayed (see Fig-
ure 5.11(b)).
The same graph for this study can be seen in Figure 5.11(a).
When
comparing the graph from this study with the graph from [43], the following points can
be seen:
• Both graphs shows that extreme chronotypes have the highest social jet lag, and
the slope looks somewhat similar.
• Besides the social jet lag for the early chronotypes, the social jet lag for this study
is significantly lower than for [43].
The division of social jet lag vs. age which can be seen in Figure 5.12(a) has also
been generated in [30] (see Figure 5.12(b)). Both graphs show a peak in the early 20s,
and after that it declines. But again it can be seen that the social jet lag for this study
lies significantly below what can be seen in [30]. A reason for this can be that [30]
removes all entries where they have set an alarm clock on free days. This is not possible
to do for this study since we do not have that information available. Figure 5.12(a) also
divides by gender to explore the potential differences in gender. It can be seen that the
two genders are very close, and it is not possible to distinguish them from each other.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Sleep investigation
(a) Social jet lag vs.
chronotype.
The
error bar is the SEM. It can be seen that
the extreme chronotypes have a higher so-
cial jet lag. But the amount of social jet
lag is significant lower than for the results
which can be seen in the literature.
(b) Social jet lag vs.
chronotype from
[43]. Figure is taken directly from article
and is solely for comparison purpose.
Figure 5.11: Social jet lag vs. chronotype. The social jet lag for the extreme chrono-
types are only 1/3 of what can be seen in the literature.
(a) Social jet lag vs. age by gender. The
error bar is the SEM. It shows that the
social jet lag decreases with age and for
large periods males has a lower social jet
lag than females. The tendency fits well
with the literature, but the amount of so-
cial jet lag is signigicant lower.
(b) Social jet lag vs. age from [30]. Fig-
ure is taken directly from article and is
solely for comparison purpose.
Figure 5.12: Social jet lag vs. age.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Sleep patterns
43
Until now, it has been the individual parameters such as age and gender which
have been investigated. The next step is to investigate the difference between countries.
To have a sufficient user base, it was decided to only look at countries with over 1.000
registered users. The countries that had that were: Japan, Germany, Taiwan, the United
Kingdom, Russia, China, Sweden, Spain and France. Besides the minimum number of
users, a social jet lag point (0-5) should have at least 50 persons from the given country
before it was taken into account. Figure 5.13 shows the social jet lag vs. age for each
of the listed countries. There is some overlapping in the graph, but it can be seen that
the Asian countries (Japan, Taiwan and China) lie below the European countries for the
majority of the social jet lag groups.
5.2.3
Daylight
According to the theory, people will sleep less when they are exposed to an increased
amount of daylight. To investigate the influence daylight has on sleep durations, the
daylights has been divided into groups ranging from 0-24 hours with an interval of 30
minutes. The first part is to look into the average sleep duration by country by daylight.
The countries which will be used here are Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, China,
Sweden, Spain and France. The next part is to investigate on the individual level whether
we sleep longer on the days which lie in the upper 10th percentile of personal exposure to
light compared to the lower 10th percentile. If the range from the minimum to maximum
amount of daylight is below 1 hour for a given user, the user will be discarded. This will
again be divided by country. To make sure to have enough data, there shall be at least
8 entries in both the lower and the upper part. To control for longer sleep durations on
free days, it will only be workdays which are investigated.
5.2.3.1
Results - Daylight
The first part was to find the average sleep duration vs. daylight interval per coun-
try. The result can be seen in Figure 5.14(a). Here, it can be seen that in countries
like France, Germany, Spain and China, the average will somewhat decrease with an
increased amount of daylight. However, the daylight does not seem to have a direct
effect on sleep durations in countries like the United Kingdom, Sweden and Japan.
In Figure 5.14(b) the personal difference between sleep duration for high exposure
to daylight (Upper 10 percentile exposure to light) vs. sleep duration for low exposure
to daylight (Low 10 percentile of exposure to daylight) has been plotted. The mean and
median for each of the countries can be seen in Table 5.1. All the investigated countries
had both a negative mean and median, where Sweden was the country with the lowest
difference and China the highest. The negative values mean that people sleep longer in
the lower 10th. percentile (Low amount of daylight).
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Sleep investigation
Figure 5.13: Social jet lag vs. age divided by country. The error bar is the SEM.
The Asian countries has lower social jet lag compared to the European
countries.
Country
Mean
Median
Number of users
Japan
-734.73
-664.0
1263
Germany
-548.0
-607.33
621
United Kingdom
-416.52
-467.67
347
Sweden
-169.26
-109.42
339
Spain
-1001.47
-1317.27
111
France
-900.44
-1041.23
198
Table 5.1: Sleep difference between high and low exposure of daylight. Negative value
equals sleep longer when exposed to low amount of daylight.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Sleep patterns
45
(a) Average sleep duration vs. daylight
divided by country.
The error bar is
the SEM. The average sleep duration
decreases with an increase in daylight
for France, Germany, Spain and China.
However an increase in daylight do not
seem to have an effect on the average
sleep duration for the remaining coun-
tries.
(b) Individual difference in sleep between
the high exposure to light vs. low expo-
sure to light. All countries have a nega-
tive tendency which means that when the
users are exposed to an increased amount
of light, they sleep for a shorter period.
Figure 5.14: Daylight figures.
5.2.4
Summary
In this section, the chronotype and social jet lag distribution for this study was com-
pared to what is known in the literature. It was found that the chronotype fitted very
well with what is already known, both when comparing regarding age and gender but
also in that the average sleep duration throughout a week did not change significantly
between the chronotypes. It was shown that the average chronotype changed during the
year, but was also correlated with time of year where it is normal to have vacation. The
social jet lag had similar slopes as seen other places in the literature, but it was around
2/3 below what other papers report. It was shown that there was no significant change
between the gender and social jet lag. For daylight, it was shown that when people were
exposed to an increased amount of daylight they slept for a shorter time. Whether this
was due to the increased amount of light or other factors cannot be concluded.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Sleep investigation
5.3
Before bed usage of mobile devices
As described in Section 2.2.1, usage of mobile devices before bedtime can have an influ-
ence on how we sleep. This section will therefore investigate the following:
• Is there a difference between groups in how much they use their phone before
bedtime? The groups looked at for this study are: Age and chronotype. The
usage before bedtime includes both the amount of usage for a given period before
bed and the recency (last app usage).
• Look at the individual level, and find the average usage of phone before bed for
each of the users, and then compare the sleep entries with app usage below the
average with the ones above.
It is well known that younger people use their phones more throughout the day com-
pared to elderly persons [6]. But do they use it more before they go to bed? Figure 5.15
shows the age vs. average time from last app activity to bed and age vs. application
usage during the last hour before sleep onset. Here it can be seen that the older we get,
the less we use our phone during the last hour. But it also shows that the older we get,
the app recency increases.
(a) Age vs. average app usage last hour
before bed.
Error bar is the SEM. It
shows that the average application usage
before bed decrease with age.
(b) Age vs. time from last app activity
to sleep onset. Error bar is the SEM. It
shows that the average time from last ap-
plication activity to sleep onset encreases
with age.
Figure 5.15: App usages before bedtime.
Figure 5.16 shows the app usage during the last hour and the last two hours before
bed vs. chronotype. Here it can be seen that in general the average app usage increases
with chronotype and there is no bigger difference between 1 hour before bed or 2 hours
before bed. A similar plot has been generated for 3 hours before bed, which also shows
the same pattern. This pattern is not surprising due to the fact that the chronotype as
it has been displayed is highly correlated with age.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Before bed usage of mobile devices
47
(a) App usage in seconds 1 hour before
bedtime vs.
chronotype.
Error bar is
the SEM. Shows that the application us-
age last hour before bed increases with
chronotype.
(b) App usage in seconds 2 hours before
bedtime vs. chronotype. Error bar is the
SEM. Shows that the application usage
last two hours before bed increases with
chronotype.
Figure 5.16: Application usages before bedtime vs. chronotype.
According to the theory, we should sleep for a shorter length of time when using our
phone before bed time. To investigate that claim, and whether there is a difference when
using a phone before bed, the amount of mobile app usage during the last hour before
bed was used. To control for potential differences in sleep duration at weekends, this
investigation will only use sleep from workdays. This study will take the personal app
usage and compare days where the app usage is in the upper 10th percentile with the
days in which it is in the lower 10th percentile. For this study, it was decided that there
should be at least 8 sleep entries per user in both the upper and the lower 10th percentile.
In Figure 5.17, the difference divided by country and by age has been displayed. It can
be seen that both when dividing by country and when dividing by age group, we sleep
for longer when we use our mobile-phone more. The same result can be seen if we use the
adjusted sleep duration value instead. This is the complete opposite of what is expected
from the literature. This just shows that there are many factors which have an influence
in how we sleep. One explanation can be that the SmartBands detects that the users
are sleeping while they are actually lying in the bed and using their phones. It is known
that Sony have a problems detecting that type of usage [7].
5.3.1
Summary
It was clearly shown that there was a correlation between the age and how much we use
the phone before we go to bed. The same was true for the time since we last used an
app before sleep onset, which increases with age. It could be seen that the average app
usage before bed increased with chronotype. This is true for 1, 2 and 3 hours before bed.
It was also investigated whether it could be seen that people sleep for a shorter period
when using their phone for a longer period than normal. It could be seen that in periods
where people used their phone more, they also slept for a longer period. Therefore, the
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Sleep investigation
(a) Difference in sleep duration when app
usage is in the top 10th percentile. Di-
vided by country.
(b) Difference in sleep duration when
app usage is in the top 10th percentile.
Divided by age group.
Figure 5.17: Sleep duration compared to application usage before bedtime. The posi-
tive trend means that users sleep longer when application usage increases.
This is not what was expected according to the theory.
theory about us sleeping for a shorter period when exposed to more light (App usage)
cannot directly be seen in this study.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Sleep prediction
This chapter will combine the knowledge found in the previous chapters and generate a
feature set which can be used to predict relevant target values. This study will try to
predict the following two target values, which in their own ways describe a healthy sleep
pattern:
• Sleep duration
• Social jet lag
The dataset used for predicting sleep duration is based on the sleep dataset, which
means there can be several entries from the same user. The dataset used for the pre-
diction of social jet lag is based on the user dataset which means each user will only
occur one time. Both classification and regression will be used for both target values.
Since the goal for this thesis was to investigate which features that were important for
predicting a healthy sleep, the main machine learning models are Random Forrest for
classification and Random Forrest Regressor for regression. The main reasons behind
the choice are:
• Possibility for ranking of features and meaningful explanation of how a feature
divides the dataset.
• Ensemble learning method, which will try to control for potential overfitting and
combines several models.
Other machine learning models; SVM and Logistic regression for classification and
Multiple Regression and SVM Regressor for regression have also been investigated and
the performance of these will be mentioned and compared with the Random Forrest
classifier/regressor. To reduce the need for computational power and the possibility for
overfitting, these models will be trained and tested with the top features found with the
Random Forrest model. The performance for all of the models is based on a 10 fold
cross validation. As performance measure the regression models uses the r2 score and
the classification models uses the accuracy score.
For generating the machine learning models, it has been chosen to use Scikit-learn
[34] and not the build in machine learning packages for PySpark. The choice has been
made based on the increased number of models available for Scikit-learn and Scikit-learn
is well known and documented on the internet.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Sleep prediction
6.1
Prediction: Sleep duration
6.1.1
Features
The features used when trying to predict the sleep duration, can be divided into the
three following groups: Environmental, Social and Individual. Some of the features have
an overlap between two of the groups. The chosen features and the category division
can be seen in Figure 6.1
As it can be seen, the start time has also been added as a feature. This is solely done
to see how much predictive power it has. So there will be generated two different feature
sets for each of the machine learning models. One with start time and one without.
Some of the features are unique to the given user, they will therefore be the same for
all of the users sleep entries in the dataset. The features which do not vary between
the sleep entries for a given user are: Height, Weight, BMI, Gender, Age, Chronotype
and Social jet lag. The rest of the features are unique for the given sleep entry. The
chronotype and social jet lag used is the average per month for the given user. It was
only entries with filled information for all features which was used. This resulted in a
dataset with a total of 4.592.868 sleep entries. Some of the features are categorical
but the machine learning models in Sckit-learn need numeric values. So for each of the
categorical features, dummy variables have been created for each the possible values.
The categorical features and number of possible values can be seen in Table 6.1.
Feature
Number of possible of values
Weekday
7
Moon phase
8
Gender
2
Region
10
Country
235
Table 6.1: Categorical features. These will be converted to dummy variables.
As it can be seen in Table 6.1, adding dummy variables for the country feature will
increase the feature set enormously. It was therefore chosen to only generate a dummy
variable for the top 45 countries ( > 10.000 sleep entries per country), and the rest was
treated as one country.
6.1.2
Regression
The regression part predicts the exact sleep duration in seconds. The average r2 for each
of the models can be seen in Table 6.2, which shows that the Random Forrest regressor
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Prediction: Sleep duration
51
Figure 6.1: Selected features for predicting sleep duration divided by category. There
will be generated two feature sets. One with and one without the start
time.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Sleep prediction
outperforms the SVM and Multiple regression model. It also shows that the multiple
regression performs slightly better than the SVM. In general all of the models performs
better when the start time was added to the feature set. Neither of the models have
impressive scores and the perforamnce is very low.
Model
r21
r22
Random Forrest regressor
0.41
0.18
SVM
0.33
0.14
Multiple regression
0.15
0.08
Table 6.2: Average r2 for predicting sleep duration with(r21) and without (r22) start
time as feature. The performance increases when the start time is added to
the feature set.
The top features for the Random Forrest regressor can be seen in Figure 6.2. The
start time has not surprisingly high predictive power when it is added. What is interest-
ing though is that features such as longitude and latitude are ranked as high as they are.
More important than age and any weekday. We would have thought that both age and
weekday would have some predictive power since the average sleep duration has been
seen to vary with these two factors.
(a) Top features for Random Forrest re-
gressor with start time added as feautre.
(b) Top features for Random Forrest re-
gressor without start time as feature.
Figure 6.2: Top features for Random Forrest regressor. Not surprising that the start
time has a large predictive power when it is added as feature. But it is
interesting to see that longitude, latitude and p deep sleep has so high
predictive power.
6.1.3
Classification
It is well documented that from the age of 18 we need at least 7 hours of sleep each night
[17], so the classes which will be predicted is whether you sleep below 7 hours (Class
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Prediction: Sleep duration
53
0) or 7 hours or above (Class 1). The number of entries in each class can be seen in
Table 6.3.
Class
N
0 (Under 7 hours)
2.647.961
1 (7 hours or above)
1.944.907
Table 6.3: Number of entries for each class. The classes are reasonably balanced.
By looking at the counts in Table 6.3 it can be seen that the classes are reasonably
balanced. Table 6.4 shows the accuracy score for each of the models both with and
without start time as feature. It can be seen that the Random Forrest classifier has the
best performance both with and without start time.
Model
Accuracy1
Accuracy2
Random Forrest
0.75
0.67
SVM
0.70
0.62
Logistic regression
0.67
0.61
Table 6.4: Average accuracy for predicting sleep duration.
Accuracy1 = with start
time and Accuracy2 = without start time. The start time adds predictive
power when it is added to the feature set. The Random Forrest classifier
outperforms the two other models.
When looking at Table 6.4 it is clear to see that the start time has some predictive
power. This can also be seen in Figure 6.3 where the top features for a Random Forrest
model with and without start time as feature has been plotted. The chronotype is the
second most important feature when start time is included as feature. But without the
chronotype is only the seventh most important feature. That shows that adding the
start time also gives the chronotype a higher importance and greater predictive power.
Another interesting thing is again to see that weekday do not seem to have any or very
low predictive power.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Sleep prediction
(a) Top features for Random Forrest
with start time.
The start time leads
to an increased importance of the chrono-
type.
(b) Top features for Random Forrest
without start time.
Figure 6.3: Top features for Random Forrest. Start time adds predictive power, while
weekday do not seem to add any.
Table 6.5 shows the average classifications scores for the Random Forrest model. The
scores shows that the models in general are better at classifying and detect class 0 entries
correctly. But overall the scores looks good.
Class 0
Class 1
Per-class Precision1
0.8
0.7
Per-class Recall1
0.76
0.74
Per-class F1 score1
0.78
0.72
Per-class Precision2
0.72
0.61
Per-class Recall2
0.71
0.61
Per-class F1 score2
0.71
0.61
Table 6.5: Performance score for Random Forrest classier when predicting sleep dura-
tion both with(1) and without(2) start time as feature..
To further investigate the performance of the Random Forrest classifier, the ROC
curves and the confusion matrix has been plotted in Figure 6.4 and Figure 6.5.
In
Figure 6.5, it can be seen that the classifier tends to classify items as class 0, but the
majority of class 1 is still classified correctly. The ROC curves do also show that the
performance for the Random Forrest model is better than random guessing.
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Prediction: Sleep duration
55
(a) ROC curve for Random Forrest with
start time
(b) ROC curve for Random Forrest with-
out start time
Figure 6.4: ROC curves for Random Forrest classifier. It can be seen that the perfor-
mance increases when adding the start time as feature.
(a) Confusion matrix for Random For-
rest with start
(b) Confusion matrix for Random For-
rest without start time
Figure 6.5: Confusion matrix for Random Forrest classifier. With start time added as
features the recall of class 0 decreases, and they are instead classified as
class 1.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Sleep prediction
6.2
Prediction: Social jet lag
As mentioned earlier, this dataset has the users as rows and the personal information as
features. The dataset consists of 53.850 users.
6.2.1
Features
The division of features for predicting social jet lag can be seen in Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Selected features for predicting social jet lag divided by category.
Dummy variables has again been created for the categorical features. The categorical
features are: Gender, Region and Country.
6.2.2
Regression
The regression task for this part is to predict the actual social jet lag. The social jet lag
which will be predicted is the average per month. The top features from the Random
Forrest regressor can be seen in Figure 6.7(a). It is not surprising to see that features
such as chronotype and sleep duration work + free are important when predicting social
jet lag. But it is interesting to see that features such as longitude and population density
also has some predictive power. It can be seen that the predictive power for recency of
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Prediction: Social jet lag
57
app usage is larger than the amount of app usage the last hour before bed. As mentioned
earlier, this is the features which has been used to train the reaming models. The average
r2 score for each of the models can be seen in Table 6.6. As it can be seen, the r2 scores
are not impressive, and they have a hard time predicting the social jet lag. But it is
the Random Forrest regressor which has the best performance. Figure 6.7(b) shows the
actual social jet lag vs. the predicted to investigated how the social jet lag was classified.
It can be seen that it predicts strongest around a social jet lag of 0 and in the model
predicts in general the social jet lag less extreme compared to the actual.
Model
r2
Random Forrest regressor
0.26
SVM
0.12
Multiple regression
0.17
Table 6.6: Average r2 for predicting social jet lag. The scores are not impressive but
the Random Forrest regressor outperforms the two other models.
(a) Top features for Random Forrest re-
gressor. The chronotype is not surprising
the most important feature.
But inter-
esting enough, features as longitude and
average recency of app usage do also have
some predictive power.
(b) Predicted vs.
actual social jet lag.
Red line indicates perfect classification.
Red dots represents the highest densities
while the blue dots represent the lowest
densities. The social jet lag are in most
of the cases predicted less extreme than
it actual is.
Figure 6.7: Top features for Random Forrest regressor and predicted social jet lag vs
actual.
6.2.3
Classification
It has been chosen to have 3 classes for this classification. Class 0 which is the lower 3rd
percentile, class 2 which is the upper 3rd percentile and class 1 which is in between those
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Sleep prediction
two percentiles. This gives the distribution of classes which can be seen in Table 6.7.
The lower and upper limit are 1021.43 and 3051.81 seconds respectively.
Class
N
0
17.771
1
17.770
2
18.309
Table 6.7: Classes and number of items per class.
The top features for the Random Forrest model can be seen in Figure 6.8(b). If they
are compared to the top features from the regressor, it can be seen that the age feature
for example has lost predictive power. But it is still chronotype and sleep duration work
+ free which has the highest predictive power. The average accuracy score for each of
the models can be seen in Table 6.8.
Model
Accuracy
Random Forrest
0.51
SVM
0.41
Logistic regression
0.49
Table 6.8: Average accuracy for predicting social jet lag. All 3 models performs better
than random guessing. The Random Forrest model performs best, while
the SVM performs worst.
The accuracy scores looks decent, and above 33% which means they perform better
than random guessing. The total confusion matrix for all 10 folds can be seen in Fig-
ure 6.8(a). The confusion matrix shows that the two extreme social jet lag groups (class
0 and class 2) are predicted better than class 1, and it is a limited number from each
of the two extreme classes which is classified as the other extreme class. While the class
1 entries are classified evenly between the three groups. The precision and recall which
can be seen in Table 6.9 tell the same story: class 0 and class 2 has higher scores, and
are easier to predict.
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Summary
59
Class 0
Class 1
Class 2
Per-class Precision
0.525
0.414
0.566
Per-class Recall
0.588
0.319
0.624
Per-class F1 score
0.553
0.36
0.595
Table 6.9: Performance score for Random Forrest classier when predicting social jet
lag.
(a) Confusion matrix for Random For-
rest classifying social jet lag.
The two
extremes (class 0 and 2) are easier to clas-
sify compared to the normal(class 1). It
is a limited number of the extreme classes
which are predicted as the other extreme
class.
(b) Top features for Random Forrest clas-
sifier
Figure 6.8: Confusion matrix and top features for Random Forrest classifier.
6.3
Summary
This section has investigated the performance of machine learning models predicting
social jet lag and sleep duration. For predicting social jet lag it was the users’ who
were the entries in the dataset, while for predicting sleep duration it was the individual
sleep entries which were entries. Both classification and regression were used to predict
the two target values, and the top features were investigated for each of them. When
predicting the sleep duration with start time added to the feature set the performance
increased for both the classification and the regression. Without the start time the overall
performance for the regression models were pretty low wit an average r2 score on 0.18.
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Sleep prediction
For the classification part where it should be classified whether the sleep duration was
above 7 hours or not. The classification got an average accuracy of %67, which is better
than random guessing. The regression models for prediction of social jet lag performed
slightly better than the ones predicting sleep duration, with an r2 on 0.26. The accuracy
for the classification model was 51%. For all situations either classification or regression,
it was the Random Forrest model which performed best. The general performance in
terms of classification were good, while the performance for the regression models were
poor.
Regarding the top features, the models predicting sleep duration showed an interest-
ing result. Neither the weekday nor age had a predictive power close to 0 (if any). This
is interesting since it has been shown that the sleep duration vary with those two groups.
Instead it were features like longitude and latitude which both had a higher predictive
power.
The top features for predicting social jet lag was not surprisingly the chronotype and
average sleep duration for work and free days.
The importance of the two features; application usage before bed and application
usage (Recency), did for both the prediction of sleep duration and social jet lag follow
the importance for the age feature closely. This is not surprisingly since it has been
shown that the usage of mobile phone before bed strongly depends on your age. It can
be seen that it is mostly the two main application features; application usage before bed
and application usage (Recency) which have predictive power. The application usage
before sleep divided by category do only in some of the cases have a predictive power.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The chosen limit for merging sleep entries together was set to 25 minutes. Which meant
that all sleep entries which were less than 25 minutes apart were merged. It would have
made sense to change that to 1 hour, to ensure that all entries which belongs together
are merged. This change will most likely not change the results significantly, but it
would make them more reliable.
The motion activities during a day were discarded due to the possibility of error
measurements. Those features would have been interesting to add to the machine learn-
ing models. There could be an value for future studies to look into how to remove the
potential error measurements from the dataset.
The two main terms from the literature which were compared with the results from
this thesis were the chronotype and the social jet lag. For the comparison there was a
need for detecting both free and workdays. This information was not available, and it
was therefore chosen to use weekends as free days and weekdays as workdays. This could
have an effect on the result since it is not all who follows that pattern, and have been an
error source when the results were compared with the literature. When comparing the
chronotype both according to age and gender the results corresponded well with what
is seen in the literature. The social jet lag on the other hand, showed the same trends
as what can be seen in the literature, but the amount of social jet lag was significantly
lower. This can be due to one of the main problems with this dataset: The lack of
knowledge about the users. The dataset does for example not contain any information
about whether the users woke up with an alarm clock, and they can therefore not be
removed from the investigation. Another problem with this dataset is the lack of sleep
entries per user. Most users had between 1 and 2 months of registered sleep, which made
it hard to see how the sleep pattern for an individual person changed throughout a year.
Even though there was a lack of information about the user and the sleep entries, the
quality of the data available was high compared to the fact that it was collected in an
uncontrolled environment.
The usage of mobile phones before bed was investigated, and it was found that it
strongly depended on the age of the user. The usage of mobile before bed decreased with
age. The amount of application usage before bed and the time from last app activity to
sleep onset was generated as features to include in the machine learning models. It was
shortly investigated which influence usage of mobile phone before sleep had on our sleep
duration. It was found that we slept longer when using our phone more. This was the
complete opposite of what it should according to theory. But this is a good example of
the limitations in this dataset. There are so many factors, and it is almost impossible
to control for all of them without having a bit more knowledge about the user and the
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Discussion
context they are in.
The sleep states from the Sony dataset was investigated to see whether there was any
correlation between those and the known sleep states from the literature. It was found
that there were no correlation, and they could therefore not be used as a measure of
sleep quality. In lack of better measurements for sleep quality, the social jet lag and sleep
duration were chosen as the two target values for the machine learning models. The two
target values were tried predicted based on regression and classification. It was found
that the classification models in general performed better than the regression models.
The classification model for predicting sleep duration could predict 67% correctly while
the model for predicting social jet lag predicted 51% correct. The performance for the
models predicting sleep duration could be increased by adding the start time to the
feature set, and the classifier got an 75% accuracy. It was interesting to see that the two
extreme classes of social jet lag could be divided by the machine learning model, and it
was the middle/normal class which was hard to classify.
The importance of the two features; application usage before bed and application us-
age (Recency), did in most of the cases follow the importance for the age feature closely.
Which is not surprising since it has been shown that application usage depends on your
age. But it was surprising that the weekdays did not seem to have any significant impor-
tance when predicting sleep duration. This is surprising because it has been shown that
the sleep duration for weekends lies significant above sleep duration for weekdays. Other
interesting findings were that the features such as longitude, latitude and population in
many cases also had high predictive power compared to the rest of the features.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This project has investigated sleep patterns based on large scale data collected from
wearables and is a part of Sony LifeLog. The period for the data collection was from
d.
1st of October 2015 to the 31st of October 2016.
Two datasets were generated
based on the Sony LifeLog data. One dataset which contained information about all
registered nights of sleep and one which contained information about the individual
users. The attributes in these dataset have been expanded widely both with usage of
already available data, for example social jet lag, BMI and chronotype. Other attributes
has been added based on external datasets/algorithms, for example lunar cycle, daylight,
country and population. The final datasets contained 4.592.868 sleep entries and 53.850
unique users. These datasets are the ones which have been trained with machine learning
models.
The sleep dataset from Sony LifeLog was investigated and compared to the literature.
This comparison verified that the collected data could be used in further studies. The
problem that still remains is the lack of information. It will therefore be hard to make
any hard conclusions based on the dataset other than the verification of the data, and
the potential usage of the SmartBands in smaller experiments. The data quality itself
was high even though it was collected in a uncontrolled environment.
The key features which are used to predict how we sleep was investigated. Some
features were not surprising, but the importance of longitude and latitude was a but
surprising. The app related features do also have a predictive power.
Future work could be to investigate how mobile usage before sleep influence our sleep
more in depth. This thesis has only briefly touched upon this topic, and there is room
for further exploration. This exploration need to take the sleep latency or time in bed
before bed into account since that seems to be the biggest problem.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Population density
1 import numpy as np
2 from osgeo import gdal
3
4 def get_population_density(latitude , longitude):
5
#Inspiration from:
6
#https://github.com/mlgill/zika_prediction/
7
8
#GDAL information:
9
#https://pcjericks.github.io/py-gdalogr -cookbook/raster_layers.html
10
#http://www.gdal.org/gdal_tutorial.html
11
12
x = longitude
13
y = latitude
14
15
try:
16
#Define the size of the area
17
size = 100
18
19
dist_matrix = np.meshgrid(np.arange(-size, size+1),
20
np.arange(-size, size+1))
21
dist_matrix = np.sqrt((dist_matrix[0]**2 + dist_matrix[1]**2))
22
sort_order = dist_matrix.ravel().argsort() #The order of areas used.
23
24
xOffset = int((x - xOrigin) / pixelWidth) - size
25
yOffset = int((y - yOrigin) / pixelHeight) - size
26
27
data = band.ReadAsArray(xOffset , yOffset , 2*size+1, 2*size+1)
28
data_sort = data.ravel()[sort_order]
29
density = data_sort[data_sort >0][:9].mean() #Takes the mean in the
selected areas
30
except:
31
density = None
32
33
return density
34
35
36 dataset = gdal.Open('gpw_population_density/gpw-v4-population -count_2015.tif
')
37 transform = dataset.GetGeoTransform()
38
39 xOrigin = transform[0]
40 yOrigin = transform[3]
==PAGE:76==
66
A Population density
41 pixelWidth = transform[1]
42 pixelHeight = transform[5]
43
44 band = ds.GetRasterBand(1)
45
46 population = get_population_density(55.682904,12.5635604)
Listing A.1: Python code for calculating Population density for a given coordinate set.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Description of app
categories
This is a short description of which types of apps that belongs to each of the app cate-
gories. And is just to give an quick overview of what each the categories contain.
Browsing
This category contains all browser apps such as Chrome and Firefox. Furthermore
it also contains:
• Weather apps. such as DMI (Danish weather app)
• News apps like for example BBC
Other
As the category title says, this is the category where all the other apps ends. This means
that apps such as:
Books
This category contains all book apps such as the bible, dictionaries and cookbooks. But
it also contains apps like QR code readers and Wikipedia.
Music
This category contains the following types of apps:
• Audio players
• Audio recorders
• Radio apps
• HIFI remotes
• Audio books
• Guitar tuners
==PAGE:78==
68
B Description of app categories
Games
This category contains all the different types of games. Such as card, puzzles, sport
games etc.
Camera/Album
This category contains the album apps, different apps to take pictures and image sharing
apps like Flickr and Google Photos.
Communication
This is all apps which is used to communicate and meat with others. This means apps
like:
• Facebook, Snapchat and LinkedIn SMS
• Skype Mail
• Phone call + hands free apps.
• MeetUp
• NFC reader
Movie/TV
All video players, streaming services like Netflix and Viaplay. But also some apps which
could have been placed in the Music category.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C
Sleep logbook
Date
Onset
Offset
Onset(SWR30)
Offset(SWR30)
∆Onset
∆Offset
19-12-2016
00:10
07:35
00:14
07:39
4
4
20-12-2016
00:45
08:00
00:44
08:00
1
0
21-12-2016
24:00
09:15
23:56
09:19
4
4
22-12-2016
00:10
08:55
00:11
08:58
1
3
23-12-2016
23:15
08:55
23:16
08:53
1
2
24-12-2016
01:35
09:25
01:34
09:24
1
1
27-12-2016
01:15
09:15
01:12
09:16
3
1
28-12-2016
00:30
09:00
00:34
09:01
4
1
30-12-2016
00:00
09:00
23:57
09:01
3
1
31-12-2016
02:20
09:30
02:24
09:28
4
4
01-01-2017
00:10
07:35
00:14
07:39
4
4
02-01-2017
00:10
07:35
00:14
07:39
4
4
03-01-2017
00:10
07:35
00:14
07:39
4
4
Table C.1: Sleep logbook for a period of 1 month..
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX D
Figures
D.1
Bedtime and wake up time distribution
divided by gender
Figure D.1: Bedtimes and wake up times by gender..
==PAGE:82==
72
D Figures
D.2
Sleep onset by day in month for
November and December
(a) Sleep onset by day in November.
(b) Sleep onset by day in December.
Figure D.2: Average sleep duration by weekday divided by early and late chronotypes.
==PAGE:83==
D.3 Box plot of social jetlag
73
D.3
Box plot of social jetlag
Figure D.3: Social jet lag for the total period vs. social jet lag per month..
==PAGE:84==
74
D Figures
D.4
Distribution of chronotype from literature
Figure D.4: Distribution of chronotypes from the study in [29]. Figure is taken directly
from the article, and is solely for comparison purpose.
==PAGE:85==
D.5 Chronotype vs. age
75
D.5
Chronotype vs. age
Figure D.5: Average chronotype vs. age. The error bar is the SEM.
==PAGE:86==
76
D Figures
D.6
Distribution of social jet lag from literature
Figure D.6: Distribution of social jet lag from the study in [30]. Figure is taken directly
from the article, and is solely for comparison purpose.
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX E
Shapefile: Find country
based on coordinates
1 #%%file countries.py
2 from osgeo import ogr
3
4 # Inspiration form https://github.com/che0/countries
5
6
7 class Point(object):
8
""" Wrapper for ogr point """
9
def __init__(self, lat, lng):
10
""" Coordinates are in degrees """
11
self.point = ogr.Geometry(ogr.wkbPoint)
12
self.point.AddPoint(lng, lat)
13
14
def getOgr(self):
15
return self.point
16
ogr = property(getOgr)
17
18 class Country(object):
19
""" Wrapper for ogr country shape. Not meant to be instantiated directly
. """
20
def __init__(self, shape):
21
self.shape = shape
22
23
def getIso(self):
24
return self.shape.GetField('ISO2')
25
iso = property(getIso)
26
27
def __str__(self):
28
return self.shape.GetField('NAME')
29
30
def contains(self, point):
31
return self.shape.geometry().Contains(point.ogr)
32
33 class CountryChecker(object):
34
""" Loads a country shape file, checks coordinates for country location.
"""
35
36
def __init__(self, country_file):
37
driver = ogr.GetDriverByName('ESRI Shapefile')
==PAGE:88==
78
E Shapefile: Find country based on coordinates
38
self.countryFile = driver.Open(country_file)
39
self.layer = self.countryFile.GetLayer()
40
41
def getCountry(self, point):
42
"""
43
Checks given gps-incoming coordinates for country.
44
Output is either country shape index or None
45
"""
46
47
#Defines the most common countries like Japan, Sweden , USA to
increase performance.
48
common_countries = [88,71,245,206,174,187,190,64,163,29,
49
59,208,85,129,57,153,8,201,154,44]
50
for i in common_countries:
51
country = self.layer.GetFeature(i)
52
if country.geometry().Contains(point.ogr):
53
return Country(country)
54
55
for i in xrange(self.layer.GetFeatureCount()):
56
country = self.layer.GetFeature(i)
57
if country.geometry().Contains(point.ogr):
58
return Country(country)
59
60
# nothing found
61
return None
62
63 #Code to check the coordinates
64 coordinates_dict = {}
65 with open(path,'rb') as f:
66
lines = f.readlines()
67
for line in lines:
68
lon, lat = line.split(",")
69
key = lon + "-" + lat
70
if key not in coordinates_dict:
71
name = cc.getCountry(Point(float(lat), float(lon))).__str__()
72
coordinates_dict[key] = name
Listing E.1: Python code for finding country based on shapefile.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Alarm app list. url: https://www.dropbox.com/s/uao7gdf8ixr3ean/apps_
alarm.txt?dl=0 (visited on January 20, 2017).
[2]
S Ancoli-Israel et al. “The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and circadian
rhythms. American Academy of Sleep Medicine Review Paper”. In: Sleep 26.3
(2003), pages 342–392.
[3]
Apache Spark. url: http://spark.apache.org/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[4]
Apple. Nighshift. url: https://support.apple.com/en-gb/HT202613 (visited
on January 20, 2017).
[5]
Application usage increase. url: http : / / www . smartinsights . com / mobile -
marketing/mobile-marketing-analytics/mobile-marketing-statistics/
(visited on January 20, 2017).
[6]
Application usage vs. age in the US. url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
323522/us-user-mobile-app-engagement-age/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[7]
Automatic sleep tracking state. url: http://support.sonymobile.com/global-
en/swr30/userguide/Manual-sleep/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[8]
Christian Cajochen et al. “Evening exposure to a light-emitting diodes (LED)-
backlit computer screen affects circadian physiology and cognitive performance”.
In: Journal of Applied Physiology 110.5 (2011), pages 1432–1438.
[9]
Christian Cajochen et al. “Evidence that the lunar cycle influences human sleep”.
In: Current Biology 23.15 (2013), pages 1485–1488.
[10]
Anne-Marie Chang et al. “Evening use of light-emitting eReaders negatively af-
fects sleep, circadian timing, and next-morning alertness”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 112.4 (2015), pages 1232–1237.
[11]
Charles A Czeisler. “Perspective: casting light on sleep deficiency”. In: Nature
497.7450 (2013), S13–S13.
[12]
JF Duffy et al. “Relationship of endogenous circadian melatonin and temperature
rhythms to self-reported preference for morning or evening activity in young and
older people.” In: Journal of investigative medicine: the official publication of the
American Federation for Clinical Research 47.3 (1999), pages 141–150.
[13]
Russell G Foster and Till Roenneberg. “Human responses to the geophysical daily,
annual and lunar cycles”. In: Current biology 18.17 (2008), R784–R794.
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
[14]
Flavia Giannotti et al. “Circadian preference, sleep and daytime behaviour in
adolescence”. In: Journal of sleep research 11.3 (2002), pages 191–199.
[15]
Jennifer Girschik et al. “Validation of self-reported sleep against actigraphy”. In:
Journal of epidemiology 22.5 (2012), pages 462–468.
[16]
Google. Google Maps API for Geocoding. url: https://developers.google.
com/maps/documentation/geocoding/intro (visited on January 20, 2017).
[17]
Max Hirshkowitz et al. “National Sleep Foundation’s sleep time duration rec-
ommendations: methodology and results summary”. In: Sleep Health 1.1 (2015),
pages 40–43.
[18]
O Horacio et al. “Access to electric light is associated with shorter sleep duration
in a traditionally hunter-gatherer community”. In: Journal of biological rhythms
(2015), page 0748730415590702.
[19]
Jim A Horne and Olov Ostberg. “A self-assessment questionnaire to determine
morningness-eveningness in human circadian rhythms.” In: International journal
of chronobiology 4.2 (1975), pages 97–110.
[20]
Thomas Kantermann et al. “The human circadian clock’s seasonal adjustment is
disrupted by daylight saving time”. In: Current Biology 17.22 (2007), pages 1996–
2000.
[21]
Tuuli A Lahti et al. “Transition to daylight saving time reduces sleep duration
plus sleep efficiency of the deprived sleep”. In: Neuroscience letters 406.3 (2006),
pages 174–177.
[22]
Nicholas D Lane et al. “A survey of mobile phone sensing”. In: IEEE Communica-
tions magazine 48.9 (2010).
[23]
Luciano Mecacci and Gastone Rocchetti. “Morning and evening types: stress-
related personality aspects”. In: Personality and Individual Differences 25.3 (1998),
pages 537–542.
[24]
NASA. Gridded Population of the World (GPW), v4. url: http://sedac.ciesin.
columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v4 (visited on January 20, 2017).
[25]
PySpark: RDD vs. DataFrames. url: https://community.hortonworks.com/
articles/42027/rdd-vs-dataframe-vs-sparksql.html (visited on January 20,
2017).
[26]
Till Roenneberg, Serge Daan, and Martha Merrow. “The art of entrainment”. In:
Journal of Biological Rhythms 18.3 (2003), pages 183–194.
[27]
Till Roenneberg, C Jairaj Kumar, and Martha Merrow. “The human circadian
clock entrains to sun time”. In: Current Biology 17.2 (2007), R44–R45.
[28]
Till Roenneberg, Anna Wirz-Justice, and Martha Merrow. “Life between clocks:
daily temporal patterns of human chronotypes”. In: Journal of biological rhythms
18.1 (2003), pages 80–90.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
81
[29]
Till Roenneberg et al. “A marker for the end of adolescence”. In: Current Biology
14.24 (2004), R1038–R1039.
[30]
Till Roenneberg et al. “Social jetlag and obesity”. In: Current Biology 22.10 (2012),
pages 939–943.
[31]
Martin RÖÖSli et al. “Sleepless night, the moon is bright: longitudinal study of
lunar phase and sleep”. In: Journal of sleep research 15.2 (2006), pages 149–153.
[32]
Avi Sadeh. “The role and validity of actigraphy in sleep medicine: an update”. In:
Sleep medicine reviews 15.4 (2011), pages 259–267.
[33]
Frank AJL Scheer and Charles A Czeisler. “Melatonin, sleep, and circadian rhythms”.
In: Sleep medicine reviews 9.1 (2005), pages 5–9.
[34]
Scikit-learn. url: http://scikit-learn.org/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[35]
Sleep cycles. url: http://www.howsleepworks.com/types_cycles.html (visited
on January 20, 2017).
[36]
Sleep stages. url: https://blog.withings.com/2015/03/17/the-4-different-
stages-of-sleep/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[37]
Sony. Lifelog. url: https://lifelog.sony.com/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[38]
Sony. SWR10 armband userguide. url: http : / / support . sonymobile . com /
global-en/swr10/userguide/Auto-night-mode/ (visited on January 20, 2017).
[39]
Sun class implementation. url: https://ptaff.ca/crepyscule/api/public/
Sun.Sun-class.html (visited on January 20, 2017).
[40]
Jacques Taillard et al. “The circadian and homeostatic modulation of sleep pressure
during wakefulness differs between morning and evening chronotypes”. In: Journal
of sleep research 12.4 (2003), pages 275–282.
[41]
Ludvig maximilian universität. Munich chronotype questionnaire (MCTQ). url:
https://www.bioinfo.mpg.de/mctq/core_work_life/core/introduction.
jsp (visited on January 20, 2017).
[42]
Jan Van den Bulck. “Adolescent use of mobile phones for calling and for sending
text messages after lights out: results from a prospective cohort study with a one-
year follow-up”. In: SLEEP-NEW YORK THEN WESTCHESTER- 30.9 (2007),
page 1220.
[43]
Marc Wittmann et al. “Social jetlag: misalignment of biological and social time”.
In: Chronobiology international 23.1-2 (2006), pages 497–509.
[44]
Brittany Wood et al. “Light level and duration of exposure determine the impact
of self-luminous tablets on melatonin suppression”. In: Applied ergonomics 44.2
(2013), pages 237–240.
[45]
Jamie M Zeitzer et al. “Sensitivity of the human circadian pacemaker to nocturnal
light: melatonin phase resetting and suppression”. In: The Journal of physiology
526.3 (2000), pages 695–702.
==PAGE:92==
