==PAGE:1==
The Use of Coﬀee Residue as a Large
Pore Forming Agent in Fired Clay Bricks
- With an Initial Screening of Coﬀee Residue
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
The Use of Coffee Residue as a Large Pore
Forming Agent in Fired Clay Bricks
- With an Initial Screening of Coffee Residue
Project made by:
Rikke Klavstrup Wittendorff
stud.polyt. S102916
Project made for:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering
GEA Process Engineering A/S
Counselors:
Pernille Erland Jensen, Associate Professor
Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Professor
Technical assistance:
Ebba Cederberg Schnell, Laboratory Coordinator
Malene Grønvold, Laboratory Technician
Christian Peter Rasmussen, Electronics technician
Project period:
23.01.2017 - 11.08.2017
Front page photo credits:
Coffee beans: https : //www.taylorscoffee.co.uk/blog/
category/the −life −of −a −coffee −bean/
Bricks: http : //wienerberger.dk/produkter/
pt −209 −gul?wb_condition = false
ii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report is the result of a master thesis within the Department of Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. The project constitutes the eﬀort of 32.5 ECTS points and has
been carried out in the period from January 23rd 2017 to August 11th 2017.
The screening process of the coﬀee residue (section 2 and Appendix A) has been carried out in
cooperation with fellow students Jeanette Garst Johansen and Emilie Oline Buch Larsen, wherefore
most photos, data and general structure of these sections might be identical or similar in all three
reports.
Rikke Klavstrup Wittendorﬀ, S102916
Kongens Lyngby, August 2017
iv
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank GEA Process Engineering A/S and our contact person,
Anders Holmen Pedersen, who made the preliminary tests and delivered the coﬀee residue, that
made this project possible.
The project was conducted and written parallel with the master thesis of fellow student and
close personal friend, Jeanette Garst Johansen, without whom this project would not have been
possible. All experimental work, documentation, discussion of results and general report writing
has been done in close cooperation.
I would also like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Pernille E. Jensen for guidance,
idea processing and constructive feedback throughout the entire project. Furthermore, a great
thanks to Lisbeth M. Ottosen for co-supervising, to Laboratory Coordination, Ebba Cederberg
Schnell, and her team for demonstrations of experiments and overall support and guidance through
all lab related experiments and concerns, to Emilie Oline Buch Larsen for general cooperation and
idea processing, PhD students Ida Maria Gieysztor Bertelsen and Wan Chen for helping with
brick-related problems and questions.
Finally, I would like to dedicate this thesis to my grandfather. A fellow engineer, fellow Calves
Perthes patient and the sole reason for me entering the ﬁeld of civil engineering.
A great inspiration, giver of hope and comfort and possibly my biggest fan. He did not get to
see me graduate, as his work with asbestos at a young age caught up with him recently and has
truly shown me the great importance of material science.
vi
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
In this thesis, the possible use of industrial instant coﬀee residue as a large pore-forming agent
in ﬁred clay bricks, is investigated. Approximately 400,000 t of the residue is generated globally
each year from the instant coﬀee production, and is currently perceived as a waste material. By
recycling it as a pore-forming agent, it could help reduce the use of clay in the brick production
and create lightweight bricks with higher insulation properties.
An initial screening and characterization of the residue was performed, investigating the forma-
bility, drying processes, solubility of the hardened material, pH value, grain size distribution, con-
tent of water, chemical elements and organic material. From this, the coﬀee residue was found
to contain approximately 90% water upon arrival from the factory and the most eﬀective ways
to reduce this water content, without the residue hardening, was to dry it in an oven at low
temperatures between 30-50°C or in a microwave. When hardening the residue, by drying in the
oven for 24 hours at various temperatures, it was found, that the drying at 80°C would result in
the strongest material, by visual inspection. It was not possible to form large samples without
them cracking, due to the large shrinkage, however, it was found possible to produce disc-shaped
aggregates (CR aggregates) with diameters of 10 mm and 15 mm, by drying the material on a
curved surface at 50°C.
The residue was found to be slightly acidic with a pH value of 4.9 and the results of the grain
size distribution categorized the particles as medium sized, as the grains were <100 µm. With the
use of the residue as hardened aggregates, these results would not have any aﬀect on the ﬁnished
product. The digestion of the residue, however, classiﬁed the material as a Class 3 - Contaminated
Soil, according to a decree from the Danish Environmental Protection Agency, as the contents of
cadmium, chrome, nickel and zinc, exceeded the limits of Class 1 and 2. This ﬁnding shows, that
the coﬀee residue will have to be puriﬁed for future use in building materials, which is essential
for additional research, but was not further investigated in this study.
The pure hardened material could not be formed into large bricks without cracking and the
hardened material would dissolve in water, wherefore it was decided to use it in combination with
another building material. From the initial characterization of the residue, it was found to contain
92% organic material, making it possible for use as a pore-forming agent in ﬁred clay bricks, as the
high temperatures, when ﬁring the clay, would cause the residue to incinerate almost completely.
Samples containing 2.5% and 5% CR, were made containing aggregates with both the large and
small diameters (10mm and 15 mm) and used for investigating the inﬂuence of the pores on the
physical properties of the bricks.
The adding of CR aggregates resulted in a lower volumetric shrinkage, meaning that less clay
would be needed to obtain a given size of brick. Furthermore, the addition of the large pores,
viii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 0:
resulted in lower densities and thermal conductivities, thus improving the insulation properties of
the bricks, as desired. The smaller aggregates, with a diameter of 10 mm, showed a tendency to
better improve the insulation properties, than the larger ones with a diameter of 15 mm.
A slight increase of water absorption was found for the samples containing 5% CR aggregates,
compared to the reference samples, whereas the content of 2.5% aggregates had no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the water absorption. From the same experiment, the minute suction was found to
increase, as the content of CR aggregates was increased, however, all the samples were within, or
very close, to the compared theoretic limits.
The compressive strength, of the brick samples, was reduced by the addition of large pores and
the samples with a content of 5% CR aggregates did not meet the minimum limit of 10 MPa from
EN 771-1 (2005).
Because of the large pores, inside the brick samples, the water was absorbed irregularly, during
the water absorption test, and large diﬀerences between the measured compressive strengths, were
also observed. This indicates, that the random placement of the large pores, results in a rather
inconsistent material, when considering the physical properties.
ix
==PAGE:11==
Resume
Denne afhandling omhandler muligheden for anvendelse af industrielt instant kaﬀegrums, som et
stort poreformende tilslag i brændte mursten. Ca. 400.000 t af det industrielle kaﬀegrums produc-
eres globalt hvert år som et biprodukt fra produktionen af instant kaﬀe og opfattes som værende
aﬀald. Ved at genanvende det som et poreformende tilslag, kan være med til at reducere brugen
af ler i murstenproduktionen og producere letvægts mursten med højere isolationsegenskaber.
En indledende screening og karakterisering af kaﬀegrumset blev udført, hvorved der blev un-
dersøgt formbarhed, tørringsprocesser, opløselighed af det hærdede materiale, pH-værdi, kornstør-
relse, vandindhold, indhold af kemiske stoﬀer og organisk materiale. Heraf blev det konstateret,
at kaﬀegrumset indeholdt ca. 90% vand ved levering fra fabrikken, og den mest eﬀektive måde,
hvorpå dette vandindhold kunne reduceres, uden det hærdede, var at tørre det i en ovn ved lave
temperaturer mellem 30-50°C eller i en mikrobølgeovn. Hærdning af materialet, ved tørring i en
ovn i 24 timer ved forskellige temperaturer, viste at det ikke var muligt at frembringe store stykker,
uden at de revnede, på grund af den store krympning under tørringsprocessen. Det viste sig dog
muligt at fremstille skiveformede aggregater (CR aggregater) med diametre på hhv. 10 mm og 15
mm, ved at tørre materialet på en krum overﬂade ved 50°C.
Kaﬀegrumset viste sig at være lidt sur med en pH-værdi på 4,9, og resultaterne af korn-
størrelsesfordelingen, kategoriserede partiklerne som værende størrelse ”medium”, idet disse var
<100 µm.
Ved anvendelse af kaﬀegrumset som hærdede aggregater, ville disse resultater dog
ikke have nogen indﬂydelse på de færdigbrændte mursten. Oplukningen af materialet med mass-
espektrometri, klassiﬁcerede imidlertid dette som værende Kategori 3 – Forurenet, i henhold til
de gældende krav fra Miljøstyrelsen, idet indholdet af cadmium, krom, nikkel og zink overskred
grænserne for Kategori 1 og 2. Dette betyder at det industrielle kaﬀegrums skal renses/vaskes
inden brug i byggematerialer, hvilket er essentielt for videre forskning, men blev ikke undersøgt
nærmere i denne afhandling.
Det hærdede materiale kunne ikke formes til store mursten, uden at det revnede under tør-
ringen, og det hærdede materiale gik desuden i opløsning når det blev nedsunket i vand.
På
baggrund af disse observationer, blev det besluttet at bruge kaﬀegrumset i kombination med an-
det byggemateriale. Fra den oprindelige karakterisering af materialet, blev indholdet af organisk
materiale fundet til værende 92%, hvilket gør det muligt at anvende det som et poredannende
tilslag i brændte mursten, idet de høje temperaturer, under brændingen af leret, vil resultere i en
næsten fuldstændig forbrænding af kaﬀe-aggregaterne.
Prøver, indeholdende 2.5% og 5% kaﬀegrums, blev fremstillet med aggregater med både de store og
små diametre (10 mm og 15 mm) og anvendt til undersøgelse af porernes indﬂydelse på murstenenes
fysiske egenskaber.
x
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 0:
Tilsætningen af kaﬀe-aggregater resulterede i en lavere volumetrisk krympning, hvilket betyder at
mindre ler ville være nødvendigt for at opnå en given størrelse af mursten. Desuden resulterede
tilsætningen af de store porer i lavere densitet og termisk ledningsevne, hvilket forbedrer isola-
tionsegenskaberne af murstenene, som ønsket. De mindre aggregater, med en diameter på 10 mm,
viste tendens til at forbedre isolationsegenskaberne mere end de større, med en diameter på 15
mm.
En lille stigning i vandabsorption blev fundet for prøverne indeholdende 5% kaﬀe-aggregater,
sammenlignet med referenceprøverne, mens indholdet af 2.5% aggregater ikke havde nogen sig-
niﬁkant indﬂydelse. Fra samme eksperiment blev det konstateret, at minutsugningen steg, i takt
med at indholdet af kaﬀe-aggregater blev forøget, men alle prøverne var stadig inden for, eller tæt
på grænsen for de sammenlignede teoretiske værdier.
Trykstyrken af murstenprøverne blev reduceret ved tilsætning af store porer og prøverne med
et indhold på 5% CR-aggregater opfyldte ikke minimumsgrænsen på 10 MPa fra EN 771-1 (2005).
På grund af de store porer inde i murstenprøverne, blev vandet absorberet uregelmæssigt
under vandet absorptionstesten og store forskelle mellem de målte trykstyrker blev observeret.
Dette indikerer, at den tilfældige placering af de store porer resulterer i et inkonsistent materiale,
i forhold til de fysiske egenskaber.
xi
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 0:
Nomenclature
The following list contains all the abbreviations and mathematical symbols used in this report.
Additionally, the words are written in full length and the corresponding abbreviation is presented
in (), when used the ﬁrst time in each section. Likewise, the symbols are reintroduced in the
sections, where they are used for calculation.
Abbr:
Description:
CR
Coﬀee Residue
ICP
Inductively Coupled Plasma (mass spectrometry)
LOI
Loss of Ignition
MC
Metals Content ([mg/kg])
NPEX
No Prior Experiments
PEX
Prior Experiments
WC
Water Content ([%])
Symbol:
Description:
Unit:
A
Extract metal concentration
[mg/L]
Ax
Area
[m2]
B
Measured coﬀee residue
[g]
C
Dilution
[-]
Fc
Compressive Load
[N] or [kN]
fc
Compressive Strength
[MPa]
h
Height
[mm]
k
Capillarity
[-]
λE
Electrical conductivity
[W/mK]
λT
Thermal conductivity
[W/mK]
l
Length
[mm]
µ
Mean value
Var.
m
Mass
[g] or [kg]
∆m
Change in mass
[g]
P
Porosity
[m3/m3] = [%]
Q
Mass per unit volume absorbed sucking area
[kg/m2]
ρ
Density
[kg/m2]
s
Standard deviation
Var.
t
Time
[min]
T
Temperature
[°C]
V
Volume
[mm2] or [m2]
w
Width
[mm]
xii
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Screening and Idea Process
3
2.1
Controlling the Water Content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Idea Development Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
21
3.1
Composition of Clay Bricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Perforated Bricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Requirements for Recycling of Waste Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Similar Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Materials and Methods
25
4.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Coﬀee Residue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.2
Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.3
Prefabricated Bricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Characterization of Coﬀee Residue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.1
pH Value and Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2
Loss of Ignition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.3
Water Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.4
Digestion with ICP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.5
Grain Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Determining Number of Necessary Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Preparation of Brick Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.1
Forming and Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.2
Mixing of Clay and Coﬀee Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.3
Forming of Brick Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.4
Firing of Brick Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Physical Properties of Large Pored Clay Bricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.1
Shrinkage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.2
Porosity and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.3
Compressive Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.4
Water Absorption and Minute Suction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
xiv
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 0:
4.5.5
Thermal Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results and Discussion
39
5.1
Characterization of Coﬀee Residue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.1
pH Value and Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.2
Loss of Ignition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.3
Water Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.4
Digestion with ICP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.5
Grain Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Determining Number of Necessary Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Preparation of Brick Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.1
Forming and Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.2
Forming and Firing of Brick Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Physical Properties of Large Pored Clay Bricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.1
Dimensions and Shrinkage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.2
Porosity and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.3
Compressive Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.4
Water Absorption and Minute Suction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.5
Thermal Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4.6
Comparison With Results From Similar Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusion
61
6.1
Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
65
Appendix
69
xv
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
Coﬀee is the second most popular beverage in the world, only surpassed by water, and right next
to oil, it is also the worlds most used commodity. [15]
Traditional home brewing of coﬀee utilizes approximately 15-25% of the ground coﬀee beans,
where the production of instant coﬀee utilizes up to 50% of the coﬀee beans. At home, the coﬀee
waste is either thrown in the trash or the compost pile, whereas the 50% waste of the 776,000 t
instant coﬀee, produced globally each year, will be send to a landﬁll for storage. The treatment
at the instant coﬀee factories extracts most nutrients from the coﬀee, making it useless as animal
feed and fertilizer, thus resulting in the waste either being stored or incinerated, both of no use
for the environment.
In this project, the properties of industrial coﬀee waste has been investigated through a screen-
ing, in order to determine the basic properties of the material. An employee at GEA A/S had
discovered, that the waste product from their newly developed extraction methods, would harden
when dried. Based on this discovery, he was interested in ﬁnding out more about the product and
if it could be used as a building material, or as an additive in an existing material. For the reason
of re-purposing the waste, turning waste into value, but also as an opportunity to enhance the
environmental properties of existing materials.
The environment is a great factor in any industry, but especially the building industry has had a
rather large focus on durability and green initiatives in the last couple of decades. Buildings pro-
ducing and using green energy, developing materials for saving energy, recycling building materials
and ﬁnding new ways to use otherwise useless waste materials in order to reduce the use of either
environmentally harmful materials, such as cement, or materials of non renewable resources, such
as clay.
The clay bricks are one of the oldest produced building materials in the world, and were used as
early as 14,000 BC along the Nile in Egypt. The discovery of the preservation method of ﬁring
the clay bricks, has been traced back to 5,000 BC and was widely used by the Romans, who were
also responsible for bringing them to England.
Fired clay bricks have many desired traits for a building material, such as durability, ﬁre re-
sistance, strength, aesthetic possibilities and a reasonable thermal resistance. Furthermore, the
clay bricks will prevent a poor indoor climate in a building, as the thermal mass eﬀect of the ﬁred
clay, will keep a building cool in the summer and warm in the winter, thus reducing the use of
mechanical climate control and saving energy. [1]
1
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1:
Introduction
Because of its many advantageous features, masonry buildings has been built for centuries and
with its variate of sizes, shapes and colors, it works well in traditional buildings, such as churches
as the main siding material, illustrated by a traditional Danish church in Figure 1.0.1b, and in
modern buildings in combination with other building materials, such as steel, wood and concrete,
for a more modern look as illustrated in Figure 1.0.1c.
(a) Colosseum.[24]
(b) Danish church.[25]
(c) Modern masonry building.[26]
Figure 1.0.1: Examples of masonry buildings.
The main part of this project focuses on the use of the industrial coﬀee residue as a large pore-
forming agent in ﬁred clay bricks. Besides utilizing an otherwise non valuable industrial byproduct,
the large pores in the clay bricks would possibly bring the following beneﬁts:
• Higher insulating properties, reducing the dimension of the exterior walls.
• Reduced CO2 emission from transport, due to the lower weight.
• Usable both horizontal and vertical, as the pores are enclosed, as oppose to fully perforated
bricks.
• Reducing the use of natural clay, a non renewable resource.
2
==PAGE:19==
2
Screening and Idea Process
Prior to this project, the contact person from GEA A/S had made some observations, during
routine drying and enzyme treatment of the coﬀee residue (CR). The discoveries from these routine
treatments, were the grounds for this project and the starting point of the idea development
process. According to an introduction meeting, in the beginning of the project, the contact person
at GEA A/S had discovered, that the CR would harden, when dried at 80°C and could withstand
repeatedly beating with a hammer. Furthermore, the hardened material could not be dissolved
in water. Based on these informations, the initial idea was to use the pure waste material as a
building material.
In order to conﬁrm these discoveries, the residue was investigated in an initial qualitative screening,
by reconstructing the experiments done by the contact person from GEA A/S and, in an ongoing
process, determining how and where the CR could be used. From the results, new aspects needed
to be investigated, some uses of the material were excluded and new possibilities emerged and
needed to be tested.
The screening process was carried out in the ﬁrst two months of the project, in order to
determine and specify the ﬁnal focus of the project. It included tests with diﬀerent drying methods,
formability and general physical behaviour of the dried material and the behaviour of the material
during the drying process.
In addition to the qualitative study, a more quantitative characterization of the CR was made,
according to the one made for other new additives in building materials, such as alternative ashes
or waste products [33]. These analyses are presented in full later on in section 5.1, however, as
the characterization was carried out parallel to the screening, some results have been used in
developing the project idea. These results will brieﬂy be presented, when used.
As the CR contained approximately 90% water upon arrival, a large part of the screening process
was spent on ﬁnding a method for reducing the water content as much as possible, without
compromising the properties of the material. The screening of drying methods will therefore be
described in the following separate section, rather than as a part of the idea development process.
3
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
2.1
Controlling the Water Content
As mentioned, the waste product from the instant coﬀee factory was delivered with a water content
(WC) of approximately 90% and would harden, when dried.
Diﬀerent methods for removing or at least reducing the WC were attempted and these are
presented in the following sections.
Drying at Low Temperatures
Since the residue would harden rather quickly at temperatures around 80°C, the possibility to dry
the CR at a low temperature was investigated.
Experiment:
Approximately 20 g of CR were dried in the oven at 30°C in a glass. 6 samples were dried at the
same time. 3 of the samples were weighed every hour for WC calculation and the other 3 samples
were used for a qualitative observation of consistency during the drying.
The loss in weight was subtracted from the starting weight and from this, the change in WC was
calculated for each hour. The results of the experiment is illustrated in Figure 2.1.1, where a
steady decrease of the WC is shown.
The full data from the experiment is presented in Appendix A.1 where Table A.1.1 lists the
weightings from the ﬁrst 3 samples and Table A.1.2 lists the qualitative observations of the CR
consistency during the drying process.
From the qualitative observations, it was noted how the CR after 7 hours was still wet/moist
in the bottom of the glass, but started to dry at the top.
Figure 2.1.1: Resulting average WC of coﬀee residue over time, drying in an oven at
a constant 30°C.
Conclusion:
The experiment showed possibilities for drying the CR at the low temperature of 30°C for up to
7 hours, before the material started to form a crust in the top of the glass. Frequent stirring of
the sample could even out the drying. The WC was successfully lowered to approximately 68%
without the CR loosing its formability.
4
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Drying, Crushing and Remixing
In order to be able to fully control the WC, it was tested if the CR could be used as a powder by
evaporating the water at low temperatures and crushing the hardened material.
With a powder, having a relatively low WC, it could be possible to add water and thereby
obtain a more speciﬁc and constant WC for further use of the material.
Experiment:
The CR was dried in the oven at 40°C until hardened.
Small lumps of the hardened material were placed inside the spaces between the rings in the
crushing container, as shown in 2.1.2a and the container was then placed into the machine and
clamped into place as shown in 2.1.2b. The ring crusher was run at 1100 rpm for 30 sec.
(a) Rings in crushing container.
(b) Container placed in machine.
Figure 2.1.2: The ring crusher.
The dry powder was remixed with water, obtaining diﬀerent WCs and pressed into pellets, which
were then dried in the oven at 80°C for 16 hours.
The drying and crushing of the hardened coﬀee, was possible and the CR powder could successfully
be remixed with water and rolled into balls or pressed to pellets.
After drying the remixed samples, it was observed that they were more fragile than the dried
samples, formed from the CR that was not dried and crushed. (See more results from the crushing
and remixing experiment in the Idea Loop 2 in section 2.2)
5
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
(a) Dried material before.
(b) Dried material after.
(c) Powder mixed with water.
Figure 2.1.3: Crushing stages of the coﬀee residue.
Conclusion:
Since the samples, that had been crushed and remixed with water, were more fragile, than the
ones made directly from the residue, that had not been dried and crushed, it was concluded that
the crushing and remixing had a negative inﬂuence on the strength of the material.
Centrifuge
As the CR hardens, when exposed to heat, the WC could be reduced without using heat by forcing
it out in a centrifuge.
Experiment:
Four test-tubes were ﬁlled with an equal amount of CR and placed evenly in the centrifuge. The
centrifuge was run for 15 min. and the samples were run 3 times in the centrifuge, in order to
extract as much water as possible.
As illustrated in Figure 2.1.4, the water was successfully extracted and gathered at the top of
the samples. The two ﬁgures are of the same photo, but in Figure 2.1.4b, the water level has
been highlighted for informational purpose. For each run through the centrifuge, the water was
discarded to make it easier to see when no more water could be extracted.
(a) Extracted water after centrifuge.
(b) Water level highlighted.
Figure 2.1.4: Result of the ﬁrst round in the centrifuge.
Conclusion:
The amount of water extracted was very little and only a small amount of residue could go into
the centrifuge at the same time. Removing the desiccated residue after the extraction also left a
large amount of the sample in the test tubes, so with the amounts needed for the further project,
this method for controlling the WC was rejected.
6
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Vacuum Suction
Another method for extracting the water without using heat, was to suck it out with a vacuum
pump.
Experiment:
The fresh CR was placed in a funnel on top of a ﬁlter. The funnel was placed with a tight seal on
a conical ﬂask with a tap and the vacuum pump was connected to this tap.
In the ﬁrst 5 minutes of vacuum suction, a small amount of water was extracted, but after
5 minutes, no more water came through the ﬁlter. When removing the residue from the funnel,
it was observed that the CR had been pressed/sucked tight in the area above the ﬁlter and the
water was not able to get through, regardless of the vacuum in the ﬂask.
Conclusion:
The method for reducing the WC by extracting the water with vacuum, was not successful and
therefore rejected.
Microwaving
As the CR seemed to dry from the outside in the regular oven and then crack, when the outside
had hardened and water still needed to evaporate from the center, this cracking problem might
be solved by drying the residue from the inside out, by using a microwave oven.
Experiment:
In the ﬁrst test, a small amount of CR was placed in the microwave at "medium" eﬀect for 2
minutes. This resulted in the CR heating very fast and instead of drying, it started to overheat
and explode.
This method was deemed not suitable for hardening the CR and was dormant
for weeks until the need for simply lowering the WC (without hardening) reemerged. Laboratory
Coordinator, Ebba Cederberg Schnell, suggested that a glass of water was placed in the microwave
along with the bowl of CR, as this was the procedure used when drying sand for concrete, in order
to prevent the sand from overheating.
The modiﬁed method prevented the CR from overheating and exploding and Jeanette Garst
Johansen [27] and Emilie Oline Buch Larsen [29] continued with this method, lowering the WC
to as much as 66%. They also found that the glass of water was not necessary when drying larger
amounts of CR, as the large WC of the residue would have the same eﬀect.
Conclusion:
Adding the glass of water to the microwave during the drying or drying large amounts of CR at
the same time, prevented it from overheating and exploding. It was possible to reach a relatively
low WC in a short time without the CR hardening, thus making this method very successful for
controlling the WC.
7
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
2.2
Idea Development Process
The screening process was conducted in an ongoing loop with the Scientiﬁc Method [10] as illus-
trated in 2.2.1, where the results from investigating initial ideas, became the background knowledge
for new ideas and new experiments and so on, until the ﬁnal use of the CR for this project, was
determined.
The main goal for this project was to "use coﬀee residue in/as a building material", however the
speciﬁc focus area was not very clear in the preliminary state of the project. By creating a hy-
pothesis of a potential use for the material, more speciﬁc requirements for the properties of the
material could be tested. If the properties of the CR were not ideal for the intended use, the results
from the performed tests were then reviewed and discussed in order to create a new hypothesis to
be tested.
Figure 2.2.1: Illustration of process for idea development.
A complete illustration of the idea development process loops is illustrated in Figure 2.2.2 and
each loop and the correlated experiments, results and conclusions are described further in the
following sections.
8
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Figure 2.2.2: Illustration of process for idea development. *The hypotheses have been shortened in order
to ﬁt into the ﬁgure, but written in full in the correlating sections.
9
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Initial Idea
The initial idea was to mix the raw CR from the factory, into concrete as a cement replacement,
like other waste products such as ﬂy ashes and sewage sludge ashes.
Some organic materials does not work well in the moist environment of the fresh concrete [34],
however, a previous study of using gram ﬂour as a replacement for the chemical admixtures in
concrete, had shown to improve the durability of the concrete in terms of electrical resistance,
ultrasonic pulse vibration and carbonation [23].
Based on that study, it was decided to go ahead with the use of the CR in concrete, despite it
being a primarily organic material.
As stated in the project description, the CR would harden as it was dried. The chemical process
of the hardening is still unknown and the physical properties of the dried material had only been
observed after drying at 80°C, prior to this project.
In order to test the eﬀect of the drying temperature on the physical properties of the hardened
material and determine whether the drying technique had any inﬂuence on the hardened material,
various temperatures were investigated. For the hypothesis of using the CR in concrete, especially
the low drying temperatures were of interest, however the experiment was conducted for several
temperatures at the same time, in order to further understand the material.
Hypothesis: The raw CR may be used in concrete as a cement replacement
Experiment: Hardening at Diﬀerent Temperatures
Two types of drying methods were conducted and the physical strength of the hardened material
was observed and estimated by hand:
1. The raw CR was spread in a petri dish and placed in an airtight exsiccator with silica, in
order to avoid moisture. The sample was stored in this way for 24 hours, 48 hours, 5 days
at the following temperature:
• 20°C (Room temperature)
2. The raw CR was spread in a petri dish and dried in an oven for 16 hours at the following
temperatures:
• 40°C
• 60°C
• 80°C
• 100°C
At 20°C in the airtight exsiccator, the CR in the petri dish dried and began to crack after 2 days.
The dried lumps were dry but not as hard as the samples dried at higher temperatures, and it
was possible to break them by hand.
The samples were left in the exsiccator for an additional three days in order to see if they
would harden more over time.
As illustrated in Figure 2.2.3, an unidentiﬁed growth started to spread on the semi hardened
coﬀee ﬂakes in the petri dish. The samples were kept for the entire duration of the project and
10
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
did not change for the rest of the period. The light green growth remained on the coﬀee ﬂakes,
but did not spread any further.
(a) Samples after 2 days.
(b) Samples after 5 days.
(c) Samples after 5 days, closeup.
Figure 2.2.3: Coﬀee residue dried at room temperature. Showing light green growth.
In all cases of drying in the oven, the coﬀee spread had cracked similarly as in Figure 2.2.3b, due
to the shrinkage during evaporation of the water. The strength of the hardened material seemed
to increase as the temperature increased, until 80°C as the ﬂakes, dried at 100°C, seemed slightly
more crisp and brittle. (The full data is listed in Appendix A, Table A.1.3)
Figure 2.2.4 illustrates the average of reduced weight, µ∆m, and the corresponding standard devi-
ations, over the time period of 16 hours, for the drying temperatures, T, of 40°C, 60°C, 80°C and
100°C. The Figure illustrates a tendency of a larger weight loss as the temperature is increased.
It is assumed, that the reduction in weight is caused by evaporation of the water in the CR.
With this assumption, Table A.1.3 also shows the tendency of the diﬀerent rates of WC reduction
at the given temperatures.
Figure 2.2.4: The average weight loss of coﬀee residue samples
after drying for 16 hours at various temperatures.
Conclusion:
If the CR was to be used as a cement replacement in concrete, it would be used raw at approx-
imately room temperature, making the unidentiﬁed growth a potential problem, especially if it
would start growing and possibly spreading inside the pores of the concrete. A new hypothesis
was needed and the use of unheated CR was not desired, with the use in concrete.
11
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Idea Loop 1
As the CR was rejected as an additive in concrete when undried, the drying process and the pos-
sibilities of shaping the residue before hardening were investigated, in order to obtain a hardened
coﬀee aggregate.
From the experiment for the initial idea, hardened pieces of CR had been produced and seemed
to be a light material. From this observation, it was decided to test the residue as a replacement
for lightweight aggregates (e.g. LECA nuts) in concrete.
Hypothesis: The CR may be formed and dried, with a low density, to produce lightweight aggre-
gates for use in concrete
Experiment: Density and Formability
The CR was molded and dried in diﬀerent shapes, in order to determine the formability of the
material. The following shapes were tested:
• Spread (Figure 2.2.5a)
• Balls, rolled by hand (Figure 2.2.5b)
• Pellets, pressed in pellet press (Figure 2.2.5c)
As the untreated CR contained a lot of water, it was diﬃcult to roll it and press it in the pellet
press. For these shapes, the residue was therefore desiccated for 8 hours at 30°C prior to the
forming. Untreated CR was used for the spread as this could easily be placed in the petri dish
with a spoon.
(a) CR spread before drying.
(b) CR ball after drying.
(c) CR pellets before drying.
Figure 2.2.5: Coﬀee residue (CR) formed in diﬀerent shapes for use as aggregates.
The balls and pellets cracked during the drying process, but only a few of the spread-samples
from the untreated CR had cracked.
As the pellets dried in a somewhat regular shape, it was possible to estimate the volume and
from that estimate the density of the dried material. The volume was estimated to 0.975 cm3 and
the mass of the pellet was weighed to be 1.29 g:
ρCR = m
V = 1.29
0.975 · 103 = 1323 kg/m3
(2.2.1)
12
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
As a lightweight aggregate is deﬁned by having a density of less than 1120 kg/m3 for ﬁne aggregates
and less than 880 kg/m3 for coarse aggregates, the pure CR aggregates cannot be categorized as
being lightweight [22].
Modiﬁed Experiment: Decreasing Density
The CR aggregates only exceeds the lightweight limit with approximately 18%, wherefore it might
be possible to alter the density of the aggregate in order to obtain lightweight status.
When producing lightweight aggregates, such as LECA nuts, clay is ﬁred at extreme temperatures
in a rotary kiln, causing bubbles to form inside the aggregate. However, since the CR is mostly
organic material, according to the results from the Loss of Ignition (LOI) experiment in section
5.1.2, the CR aggregates cannot become lightweight by creating bubbles at high temperatures or
by adding pore-forming agents, that could be incinerated, as all of the material would incinerate.
Instead, by adding styrofoam balls to the CR, these pores could be formed without having to
burn away material. With a density of 50 kg/m3 [5] styrofoam has a 40 times larger density than
air, but compared to the CR, the density of styrofoam is very low and by creating styrofoam-pores,
a density < 1120 kg/m3 could be obtainable.
As the CR has an oily consistency, it was not possible to fully enclose the styrofoam balls in the
material. The styrofoam balls in the surface of the dried pellet fell out and the pellet itself cracked
completely at the slightest touch, when removed from the oven.
Conclusion:
As it was not possible to decrease the density of the CR aggregates with the use of styrofoam
balls, it was not possible to fulﬁll the hypothesis of using the CR as a lightweight aggregate.
A new hypothesis was needed.
13
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Idea Loop 2
As determined in Idea Loop 1, the CR was not a lightweight material. Instead, the pure CR
aggregates were tested for the use as regular aggregates in concrete, to replace some of the current
and denser ones, such as stone. This would decrease the density of the concrete and possibly
reduce the use, transport and excavation of natural stone for use in concrete.
Hypothesis: The CR may be formed and dried to produce aggregates for use in concrete
Experiment: Forming of balls
As in Idea Loop 1, the pure CR was desiccated in the oven at a low temperature for a short period
of time, making it possible to form spherical aggregates, resembling the shape of the currently
used, natural stone aggregates.
The remaining amount of water was, however, still large enough, that the CR spheres cracked
during the drying process at 80°C, as also illustrated in Figure 2.2.5b from Idea Loop 1.
Additional Experiment: Reaction to Water
In an addition to investigating the formability of the CR aggregates, it was tested how the hardened
CR would react to water, since the aggregates would be submerged in the wet concrete for several
hours, before it would harden.
Small samples of CR, dried for 20 hours at 80°C in random shapes, were submerged in distilled
water and observed for a total period of 6 hours. The smaller sample on the left in the sub ﬁgures
of Figure 2.2.6 was placed in a small amount of water and only exposed on one surface, whereas
the larger sample on the right in the sub ﬁgures, was fully submerged and thereby exposed on all
surfaces.
(a) Samples at test start.
(b) Samples after 30 minutes.
(c) Samples after 6 hours.
Figure 2.2.6: Hardened coﬀee residue samples, reaction to water.
It was observed, as illustrated in Figure 2.2.6, that the hardened CR samples started to react with
the water after only 30 minutes of exposure, and after 6 hours, the samples started to dissolve.
Conclusion:
Due to the hardened CR dissolving in the water, it would not be optimal to use it in the concrete,
as some of the material might sieve into the concrete and the shape of the aggregates could change
before the hardening of the concrete.
A new hypothesis was needed.
14
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Idea Loop 3
As the CR was also rejected as an additive in concrete when hardened, due to the material
dissolving in water and thus being inadequate for use in the fresh concrete, a completely new
approach was needed.
Based on this observation, it was decided, that the CR should be used as an independent
building material in the form and shape of bricks.
Hypothesis: The CR may be formed and dried to produce a material resembling unﬁred bricks
Experiment: Drying and formability
Larger samples of untreated CR were dried in large beakers at low temperatures, in order to see
if it was possible to obtain a brick-like shape without it cracking. The samples were dried in the
oven at 80°C for 24 hours, as this temperature had shown the visually observed, largest strength.
As in Loop 1, the large samples would crack and shrink too much and it was not possible to obtain
a consistent shape.
Modiﬁed Experiment: Changing water content, drying, crushing remixing
As the large WC was assumed to be the main reason for the CR samples cracking and shrinking,
it was attempted to better control this, by using the CR as a dry powder and then adding the
desired amount of water.
The CR was dried at 40°C and crushed in the Ring Crusher as explained earlier in section 2.1.
Two samples were mixed with 43% and 55% water respectively (see Appendix A, Table A.1.4 for
full data set.). The balls of remixed CR powder, were dried in the oven for 20 hours at 80°C.
(a) CR balls before drying.
(b) CR balls after drying.
Figure 2.2.7: Balls of dried, crushed and remixed coﬀee residue. Left: Ball 1 with
WC = 43%. Right: Ball 2 with WC = 55% WC.
As illustrated in Figure 2.2.7, Ball 1, with the WC of 43%, was too dry to properly form and
started cracking even before the drying process had started. Ball 2, with the WC of 55% was
formed into a coherent sphere, but cracked during the drying process.
15
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Conclusion:
For the purpose of forming the CR, the crushing and remixing experiment had shown, that the
minimal CR/water ratio lies somewhere within the range of 43% and 55%, as Ball 1 was too dry
and Ball 2 was still wet.
For the purpose of using the crushing and remixing method for controlling the WC, it was not
successful, as the material seemed to lose some of the hardening properties in the process.
There was not found a method for drying large samples without them cracking, making it
impossible to form a whole brick of the CR alone. A new hypothesis was needed.
16
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
Final Idea
As it was not possible to use the CR as an independent building material in the form of bricks,
according to the ﬁndings in Idea Loop 3, it was decided to use it as a pore-forming agent inside ﬁred
clay bricks. The possibilities of shaping the material (and thereby shaping the pores) along with
the fact, that the CR was an organic material and would incinerate during the high temperatures,
when ﬁring the clay bricks, could make it viable for this particular use.
The forming of the CR, without it cracking, had been a problem for several of the earlier tests,
however, with the small sizes needed for CR aggregates, it could be possible to ﬁnd a working
method.
Hypothesis: The CR may be formed and dried to produce aggregates to use for shaping of pores
in ﬁred clay bricks
Experiment: Drying and forming of aggregates in petri dish (TEST 1 and 2)
The raw and undried CR was placed with a spoon in various amounts, according to circles, drawn
in a petri dish. The initial diameter of the individual lumps was thereby known and the resulting
diameter after drying was measured, in order to estimate the optimal starting diameters for the
aggregates. The coﬀee aggregates were dried in the oven at 80°C for approximately 24 hours.
(a) 1.5 and 2.0 mm before drying.
(b) 2 and 3 mm before drying.
(c) 4 mm before drying.
(d) 1.5 and 2.0 mm after drying.
(e) 2 and 3 mm after drying.
(f) 4 mm after drying.
Figure 2.2.8: Test drying of coﬀee aggregates on ﬂat surface with known initial diameter (TEST 1).
17
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
The experiment was conducted twice and from the results, listed in Table A.2.1 and A.2.2 in
Appendix A, it was concluded that the CR was likely to ﬂatten during the drying process and
therefore causing the aggregates to crack down the middle, as the material ﬂowed to the sides,
illustrated in Figure 2.2.8.
Based on TEST 1 and 2, four resulting diameters were selected and by altering the drying method,
the following diameters were to be obtained:
• 5 mm
• 10 mm
• 15 mm
• 20 mm
Modiﬁed Experiment: Drying and forming of aggregates in palette (TEST 3-5)
In order to avoid the material leaving the center of the aggregate and thereby causing it to crack,
the CR was instead dried on a curved surface by using plastic painting palettes, as illustrated in
Figure 2.2.9. During the drying process, gravity kept all the material in place and none of the
aggregate samples were cracked in the initial test.
(a) Before drying.
(b) After drying.
Figure 2.2.9: Test drying of coﬀee aggregates on curved surface with known diameter and weight.
Further testing of the method with drying the aggregates in palettes were conducted, in order
to obtain the selected diameters. It was possible to create aggregates with a ﬁnal diameter of 15
and 20 mm in the palette from Figure 2.2.9, but it was not possible to obtain aggregates with the
diameters of 5 or 10 mm.
A smaller palette was used in an attempt to produce the smaller aggregates and it was possible
to create aggregates with a ﬁnal diameter of 10 mm. The aggregates with a ﬁnal diameter of 5
mm, were not obtainable and therefore discarded.
Additional test: Test brick
In order to test if a brick could be made with the CR aggregates inside, without becoming too
fragile, a test brick was made with the rejected aggregates, from the previous testing of the possible
aggregate sizes.
The brick was made with 150 g clay and 3.5 g CR aggregates and formed by hand, prior to
drying at 80°C for 3 days and ﬁred at 1020°C for an additional 3 days, corresponding to the later
18
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2:
Screening and Idea Process
rejected Method 1 in section 4.4.4. Small cracks had formed on the bottom of the test brick during
the drying and ﬁring process, as illustrated in Figure 2.2.10, but it was impossible to break it by
hand and therefore a viable reason to continue with the hypothesis.
The sample was cracked down the middle with a hammer, revealing how the CR aggregates
had incinerated, leaving cavities of air in their places, as illustrated in Figure 2.2.10c.
(a) Test brick before ﬁring.
(b) Test brick after ﬁring.
(c) Pores in test brick.
Figure 2.2.10: Test brick with coﬀee residue aggregates before and after ﬁring.
Conclusion:
The test brick had a few minor cracks after the ﬁring process, however, it was not fragile. The
strength and overall physical appearance of the large pored test brick was estimated to be accept-
able and the hypothesis of the use of CR as a large pore-forming agent with aggregate sizes of 10,
15 and 20 mm was accepted.
19
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
3
Theory
With the increasing insulation requirements, new and thinner building materials are being devel-
oped in order to limit the thickness of the exterior walls of buildings. In Danish houses from the
1960’s, masonry walls were a mere 30 cm wide including insulation [12]. An example is illustrated
in Figure 3.0.1a, where the heat loss of the wall is indicated with a U value of 0.85 [35].
The current requirements for masonry walls, according to the Danish Building Regulations of
2015 (BR15), is a U-value of 0.15 [13] and is illustrated in Figure 3.0.1b with a total width of
approximately 40 cm. These additional centimetres of insulation, results in many wasted square
metres in the building, as the area of a building is deﬁned and measured from the outer point of
the exterior wall. [11]
Despite the high levels of CO2 emissions during the production, ﬁred clay bricks can be referred
to as an environmentally sustainable construction material, due to their longevity and ability
to be recycled. [7] So instead of searching for new materials with higher insulation properties,
but low durability, it could be advantageous to investigate optimization of an existing material
with highly desired properties. By enhancing the insulation properties of bricks, the increasing
insulation thicknesses could possibly be remedied.
(a) BR61 requirements of U≈0.85,
resulting total width ≈30 cm.
(b) BR15 requirements of U≈0.15,
resulting total width ≈40 cm.
Figure 3.0.1: Vertical sections of masonry walls, illustrating the diﬀerence of isolation requirements from
1961 vs. 2015. ((a) Translated version, (b) altered version of illustration from [35])
21
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3:
Theory
3.1
Composition of Clay Bricks
Masonry bricks consists mostly of pure clay and sand, making it easy to mold when mixed with
water.
The WC of a brick mix depends on the plasticity of the clay, but according to oral
information from the suppliers of clay for this project, Wienerberger A/S, their clay had a WC of
approximately 17% at the time of molding.
A good mix should contain the following elements: [8]
• Silica (50-60%) to prevent cracking, shrinking and warping of the brick during the drying
and ﬁring process. In presence with alumina and oxide of iron, the silica will fuse at low
temperatures and in proper amounts, the silica brings hardness, resistance to heat and
durability to the brick. On the contrary, too much silica will destroy the bond between the
particles, thus making the brick brittle.
• Alumina (20-30%) to add plasticity to the mix, making it possible to mold. When ﬁred, the
components of alumina fuses together and creates a homogeneous and hard material. Too
much alumina, caused by an insuﬃcient content of sand, will cause the brick to crack, shrink
and warp during the ﬁring process and the brick will become too hard.
• Lime (2-5%) is a binding agent by acting as a ﬂux, enabling the silica to melt and thus
binding the particles together. It also reduces the shrinkage of the brick, but should only be
present in a very ﬁne powdered state, as larger particles can cause ﬂaking of the brick.
• Oxide of iron (5-6% ≯7%) acts as a binding agent like the lime and adds the distinctive red
color to the brick. Various amounts of oxide of iron will result in various intensity of the red
color, where too much will result in the brick getting a dark or black color.
• Magnesia (<1%) in very small quantities presents a yellow tinge in the brick and helps reduce
the shrinkage. Excessive contents of magnesia will cause the brick to decay.
3.2
Perforated Bricks
The term perforated brick is deﬁned as a clay brick with vertical perforations to reduce weight,
thermal conductivity and water absorption. [18] Figure 3.2.1 shows the two most common perfo-
rated bricks in Denmark, available at any construction market, the 3-holed perforated brick and
the webbed perforated brick, both used for non-supporting constructions.
(a) Perforated brick with large holes.
(b) Webbed perforated brick.
Figure 3.2.1: Common types of perforated bricks in Denmark.
22
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3:
Theory
When categorizing a brick, several properties are taken into account and some of the most impor-
tant ones are: Shrinkage, compressive strength, water absorption and minute suction.
According to a technical note from the Brick Industry Association [6], hollow core bricks should
have an individual minimum compressive strength between 15.2 and 17.2 MPa. According to the
European Standard, EN 771-1 (2005), the compressive strength of ﬁred clay bricks should be no
less than 8 MPa [17] for densities between 1200-1400kg/m3 and 10 MPa for densities between
1400-1600 kg/m3. In case the large pored bricks does not meet the requirement of 15.2-17.2 MPa
from the Brick Industry Association, the requirements from EN 771-1 (2005) will be considered
as the lowest acceptable compressive strengths, when assessing the results of this study, later in
the report.
Since the perforated bricks are assumed to be used in the inner leaf of the wall, there is no
requirements to the water absorption, however, the minute suction of the Wienerberger perforated
bricks is stated in the production sheet [4] to be between 2.0 and 3.0 kg/m2 and will be used in
the discussion for comparison. The individual water absorption (from 5 hours boiling test), for
hollow core bricks should be maximum 20-25%. [6]
A diﬀerent method for testing the water absorption was used in this study, but for comparison,
the limit of maximum 20-25% will still be used.
3.3
Requirements for Recycling of Waste Materials
When recycling waste materials, the possible uses for the material depends on the physical prop-
erties of the material, but also on the content of certain chemical elements. In Denmark, waste
materials such as soil, ﬂy ashes and sludge can be recycled in building materials or landscaping
constructions, according to their classiﬁcation by the Danish Recycling Decree.
The classiﬁcations are enforced in order to prevent harmful chemicals and metals leaching or be-
ing washed into the surrounding environment and, based on the content of chemical elements, the
waste materials are divided into the following classes:
• Class 1
Can be used freely in industrial, urban and residential areas for building and construction
• Class 2 - slightly contaminated soil
Recycling requires authorization/approval by the Environmental Protection Act.
• Class 3 - Contaminated soil
Has to go through puriﬁcation and/or to a landﬁll.
The classiﬁcation is based on both the solid content, [mg/kg], of each element and the concentration
in eluate, [µg/l], and the material is classiﬁed based on the element resulting in the worst class.
As a part of the characterization analysis of the CR, a digestion with the use of Inductively
Coupled Plasma method (ICP) was performed, showing the content of some of the chemical
elements, used for the classiﬁcation (sulfate, sodium, cadmium, chrome, cobber, nickel and zinc).
The relevant values from the decree is listed and compared with the results from the CR in section
5.1.4, while the full table of concentration-limits for the three classes, can be found in the "Decree
on the use of Residues, Soil and Sorted Construction Waste" [9].
23
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3:
Theory
3.4
Similar Studies
Several studies has been conducted with the focus of using organic waste as combustible pore-
forming additives in the production of ﬁred clay bricks, in order to save raw materials, recycle
waste and increasing the thermodynamic properties.
In this project, the following studies has been considered and used for comparing results:
• "The Use of Coﬀee Residue as a Small Pore-Forming Agent in Fired Clay Bricks" [27]
This study was conducted parallel to this project and focuses on the use of raw coﬀee
residue (CO) mixed directly with clay, in order to form grain-sized pores.
Contents of
5%, 7.5%, 10% and 12.5% CR were investigated and the properties for shrinkage, porosity,
density, compressive strength, water absorption, minute suction and thermal conductivity,
were determined.
The study showed that the CR would successfully create grain sized pores, decreasing the
density and thus lowering the thermal conductivity. Furthermore, the study showed that an
increase of CR content would weaken the compressive strength of the bricks and the adding
of 10% residue, would result in a mean compressive strength below the required 10 MPa
from the European Standard (EN 771-1, 2005).
• "Eﬀect of Organic Residues Addition on the Technological Properties of Clay Cricks" [17]
This study was conducted in 2008 and investigates the use of several organic materials as
combustible pore-forming agents. The materials investigated were: Sawdust, tobacco residue
and grass, all in the concentrations of 2.5%, 5% and 10%. The samples were investigated
for several physical properties including porosity, density, compressive strength and water
absorption.
The study showed that the organic additives could successfully be used as pore-forming
agents in the bricks, which still maintained acceptable mechanical properties. It was observed
in the study, that an increase of organic content would increase the amount of water needed
to maintain a proper plasticity.
• "Thermal Conductivity Of Fired Clay Bricks Incorporated With Cigarette Butts" [2]
This study was conducted in 2013 with a focus of the inﬂuence of the thermal conductivity
when using cigarette butts as a pore-forming agent in ﬁred clay bricks. Samples with 2.5%
and 5% cigarette butts were made and tested with the Hot Guarded Plate Method.
The study showed that both the thermal conductivity and the density of the bricks would
be reduced with the increase of incorporated cigarette butts.
• "Utilization of Opium Seeds as an Organic Pore Forming Agent in Heavy Clay Products "
[32] The use of opium seeds as a pore-forming agent in ﬁred clay bricks, was studied in
this article from 2004. Concentrations of 0%, 5%, 10% and 15% seeds, with a diameter of
approximately 1 mm, were tested in bricks, ﬁred at 900°C.
It was found, that the seeds could be used as a pore-forming agent and that the adding
of the seeds would change the properties of the bricks drastically up to a content of 10%,
whereafter the properties did not change much, but bloating and black coring started to
occur.
24
==PAGE:41==
4
Materials and Methods
As there has been no prior investigation of this coﬀee residue (CR), it was necessary to start the
project with a preliminary, qualitative study of the material, in order to ﬁnd the best way to use
it in the building industry. The study included tests with diﬀerent drying methods, formability
and general physical behaviour of the dried material and the behaviour of the material during the
drying process.
In addition to the qualitative study, a more quantitative characterization of the residue was
made, according to the one made for other new additives in building materials, such as alternative
ashes or waste products [33].
These analyses are based on standard methods and gives more
concrete and comparable results, than the initial observations.
From the screening and idea development process in section 2, the ﬁnal focus of this project was
decided to be "The Use of Coﬀee Residue as a Large Pore Forming Agent in Fired Clay Bricks" and
in relation to this speciﬁc path, methods for mixing and testing the ﬁred clay bricks are presented
in the following sections, along with a short description of each conducted experiment.
4.1
Materials
For the ﬁnal idea and focus of this project, clay and CR were the main materials used. Also pre-
fabricated bricks, made from the same type of clay as used for the brick samples, were investigated.
All three materials are presented in the following sections.
4.1.1
Coﬀee Residue
The CR was delivered by GEA Process Engineering A/S, from their prototype instant coﬀee
production. The CR was delivered from 2 individual batches and shall be treated as two diﬀerent
samples, as the ﬁrst batch (Batch 1) came from a small scale prototype and the second batch
(Batch 2) came from a full scale trial run of their newly invented extraction equipment. The
contact person from GEA A/S explained, that the residue from Batch 2 had been rinsed out of
the container with water by mistake (this was their normal procedure, but was not supposed to
be the procedure for the samples for this project.) and from the results of the WC test in section
5.1.3, it is clear, that this has resulted in a higher WC, hence the separation of the two batches.
A prior investigation of the chemical composition of the CR had been made in cooperation with
GEA A/S, and had showed that it consists of approximately 40% lipids, 10% minerals, 5% lignin
and 45% melanoidines [16].
25
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
Figure 4.1.1: Untreated Coﬀee Residue, spread in petri dishes.
The CR has a cake frosting-like consistency and a dark brown color because of the content of
melanoidines, as illustrated in Figure 4.1.1.
Material properties, relevant to this project, are
further explained through the test descriptions in section 4.2, with correlating results in section
5.1.
4.1.2
Clay
The clay for the bricks was delivered as ﬁnished (but unburned) bricks from Wienerberger in
Helsinge, Denmark (www.wienerberger.dk).
The clay is used by Wienerberger with a WC of approximately 17%, but after being stored in
the basement at DTU for several months, the WC had decreased to approximately 15%. Water
was added during the forming of the brick samples, in order to obtain a WC similar to the initial
one.
4.1.3
Prefabricated Bricks
In addition to the handmade brick samples, the tests for the physical properties of the ﬁred clay
bricks in section 4.5 were also performed on store bought prefabricated bricks from Wienerberger.
The solid brick in Figure 4.1.2 (W.0) was intended as a comparative to the handmade reference
sample bricks (A) and the perforated bricks in Figure 4.1.2 with 3 (W.3) and 25 holes (W.25)
respectively, were intended as comparatives to the handmade brick samples with pores (B and C).
Figure 4.1.2: Prefabricated bricks from Wienerberger.
26
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.2
Characterization of Coﬀee Residue
In the initial project phase, a number of analyzes and tests were performed parallel to the quali-
tative screening of the CR, in order to determine the characteristics of the new material.
Both physical and chemical properties were examined, to better understand the properties and
composition of the material it self and to generally identify points of interest and possibilities for
further studies.
The following characteristics were tested in this analysis:
• pH value and conductivity
• Loss of ignition (LOI) (organic content)
• Water content (WC)
• Digestion with ICP (MC) (metals content)
• Grain size
4.2.1
pH Value and Conductivity
The pH value was determined as a part of the characterization. If the CR were to be used in e.g.
concrete, the pH value could have an inﬂuence of the strong basic environment in the concrete.
Test description:
For measurements, a combination electrode was used in connection with a pH meter. The dried
and crushed CR was dissolved in distilled water and put on a shaking table for one hour, after
which the pH and the conductivity were measured.
The full experimental descriptions for this experiment, can be found in Appendix B, section B.0.1.
4.2.2
Loss of Ignition
The content of organic matter in the CR, corresponds largely to the loss of ignition at 550°C.
Test description:
The experiment was performed with 3 samples. The 3 crucibles were weighed, then ﬁlled with
CR and the 3 samples were weighed again with both CR and crucibles (mbefore), before placed
in a furnace. The samples were in the furnace at 550°C for 30 minutes (1 hour if the furnace was
cold) and then cooled in a desiccator. When cooled, the samples were weighed (mafter) and the
organic content was then calculated according to equation 4.2.1.
% organic content = mbefore −mafter
mbefore
· 100
(4.2.1)
The full experimental descriptions for this experiment, can be found in Appendix B, section B.0.3.
27
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.2.3
Water Content
The water content (WC) of the CR was measured in order to determine the amount of water in
the initial material from the factory.
As mentioned earlier, the CR was delivered in 2 batches and this test has been conducted for both
Batch 1 and Batch 2.
Test description:
Wet CR was poured into 3 beakers, weighed (mw) and placed to dry in the oven at 105°C overnight.
The dry samples were weighed after cooling (md) and the WC was then calculated from the two
weightings according to equation 4.2.2.
WC = % water content = mw −md
mw
· 100
(4.2.2)
The full experimental descriptions for this experiment, can be found in Appendix B, section B.0.4.
4.2.4
Digestion with ICP
A digestion of the CR according to [DS / EN 259] was performed, in order to get an overview of
the content of acidsolouble metals.
As alternative heavy metal containing materials, such as sewage sludge waste, is currently used
as pore-forming agents, this is relevant in order to compare the use of CR to current solutions.
Test description:
1.00 g of dried CR was weighed and put into a screw-capped autoclave glass, then 20.00 mL of
half-concentrated HNO3 were added. The samples were placed in the autoclave at 200 kPa for 30
minutes. The bottles were then cooled to room temperature and ﬁltered with suction through a
0.45 µm ﬁlter. The autoclave glass was rinsed 3 times with distilled water and the ﬁlter had to
suck dry between each rinse. The ﬁltrate was transferred into a 100.00 mL volumetric ﬂask and
distilled water was added. The liquid was then poured into a 20 mL plastic vial and stored for
ICP.
The results from the ICP analysis were calculated from equation 4.2.3.
MC = mg/kg = A · 0.1000L · C
B · 103kg/g CR
(4.2.3)
Where:
A = extract metal concentration, mg/L = ppm
B = g CR weighed
C = dilution
The full experimental descriptions for this experiment, can be found in Appendix B, section B.0.5.
28
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.2.5
Grain Size
The grain size distribution was measured on the wet CR.
Test description:
The sample was placed into the laser diﬀractometer (Master-sizer 2000) and the results were
displayed on the corresponding computer.
No written instructions had been provided, but instead a demonstration was conducted by an
associated laboratory worker.
4.3
Determining Number of Necessary Samples
The extensive screening and idea development process, in the initial stage of the project, resulted
in less time for the ﬁnal project idea, wherefore the time consuming task of mixing, pressing,
drying and ﬁring the brick samples could become a problem.
Preferably, each experiment, concerning the physical properties of the ﬁred clay bricks, should
be conducted on at least three individual samples from the same sample series and a set of samples
should be made for each experiment.
As both the measurements of shrinkage and thermal conductivity does not have any inﬂuence on
the physical properties of the brick sample, these can be measured on the three samples used for
compression strength before the compression test.
This leaves 3 experiments (porosity/density, water absorption/minute suction and compression
strength), for which 3 samples of each series (A.0, B.10, B.15, C.10, C.15) should be made, resulting
in a total of 45 samples. (At the time of this investigation, the 20 mm CR aggregates and the D
series of coﬀee/pore content had not yet been rejected, resulting in a total of 90 samples.)
It was tested if the 3 experiments could be conducted subsequently on the same 3 samples, without
compromising the results. The test was made on samples from the reference series, A.0, in order
to preserve CR aggregates.
Test description:
9 brick samples of the A.0 (reference) were made and the 3 experiments were performed in various
order, to see which, if any, of the experiments were causing irregularities. As listed in Table 4.3.1,
A.0.4-6 were used for compression strength test ﬁrst, A.0.7-9 were used for water absorption test
ﬁrst and A.0.10-12 were used for porosity/density test ﬁrst. By performing all 3 experiments on
the samples as a ﬁrst, the results from these experiments can still be used in the ﬁnal project,
even if the overall test shows that the experiments cannot be performed subsequently on the same
set of samples.
Table 4.3.1: Order of the experiments performed for each set of samples.
29
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.4
Preparation of Brick Samples
The brick samples and CR aggregates were made by hand and the methods are explained in the
following sections.
4.4.1
Forming and Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates
Before forming the bricks, the CR was dried in the shape of discs, correlating to the desired shape
and size of the pores. From the idea development process in section 2.2, the following sizes and
methods were decided:
Table 4.4.1: Dimensions and method for forming of coﬀee aggregates.
Materials:
• Palette (large and small)
• Tulle (or plastic bag)
Method:
The fresh CR was dried in the oven at 50°C for 2 hours, in order to reduce the initial WC and
thereby reduce the shrinkage of the aggregates.
Aggregates with a ﬁnal diameter of 10 mm were formed in the small palettes, illustrated in Figure
4.4.1b, and the desiccated CR was placed with a tulle.
Aggregates with a ﬁnal diameter of 15 and 20 mm were formed in the big palettes, illustrated
in Figure 4.4.1b and 4.4.1c respectively, and the desiccated CR was placed on the palette with a
tulle.
(a) Small palette for 10 mm
aggregates.
(b) Large palette for 15 mm aggre-
gates.
(c) Large palette for 20 mm aggre-
gates.
Figure 4.4.1: Materials for molding the coﬀee aggregates.
30
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.4.2
Mixing of Clay and Coﬀee Aggregates
The clay and CR aggregates were mixed by hand, due to the brittle nature of the aggregates.
The mix design of each sample series is listed in Table 4.4.2, where the rejected series are marked
with * and red. They are included in the table, as some of them were rejected late in the project
and will be mentioned in relation to results in section 5.
Table 4.4.2: Mix design of sample series
Method:
As the coﬀee aggregates were very brittle, the coﬀee and clay were mixed by rolling the clay ﬂat,
placing the aggregates evenly by hand, covering with clay, gently rolling up the brick mix and
forming it by hand into a size, that would ﬁt into the brick press.
The surface of the brick mix was knead on the table top, until all small cracks were smoothed
out. All CR aggregates were pressed into the clay prior to the forming/pressing, in order to reduce
the number of aggregates in the surface of the ﬁnal brick sample. The process is illustrated in
Figure 4.4.2.
(a) Placed on clay.
(b) Covering with clay.
(c) Rolling up the mix.
Figure 4.4.2: Method for mixing clay and coﬀee aggregates.
31
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.4.3
Forming of Brick Samples
The bricks were made from the brick clay from Wienerberger and formed under compressive
pressure in a brick press (illustrated in Figure 4.4.3).
Materials:
• 300 g brick-mix (see Table 4.4.2 for mix design)
• Brick press (Illustrated in Figure 4.4.3)
• Pressure machine (Instron 6022 was used for this project)
Figure 4.4.3: Brick press parts: (1) Brick press, (2) piston, (3) bottom plate, (4) brick mold, (5) metal
spacers, (6) wooden base, (7) wax paper.
Method:
Wax paper (7) was cut and attached to the piston (2) and bottom plate (3) with tape, as illustrated
in Figure 4.4.4a and 4.4.4b, in order to ease the extraction of the pressed brick.
300 g brick mix was weighed and placed in the brick mold (4) and the brick mold was then
placed into the brick press (1) on top of the bottom plate. The piston was lightly pressed into
the mold by hand, before placing the whole setup into the pressure machine (Instron 6022), as
illustrated in Figure 4.4.4c. The brick was then pressed with 4000N at a rate of 8000N/min.
When the pressure machine reached 4000N, it automatically stopped and the brick press setup
was then placed on the metal spacers (5) for extraction of the ﬁnished brick, as illustrated in
Figure 4.4.4d. The wooden base (6) was placed between the spacers to ensure a plain surface for
the brick to land on when extracted. The pressure machine was used to push out the ﬁnished
brick from the mold.
32
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
(a) Wax paper on pis-
ton.
(b) Wax paper on bot-
tom.
(c) Setup for pressing.
(d) Setup for extraction.
Figure 4.4.4: Method for using brick press.
NB! The very ﬁrst (and rejected) brick samples and the reference samples, used for determining
number of necessary samples in section 4.3, were formed with a similar setup, but without the
wax paper (7). This caused the bricks to get stuck inside the brick press (as the piston was too
short to press the brick all the way out of the mold) and the samples had to be wiggled out of
the mold. This caused the samples to be more uneven than the ones formed with the wax paper
and some of the samples cracked a little during the extraction. The results and conclusions for
modifying the forming method can be found in section 5.3.
4.4.4
Firing of Brick Samples
As the clay was delivered as a ﬁnished brick mixture from the Wienerberger production line, just
before the stage of drying and ﬁring, the initial method was designed to reﬂect the one used by
Wienerberger.
Method F1 (Rejected):
The pressed brick samples were dried in the oven at 80°C for 3 days. After drying, the bricks were
moved to a cold furnace and ﬁred at 1050°C for an additional 3 days. The average heat inclining
rate of the furnace used for this project, had been observed to be 10°C/min (see full curve in
Appendix C, Figure C.3.1).
Method F2:
From the results of ﬁring the bricks samples using Method 1 (see section 5.3), the ﬁrst method
was rejected and it was decided to redo all samples with the ﬁring method recently used at DTU
by PhD student Wan Chen [14]. The pressed brick samples were dried and ﬁred subsequently at
the following temperatures and time periods:
• Oven - 40°C - 24 hours
• Oven - 105 °C - 24 hours
• Oven - 200°C - 16.5 hours
• Furnace - 1000°C - 6 hours
• Natural cooling in furnace over night to room temperature
33
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
4.5
Physical Properties of Large Pored Clay Bricks
For selecting the test methods for the brick samples, Danish standard DS-EN 772 [21] was used
as inspiration to get an overview of which properties were essential for ﬁred clay bricks.
As some of the methods in the standard required larger composite samples of minimum 10
bricks or measuring equipment not at our disposal, the property in question was investigated with
a modiﬁed and scaled down version of the corresponding test from the Danish standard.
All tests regarding the physical properties, where performed on both the brick samples (A.0, B.10,
B.15, C.10 and C.15) and on the prefabricated bricks (W.0, W.3 and W.25).
The following physical properties were tested in this analysis, where * indicates modiﬁed test
methods:
• Shrinkage*
• Porosity and Density
• Compressive Strength*
• Water Absorption and Minute Suction
• Thermal Conductivity*
4.5.1
Shrinkage
The shrinkage of a brick is measured with two composite bricks, according to DS 772 [21]. For the
purpose of this project, however, the shrinkage was instead measured as the shrinkage of a single
brick sample, caused by ﬁring, as the main focus of this study lies on the brick and its properties,
rather than its properties in cooperation with the mortar.
Method:
The dimensions of the brick samples were measured in three places on three sides (width, length
and height) both before and after ﬁring. From these measurements, the vol-% shrinkage of the
bricks was calculated.
The weight of each sample was also measured both before and after ﬁring and from these, the
wt-% shrinkage was calculated.
4.5.2
Porosity and Density
The porosity and dry density of the brick samples were measured in order to determine the eﬀect
of the pores on the weight of the material, along with an estimation of the fragility of the large
pored bricks.
Method:
The test samples were dried at 105°C for 24 hours. The samples were weighted, m105, and placed
in an airtight exsiccator and all air was removed with a vacuum pump over 3 hours.
Still in
vacuum, the exsiccator was ﬁlled with air-free distilled water (20°C) until 3 cm over the samples.
After 1 hour, air was let into the exsiccator and the samples were left in the water over night.
34
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
The samples were then weighted under water, msw, whereafter the surface was dried with a damp
cloth, to remove excessive water, and then weighed again over water, mssd. The ﬁnal results of
the open porosity, Po, and the dry density, ρd, were calculated from the following equations:
Po = Vo
V = (mssd −msw)/ρw
(mssd −m105)/ρw
(4.5.1)
ρd = m105
V
=
m105
(mssd −m105)/ρw
(4.5.2)
The full experimental descriptions for this experiment, can be found in Appendix B, section B.0.6.
4.5.3
Compressive Strength
The compressive strength is essential, when dealing with building materials, as walls will have to
be able to withstand great vertical loads from the above lying constructions.
According to the Danish standard, DS-EN 772 [21], the compression strength of ﬁred clay bricks
is tested with a sample of minimum 10 bricks, joined together with mortar. As mentioned earlier,
this scale of experiment is not possible with the amount of samples made for this project, wherefore
the standard method was not used.
Instead, a method similar to the one for testing the compressive strength of concrete test
specimens [19] was used.
Method:
Both the brick samples and the prefabricated bricks were tested in a Mohr & FederhaﬀAG, 200
kN compression press, illustrated in Figure 4.5.1a. The perforated bricks were tested with the
load both parallel and perpendicular to the perforations, as illustrated in Figure 4.5.1c and 4.5.1d
respectively.
(a)
Mohr
&
Federhaﬀ
AG, compression press.
(b) Test setup for brick
samples.
(c) Test setup for parallel
load.
(d) Test setup for perpen-
dicular load.
Figure 4.5.1: Apparatus and setups for compression strength test.
Because of the size of the prefabricated bricks, these were tested with an additional metal block,
in order to increase the load area to the size of the block: (W x L = 80 mm x 125 mm). The
metal block was placed as illustrated in Figure 4.5.2a.
35
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
The resulting load, Fc, was divided with the load area, AF , to obtain the ﬁnal resulting compressive
strength, fc.
For the calculations of the compressive strength of the brick samples, the load
area, AF , was calculated as the length of the sample and the width of the load area of the
compression press, whereas the compressive strength of the prefabricated bricks was calculated
with the dimensions of the metal block (80x125 mm).
No written instructions were provided, but instead a demonstration had been conducted by a
fellow student.
(a) Method 1.
(b) Method 2.
Figure 4.5.2: Placement of metal block on prefabricated bricks.
4.5.4
Water Absorption and Minute Suction
The water absorption (capillary suction) was tested to determine how much water the samples
could absorb and the speed at which the water was aspirated.
The minute suction is the absorption of water during the ﬁrst minute of the test and has an
inﬂuence on the attachment between the mortar and the brick.
Method:
The samples were dried at 105°C for 24 hours. The dried samples were then weighed and placed
on metal spacers in a large tray. The tray was ﬁlled with distilled water until it covered the bottom
surface of the samples and 5 mm of the sides.
The samples absorbed water through the exposed surfaces and were weighed in given intervals
according to the experimental description, found in Appendix B, section B.0.7. The last weighing
took place after 4 hours and the mass per unit volume absorbed sucking area, Q, was calculated
with equation 4.5.3.
36
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4:
Materials and Methods
Q = mt −m0
A
(4.5.3)
Where:
Q = the mass per unit volume absorbed suction area [kg/m2]
mt = the sample mass at time t [kg]
m0 = the dry mass of the sample [kg]
A = the suction area [m2]
The prefabricated perforated bricks, in the series W.3 and W.25, were to be tested both horizon-
tally and vertically, to investigate the inﬂuence of the holes. For calculation of capillarity, k, and
mass per unit volume absorbed sucking area, Q, the gross area of the brick was used, in order to
see the inﬂuence of the holes and not just get the capillarity of the solid material (net area).
From the resulting absorption curves, the capillarity, k, was determined by dividing Qcap with
√tcap, found by the intersection of trend lines from Situations 1 and 2, according to the illustration
in Figure 4.5.3, from the test description, which can be found in Appendix B, section B.0.7.
Figure 4.5.3: Illustration of method for determining Qcap with √tcap
4.5.5
Thermal Conductivity
The thermal conductivity of the bricks is interesting, as the adding of pores should in theory
reduce the thermal conductivity and thereby increase the insulating qualities of the material.
Method:
The samples were dried at 105°C for 24 hours. The thermal conductivity, λT , of the dried samples
were then measured with a surface probe, connected to an Isomet, as illustrated in Figure 4.5.4.
The perforated samples were measured perpendicular on the perforations, as this would be the
surface facing outwards in a wall.
(a) Setup for brick samples.
(b) Setup for prefabricated bricks.
Figure 4.5.4: Setup for measuring thermal conductivity with surface probe and Isomet.
37
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
5
Results and Discussion
In the following section, all the results from the main part of this project are presented and
discussed. A parallel project, investigating the use of raw coﬀee residue (CR) as a small pore-
forming agent, has been carried out by Jeanette Garst Johansen [27] and, when relevant, results
for the physical properties of the bricks from this project, will be compared to the ones from [27].
Results from the following experiments and investigations are presented and discussed in the
following sections:
• Characterization of Coﬀee Residue
– pH Value and Conductivity
– Loss of Ignition (Organic Content)
– Water Content
– Digestion with ICP
– Grain Size
• Determining the Necessary Number of Samples
• Preparation of Brick Samples
– Forming and Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates
– Forming and Firing of Brick Samples
• Physical Properties of the Fired Clay Bricks
– Dimensions and Shrinkage
– Porosity and Density
– Compression Strength
– Water Absorption and Minute Suction
– Thermal Conductivity
– Comparison With Results From Similar Studies
39
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
5.1
Characterization of Coﬀee Residue
The characterization analysis of the CR was conducted parallel to the screening process in the
ﬁrst part of the project, in order to get an overview of the properties for this otherwise unknown
material.
In the following sections, results are presented as mean values with corresponding
standard deviations. The full set of data for these results can be found in Appendix C, section
C.1.
This part of the project was done in cooperation with both Jeanette Garst Johansen [27] and
Emilie Oline Buch Larsen [29]. Some of the results from this characterization was used in the idea
development process in the search of a possible use as/in a building material.
5.1.1
pH Value and Conductivity
The pH value of the CR was measured to be 4.9 ± 0.05, which is a bit lower than the neutral pH
value of 7, meaning that the CR is slightly acidic. The conductivity, λE, of the CR was measured
to be 689 ± 57 µS/cm.
In Figure 5.1.1 (modiﬁed from [28]), the pH value of the CR is compared to some relatable
everyday items, chemical compounds and building materials. For the use in this project, where
the material is incinerated, the pH value and conductivity of the material, is not of great interest,
as it will not have an inﬂuence of the ﬁnal product.
Figure 5.1.1: pH scale, comparing the coﬀee residue to various materials
and everyday items. (Illustration is reconstructed and modiﬁed from the
original illustration [28].
5.1.2
Loss of Ignition
The CR was tested for loss of ignition (LOI) at 550°C, according to the method explained in
section 4.2.2. The results showed, that an average of approximately 92% of the material, burnt
away during the ﬁring, meaning that the CR consists of approximately 92% organic material.
This result was used during the screening and idea development process and was the base for
the idea of using the CR as a pore-forming agent, as it could incinerate almost completely, during
the ﬁring of the clay bricks.
40
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
5.1.3
Water Content
The water content (WC) of the untreated CR was measured according to the method described
in Section 4.2.3. As illustrated in Figure 5.1.2, the CR shrunk signiﬁcantly during the heating
process and the WC was measured to be 85% and 88% for Batch 1 and 2 respectively.
(a) Samples before drying.
(b) Samples after drying.
Figure 5.1.2: Samples for determining water content in the coﬀee residue.
It was from these results, the investigation of proper methods for controlling the WC initiated. It
was later observed, that the water from the CR would naturally gather in the top of the container,
when the CR was stored in the refrigerator. A possible method for lowering the WC could therefore
be to store the CR and simply pouring the water from the container.
5.1.4
Digestion with ICP
The concentrations of acid-soluble metals in the CR were measured according to the method
described in section 4.2.4.
The solid content of the chemical elements were calculated with equation 4.2.3 and the mean
values, µ, and correlating standard deviations, s, are presented in Table 5.1.1 and shows that
the highest concentration found, was that of sulphur (S) with 0.17%. As some sulfur compounds
are odoriferous, because of the often unpleasant odors created when it reacts to e.g. oxygen, the
content of this speciﬁc chemical element, could explain the horrible smell of the raw CR, that grew
even worse during the period of time, the CR was stored in the refrigerator. The full data and
the measurements in mg/l, can be found in Appendix C.
Table 5.1.1: Solid content of acid-soluble metals in the coﬀee residue.
Even though the concentrations of the rest of the elements looks fairly low, it cannot be assessed
by internal comparison. Some of the elements are more toxic or harmful for the environment than
others, wherefore the concentration limits are not the same for all elements.
The limits for recycling a waste material or soil in building materials or landscaping construc-
tion in Denmark, are stated in a decree from the Danish Environmental Protection Agency. From
these limits, materials can be classiﬁed according to the content of chemical elements and metals.
First, the waste material is classiﬁed from the solid content, as presented in Table 5.1.2.
41
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Table 5.1.2: Concentration limits of solids for classiﬁcation of recycled waste
materials [9], compared to the results for the investigated coﬀee residue (CR).
From the comparison of the solid contents in the CR, with the requirements from the decree in
Table 5.1.2, the contents in the CR does not exceed the limits of Class 1.
The results are then compared for the concentration in eluate, as the ﬁnal classiﬁcation is based
on the element resulting the the worst class. The results from the ICP analysis were measured in
mg/l and converted to µg/l, in order to compare with the classiﬁcation limits, presented in Table
5.1.3.
From the comparison, it is clear, that the contents of cobber, nickel and zinc exceeds the limits
of Class 1 and 2 and the contents of both cadmium and chrome are very close to the limits. The
contents exceeding the limits, are not extremely high, but nonetheless, the limits are exceeded and
the CR can only be classiﬁed as a Class 3 material.
Table 5.1.3: Concentration limits in eluate for classiﬁcation of recycled waste
materials [9], compared to the results for the investigated coﬀee residue (CR).
As the CR is classiﬁed as a contaminated soil in Class 3, it cannot be used in building materials
without ﬁrst being puriﬁed, according to the Decree on the use of Residues, Soil and Sorted
Construction Waste [9]. This complicates the recycling process of the CR, however, since the
limits are not exceeded by extreme amounts, it could be possible to suﬃciently purify the residue.
This process will not be further investigated in this project and the CR is used as it is.
5.1.5
Grain Size
The grain size distribution was measured according to the method explained in section 4.2.5 for
the raw CR.
42
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Figure 5.1.3 illustrates the accumulative distribution of grain sizes on a logarithmic scale and
shows how the CR consists mostly of grains in the size rage of 10-100 µm. With a grain or particle
size in the range <100 µm, the CR falls into the category of Medium-sized particles along with
e.g. ﬁne ice crystals, pollen, hair, large bacteria, windblown dust, ﬂy ash, coal dust, silt, ﬁne sand,
and small dust. [36]
For the use of CR as a large pore-forming agent, the grain size distribution is not relevant, as the
CR is formed into larger aggregates, before mixing with the clay.
Figure 5.1.3: Grain size distribution for untreated coﬀee residue (CR).
5.2
Determining Number of Necessary Samples
The number of necessary samples was analyzed in the hope of reducing the time consuming task
of producing brick samples. As mentioned in section 4.3, a set of 3 samples for each experiment
would result in a total of 45 samples to be formed and ﬁred, needing approximately 1160 and 560
CR aggregates with the diameters of 10 mm and 15 mm respectively.
Compressive strength, porosity/density and absorption tests were made with the reference as
explained in Table 4.3.1 in section 4.3. All tests were conducted with samples both with prior
experiments done (PEX samples) and with no prior experiments done (NPEX samples).
From the results of the water absorption test, illustrated in Figure 5.2.1, the NPEX samples
(A.0.8-9) had a lower absorption curve, than the PEX samples (A.0.10-12). The initial curve
(grey dashed) for all three samples, A.0.7-9, showed large standard deviations, consistent with
observations made during the experiment, where sample A.0.7 absorbed the water at a much
larger rate, than the two other samples in the series. This deviation was caused by visible cracks
in the speciﬁc sample and, based on that physical deviation, the mean value of the absorption rate
in consideration for the further investigation, was calculated with only samples A.0.8 and A.0.9.
The total water absorption, illustrated in Figure 5.2.2a, shows that the NPEX samples (A.0.7-
9), absorbed 2% less water than the PEX samples.
In Figure 5.2.2b and 5.2.2c, results show
that the A.0.7-9 samples (in this case PEX), has a lower open porosity and a higher density than
samples A.0.10-12. When comparing all the results from all three experiments, the higher density
of A.0.7-9 can explain the lower water absorption.
43
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Figure 5.2.1: Mean values of water absorption for brick samples with prior and no prior experiments done.
(a) Mean values for absorption.
(b) Mean values for porosity.
(c) Mean values for dry density.
Figure 5.2.2: Comparison of results for brick samples with prior and no prior experiments done.
The samples A.0.4-6 were only used for compressive strength testing. Due to the fact, that the
brick samples were formed from the rejected forming method (without wax paper, see section
4.4.3) and ﬁred according to the rejected ﬁring method F1 (see section 4.4.4), they varied a lot
in quality. This becomes very clear in the results from the compression test, where Figure 5.2.3
shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the two mean values of compression strength, but also signiﬁcantly
large standard deviations. As the standard deviations overlap, it is not liable to conclude that the
results are diﬀerent.
Figure 5.2.3: Mean values of compression strengths for brick samples
with prior and no prior experiments done.
44
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
From these tests and results, there is a tendency of the compressive strength being compromised
by the exposure to prior experiments. Due to the large deviations, the results are not consistent
enough to ﬁnally conclude, that the exposure to a prior experiment, has had an inﬂuence on the
results of the subsequent experiment.
In the similar studies, presented in section 3.4, at least 12 samples were used for each test of
sawdust, tobacco residue and grass [17]. In the Danish Standard, DS/EN 771-1, a list of the
number of samples required for each test, is presented. In this list, the number of samples for the
density, absorption and compressive strength tests is required to be at least 10. These numbers
are, however, denoted with the following statement:
"If appropriate e.g. when the units are not aﬀected by a test procedure, the same test units may
be used for diﬀerent tests" [20]
Based on this statement, and the fact, that this particular project was the ﬁrst study of the CR,
focusing primarily on the screening and possibility of using the material, it was decided,that it
would be suﬃcient to do all experiments on the same 3 samples of each series.
5.3
Preparation of Brick Samples
The brick samples were made by hand, according to the explained methods in section 4.4. In the
following sections, the results and observations from using these methods are presented.
5.3.1
Forming and Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates
The method for forming and drying the CR aggregates were investigated in the screening process
in section 2.2 and the method used for the making ﬁnal CR aggregates is explained in section
4.4.1.
The result of drying the CR in the palettes is shown in Figure 5.3.1. The aggregates obtained
an almost uniformly circular shape with a curved bottom. It was observed, while producing the
aggregates, that many would crack during the drying process or immediately after. The WC of
the residue, at the time of forming the aggregates, was approximately 85%, which caused the
aggregates to shrink and therefore crack during the drying process. By lowering the WC, it might
be possible to prevent the aggregates from cracking, however, a new study of forming method
would be necessary, as the weight and starting diameters would no longer result in the selected
sizes of the hardened aggregates.
(a) Top view of CR aggregates.
(b) Side view of CR aggregates.
Figure 5.3.1: Hardened coﬀee residue (CR) aggregates.
45
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
5.3.2
Forming and Firing of Brick Samples
Photos related to the forming and ﬁring of the brick samples are included in Appendix C, section
C.3 and will be referred to when relevant.
As described in section 4.4.4, the bricks were initially dried and burned according to the method
used by Wienerberger (Method 1).
The ﬁrst set of reference samples (A.0.4-12), dried with only a small amount of cracks, but
with a very uneven surface, as the samples had to be extracted from the brick press by wiggling
them out (Figure C.3.2 in Appendix C).
A single set of samples containing CR aggregates, D.20.1-3, were formed and ﬁred along with
the ﬁrst set of references. The samples contained CR aggregates with a diameter of 20 mm and
cracked during the drying process, as shown in Figure 5.3.2. As all the cracks seemed to be located
around the CR aggregates, it was concluded, that the aggregates were the cause and it was therefor
decided to reduce both the content and size of the CR aggregates.
(a) Top view.
(b) Largest cracks.
Figure 5.3.2: Rejected samples series D.20 after ﬁring.
As the forming process had been modiﬁed, brick samples with CR aggregates were formed, using
the modiﬁed method with the wax paper. During the drying process with Method 1, all samples
developed signiﬁcant cracks and were rejected (Figure C.3.3, Appendix C).
The modiﬁed extraction method was working (see the unﬁred bricks in Figure C.3.4, Appendix
C), wherefore the ﬁring method was then questioned. As explained in section 4.4.4, Method 2 was
chosen and used for drying and ﬁring of the accepted sample series: A.0.1-3, B.10.1-3, B.15.1-3,
C.10.1-3 and C.15.1-3. The ﬁnal brick samples are presented in Figure 5.3.3.
During the ﬁring process, there were only room for 12 samples in the furnace, wherefore the
reference brick samples of series A.0.1-3 was ﬁred in a diﬀerent furnace, at the same time as the
rest of the sample series. However, this furnace had a diﬀerent heating and cooling rate, and for
this reason, the reference samples were not exposed to the extreme heat for as long as the rest
of the samples. The shortened ﬁring period resulted in the samples getting a light red shade, as
illustrated in Figure 5.3.3.
The sample series C.10 were the last to be formed in the brick press and, even though the
samples were tightly wrapped in plastic wrap, when transported and while waiting to be formed,
cracks had started to appear immediately after forming (Figure C.3.4d, Appendix C). The cracks,
however, did not change in either size or number during the drying and ﬁring processes and, based
on the cracks being relatively small, the samples were accepted.
46
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Figure 5.3.3: Bricks with coﬀee aggregates, dried and ﬁred according to Method
2 from section 4.4.4.
5.4
Physical Properties of Large Pored Clay Bricks
The physical appearance of the large pores were visible after the brick samples had been through
the compression test, discussed later in this section. Figure 5.4.1a shows a section of the C-series
of brick samples with 5% CR aggregates with diameters of 10 and 15 mm respectively. Figure
5.4.1b shows how some of the ash from the CR aggregates remain in the pores, in accordance with
the LOI of 92%.
(a) Section of bricks with 10 and 15 mm pores.
(b) Ash residues from CR.
Figure 5.4.1: Sections of brick samples showing forming of large pores.
5.4.1
Dimensions and Shrinkage
The brick samples were measured both before and after ﬁring and the dimensions were used to
calculate the shrinkage of ﬁring.
From the results in Table 5.4.1 it is seen how the shrinkage increases by 6% when adding 2.5% CR
aggregates in series B, compared to the reference samples of series A. When further increasing the
CR content from 2.5% in sample series B to 5% in sample series C, the wt-% shrinkage increases by
47
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
another 7%. As the shrinkage in weight is mostly caused by evaporation of water and incineration
of the CR aggregates, the result of the wt-% increasing proportionate with the increase of the CR
aggregates content, is as expected.
The shrinkage in volume, however, does not change signiﬁcantly when adding 2.5% CR aggregates
in sample series B, compared to the reference series A, with a slight decrease of 0.7%. When
adding 5% CR aggregates in sample series C, a total decrease of 1% in vol-% shrinkage is observed,
compared to the reference series A.
The decrease in vol-% shrinkage is explained by the smaller amount of clay used in sample
series C, thus reducing the amount of shrinkable material.
The reduced volumetric shrinkage
could be an advantage, as less amounts of clay would be needed to obtain a given size of brick.
Table 5.4.1: Dimensions of brick samples before and after ﬁring, including the resulting shrinkage in both
wt-% and vol-%.
5.4.2
Porosity and Density
The porosity and density was found for both the brick samples and the prefabricated bricks, in
order to compare the samples with the existing products on the market. For this project, the
open porosity, Po, and dry density, ρd, are considered and calculated from equations 4.5.1 and
4.5.2 respectively, presented in section 4.5.2. The full data set from the experiment is found in
Appendix C, section C.4.2 and from these results, the mean values are presented in Figure 5.4.2
and 5.4.3.
Figure 5.4.2 presents the mean values for the open porosity, Po, and from this comparison, the
trend in the results for the brick samples shows an expected increase in porosity with the increase
of CR aggregates.
The opposite trend is the case for the prefabricated bricks, where the perforated samples, W.3
and W.25 has a decreasing porosity, compared to the solid samples, W.0. As the prefabricated
bricks had full perforations, these were not considered as pores by the measuring method and
the results from this experiment, therefore reﬂect the properties of only the solid material. From
Figure 5.4.2, it is seen that the porosity of the perforated bricks, W.3 and W.25, are lower than for
the solid samples, W.0, which is consistent with the fact, that the solid brick was of the soft-molded
type and the perforated bricks were machine pressed.
48
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Figure 5.4.2: Open porosity for brick samples with A.0 = 0% CR, B = 2.5% CR, C =
5% CR and prefabricated bricks, W.
Similar results are presented in Figure 5.4.3, where the prefabricated perforated samples, W.3 ad
W.25, has a higher density than the solid samples, W.0.
By comparing the results from the brick samples and the prefabricated bricks, the porosity
and density for the reference brick sample A.0 is almost identical to the results for the prefabri-
cated perforated brick W.3, consistent with the fact, that the brick samples were formed under
compression pressure as well.
The results from the brick samples alone, shows that the size of CR aggregates has no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on neither the porosity nor the density of the brick sample, as the diﬀerence between
B.10 and B15 samples is a mere 0.3% and the diﬀerence between C.10 and C.15 is 0.6%.
The comparison illustrated in Figure 5.4.3 also shows the declining values of the density, as
more CR aggregates are added, consistent with the fact, that the amount of solid material is
decreased.
The adding of 2.5% CR aggregates in sample series B, resulted in a 5% reduction of the dry
density, compared to the reference samples A, and by doubling the content of CR aggregate in
sample series C, a total reduction of 12% was obtained, compared to A.
Figure 5.4.3: Dry density for brick samples with A.0 = 0% CR, B = 2.5% CR, C = 5%
CR and prefabricated bricks, W.
49
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
5.4.3
Compressive Strength
The methods for testing the prefabricated bricks in the compression press, as explained in section
4.5.3, resulted in extremely low and deviating compressive strengths from 0.77 to 12.89 MPa (see
full data in Appendix C, Table C.4.7).
According to Wienerberger product information for soft-molded bricks of type W.0, the com-
pressive strength is minimum 22 MPa [3] and the minimum strength for the machine pressed
perforated W.3 and W.25 bricks is 30 MPa [4]. As these given values are so diﬀerent from the
results of the test, it was concluded that both test methods for the prefabricated bricks, were
ineﬃcient and the theoretic values from the product information sheets were used for further com-
parison.
Figure 5.4.4 illustrates the experimental compressive strengths of the brick samples and the the-
oretic values for the prefabricated bricks.
From the porosity and density experiment, the reference brick samples, A, bore great resem-
blance to the machine pressed sample W.3, and would therefore be expected to obtain a similar
compressive strength. In Figure 5.4.4, however, the compressive strength of sample series A, is
46% lower than the theoretic one for the prefabricated machine pressed bricks.
The large diﬀerence between the theoretic values and the experimental ones, makes the exper-
imental results less reliable and the testing method questionable. Without further investigation
with a diﬀerent testing method, it can not be concluded, that the experimental values gives a
proper indication of the compressive strengths of the large pored bricks. From the results in Fig-
ure 5.4.4, it is seen, that only the reference samples, A.0 and the samples with 2.5% CR aggregates,
B.10 and B.15, met the requirement of a minimum compressive strength of 10 MPa for a density
>1400 kg/m3.
Despite the questionable testing method, the fact that all the brick samples were tested under the
same conditions, makes it possible to review the results in relation to each other.
As expected, the results in Figure 5.4.4 show a trend of the compressive strength declining
proportional with the increasing content of CR aggregates. With the content of 2.5% aggregates
in sample series B, the compressive strength is reduced by 29%, compared to the one for the
reference samples and with the content of 5% in sample series C, the strength is reduced by a total
of 49%.
From the results of B.10, B.15, C.10 and C.15, there is no indication of the size of the aggregate
having any inﬂuence on the compressive strength.
50
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Figure 5.4.4: Compressive strengths from experiments with the brick samples, A-C, and theo-
retic values for prefabricated bricks, W.
As seen in Figure 5.4.1, the CR aggregates were randomly placed inside the brick sample, with a
tendency to cluster. These clusters of aggregates resulted in relatively large areas inside the brick
sample with a weakened supporting structure of the clay, causing the brick to crack in these areas
during the exposure to compressive load.
Machine pressed perforated bricks has evenly distributed perforations, ensuring that the sup-
porting material of ﬁred clay, is present in the critical areas. The method for mixing the CR
aggregates into the clay, makes it impossible to control the placement of the pores, and in order
to possibly increasing the compressive strength, this method has to be modiﬁed. Placing the CR
aggregates into a pattern, directly into the brick press or mold, would reduce the clustering and
possibly increase the compressive strength.
5.4.4
Water Absorption and Minute Suction
The water absorption is calculated in order to determine if the large pores has an inﬂuence on the
absorption properties of the bricks.
In Figure 5.4.5 the results of the absorption rates for the brick samples are illustrated. From
this, it is seen how the sample series B and A has an almost identical incline, whereas sample series
C has a higher absorption at the ﬁrst measurement after 1 min., resulting in a parallel curve. The
addition of 5% CR aggregates in sample series C, causes the bricks to absorb the water faster than
the two other series.
The pairing of curves for the sub series of B.10 and B.15 and for the sub series C.10 and C.15,
indicates that the percentage of CR content is the main inﬂuence on the absorption rate. For both
sample series, the results for the sub series with a CR aggregates diameter of 10 mm, are lower
than for the ones with CR aggregate diameter of 15 mm. The diﬀerence is not large, but it shows
a slight trend, that the size of the pores has an inﬂuence on the absorption rate.
51
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Figure 5.4.5: Water absorption rate for brick samples.
The capillarity, k, has been calculated from the curves in Figure 5.4.5, based on the method
described in section 4.5.4 (individual curves with trend lines for "Situation 1" and "Situation 2"
used for the calculations in Table 5.4.2, are illustrated in Appendix C, section C.4.4.)
Table 5.4.2 lists the estimated values of Qcap and √tcap used for the calculations with equation
4.5.3, along with the results for the capillarity, k. The results indicates, that the larger content of
CR aggregates increases the capillarity of the brick, which was also the conclusion from the curves
in Figure 5.4.5.
Table 5.4.2: Capillarity coeﬃcient, k, for brick samples.
Figure 5.4.6 contains the same curves for the brick samples A, B and C, but with the addition of
the prefabricated bricks, W.0, W.3 and W.25. For illustrative purposes, the curves for the brick
samples, A-C, has been toned down and is mostly represented in order to ease the comparison.
The solid prefabricated brick and the W.3 bricks have a signiﬁcantly more steep incline, than
the brick samples, indicating a higher absorption rate, whereas the W.25 brick is closer to the
results of the brick samples. This could be explained by the lower percentage of solid material
in the W.25 brick, due to the perforations along with the fact, that the surface area of the
perforations were intentionally not deducted from the absorption area, in order to see the eﬀect
of the perforations.
The perforated bricks of series W.3 and W.25, were tested both parallel and perpendicular to
the perforations, where the * in the graph indicates the perpendicular test setup. It is seen from
Figure 5.4.6, that the curves for W.3* and W.25* are still inclining at the end of the experiment,
which concurs with the fact, that the bricks has a greater height in that setup and were not
fully saturated at the last measurement. In both cases, the curves for the perpendicular tests are
lower than the tests with the parallel setup, until the point where the W.3 and W.25 (parallel) are
saturated. This shows that the absorption was slowed down due to the perpendicular perforations,
52
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
as oppose to the parallel setup, where the water could be absorbed all the way to the top of the
brick unhindered.
Figure 5.4.6: Water absorption rate for prefabricated bricks, compared to the results of the brick samples
in Figure 5.4.5. (* samples tested perpendicular to perforations)
As mentioned in section 3.2, lightweight bricks and perforated bricks are only used in the inner
leaf of the exterior wall, and because of this, there is no requirements for the water absorption
properties. By comparing the curves for the brick samples and the prefabricated bricks in Figure
5.4.6, the brick samples have a water absorption rate very similar to the one for the prefabricated
brick, W.25, and the results are therefore considered acceptable. Compared to the W.0 and W.3
series, the CR aggregates has slightly reduced both the rate and total amount of water absorbed,
which is considered an improvement.
The minute suction is critical to the construction of a masonry wall, as the brick will suck the
water from the mortar, which needs the water to react with the cement. The selection of mortar
depends on the minute suction of a brick, but there are of course limits, that needs to be respected.
According to Wienerberger product information for bricks of type W.0, the minute suction lies
within 2.0-3.0 kg/m2 [3] and within 2.2-3.3 kg/m2 for the perforated brick of type W.3 and W.25
[4]. Comparing this to the results of the minute suction illustrated in Figure 5.4.7, the results lye
very close to these values. For the brick samples, only the reference sample series, A.0, and the
samples with 5%, 10 mm CR aggregates, series C.10, lies outside the interval. As the reference
samples, has a minute suction below the limit, used for comparison, they would risk "swimming"
in the mortar when the bricks are laid, because it will take too long to suck the excess water. On
the contrary, the C.10 bricks would cause the mortar to dry out, before the cement could react
with the water, causing the mortar to crumble.
The minute suctions for sample series A.0 and C.10 are not that far from the compared values,
and the diﬀerence could be compensated by either increasing or reducing the WC of the mortar.
From Figure 5.4.7, the adding of 2.5% CR aggregates in sample series B, results in a 22% increase
53
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
of the minute suction and the 5% CR aggregates in sample series C, results in a total 84% increase.
The ﬁgure shows a slight tendency of the minute suction being lower in the sub series with CR
aggregate diameter of 15 mm, however, as the standard deviations are overlapping, and are very
large for the sample series C, the results are not unique enough to make such conclusions.
Figure 5.4.7: Minute suction for both brick samples with A.0 = 0% CR, B = 2.5% CR, C =
5% CR and prefabricated bricks, W. (* samples tested perpendicular to perforations)
5.4.5
Thermal Conductivity
The thermal conductivity, of both the brick samples and the prefabricated bricks, was measured
with an Isomet and a setup as explained in section 4.5.5.
The mean values, µλ,T , and correlating standard deviations, sλ,T , of the results from the experi-
ment, are listed in Table 5.4.3. (The full data can be found in Appendix C, section C.4.5.)
Table 5.4.3: Thermal conductivity, λT [W/mK], of brick samples and prefabricated bricks.
Consistent with the theory, that more pores would result in better insulation properties, the
increase of CR aggregates results in lower thermal conductivity. By adding 2.5% CR aggregates in
sample series B, the thermal conductivity is reduced by 18% and by adding 5% CR aggregates in
sample series C, the thermal conductivity is reduced by 33%, compared to the reference samples
of series A.
An interesting observation in the results, is the tendency of the samples containing the CR
aggregates with a diameter of 10 mm, having a 9% and 13% lower thermal conductivity for series
B and C respectively, than the samples containing the CR aggregates with a diameter of 15 mm.
The results from the prefabricated bricks, show an opposite tendency, where the solid brick has
the smallest thermal conductivity and the W.25 brick with the largest amount of holes, had also
the highest thermal conductivity. As the solid W.0 bricks are soft-molded and the perforated W.3
and W.25 are machine pressed bricks, the solid material is expected to be more dense and thereby
less insulating in the W.3 and W.25 samples.
A wall built with the perforated bricks should in total have a lower conductivity than the
same wall with solid bricks, but the measuring apparatus, used in this project, seems to have
54
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
measured the conductivity of only the solid material and not counting in the holes for the perforated
bricks. The results can instead be used to compare the conductivity of soft-molded and machine
pressed bricks, of which the results in Table 5.4.3 indicates, that the brick samples has a thermal
conductivity, similar to the ones for the machine pressed bricks, W.3, consistent with the fact,
that the brick samples were formed by compression in a machine.
In order to determine the actual eﬀect of the pores on the masonry wall, a set of calculations
were conducted to ﬁnd the U-value for a masonry wall with the thermal conductivity for both a
solid heavy clay brick (ρ = 2000 kg/m2) and the results for both sample series B.10 and C.10.
The calculations were based on the calculations in a technical information sheet from Ibstock Ltd.
[31], where the reduction of brick density and lowering of thermal conductivity were said to be
negligible.
From the same data, the U-value was calculated with the two brick samples from this study and
a new calculation was made with the original 2000 kg/m2 brick, but with the increased insulation
thickness needed to match the U-value of the walls with B.10 and C.10 bricks. By landing on the
same U-value, it was found, that the insulation thickness of 100 mm could be reduce by 3.5 mm
and 6.5 mm with the use of the B.10 and C.10 bricks respectively.
In a wall of 400 mm, the possibility to save 6.5 mm of insulation material, is not a lot. With the
standard insulation materials having a ﬁxed interval of thicknesses, it might not even be possible
to reduce the thickness with only 6.5 mm. Nonetheless, the large pored bricks does make a slight
diﬀerence, which could possibly be developed by further optimization of the bricks or be of greater
use in combination with other materials.
5.4.6
Comparison With Results From Similar Studies
As mentioned in section 3.4, similar studies of organic pore-forming agents in ﬁred clay bricks has
been conducted. The results of the physical and thermal properties of the brick samples from this
projects, are compared to those for the following pore-forming agents:
• Raw coﬀee residue (CR) (small, grain-sized pores) [27]
• Sawdust [17]
• Tobacco Residue [17]
• Grass [17]
• Opium Seeds [32]
• Cigarette buds (thermal properties only) [2]
In Table 5.4.4, all the comparable results of the physical properties for the diﬀerent organic pore-
forming materials are listed.
With a content of 2.5% additives, the porosity increases with approximately 3% for all four mea-
sured types. When doubling the additives content, the porosity for the CR large pores and Tobacco
Residue, both increases with 6% compared to the corresponding reference sample, whereas the
Grass porosities has a slightly larger total increase of 7% , closely followed by Sawdust and Opium
55
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Seeds with a total increase of 8%. The smallest change in porosity is seen for the CR small pores
with a total increase of 2%.
The use of the CR as a large pore-forming agent has the same eﬀect on the porosity of the ﬁred
bricks, as the use of sawdust, tobacco residue, grass and opium seeds with the same concentration
of additives. The large pores causes a higher porosity than the grain-sized pores with the same
concentration of additives.
Table 5.4.4: Results of physical properties of ﬁred clay bricks with a variation of organic
pore-forming agents.
* Results from parallel project by Jeanette Garst Johansen [27].
** Results from article by Ismail Demir from 2008 [17].
*** Results from article by M. S. Başpınar and I. Demir from 2004 [32].
The density of a brick is closely related to the porosity, which explanes the low porosity for the
small pored bricks. This is clear from the results in Table 5.4.4, where the decrease in density for
the CR small pores, was only 4% when adding 5% raw CR and the density for the bricks with CR
large pores, was decreased by 10%. From these results it can be concluded that the small pores,
made with CR, does not have a better eﬀect on the porosity/density of the material, but larger
amounts can be added as small pores, before reaching a critical value.
All the larger pores had close to the same change in porosity, but when comparing the decrease
in density, the CR large pores only reduced the density y 10%, whereas the tobacco residue reduced
56
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
it by 18%, the sawdust and grass reduced it by 19% and the opium seeds resulted in a 22% lighter
brick.
From these results it can be concluded, that the CR large pores will make the bricks as porous
as with the use of the compared large pore-forming materials, but without reducing the density
as much. This means that the compressive strength of the CR large pored bricks should be just
as compromised, but with less improvement of the insulating properties.
The values for the total water absorption show that the addition of CR aggregates results in a lower
amount of total water absorbed than the reference sample, whereas the use of the other additives
results in increasing values, which might indicate that the size of the large pores, is reducing the
ability for the water to be stored inside. The total water absorbed by the brick samples with the
grain-sized pores, was 2% larger, indicating, that more water is able to ﬁll the pores.
The water absorption for the sawdust, tobacco, grass and opium seeds, had been tested with the
5 hours boiling method, which was not conducted in this or the parallel CR study. The samples
with CR were only exposed to water for the 4 hours during the absorption test, as explained in
section 4.5.4, and only on a single surface. The results for the CR samples can therefore not be
directly compared to the ones with the other organic additives.
During the water absorption test, it was observed, that the brick samples with the CR small pores
would absorb the water in a much more even distribution, as oppose to the brick samples from this
project, as illustrated in Figure 5.4.8. This diﬀerence is caused by the more evenly distribution
of the small pores, which also makes the small pored bricks a more uniform material and easier
to categorize, whereas the large pored bricks showed great deviations within sample series due to
the uneven distribution of the CR aggregates.
(a) CR small pores pores. [27]
(b) CR large pores.
Figure 5.4.8: Brick samples with CR small and large pores during water absorption experiment.
The results from the compressive strength tests are illustrated in Figure 5.4.9 and show, by visual
comparison, that the brick samples with the small pores, formed with raw CR, has a signiﬁcantly
higher compressive strength, than the samples with the other additives. The results from the
corresponding reference tests illustrates, that the samples with CR small pores also had an initial
higher strength. The relation between the results for the reference and the 5% content of the
additives, show that the compressive strength of the samples with CR small pores and opium
seeds decreases only by 19% and 24% respectively, and the rest are decreased by 48%, 37%, 38%
and 34% for CR large pores, sawdust, tobacco residue and grass respectively.
As mentioned in the results for the compressive strength test of the CR large pores in section
57
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
5.4.3, the CR aggregates had seemed to cluster, during the forming of the bricks, resulting in
large areas inside the bricks with very little supporting clay material. This would explain the
largely decreasing compressive strength of the samples with the large CR aggregates. From the
comparison with the other organic materials, the small grain-sized pores, made with the CR and
the small pores of approximately 1 mm in diameter, made with the opium seeds, looks to have the
least inﬂuence on the compressive strength, however, the result for the adding of 5% opium seeds,
does not meet the requirement of a minimum strength of 8 MPa (density <1400 kg/m3), because
the reference sample barely does. For the addition of 5% additives, only the CR small pores, the
sawdust and the grass meets the requirement of a minimum compressive strength of 10 MPa for
densities >1400 kg/m3.
The testing of the compressive strength has been done diﬀerently in each study and from the
results of the reference samples, it is obvious that the properties of the clay has a great inﬂuence
on the compressive strength, when adding pores. Even the reference results for the CR large
and small pores are very diﬀerent, despite the fact, that they were made from the same clay, at
the same time and with the same forming and burning method. In order to be able to directly
compare the inﬂuence of the organic materials on the compressive strength, the test should be
reconstructed and containing all the sample series.
Figure 5.4.9: Visualization of compression strengths for bricks with CR aggregates, sawdust, tobacco,
grass and opium seeds, according to the values in Table 5.4.4 (* from [27], ** from [17]), *** from [32].
The inﬂuence on the thermal properties of the use of cigarette butts as a pore-forming in ﬁred
clay bricks, was studied by Aeslina Abdul Kadir and Noor Amira Sarani in 2013 [2] with additive
concentrations of 2.5% and 5%. The study also had a variable in the heating rate during the ﬁring
of the samples, however, since the samples from this project were ﬁred at a rate of 10°C/min.
(according to section 4.4.4), the samples with the highest heating rate of 5°C/min. from [2], will
be used for comparison.
58
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5:
Results and Discussion
Table 5.4.5: Results of thermal properties of ﬁred clay bricks with a variation
of organic pore-forming agents.
* Results from parallel project by Jeanette Garst Johansen [27].
** Results from article by Aeslina Abdul Kadir and Noor Amira Sarani from
2013 [2].
The results from the thermal conductivity experiments for the CR large pores, from this project,
are listed in Table 5.4.5 along with the results for the CR small pores and cigarette butts.
The results showed, that the addition of 2.5% additives would decrease the thermal conductivity
by 18% with the use of the CR large pores, but only 3% with the use of cigarette butts. By adding
5% of the pore-forming aggregates, the thermal conductivity was lowered by 33% with the use of
CR large pores, 12% with the use of the CR small pores and 11% with the use of cigarette butts.
It should be noted, that the thermal conductivity of the samples with cigarette butts had been
measured using a diﬀerent method, making a direct comparison unreliable, however, the internal
comparison between the samples of the same series, show, that the use of the CR as a large
pore-forming agent, has the greatest success of lowering the thermal conductivity of the bricks,
compared to the reference samples.
From all the results discussed in this section, the use of the CR as a large pore-forming agent proved
only advantageous for the water absorption properties and the lowering of thermal conductivity.
The large pores did result in a lower density than the same concentration of small pores, formed
with the raw CR, however, the reduction of density in the material is only advantageous if it does
not compromise the compressive strength too much. Which it did, compared to the results from
the small pored samples.
59
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
6
Conclusion
From the initial screening and characterization of the coﬀee residue (CR) it was learned, that the
CR had a high water content (WC) of 85-88%, which made the material very diﬃcult to work
with. During the screening process it was found that the WC could successfully be reduced to
66% and 68% by microwaving larger amounts of the CR or drying it in the oven at 30°C for 8
hours respectively.
Centrifuging the CR was found to successfully extract water without the use of heat, however,
the method would require the proper equipment, in order to treat larger amount of CR at a time
and make this method feasible.
Using the CR as a dry powder by drying and crushing it, resulted in a weaker material, when
remixed with water and dried, however, the minimum WC level was found to be somewhere
between 43% and 55% as the remixed CR was too dry to properly form at 43% and still wet and
formable at 55%.
It was not possible to dry the CR at room temperature, as an unidentiﬁed growth started
to spread on the semi-hardened material after 2 days, making it unsuitable for use as a cement
replacement in concrete. The hardened CR was found to dissolve when submerged into water for
6 hours and from these results, the use of CR in concrete was fully rejected.
The screening and idea development process was rounded oﬀwith the decision to shape and dry
the CR into pore-forming aggregates with diameters of 10 and 15 mm, as 5 mm were impossible
to shape and 20 mm were too big for the brick samples and most of them would crack during the
drying process.
The grain size distribution of the CR was found to be medium sized particles with grains mostly
in the range of 10-100 µm. The results of the pH-value showed how the CR was slightly acidic with
a pH of 4.9, however this was not going to aﬀect the bricks, when used as hardened, pore-forming
aggregates.
An important ﬁnding was that, from the digestion test with ICP, the CR was classiﬁed as "con-
taminated soil" in Class 3, because of cadmium, chrome, cobber, nickel and zinc concentrations
exceeding the permissible limits for Classes 1 and 2. As a Class 3 material, the CR has to be
puriﬁed before used in building materials.
The additional investigation of the necessary number of samples needed for performing the planned
experiments, showed a tendency of the exposure to a prior experiment, having an inﬂuence on
the results of the compressive strength. Due to the large deviations from the experiments and the
physical irregularities in the samples, the results were not unique enough to conclude a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence and the ﬁnal experiments were carried out on the same 3 samples for each series.
61
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6:
Conclusion
The investigation of the use of industrial CR as a large pore-forming agent in ﬁred clay bricks,
has shown that the adding of CR aggregates can be advantageous in some aspects. The large
pores would increase the wt-% shrinkage of ﬁring but reduce the vol-% shrinkage, thus reducing
the amount of clay material needed in order to obtain the same size of brick.
The adding of CR aggregates resulted in a more porous brick with a lower density than the
solid reference samples. With the lower density came also increased insulating properties in terms
of a lower thermal conductivity. The reduced thermal conductivity was additionally calculated to
reduce an assumed insulation thickness of 100 mm, in a masonry wall, with 3.5 mm and 6.5 mm
for the CR aggregate concentrations of 2.5% and 5% respectively.
As expected, the large pores resulted in reduced compressive strengths of the brick samples,
compared to those of the reference samples, where the bricks with a content of 2.5% CR aggregates
stayed above the limit of a minimum strength of 10 MPa, but the content of 5% resulted in
strengths just below.
It was observed, after the compression test, that the CR aggregates had clustered during the
mixing process, which could explain large reductions of compressive strengths in the large pored
brick samples.
The size of the aggregates showed to have slight inﬂuence on the water absorption and minute
suction, where the use of the larger aggregates, with a diameter of 15 mm, resulted in a lower
minute suction, however, the deviations of from the experiment were unfortunately too large for
the results being unique enough to fully conclude, that the aggregate dimension had an eﬀect.
From the measurements of the thermal conductivity, the use of the smaller aggregates, with a
diameter of 10 mm, resulted in a lower conductivity for both CR concentrations.
All in all, the CR aggregates showed great potential as a pore-forming agent, as it was possible
to shape it into diﬀerent sizes and was indeed incinerated during the ﬁring process, thus creating
the desired pores.
The lowering of the thermal conductivity was signiﬁcant, however, the eﬀect of this on the U
value of the entire exterior wall, was not. The eﬀect of the large pores on the physical properties
of the bricks were not all satisfactory. Nevertheless, some further investigations of the shape, size,
placement and concentration of the aggregates, could possibly improve many of the unsatisfac-
tory results, thus converting the currently useless waste into a valuable material for the building
industry.
62
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6:
Conclusion
6.1
Further Research
During the presentation and discussion of the results from this study, possible solutions and im-
provements of both methods and material use, has emerged. In order to discover the optimal
use of the investigated material, several options should be investigated further and with a larger
amount of samples.
Purifying the Coﬀee Residue:
As the CR was classiﬁed to be a contaminated soil, it will have to be puriﬁed, in order to lower
the content of cadmium, chrome, nickel and zinc to the required levels.
Modiﬁed Experiments:
The testing of the brick samples proved to be a great challenge and especially the results of
compressive strengths and thermal conductivity could need further investigation with more stan-
dardized testing methods, along with more samples per experiment for greater accuracy.
Alternative to Expanded Clay Aggregates:
As lightweight expanded clay aggregates (LECA) are produced by heating clay to approximately
1150°C in a rotary kiln in order for small bubbles to form inside the aggregates, the environmental
eﬀect of this production method is quite large. [30]
It would be interesting to attempt to form a similar type op lightweight aggregate, using the
CR as the pore-forming agent in clay, ﬁred in a rotary kiln, but at lower temperatures, as the
forming of bubbles would not be needed.
Diﬀerent Shapes:
One of the advantages of having pores instead of full perforations, is the fact, that the bricks
could be used both horizontally, as normally in masonry walls, but also vertically as seen in e.g.
a masonry window sill.
In order to be equally strong from all angles, the optimal shape of the pores would be spherical,
as forces is transferred in triangular shapes, and the aggregates could then be placed in the non-
critical areas inside the brick, explained further in the next item.
Structured Placement of Pores:
As mentioned in section 5.4.3, the clustering of the CR aggregates could be part of the reason for
the low compressive strengths, seen in the brick samples. Placing the CR aggregates into patterns,
as seen in machine pressed prefabricated perforated bricks, such as the W.3 and W.25 samples
presented in this project, it could be possible to reduce the aggregate clustering and thereby
increasing the compressive strength.
Small pores:
From comparing the results of this project with the parallel project, investigating the use of the
raw CR as a small pore-forming agent [27], the small pores seemed to get a more even distribution
of pores, a more even water absorption and higher compressive strengths, along with the possibility
to obtain a larger CR content. A further investigation of these types of pores would be interesting.
63
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Noor Amira Sarani Aeslina Abdul Kadir. “An Overview of Wastes Recycling in Fired Clay
Bricks”. In: International Journal of Integrated Engineering 4.2 (2012), pp. 53–69.
[2]
Noor Amira Sarani Aeslina Abdul Kadir. “Thermal Conductivity Of Fired Clay Bricks In-
corporated With Cigarette Butts”. In: Waste Management 690-693 (2013), pp. 919–924. doi:
10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.690-693.919.
[3]
Wienerberger AG. Product information for WT101 Sommer (solid brick). July 2017. url:
http://wienerberger.dk/produkter/wt- 101- sommer?wb_conditionf%CC%84alse#
collapse-collapse1366172190020.
[4]
Wienerberger AG. Product information for WT311 Gul reduceret (perforated bricks). July
2017. url: http://wienerberger.dk/produkter/wt-311-gul-reduceret?wb_conditionP%
CC%84roductType:1366169583970%5C#collapse-collapse1366172190020.
[5]
Aqua-Calc. Styrofoam density. 2017. url: http : / / www . aqua - calc . com / calculate /
volume-to-weight/substance/styrofoam.
[6]
Brick Industry Association. TECHNICAL NOTE - Speciﬁcations for and Classiﬁcation of
Brick. October 2007. url: http://www.gobrick.com/portals/25/docs/technical%5C%
20notes/tn9a.pdf.
[7]
Bæredygtigt Byggeri og Tegl. (Danish) [Sustainable Construction and Masonry]. Kalk- og
Teglværksforeningen.
[8]
Ashok Kumar Jain B.C. Punmia and Arun Kumar Jain. Basic Civil Engineering. Laxmi
Publication (P) Ltd., 2003. isbn: 978-81-7008-403-7.
[9]
Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af restprodukter, jord og sorteret bygge- og anlægsaﬀald. (Dan-
ish) [Decree on the use of Residues, Soil and Sorted Construction Waste]. 2017. url: https:
//www.retsinformation.dk/pdfPrint.aspx?id=184757.
[10]
Science Buddies. What is the Scientiﬁc Method. 2002. url: https://www.sciencebuddies.
org/science-fair-projects/project_scientific_method.shtmll.
[11]
Bygnings- og Boligregistre (BBR). (Danish) [The Building and housing register (BBR)].
Arealvejledning. (Danish) [Area deﬁnitions]. url: http://bbr.dk/arealvejledning/0/31.
[12]
Bygningsreglement 1961, (BR61). (Danish) [Danish Building Regulations 1961 (BR61)]. The
Danish Ministry of Housing, 1960.
[13]
Bygningsreglement 2015, (BR15). (Danish) [Danish Building Regulations 2015 (BR15)]. The
Danish Ministry of Housing, 2015.
65
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chapter 6:
Conclusion
[14]
Wan Chen. “Electrochemical upgrading of diﬀerent ashes for use in production of bricks”.
PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2017.
[15]
Coﬀee.org. 20 Interesting Coﬀee Facts. url: http://www.coffee.org/20-Interesting-
Coffee-Facts.
[16]
Jakob Dan-Nielsen. A Spectroscopic and Chemical Analysis on the Composition of Spent
Coﬀee Grounds - An Exploratory Investigation of processing eﬀects. 2016.
[17]
Ismail Demir. “Eﬀect of organic residues addition on the technological properties of clay
bricks”. In: Waste Management 28 (2008), pp. 622–627. doi: http://production.datastore.
cvt.dk/filestore?oid=539d579f60ad71dd250629dd&targetid=539d579f60ad71dd250629df.
[18]
The Science Dictionary. Deﬁnition of perforated brick. url: http://thesciencedictionary.
org/perforated-brick/.
[19]
DS-EN 12390-3 Testing hardened concrete - Part 3: Compressive strength of test specimens.
3rd. Dansk Standard, 2012.
[20]
DS-EN 771-1 - Speciﬁcation for Masonry Units - Part 1: Clay Masonry Units. 3rd. Dansk
Standard, 2011.
[21]
DS-EN 772 - Methods of test for masonry units. 4th. Dansk Standard, 2002-2015.
[22]
Clay & Slate Institute (ESCSI) Expanded Shale. Chapter 3 - Physical Properties of Struc-
tural Lightweight Aggregate. April 2017. url: http://www.escsi.org/uploadedFiles/
Technical_Docs/General_Information/3%5C%20Chapter%5C%203%5C%20Physical%5C%
20Properties%5C%20of%5C%20SLWA%5C%20Completed.pdf.
[23]
S. V. Deo G. K. Patel. “Eﬀect of Natural Organic Materials as Admixture on Properties
of Concrete”. In: Indian Journal of Science and Technology 9 (2016), pp. 919–924. doi:
10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i37/93541.
[24]
Image, Colosseum. url: http://bricklayingschool.com/3-historic-masonry-buildings/.
[25]
Image, Danish church. url: http://www.danmarks-kirker.dk/helsingor/humlebaek_
hel.htm.
[26]
Image, modern masonry. url: http : / / www . bygogbolig . dk / artikel / mursten - er -
arkitekternes-rolls-royce/.
[27]
Jeanette Garst Johansen. “The Use of Coﬀee Residue as a Small Pore-Forming Agent in
Fired Clay Bricks”. MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2017.
[28]
KULLABS.com. url: https://www.kullabs.com/classes/subjects/units/lessons/
notes/note-detail/861.
[29]
Emilie Oline Buch Larsen. “Investigation of Industrial Coﬀee Waste as Construction Mate-
rial”. MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2017.
[30]
Leca®. url: http://www.leca.co.uk/lecar/production/.
[31]
Ibstock Brick Ltd. TECHNICAL INFORMATION SHEET A9 - Understanding k values
(Design Thermal Conductivity) and U-values. September 2015. url: http://www.ibstock.
com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/TIS-A9-UNDERSTANDING-K-VALUES-AND-U-VALUES.
pdf.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
66
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chapter 6:
Conclusion
[32]
I. Demir M. S. Başpınar. “Thermal Conductivity Of Fired Clay Bricks Incorporated With
Cigarette Butts”. In: vol. 264-268. Trans Tech Publications, Switzerland, 2004, pp. 2255–
2260. doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/KEM.264-268.2255.
[33]
Rikke Klavstrup Mathiasen. Anvendelse af slamaske fra depot i beton - den friske betons
egenskaber. (Danish) [The use of sewage sludge ashes from depot in concrete - the properties
of the fresh concrete]. 2017.
[34]
Paulo J. M. Monteiro P. Kumar Mehta. “Concrete”. In: McGraw-Hill, 2006. Chap. Aggre-
gates, p. 258.
[35]
Mur og Tag. Typehuset 1960-79 - Katalog over typiske løsninger og principper. (Danish)
[The standard house of 1960-79 - Catalogue of typical solutions and principles].
[36]
The Engineering Toolbox. Particle sizes - Sizes of airborne particles as dust, pollen bacteria,
virus and many more. url: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/particle- sizes-
d_934.html1.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
Appendix
69
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
Appendix Contents
A Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
73
A.1 Controlling the Water Content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.1.1
Drying at low Temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.1.2
Hardening at Diﬀerent Temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.1.3
Drying, Crushing and Remixing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B Test Methods
81
B.0.1
pH values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.0.2
Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.0.3
Loss of Ignition (Organic Content) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.0.4
Water Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.0.5
Digestion with ICP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.0.6
Porosity and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.0.7
Water Absorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C Complete Results From Experiments
97
C.1 Characterization of Coﬀee Residue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.1.1
pH Value and Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.1.2
Loss of Ignition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.1.3
Water Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.1.4
Digestion with ICP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.1.5
Grain Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.2 Determining Number of Necessary Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
C.3 Forming and Firing of Brick Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
C.4 Physical Properties of the Fired Bricks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
C.4.1
Dimensions and Shrinkage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
C.4.2
Porosity and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
C.4.3
Compression Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
C.4.4
Water Absorption and Minute Suction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
C.4.5
Thermal Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
71
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
A
Complete Results and Photos
from Screening Process
In the following appendix, the full data and additional photos from the screening process in
section 2 is presented. As most of the screening process was done as a qualitative study, some of
the experiments resulted in very little data and is therefore presented fully in the respected section
and not here.
As the entire screening process has been conducted in close cooperation with fellow students
Jeanette Garst Johansen and Emilie Oline Buch, data, conclusion and general structure of this
appendix may bear similarities to their reports ([27] and [29] respectively).
Results from the following experiments and investigations from the screening process are included
(in order of appearance):
• Controlling the Water Content
– Drying at Low Temperatures
– Hardening at diﬀerent Temperatures
– Drying, Crushing and Remixing
• Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates
73
==PAGE:90==
Appendix A:
Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
A.1
Controlling the Water Content
As the waste product from the instant coﬀee plant is delivered with a WC of approximately 90%,
various methods for lowering the WC has been tested and the full data from all these tests are
presented in the following sections.
A.1.1
Drying at low Temperatures
Table A.1.1: Measurements and calculations from hardening CR at a constant temperature of
30°C for a duration of 8 hours.
Table A.1.2: Qualitative observations from hardening CR at a constant temperature
of 30°C for a duration of 8 hours.
74
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A:
Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
A.1.2
Hardening at Diﬀerent Temperatures
Table A.1.3: Measurements and calculations from hardening CR at diﬀerent temperatures.
A.1.3
Drying, Crushing and Remixing
Table A.1.4: Mixing quantities for CR balls made from CR powder and water.
75
==PAGE:92==
Appendix A:
Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
A.2
Drying of Coﬀee Aggregates
• TEST 1: CR directly from bucket. Placed with spoon. Hardened at 80°C for 24 hours in
petri dish. The correlating WC of the CR at the time of forming the aggregates, is presented
in Table C.1.3
Table A.2.1: Dimensions and notes from CR aggregates Test 1.
76
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A:
Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
• TEST 2: CR dried at 40°C for 1.5 hours before forming. Placed with spoon. Hardened at
40°C for 24 hours in petri dish. The correlating WC of the CR at the time of forming the
aggregates, is presented in Table A.2.6
Table A.2.2: Dimensions and notes from CR aggregates Test 2.
77
==PAGE:94==
Appendix A:
Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
• TEST 3: CR dried at 40°C for 2 hours before forming. Placed with spoon. Hardened at
50°C for 24 hours in palette. The correlating WC of the CR at the time of forming the
aggregates, is presented in Table A.2.7
Table A.2.3: Dimensions and notes from CR aggregates Test 3.
• TEST 4: CR dried at 50°C for 2 hours before forming. Placed with tulle. Hardened at
50°C over a weekend in palette. The correlating WC of the CR at the time of forming the
aggregates, is presented in Table A.2.8
Table A.2.4: Dimensions and notes from CR aggregates Test 4.
78
==PAGE:95==
Appendix A:
Complete Results and Photos from Screening Process
• TEST 5: CR dried at 50°C for 2 hours before forming. Placed with tulle. Hardened at 50°C
for 24 hours in palette. The correlating WC of the CR at the time of forming the aggregates,
is presented in Table A.2.8.
Table A.2.5: Dimensions and notes from CR aggregates Test 5.
Table A.2.6: Water content of CR from BATCH 1 - dried at 40°C for 1.5 hours.
Table A.2.7: Water content of CR from BATCH 2 - dried at 40°C for 2 hours.
Table A.2.8: Water content of CR from BATCH 2 - dried at 50°C for 2 hours.
Table A.2.9: Water content of CR from BATCH 2 - dried at 50°C for 4 hours.
79
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
B
Test Methods
In the following appendix, the written instructions provided for the conducted experiments are
presented.
For some of the experiments, no written instructions have been provided, but instead a Danish
Standard or a demonstration has been conducted by an associated laboratory worker.
It will
be mentioned in section 4 if relevant and the experimental procedure will be more elaborately
explained in the same section.
The following written instructions are included in this appendix (in order of appearance):
• pH Value
• Conductivity
• Loss of Ignition (Organic Content)
• Water Content
• Digestion with ICP
• Porosity and Density
• Water Absorption
81
==PAGE:98==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.1
pH values
 
pH in 1 M KCl solution. L/S: 2,5 
 
 
A 
Principle 
 
The pH in soil is measured potentiometric ally in slurry of soil and potassium 
chloride at a ratio of 1: 2.5 
 
 
 
B 
Special equipment 
 
Use a combined electrode with at pH-meter for measuring 
 
 
 
C 
Reagents 
 
1) 
Potassium chloride 1 M KCl: 
Weigh 74.56 g KCl on a technical balance into a 1000.00mL volumetric flask. Add 
distilled water to the mark and mix. 
 
2) 
Buffer solution, pH 4.00: 
Radiometer pH 4 
 
3) 
Buffer solution, pH 7.00: 
Radiometer pH 7 
 
Read chemical instructions before the work begins. www.kemibrug.dk 
 
 
 
D 
Procedure 
 
1) 
Preparation of soil suspension 
 
Weigh 5.00 g of dry, crushed soil on technical into a 20 mL plastic vial. Add 12.5 
mL of 1 M KCl with pipette.  
 
The slurry is placed on a shaking table for 1 hour. Take the samples off and leave 
it for 5-10 minutes until the liquid phase is separated from the soil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
48
82
==PAGE:99==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
E 
Calculation of results 
 
The result is read directly on the device and is indicated as pH (KCl) to one 
decimal place. The reading is considered stable when "STAB" in the display. 
 
 
 
F 
Waste management 
 
Potassium chloride and buffer solution pH 4 and pH 7 is poured into the 
sink. 
 
Slurry of soil is collected into the container for soil waste.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
49
83
==PAGE:100==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.2
Conductivity
 
Conductivity in soil 
 
 
A 
Principle 
 
A soil liquid containing ions and dissolved compounds are of great interest, as 
this can provide a picture of a soil liquid total concentration (ionic strength), the 
ion activity ratio in the liquid and give an impression of equilibrium conditions 
between solid particles and dissolved compounds.  
 
The conductivity of the soil solution is an indication of how good an electrical 
current which can be passed through the given fluid and depends on the number 
of conductive particles present in the liquid. 
 
 
 
B 
Special equipment 
 
For measurement a conductivity meter 
 
 
 
C 
Procedure 
 
Weigh 10.00 g dry, crushed soil on a technical balance into a 50ml plastic bottle. 
 
Add 25.00 ml distilled water with a volumetric pipette. Place the plastic bottles on 
a shaking table for 30 min. 
 
Take the samples off and let it stand for 10 min for the liquid to separate from 
the soil. 
 
Rinse the conductivity electrode with distilled water. Place electrode in the liquid. 
When the display on the conductivity shows “STAB” the result is read as mS/cm. 
 
 
 
D 
Calculation of results 
 
The conductivity used without further calculation as mS/cm. 
 
 
 
E 
Waste management 
 
Reagents and soil is collected in at waste dunk marked heavy metals X 4.41 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
24
84
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.3
Loss of Ignition (Organic Content)
 
Organic content 
 
 
A 
Principle 
 
The organic material in the soil is almost equivalent to the result of loss of 
ignition by 550°C. In a heavy metal contaminated soil the heavy metals 
will in great extent react with the organic material in the soil and be 
bound in this fraction. 
 
 
 
B 
Special equipment 
 
Furnace 
 
 
 
C 
Procedure 
 
NB: The crucibles are transported using a plier, because the fingers 
leave moisture and thereby changing the weight. 
 
The crucibles are placed in a 550˚C furnace for 30 min to remove dirt (1h if 
the furnace is cold). The crucibles are then placed in a desiccator for cooling 
down using a pincer. 
 
Weigh the crucibles on an analytical balance using a pincer.   
 
Weigh 2.5 g of dry soil or ash into the crucible using an analytical balance. 
Place the crucible in the furnace for 1 hour at 550˚C. 
 
The crucibles are then placed in a desiccator for cooling down using a pincer. 
 
Weigh the crucibles  
 
 
 
D 
Calculation of results 
 
The loss of ignition is approximately equivalent to the organic matter content in 
the soil and is expressed as a percentage of dry matter. 
 
100
)
(
)
(
)
(
content
 
organic
%
⋅
−
=
furnace
before
m
furncance
after
m
furnace
before
m
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
46
85
==PAGE:102==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
E 
Waste management 
 
The soils are collected in at container for soil waste and clean the crucibles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
47
86
==PAGE:103==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.4
Water Content
 
Water content 
 
 
A 
Principle 
 
The water content has a great importance when running electrodialytical soil 
remediation because the electric current is passed through the soil with the soil 
solution 
 
If the water content of the soil is less than about 15%, it is necessary for the 
experiment to add extra fluid. 
 
 
 
B 
Special equipment 
 
Heating closet 
 
 
 
C 
Procedure 
 
For very accurate measurement: 
 
3 beaker is placed in an heating closet at 105°C overnight. 
The beakers to cool in the desiccator and weighed on an analytical balance. 
 
This is done using a tweezers to devoting moisture. 
 
Weigh 5 g soil on an analytic balance into each beaker and the samples are 
dried at 105°C heating closet overnight. 
 
The beakers with the dried soil weighed on analytical balance after cooling in 
the desiccator. 
 
 
In less precise measurement (most used): 
 
Weigh 3 beakers on a technical balance.  
 
Weigh about 5 g of soil on a technical balance into each beaker and the 
samples are dried at 105°C heating closet overnight. 
 
The beakers with the dried soil weighed on technical balance after cooling 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
77
87
==PAGE:104==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
D 
Calculation of results 
 
Water content is expressed in percent of the weight of the wet soil. 
 
 
 
100
  
 sample)
m(wet
sample)
m(dry
 - 
sample)
m(wet
 
=
 
content
 water
%
 
⋅
 
 
 
 
E 
Waste management 
 
The soils are collected in at container for soil waste and clean the beakers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
78
88
==PAGE:105==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.5
Digestion with ICP
 
Digestion of soil or ash – DS259 
 
 
A 
Principle 
 
This digestion method is a Danish Standard (DS 259) for determining the acid-
soluble metals in the soil. Metal concentration is found by this method 
corresponds to an "overall concentration" of the element in the soil.  
 
A total destruction of the soil will give a higher value of the various metals.  
The DS 259 will therefore provide a more determined level of a metal 
concentration of a complete determination of the metal concentration in soil 
 
 
 
B  
Special equipment 
 
Autoclave 
 
For the measurement ICP is used 
 
 
 
C 
Reagents 
 
1) 
Half-concentrated nitric acid (1: 1) HNO3: 
500 mL of concentrated HNO3 measured in a measuring glass and transferred 
to a 1000.00 mL volumetric flask which is half filled with distilled water. Mix 
well and add water to the mark. After mixing, transfer to a plastic bottle and 
labeled 
 
Read chemical instructions before the work begins. www.kemibrug.dk 
 
 
 
D 
Procedure 
 
Weigh 1.00 g of dry, crushed soil  on a technical weight in a pyrex glass with 
screw cap (autoclave glass) and add 20.00 mL 1:1 HNO3 using a volumetric 
pipette (Remember to use the fume cabinet). 
 
Autoclave glasses are closed completely, otherwise the HNO3 will evaporate.  
 
Pour 1.5 L of distilled water in the autoclave and close the lid firmly and lock it 
with the orange button. The black valve on the lid is opened completely and then 
rotated one half turn. The autoclave is switched on and it takes about 10-15 
minutes until it is warms up. After 3 minutes with steam coming out the valve 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
25
89
==PAGE:106==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
has to be closed and the pressure will begins to increase. Take the time when the 
pressure has reached in the blue mark on the pressure gauge.  
Turn off the autoclave after 30 min.  
 
The glasses are then cooled to room temperature. 
 
The samples were filtered with suction through a 0.45 µm filter using the fume 
cabinet. Use disposable gloves. The glasses are rinsed 3 times with distilled 
water. Filtered must be suck dry between each rinse. 
 
Poured the filter into a 100.00 mL volumetric flask and add distilled water to the 
mark and mix. The liquid is poured into a 20 mL plastic vial and stored for ICP. 
 
 
 
E 
Calculation of results 
 
Based on the standard curves the metals content of the soil is calculated and 
expressed in mg / kg. 
 
 
soil
g
kg
B
C
L
A
kg
mg
/
10
100
,0
/
3
−
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
 
 
 
Where 
A = extract metal concentration, mg/L = ppm 
B = g soil weighed 
C = dilution 
 
 
 
F 
Waste management 
 
Reagents and soil is collected in at waste dunk marked heavy metals X 4.41 
 
The filter paper is thrown away in the trash in the fume cabinet. 
 
Soil and Ashes must be collected in container soil waste. 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
26
90
==PAGE:107==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.6
Porosity and Density
 
Porosity and density (LBM standard) 
 
 
A 
Princip 
 
The porosity of a material tells us how porous the material is, i.e., how fragile it 
is. The higher the porosity is, the greater ability the material has to take up 
water. It also means a good ability to absorb water. The density of the material's 
mass per unit volume. The mass of a porous material can be a dry mass or a 
mass of water in the open pores, that is, by finding the density can be calculated 
mass at different conditions. 
 
 
 
B 
Special equipment 
 
For measurement use the vacuum pump and a technical balance with the 
possibility to weight under water. 
 
 
 
C 
Procedure 
 
 
Dry the sample at 105°C until the sample is completely dry i.e. constant weight. 
 
In case of a concrete sample, this has to dry at 50°C for min. 3 weeks. Because 
drying at high temperature will results in change of the pore structure.  
 
Weighed the sample on a technical balance and note the weight (m105).  
 
Place the sample in a desiccator with lid and tap. Connect the desiccator to the 
vacuum pump and pumped it down for min. 3 hours. 
 
The distilled water with room temperature is passed into the desiccator using a 
hose and the under pressure in the desiccator. Close the tap as soon as the 
water level is 3 cm above the sample. It must be close for 1 hour. 
 
After 1 hour open the tap and let the sample be under water overnight at 
atmospheric pressure.  
 
First weight the saturated sample under water on a technical balance. The water 
in box must have room temperature. The weighted is noted as (msw) 
 
The sample is dabbed with a cloth before weighing over water. Note the 
weight as (mssd) 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
50
91
==PAGE:108==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
In order to check whether where was a wash out or not. Dry the samples over 
night at 105°C and weight it again.  
 
 
D 
Calculation of results 
 
Roomtemp:         
°C 
Watertemp:         
°C 
Water density ρw=           kg/m3 
Control let:  
     Before:               kg 
     After:                 kg 
Sample nr: 
 
 
 
m105 
Kg 
 
 
 
mssd 
Kg 
 
 
 
msw 
Kg 
 
 
 
V = (mssd-msw)/ρw 
m3 
 
 
 
Vpå = (mssd-m105)/ρw 
m3/m3 
 
 
 
På = Vpå/V 
Kg/m3 
 
 
 
ρd = m105/V 
Kg/m3 
 
 
 
ρf = m105/(V-Vpå) 
Kg/m3 
 
 
 
ρssd = mssd/V 
Kg/m3 
 
 
 
ussd = (mssd-m105)/m105 
Kg/kg 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions, concepts and symbols 
 
m105 Mass of sample after drying with 105°C (kg) 
mssd 
Mass of sample over water after vacuum(kg) 
msw 
Mass of vacuum sample weight in water(kg) 
V 
Volumen of the sample (m3) 
Vpå 
Volumen of the open pores (m3) 
ρf 
Soliddensity (kg/m3) 
ρd 
Drydensity (kg/m3) 
ρssd 
Density of sample in the vacuum watersaturated surfacedry cond. (kg/m3) 
på 
Open porosity of the sample (m3/m3) 
ussd 
Water Solids Ratio in vacuum watersaturated surfacedry condition (kg/m3) 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
51
92
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
B.0.7
Water Absorption
 
Capillary suction 
 
 
A       Principle 
 
If a dry porous material is brought into contact with water, the moistened 
material as a result of capillary suction. By capillary suction, there is a 
transport of water from the surface into the material. This transfer is made 
through narrow channels in the material, which is also called capillaries. 
 
The figure shows the ideal conditions in which the recorded amount of water 
per. area (Q) as a function of t ½ shows a straight dotted line, until the 
amount of water corresponding to Qkap is aspirated. After recording no more 
water and the slope of the curve will be zero. 
 
In reality a curve look as shown by the solid line, since the pores of refilling 
quickly. Likewise, for some materials may be rising slightly, after the water 
level has reached the top of the sample. This is due to the filling of the 
smallest pores will take longer. Therefore, the water transports slow if the 
pores of the material is small, and the reverse speed if the pores are greater. 
 
 
 
B       Special equipment 
 
For measurement technical balance is used 
 
 
 
C 
Procedure 
 
The sample is dried at 105 ° C for the sample is completely dry i.e. constant 
weight. 
 
The area of the sample is measured as height, length and width. 
 
In case of a concrete sample, this has to dry at 50°C for min 3 weeks 
(constant weight). Because drying at high temperature will results in change 
of the pore structure.  
 
Weighed the sample on a technical balance and note the weight (m0).  
 
Fill a photo tray with distilled water until the water is about 5mm above the 
messing rods located at the button at the photo tray. 
 
Measure the room temperature (Troom) and the distillated water should be 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
10
93
==PAGE:110==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
20°C ± 2°C (Twater) 
 
Place the sample so the suction surface is on the messing rods and the water 
reaches 5mm up the sample. The time is started at the moment the sample 
makes contact with the water.   
 
Weight the sample after 1 – 2 – 4 – 8 – 16 – 32 – 60 – 120 – 240 - 360 
minutes from the starting time. 
 
The weighing is done by taken up the sample and pressed briefly onto a cloth 
and weighed. Note the weight (mt) 
 
 
 
D 
Calculation of results 
 
Start værdier 
Troom 
°C 
 
Twater 
°C 
 
ρw 
kg/m3 
998 
height 
m 
 
length 
m 
 
width 
m 
 
Area (A) 
m2 
 
m0 
kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
11
94
==PAGE:111==
Appendix B:
Test Methods
 
 
 
 
t (min) 
t½ 
mt (kg) 
Q (kg/m2) 
0 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
120 
 
 
 
240 
 
 
 
360 
 
 
 
 
 
A
m
m
Q
t
0
−
=
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where 
Q 
is the mass per unit volume absorbed sucking area [kg/m2] 
mt 
is the sample masse at time t [kg] 
m0 
is the dry masse of the sample [kg] 
A 
Is the sucking area [m2] 
 
 
 
 
 
Arctic Engineering and Sustainable Solutions, F 2016
12
95
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
C
Complete Results From
Experiments
The full data from all conducted experiments and investigations in the project phase is presented
in the following appendix (for results from the screening process see Appendix A).
The relevant averages and corresponding standard deviations are presented in the section 5 and
discussed in the main report.
The project phase has been carried out in close cooperation with Jeanette Garst Johansen and
the data and overall structural appearance of this section may be of some resemblance as in her
report [27].
Results from the following experiments and investigations are included (in order of appearance):
• Characterization of Coﬀee Residue
– pH Value and Conductivity
– Loss of Ignition (Organic Content)
– Water Content
– Digestion with ICP
• Physical Properties of the Fired Clay Bricks
– Dimensions and Shrinkage
– Porosity and Density
– Compression Strength
– Water Absorption and Minute Suction
97
==PAGE:114==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.1
Characterization of Coﬀee Residue
In the following sections, the full data from all the experiments concerning the characterization of
the coﬀee residue (CR) is presented along with mean values, µ, and standard deviations, s. In the
main report, only relevant mean values and standard deviation are presented.
C.1.1
pH Value and Conductivity
Table C.1.1: pH value and conductivity λE of CR.
C.1.2
Loss of Ignition
Table C.1.2: LOI measurements for CR.
C.1.3
Water Content
Table C.1.3: Water content of CR BATCH 1 - Fresh
Table C.1.4: Water content of CR BATCH 2 - Fresh
Table C.1.5: Water content of CR BATCH 2 - after 1 month in fridge in closed container.
98
==PAGE:115==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.1.4
Digestion with ICP
Table
C.1.6:
Raw
data
of
acid-soluble
metals concen-
trations
from
ICP.
Table C.1.7: Results
of acid-soluble met-
als, calculated with
equation 4.2.3 from
the
data
in
Table
C.1.6.
99
==PAGE:116==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.1.5
Grain Size
Table C.1.8: Results from laser diﬀractometer (Master-sizer 2000) for grain size distribution.
100
==PAGE:117==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.2
Determining Number of Necessary Samples
Table C.2.1: Porosity and density measurements for samples A.07-12.
101
==PAGE:118==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
Table C.2.2: Water absorption measurements for samples A.07-12.
C.3
Forming and Firing of Brick Samples
Figure C.3.1: Heating curve of furnace, manually registered.
(a) Uneven surfaces of brick samples due
to diﬃcult extraction of brick press.
(b) Cracked brick samples due to diﬃcult
extraction of brick press.
Figure C.3.2: Brick samples formed with rejected method (without wax paper).
102
==PAGE:119==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
(a) Bricks after drying.
(b) Largest cracks in bricks after drying.
Figure C.3.3: Bricks with coﬀee aggregates dried according to Method 1 from section 4.4.4, before burning.
(The bricks are placed identically in (a) and (b). (b) illustrates the surface with the largest crack, of each
brick.)
(a) A.0.1-A.0.3 before drying.
(b) B.10.1-B.10.3 before drying.
(c) B.15.1-B.15.3 before drying.
(d) C.10.1-C.10.3 before drying.
(e) C.15.1-C.15.3 before drying.
Figure C.3.4: Final brick samples of series A, B and C, before drying.
103
==PAGE:120==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
104
==PAGE:121==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.4
Physical Properties of the Fired Bricks
C.4.1
Dimensions and Shrinkage
Table C.4.1: Dimensions and shrinkage of brick samples - Before ﬁring.
A.0.1
A.0.2
A.0.3
B.10.1
B.10.2
B.10.3
B.15.1
B.15.2
B.15.3
C.10.1
C.10.2
C.10.3
C.15.1
C.15.2
C.15.3
1
51.10
50.54
50.77
51.46
51.08
51.15
51.13
51.13
51.15
52.34
52.12
51.41
51.78
51.72
52.26
2
50.90
51.16
50.94
51.35
51.25
51.42
51.51
51.2
51.75
52.43
52.22
51.82
51.88
51.79
52.69
3
50.77
51.38
50.98
51.23
51.14
51.24
51.19
51.05
51.7
51.95
52.05
51.55
51.90
51.80
52.37
μh,BF
50.92
50.85
50.90
51.35
51.16
51.27
51.28
51.13
51.53
52.24
52.13
51.59
51.85
51.77
52.44
sh,BF
0.17
0.44
0.11
0.12
0.09
0.14
0.20
0.08
0.33
0.26
0.09
0.21
0.06
0.04
0.22
1
54.57
54.63
54.79
54.75
54.94
54.7
54.96
54.66
54.6
55.07
54.71
54.56
54.72
54.8
54.56
2
54.41
54.67
54.43
54.83
54.49
54.89
54.66
54.58
54.48
54.97
54.51
54.77
54.66
54.69
54.72
3
54.48
54.44
54.24
54.93
54.72
54.68
54.47
54.58
54.61
54.56
54.44
54.50
54.50
54.61
54.64
μw,BF
54.49
54.58
54.49
54.84
54.72
54.76
54.70
54.61
54.56
54.87
54.55
54.61
54.61
54.70
54.64
sw,BF
0.08
0.12
0.28
0.09
0.23
0.12
0.25
0.05
0.07
0.27
0.14
0.14
0.16
0.10
0.08
1
54.30
54.92
55.17
54.62
54.38
54.57
54.1
54.85
54.62
54.26
54.45
54.15
54.46
54.16
54.14
2
54.10
54.21
54.12
54.29
54.22
54.07
54.13
54.36
54.14
54.20
54.08
54.54
54.16
54.16
54.19
3
54.04
54.21
54.20
54.07
54
53.89
54.22
54.11
54.28
54.27
53.99
54.23
54.16
54.04
54.58
μl,BF
54.15
54.45
54.50
54.33
54.20
54.18
54.15
54.44
54.35
54.24
54.17
54.31
54.26
54.12
54.30
sl,BF
0.14
0.41
0.58
0.28
0.19
0.35
0.06
0.38
0.25
0.04
0.24
0.21
0.17
0.07
0.24
-
299.67
298.98
299.22
297.64
297.45
297.32
297.41
297.43
297.72
297.94
297.21
296.11
296.08
298.06
298.73
sm,BF
-
150238
151111
151130
152967
151712
152094
151872
151989
152814
155474
154062
153010
153649
153258
155597
sV*,BF
* Volume from average measured dimensions (h∙w∙l). For material volume, see results from porosity and density experiments.
1253
VBF*   
[mm3]
Before Firing
mBF        
[g]
510
643
0.35
0.16
lBF    [mm]
wBF  [mm]
hBF   [mm]
2.5% coffee aggregates
Reference
5% coffee aggregates
A
B
C
0.17
0.92
1.38
513
1237
105
==PAGE:122==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
Table C.4.2: Dimensions and shrinkage of brick samples - After ﬁring.
A.0.1
A.0.2
A.0.3
B.10.1
B.10.2
B.10.3
B.15.1
B.15.2
B.15.3
C.10.1
C.10.2
C.10.3
C.15.1
C.15.2
C.15.3
1
47.97
48.07
48.04
48.48
48.48
47.49
47.78
47.71
48.22
49.06
49.36
49.35
49.56
49.66
50.41
2
49.11
48.89
48.53
49.20
49.14
49.51
49.49
48.48
49.54
50.76
50.12
50.10
50.04
50.39
51.10
3
48.00
48.24
48.39
48.84
48.02
49.62
49.12
48.43
48.10
50.08
49.71
49.77
49.76
50.29
50.70
μh,AF
48.36
48.40
48.32
48.84
48.55
48.87
48.80
48.21
48.62
49.97
49.73
49.74
49.79
50.11
50.74
sh,AF
0.65
0.43
0.25
0.36
0.56
1.20
0.90
0.43
0.80
0.86
0.38
0.38
0.24
0.40
0.35
1
51.65
50.75
51.39
51.39
51.56
51.49
51.27
51.49
51.77
53.14
52.52
52.19
51.38
51.82
52.11
2
51.58
51.23
51.15
51.65
51.69
51.03
51.42
51.53
51.23
52.65
52.32
51.97
51.44
52.03
52.23
3
51.60
51.26
51.16
51.42
51.50
51.30
51.63
51.29
50.99
51.93
52.09
51.94
51.56
51.76
52.20
μw,AF
51.61
51.08
51.23
51.49
51.58
51.27
51.44
51.44
51.33
52.57
52.31
52.03
51.46
51.87
52.18
sw,AF
0.04
0.29
0.14
0.14
0.10
0.23
0.18
0.13
0.40
0.61
0.22
0.14
0.09
0.14
0.06
1
51.35
52.12
51.97
52.14
52.04
51.65
52.25
51.66
51.59
52.18
52.20
52.94
52.24
52.33
52.30
2
51.54
51.85
51.84
51.87
51.90
51.79
51.76
51.92
51.56
52.14
52.07
52.40
52.06
52.29
52.22
3
51.49
51.40
51.66
51.45
51.30
51.76
51.80
52.41
51.76
52.02
51.84
52.18
51.83
52.05
52.06
μl,AF
51.46
51.79
51.82
51.82
51.75
51.73
51.94
52.00
51.64
52.11
52.04
52.51
52.04
52.22
52.19
sl,AF
0.10
0.36
0.16
0.35
0.39
0.07
0.27
0.38
0.11
0.08
0.18
0.39
0.21
0.15
0.12
mAF      
[g]
220.84
221.68
221.12
215.01
214.99
214.33
215.60
215.80
215.06
210.01
209.13
208.69
208.65
210.09
210.25
VAF*
[mm3]
128437
128039
128294
130307
129584
129638
130366
128930
128868
136897
135367
135894
133336
135748
138179
wt-%
26.31
25.85
26.10
27.76
27.72
27.91
27.51
27.45
27.76
29.51
29.64
29.52
29.53
29.51
29.62
vol-%
14.51
15.27
15.11
14.81
14.59
14.76
14.16
15.17
15.67
11.95
12.13
11.19
13.22
11.43
11.19
Shrinkage
Reference
2.5% coffee aggregates
5% coffee aggregates
A
B
C
* Volume from average measured dimensions (h∙w∙l). For material volume, see results from porosity and density experiments.
After Firing
hAF   
[mm]
wAF   
[mm]
lAF    [mm]
106
==PAGE:123==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
Table C.4.3: Dimensions of prefabricated bricks.
107
==PAGE:124==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.4.2
Porosity and Density
Table C.4.4: Porosity and density measurements for brick samples.
108
==PAGE:125==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
Table C.4.5: Porosity and density measurements for prefabricated bricks.
C.4.3
Compression Strength
Figure C.4.1: Brick samples after compression test.
109
==PAGE:126==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
Table C.4.6: Compressive
strength
measurements
and calculations for brick
samples.
Table C.4.7: Compressive
strength
measurements
and
calculations
for
prefabricated bricks.
110
==PAGE:127==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.4.4
Water Absorption and Minute Suction
Table C.4.8: Water absorption measurements for brick samples.
continues on next page.
111
==PAGE:128==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
(a) Qcap and √tcap intersection for A.0.
(b) Qcap and √tcap intersection for B.10.
(c) Qcap and √tcap intersection for B.15.
(d) Qcap and √tcap intersection for C.10.
(e) Qcap and √tcap intersection for C.15.
Figure C.4.2: Estimated intersections and linear functions of Qcap and √tcap for further calculation of
capillarity coeﬃcient, k, for brick samples.
112
==PAGE:129==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
C.4.5
Thermal Conductivity
The full set of data from the thermal conductivity measurements for both the brick samples and
the prefabricated bricks, are included in the following section.
An additional calculation of the U-value for a wall was conducted according to calculations from
an Ibstock Bricks Ltd "Technical Information Sheet" [31]. The calculations was made with the
data from the information sheet, only the "Inner leaf" was replaced with brick and the calculations
was made with the thermal conductivities from sample series B.10 and C.10, as these were the
lowest in their CR concentration-series. The material thickness of the brick was also changed from
102 mm [31] to 108 mm, which is the most commonly used dimension in Denmark for ﬁred clay
bricks.
Table C.4.9: Thermal conductivity measurements for brick samples.
Table C.4.10: Thermal conductivity measurements for prefabricated bricks.
Additional calculations of U-values:
The following calculations was done with data from [31] in correlation with the measurements
from the thermal conductivity experiments on the brick samples.
Table C.4.11: Calculation of U-value for brick wall with solid bricks (ρ = 2000 kg/m3)
113
==PAGE:130==
Appendix C:
Complete Results From Experiments
Table C.4.12: Calculation of U-value for brick wall with λT value for B.10 brick samples.
Table C.4.13: Calculation of U-value for brick wall with solid bricks (ρ = 2000 kg/m3). Insulation thickness
increased to obtain same U-value as for the wall with bricks samples B.10 in Table C.4.12
Table C.4.14: Calculation of U-value for brick wall with λT value for C.10 brick samples.
Table C.4.15: Calculation of U-value for brick wall with solid bricks (ρ = 2000 kg/m3). Insulation thickness
increased to obtain same U-value as for the wall with bricks samples C.10 in Table C.4.14
114
==PAGE:131==
==PAGE:132==
