==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Improving Language Correction by context-
aware language model
A NLP machine learning thesis
Daniel Cohen Larsen (s134249)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The objective of this thesis is to improve the base Ngram model with global context
information. To this end, this thesis experiments with language modelling and topic
modelling and how to combine these two.
An Ngram model was implemented from scratch with different smoothing tech-
niques culminating in the use of Kneser-Ney smoothing on a trigram model. Then,
for the topic modelling part, a LDA(Latent Dirichlet Allocation) was implemented.
A MoE(mixture-of-experts) model was created that uses the LDA topic predictions
to chose the correct expert(Ngram model) for a given unseen text.
A combined
model and some interpolation models were also created together with some base-
lines. Finally, a MoE model that uses the combined model in case of uncertainty was
implemented.
The results show that the MoE model outperforms the random baseline, and de-
pending on the number texts, chooses the right expert up to 90% of the time. A com-
bined model that is trained on roughly 7 times more data than than an expert in the
MoE model, outperforms it significantly, simply because that much extra data makes
a big difference when the amount of data of each texts is only a couple 100-thousands
words each. The interpolations did not show much as they leaned completely to the
side that performed best every time. When reducing the combined model to the size
of a single text, the performance of combined and MoE was comparable.
The MoE w. combined model shows much better performance than the MoE that
chooses randomly between candidates when uncertain. In case of a combined model
reduced in size to a single document, the MoE with combined is best-performing,
showing that the MoE idea does have some merit.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Formålet med denne afhandling er at forbedre base Ngram-modellen med global kon-
tekst information. Til dette formål eksperimenterer denne afhandling med sprogmod-
ellering og emnemodellering, og hvordan man kombinerer disse to.
En Ngram-model blev implementeret fra bunden med forskellige udjævningsteknikker,
der kulminerede med brugen af kneser-ney-udglatning på en trigram-model. Derefter
blev der for emnemodelleringsdelen implementeret en LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allo-
cation). Der blev implementeret en MoE (blanding-af-eksperter)-model, der bruger
emne-forudsigelserne til at vælge den rigtige ekspert (Ngram-model) til en given uset
tekst. En kombineret model og nogle interpolationsmodeller blev også oprettet sam-
men med nogle baselinjer. Endelig blev en MoE-model, der bruger den kombinerede
model i tilfælde af usikkerhed, implementeret.
Resultaterne viser, at MoE-modellen overgår den tilfældige baseline, og afhængigt
af antal tekster vælger den rigtige ekspert op til 90% af tiden. En kombineret model,
der er trænet på ca. 7 gange så meget trænings data end en expert i MoE-modellen,
overgår den markant, simpelthen fordi den meget større mængde data gør en stor
forskel, når datamængden af hver tekst kun er et par 100 tusinder ord i størrelse.
Interpolationerne viste ikke meget, da de lænede sig helt til den side, der presterede
bedst hver gang. Når man reducerede den kombinerede model til størrelsen på en
enkelt tekst, var ydeevnen for kombineret og MoE sammenlignelig.
MoE med kombineret model viser meget bedre præstation end MoE, der vælger
tilfældigt mellem kandidater, når den er usikker. I tilfælde af en kombineret model,
der er reduceret i størrelse til et enkelt dokument, er MoE med kombineret bedst
mulig, hvilket viser, at MoE-ideen har en vis fortjeneste.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Masters thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Masters degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis is 35-ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, March 2, 2020
Daniel Cohen Larsen (s134249)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my DTU supervisors Lars Kai Hansen and Michael Riis Andersen
for the guidance throughout this project and to make this project possible. I would
also like to thank my friends I’ve made along the way.
Without your continued
support and patience, i would not be where i am and i’m truly grateful. Finally, to
my family, thank you for enabling me to be the best i can be.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Resume
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
13
2.1
Text cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Language models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Ngram language model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Evaluating language models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Topic modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
Mixture of Experts (MoE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3
Results
41
3.1
MoE discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2
Interpolation discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3
Combined oracle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Tuning of variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.5
Other considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Conclusion
55
A An Appendix
57
A.1 Gantt Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is a subcategory of the field of artificial intelligence that is
focused on using algorithms and statistical models to solve problems by learning
patterns and using inference. Provided that sufficient training data is provided, an
ML algorithm can build a mathematical model that can predict or classify a certain
task. The aim of creating such models is to generalise the model be able to perform a
task with as high accuracy as possible on new unseen test data. There are two types
of ML, supervised and unsupervised ML. Supervised ML uses labelled training data
where it can compare its own predictions with the correct answers in order to tweak
itself towards the best mathematical model it can be. Unsupervised ML only has
the unlabelled training data and has to somehow capture the patterns in the training
data with no extra help. Supervised learning is in general the best performing kind
of ML, but has the disadvantage of needing labelled data which is harder to acquire
and often needs manual human labour to create. ML has made waves in the world
because of its surprisingly high performance in the sectors that we as humans have
dominated up until this point. Self-driving cars are a great example of the visual
pattern recognition that ML is used alot for, while alplhaGO is a great example of how
large a search-space a machine driven algorithm can traverse in order to find the best
possible action, beating the top GO player in the world. ML has also demonstrated
the ability to immitate a persons visual and auditory signature resulting in ethical
dilemmas. While ML has transformed some fields, it often fails to deliver because of
lack in quality/quantity of data. Furthermore, ML algorithms build their model based
on the training data they are given, meaning that models can suffer from biases in the
data. This can create awkward situations like a criminal risk assessment system being
biased towards a certain race. IE: The model is only as good as the data we give it.
Nevertheless, ML has come to stay because of its ability to sift through inconceivable
amounts of data that no human would be able to traverse and build understanding of
patterns in that data, and as population grows and as the creation of new devices for
IOT and smart-”eveything”, the amount of data also grows exponentially, creating
the necessity for smart ML algorithms to help us keep up. ML is frequently used in
natural language processing(NLP), meaning that models are trained on large corpuses
of natural language data. These models can capture patterns in human language in
order to analyze sentiment, predict, classify, generate and correct natural language.
NLP is used in speech recognition, grammatical correction and text generation as
examples. Anonymisation of data is also a desirable application now that GDPR has
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
arrived. Ethical issues might arise when models learn to imitate the semantics of a
person and generate replicas. What is real and what is fake? We get closer every
day to that dilemma and companies like openAI and are somewhat holding back
technology in this department out of fear what it may do if released to the public.
Language modelling is a central task in NLP. A statistical language model is
a probability distribution over sequences of words.
Language models can capture
context and grammatical complexity in text and use it to assign higher probability
to sequences of text that resemble correct natural language. A major problem with
building a language model is that training data is never complete enough for the
model to capture all possible word sequences in a language. A possible solution is to
assume that the probability of a word only depends on the previous n words. This
is known as an Ngram model and the assumption for the model is called a Markov
assumption.
See [22] and the theory chapter for more details.
Another issue is
that language models are typically trained on a training set that is biased towards
a specific context. In order to generalize to multiple contexts, the model needs to
be able to adapt to the context it is being tested on. A possible solution is to train
multiple models on different contexts and then have a main model that decodes the
context of a given test set and uses the appropriate model. As mentioned, NLP is an
active field. Amodei et al. [3] got created a few years ago, which is able to recognize
multiple languages and a wide variety of accents and general environmental noise. As
they explain in their paper, ”application-specific language models are important for
achieving top accuracy and we leverage strong existing Ngram models with our deep
speech system”. The paper describes an architecture that is a combination a deep
neural network which has shown to perform well in many scenarios, combined with
application specific language models in the form of Ngrams.
Other papers have explored creating these application-specific/context-aware lan-
guage models that can augment performance of other ML models. The papers: [2],
[70] and [6] explore contextual language modelling for speech. [35] and [24] lever-
age Recurrent Neural Networks RNN achitectures to create context-aware language
models that supposedly outperform the current Ngram solutions that many systems
apply. More on this in the related works part of this chapter.
The importance of this papers research into better context-aware language model
can first and foremost be measured in the number of applications it can augment,
which is essentially all models that output suggested sequences of words in a natural
language scenario.
A more real world example is by the company ”Writereader” [86] where they lever-
age ML to do grammatical correction on incorrectly written sentences from children.
The idea involves having the children write a childrens book about a topic they are
passionate about and then in real time correcting the language specific mistakes they
will inevitably create in the process. By using a model to correct the youngsters work
in real time, the teacher only has to make sure the model is performing as intended,
as opposed to going around the class room to correct every single students mistake
manually. Currently, there aren’t enough capable teachers available, so reducing the
load on a teacher in any way is relevant. Learning to read by creating books will im-
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Related works
3
prove the critical language tools that the next generation of thinkers need to succeed
in the future.
A goal of the language models this paper explores is to perhaps improve their
model. Curently, writereader uses a form of Ngram model. Even though writereader
might be a focus, the product of this research can be effortlessly applied to other
applications such as speech recognition and machine translate with minimal work.
The goal of this thesis is to improve the Ngram language model with a contex-
tual element.
The syntactic-focused scope of an Ngram language model with the
semantic/contextual-focused scope of a topic model. Specifically, the topic model
will be integrated as a MoE(mixture-of-experts) where each expert is a topic with a
corresponding model trained on that kind of topic. The mixture will decide on one
specific model that is the best for the unseen document(other experts give 0 and the
chosen expert gives 1). Other improvements and experimentation in the process of
this will also be made as this thesis is foremost an exploration of an area of natural
language processing. It should be mentioned that this thesis is not interesting in
beating the state of the art, but more of the conceptual proofs and discoveries. What
matters is the relative performance between models. It is further difficult to compete
with the amount of data available to the models in this thesis.
The hypothesis is that contextual information will boost performance of the model
significantly.
In order to make improvements, first, work will be done on understanding and
creating Ngram language models in order to have a baseline to compare performance
to. After that, experimentation with topic models and the eventual combination of
Ngram and topic models will be done.
In the essence of this, the next part of chapter 1 highlights the rather big area of
language modelling and topic modelling, chapter 2 (theory) will highlight the theory of
language modelling, specifically Ngrams, and topic models, specifically LDA. Chapter
3 will show the results of the implementation effort. Chapter 4 will then discuss the
simplifications and decisions that have lead to the results and also both what could
have been done differently and what could be done in the future.
1.1
Related works
This thesis’ final product is a context-specific language model(LM) that utilises both
a syntactic Ngram model and a LDA topic model in a mixture-of-experts(MoE) en-
semble. Therefore this chapter will highlight the parts of such a model.
On figure 1.1, the composition of a context-specific LM is shown. A section will
discuss each of the squares. One for the field of language models, then the field of text-
classification (topic modelling etc.) and then it will funnel down to context-specific
language models. Pros and cons will be discussed and so will this thesis’ differences
to the rest.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Diagram of context-specific LM.
1.1.1
Language model
With the help of a summary medium article[53], this language model part will be
written. Just as this thesis started with implementing an Ngram model, it would be
apt to start with the count-based language model. These models have been explained
in the theory chapter, but in few words, Ngram models look at the last n words and try
to capture the patterns in these. The principle of only looking at a few words instead
of all previous words is called a Markov assumption. Ngrams estimate probability
from counting and in order to handle 0-count Ngrams, smoothing is applied. The
prevalent smoothing techniques involve K-value smoothing(see 2.3.4.1), kneser-ney
smoothing(see 2.3.8) which performs way better and modified kneser-ney [71] which
is one of the best Ngram smoothing techniques to this day. A study of smoothing
techniques can be seen in Chen and Chen [16].
The issue with Ngram models is the data sparsity. The number of possible sentence
combinations grows exponentially with respect to the vocabulary size, the sentence
length and the number of context sentences. Since the Ngrams are stored in a table,
there are essentially very many empty/0-count Ngrams. This issue is manageable at
small data-sizes but it does not scale well. Fortunately, this thesis works with small
amounts of data, when working with Ngrams.
Around this time, experiments with whole-sentence language models were also
being done. [43](trigger-based language model)(1993) and [73](Whole sentence max-
imum entropy LM)(1997) were some of such models.
Neural networks(NN) do not suffer from the data sparsity issue, which is why they
were the next evolution. NNLM are also called continuous-space language models.
Data sparsity is solved because NNs embed words as vectors. They work on the idea
that words semantically close to each other will likely appear close in the vector space.
This effect is dramatically shown by the famous word2vec[56] example where king -
man + woman = queen, meaning that these vector calculations result in the vector of
the word queen. NNLM can capture context on sentence/corpus/subword(character)-
level since they are not bound by word-level like Ngrams are. Many NNLMs still
work off a Markov assumption of a defined length horizon. The first neural networks
used for language modelling were the feed-forward NNLM[10], then hierarchical feed-
forward NNLM’s [66] and [63] as they performed better.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Related works
5
FFNNLMs were developed and experimented with for language modelling for
about 9 years. These papers included: [10](2003), [74](2007), [64](2007), [46](2011)
and finally culminating in a comparison between FFNNLM and RNNLM [76](2012)
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [59] began being the most popular neural
network language model around 2010 and continued from there. It was improved one
year later with a factorisation of the output layer which decreased the complexity [58].
The difference from feed-foward neural networks is that they maintain a hidden-layer
of neurons with recurrent connections to its own previous values. This way they are
not limited in the size of context as the feed-forward neural networks are. Context
being defined as a number of previous sentences of arbitrary length. Performance-
wise, RNNs have shown to outperform carefully tuned Ngram LMs and feed-forward
neural networks too. Mikolov et al. [60] and Povey et al. [69] shows the state-of-the-
art performance RNNs achieved at the time. Another nice thing about RNNs, is
that the context size parameter doesn’t exist, meaning that a difficult to determine
variable has been removed.
Recurrence is not always a blessing, as the dynamic nature of such a network
makes it so that an input can blow up exponentially on the subsequent recurrences.
Furthermore, the range of context of these initial RNN’s was rather limited though
because of the vanishing gradient problem. When training, the gradient can become
so small that it can completely halt further training of the neural network. This is
further highlighted in the older articles: [28] and [9] where it is indicated that the
gradient becomes increasingly ill-behaved the farther back in time an error signal
must be propagated. This makes it hard to learn arbitrarily long-span phenomena.
Attempt at fixing this issue in order to gain access to long-term dependency was made
in 1997 when the Long short-term memory(LSTM)[29] RNN architecture was created.
Its not a perfect fix though, and neither is the somewhat mitigating gradient clipping
of 2012 [68]. Work on a more effective learning algorithm has also been done in 2011
with a hessian-free optimisation [51].
The GRU-cell[17](2014) and Gated Feedback Recurrent Neural Networks [18] also
somewhat fix this issue, though they have other negatives. Long-range dependency
will later on be shown to be fixed by context-dependency and ultimately by the
transformer-XL.
Switching the focus of RNNs to subword-level and character-level, which is some-
thing that Ngrams couldnt do, have shown to perform better than word-level RNNs.
This is partially because the lower levels can begin to put permutations of the same
word in structurally related embeddings. So ”explain” and ”explaining” can be as-
sociated. A character-level LM can be seen in [38]. A hybrid version also appeared.
The gated word-character RNN [61] uses a gate to decide on whether to represent a
word by character- or word-level. This kind of model could use character-level inputs
to represent rare and OOV(out-of-vocabulary) words better than previously.
For an exploration of the limits of language modelling from 2016, see Jozefowicz
et al. [37]
Around this time, RNNLMs yielded state-of-the-art performance in many cases.
See Jozefowicz et al. [37](2016) and Shazeer et al. [75](2017). State-of-the-art for some
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
tasks was held by [62](2018), which narrowly outperformed context-specific language
models of the same time, such as TopicRNN[24] (see context-specific LM section).
Adversarial learning[62] was a new way of pertubation that seemed to perform very
well at around the same time. In the TopicRNN paper: Dieng et al. [24], one sees
that TopicRNN gets outperformed only by the adversarial algorithm: Miyato, Dai,
and Goodfellow [62].
2017 was a special year. Transformers were first created here, they have been
a big step forward and has made big waves in the NLP community.
They work
similarly to RNNs, but do not require the sequences of data be processed in order.
Usually, it matters that the words of a sentence are taken in order from beginning
of sentence to the end of sentence, but since the transformer is bidirectional this
doesn’t matter. Because of this, transformers allow much better parallelization and
because of this, transformers have been trained on truly massive amounts of data.
More than was possible before. BERT(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers) is one such pretrained model from google. GPT-2 is openAI’s version
and is an unsupervised transformer LM that achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and
perplexity on 7 of 8 zero-shot tasks! This is presumably the current cutting
edge LM and has truly rocked the world of language modelling.
Transformer XL ([4]) has better ability to capture long-range dependency than
the vanilla transformer because of an added recurrence element. Transformer-XL too
achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple language modelling benchmarks.
1.1.2
Text classification (topic models)
Most latent topic models use the same embedding. This embedding is called the ”Bag-
of-Words” (BoW) and it is an embedding of words where word order and grammar
is disregarded and every word is represented by the unique word and it’s frequency
in the given sentence/document. The reason this embedding makes sense for topic
modelling is that topics are collections of words that are semantically similar. While
bag-of-words are unigrams, there have been experimentation with bigram embeddings
instead as some words co-occur such as; ”hong kong”.
LSA(latent semantic analysis), created in Deerwester et al. [23] and works by ma-
trix decomposition (SVD)(singular value decomposition) on a term-document matrix
and is a technique that is not used as often today. LSAs pros are that its quick and
efficient to use, while the cons are uninterpretable embeddings and LSA needs a very
large set of documents and vocabulary. It’s usually used as a baseline.
pLSA[31](1999) stands for probabilistic latent semantic analysis. It uses a prob-
abilistic method instead of SVD. pLSA is usually not used much.
LSA is more
commonly used as a baseline performance, and if one wants the best performance,one
jumps straight to LDA which outperforms pLSA. pLSA does not know how to assign
probability to unseen documents and the parameters grows linearly with documents,
so pLSA is liable to overfitting.
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Related works
7
Finally LDA[13](2003) was created as a bayesian version of PLSI, which is a
generative probabilistic model that assumes a dirichlet prior over topics. The pro of
LDA is that overfitting is being somewhat mitigated compared to PLSI. A major pro
of LDA is that it can generalise to new documents. Even if the dataset hasn’t been
seen before, one can sample from the dirichlet distribution and continue. This is a
major reason for choosing LDA over pLSA which is in trouble if the document data
point doesn’t exist in the model.
LDA was extended by David Blei in 2007 in the paper Blei and Lafferty [12], which
slightly improved the performance.
One of the best performing topic models is the lda2vec[65] model. This model
combines LDA[13] and word2vec[56] and learns word, document and topic vectors
simultaneously. Deep learning usually performs very well which is why its no suprise
that lda2vec is a natural extension of LDA.
Neural topic models are the natural extension and have been explored in a variety
of ways. Cao et al. [15](2015), Miao, Grefenstette, and Blunsom [54](2017) are some
such papers. Neural variational inference is a hot topic in topic modelling right now
and one such article is: Miao, Grefenstette, and Blunsom [54](2017/2018).
It seems that the state-of-the-art of topic modelling right now is to use a trans-
former for it. One such transformer could be BERT. BERT is a better performing
Word2Vec that also embeds words in a vector space where clusters of words can be
considered topics. Many still refer to the LDA model as a good understandable topic
model though.
1.1.3
Context-specific language models
Context-specific language models introduce larger-scope context to language mod-
els that are traditionally narrow. More generally, topics are largely semantic and
language models are largely syntactic(IE: focus on sentences instead of documents).
There are two primary ways that context is added. Either the context vector is
added on the input/output as an additional feature, or a pre-trained/prior learned
topic distribution is used to rescore the output.
A third kind involves an ensem-
ble of many separately trained models and then either a mixture IE: mixture-of-
experts(MoE) or one specific LM from topical information is chosen. This is sort of
what the MoE model in this thesis does.
This chapter will be discussing the context-specific language models of note in the
last couple decades. It can be quite difficult to distinguish these from the language
modelling part of related works written earlier as most papers try to fix the long-term
issue of language modelling.
In 1990, Kuhn and De Mori [41] presented a simple technique used to bring long
span context info into Ngram language models. Here, a language model can consider
long-span context by caching words when they appear so that next time higher prob-
ability is assigned to the word. If, for example, the text is about elephants, then a
model will see the word ”elephant” for the first time and assign low probability to
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
the word because it is rare. It will then cache ”elephant” and next time it is seen,
it will assign higher probability to ”elephant”. The practical way it works is that a
language model score is a result of a model trained on the K last words interpolated
with a general model. That way, a general model can fit unseen documents better by
training on its context as it goes. This kind of model is quite robust to unfamiliar
input that might contain errors as is very common.
Similar to the cache-LM is the LSA-based approach ([8] (2000),[21] (1998). Long-
span history is represented as a vector in latent semantic space. Calculating the base
LSA-estimated word probability on cosine similarity between the hypothesised word
and the history results in similarity-based probabilities. These probabilities are then
interpolated with Ngram probabilities.
Another idea at the time was to topic-condition LMs [40](1993), [34](1999), where
training data is partioned into subsets that each only contains data of one topic. Each
of these subsets have a separate language model trained on them and at runetime the
most appropriate one is chosen for a given unseen context. This way, for each topic,
one has a language model that is conditioned to that specific topic. This is quite
similar to the idea of the MoE model of this thesis. By assigning models to specific
topics, one can chose the most appropriate one for new unseen contexts.
A breakthrough in context-specific language models happened in 2012 with [55].
Their ”context dependent recurrent neural network language model(CDRNNLM)
achieved state-of-the-art results on the penn treebank dataset(which is well known).
This was done by adding topic information from a chunk of previous sentences to an
RNN language model on a given sentence. The topic distribution represented as a
vector of probabilities of previous n words is used when computing the hidden state
of the RNN each pass. This kind of moving window of previous sentences has roots
in the previous ideas of considering a chunk of previous items in order to have better
contextual information in the model. The latent topic information of the previous
chunk of sentences in this context-model is extracted by a latent-dirichlet-allocation
(LDA) topic model [13]. This is the same topic model used in this thesis and is still
to this present day one of the most iconic and used topic models with a massive
amount of citations on its original paper. CDRNNLM chooses to explicitly compute
a context vector based on this sentence history and provide it to a recurrent neural
network as an additional input. This allows for sophisticated and pre-existing topic
modelling techniques to be used with little overhead (LDA etc.). This also means
that big pretrained models can be used by the model with little overhead, which has
some advantages over end-to-end. For small amounts of data, it is an advantage to
be able to add a topic model that has been trained on massive amounts of data. Sim-
ilarly, around the same time,[89](2012),[5](2011) used similar approaches to bringing
information into a LM from the side. One of the main reason for using the topic
information as additional input to a model instead of using many submodels trained
on one topic each, is that training data will be less fragmented. The fragmentation of
training data into subgroups for each topic reduces the amount of data for each sub-
model significantly. [55] solves this, and also avoids the vanishing gradient problem
[9],[29] as was described earlier. This paper seems to be a milestone that many papers
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Related works
9
later on in this section refer back to as being similar, indicating that this paper has
had a great amount of significance.
Mikolov and Zweig [55] results show that the kneser-ney-smoothed 5-gram model
performs slightly worse than the RNNLM. Furthermore, in the results of Mikolov
and Zweig [55], the RNN+LDA-model performs best. This indicates that integrating
topic data into the model outperforms caching. It also indicates that LDA might
perform slightly better than LSA and finally that in whatever case topic information
improves the performance of the model. Ngram+caching still outperforms the feed-
forward neural network language models. What is also interesting is the fact that
interpolating with a 5-gram model peforms better than RNN+LDA and interpolating
with 5-gram+cache further performs the best.
In 2014, Mikolov et al. [57] propose an RNN able to learn contextual features
with stochastic gradient descent. This is an attempt to partially solve the vanishing
gradient problem in a simple way. This is done by having the model posses both a
fully connected recurrent matrix for quickly changing hidden units and a diagonal
matrix that encourages the state of the context units to change slowly. The fast layer
learns similarly to an Ngram model while the slow layer learns topic information
like a cache model [41],[55]. This kind of structure makes sense, since context is a
longer-term property so it should change slowly, while syntactic properties of a given
sentence should change rapidly. Small performance improvements over the standard
LSTM model can be seen in the results and the model outshines LSTM if there is
a constraint to model size. Ngram+cache is used as a baseline again where it shows
quite good performance, even though its slightly worse than most of the neural models,
especially when the neural models scale in hidden units.
As is apparent, the notion of integrating context info into a neural language model
is a central idea for many of these articles. Lint et al. [50] constructs context informa-
tion by predicting a BoW representation from the previous sentences with a seperate
model and Wang and Cho [80] builds BoW context from previous sentences and
integrates it into an LSTM architecture.
In 2016, [36] propose the document context language models(DCLMs).
These
models explore a multi-level recurrent architecture that combines local and global(document-
level) information. They propose a model that incorporates context-information into
the hidden state of the RNN and another model that incorporates the context info
in the output. The model that incorporates in the hidden state gives slightly better
results. Earlier models that also uses topic information from the entire document to
predict words in each sentence are Mikolov and Zweig [55](2012) and Le and Mikolov
[47](2014)
In 2016, Wang and Cho [81] proposed a late fusion modification of an LSTM
model to incorporate context-information from preceding sentences. They propose
two versions, either a BoW or sequence of BoW version. This paper relates to back
to Mikolov and Zweig [55] as many others.
One of the main differences is that
Wang and Cho [81] explicitly models preceding sentences to approximate corpus-level
probability while Mikolov and Zweig [55] wants to get better context of the current
sentence. Its a matter of scope. Wang and Cho [81] is also an end-to-end model,
==PAGE:22==
10
1 Introduction
meaning that it does not use an external measure to get the feature vector (like LDA
or LSA), but learns the whole model and vector in one process. Furthermore, the
last-fusion is chosen because it outperforms early fusion, meaning that fusing the
context-info into the language model later in the process(usually output) is superior.
Also in 2016, Ahn et al. [1] utilizes the topic associated to the fact pairs derived
from a knowledge graph Vinyals and Le [79]. Both Ahn et al. [1] and TopicRNN[24]
described in the next sentence use a hybrid model that combines the predicted word
distribution given by both a topic model and standard RNNLM.
TopicRNN[24] is an end-to-end model that combines topic and RNN language
models together . It uses a variational autoencoder and it incorporates topic infor-
mation through a linear transformation to rescore the prediction of the next word.
Implementing TopicRNN was a consideration in this thesis but ultimately it was not
decided. The idea of TopicRNN is however very close to what this thesis is about
and is therefore a quite significant paper. TopicRNN has produced quite promising
results and works by combining the syntactical element of a RNNLM with the se-
mantic element of a latent topic model. Instead of choosing the dirichlet-distribution
from LDA, a gaussian distribution is chosen as the topic distribution. It works by
drawing a topic vector from a distribution, then computing the hidden state where
the weights of the former hidden state and former output are given as input recur-
rently. The stopword indicator is drawn from a Bernoulli distribution and finally the
probability is calculated with or without context information based on whether it is a
stopword or not. If it is a stopword, the context information is not taken into account.
Just as mentioned earlier in Wang and Cho [81], late fusion is better performing and
so TopicRNN fuses topic info at the end output when probability is calculated and
not in the hidden layer.
Ghosh et al. [26], an extension of the LSTM architecture, and Mikolov and Zweig
[55] are quite similar in the idea that TopicRNN[24] has. Just as Wang and Cho [81],
TopicRNN[24] is end-to-end and does therefore not require pre-trained topic model
features as Mikolov and Zweig [55] and Ghosh et al. [26]. TopicRNN also relates to
Mikolov et al. [57].
Some positives of TopicRNN include:
• The topic distribution learnt by TopicRNN can be a useful alternative to LDA
• It has an interesting way of handling stopwords by using a stopwords Bernoulli
distribution and only applying topic information in the case where it is not a
stopword.
TopicRNNs results show that it appears to outperform Mikolov and Zweig [55] and
all other listed models except Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow [62] which performs the
best. Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow [62] presents a pertubation technique for RNNs,
but is not a contextual-specific language model.
Lau, Baldwin, and Cohn [42] introduces attention based convolutional neural
network to extract semantic topics. It extends the RNN cell with additional topic
==PAGE:23==
1.1 Related works
11
features, Attention is an important notion and is the main reason for the transform-
ers(same year) exciting performance.
Next up is the Topic Compositional Neural Language model (TCNLM) [82](2017)
combining global and local information as the previous many models have done. The
novel thing about this promising language model is that it uses a neural language
model and neural topic model. It learns the topic model and language model jointly
under a variational autoencoder(VAE)[39] framework, that can infer topics by max-
imizing variational lower bound, for an efficient end-to-end training process.
As
mentioned, end-to-end is the new craze for the latest LMs. It uses a global neural
topic model of a document to create a mixture of experts(MoE) (proposed in 2017):
Shazeer et al. [75] where each expert correspond to one latent topic. The way the
MoE is trained is by extending each weight matrix of the RNN to be an ensemble
of topic-dependent weight matrices. How much each ensemble member is used de-
pends on the document-dependent probability of the corresponding topic to a given
ensemble member of the MoE. In other simpler words, the mixture of experts is a
mixture of RNN’s that each correspond to a single topic. Depending on the unseen
context, a mix of these RNN’s depending on what topics the document is about will
be used to output a combined probability. The way these topics are mixed, is by
weighing the experts by topic-usage probabilities. This thesis model is also a sort of
MoE, where each models contribution is either 0 or 1. All models except one are 0,
meaning that the mixture only gets affected by one chosen model at a time. As with
other integrated models, it does not use a pre-trained topic model but considers the
word-sequence prediction task, as opposed to for example Mikolov and Zweig [55].
Previous models that integrate topics into language models such as Mikolov and
Zweig [55] and Lau, Baldwin, and Cohn [42] have the limitation of having to balance
the hidden units and number of topics when integrating the topic information. Alter-
natively, rescoring the distribution over words with a topic vector like TopicRNN[24],
there is an issue with having to design the vocabulary of the topic model.
Wang et al. [82] has shown to outperform other previous pure-RNN and context-
specific RNN models.
This includes the TopicRNN[24] model mentioned earlier,
LDA+LSTM and LCLM from Wang and Cho [81] and Lau, Baldwin, and Cohn
[42].
==PAGE:24==
12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
Before exploring the theory of language models, a few things regarding the data that
these models get as input, need to be discussed. A major part of machine learning
is the correct handling of the data. Simply said, badly handled or insufficient data
results in bad machine learning results 100% of the time.
2.1
Text cleaning
2.1.1
Padding
When converting a sentence into Ngrams, in order to get all Ngrams of the sentence,
padding on both sides of a sentence is needed. BOS(beginning of sentence) is inserted
in the beginning of a sentence, and EOS(End of sentence) is inserted in the end.
The first bigram of sentence: ”Test one two three” is then bigram(”BOS”, ”TEST”).
Likewise the last bigram is bigram(”three”,”EOS”). These edge-Ngrams tells us about
words often used in the beginning or end of a sentence and carry syntactic value. For
higher Ngrams, more padding is needed.
2.1.2
Stopwords
Stop-words don’t have much semantic meaning, as it’s existence is either purely for
grammatical reasons or refers back to a previous word (something that is hard for a
language model to model). Removing these in situations where only semantics matter
is almost necessary. They are kept in syntactic models though. ”The” or ”It” are
examples of stopwords in the NLP-community. NLTK(NLP library for python, see
[14]) currently has a list of 179 stop-words.
2.1.3
Tokenizing
When working with raw text data, a stream of characters/words is very normal. In
order to work with the data, the sentences must first be split according to some clever
regex rules. One cant simply split a sentence by ”.” as ”mr.” and ”etc.” also contain
”.” and don’t indicate the end of a sentence. Models for splitting sentences correctly
can be found in most NLP libraries. Splitting a corpus into it’s token sentences is
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theory
tokenizing. These sentences can then be split into words by the space between them.
Ordering is kept as ordering is very important for NLP. There is also the question
of whether dog and dogs should be considered the same word or not. In this paper,
they are different words, since they aren’t interchangeable syntactically.
2.1.4
Symbols
We don’t want the model to consider ”.” a word, so at least ”.” should be removed
from corpus.
2.1.5
Unknown words
A vocabulary contains all words in the training set and their frequency. Vocabularies
are needed for language models and has an inherent problem. What happens when
a test set contains words not in the vocabulary IE: OOV(out of vocabulary words)?
0 probability words result in inaccurate probabilities or in some models result in 0
probability for the entire test set.
One limited solution to the issue is that the vocabulary is kept closed. This means
that the vocabulary of trained model contains all words in the test set. For example,
one can chose all words in a lexicon as the dictionary.
Another solution that has been chosen for this papers implementation is the
Pseudo-word ”UNK”, which is meant to symbolise all unknown words. In this way,
all words will be in the vocabulary of the trained model, because words not in the
vocabulary will be converted to the ”UNK”-word. The UNK word needs to be defined
in the training step and one way to do it is to define an occurrence limit. Meaning
that words occurring fewer than a specified number of times are replaced with the
”UNK” word. This replacement strategy both handles the definition of UNK and also
the removal of words occurring too few times to really define a proper pattern.
2.1.6
Lowercase
All words except the special words(”BOS”/”EOS”/”UNK”) should be normalised to
lowercase, so that the model doesn’t accidentally think that ”The” and ”the” are
two different words.
2.2
Language models
A statistical language model is able to model spoken language by observing the pat-
terns in our language (see [22] for source material). As a probability distribution, it
can assign probability to each ”next word” or entire sequences like for example an
entire sentence or chapter, depending on how likely it is to appear based on the data
it has been trained on. Language models have many applications such as: Machine
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Ngram language model
15
Translation, Speech recognition, Sentiment analysis, part-of-speech tagging, parsing,
handwriting recognition and information retrieval. Language models can make dis-
tinctions between words that sound familiar to us, for example; ”recognise speech”
and ”wreck a nice beach” [84].
First, let’s focus on the syntactic patterns in language. Even though a sentence
contains the same words ”All of a sudden i notice three guys standing on the sidewalk”,
making it semantically similar, the sentence ”on guys all I of notice sidewalk three a
sudden standing the” would be given way less probability syntactically, since ”the”,
as an example, never is the last word in a sentence because of grammatical reasons.
The fact that grammatical correctness has higher probability in the training data,
makes it so that the model learns correct grammar.
In order to get the probability of a word wn, we would ideally want to look at
the entire history h of words preceding wn IE: P(w|h). h can be written as wn−1
1
.
Now, lets say the we wanted the probability for ”the”, given the previous words
”transparent that”. One would need to take the amount of times ”transparent that
the” appears given how many times ”transparent the” appears, IE: the probability
of branching to ”transparent that the”, also called; relative frequency counts. C(x)
means the count of x and wn
1 means the sequence of n words as described in [22].
P(wn|wn−1
1
) = p(the|transparent that) = C(transparent that the)
C(transparent that)
(2.1)
If instead, one is interested in the joint probability (P(w1, w2, ..., wn)), the proba-
bility of seeing n specific words/events occur together, can also be given by the history
of words with the chain rule.
P(w1)P(w2|w1)P(w3|w2
1)...P(wn|wn−1
1
) =
n
∏
k=1
P(wk|wk−1
1
)
(2.2)
Using the entire history is infeasible, since there exists no corpus in the world, large
enough to contain all combinations of words. Language is also dynamic, meaning that
even small changes would make a sentence have zero probability. New sentences pop
up often that has not been seen before. Instead of the exact probability P(wn|wn−1
1
),
an approximation of history is needed.
2.3
Ngram language model
An Ngram model is a simple language model that operate from a Markov assumption.
A Markov assumption assumes the entire history of previous words in a sequence to
be approximated by just a few last words.
P(wn|wn−1
1
) ≈P(wn|wn−1
n−N+1)
(2.3)
This assumption makes sense because syntax is local in such a way that a few previous
words are a good enough approximation for most applications.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theory
If n = 1, IE a unigram model, is also called a BoW(bag-of-words) model which is
much used simplified representation for nlp. Let’s consider the simplest case: Only
the previous word matters for the probability of the next word.
This is called a
bigram, bi = 2 words. The complete word sequence would then be:
P(wn
1 ) ≈
n
∑
k=1
P(wk|wk−1)
(2.4)
IE: The probability of the next word in a sequence, given all previous n words, is it
approximated only by the last word.
As higher order Ngrams are chosen, more data is needed, so one needs to consider
what size of Ngram is necessary for a given training data. If one chooses an Ngram
too high, the Ngram matrix would be very sparse and the Ngrams would look too
much like the training set which is not useful for generalising to unseen test data.
2.3.1
Splitting a sentence
Splitting a sentence into bigrams looks like this:
P(BOS the elephant jumped high EOS) = P(the|BOS) P(elephant|the)
P(jumped|elephant) P(high|jumped) P(high|EOS) P(EOS|high)
2.3.2
Maximum Likelihood Estimation MLE
So how do we calculate the probability of a bigram? The answer is MLE. MLE is
used for estimating Ngram probability. For a bigram C(xy), the MLE is the count of
the specific bigram normalised by the counts of all bigrams branching from x. This
frequency is called the relative frequency. The formula for this is seen formally below:
P(wn|wn1) =
C(wn−1wn)
∑
w C(wn−1w)
(2.5)
The denominator can be simplified, as the count of all bigrams is the same as the
count of x appearing in the training corpus.
P(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn)
C(wn−1)
(2.6)
Extending MLE to the general Ngram case:
p(wn|wn−1
n−N+1) = C(wn−1
n−N+1wn)
C(wn−1
n−N+1)
(2.7)
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Ngram language model
17
2.3.3
Log-probabilities
Multiplying large amounts of probabilities X that are X ≤1 results in numerical
underflow since sub-one numbers get smaller and smaller when multiplied. Gener-
ally, its smart to convert probability to log-probability to avoid then and also make
the values easier to work with. It’s especially convinient that probabilities that need
multiplying are instead added together in log-space. One can always convert back-
and-forth:
p1 ∗p2 ∗p3 ∗p4 = exp(log p1 + log p2 + log p3 + log p4)
(2.8)
2.3.4
Smoothing
A problem arises when there are cases of Ngrams in the test set with 0 probability
in the trained model.
Ngrams should have a probability in all cases, as the test
set probability would be 0 if any probability multiplied with it is 0(infinite if log-
probability). The test set probability will be wildly underestimated. This also makes
it impossible to calculate perplexity.
This issue can be mitigated by moving some weight from the highly occurring
Ngrams to the less occurring ones. This is called smoothing.
Smoothing or Discounting is the act shaving off probability mass from more
frequent instances to instances never seen before.
2.3.4.1
K-smoothing
The simplest version of k-smoothing is called laplace smoothing. It’s also called add-
one smoothing because the principle is simply to add 1 to all Ngram counts before
normalising into probabilities. This means that no Ngram has 0 count. This is a too
simple concept that doesn’t perform well enough to really be used. The reason it
doesn’t perform well is because it moves too much probability mass to all the zeros,
resulting in a massive change to the count matrix.
The MLE is so:
Plaplace(wi) = C(wi)
N + V
(2.9)
Here, V is the Vocabulary. Applied to bigram:
P(wn|wn−1) =
C(wn−1wn) + 1
∑
w(C(wn−1w) + 1) = C(wn−1wn) + 1
C(wn−1) + V
(2.10)
Since 1 has been added to every count, we need to add V in the denominator to com-
pensate for the V extra. If this wasn’t done, the summed probability would exceed 1.
K-value smoothing is just add-k-smoothing instead of 1. This enables us to opti-
mise the k-value on a held-out development set to move less probability mass.
PAdd−k(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn) + k
C(wn−1) + kV
(2.11)
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theory
In order to add k to the count of the bigram, the denominator is again compensated
by the extra count of a given k to preserve the probability bound of summing to 1.
The k-value is a hyper-parameter with specific value that results in optimal model
performance. In order to find this value, k is varied in order to find the local minimum
of perplexity, giving the highest probability on the development set. As can be seen
Figure 2.1: Tuning of k-parameter on 2 training sets by looking it local minimum
of perplexity(y-axis) given values of k(x-axis).
on figure:2.1, the local minimum is around 10−2 meaning that a k-value of around
10−2 achieves best performance for the model on these two training sets. Furthermore,
it seems to be a very similar value for both training sets, indicating that the optimal
k-value of theses training sets seems to be very similar. The fact that the optimal
k-value doesn’t fluctuate much is great, since it means that it is more generalised.
2.3.5
Backoff
Backoff is a hierarchical structure that backs off to a lower order Ngram(N-1) if there is
zero evidence for a given Ngram. As an example, if a trigram has zero evidence(never
seen), we back off to the bigram and if the bigram doesn’t have evidence, the unigram
is considered. By using less context sometimes, it helps the model generalize to unseen
contexts, in the sense that if a trigram doesnt exist, then it’s better to use a bigram.
With backoff, similarly to smoothing, probability mass needs to be shaved from
higher order Ngrams to the lower order Ngrams.
This is because a 0 probability
trigram now has a possibility of returning non-0 probability because of backoff, so its
important to do this shave to prevent the total assigned probability from going over
1. The function for distributing/smoothing probability is called α and is the discount.
α is not to be confused with α applied on backoff is called katz-backoff. The formula
for katz-backoff:
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Ngram language model
19
PBO(wn|wn−1
n−N+1) =
{
P ∗(wn|wn−1
n−N+1)
if C(wn
n−N+1 > 0)
α(wn−1
n−N+1)PBO(wn|wn−1
n−N+2)
otherwise
As can be seen in the formula, we chose the Ngram probability if it exists, and else
we back off to (N-1)gram and adds the discount function α. P ∗is the discounted
probability.
2.3.6
Interpolation
Simple linear interpolation combines probabilities from all lower orders of Ngrams.
Each order Ngram (trigram/bigram/unigram) are weighted by a parameter λ. Linear
interpolation of a trigram looks as such:
Pint(wn|wn−2wn−1) = λ1P(wn|wn−2wn−1) + λ2P(wn|wn−1) + λ3P(wn)
(2.12)
Since λ is a weighing parameter, it sums to one: ∑
i λi = 1 This hyper-parameter
is learned from a held-out corpus such as a development set of which the model is
not trained upon. Varying the parameter value to maximise the likelihood of the
development corpus find the optimal value. A popular method for optimising is the
EM(Estimation Maximisation)-algorithm to converge on a local optimum of λ.
If a trigram has a bigram with accurate counts, it can be inferred that the trigram
is more trustworthy, since the context of the trigram is more accurate. This principle
tweaks the weights in favour of those kinds of trigrams which is beneficial.
P(wn|wn−2wn−1) = λ1(wn−1
n−2)P(wn|wn−2wn−1)+λ2(wn−1
n−2)P(wn|wn−1)+λ3(wn−1
n−2)P(wn)
(2.13)
2.3.7
Absolute discounting
Absolute discounting subtracts a fixed discount value from all training set counts
(commonly d = 0.75). The 0.75 was found by [19] to be a pretty good discount esti-
mate for bigrams. The subtracted discount can then be used to add to 0-probability
eNgrams to ensure they are not 0 probability (as that ruins the summed probability).
Subtracting a discount from a high count wont affect much, but it will greatly modify
smaller counts which is fine as low counts are not very trustworthy and we want to
omit them to focus on the higher count grams. Following the example of [22], lets
consider a bigram as a simple example:
PAbsoluteDiscounting(wi|wi−1) = C(wi−1wi) −d
∑
v C(wi−1v) + λ(wi−1)P(wi)
(2.14)
Again, interpolation is about considering a weighted sum of different orders of Ngram
below the targeted Ngram. The first part of the formula is the discounted bigram
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Theory
probability and the second part is the weighted unigram probability. Together they
interpolate to a bigram probability. The lowercase ”v” means all the words continued
from wi−1. This is to calculate all the bigram continuations in order to know how
much the of the total number of bigrams, the specific discounted bigram is.
2.3.8
Kneser-Ney Smoothing
Originally from [71] and further modified in [16], interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing
is commonly used as it is one of the best performing smoothing methods. Kneser-Ney
builds upon absolute discounting. Considering the bigram+unigram interpolation ex-
ample used in [2.3.7], the unigram part of the equation suffers from no understanding
of the words preceding itself. This causes undesirable words to be chosen just be-
cause of their higher count instead of being chosen for fitting into the continuation
of a sentence. What Kneser-Ney does, is to get the Pcontinuation(w)(how likely is
w to be a continuation) instead of the P(w)(how likely is w). How do we find this
continuation probability? The answer comes from the idea that if a unigram word
appears in many different continuations instead of just one repeating context, then
it is more likely to appear in a new unseen context.
PCont(w) =
|v : C(vw) > 0|
|(u′, w′) : C(u′w′) > 0|
(2.15)
The nominator is the count of unique bigrams a word w has appeared in as a contin-
uation. The denominator is the count of unique bigrams. IE, the formula is basically
how many times a word continues a unique bigrams of the total unique bigrams.
Another way of looking at this is the number of word types seen to prece w
normalized by the number of words preceding all words:
PCont(w) =
|v : C(vw) > 0|
∑
w′ |v : C(vw′) > 0
(2.16)
The total interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing for bigrams is:
PKN(wi|wi−1) = max(C(wi−1wi) −d, 0)
C(wi−1)
+ λ(wi−1)PCONT INUAT ION(wi)
(2.17)
This formula is the interpolated absolute discount, with a positive constraint and
previously mentioned P_Continuation term for the unigram handling. The positivety
constraint (”max”) makes it so that if the discount is higher than the probability,
then we don’t get negative probability. The second term is the unigram continuation
probability mentioned earlier with the interpolation weight λ. So, more in depth; λ is
the normalising constant that uses the probability mass discounted from the bigram
to assign to PCont. λ is given by:
λ(wi−1) =
d
C(wi−1)|w : c(wi−1, w) > 0|
(2.18)
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Ngram language model
21
As can be seen, the λ is correlated with d.
That is because λ is the amount of
discounted probability mass that can be assigned to the unigram. λ is calculated
by the normalised discount multiplied by the total number of word types that can
follow wi−1, iE: the number of word types discounted, IE: the number of times the
normalised discount has been applied.
Instead of just bigrams, it would be useful to get the generalised formula for
Ngrams, since specifically the trigram version is wanted (as trigram is implemented
in this paper). The general formula is recursive, as we keep backing off to lower orders
until we hit unigram:
PKN(wi|wi−1
i−n+1) = max(cKN(wi
i−n+1 −d, 0)
∑
v cKN(wi−1
i−n+1v)
+ λ(wi−1
i−n+1)PKN(wi|wi−1
i−n+2) (2.19)
Whether we are considering trigram, bigram or unigram the count changes to reflect
what Ngram is being interpolated. The count is such:
CKN(x) =
{
count(x)
for highest order
continuationcount(x)
for lower orders
Where continuation count is the number of unique single word contexts. At the end
of the recursion unigrams are handled
The discount value is a hyper parameter that can be left at 0.75, or alternatively
estimated by keeping probability constant and varying the discount value over a
development set. A local optimum reveals the best value for a given development set,
hopefully improving the model. Below, such an estimation has been made:
Figure 2.2: Tuning of discount-parameter on 2 training sets by looking it local min-
imum of perplexity(y-axis) given values of k(x-axis).
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Theory
2.4
Evaluating language models
A well-performing language model assigns higher probability to more frequently ob-
served sentences than wrong/rarely-observed ones.
2.4.1
Dividing data sets
Usually a data set is split into a training set, a testing set and sometimes a devel-
opment set. The split is usually 80% training, 10% development and 10% test. The
split can either be a section, a random section or even random individual sentences
extracted from throughout the corpus. Training set is used for training the model,
development set is used for tuning parameters and the test set is for measuring per-
formance(perplexity). It’s important that the sets are disjoint, as testing on training
data gives huge inaccuracies because of the bias. Testing on unseen data is important
as we want our model to be able to generalise well to new instances, otherwise a
model wouldn’t be very practical.
2.4.2
Extrinsic evaluation
The best way is to run the whole system end-to-end. Testing the model on an unseen
test set and recording the quality of prediction can be directly compared with other
language models to get an idea of the performance of the model. Extrinsic evaluation
is more expensive as it requires many tests and comparisons. When testing on unseen
data, make sure that the training data for the model is in a similar task/genre and
also in the appropriate dialect(if relevant).
2.4.3
Intrinsic evaluation
Intrinsic evaluation is about measuring the quality of the model quickly to get an idea
of how good the model is independently of any application. It is an approximation
to the extrinsic evaluation and should only be used while developing the model for a
quick measure of quality. Perplexity is usually used an intrinsic metric.
2.4.3.1
Perplexity
Perplexity[22] is used for intrinsic evaluation of language models and is also called
the weighted average branching factor. This means that perplexity is the number
of possible next words that can follow any word. The formula for perplexity is the
inverse probability of the test set normalised by the number of words:
PP(W) = P(w1w2...wN)−1
N =
N
√
1
P(w1w2...wN)
(2.20)
==PAGE:35==
2.5 Topic modelling
23
The denominator in the square root can be approximated using the aforementioned
chain rule to:
PP(W) =
N
v
u
u
t
N
∏
i=1
1
P(wi|w1...wi−1)
(2.21)
Since perplexity is inverse, the higher conditional probability of a sequence of words,
the lower the perplexity value. This means that we want to minimise the perplexity
value in order to maximise conditional probability.
If all N words has equal probability of occurring, the perplexity would simply
be N, but if a word wi occurs more often, the branching factor is still N, but the
perplexity is less, since there is higher chance of branching to the specific word. This
is why perplexity is called weighted average branching factor. Perplexity is lower if
there more defined branches. Lower perplexity means less branching choices from
words.
This is also why the perplexity is way higher for a unigram, than for a
bigram and trigrams are higher than bigrams. Simply, trigrams have less possible
branches and the trigram model is therefore more certain and has higher probability.
This is reinforced by extrinsic evaluation showing that higher Ngrams like trigram
achieve better probability. At the end of this section, it needs to be set in stone,
that perplexity is not a guaranteed metric of better accuracy, but there is often a
correlation.
2.5
Topic modelling
A good language model should use both the syntactic and semantic information of a
document. The Ngram model described above primarily captures syntactic patterns
and is very narrowly focused (last few words).
In order to capture the semantic
meaning, the overall themes/topics needs to be discovered. If, for example, an Ngram
model has been trained on a text about snails, and the new unseen document is about
snails, the topic ”snail” should be identified in the unseen document and from there
the Ngram model trained on snails should be chosen. More generally, it could be
a document about animals, and an Ngram model trained on tigers and monkeys is
still better than a randomly chosen model that might have been trained on treehouse-
building.
So what is a topic?
A topic is a group/set of words under a single theme
or formally: a distribution over terms in a fixed vocabulary.
Topics are initially
hidden/latent until inferred by a topic model. In the case of LDA(seen later on), topics
are latent multinomial variables. Multinomial meaning multiple variables within.
A topic distribution is a distribution of topics iE: a distribution of distribu-
tions and can be used to provide explicit representation of a document. IE: Explain
underlying/latent information in a document. Topic distributions are outcomes of a
topic model.
A topic model is an unsupervised statistical model in NLP, used to identify
abstract topics in a collection of documents. It is assumed that a document contains
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Theory
possibly multiple topics and that topics that are connected have a higher chance to
co-occur in a document.
For BoW(bag-of-words)-based topic models specifically (like LDA), Word order
doesn’t matter as we are only interested in the semantic patterns, meaning that a
generative output has very low probability of a coherent sentence, but the output
gives a good topical understanding through the word mixture it provides.
Uses of topic models are broad and can be used to identify important historical
events [87], recommend books based on past reading [52], understand articles quickly
[72], cluster similar articles [88], sentiment analysis [7], object localisation in images
[20], automatic harmonic analysis for music [33] and bioinformatics [27] to name some.
As can be seen not only NLP benefits from topic models. In our case, it will be used
for language modelling.
The idea is as such: With the topics of an unseen document, one would be able
to decide on the best Ngram model to use for a given unseen document. An Ngram
model is trained on a single document, meaning that the model is trained on some
few specific topics out of all topics. The hypothesis is a such: by making sure that the
right Ngram model is used for an unseen document a significantly higher accuracy
than a randomly chosen Ngram model will be seen, as the Ngram model has been
trained on more similar words instead of a randomly chosen Ngram model.
2.5.1
LDA
This section has drawn from multiple sources of knowledge. Mainly; [13], [25], [48],
[85], [49],[77]. The following videos too: [45], [44], [11]. From this point, LDA notation
is used and what parameters have been defined before might not apply.
LDA is a continuation of the pLSI(probabilistic latent semantic indexing), also
called pLSA(probabilistic latent semantic analysis). pLSA is an alternative to LSA
and models each word in a document as a sample from a mixture model, where
mixture components are multinomial random variables that can be viewed as topics.
Each word being generated from a single topic. Each document is presented as a list of
mixing proportions for mixture components and reduced to a probability distribution
on a fixed set of topics. This resulting distribution is the reduced description of the
document.
pLSA, while a leap forward of LSA, has issues. On document level, no probabilis-
tic model is provided. Each document is only represented by the mixing proportions
for topics. Because of this, the model grows linearly with size of corpus, creating
overfitting issues and it is not clear how to assign probability to an unseen document
outside training data.
In order to fix this, lets first look at the central assumptions. Dimentionality re-
duction methods like LSA/pLSA amongst others all work on a bag-of-words assump-
tion.
Bag-of-words work on an assumption of exchangeability.
Exchangeability
means that word order doesnt matter and that for any permutation of an order of
integers results in the same joint distribution. Exchangeability is applied to words in
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Topic modelling
25
documents and also to documents in a collection. The formula for exchangeability:
P(w1, ...wN) = P(wπ(1), ..., wπ(N))
(2.22)
Since exchangable random variables in a collection has a mixture distribution
representation, the idea is to consider mixture models that capture exchangability
representations for documents and words. This is leads us to LDA.
Latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) is a generative probabilistic model for collec-
tions of discrete data such as collections of documents of words. LDA is a three-level
hierarchical Bayesian model that can discover themes/topics of a collection of docu-
ments of words through posterior inference. The three levels are as such: Collection
level, document level and word level.
Latent means everything we don’t know a priori and is hidden in the data. This
could be themes/topics. The Dirichlet distribution is convenient on simplexes, in
the exponential family and a multivariate generalisation of a β-distribution.
Simplexes are a generalisation of the notion of a triangle or tetrahedron. The
simplex is drawn from the relationship between two probabilities P1 and P2. These
are given by P1 + P2 = 1 for Pi >= 0.
Simplex
1
1
= 1 −
l2
l1
P1
Figure 2.3: Simplex drawing.
For a k −1-simplex, a k-vector θ can exist in the simplex if it contains positive
numbers θi ≥0 and if all values sum to 1 ∑k
i=1 θi, meaning that its a probability
distribution. The probability density of the k-vector on the simplex, IE the Dirichlet
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Theory
distribution θ is given by:
P(θ|α) = Γ(∑k
i=1 αi)
∏k
i=1 Γ(αi)
θα1−1
1
...θαk−1
k
(2.23)
The α is a k-vector(topic long) of positive numbers and Γ(x) is the gamma func-
tion. Please note that α is different from the α mentioned before the LDA chapter.
A gamma function is in layman’s term a generalization of the factorial to complex
numbers. Dirichlet distributions are from the exponential family and have the prop-
erty of conjugating to multinomial distributions which is a good property for what is
needed.
For n dimensions, one has n parameters in α that affects the shape of the distribu-
tion. IE: α is an n-length vector that is responsible for the concentration. Lets have
a look at how varying α values changes the Dirichlet distribution θ: It can be seen
Figure 2.4: Source: LDA guide[25].
that large α values concentrates the distribution to the middle of the triangle where
smaller α concentrates the distribution to the corners of the triangle. Exactly a value
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Topic modelling
27
of 1 makes the distribution uniform or a 2-simplex. We are interested in pushing
the distribution to concentrate in the corners, so an α between 1 and 0 is ideal for
LDA. The low α makes it so that words are likely to belong to a single topic as with
real-word document as the points are nicely in the corners of the simplex.
Allocation means that with the Dirichlet distribution, one can allocate topics to
documents and words in documents to topics.
One way to describe statistical model in order to understand them, is to look at
the imaginary generative process of the model.
Figure 2.5: Figure showing the imaginative generative process of LDA, source: Blei,
Ng, and Edu [13].
On figure: 2.5 to the left, one can see a bunch of topics, each topic a distribution
of words over the vocabulary. Each word in a topic has a probability in the topics
distribution. The generative process entails to first chose a distribution over topics.
For each word in the document, chose a coloured button from the distribution over
topics and then look at the topic associated with that colour and draw a word. This
kind of model is also called a mixed membership model and characteristic of this,
is that mixture-components/topics stay the same from document to document, but
how much each document exhibit each these mixture-proportions/topics changes from
document to document across the whole collection. IE: document topic distribution
signature changes, but the topics themselves don’t. Before presenting the generative
process of LDA, please note that ” ” means ”distributed as” and also note that the
shift to LDA notation means that previous notation might not apply. Also note, that
ξ is a positive real value parameter and is commonly denoted by λ elsewhere. The
generative process can be read of the graphical model.
1. Choose N ∼Poisson(ξ)
2. Choose θ ∼Dir(α)
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Theory
3. For each N words wn
a) Choose topic zn ∼Multinomial(θ)
b) Choose a word wn from P(wn|zn, β), a multinomial probability conditioned
on topic zn
The Poisson distribution is not critical and other document length distributions can
be used. It is assumed that the k value of the Dirichlet distribution is known and
fixed, where k is the dimension of z. This means that the number of topics is defined
beforehand and fixed. The word probabilities are parametized by a kxV matrix β
where βij = P(wj = 1|zi = 1). β is assumed fixed for now and needs to be estimated.
Finally, N is independent of other data generating variables like θ and z. Please note
that N is vocabulary sized now and wn is the n’th word of the vocabulary V. This is
in contrast to earlier where the focus was on sentences and where n, indicated the n
previous words of an Ngram etc.
Taking equation 2.23, lets expand it to give the joint distribution of θ(topic mix-
ture), z(N topics) and w(N words):
P(θ, z, w|α, β) = P(θ|α)
N
∏
n=1
P(zn|θ)P(wn|zn, β)
(2.24)
P(zn|θ) is θi for the unique i such that zi
n = 1. To obtain the marginal distribution
of a document P(w|α, β), integrate over θ and sum over z. in order to remove them
from the left side:
P(w|α, β) =
∫
P(θ|α)
( N
∏
n=1
∑
zn
P(zn|θ)P(wn|zn, β)
)
dθ
(2.25)
Extending this to m documents IE. a corpus is done by taking the product of the
marginal probabilities of a single document (IE: eq:2.25)
P(D|α, β) =
M
∏
d=1
∫
P(θd|α)
( Nd
∏
n=1
∑
zdn
P(zdn|θd)P(wdn|zdn, β)
)
dθd
(2.26)
The three levels of parameters of LDA is the corpus-level(α, β), which are sampled
only once, document-level(θd) sampled once per document and word-level(zdn and
wdn) sampled once per word per document. D is the corpus.
Now, what is the difference between LDA and simple Dirichlet-multinomial clus-
tering model?
The simple model is two-level and the Dirichlet distribution is sampled only
once for the corpus. The multinomial clustering variable is selected once for each
document in the corpus. A set of words are selected for document conditional on the
cluster variable. The most important part is the fact that documents are restricted
to be associated with a single topic.
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Topic modelling
29
LDA on the other hand is three levels and because of this third level, the topic
node is sampled repeatably within a document. Because of this a document can be
associated with multiple topics which is one of the main features of LDA.
Lets dive into the LDA structure by looking at it graphical model, see fig:2.6. In
Figure 2.6: LDA graphical plate model.
the graphical model, nodes are random variables, edges are node dependants between
random variables, shaded nodes are observed while unshaded nodes are hidden. For-
mally: Graphical models define a factorisation of the joint probability distribution on
the set of random variables that are sitting on the graph. Explained in other words,
it defines a factorisation of a joint distribution of all hidden and observed random
variables. Factorisation meaning a mathematical object presented as a product of
several factors. Joint probability meaning the probability of the intersection of two
or more events. Ensemble is a probability distribution for the state of the system. In
simpler terms, it shows a separation of random variables and their dependency and
conditional independence.
The LDA graph has both topic, word and context(largest plate of M). Lets analyse
the variables and definitions:
• α - Constant vector of k size that sets the prior on the per-document topic
distribution, IE the Dirichlet distribution.
• z - Per-word topic assignment. A topic from a set of k topics assigned to word
n. A topic is a Distribution of words (0.4 Cow, 0.3 bird, 0.2 hamster ...etc).
• θ - Per-document topic proportions. θd is a Dirichlet distribution over topics
for a document d. For a specific word, the topic proportion is written as: θi
d
• β - Per-corpus topic distribution over full vocabulary.
• K - Number of topics a document belongs to(fixed number)
• k number of topics
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Theory
• V - Vocabulary size
• M - Number of documents
• w - Represents a document (vector of w) of N words w = (w1, w2, ..., wN)
• D - Corpus, collection of M documents
As mentioned the generative process is imaginary as we don’t get to observe this
structure. The main machine learning challenge in using Bayesian statistics is the
need to calculate the join posterior distribution of a set of parameters. This is done
with posterior inference to infer all of the values of these hidden variables (topic
proportions of documents/the coloured buttons/topics themselves). This all needs to
be inferred from the collection of documents given as input.
Computing the latent variables in a given document is given by the inference
problem:
P(θ, z|w, α, β) = P(θ, z, w|α, β)
P(w|α, η)
(2.27)
This is the exact equation, but it its intractable to compute. P(w|α, β) is given as:
P(w|α, β) = Γ(∑
i αi)
∏
i Γ(αi)
∫( k
∏
i=1
θαi−1
i
) 

N
∏
n=1
k
∑
i=1
V∏
j=1
(θiβij)wj
n

dθ
(2.28)
The link between θ and β in the last parenthesis where the sum over topics occurs is
what makes the equation intractable. This coupling in the summation over topics is
the main reason that approximate inference is necessary.
As mentioned, only the document collection is known and can be used to infer
these latent values from. For this, many methods exist for inferring/approximating,
such as: (list is from a presentation by David Blei)
• Mean field variational methods (Blei et al., 2001, 2003)
• Expectation propagation (Minka And Lafferty, 2002)
• Collapsed Gibbs sampling (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2002)
• Distributed sampling (Newman et al., 2008; Ahmed et al ., 2012)
• Collapsed variational inference (Teh et al., 2006)
• Stochastic inference (Hoffman et al., 2010, 2013; Mimno et al., 2012)
• Factorisation inference (Arora et al., 2012; Anandkumar et al., 2012)
• Amortised inference (Srivastava and Sutton, 2016)
Variational inference will be used in this paper and therefore the focus will be on that
technique.
==PAGE:43==
2.5 Topic modelling
31
2.5.2
Variational inference
Source: [32] and [13] Sampling-based inference, invented in 1940, have previ-
ously been used frequently and are usually instances of Markov Chain Monte-Carlo
(MCMC). These are usually Gibbs sampling or Metropolis-Hastings. They are guar-
anteed to find the global optimal solution at some point, but it can take a very long
time and it is difficult to tell how close to a solution that method is. To prevent this, a
good proposal needs to be chosen, but it is difficult to chose correctly. An alternative
to this is the variational inference (VA) approach. The Variational approximation
is more widely used now and the main differences from sampling-based inference is:
VA will almost never find the exact solution but it quickly knows when the algorithm
converges. VA’s also scale better which might be one reason they are more popular.
The idea of variational inference is to approximate the true posterior distribution
with some known probability distribution. The choice of variational family is impor-
tant for how closely the true posterior can be approximated and for our uses. This
optimisation problem needs a distance measure between the approximate distribution
and the true distribution, such that minimisation of this distance by tweaking the
free variational parameters results in the best approximation of the true posterior.
In order to find this family of lower bounds, simple modifications of nodes and
edges on the original model has to be made. Furthermore free parameters γ and
ϕ are added. The simplification made removes the problematic binding between θ
Figure 2.7: The right graphical model is a simplified version of the left graphical
model where the connection between θ and z has been removed. This
creates an independence between the two models. This figure is taken
from Blei, Ng, and Edu [13].
and β by removing the bindings between θ, z and w. With this change, a family of
distributions on the latent variables is obtained. This family is characterised by the
variational distribution:
Q(θ, z|γ, ϕ) = Q(θ|γ)
N
∏
n=1
Q(zn|ϕn)
(2.29)
==PAGE:44==
32
2 Theory
γ is a Dirichlet parameter and the multinomial parameters (ϕ1...ϕN) are free varia-
tional parameters. The idea with this equation (eq:2.29), is to tweak γ, ϕ for the best
approximation of true distribution p (in eq:2.27).
The optimisation problem to determine the value of the free variational parameters
(γ∗, ϕ∗) that is a tight lower bound on the log likelihood:
(γ∗, ϕ∗) = arg min
(γ,ϕ) D(Q(θ, z|γ, ϕ)||P(θ, z|w, α, β)
(2.30)
Optimal values for the variational parameters are found by minimising the D(Q||P)-
part of eq:2.30. This part is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the Q(−)(variational
approximate distribution) and P(−)(true posterior distribution).
The Kullback-Leibler divergence between distributions Q and P is given by:
KL(Q||P) =
∑
x
Q(x) log Q(x)
P(x)
(2.31)
A property of KL-divergence is that: KL(Q||P) ≥0 for all Q,P and KL(Q||P) = 0
iff q=p. This means that KL-divergence approaches 0 as the distributions get closer
to each other. It should be noted that its called Divergence, as opposed to distance,
because KL is not symmetric (KL(Q||P) ̸= KL(P||Q))
In order to find the variational lower bound for the optimisation problem lets
begin by writing the KL-divergence out:
KL(Q||P) =
∫
Q(θ) ln Q(θ)
P(θ|w)dθ
(2.32)
Splitting the fraction into two integrals gives:
KL(Q||P) =
∫
Q(θ) ln Q(θ)dθ −
∫
Q(θ) ln P(θ|w)dθ
(2.33)
Since P(θ|w) = P (θ,w)
P (w) the equation becomes:
KL(Q||P) =
∫
Q(θ) ln Q(θ)dθ −
∫
Q(θ) ln P(θ, w)
P(w) dθ
(2.34)
The same fraction split can be done again to obtain:
KL(Q||P) =
∫
Q(θ) ln Q(θ)dθ −
∫
Q(θ) ln P(θ, w)dθ +
∫
Q(θ) ln P(w)dθ
(2.35)
Here, the last part of the equation is equal to ln P(w). Isolating this gives:
ln P(w) =
∫
Q(θ) ln P(θ, w)dθ −
∫
Q(θ) ln Q(θ)dθ −KL(Q||P)
(2.36)
Here,
∫
Q(θ) ln P(θ, w)dθ −
∫
Q(θ) ln Q(θ)dθ is the variational lower bound on the log
likelihood. This is also called ELBO(evidence lower bound) and by maximizing ELBO,
==PAGE:45==
2.5 Topic modelling
33
the KL-divergence will likewise be minimized because the two parts are oppositely
correlated. In this way, one can minimize the KL-divergence and thereby find an
approximate solution to P.
Minimising this optimisation problem can be done with the use of an iterative
fixed-point method. This is done by computing the derivative and setting it equal
to 0. This way the following update equations can be isolated:
ϕi
n ∝βi
wn exp{EQ[log(θi)|γ]}
(2.37)
Where γi is:
γi = αi +
N
∑
n=1
ϕni
(2.38)
β and α being the model parameters and γ and Ψ being the variational parameters.
Finally, ∝means ”proportional to”. The expectation in the update is calculated as
such:
EQ[log(θi)|γ] = Ψ(γi) −Ψ(
k
∑
j=1
γj)
(2.39)
Ψ is the first derivative of the log Γ function.
The update is a based on a posterior Dirichlet given expected observations taken
under the variational distribution E[zn|ϕn].
The multinomial update however, is like Bayes theorem: P(zn|wn) ∝P(wn|zn)P(zn)
where P(zn) is approximated by the exponential of the expected value of it logarithm
under the variational distribution.
The variational distribution is in reality conditional as it depends on w.
The
optimisation equation (eq:2.30 also depend on a fixed w, meaning that γ∗and ϕ∗also
do. These two variables are document-specific. The variational distribution can thus
be written like this: Q(θ, z|γ∗(w), ϕ∗(w)). This is just to show the dependence on w.
Because of this dependancy, the variational distribution gotten from the optimisation
problem is an approximation of the true posterior distribution: P(θ, z|w, α, β). A
note; γ∗(w) represents a document in the topic simplex.
The complexity of the LDA inference algorithm fig:2.8 is O((N+1)k) operations
per iteration because of how the for-loops are set up. According to [13], the total
number of operations to convergence of a collection is roughly on the order of N 2k.
This is because the number of iterations are O(N), which therefore means that total
number of operations is the previously mentioned operations per iteration N times:
O(N + 1)kN.
The formula of marginal log likelihood of a collection of documents with respect
to parameters α and β:
l(α, β) =
M
∑
d=1
log(P(wd|α, β))
(2.40)
==PAGE:46==
34
2 Theory
Figure 2.8: LDA inference algorithm. Source: Blei, Ng, and Edu [13].
Variational inference has provided a tractable lower bound on the log likelihood, the
bound can be maximised with respect to α and β.
This process of first maximising lower bound with respect to variational parame-
ters γ and ϕ and then using the maximised variational parameters to maximise the
lower bound with respect to the model parameters α and β is called ”alternating varia-
tional EM”. EM stands for estimation maximisation. The E-step being the algorithm
seen on fig:2.8. The M-step update for β can be written as:
βij ∝
M
∑
d=1
Nd
∑
n=1
ϕ∗
dniwj
dn
(2.41)
The M-step for α can be implemented using the Newton-Raphson [67] optimization
method in which the Hessian [83] is inverted in linear time.
The E-step and M-step are repeated until the lower bound log likelihood converges.
2.5.3
Extended/Smoothed LDA
Like with Ngrams, vocabularies have a sparsity problem as there will most certainly be
unseen words not present in the training data. These words are assigned 0 probability
and if only one word is unseen, the entire document gets zero probability.
Laplace smoothing and k-value smoothing etc. has been mentioned earlier. These
are some of the standard approaches to this issue, iE: adding probability to zero
probability instances.
For mixture models these techniques are not useful as maximum a posteriori meth-
ods. Using a Dirichlet prior on the multinomial parameters an intractable posterior
is obtained, for the same reasons as with basic LDA. The same solution applies to
this issue, which is to use variational inference methods on the extended model that
includes the smoothing on multinomial parameters.
==PAGE:47==
2.5 Topic modelling
35
Figure 2.9: Graphical model of extended LDA, source is Blei, Ng, and Edu [13].
The extended graph is seen on fig:2.9. β, here, is a k x V random matrix where
each row is a mixture component independently drawn from a Dirichlet distribution
with single scalar parameter η.
Extending the inference procedure to consider βi
as a random variable endowed with a posterior distribution we can move to a fuller
Bayesian approach to LDA.
Using a variational approach to Bayesian inference, separable distributions are
placed on the random variables β, θ and z:
Q(β1:k, z1:M, θ1:M|λ, ϕ, γ) =
k
∏
i=1
Dir(βi|λi)
M
∏
d=1
Qd(θd, zd|ϕD, γd)
(2.42)
Here, Qd(θ, z|ϕ, γ) is the variational distribution defined earlier. The same update
equations are used for ϕ and γ, while the update for λ is given by:
λij = η +
M
∑
d=1
Nd
∑
n=1
ϕ∗
dniwj
dn
(2.43)
Convergence of the inference equation yields an approximate posterior distribution
for β, θ, z from the variational parameters λ, ϕ, γ.
As with basic LDA, using the
variational EM-algorithm to find maximum likelihood estimates of α and η
2.5.4
Online-learning LDA
This thesis uses the gensim libraries implementation of LDA. This implementation is
an online-learning version of LDA that scales much more efficiently with document
size, while matching or even exceeding the performance of standard batch LDA [13].
So, in essence, batch-learning means that one learns on a batch/group of data at once.
This could be an entire corpus of documents. Mini-batch learning is about splitting
a whole corpus into smaller groups and then learning the model on each mini-batch
at a time. Online learning takes it a step further and essentially trains the model 1
==PAGE:48==
36
2 Theory
data-point at at time. One could say that online-learning is mini-batch learning where
the mini-batch is size=1. Online-learning makes it so that each line that is streamed
in, can be discarded afterwards, meaning dramatically less local memory usage which
in some cases, when developing on a normal desktop computer can mean that the
algorithm cant run (because local RAM memory is not large enough). The variational
Bayes algorithms responsible for approximation intractable posteriors iterate between
analysing each data point and updating variational parameters accordingly. Since
this is done each iteration the cost rises linearly with collection size and makes it
impractical for very large data sets. A fix to this is even more important on topic
models, since they need to summarise large amounts of data.
So what is different about this online-learning version([30])? OLDA(online LDA)
corresponds to a stochastic natural gradient algorithm on a variational objective. Lets
look at the algorithm and explain it in steps: The data for OLDA is organised in a
Figure 2.10: Online-LDA algorithm from Hoffman, Blei, and Bach [30].
stream of words where t is the word-index in this stream. Let λ be the symbol for
the topics. λ is the optimal λ given ϕt if the entire corpus was a single document nt
repeated D times.
Looking at the algorithm, a ρt is defined. ρt is the weights given to λ and both
forgets old values in accordance with the κ-parameter and the τ-parameter slows early
iterations to guarantee convergence.
For each t-iteration, a word t is processed and the update equations are repeated
until the optimal topics λ have been found. Then λ is updated using the weighted
average of the previous value and λ . In Laymann’s terms, this means that the topics
λ are updated from their previous state to a new state after each word t and ρ is
the weight that manages how much the new state is taken into account compared to
how the old state is taken into account, and how much forgetfulness should be in the
==PAGE:49==
2.5 Topic modelling
37
update. This way, the topics are continually updated each word at a time.
2.5.5
Other topic models
Figure 2.11: Different latent variable models, from Blei, Ng, and Edu [13].
This section dives into the other latent variable models that exists and other topic
models in general.
2.5.5.1
Unigram model
In the unigram model figure: 2.11 (a), each word in each document is independently
drawn from the multinomial distribution:
P(w) =
N
∏
n=1
P(wn)
(2.44)
2.5.5.2
Unigram Mixture model
Adding a random topic variable z to the unigram model gives us a mixture of unigrams
(figure: 2.11 (b). Now, when generating a document, a topic zi is first chosen and
then the N words of the document are created independently with the use of the topic.
The probability of a document is defined as:
P(w) =
∑
z
P(z)
N
∏
n=1
P(wn|z)
(2.45)
==PAGE:50==
38
2 Theory
Here, P(w|z) is the conditional multinomial probability. Since one topic is used for
generating an entire document, the word probability distribution in the document
represents that one topic. Having a document represented by only one topic is not
good enough to model large amounts of documents.
This is why with LDA, the
documents can be represented by multiple topics.
2.5.5.3
pLSI
pLSI ([31]), seen on figure:2.11(c), is a further extension of the unigram mixture
model that also has a document label d. The document label d indexes the list of
documents in the training set and is a multinomial random variable that has the size
of the training set document possible values. Document-label d and word wn are
conditionally independent for an unseen topic z:
P(d, wn) = P(d)
∑
z
P(wn|z)P(z|d)
(2.46)
P(z|d) is a mixture of weights of topics in a document d and is an attempt to capture
multiple topics for 1 document by fixing the 1 topic for 1 document issue. P(z|d) is
only learned for the training set documents. This means that pLSI has no good way
of assigning probability to unseen documents. This is an issue.
Another issue, is that since the distribution is indexed by training documents, the
estimated number of parameters grows linearly with documents. This can be seen for
a k-topic pLSI model, which is k distributions of size V and M mixtures over k latent
topics. This results in kV + kM parameters, meaning that M grows linearly. Linear
grows makes the model prone to overfitting which is a big issue.
Since LDA has its topic mixture weights are treated as k-parameter hidden random
variable rather than a set of individual parameters linked to the training set, LDA
generalised well to new documents. Since LDA parameters do not depend on the
document (k + kV ), there is no linear growth and therefore no overfitting.
2.6
Mixture of Experts (MoE)
The mixture of experts model is represented by the very basic pseudo-code given
herunder.
1 for training_set in training_set_list:
2
topic_probabilities = Apply LDA to "training_set"
3
most_probable_topic = Extract most probable topic from "
topic_probabilties"
4
Append "most_probable_topic" to "topicAssignment_list"
5
6 for test_set in test_set_list:
7
topic_probabilities = apply LDA to "test_set"
8
most_probable_topic = Extract most probable topic from "
topic_probabilties"
==PAGE:51==
2.6 Mixture of Experts (MoE)
39
9
if count("topicAssignment_list") is not 1:
10
Apply "combined_model" to "test_set"
11
OR
12
Apply random model from "topicAssignment_list" that have the topic "
most_probable_topic" to "test_set"
13
else:
14
Apply the specific model to "test_set" (from topicAssignment_List)
.
==PAGE:52==
40
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3
Results
The data consist of several books of varying length from the NLTK-library[14]. The
books and their length, measured in number of words, are seen on the table. Here,
#
Text/Book/Document
Length
0
melville-moby_dick
270172
1
austen-sense
147827
2
shakespeare-macbeth
24623
3
austen-emma
201178
4
milton-paradise
98653
5
edgeworth-parents
225246
6
whitman-leaves
157634
Table 3.1: NLTK books and their corresponding index and length.
milton-paradise and shakespeare-macbeth are significantly shorter than melville-moby_dick.
The difference in length is not perfect, but neither is the practical world. The results
are either computed using all 7 texts, or a subset of two texts. These two texts being
text 0 and text 1. These texts are quite different in topic, which fits their purpose
perfectly. These texts will either be reffered to as ”texts” or ”books”.
First result is the application of a Kneser-Ney smoothing trigram model trained
on all the texts tested on all texts.
Meaning that a model trained on text 1 is
applied on text 1(oracle value), 2, 3, 4, 5 etc.
The purpose of this result is to
study the Ngram model to ensure that it performs as intended and also study how
well the models trained on some text perform on test data from a different text. All
values unless stated otherwise are perplexities, meaning that a lower perplexity means
higher probability (since perplexity is inverse probability). As mentioned in the theory
chapter, perplexity is an intrinsic evaluation measure and it measures the branching
factor of a model. Branching, being the amount of different branches one can go from
a point. A low branching factor indicates a more certain model. Perplexity can’t
be compared between results with instances of different parameters necessarily, since
the value of perplexity as a performance measure comes from comparison between
models in the same instance. Finally, the perplexity numbers are in log, so that they
can easily be handled. A final note before the results; these results are the mean of
many splits. A split means the split of a text into training and testing set. This split
is 90% of the text as training set and 10% as testing set. Unless specified otherwise,
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Results
the results are averages over 100 random splits of the data. For now on, these random
splits will simply be reffered to as ”splits”. Furthermore, unless specified otherwise,
the Kneser-Ney trigram model will simply be called the ”Ngram”-model.
Figure 3.1: Cross-application of Ngram models trained on each training set applied
to each test set..
What can be seen on figure 3.1 is that the Ngram model trained on training set x,
will also be the best performing Ngram model on test set x. This makes sense of course,
since an Ngram model trained on the ”moby dick” book will assign higher probability
to words in the topic of sea/sailing/fishing since the book is about hunting a whale.
None of the other books are as proficient in this type of topic or the general syntactic
way that Herman Melville builds sentences. This general principle is why the diagonal
is the optimal oracle value for each text/book. The error of the mean all lie between
0.01-0.03, which is a low/insignificant error. Some books perform better than others
on a given text, which indicates that they might fit the text better and that the texts
might be closer to each other in topic and/or sentence contruction/grammar.
Figure 3.2: Different types of models applied on all the texts. Combined model has
been reduced in size. The errors for MoE, Int-MoE and Random lie
around 0.1-0.3, the other models are less than 0.1..
The main results are seen in figure 3.2, which shows the application of various
==PAGE:55==
3 Results
43
models on the different texts. These different models are not to be confused with the
Ngram model applied in figure 3.1. The different models in this result matrix will be
explained and discussed promptly.
Oracle is the specific Ngram model trained on training set X, tested on testing
set X, meaning that the model is being tested on the same book as it has been
trained on. One might think, that this value would be the lowest one as it is the
language model that specifically has been trained on the same kind of writing in the
same topic. From the results, it is clear that this is not the case though, since the
combined model(4) outperforms the oracle value significantly. Because of this, other
models such as Int-oracle, Int-MoE(sometimes) and MoE with combined also perform
better. Furthermore, it can be seen that the k-value smoothing also outperforms the
oracle value sometimes. These things will be discussed further later on. As such
oracle is not the best model, but it is a good baseline to compare to.
The Worst model is essentially the worst performing base-line of the Ngram
models trained on the different books tested on a given test-set. This value is just for
contrast to the oracle value and to hopefully see that all other models perform better
than this one. This seems to always be the case, which makes sense.
Random indicates the random baseline. A random Ngram model is chosen in-
stead of the choice being guided by a topic model. MoE should always perform better
than random meaned, which on the results can be seen to be true.
MoE specifies the MoE(Mixture-of-Experts) model where an LDA topic model
is used to decide on a specific Ngram model that is hopefully optimal for the unseen
data.
If the model is not certain(multiple texts have the predicted topic), it will
randomly choose between the multiple texts that have been assigned the topic. The
Latent Dirichlet Allocation topic model is trained on all books/texts combined, while
the Ngram model experts are trained on specific texts each. The number of topics
chosen for this model is equal to the number of books/texts. This is done in the
hopes of the model attributing a topic to each book/text that can then be used to
chose the correct language model when an unseen text contains that topic. As can be
seen, the MoE models performance lies between the best and worst perplexities and
is always better than the random baseline. MoE performs worse than the combined
model. This can be because of the fact that when MoE choses badly, the perplexities
destroy the mean. This will be explored later on.
Combined model is an Ngram model trained on all the books combined and as
can be seen in the results, the combined model outperforms the other models. This
includes outperforming the MoE-model and the oracle model. The short reason for
this might be the size advantage of the combined model, which makes it much more
certain of general gramatical structure. Further will be explored later.
Interpolation(Oracle) is an interpolation between the combined model and the
oracle value. The formula for interpolation is:
ϵ ∗Combined_model + (1 −ϵ) ∗Oracle
(3.1)
Without tuning the ϵ-interpolation variable, the default is set to 0.5, meaning 50% of
each model is used. The performance of this model is between the combined model
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Results
and the MoE model. This model doesn’t really provide much use as the oracle value
never dips below the combined model. This is derived from looking at the error values,
which show that both oracle and combined have an error value of 0.01. Since one
value is 9.6 and the other 10.6 interpolation has no purpose.
Interpolation(MoE) is an interpolation between combined and MoE. The for-
mula for interpolation is:
ϵ ∗Combined_model + (1 −ϵ) ∗MoE
(3.2)
Likewise, the ϵ-value is set to 0.5 default. Same issue here, combined is always better.
So the ideal ϵ is as close to combined as possible, ie: as close to 1 as possible.
MoE w. Combined is a MoE that instead of randomly choosing between topic
candidates, it uses the combined model on the unseen text if it is uncertain(multiple
texts assigned the predicted topic). This means that instead of choosing randomly, it
uses the general model when uncertain about the best specific model. The resulting
performance is the second best of all the models. It performs much better than the
pure MoE model. This model is quite interesting, in that it only decides on an expert
if it is certain. When reducing combined in size, this model performs best of all.
Oracle K is the k-smoothing Ngram model. Here, it can be seen that this smooth-
ing sometimes performs better, sometimes worse than Kneser-Ney smoothing. While
interesting, k-smoothing shouldnt perform better than Kneser-Ney overall, and be-
cause it hasnt gotten as much attention, it is possible that something is wrong with
the implementation.
Let’s now look at the model performance in the case of two texts instead of 7.
Looking at the result table with just two texts (fig: 3.3), it can be seen that MoE and
Figure 3.3: Results matrix of all models applied on 2 texts.
combined performs identically. This makes sense, as MoE has fewer to chose from.
==PAGE:57==
3.1 MoE discussion
45
Something significant about the fewer texts, is the better performance of the MoE.
Here, the MoE performs better because there are fewer texts to choose from. This is
the main realisation of the text reduction.
3.1
MoE discussion
The MoE model is the end goal of this thesis and since the MoE model performed
worse than the combined model even when the combined model was reduced in size
dramatically, it is worth discussing why that might be.
MoE performing worse than combined might be due to the fact that when MoE
chooses wrong, the higher perplexity given by the wrongly chosen model can severely
impact the mean perplexity of MoE. In instances when it chooses correctly, it has the
same perplexity as oracle, meaning that it outperforms the reduced combined model.
To highlight the fact that the mean gets destroyed by wrong choices, a look at the
distribution of perplexities of the MoE model: On figure 3.4, it can be seen that there
Figure 3.4: MoE perplexity histogram.
is a huge difference between the two areas the perplexities lie in. This is because
when it chooses correctly, the perplexities are around 10-ish, while when it chooses
wrong, the perplexities lie around 14.
Looking at the confusion matrix for 2 texts of MoE, one can see a better view of
3.1 (1) Re-
visit
and
uddyb
figure
text
3.1 (1) Re-
visit
and
uddyb
figure
text
how often MoE chooses correctly. On figure:3.5, MoE chooses correctly around 84%
of the time.
This is naturally however significantly less when scaling to more text. The MoEs
performance on 7 texts is seen in figure:3.6 In the diagonal, the percentage that MoE
chooses correctly range from 23%-45%. This is significantly less than with two texts.
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Results
Figure 3.5: MoE Confusion matrix for 2 texts. Values are percentages. A confusion
matrix shows how often the MoE chooses the correct model and how
often it chooses the incorrect model. The correct model being the model
trained on a part of the same book the test set comes from..
Figure 3.6: MoE Confusion matrix for 7 texts. Values are percentages. A confusion
matrix shows how often the MoE chooses the correct model and how
often it chooses the incorrect model. The correct model being the model
trained on a part of the same book the test set comes from..
There is however not only one good choice, as other texts might somewhat share the
topic in the target text.
The reason that the MoE model doesn’t split the texts more decisively than 84%
of the time (in the case of 2 texts), might be because both topics learned by MoE
has words from both texts. In fig:3.7, word ”elinor” is characteristic of the ”Sense
and Sensibility” and ”whale” is characteristic of ”Moby Dick”. Looking at this figure,
one can see that ”whale” is distributed around higher probability in both the topic
assigned to ”Moby dick” and to ”Sense and Sensibility”, while ”Elinor” is distributed
on lower probability in both topics. It can be seen however that ”Whale” is slightly
higher distributed in the topic assigned to ”Moby dick”. This is the same with ”Elinor”.
This means that the topics of both texts are mixed but one topic does have a slightly
higher change of ”Whale” than the other and vise versa with ”Elinor”, meaning that
the MoE model does consistently model each book as their own topic, but not entirely
seperated as is apparent.
==PAGE:59==
3.2 Interpolation discussion
47
Figure 3.7: Elinor and Whale distribution topic distributions in two texts (moby
dick, sense and sensibility).
3.2
Interpolation discussion
Regarding the interpolations, this thesis tried to vary the interpolation value to find
the optimal value by cross-validation on the training set of a text, to then use that
value when testing. This, however, just gives the result that the interpolation value
should be as small or as big as possible so that the interpolation only uses the one
model that performs best. If, for example, MoE sometimes performed better than
combined, then the plot of the variation of the interpolation parameter would show
an optimum value. MoE never performs better than combined though. This same
issue happens with the oracle interpolation.
3.3
Combined oracle
The Oracle model performing best has shown not to always be the case, as the
combined model actually outperforms the oracle model when at full size. In order to
gain an understanding of how the combined model is outperforming all other models,
lets have a look at the result matrix when the combined model has been reduced to
the size of a single text after it has been built. This is done by cutting a random part
off. On figure:3.8, the oracle values surpass the combined model when the combined
model has been reduced.
The MoE w. Combined model outperforms the combined model and LDA model
in this case, showing that the MoE model might have some merit if it had access to
similar amounts of data.
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Results
Figure 3.8: The reduced result matrix.
The reason for the great performance of the combined model, must be because of
the much higher amount of data it has access to. The 7 times higher amount of data
gives better general grammatical understanding than a model on a single text. Since
gramatical words appear often and since the general model assigns higher probability
to gramatical words, the total probability would probably rise higher, since they are
so frequent.
Should the combined model always be used then? The combined model is better
in this case of low amounts of data, simply because the MoE doesnt have enough data
to model grammatical patterns properly. It is not certain whats best if we scale the
amount of data for combined and MoE.
3.4
Tuning of variables
Tuning, or crossvalidating variables means the process of varying a variable recording
the corresponding performance changes to determine the optimal value of it.
Tuning was done on the discount-value of the kneser ney smoothing. It looked
like fig:3.9. Here, a value of 0.7 corresponds with the value seen on page 17 in [22]
which shows an optimal value of 0.75.
Tuning of the k-value of k-smoothing was also done. On figure: 3.10, the opti-
mal k-value was surprisingly low, but just meant that it was optimal to move small
amounts of probability mass instead of 1 which has shown to be too much. Moving 1
probability mass is called laplace smoothing, and has been shown to move too much.
An attempt was made to tune the alpha value of the LDA topic model, but as
of yet, the results seem rather inconclusive: Figure 3.11 shows a low optimal value
which makes sense as was discussed in the LDA theory chapter. Low alpha value
means that the points are concentrated in the edges of the simplex.
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Tuning of variables
49
Figure 3.9: Discount-value crossvalidation on text 0 and text 1. The black line is
just a divider between figures.
Figure 3.10: k-value crossvalidation.
The reason for the weird appearance of the plot might be because the way i vary
alpha in the LDA is not correct. The library i use for LDA takes an array, so i simply
gave it an array of the same value of alpha.
An attempt was also made to tune the interpolation variable too (fig:3.11), but
since it always leaned completely to one side there wasnt much to draw from it. The
same result appeared for the combined+MoE interpolation.
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Results
Figure 3.11: Alpha-value crossvalidation and interpolation-value crossvalidation
(oracle+combined).
3.5
Other considerations
3.5.1
The choice of data
The choice of texts from nltk data might not have been the best simply because of the
lack of data. It could have been interesting to use much larger data sets to see how
the perplexities of the different models changed. The main reason that low amounts
of data were chosen, was because it was easy to get a hold of and because children
books also have low amounts of data. Another reason, was the faster computation
speed.
3.5.2
Stopwords
Stopwords are not removed in the language models but they are removed in the
topic model. When removing stopwords from the data the language model is trained
upon the figure appears: On this figure 3.12 it can be seen that all perplexities worsen,
except the oracle K value. This makes sense as much of the gramatical understanding
is lost when removing stopwords.
3.5.3
The choice of models
Ngrams were chosen because they are a good, well documented, baseline language
model.
Trigrams were chosen over other Ngram models because the library from
gensim used for the Kneser-Ney calculations(since its quite troublesome to implement)
only handles trigrams.
This model was further enhanced with a custom unigram
handling.
==PAGE:63==
3.5 Other considerations
51
Figure 3.12: Stopwords omitted in language model, 5 splits.
K-value smoothing was implemented before Kneser-Ney and even though on
the results it seems it performs better, i suspect there is something wrong with the
implementation of k-value, as it should be performing worse than Kneser-Ney usually.
When investigating this, the value of k-smoothing doesnt seem to even react much
to changes in parameters like removing stopwords from the data that the language
model is trained upon. See 3.12 where the oracle K-value stays approximately the
same.
Originally, this thesis was planning on implementing TopicRNN [24], but finding
a working implementation proved rather difficult and it was deemed a too great effort
for the time left to implement TopicRNN from scratch and instead other areas were
explored closer to the base model. This was a big pivot away from neural networks
and the integration of context changed from internal fusion on the output (TopicRNN)
to an external MoE model.
3.5.4
Unknown handling
A special ”UNK” word that could be used to handle unknown words, of which, with
such a small model, there were many, was needed. With such small amounts of data
as these books provide (200.000 words etc), a way of handling unknown words, that
will inevitably appear in unseen contexts, was needed. The ”UNK”-word has been
defined by use of a frequency threshold, meaning that all words with a frequency of
1 or lower were converted to the ”UNK”-token. A consideration after the choice of
threshold=1, is to set the threshold higher to make the frequency of ”UNK” lower.
An issue arises when the frequency of ”UNK” becomes way too high, since unknown
words will be assigned a very high probability which sort of doesn’t make sense in
practice.
The results of raising the threshold can be shown by increasing it to a
==PAGE:64==
52
3 Results
frequency of 100. On figure 3.13, one can see that the perplexities become closely
Figure 3.13: UNK Threshold set to 100 instead of 1.
packed together and significantly lower. This is because most of the words are now
”UNK”, which makes it so that the model assigns higher probability to ”UNK” tokens
meaning that the total perplexity goes down a lot. Perplexity is also called branching
factor, and since there are fewer branches (since a lot of words are now just UNK),
the perplexity is much lower.
Instead of adjusting the threshold, which could be done through crossvalidation,
a different kind of UNK handling decision was made. Unknown penalized perplexity
(UPP) is a way of normalizing the UNK-word so it doesnt explode in probability. The
original article is [78]. Essentially, i normalized the count of ”UNK” by the number
of knownwords.
3.5.5
Future work
For future work, the number of topics could potentially be a great choice for tuning
as there must be a certain number of topics that produce the best performance for
these specific texts. Reducing the number of topics would group texts under each
topic, clustering texts similar to other texts in the process. This way, a model could
be trained on each of these groups in a sort of localized combined model. Then for
an unseen document, one could choose a model trained on a group depending on
the topic. This method would scale much better than the model that has the same
number of topics as texts, and would be a better solution for practical use.
Looking at related works, the best performing Ngram model seems to be the 5-
gram Ngram model. Looking into varying the ”N” in Ngrams could also be of future
interest.
From the related works, there seems to have been a battle between contextual
RNNs and long-term specialized RNNs. Transformers solve the issues of RNNs that
initially warranted the addition of a topic model in the first place. Transformers have
the capacity to look at the entire long-term history and is currently both the best
language model AND topic model.
==PAGE:65==
3.5 Other considerations
53
In principle, the idea of delegating a LM to a document depending on its topic
could be applied to a transformer, creating a MoE topic-transformer. This might be
an idea for future exploration.
Regarding Write-Reader[86], it could be interesting to apply a state-of-the-art
transformer model to danish data, since a transformer structure would probably be
able to greatly improve the performance of their system.
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
This thesis’ main research goal was to experiment with adding contextual information
to a language model in order to hopefully improve it. In order to do so, a Kneser-Ney
smoothed trigram model was created as a language model example. Latent Dirichlet
Allocation(LDA) was used for a topic model and then a MoE model was created that
attempts to use an LDA to choose the best language model to handle a specific unseen
text.
Following the results, it appears that while the Ngram+LDA MoE(Mixture-of-
Experts) does perform better than the random-choice-baseline, it does get outper-
formed by the combined model quite significantly. If the combined model is reduced
in size to the size of a single expert in the MoE model, they perform equally, indi-
cating that a combined model is still a preferable choice because it is much easier
to use. The reason for the much greater performance of the combined model must
come from the much larger size of the training data given to it as its performance
drops dramatically with the size reduction. The size-advantage might be mitigated
if much larger data-amounts were used for these models, as a couple thousand words
each document is not enough to let the model accurately learn syntactical patterns
of grammar.
Using the combined model when the MoE is uncertain shows to perform the best
of all models when the combined model has been reduced in size.
It drastically
outperforms the MoE that chooses randomly when uncertain. This model was still
outperformed by the full size combined model, which makes sense as even though the
LDA chooses the correct oracle Ngram model, the model chosen has inferior perfor-
mance to the combined model. The results when reducing combined does indicate
that a MoE LDA-model improves the performance, if the expert chosen is actually
better than the combined model.
For the future, the results indicate that a MoE where each expert is a state-of-
the-art language model might be able to achieve greater performance. Today, the
topic model could either be an LDA or even a transformer topic model based on f.eks
BERT that can cluster words in a vector space like word2vec. The language model
could also be a transformer, as they seem to be state-of-the-art.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Gantt Timeline
The timeline is presented in a gantt diagram, showing the dates at which parts of the
project will be completed, ordered from top to bottom in urgency.
Originally, TopicRNN and the conversion of this model to the writereader data-set
was supposed to be the plan. This changed as TopicRNN seemed to be infeasable for
this thesis, changing the direction of the thesis towards more experimentation on the
ngram model. Some principles from TopicRNN were used in this effort.
==PAGE:70==
58
A An Appendix
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Sungjin Ahn et al. “A Neural Knowledge Language Model”. In: (August 2016).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.00318.
[2]
Petar Aleksic et al. Bringing Contextual Information to Google Speech Recogni-
tion. Technical report.
[3]
Dario Amodei et al. “Deep speech 2: End-to-end speech recognition in En-
glish and Mandarin”. In: 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML 2016. Volume 1. International Machine Learning Society (IMLS), 2016,
pages 312–321. isbn: 9781510829008.
[4]
Anonymous authors. TRANSFORMER-XL: LANGUAGE MODELING WITH
LONGER-TERM DEPENDENCY. Technical report.
[5]
Ebru Arısoy et al. “Discriminative Language Modeling With Linguistic and Sta-
tistically Derived Features”. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH,
AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING 0.0 (2011), page 1. doi: 10.1109/TASL.
2011.2162323. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
5955079/.
[6]
Ying Zhang Avneesh Saluja Ian Lane. “Saluja et al: Context-aware Language
Modeling for Conversational Speech Translation”. In: (). url: https://asaluja.
github.io/mtsummitxiii-contextaware.pdf.
[7]
Mohammad F.A. Bashri and Retno Kusumaningrum. “Sentiment analysis using
Latent Dirichlet Allocation and topic polarity wordcloud visualization”. In: 2017
5th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology,
ICoIC7 2017. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., October
2017. isbn: 9781509049127. doi: 10.1109/ICoICT.2017.8074651.
[8]
Jerome R Bellegarda. Exploiting Latent Semantic Information in Statistical
Language Modeling. Technical report. 2000. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/abstract/document/880084/.
[9]
Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi. “Learning Long-Term De-
pendencies with Gradient Descent is Difficult”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks 5.2 (1994), pages 157–166. issn: 19410093. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
[10]
Yoshua Bengio et al. A Neural Probabilistic Language Model. Technical report.
2003, pages 1137–1155.
==PAGE:72==
60
Bibliography
[11]
David Blei. (295) Prof. David Blei - Probabilistic Topic Models and User Be-
havior - YouTube. url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FkckgwMHP2s&
t=1086s.
[12]
David M. Blei and John D. Lafferty. “A correlated topic model of Science”. In:
The Annals of Applied Statistics 1.1 (June 2007), pages 17–35. issn: 1932-6157.
doi: 10.1214/07-aoas114.
[13]
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Jordan@cs Berkeley Edu. Latent Dirichlet
Allocation Michael I. Jordan. Technical report. 2003, pages 993–1022.
[14]
Nltk Book. NLTK Book. url: https://www.nltk.org/book/.
[15]
Ziqiang Cao et al. A novel neural topic model and its supervised extension. June
2015.
[16]
Stanley F. Chen and Stanley F. Chen. “An Empirical Study of Smoothing
Techniques for Language Modeling”. In: 13 (1998), pages 310–318. url: http:
//citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.131.5458.
[17]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
decoder for statistical machine translation”. In: EMNLP 2014 - 2014 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of
the Conference. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), June 2014,
pages 1724–1734. isbn: 9781937284961. doi: 10.3115/v1/d14-1179.
[18]
Junyoung Chung et al. “Gated Feedback Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: 32nd
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2015 3 (February 2015),
pages 2067–2075. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.02367.
[19]
Kenneth W Church and William A Gale. A comparison of the enhanced Good-
Turing and deleted estimation methods for estimating probabilities of English
bigrams. Technical report. 1991, pages 19–54.
[20]
Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis, Jakob Verbeek, and Cordelia Schmid. Weakly Super-
vised Object Localization with Multi-fold Multiple Instance Learning. Technical
report 1. 2016.
[21]
Noah Coccaro and Daniel Jurafsky. TOWARDS BETTER INTEGRATION
OF SEMANTIC PREDICTORS IN STATISTICAL LANGUAGE MODELING.
Technical report. url: https://www.isca- speech.org/archive/icslp_
1998/i98_0852.html.
[22]
Jurafsky Daniel and James H Martin. Ngram chapter. Technical report. url:
https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/3.pdf.
[23]
Scott Deerwester et al. Indexing by Latent Semantic Analysis. Technical report.
[24]
Adji B. Dieng et al. “TopicRNN: A Recurrent Neural Network with Long-Range
Semantic Dependency”. In: (November 2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1611.01702.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
61
[25]
Thushan Ganegedara. Intuitive Guide to Latent Dirichlet Allocation - Towards
Data Science. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/light- on- math-
machine-learning-intuitive-guide-to-latent-dirichlet-allocation-
437c81220158.
[26]
Shalini Ghosh et al. “Contextual LSTM (CLSTM) models for Large scale NLP
tasks”. In: arxiv.org (). doi: 10.1145/1235. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1602.06291.
[27]
Go Eun Heo et al. “Analyzing the field of bioinformatics with the multi-faceted
topic modeling technique”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 18 (May 2017). issn: 14712105.
doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1640-x.
[28]
Sepp Hochreiter. THE VANISHING GRADIENT PROBLEM DURING LEARN-
ING RECURRENT NEURAL NETS AND PROBLEM SOLUTIONS. Techni-
cal report.
[29]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In: Neu-
ral Computation 9.8 (November 1997), pages 1735–1780. issn: 08997667. doi:
10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[30]
Matthew D Hoffman, David M Blei, and Francis Bach. Online Learning for
Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Technical report.
[31]
Thomas Hofmann. “Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis”. In: Proceedings of
the Fifteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. UAI’99. San
Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999, pages 289–296.
isbn: 1558606149.
[32]
https://ermongroup.github.io/. Variational inference. url: https://ermongroup.
github.io/cs228-notes/inference/variational/.
[33]
Diane J Hu. Latent Dirichlet Allocation for Text, Images, and Music. Technical
report.
[34]
RM Iyer. “Modeling long distance dependence in language: Topic mixtures ver-
sus dynamic cache models”. In: ieeexplore.ieee.org (). url: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/abstract/document/736328/.
[35]
Aaron Jaech and Mari Ostendorf. “Low-Rank RNN Adaptation for Context-
Aware Language Modeling”. In: (October 2017). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1710.02603.
[36]
Yangfeng Ji et al. Workshop track-ICLR 2016 DOCUMENT CONTEXT LAN-
GUAGE MODELS. Technical report.
[37]
Rafal Jozefowicz et al. “Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling”. In: (Febru-
ary 2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02410.
[38]
Yoon Kim et al. “Character-Aware Neural Language Models”. In: 30th AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2016 (August 2015), pages 2741–
2749. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1508.06615.
==PAGE:74==
62
Bibliography
[39]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-encoding variational bayes”. In:
2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014 - Con-
ference Track Proceedings. International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR, December 2014.
[40]
Reinhard Kneser and Volker Steinbiss. “On the dynamic adaptation of stochas-
tic language models”. In: Proceedings - ICASSP, IEEE International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. Volume 2. Publ by IEEE,
1993. isbn: 0780309464. doi: 10.1109/icassp.1993.319375.
[41]
Roland Kuhn and Renato De Mori. “Cache-based natural language model for
speech recognition ANR AISSPER: Artificial Intelligence for Semantically con-
trolled SPEech UndeRstanding View project SUMACC View project”. In: ieeex-
plore.ieee.org (1990). doi: 10.1109/34.56193. url: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/3191800.
[42]
Jey Han Lau, Timothy Baldwin, and Trevor Cohn. “Topically Driven Neural
Language Model”. In: ACL 2017 - 55th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings of the Conference (Long Papers) 1
(April 2017), pages 355–365. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.08012.
[43]
R Lau et al. “Trigger-based language models: A maximum entropy approach”.
In: ieeexplore.ieee.org (). url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/
document/319225/.
[44]
LDA Youtube. (295) LDA Topic Models - YouTube. url: https : / / www .
youtube.com/watch?v=3mHy4OSyRf0.
[45]
Youtube LDA. (295) LDA Algorithm Description - YouTube. url: https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWJYZq_fQ2A&t=337s.
[46]
Hai-Son Le et al. STRUCTURED OUTPUT LAYER NEURAL NETWORK
LANGUAGE MODEL. Technical report.
[47]
Quoc V. Le and Tomas Mikolov. “Distributed Representations of Sentences
and Documents”. In: 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
2014 4 (May 2014), pages 2931–2939. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4053.
[48]
Lettier. Your Guide to Latent Dirichlet Allocation - Lettier - Medium. url:
https://medium.com/@lettier/how-does-lda-work-ill-explain-using-
emoji-108abf40fa7d.
[49]
Susan(Medium) Li. Topic Modeling and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) in
Python. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/topic- modeling- and-
latent-dirichlet-allocation-in-python-9bf156893c24.
[50]
Rui Lint et al. “Hierarchical recurrent neural network for document modeling”.
In: Conference Proceedings - EMNLP 2015: Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
2015, pages 899–907. isbn: 9781941643327. doi: 10.18653/v1/d15-1106.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
63
[51]
James Martens and Ilya@cs Utoronto Ca. Learning Recurrent Neural Networks
with Hessian-Free Optimization Ilya Sutskever. Technical report. 2011.
[52]
Andrew McAllister and Ivana Naydenova. Building a LDA-based Book Recom-
mender System. url: https://humboldt-wi.github.io/blog/research/
information_systems_1819/is_lda_final/.
[53]
Synced Medium. Language Model: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art Technology.
url: https://medium.com/syncedreview/language-model-a-survey-of-
the-state-of-the-art-technology-64d1a2e5a466.
[54]
Yishu Miao, Edward Grefenstette, and Phil Blunsom. “Discovering Discrete
Latent Topics with Neural Variational Inference”. In: 34th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017 5 (June 2017), pages 3721–3731. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.00359.
[55]
Tomas Mikolov and Geoffrey Zweig. CONTEXT DEPENDENT RECURRENT
NEURAL NETWORK LANGUAGE MODEL. Technical report. url: www.cs.
princeton.edu/.
[56]
Tomas Mikolov et al. Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and
their Compositionality. Technical report.
[57]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Learning Longer Memory in Recurrent Neural Networks”.
In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 -
Workshop Track Proceedings (December 2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1412.7753.
[58]
Tomáš Mikolov et al. “Extensions of recurrent neural network language model”.
In: ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing - Proceedings. 2011, pages 5528–5531. isbn: 9781457705397. doi:
10.1109/ICASSP.2011.5947611.
[59]
Tomáš Mikolov et al. Recurrent neural network based language model. Technical
report. 2010.
[60]
T Mikolov et al. “Empirical evaluation and combination of advanced language
modeling techniques”. In: isca-speech.org (). url: https://www.isca-speech.
org/archive/interspeech_2011/i11_0605.html.
[61]
Yasumasa Miyamoto and Kyunghyun Cho. “Gated Word-Character Recurrent
Language Model”. In: EMNLP 2016 - Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, Proceedings (June 2016), pages 1992–1997. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01700.
[62]
Takeru Miyato, Andrew M Dai, and Ian Goodfellow. ADVERSARIAL TRAIN-
ING METHODS FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED TEXT CLASSIFICATION. Tech-
nical report. 2017.
[63]
Andriy Mnih and Geoffrey Hinton. A Scalable Hierarchical Distributed Language
Model. Technical report.
==PAGE:76==
64
Bibliography
[64]
Andriy Mnih and Geoffrey Hinton. Three New Graphical Models for Statistical
Language Modelling. Technical report.
[65]
Christopher E Moody. “Mixing Dirichlet Topic Models and Word Embeddings
to Make lda2vec”. In: (May 2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02019.
[66]
Frederic Morin and Yoshua Bengio. Hierarchical Probabilistic Neural Network
Language Model. Technical report.
[67]
Newton Raphson Method | Brilliant Math & Science Wiki. url: https://
brilliant.org/wiki/newton-raphson-method/.
[68]
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. “On the difficulty of
training Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: 30th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML 2013 PART 3 (November 2012), pages 2347–2355. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1211.5063.
[69]
Daniel Povey et al. “Strategies for training large scale neural network language
models Speech Recognition View project Spoken language identification View
project Strategies for Training Large Scale Neural Network Language Models”.
In: ieeexplore.ieee.org (2011). doi: 10.1109/ASRU.2011.6163930. url: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/241637478.
[70]
Golan Pundak et al. “Deep context: end-to-end contextual speech recognition”.
In: (August 2018). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02480.
[71]
Kneser R and Ney H. “Improved backing-off for m-gram language modeling, ””
in: (1995). url: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.
1.1.725.3882.
[72]
Zhaochun Ren et al. “Summarizing Web Forum Threads Based on a Latent
Topic Propagation Process”. In: Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. CIKM ’11. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2011, pages 879–884. isbn:
9781450307178. doi: 10.1145/2063576.2063703. url: https://doi.org/10.
1145/2063576.2063703.
[73]
R Rosenfeld. A Whole Sentence Maximum Entropy Language Model. Technical
report. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/659010/.
[74]
Holger Schwenk. “Continuous space language models q”. In: (2006). doi: 10.
1016/j.csl.2006.09.003. url: www.elsevier.com/locate/csl.
[75]
Noam Shazeer et al. “Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated
Mixture-of-Experts Layer”. In: 5th International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, ICLR 2017 - Conference Track Proceedings (January 2017). url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06538.
[76]
Le Hai Son, Alexandre Allauzen, and François Yvon. Measuring the Influence
of Long Range Dependencies with Neural Network Language Models. Technical
report. 2012, pages 1–10.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
65
[77]
Ankur(medium) Tomar. Topic modeling using Latent Dirichlet Allocation(LDA)
and Gibbs Sampling explained! url: https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/
topic-modeling-using-lda-and-gibbs-sampling-explained-49d49b3d1045.
[78]
Joerg Ueberla. “Analysing a simple language model·some general conclusions
for language models for speech recognition”. In: Computer Speech and Language
8.2 (April 1994), pages 153–176. issn: 10958363. doi: 10.1006/csla.1994.
1007.
[79]
Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. “A Neural Conversational Model”. In: (June 2015).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.05869.
[80]
Tian Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. “Larger-Context Language Modelling”. In:
(November 2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.03729.
[81]
Tian Wang and Kyunghyun Cho. LARGER-CONTEXT LANGUAGE MOD-
ELLING WITH RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK. Technical report.
[82]
Wenlin Wang et al. Topic Compositional Neural Language Model. Technical
report. 2018.
[83]
Wiki. Hessian matrix - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Hessian_matrix.
[84]
Wiki LM. Language model - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Language_model.
[85]
Wiki1. Topic model - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Topic_model.
[86]
Write Reader. WriteReader – Learn to read and write by creating books |
WriteReader. url: https://www.writereader.com/en.
[87]
Tze-I Yang, Andrew Torget, and Rada Mihalcea. “Topic modeling on historical
newspapers”. In: Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Tech-
nology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities. 2011, pages 96–
104.
[88]
Chyi-Kwei Yau et al. “Clustering scientific documents with topic modeling”. In:
Scientometrics 100.3 (2014), pages 767–786.
[89]
Zamora Martinez and S.Espana Boquera. “Cache neural network language mod-
els based on long-distance dependencies for a spoken dialog system”. In: ieeex-
plore.ieee.org (). url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
6289041/.
==PAGE:78==
