==PAGE:1==
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
An Adaptive Managed Retreat Case Study
Master Thesis
New Zealand Climate Change Research Institute
DTU Management Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
An Adaptive Managed Retreat Case Study
Master Thesis
March, 2020
By
Rick Pieter Kool
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Rick Kool, 2019
Published by:
DTU, New Zealand Climate Change Research Institute, Kelburn, Cotton
Building, Wellington 6012 New Zealand, and Akademivej , Building 358,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months as a collaborative project between Vic-
toria University Wellington (VUW) and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The
research took place in New Zealand. Guidance from the New Zealand research team
consisting of Dr Judy Lawrence from VUW and Dr Rob Bell from NIWA as the direct
supervisors for the research. Supervision in Denmark consisted of Dr Martin Drews from
DTU Management Engineering guiding and making sure this research complies with DTU
standard for a thesis.
The project was funded from the Ministry of Business, Employment and Innovation (MBIE)
through the Resilience Science Challenge Coastal Sub-theme Adapting to New Zealand’s
Dynamic Coastal Hazards.
Rick Pieter Kool - s172357
Signature
Date
ii
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
08 / 03 / 2020
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Low-lying coastal areas of New Zealand are increasingly exposed to sea-level flooding
and sea level rise (SLR) has been indicated as one of the key factors affecting low-lying
coastal communities in New Zealand. SLR causes increases in groundwater levels, in turn
reducing the discharge capacity of gravity-based two water infrastructure. Other impacts
from climate change like changes in precipitation patterns cause increased discharge to
the drainage systems. This requires adaptation of two water infrastructure and raises the
issue of how local government can maintain levels of service for the two waters as the im-
pacts of climate change worsen over the coming decades(and beyond). The adaptation
option being explored in this study is retreat of two waters infrastructure (waste water and
storm water) and how it could be implemented in a managed way. This includes exploring
the interface between water services and the community retreat.
To encompass this deep uncertainty, rather than pre-selecting a scenario, a dynamic
adaptive approach is used to develop a range of alternative pathways to achieve the
desired objective or level of service. Long term retreat was investigated for the Petone /
Alicetown two water infrastructure by using Dynamic Adaptive Pathway Planning (DAPP).
A mix of quantitative and qualitative input was used to determine adaptation thresholds
(AT’s) for the system. This was achieved by investigating two water asset exposure using
an exposure assessment in conjunction with ground-thruthing findings with local experts.
By using a DAPP approach to frame retreat in different areas it was found to be a suitable
approach to address uncertainties arising from SLR when implementing a two water re-
treat strategy. This was possible using a combination of an area specific retreat strategy
(1), area specific pathways (2), area specific retreat phases (3), signal land use changes
(4) and identify pathway conflicts and synergies. Pathway portfolios were developed with
a portfolio of actions, planning and land use implications and failure conditions. This was
useful for determining pathway / portfolio changes. This enabled (1) separation of retreat
phasing from the pathways and (2) visualization of the effects between these pathways.
It was found that by using a systematic approach combining adaptation pathways, retreat
phases and signalling land use changes by using long-term planning over potentially dif-
ferent pathway portfolios, could minimize disruption, signal land use changes and allow
for gradual budget adjustments. The development of this ’routine’ provides a structured
approach for managed retreat of two water infrastructure. Compensation plays an impor-
tant role in addressing the inequity of signaling restrictive land use planning (e.g. closed
zoning to further development). Timely discussions around compensation and limiting
development in vulnerable areas is therefore important for fitting retreat in a long term
threshold based approach. Creating amenity for the community by repurposing areas
could help overcome the social feasibility barrier. In the end retreat is a socio-political
issue, what has been developed in this study is a way to inform and improve the decision
making process for relevant stakeholders, authorities and the community.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Dr. Judy Lawrence, Senior Research Fellow, New Zealand Climate Change Research
Institute, School of Geography, Environment and Earth Sciences, Victoria University of
Wellington
Dr. Rob Bell, Programme Leader, Climate Impacts and Adaptation, New Zealand Insti-
tute for Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA)
Dr. Martin Drews, Senior Scientist, DTU Management Engineering, Systems Analysis
and Sustainability, Technical University of Denmark
iv
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
Types of Adaptation Options
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Managed Retreat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Dynamic Adaptive Pathway Planning (DAPP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Urban Drainage Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Implications for Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Study Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Methods and Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Research Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Results
23
4.1
Vulnerability Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Adaptation Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Sequencing Adaptation Pathways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Discussion
49
6
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendix 1
63
B Appendix 2
89
C Appendix 3
126
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Recent investigations in New Zealand seek to document how climate change is likely to
affect coastal communities, e.g., by means of sea level rise (SLR) and enhanced risk of
coastal flooding, rising groundwater and combined rainfall, river flood and storm-tide oc-
currences. Sea level rise has been indicated as one of the key factors affecting low-lying
coastal communities in New Zealand (Ministry for the Environment, 2017; Local Govern-
ment New Zealand, 2016; Paulik et al., 2020; Hughes et al., 2020 (In Press)). Negative
consequences induced by SLR include more frequent flooding, increased erosion and
increases in groundwater levels, saltwater intrusion, liquefaction and drainage problems.
Climate change impacts for New Zealand as a result of SLR threaten coastal infrastruc-
ture, communities and low-lying ecosystems (Rouse et al., 2017). Low-lying coastal ar-
eas of New Zealand are already exposed to extreme sea-level flooding (present-day 1/100
year event). This affects 0.8 percent of the land area of New Zealand but exposes approx-
imately 72,000 residents or 1.6 percent of New Zealand’s population (Paulik et al., 2020).
Infrastructure exposure to climate change in New Zealand was investigated by Local Gov-
ernment New Zealand (Local Government New Zealand, 2019a, 2019b). It became clear
that three waters (waste water, water supply and storm water) have the greatest expo-
sure of the investigated infrastructure. Local Government New Zealand (2019b) found
that the replacement value of three waters infrastructure exceeds the replacement value
of exposed roads and buildings.
New Zealand’s national coastal hazards and climate change guidance uses a scenario
approach to assimilating SLR projections into land-use planning and engineering design,
with the primary purpose of stress-testing adaptation options and actions (Ministry for the
Environment, 2017; Lawrence, Bell, et al., 2018). Scenarios track with some certainty
to mid century then there is a widening (or deep) uncertainty in SLR later this century
and beyond e.g. in the next 100 years, which is the planning period required by the New
Zealand Coastal Policy Statement-2010. The 4 scenarios in the guidance (Appendix 1)
cover a range of SLR from 0.55 to 1.36 m by 2120 which primarily depends on how global
emissions will track and the emergence of polar ice-sheet instabilities.
To encompass the deep uncertainty from mid century, rather than pre-selecting a scenario
(which could be the best estimate, a most-likely scenario, or a worst case), a dynamic
adaptive approach is used to develop a range of alternative pathways to achieve the de-
sired objective or level of service. Monitoring the system performance, relative to those
objectives, through early signals and triggers (decision points), informs stakeholders and
the community when an alternate pathway will need to be implemented. While this ap-
proach has been applied to communities generally or large-scale projects (e.g. the Delta
project in The Netherlands), little research has been undertaken on its applicability as a
framework for addressing the adaptation of stormwater and wastewater networks (other
than Kapetas and Fenner, 2020; Manocha and Babovic, 2017).
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
1
==PAGE:10==
This study focuses on the Petone and Alicetown area, located in Lower Hutt in the Welling-
ton region, which can be seen in Figure 1.1. The area was historically developed in the
early settlement part of the late 19th and early 20th centuries to the point where the flood
plain is now largely urbanized, also shown in Figure 1.1. Damaging earthquakes have
impacted the area a few times (e,g, 1855, 2013, 2016), arising from fault lines through the
wider Wellington region. A major fault line (the Wellington Fault) runs through through the
west boundary of the Petone area (Greater Wellington Regional Council, 1996). Com-
pared to its adjacent areas, there is also an increased risk of liquefaction, ground shaking
and tsunami inundation hazard (Greater Wellington Regional Council, 1996). The area
is located in between a river mouth and the Wellington harbour area. What becomes ap-
parent when looking at the project area is how the urbanized area of Petone is trapped
between an incline at the western Hutt road, the floodplain and the proximity of the coast-
line. The area is characterized by being located in a river valley where the 54 km long Hutt
river meets the Wellington Harbour area. The width of the estuary is 4.5 km wide at this
point (Lawrence et al., 2011). The esplanade, a major road link, runs along the coastline
with some vegetated dunes present. There is also a tidal interaction with the Hutt river.
Figure 1.1: Study Area
Flooding has been an issue historically in the area, where ten major floods have occurred
between 1855 and 2000, and more recently the 2004 Hutt river floods (Lawrence et al.,
2014). Traditionally flood risk-reduction options comprise structural protection measures
like levees and stop banks, creating a legacy problem where citizens have an unrealistic
perception of flood risk and the expectation that the area will continue to protect them for
all floods going into the future. The Petone area was identified as the most vulnerable ge-
ographic unit together with the Seaview area, a reclaimed area located next to Petone, for
the Hutt City Council (Daysh, 2019). This is despite the presence of one of New Zealand’s
2
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:11==
largest flood protection schemes (Lawrence et al., 2014). Paulik et al. (2020) and Paulik
et al. (2019) show that Wellington is among the cities with the highest pipeline exposure
for all three waters infrastructure in New Zealand and with the highest replacement costs.
This raises the issue of how local government can maintain levels of service for the two
waters as the impacts of climate change worsen over the coming decades (and beyond) to
reflect the plausible futures during the lifetime of the asset. Local government has a man-
date1 to address the effects of climate change, when assessing the delivery of services
and for the wellbeing of communities. This broadly includes planning by avoiding and
mitigating adverse effects of hazards, flood risk reduction, and delivery of water services.
To date the approach taken by the local government is to address impacts of flooding on
the three waters infrastructure as they emerge (Controller and Auditor-General, 2020).
This strategy may appear to suffice in the short term (provided any inevitable service fail-
ures can be acceptably managed) but may compound the impacts in the long term as the
effects of sea level rise become more apparent. A strategy that can be developed to antic-
ipate those impacts can be explored along a number of pathways before the adaptation
threshold materializes. The adaptation option being explored in this study is managed
retreat of two waters infrastructure (waste water and storm water) and how it could be
implemented in a managed way. This includes exploring the interface between water ser-
vices and the community retreat. This implies adaptation of two water infrastructure is
not exclusively a technical issue, but rather, encompasses a socio-political issue about
residents adapting to the changing climate and SLR. This study focuses on adapting the
two water infrastructure. In this context my research question is as follows:
How could the retreat of two water infrastructure (Stormwater and Wastewater) in the
Petone and Alicetown Area be managed alongside a community retreat from the coast,
considering and defining;
• 1) What levels of Service (LoS) are appropriate while transitioning towards adapta-
tion thresholds?
• 2) How long should two waters services be maintained?
• 3) What measures and actions are appropriate to maintain L.o.S and do they coin-
cide with adaptation thresholds?
• 4) What leads - service withdrawal or resident withdrawal?
1Resource Management Act sections 6(h), 7(i), 31; Local Government Act requires ongoing planning
through 10-year council Long-Term Plans (LTPs) and longer 30-year local government Infrastructure Plans
and Section 125 requires local government to assess the provision of water and sanitary services
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter provides background on managed retreat relevant to the study and helps fo-
cus the study by discussing relevant concepts and literature grouped by topic (Appendix
3).
The first section focuses on classification of adaptation types addressing SLR in
coastal regions, as discussed in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
(2019). The second section discusses pathways to one of those types, managed retreat.
The third section discusses the DAPP approach used to frame systematic retreat from the
coastline focusing on how pathways for 2-waters infrastructure could transition to man-
aged retreat (and eventually re-purposing of the area). The last section discusses the
consequences and adaptation options for coastal Urban Drainage systems impacted by
SLR. It concludes by discussing the implications for the Petone study area and this study.
2.1
Types of Adaptation Options
Adaptation options in response to SLR according to IPCC (2019) are shown in Figure 2.1,
where the five most commonly used policy approaches are shown. In this context, these
responses are implemented to protect communities from the effects of SLR, where mostly
a combination of increased water levels and wave impact is considered during increas-
ingly extreme events. Negative consequences of SLR include more frequent flooding,
increased erosion and increases in groundwater levels, saltwater intrusion, liquefaction
and drainage problems.
Figure 2.1: Sea level rise adaptation options, adapted from (IPCC, 2019, p. 4-87)
Rouse et al (2017) outlines the advantages and disadvantages that arise from each of the
four most commonly considered adaptation policies:
• Do nothing, advantage is that it would result in low cost and effort for the present
generation. Disadvantages include that there is no future certainty for any of the
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
5
==PAGE:14==
actors, projected impacts would occur with consequences for people, property and
infrastructure, ignores risks for future generations
• Protect, advantage is that hard engineering provide immediate protection for high
value infrastructure, soft engineering aligns with natural processes and allows for
cyclic erosion. Disadvantage is that this approach is expensive, assumptions might
lead to a mis perspective of the risk, direct coastal squeeze and physical impacts
on adjoining beaches
• Accommodate, advantage is that it works with physical processes by retrofitting
measures like raising floor levels, removing current risk. Disadvantage is moderate
costs depending on retrofitting, based on static risk assumptions, requires change
in expectations of use/service levels, requires careful communications because it
has limits as SLR is ongoing
• Retreat, advantage is that it allows for a dynamic risk, it allows ecosystem resilience
to be maintained and seeks to remove risk. Disadvantage is that is potentially ex-
pensive to implement due to relocation of infrastructure, compensation costs and
likely community resistance, it also needs a long term timeframe to be implemented
without major community disruption.
Advance in a coastal engineering context is commonly achieved by land reclamation and
ongoing beach nourishment. Since the foreshore is a highly dynamic zone, advance
methods are expensive to implement (usually associated with a protect method) and to
maintain, and therefore only being considered for large cities (e.g the U-wall option for
Manhattan, NY). Ecosystem based disaster risk reduction seeks to work with natural pro-
cesses, e.g. coastal ecosystems, rather than work against them resulting in a higher
adaptive capacity and lower costs on a life cycle basis then traditional engineering solu-
tions when applied in an appropriate setting (de Vriend et al., 2015; Lange et al., 2016).
The major disadvantage of ecosystem based adaptation is its experimental nature and
not yet being integrated with shoreline and hydraulic protection guidelines which means
quantification of its benefits is immature. Advances in research with the aid of numerical
modelling will start to push these solutions to a more common approach to adaptation.
2.2
Managed Retreat
This section focuses on introducing managed retreat and provides a background on the
importance of considering managed retreat as an adaptation option for low-lying coastal
areas, given that the sea level will continue rising at a rate that is uncertain. Managed
retreat can be defined as ”an adaptive approach to risk reduction, where people, activi-
ties and assets are strategically relocated away from hazardous locations” (Hanna et al.,
2017, p. 3). In relation to the research question this would comprise two water infrastruc-
ture assets.
Implementation barriers to managed retreat are becoming increasingly identified in the
literature. (Gibbs, 2016) recognizes that although there are a lot of studies that take man-
aged realignment into account, there is a lack of implementation of these studies and
little on-the-ground experience. It also acknowledges that ‘’Evidence of climate change
impacts is rapidly increasing but there is unfortunately little change to the speed of adap-
tation by governments and individuals’’ (Mills et al., 2016).
6
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:15==
Currently there are three district Councils in New Zealand implementing cases of managed
retreat as a response to a range of hazards (Hanna et al., 2017) These include a relocation
of council assets due to coastal erosion risk, voluntary retreat as a result of a damaging
debris flow and a voluntary purchase of properties for making room for the river as part of
a flood risk reduction project.
Hanna et al. (2018) identified several key implementation barriers for managed retreat in
New Zealand. They concluded that implementation of managed retreat is difficult due to
a lack of national policy guidance, legislative mechanisms and implementation support.
In addition to this, funding the sequence of steps to achieve managed retreat is found
to be uncertain and voluntary retreat the only tool currently able to incentivise managed
retreat. When combined with withdrawal of service, it is also perceived to be compulsory
(Hanna et al., 2018). Hino et al. (2017) concluded that managed retreat is favoured for
longer timeframes, approx. >25 yrs. This agrees with (Rouse et al., 2017) for traditional
protection projects, where it states that building levees result in high maintenance costs,
environmental damage and increases development in hazardous areas from residual risk.
In short, the following four retreat categories are identified (Hino et al., 2017):
• Post Disaster, there is mutual agreement as risk is perceived to be not tolerable,
there is high political will and there is a high cost benefit
• Greater Good, Risk is perceived tolerable therefore resident opposition must be
overcome, there is high political will and high cost benefit
• Hunkered Down, mandatory resettlement, risk is perceived to be tolerable, there is
low political will and there is a low cost benefit
• Migration Risk is perceived intolerable and there is low political will and low cost
benefit, e.g. remote settlements where there is an emphasis on self-reliance
Siders et al. (2019) concluded that managed retreat is often ad hoc and focused on risk
reduction which is treated as isolated from broader societal goals. They reason that with-
out guiding policies, ad hoc managed retreat fails and misses opportunities to contribute to
societal goals. They recommend strategic retreat, aimed at contributing to these societal
goals. Identified barriers making managed retreat difficult to implement in practice include
profitable, short term economic gains in coastal development, imperfect risk perceptions,
subsidized insurance rates and disaster recovery costs, misaligned incentives between
residents, local officials and national governments and a preference for the status quo
(Siders et al., 2019).
A recent thesis project by Olufson (2019) investigated two recent examples of managed
retreat in order to identify what kind of components would be included in managed retreat,
how they could be sequenced and how these different components could be grouped to
assist those implementing managed retreat. The following sequence of grouped compo-
nents are identified in (Olufson, 2019):
• Community Engagement - engagement and consultation on adaptation options and
managed retreat implementation
• Planning and Preparing - planning and rule changes, planning for reduces Los and
development restrictions on at risk areas, monitoring and establishing trigger points
• Enabling Investment, Property Acquisition - new community investment in the form
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
7
==PAGE:16==
of alternative land for relocation and development of new community facilities, Public
infrastructure L.o.S. reduction and maintenance reduction
• Active Retreat - Public infrastructure relocation (replacement/redevelopment of pub-
lic infrastructure elsewhere, relocation of critical facility structures and relocation of
community facilities), privately owned infrastructure relocation (private companies
begin to reduce/remove/relocate infrastructure and covenants on property are ac-
tivated), private property relocation and abandonment (relocation/abandonment of
residential and commercial property and providing temporary housing), removal of
marine structures
• Cleanup - demolition, land rehabilitation and maintenance
2.3
Dynamic Adaptive Pathway Planning (DAPP)
A systematic way of managing retreat from the influence of coastal processes and SLR is
required to answer the research questions. Dynamic Adaptive Policy Pathways (DAPP)
(Haasnoot, 2013) is a Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty (DMDU) method, where
the planning is dynamic to account for uncertainties and change over time by exploring
alternative strategies. Policy actions have an uncertain design life and might fail sooner or
later to be effective as boundary conditions change with an Adaptation Tipping Point (ATP)
(Haasnoot et al., 2019), which from now on will be referred to as Adaptation Threshold
(AT). The concept has been adopted in Ministry for the Environment coastal hazards and
climate change guidance (2017) for a New Zealand context and developed as Dynamic
Adaptive Pathway Planning (DAPP), which is the terminology utilized in this study. The
ability to incorporate uncertainties and explore alternative strategies makes it a suitable
approach to investigate the research questions.
‘’ DAPP explores alternative sequences of decisions (adaptation pathways) for multiple
futures and illuminates the path dependency of alternative strategies. It opens the deci-
sion space and helps to overcome policy paralysis due to deep uncertainty. There are
different routes that can achieve the objectives under changing conditions (like ‘different
roads leading to Rome’).’’ (Haasnoot et al., 2019, p. 71-1)
The aim of DAPP is to adapt and transition current static and time bound planning to
decision making that enables adjustments (Lawrence, Bell, et al., 2018). This is required
due to a combination of deep geophysical and socio-economic uncertainties. Accordingly,
involvement of stakeholders is critical; for example as facilitated using a simulation game
(Lawrence and Haasnoot, 2017) and through collaborative decision making (Kench et al.,
2018). Based on Haasnoot et al. (2019), the development of a DAPP approach consists
of the following components:
• Framing
• Analysis
• Actions
• Evaluation of actions and options
• Development and selection of adaptation pathways
• Specify and implement strategy
• Monitoring and review
8
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:17==
As can be seen from Figure 2.2, pathway changes occur when a certain hazard incre-
ment, in this case SLR, is reached and current management fails to meet objectives of
the strategy. This is an adaptation threshold point (ATP), where another adaptation op-
tion (pathway) can be initiated. Adaptation thresholds are defined as the conditions under
which a policy will fail to deliver on objectives. (Haasnoot et al., 2019).
Figure 2.2: DAPP Approach, adapted from (Werners et al., 2013, p. 337)
AT’s are defined as the threshold where boundary conditions are exceeded, e.g. due to
an increasing hazard and new actions are needed to ensure acceptable performance lev-
els. This can be technical, environmental, societal or economic standards (Manocha and
Babovic, 2017; Haasnoot et al., 2019). In Babovic et al. (2018), this adaptation threshold
is found by modelling the system and placing it under increasingly larger stress. Adapta-
tion thresholds can also be identified through moderation processes using scenarios with
different conditions representing the stress similar to sensitivity testing.
Signals and triggers in the DAPP warn and initiate pathway changes respectively. As can
be seen in Figure 2.3, as performance of an asset starts to decrease, a signal is estab-
lished evaluating and warning for decrease in asset performance, signalling an adaptation
threshold is approaching. After a continuing decrease of asset performance due to chang-
ing outside boundary conditions, a trigger is reached to change or implement an option
on a different pathway. Upon reaching this trigger, a decision point is reached and there
is an implementation window until the performance of the asset dives under the adapta-
tion threshold. The length of this implementation window depends on the lead time for
a new option. Different adaptation options require a different implementation time span,
and therefore have different lead times. When delaying a change of pathway the options
for choosing alternative pathways decrease, as can be seen in Figure 2.3. Before this
happens, other triggers are reached where a different pathway is necessary to maintain
the performance level of the asset above the adaptation threshold.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: Adaptation Threshold and pathway performance, adapted from (Ministry for
the Environment, 2017, p. 211)
Then, incrementally, a decision point is reached where either current management is con-
tinued or an alternative adaptation is implemented. This could be for example alteration of
current approach such as raising stopbanks. After this there will be incremental continua-
tion of current management where an alternative adaptation is required, or an alternative
strategy. After this another strategy has to be implemented. It therefore provides a map
for alternative routes (Pathways) for arriving at the same destination (Strategy). Currently
there are few studies illustrating the applicability of DAPP for developing adaptation op-
tions for two water infrastructure in a practical setting and no studies were found using
DAPP for two water infrastructure in a retreat setting. Discussing how it is used for creating
two water infrastructure pathways for other adaptation strategies strategies will therefore
provide a start for addressing the research question with regards to measures and service
levels.
Manocha and Babovic (2017) applied a DAPP approach in Singapore to investigate storm
water management infrastructure adaptation pathways. They preselected pathways based
on a cost benefit analysis allowing for a better understanding of adaptation timing, and
aiding ‘’Bridging the gap between the highly uncertain and long term climate change and
short term decision making horizons of urban planning and development’’ (Manocha and
Babovic, 2017, p. 94). The study used a quantified approach to calculate ATP’s for
stormwater infrastructure. Triggers and signals for stormwater pathways are not included
in the study. Babovic et al. (2018) reviewed the potential for addressing future uncer-
tainty in drainage systems using DMDU methods. They found assessing drainage system
pathways using DAPP too computationally intense due to the complexity of the hydrolog-
ical models used, therefore simplified models were recommended (Babovic et al., 2018).
Radhakrishnan et al. (2017) investigated applying a DAPP approach to fluvial flood pro-
tection in an urban setting in Can Tho, Vietnam. An extra component was added to the
DAPP methodology to include a coping capacity assessment to determine community
coping capabilities on different scales. No-regret actions included combining short term
citizen initiatives with long term planning measures which could potentially delay AT’s for
pathways.
10
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Urban Drainage Systems
Urban drainage systems handle wastewater and stormwater (Butler et al., 2018).
In
general these systems can be divided into a combined system where wastewater and
stormwater are combined in the same sewers and a separate system. A combined system
disposes of storm and sewer water, usually to a water treatment plant (WTP) in the prox-
imity of the urbanized area. During periods of increased discharge due to stormwater, the
flow is diverted into the natural water course, e.g. the estuary or river, using a combined
sewer overflow (CSO). This causes pollution as both stormwater and untreated wastewa-
ter are diverted into the natural water course before reaching the WTP (Butler et al., 2018).
In separate systems the storm and wastewater pipe systems are separated, eliminating
the need for a CSO (Butler et al., 2018) and therefore preventing wastewater pollutant
spills in increased discharge scenarios. This does not remove pollution altogether as
stormwater contains pollutants as well (Butler et al., 2018). An example of a separate
drainage system can be seen in Figure 2.4.
Pumping stations are needed to pump water out of or along the system if this cannot be
done by gravity. A gravity-based system is preferred to accommodate the necessary dis-
charge, eliminating unnecessary maintenance. Since treatment facilities are usually not
available in each natural sub-catchment, pumps are often necessary to overcome eleva-
tion difficulties (Butler et al., 2018).
Figure 2.4: Conceptual overview of a Separate Drainage System, similar to the drainage
system in the study area, adapted from Butler et al., 2018
2.4.1
Urban Drainage and Sea Level Rise Interaction
Most of the literature either investigates the spatial extend as a result of wave overtop-
ping and the flooding of the pipes and nodes in the drainage system as a combined result
(Gallien et al., 2014) or the effect of groundwater interaction with the drainage system
in coastal areas (Archetti et al., 2011; Su et al., 2019). What we are looking for is the
influence of sea level rise on the performance of current two water infrastructure drainage
systems. These studies are mostly done as a case study. Gallien et al. (2014) found that
a coastal drainage system actually reduces the spatial extend of flooding, on the condition
that it is not running at capacity. It does not investigate the consequences on the urban
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
11
==PAGE:20==
drainage system performance or the consequences of saline water entering the system.
It also stresses the importance of avoiding static inundation models in favour of hydrody-
namic models.
Wdowinski et al. (2016) discussed the influence of flooding hazards due to SLR in Miami.
A significant increase in flooding induced by rainfall was found due to SLR decreasing the
discharge capacity (due to a decrease in the hydraulic gradient) of gravity-based drainage
systems. This reduction in discharge capacity due to SLR was also found in (Bloetscher
et al., 2011; Friedrich and Kretzinger, 2012; Almeida and Mostafavi, 2016). In order to
adapt, Miami beach switched to a pump-based system (Wdowinski et al., 2016).
Increases in groundwater levels due to increased precipitation and snow melting were
found to cause back water effects and reduce the discharge capacity of the drainage sys-
tem when investigating climate change adaptation for Bucharest (Stancu et al., 2017).
Investigations into flood risk for Shanghai concluded that decreases in drainage capacity
caused by land subsidence and sea level rise will have the most significant contribution to
future inundation risk in ShanghaiHu et al., 2019. This confirmed the observations from
an extreme inundation event in 2015 where the high water level in the river prevented the
drainage system to pump the excess in rainwater into the river.
Impacts from SLR include higher water tables and therefore a reduced soil storage ca-
pacity, in turn resulting in increased frequency and severity of flooding due to precipitation
(Bloetscher et al., 2011; Almeida and Mostafavi, 2016). This compromises flow capac-
ity of stormwater and coastal structures, and potentially pumping stations will have to be
installed to reduce ponding (Bloetscher et al., 2011). Sue et al. (2019) investigates the
relationship between infiltration in an aging urban sewer system and groundwater flood-
ing in a coastal area. They concluded that when the pipes in the system are not repaired,
there is an increased discharge of untreated sewage due to CSO overflow. Upon repair
however, the water table rises resulting in groundwater floods, especially in coincidence
with high tide, and this is expected to increase due to SLR. It was also found that in-
creases in GWL result in sewage backup in septic tanks in conveyance pipes (Almeida
and Mostafavi, 2016).
Sea level rise also results in increased inundation of WWTP’s placed in the vicinity of the
coastline. The increased salinity can cause damages in the WWTP, as it is not adjusted to
this increased salinity (Friedrich and Kretzinger, 2012). Schoent et al. (2015) investigated
the resilience of different wastewater system setups under a range of hazards, including
SLR. It was concluded that although all systems were vulnerable to SLR, it was found
that greywater reuse and a blackwater pressure sewer were the most robust due to less
environmental contamination during extreme events (Schoen et al., 2015).
12
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:21==
2.4.2
Water Sensitive Urban Design
Water sensitive urban design has been gaining currency with practitioners and imple-
mented in some notable cases. Water sensitive urban design (WSUD) is: ‘’an integration
of urban planning with management, protection and conservation of the urban water cy-
cle, that ensures that urban water management is sensitive to natural hydrological and
ecological processes’’ (Wong, 2006, p. 214). Whereas it traditionally is associated with
stormwater management, it now integrates management of the urban water cycle into
urban design (Wong, 2006). For stormwater, some of the more common BMP’s are de-
tention ponds, wetlands, ponds, biofilters, swales, adsorption filters, infiltration basins,
porous pavement, green roofs and settlers (Lerer et al., 2018). It is important to note that
due to rise in the ground water levels as a result of SLR, SUD’s that increase pervious-
ness could result in increases in the local groundwater table (Joyce et al., 2017). It does
offer a reduction in peak flow aiding traditional grey infrastructure in the system (Joyce
et al., 2017).
Figure 2.5: Different Runoff rates, adapted from Butler et al., 2018
Figure 2.5 shows differences in runoff rate Q for different environments. It can be seen
that rural environments have a more consistent runoff rate whereas urban environments
have a peak flow in runoff. This is undesirable, as sewers and pumps would have to be
increased in capacity to deal with peak discharges for short times and are working under
capacity for most of the operation time. This concept can also be applied to increases in
hazards due to climate change. Increased rainfall, higher GWL levels and possible flood-
ing of critical infrastructure will increase chances of encountering these peak discharges.
The aim is therefore to look for ways to ‘shave off’ this peak discharge. This can either
be done by ‘delaying’ part of the discharge to make sure that the runoff enters the system
later (e.g. green roofs, swales), increasing storage capacity (retention basins, (sub) sur-
face constructed wetland flows) or increasing capacity of the system (increase pipe and
pump capacity).
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
13
==PAGE:22==
2.5
Implications for Research
This research looks specifically into two water infrastructure retreat as a result of SLR,
and seeks to frame this within a conceptual DAPP framework. It is expected that the on-
going increase in mean sea level (rather than episodic coastal flooding events), will have
the most wide-ranging impacts on the drainage system. Several studies in the theoretical
background discuss decrease in discharge capacity (Bloetscher et al., 2011; Friedrich and
Kretzinger, 2012; Almeida and Mostafavi, 2016; Wdowinski et al., 2016) and groundwa-
ter table issues (Su et al., 2019; Bloetscher et al., 2011; Friedrich and Kretzinger, 2012;
Almeida and Mostafavi, 2016; Joyce et al., 2017) in coastal environments as a result
of SLR. The increase in the local groundwater table as a result of SLR is an important
consideration for implementing adaptation options in the Petone area. These issues are
also identified in a recent paper investigating climate change impacts on storm water and
wastewater systems in New Zealand (Hughes et al., 2020 (In Press)). SLR was found to
have severe impacts on both the storm and wastewater systems, only having low impacts
on pressurized parts of the conveyance system. Pumping stations were still found to be
severely affected (Hughes et al., 2020 (In Press)). The spatial extend of flooding in an
urbanized coastal area is still a relevant topic to this research as SLR exacerbates these
effects and more frequent inundation of the drainage system is to be expected.
Due to compounding hazards it is difficult to quantify adaptation threshold points like in
Manocha and Babovic (2017). Babovic et al. (2018) suggests to use a simplified model
to assess pathways. A simplified static inundation model is used and thresholds are de-
termined by a mix of qualitative / quantitative measures of exposure to SLR. This does
not take into account the vulnerability or performance of the system. Increased rainfall will
further exacerbate the problems with the drainage system in the long term, therefore it is
expected this will provide a conservative estimate. Including community coping capacity
as in Radhakrishnan et al. (2017) would allow for precise determining of AT’s for path-
way options. In order to incorporate this the community would have to be engaged and
involved in the pathway development. Due to time constraints this is beyond the scope
for this study.
WSUD options could be included in pathways to mitigate the reduction in capacity while
at the same time creating amenities for the area require extra space.Siekmann and Siek-
mann, 2015 describes WSUD’s as intensified use of surface detention using technical
infrastructure, and notes that implementation in urban areas is still rare. The paper sug-
gests that disconnecting drained areas is a first step to prepare drainage systems to cli-
mate change. This could also indicate an opportunity for partial retreat. The paper also
concludes that these measures are easier to upgrade then traditional sewer systems. This
means they have a higher adaptive capacity, which would be an advantage considering
the challenges the Petone area is facing.
The utilization of a more systematic retreat strategy that contributes to societal goals is
suggested in Siders et al. (2019) and to plan long term retreat using a DAPP approach is
expected to provide this. The retreat typology outline in Olufson (2019) provides an useful
typology for approaching implementation of managed retreat, and sequencing options
and actions. There is limited literature available on sequencing of two water infrastructure
retreat while facilitating community retreat away from the coastline. A literature search of
adaptation options for urban drainage (2.4.2) with managed retreat typology gives a start
on this.
14
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology
This section outlines the overall research process. Methods and Data Collection discuss
the various products, ’building blocks’, produced during the research. The research scope
discusses research boundaries. An overview of the research process is provided in Fig-
ure 3.1. The first phase of the research (1,2,3,4,5) consists of different inputs with mixed
qualitative and quantitative data. This is then used to identify both system thresholds
and adaptation option thresholds. These in turn are the input for a conceptual DAPP for
two water infrastructure in the Petone/Alicetown area. By incorporating retreat in this ap-
proach, the output provides the basis to answer the research questions.
Figure 3.1: Research Process
3.1
Study Area
This section introduces the Petone and Alicetown drainage system (Detailed description
provided in Appendix 1 and 2). The stormwater pumps are placed in the lower parts of
the system in the inner area of Petone. Therefore it is possible to more efficiently get
the excessive stormwater out during heavy Pluvial flooding. The Wastewater pumps are
placed in the vicinity of the wastewater outlets. Since the systems are gravity-based,
there is the need at the end of the system, e.g. near the outlet, (near the Hutt river or
the coastline), to pump the discharge flow to the necessary hydraulic head towards the
WWTP.
Figure 3.2: Conceptual Petone Cross Section illustrating SLR problems
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
15
==PAGE:24==
An overview of the drainage system with the location of the storm water and wastewater
pumps is provided in Figure 3.3. Discharge points of wastewater systems often are lo-
cated at the lowest elevation points of populated areas (White et al., 2017). This means
that the gravity-based two water infrastructure located in this area is especially vulnerable,
and changes in water level as a result of SLR can therefore have a considerable impact
in the hydraulic capacity.
Figure 3.2 illustrates this for specifically the Petone and Alicetown area. The left repre-
sents Alicetown, the middle Petone and the right the Esplanade at the coast. Even though
not located in the direct vicinity of the coastline, in two sections the elevation drops con-
siderably. This means that due to SLR the hydraulic gradient (∆h/L) will become smaller
resulting in a reduced discharge capacity. Additionally, during periods of increased water
levels the marine water can get into the pipe and cause ponding in the lower elevated
areas, increasingly as SLR continues.
Figure 3.3: Research Area and Important Assets
16
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Methods and Data Collection
This section discusses how the project was undertaken and the type of analyses and tools
used to answer the main question. To have a better overview of the different components
in the methodology, the components are outlined in Figure 3.4. The first paragraph dis-
cusses the exposure analysis. This includes hazard data, asset data and the tool used
to identify exposure, RiskScape. The second section elaborates on the approach for the
adaptation options. This includes a system analysis and the CIrcle tool to identify critical
infrastructure cascades. It also sets out the approach for the workshop and identifying
adaptation options. The last section discusses the approach leading up to the conceptual
DAPP, which includes area selection, system adaptation thresholds and pathway adap-
tation thresholds.
Figure 3.4: Methodology Components
3.2.1
Exposure Assessment
For the purpose of this research an analysis into exposure of the assets of the area was
performed, where direct and indirect exposure of assets to SLR was investigated for two
water assets in the area. It is difficult to assess the exact risk to the project area. Risk is
conventionally assessed by considering the intersection of consequences and the likeli-
hood of these arising from an event, or in this case gradual rise in sea level. Consequence
here partially relates to exposure of assets and people . The difficulty with applying the
conventional approach to assessing risk is that the likelihood component is difficult to
quantify, because with ongoing sea level rise, uncertainty increases over time (Ministry
for the Environment, 2017). Therefore the focus in this research is on the consequence,
in the form of an exposure assessment of two water assets in the Petone area (but ex-
cluding a detailed analysis of the extent and type of disrepair, damage to asset types and
the entire network with rising seas).
ISO 14090 defines exposure as ‘’Presence of people, livelihood, species or ecosystems,
environmental functions, services, resources, infrastructure, or economic, social or cul-
tural assets in places and settings that could be affected’’ (Standard, 2019, p. 2). This
provides the basis for starting up discussion with stakeholders in the area, giving an in-
dication and prioritization of assets that are affected. This produces a combination of
qualitative (Stakeholders) and quantitative (exposure assessment) input to prioritize as-
set exposure.
‘’Exposure generally refers to the state and change in external stresses that a system
is exposed to. In the context of climate change, these are normally specific climate and
other biophysical variables (including their variability and frequency of extremes). The
location of people and assets can also be regarded as exposure’’(Lawrence et al., 2011,
p. 6)
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
17
==PAGE:26==
The National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) offered to help with set-
ting up the correct functions for this analysis using their in-house developed tool Riskscape.
RiskScape is a multi-risk modelling tool developed by NIWA and GNS Science, and also
used to determine exposure to SLR in Paulik et al. (2020). It combines three important
components as input, being a Hazard Module, a Vulnerability Module and an Asset Mod-
ule (Schmidt et al., 2011). The unique aspect of this program is that it is designed to be a
flexible tool that can adapt to different hazards and assets. Exposure of assets at risk over
SLR (hazard) increments in the study area was investigated by the overlay of the hazard
datasets and asset datasets to see the extent of exposure in relation to the corresponding
scenarios. These exposed assets were then organised using a QGIS script (Appendix 2).
To evaluate exposure for the two water assets using RiskScape, the following steps were
used:
• Collect available data on SLR and Hazards, e.g. flooding
• Identify assets in the area, using asset data
• Combine and overlay the hazard with the asset data to determine the exposure
• Ground-truth with local experts
This type of exposure assessment was recently undertaken on a nation-wide scale (Local
Government New Zealand, 2019b). Due to changes in the boundary conditions, like SLR,
return periods will also change as the sea continues to rise. A SLR increase of 0.30 m will
change a 1 percent AEP into an event occurring at least once per year (White et al., 2017;
Stephens, 2015). Wellington has the highest exceedance per increment in comparison
to the other major cities in New Zealand (PCE, 2015).
Data Collection
A combination of several hazards is affecting the Petone area. Since most of the wastew-
ater and storm water infrastructure is gravity-based this increases the vulnerability to sea
level rise. Unfortunately no modelling of these systems is available at the moment, so
it was not be possible to look into different scenarios for a sensitivity analysis. For ma-
rine flooding there is a predictive data layer for flooding scenarios under rising sea levels,
which is provided by NIWA. The data used were 0.1 m increments of SLR added to the
present-day 1 percent AEP storm-tide and wave setup water level in Wellington Harbour
Paulik et al., 2020. The storm event does not change, just the increment in the water lev-
els. The dataset used as the coastal flooding hazard was developed for the Deep South
Science Challenge (Paulik et al., 2020). The aim of the research was to map marine flood-
ing extent for New Zealand nation wide for 1percent annual exceedance probability with
SLR increments of 0.1 m, and enumerate a range of assets, including two water assets,
that are at risk of coastal inundation (Paulik et al., 2020). Increases in groundwater level
are a serious threat to the Petone area, especially since it is already dealing with relatively
high groundwater levels.
Hazard and asset data were used for the exposure assessment. Hazard data layers were
overlain with selected asset data layers that determined the exposure to the hazards.
The overlays for increments in SLR are mapped for exposure up to +120 cm SLR. Asset
data for two waters infrastructure was acquired from Wellington Water, which was used
to investigate the exposure. A hazard map was also provided for pluvial flooding. It
was decided not to use this hazard as it was not possible to calculate exposure using
different increments and see compound hazard exposure for different scenarios. The
18
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:27==
marine hazard data is therefore more suitable for looking into asset exposure thresholds.
3.2.2
Adaptation Options
This section outlines the approach taken for the systems analysis, the CIrcle Tool and the
workshop. The systems analysis utilizes ISO 14090 to identify important system com-
ponents, relations and boundaries. These are used in the CIrcle tool to identify critical
infrastructure cascades. The workshop provides expert input on the project. A more ex-
tensive investigation into literature was done in order to prepare the adaptation options.
It made sure to both supplement the optioneering in the workshop as well as making sure
no options were overlooked. It was clear that there are adverse effects on the two water
system as a result of SLR, like water getting into the outlet pipes decreasing the drainage
capacity, the effects of inundation, salt water intrusion and flooding problems. However
the exact effect on a local area is seldom clear. It was not expected there are going to be
any revolutionary new techniques available to implement this. Rather, existing adaptation
options were used working in parallel with managed retreat depending on the threshold
established and lead times associated.
System Analysis
In order to further investigate stakeholder interests and two water system interactions,
a system analysis was performed during the research. ISO 14090 encourages systems
thinking to understand the complex, nonlinear and interconnected system the project is
set in (Standard, 2019). Mapping boundaries, sub systems and their interdependencies
helps to identify priorities for adaptation. This has been previously used in a New Zealand
specific study looking into cascading effects from a range of different hazards on the differ-
ent infrastructure sub systems like a dike breach (Extreme event cascade), wastewater
(SLR and coastal inundation cascade), stormwater (heavy rainfall cascade), transport
systems (climate induced landslides), power and gas (storm event cascade) and water
supply (drought cascade) (Lawrence, Blackett, et al., 2018). The result of these cascades
on the infrastructure were used in conjunction with the CIrcle tool to identify cascading ef-
fects for a range of different districts like Christchurch and the Hauraki plains (Lawrence,
Blackett, et al., 2018). This was used as a ‘benchmark’ making sure no major impacts or
components within the system have been overlooked. For this research, these cascades
were identified using a combination of assets identified in the exposure assessment and
literature.
CIrcle Tool
The CIrcle tool – Critical Infrastructure: Relations and Consequences for Life and Envi-
ronment – is a tool developed by Deltares to analyse and visualize cascading effects of
infrastructure networks, to address awareness on critical infrastructure dealing with cli-
mate change related topics (Hounjet, 2014). It does so by dividing critical infrastructure
into different categories, with the ability to add direct effects and establishing links, cas-
cading effects, between the different categories. The drainage system, stormwater and
wastewater pumps and stopbanks are selected for use in the tool. Impacts on main roads,
citizens, hazardous materials and public health as they were affected by cascades and
therefore relevant to this study. Direct impacts on these components and the full analysis
can be found in Appendix 3. According to (Hounjet, 2014; Deltares, 2017, 2015) the most
efficient approach is to discuss and analyse these critical infrastructure cascades with
different interactions, with a group of experts in a workshop session using a GIS anal-
ysis. Due to time constraints with the workshop, and since the participants are largely
unfamiliar with the tool, it was decided to apply the tool before the workshop and then dis-
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
19
==PAGE:28==
cuss the outputs at the workshop. This enabled the workshop input to be added after the
workshop. Direct impacts were added to each of the different sectors, based on the find-
ings from the exposure assessment. Increments were added resulting in the thresholds
for stormwater pumps, wastewater pumps and the drainage system. After the workshop,
thresholds identified during the workshop were also added to the direct impacts for the
different critical infrastructure cascades.
Workshop
In order to get some input on adaptation options and feedback on the project, a work-
shop was organized with a group of local experts from the agencies responsible and from
different disciplines.. In order to prepare the participants for the workshop, a pre ques-
tionnaire containing the workshop objectives was send to the participants to familiarize
themselves with the topic and consider the issues before the workshop. Furthermore in-
terdependencies or cascading effects are discussed using the CIrcle tool from Deltares.
The aim was to identify options and pathways for managed retreat of the infrastructure
using an optioneering approach which systematically covered the following :
• Thresholds
• Lead times
• Currently Available options
• Innovative Solutions
• Timing of action – when to initiate options or pathways
• Conditions
Participants were from the Hutt City Council (HCC), Wellington Water (WW) and Greater
Wellington Regional Council (GWRC). The participants have diverse backgrounds includ-
ing strategic planning, engineering, infrastructure management, sustainability planning
and drainage asset management to provide a range of knowledge and experience rel-
evant to the area concerned. This aided the optioneering process and helped with the
development of system thresholds and options from different perspectives.
3.2.3
Conceptual Dynamic Adaptive Pathway Planning
A set of parameters was developed to divide the Petone area into different sub parts,
mainly based on the exposure assessment and the cross sections of the elevation pro-
files. Since the aim was to derive a conceptual DAPP of the Petone area and the project
has time constraints, it was decided to outline conceptual areas, rather than giving them
an exact spatial boundary. The important output were the parameters used to get to this
outcome. System Thresholds were a combined output from the exposure assessment
and the workshop. This means it is a mix of quantitative and qualitative efforts. The
adaptation option thresholds summarized the findings from the high level adaptation op-
tions, and their associated AT’s. Initially option thresholds were defined per conceptual
sub area, each with their individual assessment. This was to tailor the high level option
categories to area specific solutions in order to optimize the performance of the options
in this area, as well as create options between them in different areas. The approach
taken was to develop a number of adaptation options and combine them into adaptation
portfolios.
20
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Research Scope
This section discusses the research boundaries and the research scope. The physical
boundary is the Petone area, around Petone and Alicetown. It is shown in Figure 3.3.
The scope of the research is looking into managed retreat for two water infrastructure,
namely the stormwater and wastewater system for the Petone and Alicetown area, as a
response to SLR. Within the three water services potable water was shown to be less
affected by SLR due to its sealed status in pipes and the location of the main supply line
being in the elevated part of the study area so was not included for this reason.
Impacts from multiple hazard sources are affecting the Petone area. Due to the inability
to quantify compound hazard impacts over SLR increments, the impacts of sea level rise
on the two water infrastructure is utilized to investigate managed retreat. Components
from other systems are excluded, e.g. two water infrastructure from the other side of the
Lower Hutt River. Data included in the scope is asset data from Wellington Water and
NIWA. This asset data was then be further divided in the Stormwater Nodes, Wastewater
Nodes, Stormwater Pipes and Wastewater Pipes. Relevant attributes were selected for
the exposure assessment.
The research questions are used to create context for a conceptual DAPP approach. It
was not be possible to develop a realistic DAPP framework within the timeframe of the
study. It was possible however to identify thresholds and lead times for a managed retreat
pathway to assist an eventual full DAPP approach for the area.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
This chapter presents the research results and follows the structure of the research pro-
cess outlined in section 3.1. Section 4.1. and 4.2. present the results for the conceptual
DAPP input. The conceptual DAPP itself is presented in 4.3. including area selection,
system thresholds, pathway thresholds and area interaction. The workflow can be seen
in Figure 3.4 in Paragraph 3.2.
4.1
Vulnerability Assessment
This section includes the results from the Exposure Assessment including the workshop
output, the system analysis and the identified critical infrastructure impacts and cascades
using the CIrcle tool.
4.1.1
Exposure Assessment
When looking into marine flood exposure for the area in (Paulik et al., 2020), it was seen
that Lower Hutt (Petone and Seaview areas) experience an initial rapid increase of ex-
posure to rising sea increments. Exposure was initiated using an inundation dataset with
0.10 m increments and the 1 percent AEP event. It should be noted that these maps are
based on a ‘bathtub’ approach, meaning that either natural barriers or protective struc-
tures are not taken into account.
The static coastal flood modelling highlights potential exposure to the range of water lev-
els (1 percent AEP present-day + increments of SLR) used. Both direct overtopping flow
of seawater and indirect, with the latter including seawater ingress to the network, rising
groundwater, and residual risk (e.g. possible breach of coastal foreshore berm or the
coastal end of river stopbanks/dikes).
After identifying the hazard exposure extend over SLR on the two water infrastructures
with Riskscape the exposure output from RiskScape, was sorted using a Qgis script (Ap-
pendix 2). The exposed assets per SLR are divided into three priorities. Priority 1 assets
are critical assets with high replacement costs like pumping stations and pipes that dis-
charge into the marine and fluvial water bodies. Priority 2 assets are assets not critical
to the system unless if large numbers are threatened, for example sumps and manholes.
Priority 3 assets are not critical elements regardless of the number affected.
Asset Exposure
Figure 4.1 shows the number of exposed asset per SLR increment. The left y-axis dis-
plays the total amount of assets, the right y-axis displays the amount of Pumping stations
exposed. The bar charts represent the pumping stations, the line charts represent the
total number of assets with different priorities. The aim is to identify system thresholds
based on SLR increments, as opposed to time- based thresholds. The asset exposure
over SLR increments is the quantitative component which is combined with stakeholder
input at the workshop.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Asset Exposure over SLR increments
Figure 4.1 shows a steep increase in the exposure of priority 2 assets in the area until
around +0.50 m, +0.60 m, after which the increase in exposed assets per SLR increment
starts to flatten out. A similar curve can be observed for priority 1 and priority 3 assets,
albeit in smaller numbers. Three out of four storm water pumping stations are, using this
static hazard approach, all immediately inundated at a current 1percent AEP event. Since
the location of these are inland from the coast, this might be a conservative estimation.
Wastewater pumping stations are incrementally exposed until around +0.50 m SLR com-
bined with the present day 1percent AEP storm tide level. Since they are key to running
the system now and adapting it to future challenges, a conservative estimation would still
be valid. How representative this static hazard exposure is, was verified at the workshop
and will be discussed in section 4.1.2.
Exposure Intensification
It can be seen in Figure 4.2 that during a current 1percent AEP event, there is a high
density of assets exposed in the west lower side of the Petone area, between the two
wastewater pumping stations. The reason for higher occurrence around the pumping sta-
tions is due to the increased number of asset components in and around the pumping
station. Other increased density areas are due to a high occurrence of exposed wastew-
ater assets.
The output for a current 1percent AEP event can be seen in Figure 4.2. The algorithm
used to produce this ‘heatmap’ is a Kernel Density Estimation. It interpolates between
different points, and provides a value based on the occurrence of points in the proximity
of an area. Although this produces non-quantifiable values, it is very effective in pinpoint-
ing a high occurrence of points, or in this case, assets. Given the high level nature of this
assessment and the considerable number of datapoints in the asset datasets, this is a
good representation of where asset exposure happens at different SLR increments.
24
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:33==
Comparing this to a 1percent AEP event +0.50 m, it becomes clear that throughout the
different thresholds, intensification of asset exposure occurs in these areas. This is an
important observation, as it provides an indication of where to focus a closer examina-
tion of assets located in that area for potential compartmentalizing or replacement. Fur-
thermore, it becomes clear that intensification of hazard exposure occurs in the slightly
elevated area behind the Esplanade, where the main wastewater pipes and wastewater
pumping stations are located.
Figure 4.2: Location of Asset Exposure Intensification over SLR increments
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
25
==PAGE:34==
Retreat Opportunities
For looking into any coincidence of affected assets and SLR increments, replacement
values are calculated based on average lifespan of assets, provided by Wellington Wa-
ter. The output shows a significant number of replacements were due in the mid 1990’s
through to the mid 2000’s. There are lower numbers due in the next three decades with
peaks starting after the 2060’s. This can be found in Appendix 2.
It also shows a coincidence of pipes that are expected to need replacement based on
estimated lifetime of materials where intensification occurs over SLR increments. Actual
replacement however occurs based on scheduled inspection and when performance is
compromised, rather than on the life expectancy of the pipes. This also expected for in-
tensification of exposed assets behind the Esplanade. This gives a good indication of
when to expect replacements to occur in the coming decades.
The location of asbestos pipes was also investigated. There is coincidence with the area
mentioned in the previous section, but the asbestos pipes are located mainly along the
Esplanade. This is the main Petone wastewater collection sewer discharging towards
the WWTP. There is no date that these assets have to be removed from the ground by
Wellington Water (noting that no new asbestos pipes are being used and that the exist-
ing ones are unlikely to be harmful when buried underground, rather they can become a
hazard during replacement, e.g. cutting of the pipe). Should they be replaced at some
point in the future they would provide an opportunity to consider retreat or redesign of the
system.
4.1.2
Workshop Output
The Petone/Alicetown drainage system thresholds with regards to SLR was discussed at
the workshop and an optioneering exercise was conducted. The optioneering exercise
aimed to identify suitable adaptation options and to validate the work performed to that
point in the project timeline. The workshop outputs are presented in this order.
The system thresholds identified during the workshop are the possible future scenarios
where:
• +0.30 [m] of SLR until regular ponding due to increases in GWL is expected
• +0.30 [m] of SLR until hydraulic capacity is critically reduced
• Regular Wastewater Overflows
• Affordability as economic damages increase
• Cannot fix the system anymore
• No longer a contained system
• Regular overflows to property or watercourses
• Property owners can’t afford to upgrade their own part of the system
• Property owners are not able to get insurance for their property
• GW at the surface most of the time, ponding
26
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:35==
These thresholds were combined with the thresholds identified based on the exposure
assessment. Since there was limited time for discussion during the workshop, it was
not possible to discuss thresholds for adaptation options (pathways) in detail, therefore
thresholds for the two water system were mainly discussed. It was proposed at the work-
shop that when identifying adaptation options there may be parallel options that can re-
duce the risk in the interim leading up to full retreat thus giving time for adjustments to be
made that enable implementation of managed retreat less complex.
During the optioneering phase, possible pathways were discussed. This started out with
more conventional techniques, such as increasing pumping station capacity. After this
some more contemporary options were discussed, like creating water storage in lower
areas. For the optioneering output, the most important adaptations discussed can be
divided in the following main categories:
• Pumping Stations
• Increase Capacity
• Decentralize / Local Infiltration / Reuse
• Pressurize / Vacuum the system
• Create Storage in lower areas / overcome high tide
• Increased Imperviousness
Increasing infiltration through pervious surfaces, as discussed in the theoretical back-
ground, a great approach to infiltrate stormwater more locally, therefore reducing peak
discharges in the drainage system. Examples of this are porous asphalt or bioswales.
Both in the literature and in the workshop it was suggested that implementation of these
measures locally, results in an increase in groundwater levels in lower elevated areas,
and therefore increases the groundwater table. Therefore this would not be a good solu-
tion in the lower lying parts of Petone, but could be considered for implementation in more
elevated areas, alleviating the discharge towards the lower lying areas in the Petone area.
It also became clear that more effort until now has gone into thinking about stormwater
adaptation then wastewater adaptation. This is why during the optioneering there are lim-
ited adaptation options for wastewater. For the purpose of this research however this is
still a valid level as we were not looking into component level solutions. Pathways were
representing the level of detail needed for establishing a conceptual DAPP.
As stated in the project plan and exposure assessment (Appendix 1 and 2), a static bath-
tub approach modelling map was used to identify exposed areas over SLR increments.
This involved two main characteristics, the spatial extent of the flooding and the assets
affected over different SLR increments. During the workshop these characteristics were
discussed with the intent of verifying it with experts who have been working with more in
depth models of the area. It was concluded that both the extent and exposure over SLR
increments are considered a valid representation on which to continue the study. This
validation was based on current static assumptions and dynamic models that are still be-
ing developed for the Petone area.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
27
==PAGE:36==
4.1.3
System Analysis
ISO 14090 outlines the components for setting up a systems concept (Standard, 2019).
The System Boundary is a geographic or conceptual boundary used to demarcate the
system that is being investigated. As can be seen in Figure 4.3, the decision was made
to distinguish between a system and a sub system. The outer system boundary consists
of the complete Petone and Alicetown infrastructure. Geographically, this would be the
circumference described in Figure 4.3. The storm and wastewater system is defined as a
subsystem within the Petone infrastructure. This allows for the possibility of mapping the
system components and interdependencies of the sub system, and their connections to
the larger system in more detail (Standard, 2019). Based on the system and sub system
boundary demarcation the components in these systems are now described according to
the ISO 14090 (Standard, 2019).
Standard (2019) describe organization as a comprehensive system component. This
will from now on be referred to as a system component. Since the system boundary
is described as infrastructure in the Petone/Alicetown area, critical infrastructure will be
included in the system. The two water infrastructures were chosen as the system com-
ponents, with a sub system for both Stormwater and Wastewater. Other components
included are potable water, and more generic Petone infrastructure. This includes roads,
electricity and gas utilities. External factors that have been implemented in this case are
external stressors driven by climate change, and will be referred to as external stressors
from now on. The rationale used was to include hazards that were driven by climate
change, but would compound to area specific system interventions (Impacts). This re-
sulted in external stressors influencing the infrastructure being sea level rise (a), increased
rainfall and therefore pluvial / fluvial discharge (b), increased periods of drought (c) and
earthquakes (d). These in turn result in systematic interventions for the Petone/Alicetown
infrastructure. Earthquakes were included for completeness, but are not included in the
research solution space.
Systematic Interventions were new inputs changing the total output of the systems, as
a result of the external factors described above. For the Petone/Alicetown infrastructure
system these include Flooding (Marine Flooding (1), Pluvial Flooding (2), Fluvial Flooding
(3)), Groundwater level increases (4) and liquefaction due to earthquakes (5). Liquefac-
tion due to earthquakes was left out of considerations in line with the established boundary
conditions of the study. These main four hazards lead in turn to a range of systematic in-
terventions in the sub system specifically for storm water and waste water. These include
drainage problems such as the inability to overcome peak discharges, salt water intrusion
and inundation. These direct impacts were added to the CIrcle tool in Figure 4.3, where
cascading effects as a result of these sub system interventions were investigated.
Discussions with key stakeholders and actors were important to get an overview of key
influences on the different organizations within the system. The relation between the
stakeholders and the system components can be seen in Figure 4.3. Relationships be-
tween the different stakeholders and systematic interventions was visualized by showing
the connections between the different components in the system. For example, how the
system components and key actors are connected, and how they are affected by system-
atic interventions and their link outside of the sub system. The output from this, especially
the systematic interventions, was used as the input for identifying cascades and interde-
pendencies within the two water subsystem using the CIrcle tool.
28
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.3: System Outline
In addition to this, the contribution and involvement of different governmental instruments,
like the New Zealand Resource Management Act (1991) and the Local Government Act
(2002), were also included. For instance the latter Act requires councils to develop 10-
year Long-Term Plans and 30-year Infrastructure Management Plans and regularly update
them engaging with the communities they service. The RMA governs land use planning
in New Zealand which provides for 10-year plans on regional and local levels which influ-
ence exposure to natural hazards and the effects of climate change.
Feedback loops are related to the involved stakeholders. Feedback loop 1 is caused due
to impacts driven by SLR, which are inundation, salt water intrusion and drainage prob-
lems. This is going to put increasing stress on the storm water and wastewater system
(sub-system two water). Feedback loop 2 is related to increasing knowledge, improved
models, new guidance and area assessment due to research and knowledge sharing by
the relevant stakeholders, like Wellington Water and NIWA. The recent paper by Paulik
et al. (2020) is a good example as it aids the decision making process for stakeholders.
Feedback loop 3 contains new guidance (Ministry for the Environment, 2017) (e.g. exist-
ing development of services to accommodate for SLR as required by Wellington Water
through their Regional Standard for Water Services) and plans like the upcoming 30 year
infrastructure plan. Others include Asset maintenance and Asset upgrades.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1.4
CIrcle Tool
The input for the CIrcle tool was the comprehensive system components, outlined in sec-
tion 4.1.3. These are critical infrastructure components. Table 4.1 and Figure 4.4 show
the output from the Circle tool after including suggestions made during the workshop dis-
cussion. Only the critical infrastructure defined in the project scope, the two water in-
frastructure was included for direct impacts as a result of SLR. Cascades to other critical
infrastructure were included. A mix of qualitative and quantitative system thresholds were
added to the direct impacts based on exposure assessment and workshop output. This
aided the development of Pathways for the conceptual DAPP. Figure 4.4 shows the setup
of the circle tool. Each of the coloured elements in the Circle represent one of the different
types of critical infrastructure used, which can be found in 4.1. The coloured connection
lines represent indirect consequences in this sector, or in other words cascading effects.
Figure 4.4: CIrcle Tool Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies
Direct impacts on the storm water pumps and wastewater pumps were found to have
cascades towards citizens, public health, main roads and the the general drainage sys-
tem. Due to the inability to dispose of the excessive storm water and wastewater, the
system will be put under increasing stress as the sea rises and under more intense rain-
fall events. Excess water containing pollutants will overflow inundating roads, resulting in
consequences for traffic or potentially more long term damage to the road infrastructure.
These pollutant spills, occurring either from storm water, wastewater or simultaneously,
also have health implications. This could range from injuries, for example as a result of
inundated recreational spaces or roads, negative consequences for water quality or bad
odor due to pollutant spills. When inundation starts to occur more frequently, this causes
increased costs for citizens to maintain their property. This also could result in an inability
30
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:39==
to get insurance for certain areas.
Based on the output generated in 4.1, system thresholds were established for use in the
conceptual DAPP. This is part A) outlined in the research progress in Figure 3.1. The
first threshold is identified as +0.30 m, where the gravity-based system ceases to work
and regular ponding is expected. The second threshold is established at +0.50 m, where
all wastewater pumps, 3/4 stormwater pumps and a considerable part of the two water
system is exposed. The third established threshold is +0.80 m where the rate of exposure
considerably decreases over SLR increments as most of the system is already exposed.
For a visual overview see Figure 4.1.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.1: Critical Infrastructure Direct impacts and Cascades
Direct Impact
Cascades
Water - Non Critical Components
From the exposure assessment:
To Citizens
Priority 1 - 0.80 m Wastewater Outlets
- Overflow due to reduced capacity
Priority 2 - 0.50 m Manholes / Sumps
- Inability to get Insurance
Priority 3 - 0.80 m Low Priority
To Public Health
- Overflow due to reduced capacity
From the workshop:
To Main Roads
Groundwater Threshold - 0.30 m
- Overflow due to reduced capacity
Reduced Hydraulic Capacity - 0.30 m
StormWater Pumps
Stormwater Pumps Immediately affected:
To Water
0.00 m 3/4 Stormwater Pumps Affected
-Increased stress on the system
To Main Roads
- Road overflow / inundation
To Wastewater Pumps
- Stormwater Overflow
To Public Health
- Stormwater Inundation
To Citizens
- Inability to get Insurance
- Increased Costs
- Stormwater Overflow
Wastewater Pumps
Wastewater Pumps affected over SLR:
To Water
0.00 m 5/9 Wastewater Pumps Affected
- Increased stress on the system
0.10 m 6/9 Wastewater Pumps Affected
To Stormwater Pumps
0.20 m 7/9 Wastewater Pumps Affected
- Wastewater pollutants infiltration
0.40 m 8/9 Wastewater Pumps Affected
- Increased stress on Pumps
0.50 m 9/9 Wastewater Pumps Affected
To Main Roads
- Inundation with pollutants
To Citizens
- Inability to get Insurance
- Increased Costs
- Wastewater Overflow
To Public Health
-Wastewater overflow, health implications
32
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:41==
4.2
Adaptation Options
This section presents the condensed list of adaptation options considered for the DAPP
pathways. The complete list of options can be found in Appendix 3. These were dis-
cussed according to the policy categories outlined in IPCC (2019). Pro’s and Con’s are
also summarized to aid the decision making process.
4.2.1
No Response
No response is the current strategy utilized in the area. This does not mean that the
system is not maintained, it is being maintained continuously, rather it is not proactively
prepared for future increased stresses on the system from SLR and climate change. Prob-
lems are being treated as they arise. The advantage of using this approach is that no big
investment has to be made in the short term, with costs remaining consistent. The dis-
advantage is that, due to changing stresses on the system these disruptive interventions
will not only become increasingly frequent, but once the current system has reached its
threshold, major investments will be necessary to continue achieving the required levels
of service and disruption to communities will result, an overview can be found in Table 4.3
Table 4.2: No Response Strategy
No Response
Specific Options
Pro’s
Con’s
Repair Pipe
Close off leaks
Short Term
Long Term complete
upon emergence
non Expensive
replacement costs
4.2.2
Protect
Lowering the groundwater level around critical infrastructure would be mainly applicable
for the pumping stations that will be affected by SLR. This would delay the water reach-
ing the pumping station causing damage to corrosive parts in the pumping station. The
advantage of this option is that initially current pumping stations in place can remain func-
tional. Planting vegetation to locally lower GWL would be an inexpensive short term no
regret option to implement. Sea levels however will rise gradually and this option will see
a decline in performance and gradual increase in costs to keep the increased water away
from the asset components, eventually facing complete replacement costs.
Preventing undesirable inflow is already being done in the Petone area, mostly for pipes.
The method uses valves to prevent inflow in the system during high tide. As SLR in-
creases, structural measures to protect the system from inflow will be required. The ad-
vantage is that it can be applied to the current drainage system. However, permanent
closure of the outlets ceases the functioning of the drainage system. Therefore the sys-
tem will not function anymore resulting in the threshold failure condition of this adaptation
option. The last two options for protect as an adaptation, dry and wet proofing critical
infrastructure assets, fall in a similar category. While wet-proofing allows non-essential
parts of the asset to be flooded, dry-proofing completely separates the asset from the
water. This could also be an opportunity to incorporate robustness into this option by
implementing it as a dry-proofing solution, and when different parts of the infrastructure
start to flood, use it as a threshold to move to a different adaptation option. Depending
on the type of implementation, this approach could be adjusted to be effective for a long
time. Once the threshold is reached however, the whole system has to be replaced.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.3: Protect Strategy
Protect
Pro’s
Con’s
Lower GWL
Relatively Inexpensive
Limited mitigative capacity
around assets
Dry - Proof
Long term beneficial,
When waterproofing
especially together with
capacity is exceeded,
increased pumping capacity
expensive to replace
Wet - Proof
Long term beneficial,
When waterproofing
less expensive then
capacity is exceeded
entire waterproofing
expensive to replace
Prevent Inflow
Effective Short Term,
Once the threshold is
exceeded, it cannot be
upgraded, whole system
needs to be replaced
4.2.3
Accommodate
Raising the system and sewer outlets would be a way to make sure that the water does
not get in the pipes anymore at current water levels. Over the course of different SLR
increments this will be a recurring situation and the system will have to be raised again
on reaching the next threshold condition. Considering its design and lifetime limitations,
the SLR will keep increasing the problem until it starts to occur again. The biggest is-
sue however is the implementation. As most of the drainage system is designed to be a
gravity-based, raising the outlets will significantly reduce hydraulic capacity. This means
that the system in place now only allows for a limited increase in outlet levels before hav-
ing to switch to a pressurized system to overcome this hydraulic loss.
To overcome this it is also possible to replace the pipes and nodes. With regards to the
loss in hydraulic capacity, the sewer connections in the system could be raised, so that the
hydraulic gradient is restored. This is also only possible to a limited extent. With regards
to the increased discharges in the system, it is possible to increase the pipe diameters by
replacing the pipes. Pressurizing the system is also a way to overcome the initial stages
of SLR. Increased corrosion and vulnerability of the pumping stations, and the need for
increasing pumping station capacity over SLR increments, will reduce the lifetime of this
option under SLR. The major disadvantage is that it is not possible to do this for part of
the system, the whole system has to be adjusted.
Pumping stations are going to be under increasing stress as a result of SLR. Increas-
ingly pressurized systems and increased discharges mean pumping capacity has to be
increased. Increased GWL due to SLR means that there is a risk of pumping stations
flooding, especially since they are partly located underground. Raising the pumping sta-
tions would be a way of accommodating this. Failure conditions of this option is when the
ongoing SLR leads to flooding of the pump station components.
34
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.4: Accommodate Strategy
Accommodate
Pro’s
Con’s
Raise Sewer
Prolongs usage of
Can only be raised a limited
and Outlets
gravity-based system
amount, relatively expensive
for small SLR extention
Increase capacity
Prolongs usage of
Becomes obsolete when
pipes and nodes
gravity-based system
the system is replaced
and increased discharge
capacity
Pressurize Sewer
Prolongs usage of
System becomes less
drainage system
adaptable
Increase Pump
Effective
Expensive to implement, when
Capacity
failure condition is met,
non - upgradable
Raise Pump
Effective and will prolong the
Very expensive
Stations
lifetime of the drainage system
Decentralize
Long term effective /
Initially expensive, more ’invasive’
System
adaptable / upgradable
for community, unusual practice
4.2.4
Nature Based Adaptation
Nature based options are mainly derived from WSUD approaches, as explained in the
theoretical background. Nature based adaptation options are designed to enable the
drainage system to adapt without structural interventions. The two examples would be to
either delay entrance to the drainage system in an extreme event by temporarily storing
or facilitating local infiltration until the system has normalized again and is not working at
full capacity anymore after an extreme event.
However, many of these options require extra space. Since the Petone area is a rel-
atively densely developed area it might prove difficult to implement these options on a
large enough scale in order for it to be effective in mitigating SLR impacts. Implementing
the WSUD options requiring a larger spatial extent in later retreat stages, when there is
space available in retreated areas, would allow for implementation of these options. Stor-
age of excessive discharge is considered effective and can be integrated in many urban
community facilities. Failure conditions would be dependent on the hazard. When con-
sidering SLR increments, this will increase the GWL, leading to inundation of the storage
facility. This will start with ponding, but will increasingly fill up the storage facility until the
system is unable to handle the discharge and the storage facility can overflow.
On site treatment, applicable to both storm and wastewater, is a way of decentralizing
the drainage system. For wastewater this is more limited because storm water can be
more effectively treated and reused as grey water. This decentralized approach reduces
the need for all peak discharges to flow to the outlets / treatment facilities in the system,
mitigating the negative impacts of the reduced hydraulic capacity due to SLR. This can be
done with the help of biofilters, either reintroducing the treated storm water as greywater
or reduce the load on the WWTP by using natural solutions to pre filter the wastewater
before releasing it towards the WWTP.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
35
==PAGE:44==
Increasing perviousness to aid local infiltration is also a double-edged sword. On the one
hand it decreases stress on the system during an extreme event. As stated in the theoret-
ical background however, this increase in perviousness works both ways and might have
the opposite effect in coastal areas, like Petone, where the perviousness allows for the
groundwater table to rise further. It is therefore important that it is implemented in lesser
effected areas in the upper part of the drainage system to mitigate and reduce discharge
to the lower parts of the drainage system. The system failure conditions are when SLR
causes the water levels to also reach these areas, and the increase in groundwater table
is accelerated due to this increased perviousness.
Delay of discharge can be addressed with increased nature based solutions like green
roofs, rain gardens and revegetation. These are relatively easy to implement short term
and quite robust. Especially when implementing these in higher parts of the Petone area
thus reducing stress on the lower parts of the system. Failure conditions would be when
the discharge capacity is exceeded.
Table 4.5: Nature Based Strategy
Nature Based
Pro’s
Con’s
Biofilters
Re use, decrease stress
Reusage of treated water
(on site treatment)
on treatment plant
not always possible
Local Infiltration
Can be integrated into
When GWL becomes too high,
surroundings, ecosystem
ponding occurs
benefits
Discharge Storage
Handles discharge, ecosystem
Spatial requirements
benefits, community benefits,
adaptability
Discharge Delay
Delays discharge, short term no
Some options might require
regret, ecosystem benefits
space or integration into
public facilities and spaces
36
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:45==
4.3
Sequencing Adaptation Pathways
This section presents the results from the exposure assessment, workshop, systems cas-
cades and adaptation options into a conceptual DAPP. The first part focuses on estab-
lishing parametrization for sub area selection. The second part focuses on the system
thresholds as an output from the workshop and exposure assessment. The third part
summarizes the findings from the high level adaptation options, their associated ATP’s
and the transition to adaptation portfolios. The last part combines them into a conceptual
DAPP for visualization between different areas, retreat phases and interaction between
different implementation methods for each area.
4.3.1
Area Selection
Retreat will eventually be necessary at different SLR increments for the entire study area.
The sequence of retreat can however be different for different sub areas within the study
area. This is because of the different elevations in relation to SLR and opportunities to
make interventions for different areas based on different adaptation thresholds. This also
includes other areas that can help implement retreat in the whole study area. Since re-
treat in this context is a spatial shift in retreat phasing, there is a need to divide the project
area into smaller sub areas, each with their unique retreat strategy.
Three areas were identified using cross sections of the area from a DEM file (1) and as-
set exposure information with respect to exposure intensification over SLR increments
(2). The interrelations between the areas were explored using the parameters set out
in Table 4.6. The first row in table 4.6 defines the Area strategy. Eventually all areas
will retreat, therefore the strategy noted here is the first strategy in the sequence. Asset
exposure and intensification, elevation classification (DEM), pumping station exposure,
coastline proximity and area opportunities come from the exposure assessment.
It is the coincidence and parallel implementation between the area specific solutions that
enable the spatial retreat of services in a managed way. Consequently an holistic per-
spective is used by examining the implementation of area specific solutions for all areas
and their inter-relationships.
Table 4.6: Area Selection Parameters
Parameters
Area 1
Area 2
Area 3
Adaptation Strategy
Retreat
Protect/Retreat
Accommodate/Retreat
Land Use
Residential
Industry / Residential
Industry / Residential
Asset Exposure
Intensification
Intensification
Low Intensification
Pump Exposure
Medium
High
Low
Elevation
Low
Medium
Medium / High
Coastline Proximity
Medium
Close
Far
Opportunities
Old Pipes
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
37
==PAGE:46==
Area 1
Retreat is the strategy identified as the initial sequence for this area. The area has a high
asset exposure over all SLR increments. It is the highest exposure level in the study area.
A high concentration of assets can be correlated to either a high density of residential de-
velopment, or an industrial area. In terms of pumping stations, there are both stormwater
and wastewater pumping stations affected. The area also has a low elevation sump, in
combination with a medium coastline proximity and therefore will be particularly vulnera-
ble to the SLR threshold of +0.30 [m].
Opportunities for Managed Retreat through the spatial relationships that can facilitate
Managed Retreat are also present in the area. The first opportunity is that the area has
a high number of expected pipe replacements due. By not replacing the pipes and thus
continuing use of the current system until retreat begins creates an opportunity.
The second advantage is that, since the system won’t be used anymore, even with con-
siderably reduced hydraulic capacity, this can create useful redundancy in the system. By
rerouting stormwater through the old drains creates an increase in capacity in the other
areas. It also creates the opportunity to repurpose this area with the aim of creating extra
drainage capacity, as well as providing community and ecosystem benefits in the form of
public spaces.
Area 2
The first strategy in the retreat sequence for this area is Protect. Due to the close prox-
imity of the area to the coastline, retreat might be expected to be the first action. It also
has a high asset exposure like Area 1. The elevation of Area 2 however is higher and
therefore not located in the lower part of the study area, despite coastline proximity, and
Area 2 is critical for the pressurized wastewater system in the lower Petone part. The
area already has been artificially reinforced with a seawall and dune planting in front of
the sea wall. To allow for this part to retreat, the storm water system would have to be
isolated or completely re-routed.
Pipes in the area are not expected to require replacement soon, therefore opportunities
in other parts of the system may facilitate retreat. The advantage of doing this is that the
current system can remain in place, since it is a critical pressurized part that will become
increasingly affected. For that to happen, adaptive capacity will need to be created in
other parts of the system like Area 1, until retreat is initiated in this area.
Area 3
The first strategy for the area is Accommodation. There is a low exposure of assets af-
fected for SLR increments and for critical infrastructure like pumping stations. The area
is located the furthest from the coastline in the study area and has a relatively high eleva-
tion in relation to the other areas. Initiation of retreat phasing will therefore be at high SLR
increments. This means that this part of the two-water system in its current form will be
utilized for the longest duration of time. Accommodating the system and in the process
also capitalize on opportunities arising for this replacement are important components of
this strategy.
38
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:47==
Opportunities with this strategy is the creation of mitigative capacity for the lower parts
of the Petone drainage system. This means that it can minimise disruption during retreat
and maximize the effectiveness of retreat in the low ‘sump’ parts of the Petone area, thus
creating a reduction in discharge towards the other areas. Furthermore, the area will need
to adapt to increased stresses on the system. From the system analysis these include
increased rainfall intensities and increased groundwater levels resulting in increased plu-
vial flooding, increased saltwater intrusion, reduced hydraulic capacity and inundation.
4.3.2
System Adaptation Thresholds
System adaptation thresholds emerge from both the exposure assessment and expert
input during the stakeholder workshop which comprised a mix of quantitative and quali-
tative threshold indicators. Thresholds denote when the current system performance is
unacceptable and/or unsustainable. For example x cm of SLR (quantitative) and commu-
nity tolerability of impact (qualitative).
From the exposure assessment and workshop, the quantitative thresholds identified are
0.30 m, 0.50 m and 0.80 m of SLR increments for different assets in different areas. This
allows for generating expected pathway scenario-based lifetime and failure conditions.
The 0.30 m threshold is associated with the gravity-based system and regular ponding
due to increases in GWL. The 0.40 m and 0.50 m thresholds are associated with the
wastewater pumps becoming increasingly exposed, all of them by the time 0.50 m is
reached and the major increase in the number of manholes and sumps exposed. At 0.80
m, the number of assets affected over different SLR increments tails off. This means
that the biggest stresses on the system occur in the first 0.80 m of SLR increments. The
qualitative thresholds are related to observed unacceptable performance from a commu-
nity and a service provider perspective. The thresholds comprise physical consequences
including increasing wastewater overflows, regular ponding due to increased GWL and
regular overflows to properties or watercourses.
4.3.3
Adaptation Option Thresholds
Option (Pathway) thresholds are determined per adaptation option based on their failure
conditions. Initially this was done for each of the options, which can be found in Appendix
3. During the research it became clear that a lot of the options would have to be im-
plemented together. Therefore the list of options is simplified into pathway portfolios of
actions that would be taken together to achieve the objectives, which can be seen together
with portfolio failure conditions in Figure 4.5. Failure conditions are based on the type of
option and the system thresholds. Initially, pathway thresholds were defined per concep-
tual area 1,2,3, each with their AT. This was to tailor the high-level option categories to
area specific option sequences and to optimize the performance of the options in the area.
By calculating the performance of pathways over a range of SLR increments per Sub
Area and visualize this with a graph, enables identification of possible levels of service
across the different SLR increments, depending on the adaptation options chosen. It was
decided not to continue with this approach for this study as it would require consideration
of an area specific option for each high level category, in each sub area. Dividing up a
number of areas would simply be too time consuming because of the detail generated.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.5: Failure Conditions Adaptation Portfolios
Planning Signals
During development of two water adaptation portfolios planning options were added to the
portfolios, in preparation of retreat. Land use planning changes are not consequently re-
lated to infrastructure adaptation options, which is different for each area, but in which re-
treat phase these adaptation options (pathways) are based. A good example is upgrades
to water services and facilities by Wellington Water, through their Regional Standard for
Water Services, need to accommodate SLR as recommended by the Ministry for the En-
vironment (2017) guidance. This is serving as a signal of future sea level rise impacts.
Table 25 and Table 26 in Ministry for the Environment (2017) are used to illustrate possi-
ble planning changes alongside two water retreat, signalling retreat phases identified in
Olufson (2019). These are discussed per retreat phase.
Community Engagement (1) – Conditional Rules
Development in the area allowed under new specifications, like the current development
of services to accommodate SLR as required by Wellington Water. This is an attempt of
’specifying minimum floor levels’ in Table 26 Ministry for the Environment, 2017 through
their Regional Standard for Water Services, and suitable for areas where increases in
GWL are a problem, like the project area. The intention is that new development is more
robust and able to be in service until retreat is initiated. Regional Policy statement and
Plan can be updated to prepare for retreat. ’Collaborative planning’ and ’Asset Manage-
ment Planning’ from Table 25 Ministry for the Environment, 2017 can be used to start
stakeholder and community inclusion in the planning process.
40
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:49==
Planning and Preparing (2) – Plan changes, rules
Development in the retreat area limited. Planning methods used for this area can be
’Specifying types of construction and building design and use’ from Table 26 Ministry for
the Environment, 2017 and planning process on a smaller scale, like ’District Plans’ follow-
ing the signalling based on the Regional Policy statement in the previous retreat phase.
Enabling Investment (3) – Closed Zoning
Development in the retreat area is restricted, to prepare the area for retreat. Planning
methods could be ’Excluding particular activities from identified areas’ from Table 26 Min-
istry for the Environment, 2017 to prohibit further development.
Active Retreat (4) – Relocation
Active relocation, the retreat area is being prepared for a new function. ’Community fu-
tures’ from Table 25 Ministry for the Environment, 2017 to discuss and plan repurposing
of the retreat area to meet the community needs.
Repurpose (5) – Re Zoning
The area redeveloped according to the new repurpose / zoning strategy and a new ’Zon-
ing’ established to support the repurposing. An example could be a lake developed as a
park for amenity and recreational purpose. The planning process used can be ’Precinct,
area or structure plans’ from Table 25 Ministry for the Environment, 2017 to integrate into
the district plan.
Adaptation Portfolio
The adaptation portfolios outlined in Figure 4.5 are discussed in this section by area. This
combines the option pathways into portfolios, the failure conditions and planning signals.
The adaptation options within the portfolios are discussed in section 4.2.
Area 1
Portfolio 1 – Prevent Inflow
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include implementing a non return valve and closing
off parts of the system during extreme events. Failure condition occurs when the water
is continuously above a level that does not allow to discharge the excess water without
pumps, which occurs at +0.20 m. In Area 1 Portfolio 1 is related to the retreat phases
of Community Engagement (1), Planning and Preparing (2) and Enabling Investment (3).
Associated Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are therefore Conditional Rules, Plan
changes and no development.
Portfolio 2 – Protect Critical Infrastructure
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include dry / wet proofing critical infrastructure like
pumping stations and lowering GWL locally around pumping stations with using e.g. veg-
etation. Failure conditions occur when the gravity-based system ceases to function at
+0.30 m. In Area 1 Portfolio 2 is related to the retreat phases until Repurposing, at which
point the area will be re zoned. This means the area will be anticipated to have a different
planning purpose. Active Retreat (4) has a planning condition of closed zoning, meaning
the active part of managed retreat has begun with people moving away, houses moved
to other available land for example.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
41
==PAGE:50==
Area 2
Portfolio 3 – Maintain Gravity-Based System
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include raising nodes and pipes, increasing capacity
nodes and pipes and increasing local infiltration and filtering. Failure Conditions occur at
the threshold of +0.40 m. In Area 2 Portfolio 3 is related to the retreat phases of Commu-
nity Engagement (1), Planning and Preparing (2) and Enabling Investment (3). Associated
Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are therefore Conditional Rules, Plan changes and
no more development.
Portfolio 4 – Pressurize the Drainage System
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include pressurizing sewers, increasing local infiltra-
tion and filtering and adapting pumping stations. Failure conditions occur when the pumps
driving the system fail at the threshold of +0.50 m. In Area 2 Portfolio 4 is related to the
retreat phases until Repurposing, at which point the area will be re zoned. Active Retreat
(4) has a planning condition of closed zoning, meaning the active part of managed retreat
has begun with people moving away, houses moved to other available land for example.
Area 3
Portfolio 3 – Maintain Gravity-Based System
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include raising nodes and pipes, increasing capacity
nodes and pipes and increasing local infiltration and filtering. Failure Conditions occur at
the threshold of +0.40 m. In Area 3 Portfolio 3 is related to the retreat phases of Commu-
nity Engagement (1), Planning and Preparing (2). Associated Planning Conditions with
this Portfolio are therefore Conditional Rules and Plan changes.
Portfolio 4 – Pressurize the Drainage System
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include pressurizing sewers, increasing local infiltra-
tion and filtering and adapting pumping stations. Failure conditions occur when the pumps
driving the system fail at the threshold of +0.50 m. In Area 3 Portfolio 4 is related to the
retreat phases of Community Engagement (1), Planning and Preparing (2). Associated
Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are therefore Conditional Rules and Plan changes.
Portfolio 5 – Replacing and / or Raising Pumping Stations
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include replacing pumps for increased capacity, rais-
ing the operating height of the pumps. Failure conditions occur when the pumps driving
the system fail at the threshold of +0.80 m. In Area 3 Portfolio 5 is related to the retreat
phases until Repurposing, at which point the area will be re zoned. Enabling Investment
(3), Active Retreat (4) has a planning condition of closed zoning, meaning the active part
of managed retreat has begun with people moving away, houses moved to other available
land for example.
42
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:51==
4.3.4
Conceptual DAPP
After the options were developed they were grouped in terms of costs and time needed
for the implementation based on the lifetime and adaptive capacity of the options. This
was done using the managed retreat components identified in Olufson (2019) in order to
group the different phases displayed in Figure 4.5. This provides an accompanying ‘road
map’ where each pathway indicates which component of MR is being initiated, and what
the actions should be associated with this stage of the retreat. The components are set
out in section 2.2.2.
To illustrate changes in retreat phasing, phases are implemented using a DAPP approach.
Signals and Triggers are also implemented using each of the DAPP’s for the different ar-
eas. These are DAPP pathways signals and triggers for retreat strategies in the different
areas. This is why some pathways can have multiple signals on one pathway sequence.
The trigger is the point where active retreat is initiated, signals indicate a change in retreat
phase. Signals are included qualitatively as a result of the workshop. Triggers are linked
to the mix of quantitative and qualitative AT’s established for the study area. All available
pathways for each area were not developed for this study as it was beyond the level of
detail able to be undertaken within the time limitations of this study.
Failure conditions were determined by portfolio, rather than by portfolio per area. Some
loss of detail has occurred here as different portfolios with pathway options have different
failure conditions within different areas. This is also noted in section 4.4.3. For example,
Portfolio 5 would not be applicable in area 1 as the pump inundation at low SLR would
stop the pumps working as they would start to pump salt water into the system. Increasing
the pump capacity would not address this. By iterating and determining the strategy for
each of the areas and accompanying it with possible portfolios (preselecting) the concep-
tual DAPP could be developed and used illustratively within the timeframe of the study.
Another component not included in detail in the pathways is costing. Preliminary consid-
erations were made during development of the portfolios but not enough to quantifiably
weigh them in relation to other portfolios. How to improve on this and its relevance is
outlined in Chapter 5 Discussion.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
43
==PAGE:52==
Area 1
Area 1 has a retreat objective. These pathways are mainly feasible short to medium term
because of the low elevation of this area. The focus is therefore on protecting the cur-
rent system until the point of retreat. Post retreat repurposing options are considered for
this area. Due to the low elevation, this area would be suitable for creating extra flood
detention, also with nature based options, in the two water system. This way the area
is repurposed both providing community amenity by creating ecosystem and recreational
benefits and having a positive effect on the discharge capabilities for the two areas. All
portfolio options are outlined and a conceptual pathway outline is presented in Figure 4.6.
Threshold for this area is a SLR of +0.30 m as this is when the current gravity-based sys-
tem ceases to function. The retreat trigger is placed at +0.25 m since this is when regular
ponding and an inability to overcome the influence of the tide for discharging is expected.
Figure 4.6: Conceptual DAPP Area 1
Area 2
Area 2 has a retreat objective, but at higher SLR increments than Area 1. This means
that pathways should function above the ATP of area 1, which for area 2 is +0.50 m. This
results in pathway portfolios that are more focused towards accommodating the existing
infrastructure to longer term changes. This could be raising the level of the sewerage
system and increasing capacity of the pipes and nodes, in conjunction with nature-based
solutions like promoting local infiltration, or switching to a pressurized system. The con-
ceptual DAPP is outlined in Figure 4.7. There are two approaches illustrated for this area.
The first is to maintain the gravity-based system as long as possible. Although costs are
not quantified in this conceptual DAPP, raising the whole system is extremely expensive,
causes major disruption for the community and is limited by the burial depth of the pipes.
Before the retreat trigger there would have to be a change to the pressurized pathway
portfolio. This is also an expensive option but would be able to maintain service until the
retreat trigger for Area 2. Due to the proximity to the coastline, repurposing options could
be a natural buffer or recreational zone in between the coast and retreated Area 1.
44
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: Conceptual DAPP Area 2
Area 3
Area 3 has the highest ATP for retreat, +0.80 m. Therefore, more long-term options, like
combining longer term accommodation options, increased pumping station capacity with
a pressurized system, are considered. The conceptual DAPP is outlined in Figure 4.8.
Area 3 has initially a similar portfolio choice as Area 2, where a decision is made between
accommodating the gravity-based system or switching to a pressurized system. The life-
time of the pressurized system can be extended by initiating the portfolio to increase pump
capacity and / or heighten pump elevation. The retreat trigger for this area is pump failure
due to a combination of pump inundation and increasingly more saltwater being pumped
through the system due to increases in GWL.
Figure 4.8: Conceptual DAPP Area 3
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
45
==PAGE:54==
4.3.5
Area Interaction
The parallel implementation of pathway portfolios in each area and the interaction be-
tween the portfolios when implemented provides an opportunity to optimize the use of the
different options across the whole study area. The possibility of having a visual overview
between the different portfolios and pathways in each of the three areas enables the sys-
tem to be adjusted using a range of different adaptation strategies to achieve the retreat.
For example, implementation strategies in the higher elevated part of the study area allow
for reduction in discharge in lower parts. This results in lower requirements for adaptation
or buys extra time before a pathway in another area has to be changed. This increased
flexibility to influence one area by implementing other adaptation options in different areas
is crucial of being able to buy more time across the Petone system while the planning and
costing of the adaptations are developed and the engineering design undertaken for the
retreat over time.
Figure 4.9: Conceptual DAPP
Implementation of an interactive conceptual DAPP assessment for the Petone area is
shown in Figure 4.9. All areas will retreat eventually, but sequencing will be different. The
46
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:55==
synergies and conflict between pathways in different areas are marked with the arrows
showing Synergies (+) and Conflicts (-). These are outlined in Table 4.7. Figure 4.9 shows
a conceptual way of indicating the interaction between different pathways in different ar-
eas providing an overall dynamic strategy for the area. It first starts with a DAPP for each
of the sub areas across the study area. These pathways are selected from the portfolio
pathways in Table 4.5, based on the sub area strategy and pathway failure conditions. The
thresholds identified for the Petone area are added to the x axis, indicating the need for
pathway changes for the current drainage system. For the areas targeted for managed
retreat, retreat phases are indicated also along the x axis of the DAPP. Aligning these
pathways for each of the areas allows for the visualization of interaction between different
areas. Table 4.7 shows Synergies and Conflicts between pathway portfolios throughout
different retreat phases in each sub area.
This approached also allows for illustrating positive and negative feedback between differ-
ent options and pathway strategies, depending on the phase of the retreat. For example,
initial stages of retreat could create redundancy in the system by leaving the pipes in the
ground, but not have the extra discharge from residential / commercial use. This offers a
positive effect on the rest of the Petone drainage system. Over time the capacity of this
system will decrease. The assumption is that it will not be upgraded indefinitely because
there will be a retreat when conditions meet the trigger point, and there is no benefit from
doing so. During repurposing however, retention space could be created to allow for in-
creased water storage capacity that could have amenity and recreational value for the
remaining and wider community in the Hutt valley. This again has a positive effect on the
pathways implemented for the other areas.
Table 4.7: Pathway Conflicts and Synergies
MR Phase
Synergy (+)
Conflict (-)
Area 1
Engagement / Consultation
Planning / Preparing
Enabling Investment
Area 2
Active Retreat
Area 2
Repurpose
Area 2
Area 2
Area 2
Engagement / Consultation
Planning / Preparing
Area 3
Enabling Investment
Area 3
Active Retreat
Area 3
Repurpose
Area 3
Area 3
Area 3
Engagement / Consultation
Area 2
Planning / Preparing
Area 2
Enabling Investment
Active Retreat
Repurpose
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion
The study produced a number of findings contributing to answering the research ques-
tions. These findings are integrated into a methodology or ’routine’ that could be used to
approach managed retreat in a systematic way by using a DAPP approach and specific
options and pathways for the study area. The central research findings are presented in
Table 5.1, where they are linked to the relevant result section and research question. In
order to answer the main question, a systematic approach was used in each of the sub
areas to create a portfolio of adaptation options. This was used to set up a conceptual
DAPP for the area that illustrates the interactions between sub areas that provides oppor-
tunities to buy time during which planning and preparatory work could be undertaken to
stage and underpin the active retreat. The DAPP assessment of options and pathways
thus acts as a framework for implementing a retreat strategy over time in a manner that
aims to cause the least disruption to the community and the available investment streams.
Table 5.1: Central Research Findings
Results
Section
Research Findings
Service Levels and Duration
(Research Question 1,2)
System Thresholds
4.4.2
Duration of service depends on when
a trigger is reached initiating retreat
to avoid an AT
Adaptation Thresholds
4.4.3
AT’s have consequences for relevant
stakeholders and are key to minimizing
disruption
Adaptation Portfolios
(Research Question 1,2,3)
Pathway Portfolios
4.3 / 4.4.3
Portfolios contain two water adaptation
measures which can be used to maintain
L.o.s. until active retreat is initiated
Repurposing the area using WSUD
measures creates amenity for the
community and buys time until active
retreat starts for adjacent areas
Planning and Land use
4.4.3
Signalling planning changes warns people
and creates certainty about the future
Withdrawal Sequence
(Research Question 4)
Pathway Interactions
4.4.5
Visualization of pathway interactions
allows for identification of synergies
and conflicts arising from retreat
Retreat Routine
4.4
DAPP provides a way to systematically
frame individual retreat strategies and
deal with emerging uncertainties
The methodology used in this study
provides an example of a retreat ’routine’
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
49
==PAGE:58==
To reiterate, the main and sub questions of the research are as following:
How could the retreat of two water infrastructure (Stormwater and Wastewater) in the
Petone and Alicetown Area be managed alongside a community retreat from the coast,
considering and defining;
• 1) What levels of Service (LoS) are appropriate while transitioning towards adapta-
tion thresholds?
• 2) How long should two waters services be maintained?
• 3) What measures and actions are appropriate to maintain L.o.S and do they coin-
cide with adaptation thresholds?
• 4) What leads - service withdrawal or residential withdrawal?
Levels of Service and Maintaining two water Services
The duration of service, or how long two water services can be maintained, depends on
the retreat phase within the overall retreat strategy of the retreat area. Active retreat must
be initiated before the portfolio Adaptation Threshold (AT) is reached, which can be aided
by using signals like planning provisions to warn, and condition-based triggers to decide
on options and pathways ahead of the threshold. This provides a conceptual DAPP that
can set out portfolio conditions using SLR increments for the different portfolios, thus en-
abling the portfolios to be implemented. The duration and L.o.s depends on the area
strategy that is set while developing the retreat sequencing. Failure conditions are de-
termined for the pathway portfolios indicating when service stops, before switching to an
alternative portfolio.
AT’s have consequences for the infrastructure operator in charge of maintaining the sys-
tem and providing the service, Wellington Water. Not switching to alternative portfolios
before an AT is reached, could result in steep cost increases as economic damage in-
creases, an inability to adapt the current system and the system being no longer a con-
tained system. There are also consequences for property owners, when they can’t afford
to upgrade their own connections to the system, when property owners are not able to get
insurance or when surface water or contamination becomes increasingly disruptive. It is
therefore important to not only monitor pathway performance but also implement timely
signals and triggers that indicate/warn that an AT is approaching, to minimize economic
and community disruption. Not implementing signals and triggers would result in a re-
duced ability to switch portfolios before reaching an AT and preclude the possibility to
signal these upcoming changes to the community.
AT’s are not necessarily technical or quantitative. From the workshop it became clear that
considerations for retreat were also related to the coping capacity of the community. This
again stresses the importance of stakeholder and community engagement. When the
coping capacity of the community is lower than the technical threshold, for example there
are more regular periodic overflows but the system is able to cope, it could potentially
accelerate AT’s for retreat. There is also the possibility that the coping capacity of the
community could extent the duration of pathways (Radhakrishnan et al., 2017). Includ-
ing this extra coping capacity without communicating could bring damage claims from the
community as they have to cope with more frequent inundation.
50
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:59==
Measures (Adaptation options / Pathways)
Adaptation options (pathways) were selected from both the literature and through expert
input from stakeholders, responsible agencies and academics. To investigate this re-
search question a set of pathway portfolios was developed based on a literature review
and expert input during the workshop. The system and exposure analysis helped identify
adaptation options. Ideally a unique set of pathway portfolios would be developed for the
different retreat sub areas. The reason for this is that adaptation pathways are going to
perform differently in the sub areas and therefore would give a more accurate indication
of AT’s and improve the ability to quantify pathway performance. In this study, sub areas
defined by a list of parameters were used, rather than having geographic boundaries rep-
resenting Petone/ Alicetown.
WSUD detention and/or retention options were found to have larger spatial requirements
(Section 2.5). Since the study area is urbanised and relatively densely developed these
spatial constraints limit the possibility for implementing WSUD measures as two water
adaptation. Upon finishing the active retreat phase the area could be repurposed. Dur-
ing this phase there is an opportunity to create amenity for both the community and the
two water system depending on the pathway implemented. A water retention space in
the form of a natural water body or a park could create recreational benefits, ecosystem
benefits and create extra storage capacity for the stormwater drainage system, extending
the initiation of the active retreat phase in adjacent areas.
The proposed approach of implementing area dependent retreat strategies essentially
’buys time’ for residents and authorities. For residents to retreat and for authorities to
stage their budget more gradually over time. This could however potentially create unre-
alistic expectations for residents in areas that are retreated at a larger AT, as they perceive
the extra time alleviates the pressure the move and creates a false sense of security. Like-
wise, there is also a reputational risk for Wellington Water and the council involved if they
claim that service can be provided until a certain SLR increment, and then due to sudden
disruption, this turns out to be unfeasible. At the time of this study multiple service failures
occurred in Wellington over the last three months.
Signalling planning and land use changes for the community and relevant stakeholders
(Section 4.1.3.) can enable changes in retreat phases and service levels to be antici-
pated. Section 4.3.3 provides a range of planning options based on the retreat phase of
an area. Currently there is a requirement for upgrades to water services and facilities by
Wellington Water, through their Regional Standard for Water Services, with the aim to ac-
commodate SLR as recommended by the Ministry for the Environment (2017) guidance.
However such signals could create a legacy effect for managing the drainage system
because the dwellings are accommodated at a higher threshold than the infrastructure
servicing it. This could create disruption where part of the community potentially wants to
extend the service in the accommodated area, creating conflicts for the retreat strategy
in adjacent areas and limiting repurposing possibilities by forcing expensive maintenance
of services as drainage conditions become worse.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
51
==PAGE:60==
Withdrawal Sequence
The retreat typology used from Olufson (2019) is based on a signalling approach for man-
aged retreat where the community starts to withdraw in a planned proactive retreat sce-
nario. Alternatively, the council could start to withdraw services. There are cases in New
Zealand where councils have signalled that service levels for infrastructure will not be pro-
vided anymore1. Following the typology outlined in Olufson (2019), compensation could
initiate house relocation or removal before a service level change is used as a signal. In a
post disaster scenario, where service levels are compromised as a result of the extreme
event, community retreat happens as a reactive response (Hino et al., 2017). If there is
a decision to lead with infrastructure retreat, part of the community might choose to stay
and accept the reduction in L.o.s. In the Petone/Alicetown case, this could hinder the re-
purposing of the retreated sub area, therefore preclude creating recreational or ecological
amenity for the community using repurposing options and cause disruption in retreat of ad-
jacent sub areas. This would accelerate the AT’s SLR increment for retreat in these areas.
All the results in Table 5.1 contributed to the development of a routine applicable for stag-
ing managed retreat. It is the coincidence and parallel implementation between the area
specific strategies that enable retreat of services spatially in a managed way. Planning
signals are also added to the pathways, to help initiate plan changes necessary to fa-
cilitate community retreat. The planning signals are not consequently related to differ-
ent portfolios of options for each area. Rather, in which retreat phase the portfolios are
based. When used in the routine, identified pathway conflicts require another iteration
that is necessary to either redefine pathways or create measures mitigating the effects of
these conflicts.
The ’routine’ developed consists of the following elements:
• Identify Relevant Hazards
• Exposure Analysis of Area Assets to the selected Hazards
• System Analysis and Cascades
• Adaptation options to the hazard by combining options suggested in literature and
expert consultation
• Based on the Asset Exposure, System Cascades and Adaptation Options divide the
study area into different sub areas
• Define an Area Strategy determining at which hazard increment is retreat necessary,
then work backwards using pathway AT’s
• Establish a Conceptual DAPP for each of the areas
• Identify Synergies and Conflicts between pathways
• Investigate Conflicts and Capitalize on Pathway Synergies especially for repurpos-
ing
Alongside this routine it is important to involve relevant stakeholders to validate and con-
tribute to the steps taken. A decision tree could aid this engagement process. Local
expert knowledge combined with community input would minimize chances of critical as-
pects being overlooked.
1D and C Gallagher v Tasman District Council W245/2014
52
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:61==
Methodological Considerations
The combination of quantitative output from the exposure assessment and input through
local knowledge from the experts managing the system and responsible for delivery of
services to their communities, is the basis of the methodology used. A suite of GIS over-
lays specifying the areal extent of present-day storm-tide levels with SLR increments, was
used to verify exposure. This means that there was some loss of detail as static inundation
maps have a tendency to overestimate flooding extent. Increases in system stress due
to external stressors as a result of climate change (Section 4.1.3) are going to increased
discharges and reduce system coping capacity. An argument can therefore be made that
the exposure assessment is actually a conservative estimate when taking into account
compounding hazards that will emerge as climate changes impact on the area more fre-
quently and with greater intensity. These compounding hazards could for example be
higher water levels due to SLR in combination with increased precipitation exacerbating
flooding impacts due to an increase in discharge but a decrease in discharge capacity.
This means that AT’s could potentially emerge at lower SLR increments, accelerating fur-
ther retreat phases. This highlights the importance of implementing DAPP signals and
trigger points and monitoring pathway performance.
Portfolio costs were not quantified in the research. High level estimates were included
in the option pro’s and con’s. However, with input from experts it was possible to de-
termine cost implications for the options. Quantifying costs and pathway performance
over hazard increments, as undertaken by Manocha and Babovic (2017), it is possible
to convert the conceptual retreat areas to a geographic location for modelling purposes.
This would enable pathway costs and benefits to be determined quantitatively. Combin-
ing the suggested quantification of pathway service levels with costs, in combination with
stakeholder/expert input, would enable another level of detail to inform the decision mak-
ing process. It also would allow for visualisation of costs over the lifetime of the assets.
Showing the differences in costs between a reactive, or current, approach and a proactive
long term retreat approach, potentially could enable the relevant stakeholders to consider
a change in strategy allowing for more gradual budgeting of the retreat of two water in-
frastructure.
The L.o.s throughout the portfolio lifetime were not quantified in this research. Visualiz-
ing pathway performance over SLR increments alongside portfolio duration in Figure 4.5
would help determine pathway changes and provide the possibility to signal upcoming
changes in service levels to the community. Quantifying the transient nature of the L.o.s
in different parts of the drainage network would require detailed hydro-systems modelling
incorporating tolerances of residents and business owners, which is beyond the scope of
this thesis. The process of developing the portfolios for each pathway in this study is a mix
of qualitative input and quantitative exposure assessment, which in practice would benefit
from more detailed spatial information on the withdrawal of L.o.s over time. Therefore to
further develop L.o.s. for the area assessing system performance by performing a hydro-
logic analysis would allow more insight into the performance of the drainage system over
SLR increments, and how portfolio actions affect the drainage system from a hydraulic
point of view. There is also a need in reality to connect and engage with residents and
stakeholders (e.g. businesses) about L.o.s thresholds. How they perceive the decrease
in L.o.s, the rate at which this happens and the extent of disruption that is tolerable to the
community. These are important factors in determining the AT’s. It therefore is not just a
technical decision to set the thresholds. Without intervention, flooding due to rising seas
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
53
==PAGE:62==
will diminish the L.o.s over time until an agreed adaptation threshold is reached.
Implications and Implementation Barriers
There are a number of practical barriers to implementing retreat in the Petone and Alice-
town area. During implementation of the portfolios developed it would be important that
all the actions within the portfolio are implemented. Due to the complexity of the drainage
system a varied set of actions is needed to achieve a goal. Stress testing different portfo-
lios under different scenarios with the use of a hydrodynamic model (see methodological
considerations) would help to convey clearly the implications of using a certain set of ac-
tions within a portfolio to the relevant stakeholders. Current portfolios address criticalities
identified in the exposure assessment, until AT’s are reached. For areas with a higher
retreat threshold, the set of portfolio actions becomes more transformative.
As identified in the System analysis and CIrcle tool application (4.1.4.), there is a range
of hazards affecting the Petone and Alicetown area. These can be divided in three tiers,
increasing and ongoing hazards like SLR, compounding hazards like more frequently in-
duced weather events and rising water levels, and episodic compounding hazards like
earthquakes coinciding with an extreme weather event. Occurrences of compounding
hazards could cause disruptive damage to the system resulting and unexpectedly push-
ing the system towards or exceeding an AT. These need further investigation, as they
potentially change the long term systematic retreat to an ad hoc post-disaster retreat.
Cascades for other critical infrastructure identified using the CIrcle tool (4.1.4.) could be
integrated into the long term infrastructure planning and the effects of retreat considered.
A major road link, the Esplanade, runs along the southern boundary of the study area.
Retreat is going to impact this infrastructure. There is two water infrastructure located
underneath the road, service levels might be reduced as hazard exposure increases and
road usage could change due to driver behaviour, changing their routes and thus creating
consequences elsewhere.
The availability of funding and its budgeting over time is closely related to cautious en-
gagement with managed retreat as a politically viable option. This is despite the regional
example of making room for the river in Hutt City and purchase of properties for the pur-
pose of a managed retreat to make room for the river. Addressing the planning implica-
tions of managed retreat provides a bridge with the community using illustrative pathways
and decision points to moderate a wider council and community engagement as set out in
the coastal hazards and climate change guidance (Ministry for the Environment, 2017). A
two waters strategy based on the approach taken in this study could provide the basis for
addressing what, how and when retreat becomes a viable option. Managed Retreat as
outlined in this research could address these uncertainties as options are implemented,
with the aim of eventual retreat in a sub area and introducing costs more gradually over
time when planned strategically.
The role compensation plays in addressing the inequity of signaling restrictive land use
planning (e.g. closed zoning to further development) is an important consideration (For
example; residents may have recently invested in accommodating their property in an-
ticipation of SLR). Timely discussions around compensation and limiting development in
vulnerable areas is therefore important for fitting retreat in a long term threshold based
approach (Siders et al., 2019). The proposed repurposing of areas and the amenities
created in the area could help overcome the social feasibility barrier, as retreat becomes
54
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:63==
part of a broader development project for the community (Hino et al., 2017). Recent in-
frastructure failures in two water infrastructures in the Wellington region could create an
opening for managed retreat to be considered as part of the long term infrastructure plan-
ning and investment. In the end this is a socio-political issue, what has been developed
in this study is a way to inform and improve the decision making process for relevant
stakeholders, authorities and the community.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:65==
6
Conclusion
This section concludes the study and provides recommendations for future work. Retreat
sequencing was found to be possible by allowing for different retreat strategies in differ-
ent sub areas. This integrated strategy could minimize community disruption, allows for
gradual budget adjustments over time and buys time until retreat for adjacent sub areas.
It was found that by using a systematic approach combining adaptation pathways, re-
treat phases and signalling land use changes long-term planning over potentially differ-
ent pathway portfolios, could minimize disruption, signal land use changes and allow for
gradual budget adjustments. Therefore it is an overall spatial strategy that is achieved
by implementing a range of pathway portfolios in an integrated way containing two water
adaptation options. Retreat phases and signalling planning changes support the different
portfolios.
A combination of quantitative input with expert consultation used system adaptation thresh-
olds of +0.30 m, +0.50 m and +0.80 m. Pathway portfolios were developed until the
extend of having a portfolio of actions, planning and land use implications and failure con-
ditions. This was useful for determining pathway / portfolio changes. The result of no
specific retreat pathways was an emerging need to (1) Separate the retreat phasing from
the pathways and (2) Visualize the effects between these pathways.
The development of the ’routine’ essentially addressed the main research question, pro-
viding a structured approach for managed retreat of two water infrastructure. At the time
of this study no literature was found on approaches to two water infrastructure retreat as
a result to SLR. By using a DAPP approach to frame retreat in different areas it was found
to be a suitable approach to address uncertainties arising from SLR when implementing a
two water retreat strategy. It was found this was possible using a combination of and area
specific retreat strategy (1), area specific pathways (2), area specific retreat phases (3),
signal land use changes (4) and identify pathway conflicts and synergies. This system-
atic approach and ’routine’ that emerged potentially provides coastal communities facing
similar hazards, a framework of how to approach two water infrastructure retreat.
For the Petone and Alicetown area, there lies a decision to be made collectively by the
Wellington Water, stakeholders and the community. Either continue on the current path-
way of reactive maintenance and accept major economic damages and community disrup-
tion eventually leading to a sudden decline in L.o.s. with ad hoc and improvised solutions,
or start embracing a proactive approach where the inconvenient truth is that adaptation
due to SLR is necessary. Using a DAPP provides a window of opportunity to get out of
response mode, to a more anticipatory mode that starts to plan for retreat, making sure
compensations are handled with equity, planning of land use changes is signalled to min-
imize disruption and amenity is created by repurposing the retreated areas.
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
57
==PAGE:66==
Future Work
Several recommendations for future work emerged throughout the research process. The
first is the implementation of DAPP signals and triggers into the routine in conjunction with
planning/land use measures and retreat signals and triggers. During the research only
AT’s for pathways were considered. Implementing DAPP signals and triggers by devel-
oping pathway/portfolio lead times will enable a more detailed pathways assessment to
be undertaken.
Quantification of service duration and L.o.s. using a hydrologic analysis would enable a
more detailed assessment of the conditions under which pathways have to be changed
to maintain service levels for the community. It therefore also provides a better basis for
discussion with the relevant stakeholders. Involving the community and relevant stake-
holders to investigate what they perceive as disruption and what their expectations are in
terms of L.o.s. would aid future decision making and produce a better consensus on the
establishment of AT’s.
Costing of the adaptation portfolios would aid the decision making process in two ways.
The first is the need to assess the costs and benefits of the different pathway options. The
second is the visualization of budget development over the lifetime of the pathways. This
allows for better understanding of budget increases and how it can be allocated gradually
over the lifetime of the investment.
Finally, there is the matter of how a managed retreat strategy can be communicated
with the community, and their involvement in the managed retreat process. As stated in
the introduction, two water infrastructure adaptation, and specifically retreat is not exclu-
sively a technical issue, it has equity, financial and political implications that are non-trivial
for the community. It is therefore necessary to connect and engage with residents and
other stakeholders (e.g. businesses). Efforts have been made in this study to consider
community-relevant issues by including planning and land use implications into the retreat
routine, however this is still one step away from the community. Their involvement is key
to gain support and the momentum needed to systematically start implementing these
changes over a long term planning horizon.
58
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Ministry for the Environment. (2017). Coastal Hazards and Climate Change: guidance for
local government (Vol. ME1341). http://www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/
media/Climate%20Change/coastal-hazards-guide-final.pdf
Local Government New Zealand. (2016). The 2050 challenge: future proofing our com-
munities, (July). http://www.lgnz.co.nz/assets/42597-LGNZ-2050-Challenge-Final-
WEB-small.pdf
Paulik, R., Stephens, S. A., Bell, R., Wadhwa, S., & Popovich, B. (2020). National-Scale
Built-Environment Exposure to 100- year Extreme Sea Levels and Sea-level Rise,
1–16.
Hughes, J., Cowper-heays, K., Bell, R., & Stroombergen, A. (2020 (In Press)). Stormwater
, wastewater and climate change : Impacts on our economy , environment , culture
and society, (1004190).
Rouse, H. L., Bell, R. G., Lundquist, C. J., Blackett, P. E., Hicks, D. M., & King, D. N. (2017).
Coastal adaptation to climate change in Aotearoa-New Zealand. New Zealand
Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, 51(2), 183–222. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00288330.2016.1185736
Local Government New Zealand. (2019a). Vulnerable: the quantum of local government
infrastructure exposed to sea level rise, 52. http://www.lgnz.co.nz/our-work/
publications/vulnerable-the-quantum-of-local-government-infrastructure-exposed-to-
sea-level-rise
Local Government New Zealand. (2019b). Vulnerable: the quantum of local government
infrastructure exposed to sea level rise, 52. http://www.lgnz.co.nz/our-work/
publications/vulnerable-the-quantum-of-local-government-infrastructure-exposed-to-
sea-level-rise
Lawrence, J., Bell, R., Blackett, P., Stephens, S., & Allan, S. (2018). National guidance
for adapting to coastal hazards and sea-level rise: Anticipating change, when and
how to change pathway. Environmental Science and Policy, 82(January), 100–
107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.01.012
Kapetas, L., & Fenner, R. (2020). Integrating blue-green and grey infrastructure through
an adaptation pathways approach to surface water flooding. Phil.Trans.R.Soc.A,
378.
Manocha, N., & Babovic, V. (2017). Development and valuation of adaptation pathways
for storm water management infrastructure. Environmental Science and Policy,
77(1), 86–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2017.08.001
Greater Wellington Regional Council. (1996). Combined Earthquake Hazard Map Welling-
ton City, Pub . No. WRC/RP–T–96/13.
Lawrence, J., Tegg, S., Reisinger, A., & Quade, D. (2011). Vulnerability and adaptation to
increased flood risk with climate change — Hutt Valley summary Judy Lawrence
Simon Tegg Dorothee Quade The New Zealand Climate Change Research Insti-
tute. NZCCRI 2011 report 02, (October).
Lawrence, J., Quade, D., & Becker, J. (2014). Integrating the effects of flood experience
on risk perception with responses to changing climate risk. Natural Hazards, 74(3),
1773–1794. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1288-z
Daysh, M. (2019). GREATER WELLINGTON PREPARING COASTAL COMMUNITIES
FOR CLIMATE Assessing coastal vulnerability to climate change , sea level rise
and natural hazards, (June).
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
59
==PAGE:68==
Controller and Auditor-General. (2020). Reflecting on our work about water management.
IPCC. (2019). Special Report: The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, (Septem-
ber), in preparation. https://doi.org/https://www.ipcc.ch/report/srocc/
de Vriend, H. J., van Koningsveld, M., Aarninkhof, S. G., de Vries, M. B., & Baptist, M. J.
(2015). Sustainable hydraulic engineering through building with nature. Journal of
Hydro-Environment Research, 9(2), 159–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jher.2014.
06.004
Lange, W., Pirzer, C., Dünow, L., & Schelchen, A. (2016). Risk perception for participatory
ecosystem-based adaptation to climate change in the mata Atlântica of Rio de
Janeiro State, Brazil (Vol. 42). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43633-3_21
Hanna, C., White, I., & Glavovic, B. (2017). Managed retreat in new zealand: Revealing
the terminology, approaches and direction of local planning instruments. report
for the national science challenge: Resilience to natures challenges, university of
waikato, new zealand., (October).
Gibbs, M. T. (2016). Why is coastal retreat so hard to implement? Understanding the
political risk of coastal adaptation pathways. Ocean and Coastal Management,
130, 107–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.06.002
Mills, M., Mutafoglu, K., Adams, V. M., Archibald, C., Bell, J., & Leon, J. X. (2016). Per-
ceived and projected flood risk and adaptation in coastal Southeast Queensland,
Australia. Climatic Change, 136(3-4), 523–537. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
016-1644-y
Hanna, C., White, I., & Glavovic, B. (2018). Managed retreat governance : Insights from
matat ā , new zealand. report for the national science challenge: Resilience to
nature’s challenges, university of waikato, new zealand.
Hino, M., Field, C. B., & Mach, K. J. (2017). Managed retreat as a response to natural
hazard risk. Nature Climate Change, 7(5), 364–370. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate3252
Siders, A., Hino, M., & Mach, K. (2019). The case for strategic and managed retreat in
response to climate change. Science Policy Forum, in press, 761–764.
Olufson, S. (2019). Managed retreat components and costing in a coastal setting (masters
thesis).
Haasnoot, M. (2013). Anticipating Change; Sustainable Water Policy Pathways for an
Uncertain Future. https://doi.org/10.3990/1.9789036535595
Haasnoot, M., Warren, A., & Kwakkel, J. H. (2019). Decision Making under Deep Uncer-
tainty. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030-
05252-2
Lawrence, J., & Haasnoot, M. (2017). What it took to catalyse uptake of dynamic adaptive
pathways planning to address climate change uncertainty. Environmental Science
and Policy, 68, 47–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2016.12.003
Kench, P. S., Ryan, E. J., Owen, S., Bell, R., Lawrence, J., Glavovic, B., Blackett, P.,
Becker, J., Schneider, P., Allis, M., Dickson, M., & Rennie, H. G. (2018). Co-
creating Resilience Solutions to Coastal Hazards Through an Interdisciplinary Re-
search Project in New Zealand Co-creating Resilience Solutions to Coastal Haz-
ards Through an Interdisciplinary Research Project in New Zealand. Journal of
Coastal Research, 85, 1496–1500. https://doi.org/10.2112/SI85-001.1
Werners, S. E., Pfenninger, S., Slobbe, E. V., Haasnoot, M., Kwakkel, J. H., & Swart,
R. J. (2013). Thresholds , tipping and turning points for sustainability under climate
change. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 5(3-4), 334–340. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2013.06.005
60
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:69==
Babovic, F., Mijic, A., & Madani, K. (2018). Decision making under deep uncertainty for
adapting urban drainage systems to change. Urban Water Journal, 15(6), 552–
560. https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2018.1529803
Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, J. W. (2018). Urban Drainage.
Gallien, T. W., Sanders, B. F., & Flick, R. E. (2014). Urban coastal flood prediction: Inte-
grating wave overtopping, flood defenses and drainage. Coastal Engineering, 91,
18–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coastaleng.2014.04.007
Archetti, R., Bolognesi, A., Casadio, A., & Maglionico, M. (2011). Development of flood
probability charts for urban drainage network in coastal areas through a simplified
joint assessment approach. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 15(10), 3115–
3122. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-15-3115-2011
Su, X., Liu, T., Beheshti, M., & Prigiobbe, V. (2019). Relationship between infiltration,
sewer rehabilitation, and groundwater flooding in coastal urban areas. Environ-
mental Science and Pollution Research, 2020(USEPAa 2002). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11356-019-06513-z
Bloetscher, F., Heimlich, B., & Meeroff, D. E. (2011). Development of an adaptation toolbox
to protect southeast Florida water supplies from climate change, 417, 397–417.
https://doi.org/10.1139/A11-011
Friedrich, E., & Kretzinger, D. (2012). Vulnerability of wastewater infrastructure of coastal
cities to sea level rise : A South African case study, 38(5), 755–764.
Almeida, B. A. D., & Mostafavi, A. (2016). Resilience of Infrastructure Systems to Sea-
Level Rise in Coastal Areas : Impacts , Adaptation Measures , and Implementation
Challenges, (1). https://doi.org/10.3390/su8111115
Wdowinski, S., Bray, R., Kirtman, B. P., & Wu, Z. (2016). Increasing flooding hazard in
coastal communities due to rising sea level: Case study of Miami Beach, Florida.
Ocean and Coastal Management, 126, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.
2016.03.002
Stancu, M., Cheveresan, M., Zaharia, V., & Poienariu, T. (2017). ScienceDirect ScienceDi-
rect Climate change adaptation in urban areas . Case study for the Tineretului
area in Bucharest. Procedia Engineering, 209, 188–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.proeng.2017.11.146
Hu, H., Tian, Z., Sun, L., Wen, J., Liang, Z., Dong, G., & Liu, J. (2019). Synthesized trade-
off analysis of flood control solutions under future deep uncertainty: An application
to the central business district of Shanghai. Water Research, 166, 115067. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115067
Schoen, M., Hawkins, T., Xue, X., Ma, C., Garland, J., & Ashbolt, N. J. (2015). Sustain-
ability of Water Quality and Ecology Technologic resilience assessment of coastal
community water and wastewater service options. Sustainability of Water Quality
and Ecology, 6, 75–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swaqe.2015.05.001
Wong, T. H. F. (2006). Water sensitive urban design – the journey thus far *, 1583(2006).
https://doi.org/10.1080/13241583.2006.11465296
Lerer, S., Mikkelsen, P. S., Jomo, H., & Sørup, D. (2018). WSUD , SUDS , LIDs and all
that jazz Introduction to alternative approaches to stormwater management for
students in 12122 By Worldwide terminology.
Joyce, J., Chang, N. B., Harji, R., Ruppert, T., & Imen, S. (2017). Developing a multi-scale
modeling system for resilience assessment of green-grey drainage infrastructures
under climate change and sea level rise impact. Environmental Modelling and
Software, 90, 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.11.026
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
61
==PAGE:70==
Siekmann, T., & Siekmann, M. (2015). Resilient urban drainage – Options of an optimized
area-management. Urban Water Journal, 12(1), 44–51. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1573062X.2013.851711
White, I., Storey, B., Owen, S., Bell, R., Charters, F., Dickie, B., Council, R., Foster, L.,
Harvey, E., Hughes, J., Kerr, S., Lawrence, J., & Morgan, K. (2017). Economic and
Public Policy Research Climate Change & Stormwater and Wastewater Systems.
Standard, D. (2019). ISO 14090 Dansk standard Tilpasning til klimaændringer – Prinicip-
per , krav og retningslinjer Adaptation to climate change – Principles.
Schmidt, J., Matcham, I., Reese, S., King, A., Bell, R., Henderson, R., Smart, G., Cousins,
J., Smith, W., & Heron, D. (2011). Quantitative multi-risk analysis for natural haz-
ards: A framework for multi-risk modelling. Natural Hazards, 58(3), 1169–1192.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9721-z
Stephens, S. (2015). The effect of sea-level rise on the frequency of extreme sea levels in
New Zealand., (July), 52. http://www.pce.parliament.nz/media/1382/the-effect-of-
sea-level-rise-on-the-frequency-of-extreme-sea-levels-in-new-zealand-niwa-2015.pdf
PCE. (2015). Preparing New Zealand for rising seas: Parliamentary Commissioner for the
Environment, (November 2015).
Lawrence, J., Blackett, P., Cradock-henry, N., & Nistor, B. J. (2018). Climate Change : The
Cascade Effect Cascading impacts and implications for Aotearoa New Zealand,
1–55.
Hounjet, M. W. A. (2014). Learning from flood events on Critical Infrastructure : Relations
and Consequences for Life and Environment ( CIrcle ).
Deltares. (2017). Critical Infrastructures: Relations and Consequences for Life and Envi-
ronment, 4. https://www.deltares.nl/app/uploads/2015/04/Productblad-CIrcle.pdf
Deltares. (2015). Cascading-effects in focus with the CIrcle model, 12–14.
Radhakrishnan, M., Nguyen, Hong Quan Gersonius, B., Pathirana, A., Zevenbergen, C.,
Quang Vinh, K., & Ashley, R. M. (2017). Coping capacities for improving adaptation
pathways for flood protection in Can Tho, Vietnam. Climatic Change, (Climatic
Change and Development in the Mekong River Basin). https://doi.org/DOI10.
1007/s10584-017-1999-8
62
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix 1
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
63
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Project Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
Contents 
1. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................... 2 
1.1. 
Background .............................................................................................................. 2 
1.2. 
Adaptation ............................................................................................................... 3 
1.3. 
Managed Retreat ...................................................................................................... 6 
1.4. 
Problem Statement ................................................................................................... 7 
2. 
Study Area ....................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1. 
Area Characteristics ................................................................................................... 9 
2.2. 
Site Visit ................................................................................................................. 11 
3. 
Methodology ................................................................................................................. 13 
3.1. 
Scope ..................................................................................................................... 13 
3.2. 
Exposure Assessment .............................................................................................. 13 
3.3. 
Retreat Sequencing ................................................................................................. 16 
4. 
Data Collection ............................................................................................................... 19 
5. 
Deliverables ................................................................................................................... 20 
6. 
Organisation .................................................................................................................. 22 
Bibliography.......................................................................................................................... 23 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Recent investigations in New Zealand seek to document how climate change is likely to affect coastal 
communities, e.g., by means of sea level rise (SLR) and enhanced risks of storm surges. Increased 
damage costs and coastal squeeze stresses communities to adapt and accelerates incentives for 
working towards long term but flexible solutions that can be changed over the lifetime of the 
investment. Sea level rise has been indicated as one of the key factors affecting coastal communities 
(Local Government New Zealand, 2016; Ministry for the Environment, 2017). Negative consequences 
include more frequent inundation, increased erosion and increases in groundwater levels, saltwater 
intrusion, liquefaction and drainage problems. This study aims to look into managed retreat of two 
water infrastructure, namely wastewater and stormwater, and identify retreat sequencing, asset 
interdependencies and adaptation thresholds using a conceptual dynamic adaptive pathways planning 
(DAPP) framework. The project is funded from the Resilience Science Challenge with MBIE-funded 
Resilience Science Challenge Coastal Sub-theme Adapting to New Zealand’s Dynamic Coastal Hazards. 
1.1. Background 
Several scenarios for SLR have been adopted from the 5th Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2013) by the coastal hazards guidance for local government (Ministry 
for the Environment, 2017), which aims to assist local government in preparing for climate change.  
 
It can be seen in Figure 1 that even in moderate emission scenarios, significant rise in sea level in 
reference to preceding measurements is projected for New Zealand. It is also expected this process will 
continue well into the next century (IPCC, 2019; Ministry for the Environment, 2017; IPCC, 2013). 
Preceding the publication of (IPCC, 2019), projections were available up until 2100.  
 
Figure 1: New Zealand Sea Level Rise (SLR) projections untill 2150 (Ministry for the Environment, 2017) 
==PAGE:75==
 
3 
 
For the New Zealand projections these have been extrapolated until approximately 2120, as can be 
seen in Figure 1. Offsets have been applied to adapt the projections to New Zealand specific scenarios 
by 2100, 0.05 m for RCP 8.5 and 0.02-0.03m for RCP 2.6 and RCP 4.5 scenarios, linearly applied (Ministry 
for the Environment, 2017). The following representative concentration pathways (RCP’s) are described 
as: 
 
Scenario RCP 2.6. – Peak and Decline in global emissions would have to occur within the next 
decade, zero-net or negative emissions by the end of this century 
 
Scenario RCP 4.5. – Moderate emission-mitigation Pathways peaking around 2050 before 
declining 
 
Scenario RCP 8.5. – Continuing high emission baseline scenario with no effective global 
emissions reduction, emissions stabilising after 2100, medium trajectory 
 
Scenario RCP 8.5. H+ – Also continuing high emission baseline scenario with no effective global 
emissions reduction, 83rd percentile projections taking into account polar ice sheet instabilities 
Infrastructure exposure to Climate Change in New Zealand was investigated by the Local Government 
New Zealand in (Local Government New Zealand, 2019a, 2019b), where it became clear that three 
waters (waste water, water supply and storm water) infrastructure have the greatest exposure, and 
Wellington is among the cities with the highest replacement costs. In (Local Government New Zealand, 
2019b), it was found that the replacement value of three waters infrastructure exceeds the value of 
exposed roads &buildings.  
1.2. Adaptation  
Climate Change impacts for New Zealand as a result of SLR threaten coastal infrastructure, communities 
and low-lying ecosystems (Rouse et al., 2017). Adaptation options in response to SLR can be found in 
Figure 2, where the five most commonly used management approaches are shown. 
 
 
Figure 2: Adaptation Options, adapted from (IPCC, 2019) 
==PAGE:76==
 
4 
 
(Rouse et al., 2017) outlines the advantages and disadvantages that arise from each of the three most 
commonly considered adaptation policies: 
 
Do nothing, advantage is that it would result in low cost and effort for the present generation. 
Disadvantages include that there is no future certainty for any of the actors, projected impacts 
would occur with consequences for people, property and infrastructure, ignores risks for future 
generations 
 
Protect, advantage is that hard engineering provide immediate protection for high value 
infrastructure, soft engineering aligns with natural processes and allows for cyclic erosion. 
Disadvantage is that this approach is expensive, assumptions might lead to a mis perspective 
of the risk, direct coastal squeeze and physical impacts on adjoining beaches 
 
Accommodate, advantage is that it works more with natural geomorphic processes, allowing 
for periodic erosion or inundation, retrofitting will give immediately remove current risk. 
Disadvantage is moderate costs depending on retrofitting, based on static risk assumptions, 
requires change in expectations of use/service levels, requires careful communications 
 
Retreat, advantage is that it allows for a dynamic risk, it allows ecosystem resilience to be 
maintained and seeks to avoid risk. Disadvantage is that is potentially expensive for councils 
due to relocation of infrastructure, compensation costs and likely community resistance, it also 
needs a long term timeframe to be implemented without major community disruption. 
Advance in a coastal engineering context is commonly achieved by land reclamation. Since the 
foreshore is a highly dynamic zone, advancing methods intervening here are inclined to have an 
increased maintenance frequency. Ecosystem based disaster risk reduction seeks to work with natural 
processes, e.g. coastal ecosystems, rather than work against them resulting in a higher adaptive 
capacity and lower costs on a life cycle basis then traditional engineering solutions when applied in an 
appropriate setting (de Vriend, van Koningsveld, Aarninkhof, de Vries, & Baptist, 2015; Lange, Pirzer, 
Dünow, & Schelchen, 2016). 
A good example of a project that fits in both Advancing and Ecosystem based disaster risk reduction is 
the sand engine project in the Netherlands. In this project a large beach nourishment is applied where 
natural processes will distribute the sediment along the coastline. A recent status review concluded 
that although there was a positive impact on coastal protection, the lessons learnt have not translated 
into a daily nourishment practice (Brière, Janssen, Oost, Taal, & Tonnon, 2018). This demonstrates the 
disadvantage of ecosystem based adaptation, where methods are still experimental, difficult to quantify 
and therefore not yet commonly integrated into shoreline / hydraulic protection guidelines. Advances 
in research with the aid of numerical modelling will start to push these solutions to a more common 
approach to adaptation. 
In order to aid this climate change adaptation process the Coastal Hazards and Climate Change 
Guidance (Ministry for the Environment, 2017) adopts a decision cycle aimed at guiding communities 
in a more uniform way using a 10 step decision cycle (Ministry for the Environment, 2017). Dynamic 
adaptive planning pathways is embedded in this decision cycle. The aim of DAPP is to adapt and 
transition current static and time bound planning to decision making that enables gradual adjustments 
(Lawrence, Bell, Blackett, Stephens, & Allan, 2018). This is required due to a combination of deep 
geophysical and socio-economic uncertainties. Accordingly, involvement of stakeholders is critically 
required; for example as facilitated using a simulation game (Lawrence & Haasnoot, 2017). 
 
It is a Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty (DMDU) approach, where the planning is dynamic and 
based on future developments, as it explores alternative strategies. (Babovic, Mijic, & Madani, 2018) 
focusses on urban drainage systems, and acknowledges that the main drivers for DMDU are Climate 
==PAGE:77==
 
5 
 
Change and Changes in human settlement patterns, due to a shift in global wealth. In this context deep 
uncertainty arises due to high uncertainty of future conditions while at the same time implementing 
infrastructure with long design lives. The paper proposes the following factors have to be addressed: 
 
Knightian Uncertainty 
 
Multiple valid Potential Futures 
 
Consider decisions with path dependence in mind 
 
Policy actions have an uncertain design life and might fail sooner or later to be effective as boundary 
conditions change. This could be for example reaching an Adaptation Tipping Point (ATP) (Haasnoot, 
Warren, & Kwakkel, 2019), which from now on will be referred to as Adaptation Threshold Point. 
 
‘’ DAPP explores alternative sequences of decisions (adaptation pathways) for multiple futures and 
illuminates the path dependency of alternative strategies. It opens the decision space and helps to 
overcome policy paralysis due to deep uncertainty. There are different routes that can achieve the 
objectives under changing conditions (like ‘different roads leading to Rome’).’’ (Haasnoot et al., 2019) 
 
In (Manocha & Babovic, 2017) a DAPP approach was applied in a Singapore case study to investigate 
adaptation pathways for stormwater management infrastructure. It was found that it allowed for a 
better understanding of adaptation timing, and that it helps ‘’Bridging the gap between the highly 
uncertain and long term climate change and short term decision making horizons of urban planning and 
development’’. 
 
Adaptation thresholds are defined as the conditions under which a policy will fail to deliver on 
objectives. (Haasnoot et al., 2019). ATP’s are defined the when boundary conditions are exceeded, and 
new actions are needed to ensure acceptable service levels. This can be technical, environmental, 
societal or economic standards (Haasnoot et al., 2019; Manocha & Babovic, 2017). In (Babovic et al., 
2018), this adaptation threshold is found by modelling the system and placing it under increasingly large 
stress. Adaptation thresholds can also be identified through moderation processes using scenarios with 
different conditions representing the stress similar to sensitivity testing.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
6 
 
1.3. Managed Retreat 
For some coastal communities “managed retreat” has been identified as a potential adaptation 
pathway, especially in coastal settings for considering sea level rise impacts. This means retreating these 
communities away from the coastline over time and in the process also abandoning existing (water) 
infrastructure. In such cases, an evidence-based dynamic / staged approach towards decision-making 
and implementation is key.  
 
Implementation barriers to managed retreat are becoming increasingly identified literature. (Gibbs, 
2016) recognized that although there is a lot of studies that take managed realignment into account, 
there is a lack of implementation of these studies and little on-the-ground experience. It also 
acknowledges a previous study, where ‘’Evidence of climate change impacts is rapidly increasing but 
there is unfortunately little change to the speed of adaptation by governments and individuals’’(Mills et 
al., 2016). This applies in particular to those that address the increasing sea level rise that will be 
ongoing for centuries.  
 
Hanna, C., White, I., Glavovic, 2018 identified several key implementation barriers for managed retreat 
in New Zealand. It concluded that implementation of managed retreat was difficult due to a lack of 
national policy guidance, legislative mechanisms and implementation support. In addition to this 
funding was found to be uncertain and voluntary retreat the only tool currently able incentivise 
managed retreat. When combined with withdrawal of service, it also was perceived to be mandatory 
(Hanna, C., White, I., Glavovic, 2018). Hanna, C., White, I., Glavovic, 2017 identifies three District 
Councils implementing cases of managed retreat as a response to a range of hazards. These include a 
relocation of council assets due to coastal erosion risk, voluntary retreat as result to damaging debris 
flow and a flood risk reduction project. 
 
Siders, Hino, & Mach, 2019 concluded that managed retreat is often ad hoc and focused on risk 
reduction, treated isolated from broader societal goals. It reasons that without guiding policies, ad hoc 
managed retreat fails and misses opportunities to contribute to societal goals. It therefore recommends 
a strategic retreat, aimed at contributing to these societal goals. Identified barriers making managed 
retreat difficult to implement in practice included profitable, short term economic gains in coastal 
development, imperfect risk perceptions, subsidized insurance rates and disaster recovery costs, 
misaligned incentives between residents, local officials and national governments and a preference for 
the status quo. (Hino, Field, & Mach, 2017) concluded that managed retreat is favoured for longer 
timeframes, approx. >25 yrs. It agrees with (Rouse et al., 2017) on traditional protection projects, where 
it states that building levees result in high maintenance costs, environmental damage and increases 
development in hazardous areas. In short, the following four categories are identified 
 
Post Disaster, there is mutual agreement as risk is perceived to be not tolerable, there is high 
political will and there is a high cost benefit 
 
Greater Good, Risk is perceived tolerable therefore resident opposition must be overcome, 
there is high political will and high cost benefit 
 
Hunkered Down, mandatory resettlement, risk is perceived to be tolerable, there is low political 
will and there is a low cost benefit 
 
Migration Risk is perceived intolerable however there is low political will and low cost benefit, 
e.g. remote settlements where there is an emphasis on self-reliance 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
7 
 
1.4. Problem Statement 
This study will focus on the Petone area, located in Lower Hutt in the Wellington region, which can be 
seen in Figure 3. The area was historically developed in the early settlement part of the late 19th and 
early 20th centuries to the point where the flood plain is largely urbanized, also shown in Figure 3. 
Earthquakes in the area are frequent and there is a major fault line running through the west boundary 
of the Petone area (GWRC, 1996). Compared to its adjacent areas, there is also an increased risk of 
liquefaction,  ground shaking and tsunami inundation hazard (GWRC, 1996). 
 
Flooding has been an issue historically in the area, where ten major floods have happened between 
1855 and 2000, and more recently the 2004 Hutt river floods (Lawrence, Quade, & Becker, 2014). 
Recent adaptation initiatives have been leaning towards structural protection measures like levees and 
stop banks, creating a legacy problem where citizens are having an unrealistic perception of flood risk 
and an expectancy that the government will continuously provide protection against floods. Wellington, 
2019  identifies the Petone area as the most vulnerable geographic unit together with the Seaview area, 
a reclamation area located next to Petone, for the Hutt City Council despite the presence of one of New 
Zealand’s largest flood protection schemes (Lawrence et al., 2014). NIWA, 2019 a, 2019 b show that 
Wellington is among the cities with the highest pipeline exposure for all three waters infrastructure in 
New Zealand. This increases vulnerability to SLR, as many of the waste and stormwater systems are 
gravity based, which will result in the runoff capacity of these systems being affected. 
 
This raises the issue of how local government can maintain levels of service for the 3 waters as the 
impacts of climate change worsen over at least 100 years to reflect the plausible futures during the 
lifetime of the asset. Local government has a mandate to address the effects of climate change, for the 
delivery of services and for the wellbeing of communities. This broadly includes planning and avoiding 
and mitigating adverse effects of hazards, flood risk reduction, and delivery of water services. To date 
the approach taken by the local government is to address impacts of flooding on the 3 waters 
infrastructure as they emerge. This strategy may appear to suffice in the short term but may compound 
the impacts in the long term as the effects of sea level rise become more apparent.  A strategy that can 
be developed to anticipate those impacts can be explored along a number of pathways before the 
adaptation threshold materializes. Adaptation options to be explored include managed retreat and how 
it might be designed and implemented. In this context my research question is as following:  
 
How could the retreat of two water infrastructure (stormwater, wastewater and roading) in the Petone 
Area be managed alongside a community retreat from the coast, considering and defining; 
 
What levels of Service (LoS) are appropriate while transitioning towards adaptation thresholds? 
 
What measures and actions are appropriate to maintain LoS and do they coincide with 
adaptation thresholds? 
 
How long should two waters services be maintained?  
 
What leads - service withdrawal or house withdrawal? 
 
How can the vulnerable be identified and their needs addressed?  
 
What water infrastructure is present in the study area?  
 
What are the physical characteristics of the study area? 
 
Preceding (vulnerability) assessment of the study area? 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
8 
 
2. Study Area 
As stated in the problem statement the study area for this project will be the Petone area, and is located 
in Lower Hutt, Wellington. As can be seen in Figure 3, the area is located in between a river mouth and 
the Wellington harbour area. What becomes apparent when looking at the project area is how the 
urbanized area of Petone is trapped between incline at the west road, the floodplain and the vicinity of 
the coastline. The area is characterized by being located in a river valley where the 54km long Hutt river 
meets the Wellington Harbour area. The width of the estuary is 4.5 km wide at this point ( Lawrence, 
Tegg, Reisinger, 2011). The esplanade, a major road link, runs along the coastline with some vegetated 
dunes present. There is also a tidal interaction with the Hutt river.  
 
 
Figure 3: Petone Area with points of interest 
==PAGE:81==
 
9 
 
2.1. Area Characteristics 
When looking into marine flood exposure for the area in (Paulik, Stephens, et al., 2019), it was seen 
that Lower Hutt, meaning Petone and Seaview areas, experienced an initial rapid increase of exposure, 
which can be seen in figure 4. Exposure was initiated with an inundation dataset using 0.10 m 
increments in addition to an extreme storm event. Exposed elements gathered until now include nodes 
and pipes. After a meeting at NIWA it became clear that these were just polygons without any metadata 
information attached to them. Wellington water will be able to provide this information. (Paulik, Craig, 
et al., 2019; Paulik, Stephens, et al., 2019). It should be noted that these maps are based on a ‘bathtub’ 
approach, meaning that either natural barriers or protective structures are not taken into account. 
 
Figure 4: Current Extreme Event  Flood Inundation Scenario 
==PAGE:82==
 
10 
 
When looking at the inundation scenario in Figure 4, it is the area more inland located in extension of 
the flood plain that is most susceptible to inundation at the moment, the low elevation of this area can 
be seen in Figure 7. When adding the SLR +100cm scenario in Figure 5, it can be seen that the majority 
of the Petone area will be inundated, indicating the vulnerability of the area. This is only valid in a worst 
case scenario though where the effectiveness of the flood protection scheme is compromised. 
 
 
Figure 5: Extreme Event Flood Inundation Scenario +100cm SLR 
==PAGE:83==
 
11 
 
 
Discharge points of wastewater systems often are located at the lowest elevation points of populated 
areas (White et al., 2017), small changes can overwhelm the capacity of these systems. It also operates 
gravity based, meaning that groundwater coming up due to climate change will influence the runoff 
capacity of these systems. This means that the two water infrastructure located in this area is especially 
vulnerable. (White et al., 2017) stresses the importance of thinking ahead as it is stated that the 
discharge points of wastewater systems often are located at the lowest elevation points of populated 
areas, and that even small changes can overwhelm the capacity of these systems. It also operates 
gravity based, meaning that groundwater coming up due to climate change will influence the runoff 
capacity of these systems. (Hendy et al., 2018) focusses on climate change driven drought in New 
Zealand where, as well as in (White et al., 2017), it was argued that drought is going to make a significant 
impact on the wastewater system as it relies on stormwater to flush the system.  
 
2.2. Site Visit 
A site visit was conducted aimed at having a clearer approach to answer the three questions related to 
the characteristics of the study area, which would be the infrastructure present in the area, physical 
characteristics of the area and preceding assessments or vulnerability assessments in the area. Pictures 
from the site visit will be included also, as well as some information on past projects and documents 
that are relevant. 
 
Figure 6 was taken at the esplanade, the road connecting both ends of the valley and located right at 
the coastline. It can be seen from the picture that, along with sparse vegetation and a minimal levee 
the Petone area is separated from the sea. It also becomes clear that it is quite a significant road judging 
from the size and traffic usage.  
 
 
Figure 6: View from the coastal road 'The Esplanade', separating Petone and the Beach Zone  
==PAGE:84==
 
12 
 
Figure 7 was take at Wakefield street, with Cuba street crossing over the bridge. Along the road there 
is a steep incline towards the adjacent street in the distance, indicating it is a lower lying area. This 
area is also among the first to be inundated in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 7: Wakefield st with Cuba street intersecting this area is already part of the inundation zone in Figure 4  
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
13 
 
3. Methodology 
This chapter will discuss how the project will be outlined, the type of analyses used and what tools will 
be used to answer the main questions. The first paragraph will discuss the scope of the project, where 
also the project process will be elaborated. The second paragraph will discuss the Exposure analysis, 
the last paragraph will elaborate on the DAPP sequencing, identifying adaptation thresholds and 
stakeholder involvement. 
 
3.1. Scope 
Scope of the research will be looking into managed retreat for two water infrastructure, namely the 
stormwater and wastewater. The project looks into stormwater and wastewater affected for the 
Petone area. Within the three water services potable water is unlikely to be as majorly affected by SLR. 
These potable water systems are not gravity based but are pressurized, and problems are expected to 
occur with the actual source of the water, which is located in the upper catchment area. This is why it 
is only stormwater and wastewater infrastructure will be considered. Components considered as 
infrastructure can be viewed as connecting components, like pipelines, and key objects like pumping 
stations in the area.  
 
Impacts from multiple hazard sources are affecting the Petone area, however the primary focus of the 
research is to use the impacts of sea level rise on the two water infrastructure to investigate managed 
retreat. Other hazards could be considered depending on the timeframe, like pluvial exposure in a 
separate exposure assessment. The physical scope will be the Petone area, with its boundary around 
Petone and Alicetown. It is shown in Figure 3. Components from other systems are excluded, e.g. two 
water infrastructure from the other side of the Lower Hutt River. Data that will be included in the scope 
will be asset data from Wellington Water and NIWA. This asset data can then be further divided in the 
Stormwater Nodes, Wastewater Nodes, Stormwater Pipes and Wastewater Pipes. Relevant attributes 
will be selected for the exposure assessment. 
 
The research questions will be used to create context for a conceptual DAPP approach. It will not be 
possible to develop a realistic Dapp framework within the timeframe of the study. It will be possible 
however to identify thresholds and timeframes for a managed retreat pathway leading up to aiding a 
full DAPP approach for the area. 
 
3.2. Exposure Assessment 
For the purpose of this research an analysis into exposure of the assets and inhabitants of the area will 
be done, where both the exposure from natural hazards will be investigated for both assets in the area, 
being housing and infrastructure, and citizens. First there will be a little bit of background on different 
levels of assessment. It is important to illustrate the need to investigate this pathway, both to initiate 
the research as well as to stakeholders. It is difficult to assess the exact risk to the project area. In a 
practical setting risk is assessed by likelihood X consequence (Ministry for the Environment, 2017). 
Consequence here relates to exposure of assets or people. The difficulty with applying this rhetoric is 
==PAGE:86==
 
14 
 
that the likelihood component is difficult to quantify, with ongoing sea level rise uncertainty increases 
over time (Ministry for the Environment, 2017). Therefore the focus will be on the consequence, in the 
form of an exposure assessment of assets and people in the Petone area. 
 
(Standard, 2019), defines exposure as ‘’Presence of people, livelihood, species or ecosystems, 
environmental functions, services, resources, infrastructure, or economic, social or cultural assets in 
places and settings that could be affected’’.  
 
This means that this analysis will provide the basis for starting up talks with stakeholders in the area, 
giving an indication and prioritization of assets that are affected. (Ministry for the Environment, 2017) 
outlines three levels of assessment.  
 
First pass risk screening using available data 
 
Second pass risk assessment takes a standard risk based approach using national data, regional 
and local information.  
 
Third pass enables further investigation of short-listed risks and enables prioritisation and 
testing of strategies in conjunction with the vulnerability assessments 
 
 
The more extensive vulnerability assessment has the function to overlay hazards, values and objectives 
information, difference between top down and bottom up assessments. The three main steps involved 
in the vulnerability assessment are a sensitivity analysis for the systems associated with the planning 
area, evaluation of the adaptive capacity for the system, assessment of how vulnerable the system is 
to the effects of climate change (Ministry for the Environment, 2017). 
 
The vulnerability assessment is either bottom up or top down. ‘’Top down assessments use climate 
change scenarios for a range of drivers over different planning timeframes to generate climate change 
exposure maps, indexed to a vulnerability scale. Bottom up vulnerability assessments develop tables or 
maps that assess human and community coping capacity and distributional impacts’’ (Ministry for the 
Environment, 2017). For this research, a top down assessment would be the most relevant. 
 
When transferring this into assessing risk, consequences will be quantified by overlaying hazard 
exposure. (Ministry for the Environment, 2017) describes the function of such a risk assessment to 
overlay hazards, values and objectives information with asset fragility, sensitivity and adaptive capacity 
information, with the aim to 
 
Aggregate information for assessing impacts and adaptive capacity 
 
Input for a comparative ranking process or prioritizing exposed areas 
 
Input for identifying adaptation thresholds, triggers or for activating decision points 
 
‘’Exposure generally refers to the state and change in external stresses that a system is exposed to. In 
the context of climate change, these are normally specific climate and other biophysical variables 
(including their variability and frequency of extremes). The location of people and assets can also be 
regarded as exposure’’(Judy Lawrence, Simon Tegg, Andy Reisinger, 2011) 
 
For the exposure analysis, one percent annual exceedance probability (AEP) data is available for pluvial 
flooding + climate change increments, and marine flooding + climate change increments. In this case 
==PAGE:87==
 
15 
 
the incoming data will be a combination of combining the available hazard layers, and use riskscape to 
evaluate the consequences. For the vulnerability identification, which is what is aimed with the 
exposure assessment, (LGNZ, 2019) proposes the following identification steps: 
1. Collect available data on SLR and Hazards, e.g. flooding 
2. Identify assets in the area, using asset data 
3. Combine the datasets to identify hazard extents 
4. Ground-truth within and across teams 
 
Hazard Data Collection (1) 
A combination of several hazards was identified for the Petone area, three water related hazards,, 
Marine Flooding and high groundwater levels. Since most of the wastewater and stormwater 
infrastructure is actually gravity based, which increases the vulnerability to sea level rise. Unfortunately 
no modelling of these systems is available at the moment, so it will not be possible to look into different 
scenarios for example. However there are some calculations and measurements available, also in the 
form of maps. 
 
For Marine Flooding there is a predictive data layer for flooding scenarios under rising sea levels, which 
can be provided by NIWA. The data used will be a certain increment in water height with an additional 
extreme storm event. The storm event does not change, just the increment in the water levels. 
 
Increases in groundwater level is a serious threat to the Petone area, especially since it is already dealing 
with relatively high groundwater levels. Some more research into the actual implications of this increase 
will be necessary to accurately estimate the magnitude of the threat. 
 
Asset Identification (2) 
For this part Wellington Water will play a vital role, since they are in the position to provide data on 
their infrastructure. NIWA has provided a map already with water infrastructure, and also has access to 
datasets on population from their Riskscape database. This asset data will provide an important part to 
start describing what water infrastructure is present in the area.  
 
Combine Datasets (3) and Ground Truth, discuss with experts from WW and NIWA (4) 
Looking into consequences for assets at risk will be the aim of this analysis. The first thing to do would 
be to overlay the hazard datasets and asset datasets to see the extent of exposure in relation to the 
corresponding scenarios. Since finding the correct functions to accurately assess this might be tricky in 
QGIS, NIWA has offered to help with setting up this analysis using their in-house developed tool 
Riskscape. This multi risk modelling tool combines three important components as input, being a Hazard 
Module, a Vulnerability Module and an Asset Module (Schmidt et al., 2011). The unique aspect of this 
program is that it is designed to be a flexible tool that can adapt to different hazards and assets. 
 
The outcome of the exposure analysis will provide a good starting basis to understand what is at risk 
and where the weak points are in the system and for engaging stakeholders and start exploring 
possibilities for retreat sequencing. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
16 
 
3.3. Retreat Sequencing 
Building upon the exposure analysis for 
the 
area, 
interdependencies 
and 
thresholds can now be investigated to 
start addressing the main question. For 
this the Dynamic Adaptive Planning 
Pathways (DAPP), elaborated on in the 
introduction, will be used to start 
investigating the sequencing of the 
retreat, and what areas to focus on. This 
means 
also 
identifying 
plausible 
pathways. 
 
These options will follow from the 
exposure analysis that should start to 
give a good discussion starter for 
engagement of different stakeholders in 
Wellington. Based on the preceding 
exposure analysis, and in collaboration 
with relevant stakeholders, it will be 
possible to start identifying short and 
long term options, both maintenance 
actions and more structural changes in 
short term to longer term that maintain 
flexibility for future adaptation.  
 
 
Due to the duration of the project, there is not enough time to develop a real life DAPP approach for 
the Petone area. Rather, a conceptual DAPP will be developed to indicate how it could be done. The 
process can be seen in Figure 8. In short the DAPP process follows the following steps (Haasnoot et al., 
2019): 
 
Framing 
 
Analysis 
 
Actions 
 
Evaluation of actions and options 
 
Development of adaptation pathways 
 
Selection of preferred possible pathways 
 
Specify and implement 
 
Monitor and review 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8:DAPP process, adapted from (Haasnoot et al., 2019) 
==PAGE:89==
 
17 
 
Identifying Thresholds 
Identifying adaptation thresholds will be critical in determining how to transition infrastructural assets 
from the present scenario to some point in the future where a threshold is reached and make sure 
these assets are ready before this threshold is surpassed. The different increments used in the datasets 
can be used to identified initial thresholds, using the exposure analysis. The output from the exposure 
analysis can then be a starting point for discussing coincidence of maintenance/replacement schedules 
of assets and pathway changes. 
 
ISO 14090 defines the threshold analysis as ‘’a point beyond which a system is deemed to be no longer 
effective (economically, socially, technologically or environmentally). The aim of thresholds analysis is to 
identify such points, determine the current proximity to these thresholds, and develop an adaptation 
plan that will reduce the likelihood of crossing these thresholds.’’ (Standard, 2019) In order to identify 
these it proposes the following steps: 
 
Characterize the system 
 
Research possible climate changes 
 
Identify Thresholds 
 
Assess Resilience 
 
Identify suitable indicators 
Characterizing the system could be done with the aid of the systems concept outlined in Figure 9. This 
would provide valuable input to both the exposure analysis and identifying interdependencies for which 
I will use the CIrcle tool, which enables such interdependencies to be characterised (see section 
Identifying Interdependencies). 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Systems Concept, adapted from (Standard, 2019) 
==PAGE:90==
 
18 
 
Identifying Interdependencies 
Building on the concept, once system boundaries and links identified using the system in Figure 9, for 
identifying interdependencies and potential cascading effects the Circle (Critical Infrastructures: 
Relations and Consequences for Life and Environment) tool from Deltares will be used. A cascading 
effect is a result of, in this case effects of climate change, on the system which sets of a chain of events. 
Mapping these interdependencies between different infrastructure assets is crucial for identifying 
adaptation thresholds and pathways. An example of linking these different infrastructure assets with 
the CIrcle tool can be found in Figure 10. The tool is developed with the aim to have input from different 
experts, where identifying these relations help developing the DAPP for step 2 and the iterative process 
between step 3 and 4 in Figure 8. Licensing options and possibilities still have to be looked into. 
 
 
Figure 10: Interdependencies from the CIrcle Tool, adapted from (Deltares, 2017) 
Workshop 
In order to aid the CIrcle tool process, a workshop will be held on the 27th of November. The aim is to 
gather expert input from various backgrounds on the topic. Input for the meeting will be results from 
the exposure analysis, interdependencies between different infrastructure assets and background on 
the study area which in conjunction with the Circle tool will be used for identifying adaptation 
thresholds and pathways. 
 
Process 
The process for the project can be seen in Figure 11. The first part focusses on investigating the area 
and possible consequences, conducting a exposure analysis, evaluating asset information and gathering 
information on the area and literature. The second phase will be more focussed on collaboration with 
stakeholders, whereas the last phase will work towards establishing a conceptual DAPP for retreat of 
two water infrastructure in the Petone area. 
 
Figure 11: Project Process 
 
Phase 1 - Assessment 
(Exposure analysis)
•(1)Calculate Hazard 
Exposure
•(2)Area 
Inventarisation
•(3)Literature / 
Framing / Context
Phase 2 - Participatory 
Phase (CIrcle Tool)
•Discuss Adaptation 
Options
•Discuss Feasibility
•Discuss Long/Short 
term + Flexibility
•Discuss ATP's
Phase 3 - Retreat 
Sequencing
•Start developing 
conceptual DAPP 
framework
•Where are thresholds 
and 
interdependencies
==PAGE:91==
 
19 
 
4. Data Collection 
Data collection will be necessary in order to reach an evidence based product, mainly to characterise 
the study area, and perform an exposure assessment, which then can be used to start finding answers 
to the ‘How’ in the problem statement. Focus is on the two water infrastructure data. Water 
infrastructure data, in specific asset data, will be acquired from Wellington Water and should give a first 
indication of assets located in the area. It should also give an overview of maintenance intervals and or 
material properties.  
 
Hazard data will come from both Wellington Water and NIWA. The dataset from NIWA is related to 
modelled sea level rise, already seen in Figure 4 and Figure 5. It provides +10cm incremental projections 
until a level of +300cm, and what impacts this would have on the Petone area. Groundwater predictions 
are necessary, as this is expected to largely impact the assets in the area. An overview of the data that 
is expected is shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Data 
Source / Responsible 
Data 
Product 
General Information about the Area
Wellington Water / GWRC 
Open Data 
Topographic / Elevation Data
Area Assessment / Exposure
Assessment 
NIWA / GWRC Open Data
District Boundaries
Area Assessment
GWRC Open Data
Roads, Physical Location and 
usage 
Area Assessment / Exposure 
Assessment 
GWRC Open Data
Water Level Records 
Area Assessment
Hazard Data
NIWA
Incrementally Increasing Flood 
Map 
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
Wellington Water / GWRC 
Open Data 
Three Water Information
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
GWRC Open Data
Groundwater Predictions
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
Asset Data
Wellington Water
Three Water Assets
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
Wellington Water
Service Levels
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
Wellington Water
Legacy Problems Old Pipes
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
Wellington Water
Earlier Model Results / Return 
Periods 
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
Wellington Water
Lifespan / Maintenance
Exposure Assessment / Retreat 
Sequencing 
NIWA
Population
Exposure Assessment
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
 
20 
 
5. Deliverables 
It is envisioned that in the first stages of the project, mainly two sections of the project are developing 
now, first one being related to the area and managed retreat literature, second one related to the study 
area and corresponding exposure assessment. This should in turn start to give an answer to the 
following questions 
 
What water infrastructure is present in the study area? (1) 
 
What are the physical characteristics of the study area? (2) 
 
Preceding (vulnerability) assessment of the study area (3) 
Then it becomes important to use this knowledge and insights into the area, and start to discuss it with 
different stakeholders on what kind of other uncertainties or problems could arise, and what could be 
a good way of sequencing these steps. This means that a pretty in depth outline of what is to be 
achieved should be done at this point. This would in turn aim to discuss the following 
 
What levels of Service (LoS) are appropriate while transitioning towards adaptation thresholds? 
(4) 
 
What measures and actions are appropriate to maintain LoS and do they coincide with 
adaptation thresholds? (5) 
 
How long should water services be maintained? (6) 
 
What leads - service withdrawal or house withdrawal? (7) 
 
How can the vulnerable be identified and their needs addressed? (8) 
Ultimately leading to how to sequence this and tie this into a DAPP approach, with regards to identified 
return periods and maintenance/replacement timeframes. In the end it should start to point towards 
an answer of the how, ‘’How could the retreat of water infrastructure (stormwater, waste water and 
water supply, roading) be managed alongside a community retreat from the coast’’, already having 
answered the what, why, and where. Question that remains is the when. 
 
Table 2: Preliminary Milestones 
Month
Activity
Comments
Products/Milestones
Meetings
September
Literature study, 
methodology, 
define what 
infrastructure will 
be taken into 
account 
-Base on pre 
identified 
vulnerabilities 
-Define 
methodology 
Project plan + notes 
on findings from the 
literature study + 
methodology 
October
-Finish Literature
-Finish Area / 
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
-Input from pillar 3
-Prepare 
stakeholder 
meetings 
Status report + 
Exposure/area 
assessment + 
Literature 
(1) Discuss 
Phase 1 Fig 
11, 29th 
Oktober? 
November
Assessment, start 
qualitative data 
collection 
-Engage 
stakeholders in the 
study area, e.g. 
Wellington 
Rough outline of the 
thesis, what is going 
to be included in the 
end product? 
(2)Discuss 
Stakeholder 
Progress, 
December 
Start writing, start 
identifying level of 
service 
-Discuss 
implementation 
-Discuss Sequencing 
Start a discussion on 
results / reflections 
(3)Agree on 
definitive 
==PAGE:93==
 
21 
 
on stakeholder 
meetings 
scope to 
continue 
January
Writing
-Discuss feasibility
Discussion/writing, 
deliver concept 
(5) Discuss 
Draft 
February
Finish Study
Writing/hand-in
 
 
Table 3: Preliminary Planning (revise in template) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
22 
 
6. Organisation 
This is a collaborative project between Victoria University Wellington and DTU. This chapter will include 
some information on the participating organizations / professors.  Meetings between the universities 
will be aligned with the deliverables (see Table 2) to discuss each next phase and reflect on the progress 
made. After the project is submitted it will be defended and presented via skype as part of DTU 
requirements for completion of the project. 
 
Victoria University 
Since the research takes place in New Zealand, the main guidance will come from the New Zealand  
research team, consisting of Dr Judy Lawrence from VUW and Dr Rob Bell from NIWA as the direct 
supervisors for the research. 
 
DTU 
Dr Martin Drews will be the supervisor in Denmark and will make sure the research complies with DTU 
standard for a thesis. 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
23 
 
Bibliography 
Babovic, F., Mijic, A., & Madani, K. (2018). Decision making under deep uncertainty for adapting urban 
drainage systems to change. Urban Water Journal, 15(6), 552–560. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2018.1529803 
Brière, C., Janssen, S. K. H., Oost, A. P., Taal, M., & Tonnon, P. K. (2018). Usability of the climate-
resilient nature-based sand motor pilot, The Netherlands. Journal of Coastal Conservation, 22(3), 
491–502. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11852-017-0527-3 
de Vriend, H. J., van Koningsveld, M., Aarninkhof, S. G. J., de Vries, M. B., & Baptist, M. J. (2015). 
Sustainable hydraulic engineering through building with nature. Journal of Hydro-Environment 
Research, 9(2), 159–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jher.2014.06.004 
Deltares. (2017). Critical Infrastructures: Relations and Consequences for Life and Environment. 4. 
Retrieved from https://www.deltares.nl/app/uploads/2015/04/Productblad-CIrcle.pdf 
Gibbs, M. T. (2016). Why is coastal retreat so hard to implement? Understanding the political risk of 
coastal adaptation pathways. Ocean and Coastal Management, 130, 107–114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.06.002 
Greater Wellington Regional Council. (1996). Combined Earthquake Hazard Map Wellington City. Pub . 
No. WRC/RP-T-96/13. 
Haasnoot, M., Warren, A., & Kwakkel, J. H. (2019). Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05252-2 
Hanna, C., White, I., Glavovic, B. (2017). Managed retreat in New Zealand : revealing the terminology , 
approaches , and direction of local planning instruments. (October). 
Hanna, C., White, I., Glavovic, B. (2018). Managed retreat governance : Insights from Matat ā , New 
Zealand. 
Hendy, J., Kerr, S., Halliday, A., Owen, S., Ausseil, A.-G. E., Burton, R., … Zammit, C. (2018). Drought 
and climate change adaptation: impacts and projections. (November), 16. Retrieved from 
https://motu.nz/assets/Documents/our-work/environment-and-agriculture/climate-change-
impacts/Drought-Dialogue-Report.pdf 
Hino, M., Field, C. B., & Mach, K. J. (2017). Managed retreat as a response to natural hazard risk. 
Nature Climate Change, 7(5), 364–370. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3252 
IPCC. (2013). Climate change 2013 the physical science basis: Working Group I contribution to the 
fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Climate Change 2013 
the Physical Science Basis: Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 9781107057, 1–1535. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324 
IPCC. (2019). Special Report: The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. (September), in 
preparation. https://doi.org/https://www.ipcc.ch/report/srocc/ 
Judy Lawrence, Simon Tegg, Andy Reisinger, D. Q. (2011). Vulnerability and adaptation to increased 
flood risk with climate change — Hutt Valley summary Judy Lawrence Simon Tegg Dorothee 
Quade The New Zealand Climate Change Research Institute. NZCCRI 2011 Report 02, (October). 
Lange, W., Pirzer, C., Dünow, L., & Schelchen, A. (2016). Risk perception for participatory ecosystem-
based adaptation to climate change in the mata Atlântica of Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil. In 
Advances in Natural and Technological Hazards Research (Vol. 42). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-43633-3_21 
Lawrence, J., Bell, R., Blackett, P., Stephens, S., & Allan, S. (2018). National guidance for adapting to 
coastal hazards and sea-level rise: Anticipating change, when and how to change pathway. 
Environmental Science and Policy, 82(January), 100–107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.01.012 
Lawrence, J., & Haasnoot, M. (2017). What it took to catalyse uptake of dynamic adaptive pathways 
planning to address climate change uncertainty. Environmental Science and Policy, 68, 47–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2016.12.003 
==PAGE:96==
 
24 
 
Lawrence, J., Quade, D., & Becker, J. (2014). Integrating the effects of flood experience on risk 
perception with responses to changing climate risk. Natural Hazards, 74(3), 1773–1794. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1288-z 
Local Government New Zealand. (2016). The 2050 challenge: future proofing our communities. (July). 
Retrieved from http://www.lgnz.co.nz/assets/42597-LGNZ-2050-Challenge-Final-WEB-small.pdf 
Local Government New Zealand. (2019a). Exposed : Climate change and infrastructure. (August). 
Local Government New Zealand. (2019b). Vulnerable: the quantum of local government infrastructure 
exposed to sea level rise. 52. Retrieved from http://www.lgnz.co.nz/our-
work/publications/vulnerable-the-quantum-of-local-government-infrastructure-exposed-to-sea-
level-rise 
Manocha, N., & Babovic, V. (2017). Development and valuation of adaptation pathways for storm 
water management infrastructure. Environmental Science and Policy, 77(1), 86–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2017.08.001 
Mills, M., Mutafoglu, K., Adams, V. M., Archibald, C., Bell, J., & Leon, J. X. (2016). Perceived and 
projected flood risk and adaptation in coastal Southeast Queensland, Australia. Climatic Change, 
136(3–4), 523–537. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1644-y 
Ministry for the Environment. (2017). Coastal Hazards and Climate Change: guidance for local 
government. In Ministry for the Environment (Vol. ME1341). Retrieved from 
http://www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/media/Climate Change/coastal-hazards-guide-
final.pdf 
Paulik, R., Craig, H., & Collins, D. (2019). New Zealand Fluvial and Pluvial Flood Exposure. 
Paulik, R., Stephens, S., Wadhwa, S., Bell, R., Popovich, B., & Robinson, B. (2019). Coastal Flooding 
Exposure Under Future Sea-level Rise for New Zealand. 
Rouse, H. L., Bell, R. G., Lundquist, C. J., Blackett, P. E., Hicks, D. M., & King, D. N. (2017). Coastal 
adaptation to climate change in Aotearoa-New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Marine and 
Freshwater Research, 51(2), 183–222. https://doi.org/10.1080/00288330.2016.1185736 
Schmidt, J., Matcham, I., Reese, S., King, A., Bell, R., Henderson, R., … Heron, D. (2011). Quantitative 
multi-risk analysis for natural hazards: A framework for multi-risk modelling. Natural Hazards, 
58(3), 1169–1192. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9721-z 
Siders, A. R., Hino, M., & Mach, K. (2019). The case for strategic and managed retreat in response to 
climate change. Science Policy Forum, in press, 761–764. 
Standard, D. (2019). ISO 14090 Dansk standard Tilpasning til klimaændringer – Prinicipper , krav og 
retningslinjer Adaptation to climate change – Principles ,. 
Wellington, G. (2019). GREATER WELLINGTON PREPARING COASTAL COMMUNITIES FOR CLIMATE 
Assessing coastal vulnerability to climate change , sea level rise and natural hazards. (June). 
White, I., Storey, B., Owen, S., Bell, R., Charters, F., Dickie, B., … Morgan, K. (2017). Economic and 
Public Policy Research Climate Change & Stormwater and Wastewater Systems. 
 
==PAGE:97==
B
Appendix 2
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
89
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Exposure Assessment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
Contents 
1. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 2 
1.1. 
Background ............................................................................................................................. 3 
1.2. 
Marine Flooding Hazard Data .................................................................................................. 5 
2. 
Asset Data ....................................................................................................................................... 6 
2.1. Background Urban Drainage Systems .......................................................................................... 6 
2.2. Petone/Alicetown Drainage System ............................................................................................. 9 
3. 
RiskScape ....................................................................................................................................... 11 
4. 
Sequencing and Prioritization ........................................................................................................ 15 
4.1. Sewer Flooding: Systems and Classifications .............................................................................. 15 
4.2. Asset Prioritization ..................................................................................................................... 17 
4.3. Exposure Results ........................................................................................................................ 25 
4.4. 
Adaptation Outline ................................................................................................................ 33 
Bibliography .......................................................................................................................................... 35 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Sea level rise has been indicated as one of the key factors affecting New Zealands coastal communities 
(Local Government New Zealand, 2016; Ministry for the Environment, 2017). Negative consequences 
include more frequent inundation, increased erosion and increases in groundwater levels, saltwater 
intrusion, liquefaction and drainage problems. Research into New Zealand exposure on natural hazards, 
namely Marine, Fluvial and Pluvial flood exposure (Paulik, 2019 (a); Paulik, 2019 (b)) shows that 
Wellington is among the cities with the highest pipeline exposure for all three waters infrastructure. 
(Wellington, 2019) also identifies the Petone area the most vulnerable geographic unit together with 
the Seaview area for the Hutt City Council, a reclamation area located next to Petone, despite the 
presence of one of New Zealand’s largest flood protection schemes (Lawrence, Quade, & Becker, 2014). 
 
This study will focus on investigating managed retreat of two water infrastructure for the Petone area, 
as a potential adaptation pathway. This means retreating two water infrastructure away from the 
vulnerable areas over time. An evidence-based staged approach towards decision-making and 
implementation will be key. Additional qualitative data from the study area, supporting the planning 
perspective will be acquired through stakeholder interviews. The principal research question is as 
follows: 
 
How could the retreat of two water infrastructure (stormwater, wastewater and roading) in the Petone 
Area be managed alongside a community retreat from the coast, considering and defining; 
 
What levels of Service (LoS) are appropriate while transitioning towards adaptation thresholds? 
 
What measures and actions are appropriate to maintain LoS and do they coincide with 
adaptation thresholds? 
 
How long should two water services be maintained?  
 
What leads - service withdrawal or resident withdrawal? 
For the purpose of this research an analysis into exposure of the assets and inhabitants of the area is 
done, where both the exposure from natural hazards are investigated for assets in the study area. It is 
important to illustrate the need to investigate retreat, both to initiate the research as well as to 
stakeholders. This exposure study focuses on services and infrastructure and where people live. It is 
important to start identifying which elements are exposed (both presently and in the future), and their 
spatial extent. Some background on the hazard data will also be provided. Chapter 1 will focus on 
background on the hazard data used, and Chapter 2 will discuss the assets and their definitions. 
Standard (2019) defines exposure as ‘’Presence of people, livelihood, species or ecosystems, 
environmental functions, services, resources, infrastructure, or economic, social or cultural assets in 
places and settings that could be affected’’.  LGNZ  (2019) proposes the following identification steps 
for an exposure assessment: 
1. Collect available data on SLR and Hazards, e.g. flooding 
2. Identify assets in the area, using asset data 
3. Combine the datasets to identify hazard extents 
4. Ground-truth within and across teams 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
3 
 
1.1. Background 
In this chapter the background for both Pluvial and Marine Flooding will be investigated, as these were 
provided by Wellington Water and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA). 
It is not possible to run multiple extreme hazard events at the same time, since the interaction between 
the different hazard occurrences is both unknown and extremely complicated to model (Schmidt et al., 
2011). Accordingly, hazard scenarios have to be treated as separate assessments. Since this coincidence 
cannot be calculated accurately, after discussing this at NIWA and during the workshop it was decided 
to only use the Marine Flooding arising from sea-level rise (SLR) as the hazard to focus on for this study. 
Background on the Pluvial flooding data is still provided. 
 
Hazard Data types and Applied RiskScape Scenarios 
Hazard and asset data are used for the exposure assessment. Hazard data will be overlain with selected 
asset data that will be assessed to determine the exposure to the hazards as a components of risk. This 
section discusses the hazard data sets. Different SLR increment scenarios will be investigated in 
RiskScape, using Marine flooding maps. A detailed background for RiskScape and its functions can be 
found in Chapter 3. This is available for a present day scenario of 1% AEP and then increases with 10cm 
SLR increments. The RiskScape scenarios for these marine flooding maps are based on the New Zealand 
SLR projection scenarios (Figure 1). The scenarios will be run through until + 120 cm SLR. This 
corresponds with a NZRCP8.5 H+ scenario just under approximately 90 years, until 2110.  
 
Figure 1: New Zealand Sea Level Rise (SLR) projections untill 2150 (Ministry for the Environment, 2017) 
A hazard map was also provided for Pluvial flooding. For this hazard data, a 20% increase in rainfall was 
added and then the 1% AEP was calculated. Temperature changes will contribute significantly  to 
changes in the rainfall regimes, increasing precipitation and storm intensities (Butler, D., Digman, C., 
Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). In the end it was decided not to use this hazard as it was not possible 
to calculate exposure using different increments and see hazard exposure for different scenarios. The 
Marine hazard data was therefore more suitable for evaluating asset exposure thresholds. 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
4 
 
One percent annual exceedance Background 
(Faber, 2012) gives some background on return periods for extreme events. Since both datasets used 
here are based on an annual exceedance probability of 1%, or in other words an annual exceedance 
probability of 0.01. The return period for planning or design period T is given as following: 
𝑇ோ= n ∗T =
1
ቀ1 −𝐹௑,்
௠௔௫(x)ቁ
    𝑇 
 
In which 𝐹௑,்
௠௔௫(x) is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the extreme events (Faber, 2012). 
Since the annual exceedance probability is 1%, the return period is calculated as follows: 
𝑇ோ=
1
(1 −(1 −0.01)) =
1
(0.01) = 100 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 
 
The following conditions apply for using this method for the planning or design period and return 
period, the process must be an ergodic random process X(t) and extremes within the design period T 
must be independent (Faber, 2012). The cumulative distribution function (CDF) for the reference period 
n*T can therefore be described as: 
𝐹௑,௡்(x) = (𝐹௑,்(x))௡ 
 
This means the occurrence probability after a planning timeframe of 100 years is: 
𝑃= 1 −(𝐹௑,்(x))௡= 1 −(1 −0.01)ଵ଴଴= 0.634 
 
This is  however assuming stationary conditions with regards to boundary conditions, and therefore the 
return period. Due to changes in the boundary conditions, like SLR, return periods will also change as 
the sea continues to rise. According to (Stephens, 2015; White et al., 2017), a SLR increase of 0.30 m 
will change a 1%AEP into an event occurring at least once per year in the case of the Wellington region. 
This means flooding predictions are likely to underestimate the impact of SLR increases. An overview 
of how SLR affects exceedance of 1 / 100 years extreme high water levels for different cities in New 
Zealand can be found in Table 1, adapted from (NZ, 2015). The Wellington region has the highest 
exceedance per increment in comparison to the other major cities in New Zealand, because of its low 
tide range. 
Table 1: The changing Return Period for the exceedance of the present-day 1% AEP High Water Level (HWL) in 
major New Zealand cities. 
SLR increment [m]
Auckland
Wellington
Christchurch
Dunedin
0
Every 100 years
Every 100 years
Every 100 years
Every 100 years
0.20
Every 12 years
Every 4 years
Every 5 years
Every 9 years
0.40
Every 2 years
Every 2 months
Every 3 months
Every 9 months
0.60
Every 2 months
3 times a week
Twice a week
Once a month
 
 
==PAGE:103==
 
5 
 
1.2. Marine Flooding Hazard Data  
As stated in the project proposal, the dataset used as the coastal flooding hazard is the one developed 
for the Deep South Challenge, published in (Paulik et al., 2019). The aim of that research was to map 
marine flooding for New Zealand nation wide for 1% annual exceedance probability with SLR 
increments of 0.1 m, and enumerate elements that were at risk of coastal inundation (Paulik et al., 
2019). During this process, elements at risk were mapped by intersecting the digital elevation model 
(DEM)(derived from aerial LiDAR surveys) with the present-day 1% AEP extreme sea level and 
successive 0.1 m increments of SLR. However, these elements were, for three waters infrastructure, 
just defined as nodes and pipes. Due to inconsistent attribute information it was not possible to 
individually map these on a nationwide scale. For this research, the same exposure of assets will be 
initially be used in this research, however it will be done on the Petone scale.  
 
In order to define areas potentially exposed to direct or indirect flooding, a baseline must be 
established. This is done by defining the land-sea boundary (Paulik et al., 2019). The land sea boundary 
is defined by the MHWS10 level, which is the water level that is only exceed by 10% of all high tides 
(Paulik et al., 2019). This includes geographic tidal variations. 
 
Another complicating factor is that homogeneous boundary conditions cannot be applied on a nation- 
wide scale. Different areas have a different set of underlying components that defines an extreme AEP 
event. Due to sheltered conditions the Wellington Harbour, and therefore the Petone area, was 
categorized as an estuary with a tidal gauge. Included in this scenario are the 1% AEP storm tide levels, 
MSL offsets and MHWS-10 from the tidal gauge at Queens Wharf in Wellington. This means no wave 
setup was added for this scenario.  
 
Bathtub Approach 
The marine hazard data is modelled using a static method, or bathtub approach. The bathtub approach 
only considers the intersection of two vertical levels, being the water level and the digital elevation 
model (DEM). This may not be a realistic representation of reality, as bathtub flood modelling has a 
tendency to overestimate flooding exposure for a couple of reasons (Paulik et al., 2019). The first is 
duration of an extreme event, this is not an instant transition towards a fully extended hazard. In order 
to inundate larger areas, flow needs time to make its way through narrow connections with the sea, 
e.g. channels and culverts (Paulik et al., 2019). 
 
An alternative approach would be the use of a dynamic inundation model, using a numerical 
hydrodynamic model (Ministry for the Environment, 2017), where the (over)flow from sea to land is 
numerically resolved (DHI, 2017). As setting up and calibrating a model like this is time intensive and 
requires detailed input data, the bathtub model was considered sufficient for the exposure assessment. 
 
LiDAR and DEM 
For different parts of the coast different sources for elevation data were used. Satellite DEM data is 
available for the entire coastline of New Zealand. However, LiDAR DEM data is more accurate and 
preferred. For the Wellington region, therefore also the Petone area, the more accurate LiDAR data has 
been used (Paulik et al., 2019). 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
 
6 
 
2. Asset Data 
Asset data for two waters infrastructure was acquired from Wellington Water. This was used to 
investigate the exposure. However, due to time limitations on the research, only exposure in the sense 
of ‘assets being affected by the hazard scenarios’ will be investigated rather than assessing the 
predisposition of each type of element to be damaged or compromised. Due to the considerable size 
of the asset data this means that the system has to be analysed and critical nodes should be both 
prioritized and selected for testing exposure from the different hazard datasets. 
2.1. Background Urban Drainage Systems 
A distinction can be made between combined and separate Urban Drainage systems. The Petone 
infrastructure is mainly gravity based and a separate system. Urban Drainage systems handle two 
waters, wastewater and stormwater (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). In 
general they can be divided into two types, a combined system where wastewater and stormwater are 
combined in the same pipe and a separate system. Hybrid systems are also possible, but not common. 
 
Combined Urban Drainage System 
A combined system disposes of storm and sewer water, usually to a water treatment plant (WTP) in the 
proximity of the urbanized area. The water course in Figure 2 is a river or estuary, in the Petone area 
most of these outlets are connected to the Hutt River or the Wellington Harbour. In periods of relatively 
dry weather, the system carries mainly wastewater flow. To ensure sufficient discharge during these 
periods, gravity based drainage systems must be designed to work only in predominantly wastewater 
flow. However, during rainfall there is a significant increase in discharge flow through the sewers, 
requiring much larger pipes.  
 
This would decrease performance during dry weather, and it is not economically feasible to provide this 
increased capacity for the entire system. In order to handle the increase in discharge due to 
stormwater, the flow is diverted into the natural water course, e.g. the estuary or river, using a 
combined sewer overflow (CSO). This causes pollution as both stormwater and untreated wastewater 
are diverted into the natural water course before reaching the WTP (Butler, D., Digman, C., 
Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). 
 
 
Figure 2: Combined Drainage System, adapted from (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018)
==PAGE:105==
 
7 
 
Separate Urban Drainage System 
More recently constructed drainage systems are usually separate. As can be seen in Figure 3, the storm 
and wastewater pipe systems are constructed separately, although usually in the same excavation 
trench, eliminating the need for an CSO (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). The 
advantage of this separate drainage system is that it prevents pollutant spills in high stormwater 
discharge scenarios. Usually the stormwater pipes are the larger ones to accommodate the increased 
discharge during an intensive rainfall period, and the wastewater pipes are smaller to handle the more 
consistent but smaller wastewater discharge flow. To assume however that this removes pollution 
altogether is incorrect, as stormwater contains pollutants as well. Stormwater pollutants therefore 
remain an issue, as it is impossible to make sure no stormwater is going into the wastewater pipes. 
Stormwater can infiltrate the wastewater by means of infiltration and inflow. Infiltration can occur due 
to damages to the pipes, e.g. cracks and inflow can occur due to malpractice (Butler, D., Digman, C., 
Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). 
 
 
Figure 3: Combined Drainage System, adapted from (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018) 
 
Key Drainage System Components 
In order to investigate and start prioritizing some of the assets in the Petone Urban Drainage System, it 
is important to first elaborate on the more important elements in the system. First some of the main 
components will be discussed, and after that some more specialized elements like pumping stations. 
 
Sewers 
In the provided two waters assets for the Petone area, these sewers comprise of either stormwater or 
wastewater pipes. Materials of the provided assets consist of Reinforced concrete, Asbestos cement, 
PVC, UPC, steel cement for the stormwater pipes. For the wastewater pipes, these consist of Asbestos 
cement, High & Medium Density Polyethylene, PVC, Reinforced concrete, Steel, Steel cement and UPC. 
Current sewer pipes are usually circular in cross section. In calculations, there is usually the 
measurement of the invert level taken, which is the inner bottom of the pipe, whereas the crown level 
is the outer top of the pipe. The vertical alignment of the system makes sure the longitudinal profile of 
the system has enough land cover above the pipes. The horizontal alignment is the location of the 
network over the project area (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
8 
 
Manholes 
Manholes make up the majority of the nodes in the by Wellington Water provided asset dataset for 
two waters infrastructure. The nodes act as an access point for inspection and cleaning, and are located 
where there is a change in direction, change in gradient, change in pipe size, head of runs and major 
junctions with other sewers (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). 
 
Gully Inlets 
Gullies collect runoff from roads and other paved areas via inlets, and form therefore the connection 
between the major and the minor drainage system.  Usually there is an underlying sump. This sump is 
also a very common asset in the dataset. The gully is connected to the sewer by a lateral pipe. 
 
Inverted Siphon 
The aim of an inverted syphon is to allow flows to lower temporarily, for example to cross under canals 
or roads (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). A disadvantage is that at lower 
discharge velocities, there is an increase in sediment deposition in this lower part.  
 
Culverts 
Culverts are also designed for carrying the flow underneath canals or roads, for both storm or 
wastewater. Culverts are usually straight circular or rectangular pipes, PVC or concrete.  
 
Pumping Station 
Pumping stations are needed to pump water out of or along the system if this cannot be done by gravity. 
There are quite a few in the area of study for both storm and wastewater systems in the Petone areas, 
as can be seen in Figure 5. For the wastewater, this is mainly necessary to pump the discharge to the 
Seaview WWTP. A gravity-based system is preferred to accommodate the necessary discharge, 
eliminating unnecessary maintenance. Since treatment facilities are usually not available in each natural 
sub-catchment, pumps are often necessary to overcome elevation difficulties. Depending on future 
adaptation, with regards to SLR, pumping stations will have an increasing role in keeping the current 
storm and wastewater systems running. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
9 
 
2.2. Petone/Alicetown Drainage System 
The prioritized assets and conceptual system outline will be the input for the systems analysis, where 
other actors and drivers around the system and decision space are operating, identifying constraints or 
opportunities in this space. This would mean prioritizing certain elements and isolating them from the 
original shapefile. The scale of the analysis would be the study area, the Petone area and part of 
Alicetown.  
 
As can be seen in Figure 4. The nearest Wastewater treatment plan (WWTP) is located on the opposite 
side of the Hutt river at the Seaview Area. There is also a Potable water treatment facility located in the 
study area opposite to the WWTP, however the potable water system is not included in the scope of 
this study when looking into affected assets. The trunk wastewater pipeline runs the length of the 
Esplanade, the main road along the coast.  
 
What becomes apparent when looking at Figure 4, is the high number of wastewater pumps located in 
the vicinity of the coastline. The stormwater pumps are, as can be expected, placed in the lower parts 
of the system in the inner area of Petone. Therefore it is possible to more efficiently get the excessive 
stormwater out during heavy Pluvial flooding. The Wastewater pumps are placed in the vicinity of the 
wastewater outlets. Since the systems are gravity-based, there is the need at the end of the system, 
e.g. near the outlet, (near the Hutt river or the coastline), to pump the discharge flow to the necessary 
hydraulic head towards the WWTP.  
==PAGE:108==
 
10 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Pumping Stations and Pipe Network Petone 
==PAGE:109==
 
11 
 
3. RiskScape 
Riskscape is a multi-risk modelling tool developed by the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric 
Research (NIWA) and GNS Science. It combines three important components as input, being a Hazard 
Module, a Vulnerability Module and an Asset Module(Schmidt et al., 2011). The unique aspect of this 
system is that it is designed to be a flexible tool that can adapt to different hazards and assets. Multi- 
risk hazard modelling is defined as follows: 
 
‘’Quantitative estimation of the spatial distributions of potential losses for an area (a confined spatial 
domain), multiple (ideally all) natural hazards, multiple (ideally a continuum of) event probabilities 
(return periods), multiple (ideally all) human assets, and multiple potential loss components (for each of 
the assets, e.g. buildings, streets, people, etc.)’’ (Schmidt et al., 2011). 
 
An advantage of using this multi-risk approach is to enable overlap of return intervals from different 
hazards to be examined, and how they affect an asset. This can help identify governing (most impacting) 
risks corresponding to different time intervals during the lifetime of the asset (Schmidt et al., 2011). 
 
 
Figure 5: Schematic Riskscape set up, adapted from (Schmidt et al., 2011). 
 
Hazard types for this study are categorized as SLR increments, in this case using a raster file for flood 
mapping. The program uses a set of functions for risk calculations, where the user is free to link to this 
module depending on the calculation. The type used for the exposure assessment will be a calculation 
of the affected, exposed, assets. This is done by overlaying the spatial extent of the hazard and the 
hazard exposure, onto the spatial representation of the asset module. In this case these are the 
Wellington Water assets, which is a spatial map. This results in the identification of exposure, or which 
assets are affected, in the area (Schmidt et al., 2011). 
 
Other possibilities include calculation of relative, absolute, time averaged and space averaged loss 
(Schmidt et al., 2011). Figure 6 shows the RiskScape process and the different module possibilities. The 
first one is the asset exposure, which does not see the introduction of the fragility function. Adding the 
==PAGE:110==
 
12 
 
fragility function gives the possibility to calculate loss from a damaged or disrupt state. The first extra 
possibility is a relative, event specific and asset specific loss due to the introduction of Asset attributes 
in the fragility function calculating a damage ratio. The second possibility is an absolute, event specific 
and asset specific loss calculation due to the introduction of valuation for the asset. This is multiplied 
with the damage ratio in order to arrive at an absolute monetary loss. The third option is an absolute, 
time-averaged asset specific loss using the probability of hazard occurrence, therefore introducing risk.  
 
This allows for losses to be calculated per time period. The fourth option sees the introduction of an 
aggregation module, allowing for an absolute, time-averaged, space-averaged loss. This is relevant 
when there is the need to identify an area with higher hazard impacts, resulting in an aggregated loss 
result per area (Schmidt et al., 2011).  
 
It is not possible to run risk scenarios with different hazards, since interaction between multiple hazards 
and assets with their associated attributes is not possible to model in this system, however they often 
do occur simultaneously (Schmidt et al., 2011). Scenarios are based on the different hazards to which 
the assets are exposed. For the Marine Flooding hazard, scenarios are run until SLR reaches +1.2 m, 
with 0.1 m increments. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Riskscape Modules. Adapted from (Schmidt et al., 2011). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
 
13 
 
Types of functions  
The function used in RiskScape is able to investigate exposure for an asset. It does so by identifying if 
the hazard is present at the location of the asset. This means it gives a very basic yes/no answer in terms 
of exposure. It can then verify the magnitude of the exposure, by checking the depth of hazard 
exposure, e.g. 0.1 metre or not. If the exposure passes this predefined threshold the function will turn 
to 1, whereas unaffected or below the threshold it will turn to 0. 
 
 
Figure 7: Riskscape Function used 
 
The files contain three different types of modules (classes), which are hazards, assets and loss. This 
information cannot be predetermined by the function, the function will classify this for an analysis. 
Using the loss function requires a detailed prior assessment on the monetary value of the assets. Since 
this is not available this will not be used in the assessment. As can be seen in Figure 7, only the asset 
and hazard are defined for the argument types. Argument types specifies what functions expect for 
their inputs (CatalystNZ, 2018). 
 
 
Figure 8: Riskscape Argument Types used 
==PAGE:112==
 
14 
 
The asset, hazard and return types match the expression in Figure 8. Return types define the data type 
returned by the function(CatalystNZ, 2018). This is to select which fields with attributes should be taken 
from the input (asset) file, and what attributes should be included in the Riskscape output, the return 
type. As can be seen, the first column is adding the exposure by either adding a 1 or 0 to the asset. In 
the case for the pipes, it also includes the instalment date, material and what type of pipe it is. This 
results in the output being able to show what type of pipe, with attached age, is going to be exposed 
to the hazard at which SLR increment. This added condition component, together with asset lifetimes, 
is the first step looking into replacement opportunities for assets. The desired output is chosen per 
asset layer as not all the attributes uniform for all asset layers. 
 
Output 
The same format for the output will be maintained as explained in chapter 2. For every type of asset, it 
is now possible to see at which hazard exposure the asset is going to be exposed. It is important to sort 
and visualize this in order to get an overview of the effect of the different increments. This will be set 
out in the next chapter, where there will be a script to prioritize the assets, also based on average 
lifespans of these assets, and this prioritized asset data with known thresholds to exposure is used as a 
start for retreat sequencing of two water infrastructure. 
 
 
Figure 9: Riskscape output Columns 
 
 
==PAGE:113==
 
15 
 
4. Sequencing and Prioritization 
The output from the RiskScape process gives an initial indication of what assets to focus on next. 
Visualizing this gives the potential to not only start looking more into relevant assets, but also start 
evaluating the more affected regions within the project area. 
 
Wellington Water has provided documentation of the average lifespan of a variety of assets which can 
then be added to the original instalment date of the asset shown as an extra table column in QGIS. This 
can then further be visualized by selecting both replacements coming up, together with exposed assets. 
It then could be further selected by materials of these assets.  
 
Prioritization of assets will be key to identifying the sequencing of options and to gain an overview of 
available options. The following steps are taken to sequence the data. First selection will be made upon 
the Riskscape results. These will then be aggregated into areas, to prioritize areas for further 
examination followed by the type of assets that are in the area. 
4.1. Sewer Flooding: Systems and Classifications 
In order to gain a better understanding of what a flooding of the urban drainage system entails there 
will be some background on the different levels of systems, how they interact, how to define thresholds 
for flooding, which could prove to be useful for setting adaptation thresholds (AT’s) and what kind of 
approach can be taken in order to investigate this. 
 
Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018 distinguish between the minor and the major 
system parts of urban drainage systems. The minor system is aimed at absorbing more frequently 
occurring storm flows by utilizing gully inlets, manholes and pipes. Major systems on the other hand 
include temporary storage areas and flood pathways on the surface, like roads and paths. Design 
pathways are planned, like retention basins and flood relief channels. If this is not the case but still acts 
like a pathway, it is labelled a default pathway. When the capacity of the minor system is exceeded, and 
the major system is utilized, the flow in the major system is labelled as exceedance flow. 
 
The connection points between these systems are important. The key ones are outlined here. Gully 
inlets are entry points for stormwater from the major to the minor system, and when the minor system 
capacity is reached flow will not be able to enter it. Manholes are normal access points into the minor 
system. Upon reaching capacity, flow might be reversed. In extreme cases surcharged flow might 
reverse up through WCs and other household appliances. River outfalls are usually exit points for the 
minor system, however when waters rise in the receiving watercourse, or the ocean, it reduces the 
capacity of the minor system and could lead to exceedance. (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & 
Davies, 2018). Three levels of analysis can be distinguished. Level 1 would suffice for a small area where 
the rational method can be utilized and exceedance flow is calculated by assuming minor system is 
already at capacity. The rational method is a design method where a preliminary drainage design can 
be calculated by hand (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). Level 2 would be 
suitable for larger systems, where the minor system is still calculated with the rational method but the 
major system is modelled to examine surcharge and surface flooding. Level 3 consists of a level 2 
==PAGE:114==
 
16 
 
approach with the addition of an interactive analysis and on site verification, as well as inlet capacity 
(Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). 
 
Then exceedance flow can be categorized. This enables adaptation thresholds to be identified in terms 
of affected assets. There are three thresholds that can be set, namely surcharging (minor system), 
surface flooding (minor system) and property flooding (major system). Threshold 1 is usually based on 
the design storm return period vs the hydraulic capacity of the pipe. Once threshold 1 is crossed, the 
system will begin to surcharge. Threshold 2 therefore refers to the maximum capacity of the system to 
handle stormwater without exceedance flow being generated, based on design flooding return period. 
For threshold 3 there is no consensus on a definitive return period, as this is difficult to establish (Butler, 
D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
 
17 
 
4.2. Asset Prioritization 
Asset prioritisation starts with identifying where the critical parts in the system are, and selecting which 
assets are the most important assets functionally. It is also important to start identifying opportunities 
for adaptation, as well as adaptation thresholds. This will also help keeping track of the large amount 
of data. In order to do this, criteria have to be established. The full process can be seen in Figure 10. 
 
Criteria 
The first level of parameter is the type of asset. Water treatment facilities and Pumping facilities are 
vital non-standardized elements in the system specifically designed for the system purpose and with 
high replacement values. These are selected and examined first. 
 
The second selection criteria will be finding a correlation between material and asset age. This will 
mainly focus on assets where there is a high density of assets that are up for replacement. The first step 
in this is to find the actual replacement dates for assets. This will be done for the pipe datasets. There 
is only limited data available for nodes, and the prioritized ones are extracted from the data set on the 
first level of parameter. Replacement dates of these pipes are calculated by adding average lifetime 
spans to the original instalment dates of the pipes. In order to get a better overview of the affected 
assets, they will be categorized by type of pipe, e.g. culvert or drainage and be given a corresponding 
priority. After this, spatial density is added on top of the selection e.g. when there is a higher density of 
replacements in a certain area coming up. To this there will be an addition of pipe materials to the 
prioritization. Even though there is no immediate hazard associated with asbestos pipes that are still in 
the ground, it is still preferable that they are to be removed and upgrades could provide an opportunity 
to get them out before other parts of the system. Wellington Water has no obligation to remove them 
before a certain date, however preferably they are removed as soon as practicable. Discharge pipes are 
another prioritized asset, as due to gravity-based systems these will be the first to be affected by the 
sea-level rise. 
 
Figure 10: Asset Exposure Analysis 
 
Priority 
Priority 1 assets are focussed on quality and involve assets that have a high replacement value like 
pumping stations. More critical parts of the system, like the discharge pipes into the Marine and Fluvial 
water bodies are also Priority 1. Priority 2 assets are focussed on quantity, being important but not 
critical to the system, like sumps and manholes. If these assets are affected however in large quantities, 
it does become a threat to the system. The script therefore identifies a threshold if a specific SLR 
increment affects either a number of Critical, number 1 assets OR if there is a significant increase in 
exposure of Important, Priority 2 assets.  
 
Part 1 - Add Priorities to Assets
• (1)High Replacement 
Value/Critical Assets
• (2)High Ocurring Assets
• (3)Low Occurrence Low 
Replacement Value Assets
Part 2 - Identify Opportunities -
Replacement
• (1)Calculate Expected lifetime 
based on material
• (2)Add lifetime to the 
installment date
• (3) Identify Asbestos Pipes in 
dataset
Part 3 - Density of Affected 
Assets
• (1)Aggregate to Area
• (2)Check most affected areas 
per SLR increment
==PAGE:116==
 
18 
 
Stormwater Assets and Lifespan 
In order to start selecting exposed assets, it is important to first look into the system. As can be seen in 
Table 2, there are 4 stormwater pumping stations in the area. These are some of the most critical 
elements in the stormwater system, therefore are Priority 1. The Nodes are mainly represented by 
sumps and manholes and therefore are defined as Priority 2. Lamp holes and undefined assets are 
Priority 3 as they are not critical. 
 
Table 2: Stormwater Assets 
Exposed Assets StormWater 
Type 
Component 
Amount 
(Study 
Area) 
Description of the Component 
Priority
Pump stations 
Node 
Pumping 
Station 
4 
Pumps excess stormwater out of the area 
1 
Nodes 
Node 
Sump 
1299 
Stormwater connection between major and 
minor System 
2 
Node 
Manhole 
1153 
Normal connection between major and 
minor System 
2 
Node 
Outlet 
53 
Outlet stormwater system 
2 
Node 
End 
5 
End stormwater system 
2 
Node 
Inlet 
4 
Inlet stormwater system 
2 
Node 
Undefined 
237 
Undefined 
3 
Node 
Valve 
14 
Regulates the flow within the pipe 
3 
Node 
Valve Chamber 
3 
Facilitates larger valves & allows inspection 
3 
Node 
Lamphole 
3 
Inspection pipe for a lamp, outdated system 
3 
Pipe 
Pipe 
Discharge 
8 
Outlet 
1 
Pipe 
Main 
1418 
Main sewer 
2 
Pipe 
Sump Lead 
1030 
Connection pipe to sewer 
2 
Pipe 
Main Rising 
21 
Pressurized main sewer 
2 
Pipe 
Culvert 
4 
Carry discharge flow underneath channels or 
roads 
2 
Pipe 
Undefined 
129 
All abandoned, removed from dataset 
- 
 
 
 
 
Connection Pipe 
Pipe
Connection
863
Connections to the sewer
2
 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
 
19 
 
Wastewater Assets and Lifespan 
For wastewater assets a similar approach was taken. Pumping stations are mainly located at lower 
points of the system, like the Esplanade, and are Priority 1. The only wastewater treatment plant in the 
area is located on the other side of the Hutt river, in the Seaview area. Manholes make up the majority 
of nodes in the system and are Priority 2. Undefined nodes and lampholes or inspection points are 
Priority 3. Discharge pipes in the system are also Priority 1, the rest of the pipes are Priority 2. An 
overview of occurrence can be seen in Table 3. 
 
Table 3: Wastewater Assets 
Exposed Assets WasteWater
Type
Component
Amount 
(Study Area) 
Description of the Component 
Priority 
PumpStations
Node 
Pumping Station 
9 
Pumps excess wastewater out of 
the area when this is not possible 
by gravity 
1 
Nodes
Node 
Treatment Plant 
0 
Prepares wastewater to return 
into the water system 
1 
Node 
Manhole 
717 
Pumps excess wastewater out of 
the area 
2 
Node
End
3
Wastewater system end
2
Node 
Lamphole 
50 
Inspection pipe for a lamp, 
outdated system 
3 
Node 
Valve 
17 
Can regulate the flow within the 
pipe 
3 
Node 
AirvalveChamber 
17 
Has installment date, regulates 
flow within the pipe 
3 
Node 
Scour 
9 
Located at the lowest point of the 
system / pipe, smaller diameter 
therefore flushes the system 
3 
Node
Undefined
1051
-
3
Node
Chamber
2
Access to the system
3
Node
Septic Tank
0
Local collection of wastewater
-
Node
Scour Valve
0
Idem
-
Pipe
Pipe 
Trunk Main 
143 
Some are pressurised, large pipe 
to the treatment facility 
1 
Pipe 
Discharge Pipe 
42 
Some are pressurised, outlet of 
system 
1 
Pipe
Rising Main
2
Pressurised sewer
1
Pipe
Main
853
Main sewer
2
Pipe  
Service 
Connection 
0 
- 
- 
Pipe
Undefined
0
-
-
 
 
==PAGE:118==
 
20 
 
Prioritization Script 
In order to add the needed attribute data to the assets, a Qgis model has been developed in order to 
sort the output from RiskScape. The flow can be seen in Figure 11. The input on the left represents the 
output files from the RiskScape assessment, where the original assets files received an additional 
attribute column indicating a ‘1’ for exposed and ‘0’ for unaffected, for all SLR scenarios giving and idea 
at which level each of these assets become affected. 
 
This section will not go through all the individual scripts but will discuss some of the important parts 
out. Table 4 shows the different output for each of the asset types. At the end they are combined into 
two datasets, one for pipes and the other for nodes.  
 
Table 4: Asset Attribute Modifications 
Asset Type
Modifications
Output
Stormwater Pipes (SWP)
-Instalment Date to Year
-Year to Replacement 
-Remove Abandoned Data 
-Add Asset Priority 
 
-Replacement Map
-Asbestos Map 
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
Stormwater Connection Pipes 
(SWCP) 
-Instalment Date to Year
-Year to Replacement 
-Remove Abandoned Data 
-Add Asset Priority 
 
-Replacement Map
-Asbestos Map 
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
Wastewater Pipes (WWP)
-Add Asset Priority
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
 
Stormwater Nodes (SWN)
-Remove Abandoned Data
-Add Asset Priority 
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
 
Wastewater Nodes (WWN)
-Add Asset Priority
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
 
Stormwater Pumping Station 
(SWPS) 
-Add Asset Priority
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
 
Wastewater Pumping Station 
(WWPS) 
-Add Asset Priority
-Priority per Asset Type per SLR 
increment 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
 
21 
 
 
Figure 11: Model Flow Asset Prioritization 
 
==PAGE:120==
 
22 
 
Pipes (SWP, SWCP and WWP) 
The output for SWP and WWP provides the opportunity to show expected replacement years. In order 
to do this the instalment date in the attribute data was converted to instalment years. Since it is based 
on average lifetime spans of the pipe assets this will only lightly affect the level of detail overall.  
 
 
Figure 12: Expected Asset Lifetime SWP 
After this the individual lifespans will be added based on the material of the pipe. If there was no 
material specified, the average lifespan per material for either SWP or WWP was added to the 
instalment date, Figure 12 and Figure 13. Data was provided by Wellington Water. 
 
 
Figure 13: Expected Asset Lifetime WWP 
 
==PAGE:121==
 
23 
 
Abandoned datasets for both SWP and WWP were removed using the function ‘remove by attribute’. 
Unfortunately, the notation in the attribute data was inconsistent, and a line had to be added for each 
type not in the asset data. The notation for both Stormwater and Wastewater assets can be seen in 
Figure 14. 
 
 
Figure 14: Attributes to remove Abandoned Assets 
Finally, for SWP and WWP the priority will be added. This will be done based on priorities given in table 
1 and table 2. An example of the script added to the QGIS model builder can be found in Figure 15, with 
corresponding attribute priorities per asset. 
 
 
Figure 15: Prioritization SWP 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
 
24 
 
Nodes and Pumps 
As described in Table 3, for normal nodes and pumping stations the priority was added. These are as 
described in Table 1 and Table 2. For the stormwater nodes there was a possibility to remove 
abandoned datasets also, as this was provided in the attribute table. The output gives the option to 
visualize the exposed asset, per SLR increment, per Priority. Figure 16 and Figure 17 give the priorities 
added to the QGIS model corresponding with Table 1 and Table 2. 
 
 
Figure 16: Prioritization SWN 
 
 
Figure 17: Prioritization WWN 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
25 
 
4.3. Exposure Results 
Due to the project timeframe there is only limited possibility to quantify the priorities of all assets, 
however it is still possible to give a valid indication. As stated before, the assets from various input 
sources were therefore divided into three priorities, priority 1, priority 2 and priority 3. The aim is to 
assess, at a high level, what assets in the system are exposed at each SLR increment.  
 
Asset Exposure 
Figure 18 shows the number of exposed asset per SLR increment. The left y-axis displays the total 
amount of assets, the right y-axis displays the amount of Pumping stations exposed. The bar charts 
represent the pumping stations, the line charts represent the total number of assets with different 
priorities. As stated before, the aim is to identify thresholds based on SLR scenarios, as opposed to time- 
based thresholds. 
 
As can be seen in Figure 18, there is a steep increase in priority 2 assets in the area until around +0.50 
m, +0.60 m, after which the increase in exposed assets per SLR increment starts to flatten out. A similar 
curve can be observed for priority 1 and priority 3 asset, albeit in smaller numbers. The next section will 
go more into detail on the geographic location of asset exposure per increment. 
 
 
Figure 18: Asset Exposure under SLR, right y axis represents Pumpstation exposure 
 
Three out of four stormwater pumping stations are, using this static hazard approach, all immediately 
inundated at a current 1% AEP event. Since the location of these are inland from the coast, this might 
be a conservative estimation. Wastewater pumping stations are incrementally exposed until around 
+0.50 m SLR combined with the present day 1% AEP storm tide level. Since they are key to running the 
system now and adapting it to future challenges, a conservative estimation would still be valid. How 
representative this static hazard exposure was verified at the workshop. 
 
==PAGE:124==
 
26 
 
Preliminary Threshold Visualization 
Based on the graph in Figure 18, some increments were chosen as ‘Thresholds’ to see where the 
greatest number of assets are affected at that SLR increment. Based on Figure 18, the aim is to find an 
increment where either there is an increase in Priority 1 assets exposed, or a large number of Priority 
2 assets being affected, since there is a steep increase in assets affected until around +0.50 m, and then 
the number of affected assets eases off. Every increment in SLR where there was another increase in 
Pumping stations exposed, was also taken out. This results in Thresholds at +0.10 m, +0.20 m, +0.40 m, 
and+0.50 m in association with the present day 1% AEP storm tide level. The threshold label will then 
be added to each asset that has becomes ‘exposed’ at this SLR increment, so that this group can be 
isolated, selected and excluded for each threshold. The QGIS model in Figure 19 was used to achieve 
this, where the output is the density of exposed assets at the threshold. 
 
Figure 19: Model to output Asset Exposure Density per Threshold 
==PAGE:125==
 
27 
 
 
The output for a current 1% AEP event can be seen in Figure 20. The algorithm used to produce this 
‘heatmap’ is a Kernel Density Estimation. It interpolates between different points, and provides a value 
based on the occurrence of points in the proximity of an area. Although this produces non-quantifiable 
values, it is very effective in pinpointing a high occurrence of points, or in this case, assets. Given the 
high level nature of this assessment and the considerable number of datapoints in the asset datasets, 
this is a good representation of where asset exposure happens at different thresholds.  
 
It can be seen in Figure 20 that during a present day 1% AEP event, there is a high density of assets 
exposed in the west lower side of the Petone area, between the two wastewater pumping stations. The 
reason for higher occurrence around the pumping stations was due to the increased amount of asset 
components in and around the pumping station. The other increased density areas was due to a high 
occurrence of wastewater assets. Comparing this to a present day 1% AEP event with 0.50 m SLR, which 
can be seen in Figure 21, it becomes clear that throughout the different thresholds, intensification of 
asset exposure occurs in these areas. This is an important observation, as it provides an indication of 
where to focus a closer examination of assets located in that area in terms of compartmentalizing or 
replacement. Furthermore, it becomes clear that intensification of hazard exposure occurs in the 
slightly elevated area behind the Esplanade, where the main wastewater pipes and wastewater 
pumping stations are located. 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
28 
 
 
Figure 20: Density of Exposed Assets at 1% AEP +0.00 [m] SLR 
==PAGE:127==
 
29 
 
 
Figure 21:Density of Exposed Assets at 1% AEP +0.50 [m] SLR 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
30 
 
Opportunities 
In the model of Figure 11, there is some extra data added in the attribute table for SWP and WWP. 
These are the average lifespans per asset type, as explained in Figure 12 and 13. This gives an 
opportunity to examine areas where pipe replacements are expected to be due. Also the location of 
remaining asbestos pipes can be examined. 
 
Replacements due 
For looking into coincidence of affected assets and SLR increments, for as far as this is possible, 
replacement values were calculated based on average lifespans of assets provided by Wellington 
Water. Occurrence can be seen in Figure 22, which corresponds with the geographic location in Figure 
23. Figure 22 shows that a significant number of replacements were due in the mid 1990’s through to 
the mid 2000’s. There are lower number due in the next three decades with peaks starting after the 
2060’s. It should be noted that replacement of pipes does not occur based on asset life expectancy. 
Assets are not removed preventively. They are removed based on evaluation during inspection 
schedules, and when performance is compromised. It does however give a good indication of when to 
expect replacements to occur in the coming decades. 
 
Figures 20 and 21 show a coincidence of pipes that were expected for replacement (red / orange) and 
the area where intensification of assets have occurred. This also is valid for intensification of exposed 
assets behind the Esplanade, which is starting to occur at the +0.50 m SLR scenario in Figure 21. When 
starting to think about adaptation options, or partial retreat, this would be an area to consider. Some 
considerations to be taken into account are Figure 23 also shows that some of the newest pipes are 
also located in this increased density area, while replacement intervals from 2060’s to 2100’s are mostly 
located in Alicetown. 
 
 
Figure 22: Replacement dates in SWP and WWP 
 
Asbestos Replacements  
Figure 24 shows the location of asbestos pipes. There is some coincidence with the area mentioned in 
the previous section, but the asbestos pipes are located mainly along the Esplanade. This is the main 
Petone wastewater collection sewer discharging towards the WWTP. There is no date that these assets 
have to be removed from the ground by Wellington Water (noting that no new asbestos pipes are being 
used as they are unlikely to be harmful when buried underground, rather they can become a hazard 
during replacement, e.g. cutting of the pipe). Should they be replaced, this would provide an 
opportunity to consider retreat or redesign of the system. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
 
31 
 
 
 
Figure 23: Expected Replacement dates WWP and SWP 
 
==PAGE:130==
 
32 
 
  
 
Figure 24: Location of Asbestos Pipes 
 
 
==PAGE:131==
 
33 
 
4.4. Adaptation Outline 
This section outlines and discusses general adaptation options in preparation for the next phase which 
addresses the sequencing of the components of an eventual managed retreat (Olufson, 2019). For 
example, the short term actions and long term options and what types of options are available, are 
discussed and  coastal hazard response types are adapted and used as a frame to fit the urban/coastal 
environment, as can be seen in Table 5. 
 
For adaptation options in general, Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, 2018 proposes 
the following considerations: 
 
Minor system, reduce or limit inflow (SUDS to infiltrate locally) or divert flows 
 
Minor system, Increase Capacity, e.g. improved cleaning or pipe upsizing 
 
Minor/Major system, store more flow therefore attenuate and reduce peak flow rates, 
storage can be provided in the minor or major system 
 
Major system, better deploy surface flow features 
 
Improved building flood resilience 
 
Figure 25 shows differences in runoff rate Q for different environments. It can be seen that rural 
environments have a more consistent runoff rate whereas urban environments have a peak flow in 
runoff. This is undesirable, as sewers and pumps would have to be increased in capacity to deal with 
peak discharges for short times and are working under capacity for most of the operation time. This 
concept can also be applied to increases in hazards due to climate change. Increased rainfall, higher 
GWL levels and possible flooding of critical infrastructure will increase chances of encountering these 
peak discharges. The aim is therefore to look for ways to ‘shave off’ this peak discharge. This can either 
be done by ‘delaying’ part of the discharge to make sure that the runoff enters the system later (e.g. 
green roofs, swales), increasing storage capacity (retention basins, (sub) surface constructed wetland 
flows) or increasing capacity of the system (increase pipe and pump capacity).  
 
These solutions can be implemented in tandem with managed retreat, or as pre-retreat options to keep 
L.o.s. acceptable until (partial) retreat occurs. The next phase of the project will start to investigate 
these options, combined with input from the workshop. Table 4 shows a general outline of the adapted 
framework of coastal hazard adaptation options. 
 
Figure 25: Differences in peak runoff in different environments, adapted from (Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., 
& Davies, 2018). 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
34 
 
Table 5: General Adaptation Options SW and WW 
Stormwater Equivalent Planning Responses 
Adaptation 
Two Water 
Adaptation
Options 
No Response 
No Response 
Treat emerging threats 
 
Protect 
Isolate and protect 
assets 
-Stop banks protecting assets 
-Isolate and protect high value assets, e.g. raise/water 
proof pumping stations 
-Isolate outputs to protect from increases in Ground water 
due to SLR and pump excessive water out 
 
Accommodate 
Increase Capacity 
-Replace pipes 
-Lift system outlets 
-Lift house systems 
-Increase pumping capacity 
-Increase pressurized systems 
-Porous road paving 
 
Advance 
Polder 
-Decrease groundwater table, decrease saltwater intrusion 
 
Retreat 
Retreat 
-Sectoral retreat 
-Compartmentalize system, allowing for intermediate 
retreat options, creating opportunities other adaptation 
options, e.g. storage facilities 
 
Ecosystem-
based 
adaptation 
Increase Natural 
adaptive capacity 
(SUDS) 
Delay Facilities 
-Green Roofs 
-Natural Parks 
-Blue solutions  
 
Storage Facilities 
-surface flow constructed wetlands 
-detention ponds / basins 
-sub surface flow constructed wetlands 
-extended detention basins 
-lagoons 
-retention ponds / basins 
-sedimentation tanks 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
 
35 
 
Bibliography 
Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, J. W. (2018). Urban drainage. 
 
CatalystNZ. (2018). riskscape.pdf. In Riskscape Documentation. 
 
DHI. (2017). Shoreline Management Guidlines - DHI. 
 
Faber, M. H. (2012). Statistics and Probability Theory: In Pursuit of Engineering Decision Support. 
Ministry for the Environment. (2017). Coastal Hazards and Climate Change: guidance for local 
government. Bell, R.G.; Lawrence, J.; Allan, S.; Blackett, P.; Stephens, S.A. (Eds.), Ministry for the 
Environment Publication No. ME 1292. 284 p + Appendices. Retrieved from 
http://www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/media/Climate Change/coastal-hazards-guide-
final.pdf 
 
PCE (2015). Preparing New Zealand for rising seas : Publication by the NZ Parliamentary Commissioner 
for the Environment, 92 p. URL: https://www.pce.parliament.nz/publications/preparing-new-
zealand-for-rising-seas-certainty-and-uncertainty  (November 2015). 
 
Paulik, R., Stephens, S., Wadhwa, S., Bell, R., Popovich, B., & Robinson, B. (2019). Coastal Flooding 
Exposure Under Future Sea-level Rise for New Zealand. NIWA Client Report 2019119WN 
prepared for the Deep South Science Challenge, 76 p. URL: 
https://www.deepsouthchallenge.co.nz/projects/national-flood-risks-climate-change 
 
Schmidt, J., Matcham, I., Reese, S., King, A., Bell, R., Henderson, R., … Heron, D. (2011). Quantitative 
multi-risk analysis for natural hazards: A framework for multi-risk modelling. Natural Hazards, 
58(3), 1169–1192. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9721-z 
 
Stephens, S. (2015). The effect of sea-level rise on the frequency of extreme sea levels in New Zealand. 
(July), 52. Retrieved from http://www.pce.parliament.nz/media/1382/the-effect-of-sea-level-
rise-on-the-frequency-of-extreme-sea-levels-in-new-zealand-niwa-2015.pdf 
 
White, I., Storey, B., Owen, S., Bell, R., Charters, F., Dickie, B., … Morgan, K. (2017). Economic and 
Public Policy Research Climate Change & Stormwater and Wastewater Systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
C
Appendix 3
126
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
==PAGE:135==
 
 
 
 
Appendix 3 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Adaptation Options for Managed Retreat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
Contents 
1. 
Theoretical Background ................................................................................................................... 2 
2. 
System Analysis ............................................................................................................................... 9 
3. 
Workshop ...................................................................................................................................... 13 
4.1. 
Workshop Outline ................................................................................................................. 13 
4.2. 
Workshop Output .................................................................................................................. 15 
5. 
Cascading effects and interdependencies - CIrcle Tool ................................................................. 21 
6. 
Adaptation Options ....................................................................................................................... 24 
6.1. 
General Adaptation Options .................................................................................................. 24 
6.2. 
No Response .......................................................................................................................... 24 
6.3. 
Protect ................................................................................................................................... 25 
6.4. 
Accommodate ....................................................................................................................... 26 
6.5. 
Nature Based ......................................................................................................................... 27 
6.6. 
Managed Retreat Area Selection ........................................................................................... 29 
7. 
Sequencing (Pathways) ................................................................................................................. 31 
7.1. 
System Adaptation Thresholds .............................................................................................. 31 
7.2. 
Option Thresholds ................................................................................................................. 31 
7.3. 
Conceptual DAPP ................................................................................................................... 34 
Bibliography .......................................................................................................................................... 39 
Appendix 1 – Adaptation Options ......................................................................................................... 41 
 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
 
2 
 
1. Theoretical Background 
An investigation into the literature on coastal adaptation was done in order to inform the relevant 
adaptation options to form pathways in an adaptive framework. This supplements the optioneering in 
the workshop as well as ensuring no options are overlooked in this stage of the project.  Sea level rise 
(SLR) is going to affect the urban drainage system. It is clear that there will be adverse effects, like water 
getting into the outlet pipes decreasing the drainage capacity, the effects of inundation, salt water 
intrusion and flooding problems. However, the exact effect on a local area is seldom clear. 
 
In the project plan there was already background on managed retreat literature, however it was 
important that there was a stronger background on specifically retreat of two water infrastructure, and 
how this is planned. It is not expected there are going to be any revolutionary new techniques available 
to implement this. Rather existing adaptation options working in tandem with managed retreat 
depending on the threshold established and lead times associated. This is why there will also be 
additional investigation into Sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS) and Water Sensitive Design, as 
combining implementation of these could be useful. 
 
Urban Drainage SLR interaction 
The adverse effects of sea level rise on the Petone urban drainage system will be described and 
discussed in chapter 4, where it was discussed during the workshop with stakeholders involved with 
two water infrastructure of the area. With regards to international literature, most of the studies either 
look into the spatial extent as a result of wave overtopping and the flooding of the pipes and nodes in 
the drainage system as a combined result (Gallien, Sanders, & Flick, 2014; Kulkarni, Eldho, Rao, & 
Mohan, 2014) or the effect of groundwater interaction with the drainage system in coastal areas 
(Archetti, Bolognesi, Casadio, & Maglionico, 2011; Su, Liu, Beheshti, & Prigiobbe, 2019). What we are 
looking for is the influence of sea level rise on the performance of current two-water infrastructure 
drainage systems. This includes stormwater drainage systems and the wastewater network excluding 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTP’s).  These studies are mostly done as a case study, as adaptation 
occurs at specific local scales relevant to the systems in place and the community they service. 
 
The spatial extent of flooding in an urbanized coastal area is still a relevant topic to this research as SLR 
exacerbates these effects and more frequent inundation of the drainage system is to be expected. 
Gallien, Sanders, & Flick, 2014 found that a coastal drainage system actually reduces the spatial extend 
of flooding, on the condition that it is not running at capacity, it does not investigate the consequences 
on the urban drainage system of the high quantities of saline water entering the system. It also stresses 
the importance of avoiding static inundation models in favour of hydrodynamic models. Since a static 
bathtub inundation model is used in the exposure analysis for the study area, this is validated during 
the workshop, as discussed in chapter 4.   
 
Su et al., 2019 investigates the relationship between infiltration in an aging urban sewer system and 
groundwater flooding in a coastal area. It concludes that when the pipes in the system are not repaired, 
there is an increased discharge of untreated sewage due to CSO overflow. Upon repair however, the 
water table rises resulting in groundwater floods, especially in coincidence with high tide. This is 
expected to increase due to SLR. This confirms the basis of discussion in the exposure assessment. A 
==PAGE:138==
 
3 
 
more comprehensive solution has to be looked into as opposed to not fixing the pipes, as this also 
brings along a range of negative consequences. 
 
Joyce, Chang, Harji, Ruppert, & Imen, 2017 investigated the effect on green and grey drainage 
infrastructure under catchment rainfall runoff in combination with a hightide, and the effects of sea 
level rise with the aim to improve drainage infrastructure residence to coastal hazards. Green 
infrastructure is in this scenario described as low impact developments, LID’s. These are adaptation 
solutions or SUD’s for the drainage system like water detention ponds. It concludes that due to rise in 
the ground water levels as a result of SLR, LID’s that increase imperviousness could result in increases 
in the local groundwater table. It does offer a reduction in peak flow aiding traditional grey 
infrastructure in the system. The increase found in the local groundwater table are an important 
consideration for implementation in the Petone area, as this is projected to be one of the main issues. 
Addressing peak discharge but stimulating the problem of increased groundwater levels by 
implementing these options in the wrong areas is not a desirable scenario. 
 
Hu et al., 2019 investigates flood risk in Shanghai looking into three uncertainty factors, precipitation, 
the urban rain island effect and decrease in urban drainage capacity. This decrease in capacity resulting 
from land subsidence and sea level rise. It concludes that the model shows the decrease in drainage 
capacity caused by land subsidence and sea level rise will have the most significant contribution to 
inundation risk in Shanghai. This confirmed the observations from an extreme inundation event in 2015 
where the high water level in the river prevented the drainage system to pump the excess in rainwater 
into the river. It therefore suggests taking this increase in water level into account when designing the 
drainage capacity. 
 
Wdowinski, Bray, Kirtman, & Wu, 2016 discuss the influence of flooding hazards due to SLR in Miami. It 
acknowledges the lack of coastal hazard studies looking into flooding induced by rainfall, due to SLR 
decreasing the capacity of drainage systems as they are gravity based. Whereas traditionally been 
caused by heavy rain or a storm surge, there has been an increase in flooding frequency due to tide 
induced flooding. It was found that due to the reduced capacity in urban drainage as a result of SLR, 
the frequency of rain-induced flooding increased by 33%. In order to adapt, Miami beach switched to 
a pump-based system (Wdowinski et al., 2016). 
 
Another study into Florida developed an adaptation toolbox for water, wastewater and stormwater 
utilities (Bloetscher, Heimlich, & Meeroff, 2011). Additionally, the adaptation options are outlined with 
triggers and costing scenarios. This gives a good input in outlining the adaptation options for the two 
water infrastructure. It is also discussed that increased groundwater levels due to SLR decreases storage 
capacity in the soil, compromising flow capacity of stormwater and coastal structures, where pumping 
stations will have to be installed to reduce ponding (Bloetscher et al., 2011). 
 
Specific effects of sea level rise on wastewater infrastructure is discussed in (Friedrich & Kretzinger, 
2012). It discusses the vulnerability of wastewater infrastructure like pipelines, manholes and pumping 
stations in a coastal area of South Africa, thereby drawing parallels to the exposure assessment of the 
Petone area. It also illustrates that to minimize the amount of pumping required, centralized parts of 
the wastewater system like WWTP’s have been implemented in lower lying areas, creating a legacy 
effect as they are significantly more vulnerable to SLR in coastal areas. It also acknowledges the 
==PAGE:139==
 
4 
 
problems discussed in (Bloetscher et al., 2011; Wdowinski et al., 2016) that the change in sea level 
reduces the hydraulic gradient of the system, effectively reducing the natural capacity of the system. 
This increases siltation in the pipes (Friedrich & Kretzinger, 2012). In addition it also discusses the 
increased salinity in the groundwater, which gets in the manholes and pipes. Upon reaching the WWTP, 
this increased salinity can cause damages in the WWTP, as it is not adjusted to this increased salinity. 
The study also differentiated between different components in the system, giving pumping stations and 
treatment plants a higher priority, as done in the exposure assessment. The reasoning for this was that 
these pumps create the hydraulic head for the system, therefore when affected or exposed can have 
major impact on the system (Friedrich & Kretzinger, 2012).  
 
Schoen et al., 2015 investigates the resilience of different wastewater system setups under a range of 
hazards. Out of these hazards, or challenges, Storm with increased surge and SLR were the most 
relevant to the hazards investigated in this research. It concluded that the results were similar for storm 
surge and SLR, and therefore only results for storm surge were presented. The options considered were 
a traditional, centralized potable& wastewater system, a system with composting toilets and on site 
grey water reuse with septic tank, a system with onsite treatment of solids, and a system with a pressure 
sewer. It was concluded that all systems were vulnerable to this, however it was found that greywater 
reuse and a blackwater pressure sewer were the most robust due to less environmental contamination 
during extreme events (Schoen et al., 2015). 
 
Almeida & Mostafavi, 2016 found a considerable amount of interdependencies and cascading effects 
from SLR on different types of coastal infrastructure. They found that SLR can lead to sewage backup in 
septic tanks and conveyance pipes due to increase in GWL. Impacts from SLR were found to be higher 
water tables and reduced soil storage capacity, in turn resulting in increased frequency and severity of 
flooding due to precipitation (Almeida & Mostafavi, 2016). It also acknowledges increased corrosion 
due to increases in groundwater salinity, increased inundation on WWTP’s placed in low areas to 
minimize required pumping, sewage overflow or backup due to decreased drainage capacity and 
increased tides influencing buried infrastructure (Almeida & Mostafavi, 2016). 
 
Stancu, Cheveresan, Zaharia, & Poienariu, 2017 investigates climate change adaptation for Bucharest. 
SLR effects are not investigated since Bucharest is not located at a coastline, however increases in 
groundwater levels due to increased precipitation and snow melting (Stancu et al., 2017). It also states 
that increases in these water levels can have back water effects and reduce discharge capacity of the 
drainage system due to reduction in hydraulic capacity. It can also increase pressure on the WWTP’s. It 
proposes for the solutions space to either discharge or store increased discharge until the system is 
normalized, three main categories of adaptation options, minimize the volume of runoff entering the 
collection system, increase transport capacity or storage capacity of the drainage system (Stancu et al., 
2017).  
 
Managed Retreat Components 
Preceding research has been done in order to identify different managed retreat approached. A recent 
thesis project by (Olufson, 2019) looked into recent examples of managed retreat, albeit with an 
economic focus, in order to identify what kind of components would be included in managed retreat, 
how would they be sequenced depending on the approach taken by the government and how these 
different components could be grouped. The following grouped components were identified  
==PAGE:140==
 
5 
 
 
 
Community Engagement, engagement and consultation on adaptation options and managed 
retreat implementation 
 
Planning and Preparing, Planning / rule changes, planning for reduces Los and development 
restrictions on at risk areas, monitoring and establishing trigger points 
 
Enabling Investment, Property acquisition, New community investment in the form of alternative 
land for relocation and development of new community facilities, Public infrastructure L.o.S. 
reduction and maintenance reduction 
 
Active Retreat, Public Infrastructure Relocation (Replacement/redevelopment of public 
infrastructure elsewhere, relocation of critical facility structures and relocation of community 
facilities), Privately Owned Infrastructure Relocation (Private companies begin to 
reduce/remove/relocate infrastructure and covenants on property are activated), Private 
property relocation and abandonment (relocation/abandonment of residential and commercial 
property and providing temporary housing), Removal of marine structures 
 
Cleanup, demolition, land rehabilitation and maintenance  
 
These component groupings are a useful typology for approaching implementation of managed retreat, 
and sequencing options and actions. As stated before it is unlikely there will be any new options but 
the adaptive pathways approach for the two-waters systems is novel. Pathways will be a mix of 
traditional and WSUD adaptation options placed in these different managed retreat component stages. 
This also includes opportunities for re-purposing areas after the retreat of community housing. 
 
There is limited literature available on sequencing of urban drainage while retreating from the coastline. 
Combing adaptation options for urban drainage with managed retreat typology gives a start on this. 
During the workshop the implementation times and adaptation options will be discussed. Some 
background on this will be key in order combine this and start looking into adaptive approaches. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
 
6 
 
Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD) 
Water sensitive urban design (WSUD) is: ‘’an integration of urban planning with management, 
protection and conservation of the urban water cycle, that ensures that urban water management is 
sensitive to natural hydrological and ecological processes’’ (Wong, 2015). Whereas it traditionally was 
associated with stormwater management, it now integrates management of the urban water cycle into 
urban design (Wong, 2015). It therefore offers adaptation options that are also interesting for this 
study. Lloyd, Wong, & Blunt, 2015 look into applying the WSUD framework to Melbourne, as it is 
considered a forerunner of WSUD implementation, and acknowledge that many of its early 
implementation has been demonstrative and ad hoc.  
 
(Wong, 2015) considers three implementation scales, being local, precinct and regional scale. For the 
cause of this research, the options for stormwater quality and detention will be considered. On the local 
scale, these include on-site infiltration, porous pavements, sand filters, bioretention planters, 
raingardens, vegetated buffers and on-site detention. On a precinct scale these are infiltration basins, 
porous pavement, sand filters, bioretention swales, bioretention basins, vegetated swales, urban 
forests, constructed wetlands, retarding basins and ponds. On a regional scale these are riparian 
buffers, natural channels, urban forests, constructed wetlands, retarding basins and lakes (Wong, 
2015). Local and Precinct scale options will be the most applicable to the Petone area. 
 
Over the years, these decentralized drainage options have been developed under different names, as 
also found in literature on adaptations options used in this research. S. M. Lerer, Mikkelsen, Jomo, & 
Sørup, 2018 looks into the development and timeline of these terminologies and outlines the most 
important ones. In order to have a better idea of the adaptations options, these will briefly be discussed. 
SUD, LID, LIUDD and BMP’s are using a design with nature, or more natural, approach to stormwater 
drainage, but over the years have developed into a more holistic approach to integrate into the water 
system. WSUDS is described as ‘’ philosophical approach to urban planning and design that aims to 
minimize the hydrological aspects of urban development on the surrounding environment (Fletcher et 
al., 2015). 
 
Different definitions are given to these new stormwater management techniques include water 
sensitive design (WSUD), sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS), stormwater best management 
practices (BMP’s), green infrastructure (GI) and low impact development (LID) (S. Lerer, Arnbjerg-
Nielsen, & Mikkelsen, 2015). It also raises the point that since most WSUDS are not buried on the 
ground like pipes, but are actually integrated into the surroundings, the urban area (S. Lerer et al., 
2015). This could actually provide some opportunity for partial retreat, as these retention facilities could 
be based in the lower part of the drainage system, where partial retreat has occurred and therefore 
there is space available. 
 
Siekmann & Siekmann, 2015 describes WSUD’s as intensified use of surface detention using technical 
infrastructure, and notes that implementation in urban areas is still rare. The paper suggests that 
disconnecting drained areas is a first step to prepare drainage systems to climate change. This could 
also indicate an opportunity for partial retreat. The paper also concludes that these measures are easier 
to upgrade then traditional sewer systems. This means they have a higher adaptive capacity, which 
would be an advantage considering the challenges the Petone area is facing. 
 
==PAGE:142==
 
7 
 
For stormwater, some of the more common BMP’s are detention ponds, wetlands, ponds, biofilters, 
swales, adsorption filters, infiltration basins, porous pavement, green roofs and settlers (reference 
lecture). Joyce, Chang, Harji, Ruppert, & Imen, 2017 conclude that in areas affected by SLR, impervious 
improving solutions like porous pavement could actually increase the rise in the groundwater table, so 
these might not be very suitable to early exposed asset areas in the Petone Area.  
 
Adaptation options 
Friedrich & Kretzinger, 2012 provides specific adaptation options for wastewater pumping stations, 
reasoning that increased GWL can directly affect pumping stations since they usually extend 
underground. The adaptation options suggested are lowering the GWL locally, due to the strategic 
placement of vegetation around the station, waterproof the underground structure of the pumping 
station, move electrical system to safe heights and use more corrosion resistant materials and parts. 
These would fit into either of the categories “protect” and “accommodate”. Managed retreat would 
usually require moving the pumping station to higher ground (Friedrich & Kretzinger, 2012). 
 
Schoen et al., 2015 also provides, in addition to the different options investigated, adaptation options 
for water services. These include emergency pumps to backup normal pumps, a non-return valve to 
prevent sewage, and modifying the pump to facilitate overflow to additional storage until the system 
returns to the normal state (Schoen et al., 2015). 
 
Almeida & Mostafavi, 2016 aims to find adaptation options for different types of coastal infrastructure 
to SLR, and propose adaptation measures for different types of infrastructure from a survey of existing 
literature. They also propose adaptation options for retreat of a range of coastal infrastructure. 
Adaptation options were presented in similar format as the coastal adaptation options, namely protect, 
accommodate and retreat (Almeida & Mostafavi, 2016). As input for this, research only the adaptation 
options for stormwater and wastewater will be considered. It defines the categories as following: 
 
‘’Protection is to manage the hazards by reducing their likelihood of occurrence, accommodation is to 
manage hazards by reducing their impacts, retreat is to reduce exposure in a planned manner’’(Almeida 
& Mostafavi, 2016) 
 
The adaptation category protect is aimed at protecting components for the water treatment from 
inundation. It is completely aimed however on mitigating wave impact from a flooding even, and only 
consider protection from flooding like seawalls and coastal marshes / mangroves(Almeida & Mostafavi, 
2016). This would not be very suitable for the Petone area, as most impact is expected from the rise in 
GWL. For accommodate, increasing pumping capacity to reduce sewer backup due to SLR is 
recommended. Green infrastructure is also recommended like bioswales and raingardens Almeida & 
Mostafavi, 2016). For retreat, the recommendation is to raise pumping stations and important parts of 
the system Almeida & Mostafavi, 2016). This is not the same definition of retreat as in this research, 
and according to the IPCC (2019) this is a form of accomodating the infrastructure. 
 
Bloetscher et al., 2011 developed an adaptation toolbox specifically for Florida, with the aim of being 
used for other locations also. There is also a time-scenario based approach for these adaptation options, 
with triggers for implementation and implementation barriers. Interestingly, these also include retreat 
of large areas of the city. Adaptation options for two water infrastructure include wastewater 
==PAGE:143==
 
8 
 
reclamation and reuse, re-engineering of canal systems, control structures and pumping and septic tank 
closure (Bloetscher et al., 2011). 
 
Rosenzweig et al., 2007 investigates the adaptation work done for New Yorks City’s water systems, 
therefore also drainage systems. Adaptation options considered for two water are redundant tunnels, 
alternative storage, a tide gate and increased pumping capacity. It also acknowledges the associated 
problem of backsurge in the early stages of SLR (Rosenzweig et al., 2007). 
 
Rudberg, Wallgren, & Swartling, 2012 explores adaptations options for wastewater and water supply in 
the Stockholm region. Adaptation options for implementation, or implementing adaptive decisions, are 
investing in WW treatment technology, change standards like raising the minimum sewer connection 
levels, increase stormwater drainage capacity in new developments and change investment programs 
for renewal (Rudberg et al., 2012). It also emphasizes that a stormwater flooding will mainly have 
economic consequences, whereas a wastewater failure has both large economic and environmental 
consequences (Rudberg et al., 2012). 
 
van Roon, 2011 looks into low impact urban design and development principles (LIUDD) in different 
case studies, outlining various adaptation options (albeit in new developments) that are relevant for 
this study. Adaptation options found in the case studies include wetlands, re-vegetation, at source 
stormwater treatment/detention (decentralized system), rain tanks and sewage effluent to water 
supply by recycling. It stresses that applying these principles are not a box-ticking exercise, and has to 
be approached in a systematic assessment to ensure relevance (van Roon, 2011). 
 
The city of Rotterdam has developed a comprehensive climate change adaptation strategy, with 
adaptation options of interest to this study, as outlined in (Rotterdam Climate Initiative, 2013). Different 
adaptations have been proposed for different urban typologies with Rotterdam. General options can 
be found in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1: Adaptation options for Rotterdam, adapted from (Rotterdam Climate Initiative, 2013)  
Adaptations options include dry-proof essential infrastructure, wet-proof (controllable) infrastructure, 
elevate important infrastructure / raised platforms / small compartment dikes, local rainwater 
infiltration using SUDS, reinforce dikes, implement tidal park, local floodwalls, water robust streets, 
collective gardens, water butts/ water squares for temporary storage and local infiltration, green roofs, 
water storage and reuse, multifunctional dike reinforcement and increased water storage using green 
solutions. 
 
==PAGE:144==
 
9 
 
2. System Analysis 
The first step in understanding the major components and stakeholder relationships acting in the two 
water system is setting up a system analysis. ISO 14090 encourages systems thinking to understand the 
complex, nonlinear and interconnected system the project is set in (Standard, 2019). Mapping 
boundaries and sub systems help to focus on what is relevant. Recommended way for creating an 
understanding of components is using the system categories in Figure 2. In Figure 3 the result of the 
categorizing can be seen. 
 
Background and an example has been taken from a New Zealand specific study looking into cascading 
effects from a range of different hazards on the different infrastructure sub systems like a stopbank 
(dike) breach (Extreme event cascade),  wastewater (SLR and coastal inundation cascade), stormwater 
(heavy rainfall cascade), transport systems (climate induced landslides), power &gas (storm event 
cascade) and water supply (drought cascade) (Lawrence, Blackett, Cradock-henry, & Nistor, 2018).  
 
Note that the cascades for the stormwater and wastewater would be very relevant for the Petone area. 
The result of these cascades on the infrastructure where then used in conjunction with the CIrcle tool 
to identify cascading effects for a range of different districts like Christchurch and the Hauraki plains 
(Lawrence et al., 2018). This will be used as kind of a ‘benchmark’ making sure no major impacts or 
components within the system have been overlooked. 
 
 
Figure 2: Systems Concept, adapted from (Standard, 2019) 
 
==PAGE:145==
 
10 
 
System Boundary 
As can be seen in Figure 4, the decision was made to distinguish between a system and a sub system. 
The outer system boundary consists of the complete Petone and Alicetown infrastructure.  
 
The storm and wastewater system will be seen as a subsystem within the Petone infrastructure. This 
allows for the possibility of mapping out the system components and interdependencies of the sub 
system, and their connections to the larger system in more detail (Standard, 2019). Based on the 
demarcation of this system boundary and sub-system boundary the components in these systems will 
now be described according to the ISO 14090 in (Standard, 2019). 
 
Organisation, part of a system  
As specified in (Standard, 2019), organization means a comprehensive system component, ranging from 
an organization like a governmental intiative to an energy transmission grid. Since the system boundary 
is described as infrastructure in the Petone/Alicetown area, critical infrastructure will be included in the 
system. The aim of the project is to look into two water infrastructure, these will be chosen as the 
system organizations, with a sub system for both Stormwater and Wastewater. Other organizations 
included are potable water, and a more generic Petone infrastructure. This includes roads, electricity 
and gas. 
 
Key actors and stakeholders 
Key stakeholders and actors are important to identify in order to get an overview of important 
influences on the different organizations within the system. The relation between them and the system 
components can be seen in Figure 4. The following stakeholders and actors have been identified: 
 
Wellington Water (WW) 
 
Hutt City Council (HCC) 
 
Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC) 
 
New Zealand Institute for Water and Atmospheric research (NIWA) 
 
Academic (VUW) 
 
Community / Local Businesses 
 
Insurance Companies including council asset insurers 
In addition to this, their contribution and involvement with different governmental instruments, like 
the New Zealand Resource Management Act (1991) and the Local Government Act (2002), are also 
included. For instance the latter Act requires councils to develop 10-year Long-Term Plans and 30-year 
Infrastructure Management Plans and regularly update them engaging with the communities they 
service. 
 
External Factors 
External factors in this case are hazards driven by climate change. The rationale used was to include 
hazards that were driven by climate change, but would compound to area specific system interventions. 
This resulted in external factors stressing the infrastructure being sea level rise (a), increased rainfall 
and therefore pluvial / fluvial discharge (b), increased periods of drought (c) and earthquakes (d). These 
will then in turn result in systematic interventions for the Petone/Alicetown infrastructure. Earthquakes 
are included for completeness, but are not included in the research solution space. 
 
 
==PAGE:146==
 
11 
 
Systematic Intervention 
New Inputs changing the total output of the systems, as a result of the external factors described above. 
In the global or main system these are results of these hazards. For the Petone/Alicetown infrastructure 
system these include Flooding (Marine Flooding (1), Pluvial Flooding (2), Fluvial Flooding (3)), 
Groundwater level increases (4) and liquefaction due to earthquakes (5). Liquefaction due to 
earthquakes will be left out of considerations in line with the established boundary conditions of the 
study. 
 
These main four hazards lead in turn to a range of systematic interventions in the sub system for 
specifically both stormwater and wastewater. These include drainage problems as in the inability to 
overcome peak discharges, salt water intrusion and inundation. These direct impacts will be added to 
the CIrcle tool in Figure 8, where cascading effects as a result of these sub system interventions will be 
investigated. 
 
Feedback Loops 
Feedback loops are related to the involved stakeholders. For WW, HCC and GWRC these are Updated 
Models, Updated area assessments, new regulations (e.g. the +1.0 m for new constructions) and plans 
like the upcoming 30 year plan. Others include Asset maintenance and Asset upgrades. 
 
 The usage of these feedback loops is explained in more detail in (Lawrence et al., 2018), where it is 
emphasized that feedback loops develop when factors and or variables in the system are connected in 
a circular manner. Intervention or changes in the system can therefore not be realized when the system 
is approached as linear, and could lead to unintended consequences (Lawrence et al., 2018).  
 
Relationship Link 
These visualize the connections between the different components in the system. For example, how 
the organizations and key actors are connected, and how they are affected by systematic interventions 
and their link outside of the sub system. 
==PAGE:147==
 
12 
 
 
Figure 3: System Elements 
 
 
Figure 4: System for the Petone two water system and other infrastructure impacted by SLR 
 
==PAGE:148==
 
13 
 
3. Workshop 
As stated in the project plan, in order to get some input for adaptation options and feedback on the 
project so far a workshop was organized with a group of local experts from different background. This 
included a Marine flood risk modeller, a Fluvial flood risk modeller, head of Resilience of the HCC, 
planners from the HCC, and the Chief advisor for Stormwater from Wellington Water. Furthermore 
interdependencies or cascading effects were discussed using the CIrcle tool from Deltares. 
 
4.1. Workshop Outline 
In order to prepare the participants for the workshop, a pre questionnaire containing the workshop 
objectives was send to the participants to think familiarize themselves with the topic, or consider some 
thoughts before. Most of these were discussed in chapter two. The aim was to figure out different 
adaptation solutions, then go into specific optioneering for managed retreat, therefore the aim of the 
workshop was as following, to discuss and identify: 
• 
Thresholds 
• 
Lead times 
• 
Currently Available options 
• 
Innovative Solutions 
• 
Timing of action – when to initiate options or pathways 
• 
Conditions 
 
After this associated lead times for these different options would be discussed, in order to get an idea 
of when signals and triggers would have to be implemented for the project. Participants were asked to 
consider: 
 
What options are available for adapting (two) water infrastructure to sea-level rise and how 
would you assess their capability to address both slowly rising seas and water tables, and 
extreme coastal storm tide, storm surge and rainfall events over a 100 year + timeframe?  
 
What associated lead time would be needed to implement each  option? 
 
What would you describe as critical thresholds or indicators to evaluate performance of the 
Petone storm and wastewater system? 
 
What conditions would start the planning and implementation of an adaptive strategy? 
 
What would be a threshold for considering retreat of two water infrastructure as a realistic 
option? What conditions would determine the threshold? How would you describe a realistic 
service level while the hazards increases and how would you determine that?  
 
What kind of efforts to improve infrastructure performance would be feasible to invest in and 
for how long? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:149==
 
14 
 
Workshop Process Flow 
Figure 5 shows the process workflow used in the workshop. The first part involved a presentation on 
the work that has been done so far, after which there was the possibility to give comments on the work 
done so far on the project. Second part presented a conceptual developed CIrcle tool, where there was 
also options for suggestions of interdependencies or cascading effects that were not included in this 
version. 
 
 
Figure 5: Workshop Process 
 
 
Participants 
Participants of the workshop attended from the Hutt City Council (HCC), Wellington Water (WW) and 
Greater Wellington Regional Council (GWRC). Participants can be seen in Table 1. Participants of the 
workshop had a varied background. This was also the aim of the workshop, as this would aid the 
optioneering process in the sense that there would be a lot of different approaches presented. This also 
helped with looking at system thresholds and options from different perspectives, which will be 
discussed later in this paragraph. 
 
 
Table 1: Workshop participants, affiliation and title 
Participant
Affiliation
Background
1 
HCC 
Senior Advisor Sustainability 
and Resilience
2 
HCC 
Head of Resilience 
3
HCC
Planner
4 
WW 
Chief Advisor Stormwater 
5
GWRC
River Modeller
6
GWRC
Marine Modeller
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presentation (1)
•Project 
Objectives
•Two water 
infrastructure -
Asset Exposure 
•Two Adaptation 
Opportunities
Presentation (2)
•CIrcle Tool
•Current Version
•Improvements
Optioneering
•Range of  
Adaptation 
Options
•Managed Retreat 
Pathways, 
sequencing, 
thresholds and 
lead times
==PAGE:150==
 
15 
 
4.2. Workshop Output 
Figure 6 shows part of the discussion with regards to thresholds. The right side resembles the 
Wellington Harbour area, where the sea level is rising. Then comes the initial rise in elevation just after 
the esplanade and initial part of the Petone area. Since at the moment both the wastewater system 
and stormwater system operate mainly on gravity, this is going to significantly affect the hydraulic 
gradient, which in turn is going to largely affect the capacity of the discharge flow. It is expected that 
the threshold for the drainage system to function is around a SLR of around 0.30 m for Petone 
Alicetown, and 0.50 m for Udy street. The community in Udy street is already not able to get flood 
insurance. These are already serious consequences that are only going to increase. Both thresholds are, 
although uncertain in exact timing, certainly going to be reached and have to be anticipated. The 
current ‘treat problems as they emerge’ technique is not going to be sufficient. A first step is already 
taken as all new development has to be raised by +1.0 m in order to be approved. It was discussed that 
these streets would be a good start to look into compartmental retreat. Looking at the section in Figure 
6, it would also be a possibility to elevate complete WW and SW system and bypass these areas 
completely.  
 
 
Figure 6: Conceptual section of the study area used during the workshop to elaborate on the loss of discharge 
capacity, ponding and the +0.30 m Threshold  (Drafted by Participant 4) 
 
Table 2 shows the notes taken during the workshop by Dr Lawrence. In conjunction with the poster this 
is the  output from the workshop. It can be seen in Table 2 that the layout is in sync with the workshop 
planning, meaning the notes are sorted in chronologically. The first part concerns the questions and 
topics discussed during the presentation. The second part concerns the discussed levels of service for 
both SW and WW. After that the thresholds for the Petone two water system are discussed. The last 
part includes the optioneering, there associated thresholds and lead times and constraints are noted. 
Figure 7 shows the workshop poster. Since the notes were written during the workshop, and are still a 
bit chaotic afterwards Table 3 shows the important outcomes. 
 
==PAGE:151==
 
16 
 
Table 2: Workshop Notes 
Discussed Topics & Output
Questions Raised with Regards to the presentation
1) Question with respect to GWRC inundation modelling (Rick to follow up to compare with what 
he has used) 
2) Change the colours on the density map so red is deeper and blue shallower (Rick to do) 
3) Questions re age of pipes and maintenance schedule. Some have not been replaced as per 
schedule. These are monitored and replaced based on condition and performance. There is a 
capacity v water quality trade-off.  
4) White board drawing explains the potential threshold for groundwater rising on the SW and WW 
system. Based on gravity and shift to pumped system and limit for pumping. 300mm of SLR seems 
to be the threshold in Alicetown and 500mm in Udy Street.  
5) Impact of salt water on pipes is an issue that will increase as sea level rises. Rainfall and SLR will 
affect the capacity/ leakiness/ functioning of SW/WW system.  
 
Levels of Service for Stormwater and Wastewater
6) Three levels of service for SW and WW
 
Removal of WW (pH??)-> salt in pipes-> upsets balance in treatment plant 
 
Regular rainfall (dry, healthy homes) 
 
Acceptable level of flood protection (ability to obtain flood insurance) Note Udy Street 
already cannot get flood insurance) = this affects whether base line is current level of 
protection or something else. 
Thresholds
7) Thresholds. Only new services are affected by reduction in level of services balanced against the 
cost to council of maintenance and repair. After a flood event there is a spike in public concern. 
Factors that influence council decisions are  
 
Affordability as economic damages increase 
 
Cannot fix the system anymore 
 
No longer a contained system 
 
Regular overflows to property or watercourses 
 
Property owners can’t afford to upgrade their own part of the system 
 
GW at surface most of the time 
Q regarding whether these are acceptable to the community. Process at present ad hoc.  
 
Optioneering
8) Options
 
Move to a vacuum system 
 
Retention storage and slow release 
 
Water sensitive design incl. less hard surfaces to increase infiltration 
 
Managed retreat pathways = asset design to reduce the amount of retreat needed by 
pumping to the threshold first=create storage by removing people/ creating a pond in the 
lowest point= new houses elsewhere build above an inundation level and houses on stilts 
or build up land and pump constantly. This would need to be built into subdivision and 
building consents. 20% increase in rainfall and 1 m SLR suggested as planning guidance 
[note doesn’t match with coastal guidance] 
==PAGE:152==
 
17 
 
 
Note minimum of 500 homes in Alicetown = lowest levels affected and could introduce 
planning measures to transition these. 
 
Use DAPP to identify cost/ vulnerability impacts 
 
Look out 150 years and lock in planning controls/ reduce dependence on pumps/ reduce 
population density 
 
Lead time = 
o Big pumps =10 years 
o Planning 2 years 
o Accelerated removal of waste water= 5 years 
o Pressure or vacuum system roll out could be done in compartments doing WW and 
SW at the same time 
o Optimise storage and water sensitive design  
 
Constraints are  
o Alternative sites for housing growth are constrained in the Hutt because of 
multiple hazards elsewhere 
o Community cannot absorb more than around 2% rate increases 
 
A strategy of baby steps suggested 
 
 
Figure 7 shows the post its in the pre identified categories for the workshop. Table x is the ‘translated’ 
version of this, which, combined with the notes in Table 2 form the main output from the workshop. 
There is also an end questionnaire which will be discussed later.  
 
 
Figure 7: Grouped workshop input 
 
==PAGE:153==
 
18 
 
Table 3: Grouped information from Figure 9 
Threshold 
Available Options 
Types 
Approx. Lead 
Time 
Timing of Action 
/ Conditions 
Number of people 
affected 
Grey Water 
Storage 
Partial 
Retreat 
 
Pumps
-10 years 
 
MR
-At least 500 
homes 
L.o.s. is only for new 
Assets 
Statement of Intent -
>adjust target if not 
feasible 
Bigger Pipes
-Create an 
asset that 
reduces 
what you 
have to 
retreat from 
-4-5 years for 
funding 
-600000 to 
700000 Costs 
per home 
General:
-No more insurance 
-Cant fix the problem 
Increase 
Pumpstation 
Capacity 
Zoning of 
Retreat 
District Plan is 
coming up for 
30 yrs 
Funding SW
Cost/Risk 
Stress long term 
Wastewater:
-When it is not contained 
/ sealed 
-Wastewater Overflows 
-Not likely to overflow 
except for coincidence 
with heavy rain 
-Direct Impact on 
Properties 
-Petone is already 
experiencing regular 
overflows, approx 1 per 
month 
 
Overcome High 
Tide 
Tandem 
Retreat- 
Combine 
with Storage 
and 
Interventions
Wastewater:
-Community Acceptance 
-No open channels -> 
property affected 
-Financial -> to much 
investment 
->GW->Becomes 
compromised around 
+0.30m 
Pressure / 
Vacuum system 
Partially 
Retreat and 
extend 
lifetime 
other 
properties 
Stormwater:
-Economic Damages 
Swales / Porous 
Asphalt 
Wastewater
-Remove 
-Reduce 
Dependency 
Salt water impact from 
SLR 
-Increases Corrosion 
-Impact ability for water 
treatment 
Disassociate / 
Decentralized 
system 
Elevated houses
Create Storage in 
Lower areas 
 
 
==PAGE:154==
 
19 
 
Discussion of output  
As can be seen in Table 2 and Table 3, the most important system thresholds identified were the 
possible future scenario where 
 
 
+0.30 [m] of SLR until GWL is seriously affected 
 
+0.30 [m] of SLR until hydraulic capacity is seriously reduced 
 
Regular Wastewater Overflows 
 
Affordability as economic damages increase 
 
Cannot fix the system anymore 
 
No longer a contained system 
 
Regular overflows to property or watercourses 
 
Property owners can’t afford to upgrade their own part of the system 
 
Property owners are not able to get insurance for their property 
 
GW at surface most of the time, ponding 
These discussed thresholds will then be combined with the thresholds in the exposure assessment. This 
should give a good start of the threshold of the Petone Two water system. For the thresholds of the 
individual adaptation options these will be based on the application of these options. Since there was 
only limited time for discussion during the workshop, it was not possible to discuss these topic in detail, 
and mainly thresholds for the two water system were discussed. It was proposed that when 
conceptualizing some adaptation options, it would be good to create an asset that reduces what you 
have to retreat from, to use in tandem with retreat and therefore optimize its effectiveness. Regarding 
the optioneering output, the most important adaptation discussed can be divided in the following main 
categories 
 
 
Pumping Stations 
 
Increase Capacity 
 
Decentralize / Local Infiltration / Reuse  
 
Pressurize / Vacuum the system 
 
Create Storage in lower areas / overcome high tide 
 
Increased Imperviousness 
 
Increased imperviousness is, as discussed in the theoretical background, a great approach to infiltrate 
stormwater more locally, therefore reducing peak discharges in the drainage system. Examples of this 
are porous asphalt or bioswales. Both in literature and in the workshop it was suggested that 
implementation of these measures would locally result in an increase in groundwater levels in lower 
elevated areas, and therefore increase the groundwater table. Therefore this would not be a good 
solution in the lower lying parts of Petone, but could be considered for implementation in the right 
areas, for example more elevated, alleviating the discharge towards the lower lying areas in the Petone 
area. 
 
It was also acknowledged that more effort until now has gone into thinking about stormwater 
adaptation then wastewater adaptation. This is why during the optioneering there were no concrete 
adaptation options for wastewater. Also in the background literature, there were limited options 
available for wastewater adaptation. Either there was a consideration for fixing leaks, adjusting pump 
==PAGE:155==
 
20 
 
station capacity or decentralize the system. For the purpose of this research however this is still a valid 
level as we are not looking into component level solutions as this would not fit the level of detail in the 
conceptual DAPP. 
 
As stated in the project plan and exposure assessment, a static bathtub approach modelling map was 
used to identify exposed areas. This meant that there was a level of detail missing in the exposure 
assessment due to time constraints. In the workshop, two characteristics were discussed with the 
intend of verifying it with experts who have been working with more in depth models of the area. The 
first was the spatial extend of the flooding, and the second was the assets affected over different SLR 
increments.  
 
In order to have suggestions on where to focus next, an end questionnaire was drafted. The responses 
can be seen in Table 4. The end questionnaire consisted of the following questions for the workshop 
participants: 
 
Are there important considerations missing? 
 
What would be your approach for establishing corresponding service levels for the 
optioneering done today? 
 
Thoughts on the project so far 
 
Thoughts on improvement 
 
Table 4: Suggestions Workshop Questionnaire 
Respondent
Suggestions
Head of 
Resilience 
(Participant 1) 
‘’Seems to me that there will be challenges to establishing Service levels, 
because ultimately this will depend on what the community finds acceptable 
(which could change pre and post an event). 
On the other hand, I think as much as possible it needs to be measurable (sea 
level rise thresholds linked to particular performance or cost levels, frequency of 
certain events, etc), as opposed to more subjective things like survey results out 
of the community. 
I am not fully clear whether we can fully link service level to the options, 
because ultimately the options are ways to attain certain service levels, so they 
presumably the same for all options?’’ 
Chief Advisor 
Stormwater 
(Participant 4) 
 
‘’Key issues for me were to focus on the service that the three networks provide 
rather than the networks themselves. By focusing on the service opens up 
alternative solutions than more infrastructure. The 3 services in this area: 
 
- Provide safe and healthy homes by the removal of regular rainfall.  
- Provide acceptable level of flood protection (particularly focused on floor level 
protection). 
- reliable removal of wastewater for the protection of public health. 
  
Another issue we discussed was the impact on groundwater on these services. 
When the groundwater is at the surface it will have a big impact on all three. thin 
indicates that 300mm of SLR is a key trigger point as ground water will be on 
the surface regularly.’’ 
 
 
 
==PAGE:156==
 
21 
 
5. Cascading effects and interdependencies - 
CIrcle Tool 
The CIrcle tool – Critical Infrastructure: Relations and Consequences for Life and Environment – is a tool 
developed by Deltares to analyse and visualize cascading effects of infrastructure networks, to address 
awareness on critical infrastructure dealing with climate change related topics (Hounjet, 2014). It does 
so by dividing critical infrastructure into different categories, with the possibilities to add direct effects 
and establishing links, cascading effects, between the different categories. This as currently critical 
infrastructure (networks) are being addressed individually, rather than an interconnected entity, 
neglecting cascading effects from other parts of the network (Hounjet, 2014).  
 
In order to start a CIrcle project it is important to first chose the different categories. For this project 
the drainage system, stormwater and wastewater pumps, stop banks (dikes), main roads and public 
health were chosen. The aim is to start linking these sectors with different interactions with a group of 
experts in a workshop session in coincidence with a GIS analysis (Deltares, 2015, 2017; Hounjet, 2014) 
Due to time constraints with the workshop, and since the participants were largely unfamiliar with the 
tool, it was decided to prepare the tool and discuss the results during the workshop, and then add or 
remove alterations and different connections afterwards with suggestions from the workshop 
participants. 
 
Figure 8 shows the preliminary setup of the circle tool. Each of the coloured elements in the Circle 
represent one of the different sectors. The coloured connection lines represent indirect consequences 
of the even in this sector, or in other words cascading effects. 
 
 
Figure 8: Critical infrastructure and cascades using CIrcle 
 
==PAGE:157==
 
22 
 
Direct Impacts 
Direct impacts were added to each of the different sectors, based on the findings from the exposure 
assessment. Increments were added resulting in the thresholds for stormwater pumps, wastewater 
pumps and the drainage system. After the workshop, thresholds identified during the workshop were 
also added to the direct impacts for the different critical infrastructure cascades. In addition to this, the 
cascades investigated in (Lawrence et al., 2018) for storm and wastewater will also be used to make 
sure that nothing is overlooked. Direct impacts, therefore input into the CIrcle tool can be found in 
table 5.  
Table 5: Critical infrastructure direct impacts 
Direct impact on: 
Description 
Water
From the exposure assessment: 
Priority 1 - 0.70 [m]-Wastewater Outlets -Main Discharge Pipes   
Priority 2 - 0.50 [m]-Manholes -Sumps    
Priority 3 - 0.70 [m]-Low priority/occurrence  
 
From the workshop:  
Groundwater Threshold – 0.30 [m]  
Reduction in Hydraulic Capacity – 0.30 [m] 
 
Water pumps
Stormwater Pumps become Immediately affected during a current 
extreme event: 
0.0 [m] 3/4 Stormwater Pumps Affected 
 
Increased corrosion in electrical and pumpstations, therefore 
reduced asset lifetime 
Wastewater pumps
During extreme event increments [m]:  
0.00 5/9 Pumps   
0.10 6/9 Pumps  
0.20 7/9 Pumps  
0.40 8/9 Pumps   
0.50 9/9 Pumps 
 
Increased corrosion in electrical and pumpstations, therefore 
reduced asset lifetime 
 
Dikes/stopbanks
Increased extreme events due to SLR put increasing stress on the 
stopbanks 
 
Main roads
The Esplanade becomes affected:
0.00 [m] during an extreme event.  Serious exposure and therefore 
damage starts to occur at 0.30 [m] 
Public health
Hazardous materials
Asbestos Pipes that could fail and become exposed during an 
extreme event 
 
Citizens
Inconvenience due to Ponding or Overflows
 
 
 
==PAGE:158==
 
23 
 
Cascading effects 
This paragraph will states the cascading effects, interdependencies, between different critical 
infrastructure as a result of thresholds reached due to the input in the previous paragraph. This is 
visualized in Figure 8.  Cascades can be found in Table 6. 
 
Table 6: Critical infrastructure cascades 
From: 
To: 
Description 
Severity 
Dikes 
Main roads 
Flooding due to a Stopbank Breach 
significant 
Dikes 
Public health 
Flooding due to a Stopbank Breach 
significant 
Dikes 
Citizens 
Flooding due to a Stopbank Breach
No Possibility to get insurance anymore 
Increase in Cost 
significant 
Dikes 
Water 
Drainage System cannot handle water 
discharge 
severe 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Public health 
Sewer Overflow, Health Implications 
severe 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Citizens 
Sewer Overflow
No Possibility to get insurance anymore 
Increase in Cost 
significant 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Water pumps 
Wastewater Infiltration into Stormwater 
System, increased stress on pumps and 
pollutants 
severe 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Water 
Increased stress on the rest of the 
Drainage System 
severe 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Main roads 
Road overflow with wastewater pollutants 
significant 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Hazard 
Materials 
Increases pressure through old asbestos 
pipes 
minor 
Water pumps 
Water 
Increased Stress on the drainage system 
significant 
Water pumps 
Main roads 
Road Overflow / Inundation 
significant 
Water pumps 
Public health 
Stormwater Flooding 
significant 
Water pumps 
Wastewater 
pumps 
Stormwater Overflow 
minor 
Water pumps 
Citizens 
Stormwater Overflow
No Possibility to get insurance anymore 
Increase in Cost 
significant 
Water 
Main roads 
Overflow due to reduced hydraulic 
capacity as a result of SLR 
significant 
Water 
Public health 
Overflow due to reduced hydraulic 
capacity as a result of SLR 
significant 
Water 
Citizens 
Overflow due to reduced hydraulic 
capacity as a result of SLR 
No Possibility to get insurance anymore 
Increase in Cost 
significant 
 
 
 
==PAGE:159==
 
24 
 
6. Adaptation Options 
This section discusses the different two water adaptation options identified in literature and discussed 
during the workshop. The first part will discuss the full list of options. The following parts discuss the 
high-level adaptation options per strategy, their trade-offs and associated failure conditions. The last 
part of the chapter will focus on area selection, parameters used to determine an area and selection of 
specific area targets. 
6.1. General Adaptation Options 
All options from the literature, SLR exposure assessment and workshop have been grouped and can be 
found in Appendix 1. The options have been framed around the adaptation strategies discussed in 
(IPCC, 2019). This to make a distinction between the different possible approaches for the area. In the 
coming paragraph this list of options will be divided into high level adaptation options where the trade-
offs are discussed. The discussed adaptation options are no response, protect, accommodate and 
nature-based adaptation. Of the strategies presented in (IPCC), advancing and retreat have been 
removed when transferring these options into high level adaptation categories. Advancing has been 
removed since it was not considered a suitable option considering the cost and relatively small size of 
the Petone area. Retreat has been removed as, apart from changes to the current system, there are no 
specific retreat options for the two-water infrastructure. Rather, it is the phasing between these 
existing adaptation options that allows for retreat in other areas. Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, 
C., & Davies, 2018 propose the following high-level approaches, corresponding with the protect and 
accommodate approaches:  
 
Minor system, reduce or limit inflow (SUDS to infiltrate locally) or divert flows 
 
 Increase Capacity, e.g. improved cleaning or pipe upsizing 
 
Minor/Major system, store more flow therefore attenuate and reduce peak flow rates, 
storage can be provided in the minor or major system 
 
Major system, better deploy surface flow features 
 
Improved building flood resilience 
6.2. No Response  
No response is the current strategy utilized in the area. This does not mean that the system is not 
maintained, it is being maintained continuously, rather it is not proactively prepared for future 
increased stresses on the system from SLR and climate-change. Problems are being treated as they 
arise. The advantage of  this approach is that no big investment has to be made in the short term, rather 
costs remain consistent. The disadvantage is that, due to changing stresses on the system, these 
disruptive interventions will not only become increasingly frequent, but once the current system has 
reached its threshold major investments will be necessary to continue achieving the required L.o.s. 
Table 7: No response adaptation options 
No Response 
Area Specific Options 
Pro's  
 Con's 
Repair Pipes 
Close off leaks 
Short Term 
non Expensive 
Long Term complete 
replacement costs 
 
 
==PAGE:160==
 
25 
 
6.3. Protect 
Lowering the groundwater level around critical infrastructure would be mainly applicable for the 
pumping stations that will be affected by SLR. This will delay the water reaching the pumping station 
and causing damage to corrosive parts in the pumping station. Advantage of this is that initially current 
pumping stations in place can remain functional. Vegetation would also be an inexpensive short term 
no regret option to implement. SLR however will undo this GWL lowering gradually and this option will 
see a decline in performance and gradual increase in costs to keep the increased water away from the 
asset components, eventually facing complete replacement costs. 
 
Preventing undesirable inflow is already being done in the Petone area, mostly for pipes. The method 
uses valves to prevent inflow in the system during high tide. As SLR increases this will become an 
increasingly more structural measure to protect the system from inflow. The advantage is that it can be 
applied to the current drainage system. Permanently closing off the outlets ceases the function of the 
drainage system. Therefore, the system will at this point not function anymore, this will be the failure 
condition of this adaptation option. 
 
The last two options for protect, dry and wet proofing critical infrastructure assets fall in a similar 
category. Whereas Wet-proofing allows non-essential parts of the asset to be flooded, dry-proofing 
completely separates the asset from the water. This can also be an opportunity to incorporate 
robustness into this option. Implement it as a dry-proofing solution, and when different parts of the 
infrastructure start to flood use it as a threshold to move to a different adaptation solution. Depending 
on the type of implementation, this solution can be adjusted to be effective for a long time. Once the 
threshold is reached however, the whole system needs to be replaced. An overview can be found in 
table 8. 
 
Table 8: Protect adaptation options 
Protect
Pro's 
Con's
Lower Groundwater Level 
artificially around Assets 
Relatively inexpensive, easy to 
implement 
Limited mitigative capacity 
Dry - Proof 
Long term beneficial, especially 
together with increased pumping 
capacity 
When waterproofing is 
exceeded, expensive to 
replace 
Wet - Proof 
Long term beneficial, less expensive 
then entire waterproofing of the 
structure 
Inundation of other parts, 
could shorten overall lifespan 
Prevent undesirable inflow
Effective in the short term 
Once threshold is exceeded, 
cannot be upgraded, whole 
system needs to be replaced 
 
 
 
==PAGE:161==
 
26 
 
6.4. Accommodate 
Raising the system and sewer outlets would be a way to make sure the water does not get in the pipes 
anymore at current water levels. Over the course of different SLR increments this will be a recurring 
situation. This option will both be in design as expected lifetime a limited option. With regards to 
lifetime, this is as the SLR will keep increasing the problem will starts to occur again. The biggest issue 
however is the implementation. As most of the drainage system is designed to be a gravity-based 
system, raising the outlets will significantly reduce this hydraulic capacity. This means that the system 
in place only allows for a limited increase in outlet levels before having to switch to a pressurized system 
to overcome this hydraulic loss. 
 
To overcome this need it is also possible to replace the pipes and nodes. With regards to the loss in 
hydraulic capacity, there is the possibility to raise the sewer connections in the system, so that the 
hydraulic gradient is restored. This is also only possible to a limited extent. With regards to the increased 
discharges in the system, it is possible to increase the pipe diameters by replacing the pipes. 
Pressurizing the system is also a way to overcome the initial stages of SLR. Increased corrosion and 
vulnerability of the pumping stations, and the need for increasing pumping station capacity over SLR 
increments will reduce the lifetime of this option under SLR. Major disadvantage is that it is not possible 
to do this for part of the system, the whole system has to be adjusted. This option would be applicable 
long term. Pumping stations are going to be under increasing stress as a result of SLR. Increasingly 
pressurized systems and increased discharges mean pumping capacity has to be increased. Increased 
GWL due to SLR means that there is a risk of pumping stations flooding, especially since they are partly 
located underground. Raising the pumping stations would be a way of accommodating. Failure 
conditions of this is when the SLR again leads to flooding of the pump station components. An overview 
can be found in table 9. 
 
Table 9: Accommodate adaptation options 
Accommodate 
Pro's  
 Con's 
Raise Sewer 
and Outlets 
Prolongs usage of gravity-based system 
Can only be raised a limited amount, 
relatively expensive for small SLR 
extension 
Increase 
capacity pipes 
& nodes 
Prolongs usage of gravity-based system 
and increased discharge capacity 
Become Obsolete when System is 
eventually replaced 
Pressurize 
Sewer 
Prolongs usage of the drainage system 
Considerably 
System becomes considerably less 
flexible 
Increase 
Pumping 
Capacity 
Effective  
Expensive to implement, when 
threshold is reached, non-
upgradable 
Raise Pumping 
Stations 
Effective and will prolong the lifetime of 
the drainage system considerably 
Very Expensive 
Decentralize 
System (Local 
treatment and 
Infiltration) 
Long term effective/Flexible/Upgradable 
Initially expensive, more 'invasive' 
for community, unusual practice 
 
 
==PAGE:162==
 
27 
 
6.5. Nature Based 
Nature based solutions are mainly derived from WSUD approaches, as explained in the theoretical 
background. The aim is to use nature-based adaptation options to aid the drainage system in adapting. 
The two fundamental ways for this are either delaying entrance to the drainage system in an extreme 
event, temporarily storing or facilitating local infiltration. This will be done until the system has 
normalized again and is not working at full capacity anymore after an extreme event. 
 
What has to be taken into account is that many of these options require extra space. Since the Petone 
area is a relatively dense developed area it might prove difficult to implement these options on a large 
enough scale in order for it to be effective in mitigating SLR impacts. Combining the larger options with 
later retreat stages, where space is created, would therefore increase the effect of these options. It 
would also extend the liveability of other parts of the Petone / Alice town area. Storage of excessive 
discharge is considered effective and can be integrated in many urban community facilities. Failure 
conditions would be dependent on the hazard. When considering SLR increments, an increase in the 
GWL that leads to inundation of the storage facility needs to be considered. This will start with ponding 
but will increasingly start to fill up the storage facility. When considering increased discharges, when 
the system is unable to handle the discharge the storage facility can overflow.  
 
On site treatment, applicable to both storm and wastewater, is a way of decentralizing the drainage 
system. For wastewater this is limited as stormwater can be more effectively treated and reused as 
grey water. This decentralized approach reduces the need for all peak discharges to flow to the outlets 
/ treatment facilities in the system, mitigating the negative impacts of the reduced hydraulic capacity 
due to SLR. This can be done with the help of biofilters, either reintroducing the treated stormwater as 
greywater or reduce the load on the WWTP by using natural solutions to pre filter the wastewater 
before releasing it towards the WWTP. An overview can be found in table 10. 
 
 
Table 10: Nature based adaptation options 
Nature Based 
Pro's  
 Con's 
Biofilters (On Site Treatment)
Re use, decreased stress on 
treatment plant 
Not always possible to fully 
reuse 
Local Infiltration 
Can be integrated into 
surroundings, ecosystem 
benefits 
When GWL gets too high, 
ponding occurs 
Discharge Storage 
Handles discharge, ecosystem 
benefits, community benefits, 
adaptability 
Spatial Requirements 
Discharge Delay 
Delays discharge, short term no 
regret, ecosystem benefits 
Some options might require 
space or integration into 
public facilities and spaces 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:163==
 
28 
 
Increasing imperviousness to aid local infiltration is also a double-edged blade. On the one hand it 
decreases stress on the system during an extreme event. As stated in the theoretical background 
however, this increase in imperviousness works both ways and might have the opposite effect in coastal 
areas, like Petone, where the imperviousness allows for the groundwater table to rise further without 
this increase. It is therefore important that when implementing this in the Petone/Alice town area, it is 
implemented in lesser effected areas on the upper part of the drainage system to mitigate and reduce 
discharge to the lower parts of the drainage system. The system failure conditions are when SLR causes 
the water levels to also reach these areas, and the increase in groundwater table is accelerated due to 
this increased imperviousness.  
 
Delay of discharge can be done with increased nature-based solutions like green roofs, rain gardens 
and re vegetation. These are relatively easy to implement in the short term and quite robust. Green 
roofs implementing in the higher parts of the Petone area reduce stress on the lower parts of the 
system. Failure conditions would be when the discharge capacity is exceeded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:164==
 
29 
 
6.6. Managed Retreat Area Selection 
Retreat will eventually be necessary at different stages for the entire study area – it is mostly a matter 
of when this will be needed (due to the uncertainty of the rate of change in SLR). The sequence of 
retreat will be different for different areas within the project area. This is because not all areas are the 
same in terms of how and when they are affected by SLR (i.e. different adaptation thresholds) and 
opportunities to make interventions for different areas. This also include facilitation by other areas to 
implement retreat in the whole project area. Since retreat in this context is therefore essentially a 
spatial shift in retreat phasing, there is a need to divide the project area into smaller sub areas, each 
with their unique retreat strategy. 
 
Three areas were identified using cross sections of the study area from a DEM file (1) and asset exposure 
information with respect to exposure densification over SLR increments (2). The interrelations between 
the areas were explored using the parameters set out in Table 11. The first row in table 11 defines the 
Area strategy. Eventually all areas will retreat, therefore the strategy noted here is the first in the 
sequence. Asset exposure and intensification, elevation classification (DEM), pumping station exposure, 
coastline proximity and area opportunities come from the exposure assessment. 
 
It is the coincidence and parallel implementation between the area specific solutions that enable 
retreat of services spatially in a managed way. Consequently an holistic perspective, is used by 
examining the implementation of area specific solutions for all areas and their inter-relationships.  
 
Table 11: Retreat area parametrization 
Parameters
Area 1
Area 2
Area 3
Area Adaptation 
Strategy 
Retreat 
Protect/Retreat 
Accommodate 
Type of 
Development/Land 
Use 
Residential 
Residential 
Industry/Residential 
Asset Exposure level 
High Intensification 
High Intensification 
Low Intensification 
Pumping Stations 
Exposure 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Elevation Classification
Low
Medium
Medium
Coastline Proximity
Medium
Close
Far
Area Opportunities 
Legacy Effects, Old 
Pipes and Asbestos 
Medium to new pipes 
Medium to new pipes 
 
Area 1  
Retreat is the strategy identified as the initial sequence for this area. The area has a high asset exposure 
over SLR increments. It is the highest exposure level in the study area. A high concentration of assets 
can be correlated to either a high density of residential development, or an industrial area. In terms of 
pumping stations, there are both stormwater and wastewater pumping stations affected. The area also 
has a low elevation sump, in combination with a medium coastline proximity and therefore will be 
particularly vulnerable to the SLR threshold of +0.30 [m]. 
 
 
==PAGE:165==
 
30 
 
Opportunities for Managed Retreat through the spatial relationships that can facilitate Managed 
Retreat are also present in the area. The first opportunity is that the area has a high number of expected 
pipe replacements due, in combination with a high number of asbestos pipes. By not replacing the pipes 
and  thus continuing use of the current system until retreat begins and leaving the asbestos pipes in 
situ since removal would create health and safety risks, creates an opportunity. 
 
The second advantage is that, since the system won’t be used anymore, even with considerably reduced 
hydraulic capacity, this can create redundancy in the system. By rerouting stormwater through the old 
drains this creates an increase in capacity in the other areas. It also creates the opportunity to 
repurpose this area with the aim to both create extra drainage capacity, as well as provide community 
and ecosystem benefits in the form of public spaces.  
 
Area 2  
The first strategy in the retreat sequence for this area is Protect. Due to the close proximity of the area 
to the coastline, retreat might be expected to be the first action. It also has a high asset exposure like 
Area 1. The elevation of Area 2 however is higher and therefore not located in a sump, despite coastline 
proximity, and Area 2 is critical for the pressurized wastewater system in the lower Petone part. The 
area already has been artificially reinforced with a seawall and dune planting in front of the sea wall 
was observed. To allow for this part to retreat, the storm water system would have to be isolated or 
completely re-routed. 
 
Pipes in the area are not expected to require replacement soon, therefore opportunities in  other parts 
of the system may facilitate retreat. The advantage of doing this is that the current system can remain 
in place, since it is  a critical pressurized part that will become increasingly affected. For that to happen, 
adaptive capacity will need to be created in other parts of the system like Area 1, until retreat is initiated 
in this area. 
 
Area 3 – Accommodate 
The first strategy for the area is accommodation. There is a low exposure of assets affected for  SLR 
increments and for critical infrastructure like pumping stations. The area is located the furthest away 
from the coastline in the study area and has a relatively high elevation in relation to the other areas. 
Initiation of retreat phasing will therefore be at high SLR increments. This means that this part of the 
two-water system in its current form will be utilized for the longest duration of time. Accommodating 
the system and in the process also capitalize on opportunities arising for this replacement are important 
components of this strategy. 
 
Opportunities with this strategy is the creation of mitigative capacity for the lower parts of the Petone 
drainage system. This means that it has the possibility to optimize retreat. What this means is that it 
would maximize the effectiveness of retreat in the low ‘sump’ parts of the Petone area. This means 
effectively creating a reduction in discharge towards the other areas. Furthermore, the area will need 
to adapt  to increased stresses on the system. These include, from the system analysis, increased rainfall 
intensities and increased groundwater levels. This in turn results in increased pluvial flooding, increased 
saltwater intrusion, reduced hydraulic capacity and inundation. 
 
==PAGE:166==
 
31 
 
7. Sequencing (Pathways) 
This chapter will focus on combining the results from the exposure assessment, workshop, system and 
cascades and adaptation options into a conceptual DAPP. The first section will focus on summarizing 
the system thresholds as an output from the workshop and exposure assessment. The second part will 
summarize the findings from the high level adaptation options, and their associated ATP’s. The last 
section will combine them into a conceptual DAPP allowing for visualization between different areas, 
retreat phases and interaction between different implementation methods per area.  
7.1. System Adaptation Thresholds 
System adaptation thresholds emerge from both the exposure assessment and expert input during the 
stakeholder workshop which comprised a mix of quantitative and qualitative threshold indicators. 
Thresholds denote  when the current system performance is unacceptable and/or unsustainable.  For 
example  x cm of SLR (quantitative) and community tolerability of impact (qualitative). 
 
From the exposure assessment and workshop, the quantitative thresholds identified are 0.30 m, 0.50 
m and 0.80 m of SLR increments for different assets in different areas. This allows for generating 
expected pathway scenario-based lifetime and failure conditions. The 0.30 m threshold is associated 
with the gravity-based system and regular ponding due to increases in GWL. The 0.40 m and 0.50 m 
thresholds are associated with the wastewater pumps becoming increasingly exposed, all of them by 
the time 0.50 m is reached and the major increase in the number of manholes and sumps exposed. At 
0.80 m, the number of assets affected over different SLR increments tails off. This means that the 
biggest stresses on the system occur in the first 0.80 m of SLR increments.  
 
The qualitative thresholds are related to observed unacceptable performance from a community and a 
service provider perspective. The thresholds comprise physical consequences including increasing 
wastewater overflows, regular ponding due to increased GWL and regular overflows to properties or 
watercourses. 
 
7.2. Option Thresholds 
Option (Pathway) thresholds are determined per adaptation option based on their failure conditions. 
Initially this was done for each of the options. During the research it became clear that a lot of the 
options would have to be implemented together. Therefore the list of options is simplified into pathway 
portfolios of actions that would be taken together to achieve the objectives, which can be seen together 
with portfolio failure conditions in Figure 9. Failure conditions are based on the type of option and the 
system thresholds. Initially, pathway thresholds were defined per conceptual area 1,2,3, each with their 
AT. This was to tailor the high-level option categories to area specific option sequences and  to optimize 
the performance of the options in the area.  
 
By calculating the performance of pathways over a range of SLR increments per Sub Area and visualize 
this with a graph enables identification of possible levels of service across the different SLR increments, 
depending on the adaptation options chosen. It is decided not to continue with this approach for this 
==PAGE:167==
 
32 
 
study as it would require consideration of an area specific option for each high level category, in each 
sub area. Dividing up a number of areas would simply be too time consuming because of the detail 
generated.  
 
 
Figure 9: Pathway Thresholds 
During development of two water adaptation portfolios planning options were added to the portfolios 
in preparation of retreat. Land use planning changes are not consequently related to infrastructure 
adaptation options, which is different for each area, but in which retreat phase these adaptation 
options (pathways) are based. A good example is the current planning requirement to raise new 
development by a mandatory +1.00 m. Table 25 and Table 26 in Ministry for the Environment (2017) 
are used to illustrate possible planning changes alongside two water retreat, signalling retreat phases 
identified in Olufson (2019). These are discussed per retreat phase.  
 
Adaptation Portfolio 
The adaptation portfolios outlined in Figure 9 are discussed in this section by area. This will combine 
the option pathways in the portfolios, the failure conditions and planning signals. The adaptation 
options within the portfolios are discussed in section 4.3. 
 
Area 1 
Portfolio 1 – Prevent Inflow 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include implementing a non return valve and closing of parts of 
the system during extreme events. Failure condition occurs when the water is continuously above a 
==PAGE:168==
 
33 
 
level that does not allow to discharge the excess water without pumps, which occurs at +0.20 m. In 
Area 1 Portfolio 1 is related to the retreat phases of Community Engagement (1), Planning and 
Preparing (2) and Enabling Investment (3). Associated Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are 
therefore Conditional Rules, Plan changes and no development. 
 
Portfolio 2  – Protect Critical Infrastructure 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include dry / wet proofing critical infrastructure like pumping 
stations and lowering GWL locally around pumping stations with using e.g. vegetation. Failure 
conditions occur when the gravity based system ceases to function at +0.30 m. In Area 1 Portfolio 2 is 
related to the retreat phases until Repurposing, at which point the area will be re zoned. This means 
the area will be anticipated to have a different planning purpose. Active Retreat (4) has a planning 
condition of closed zoning, meaning the community is actively being moved away from this area. 
 
Area 2 
Portfolio 3 – Maintain Gravity Based System 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include raising nodes and pipes, increasing capacity nodes and 
pipes and increasing local infiltration and filtering. Failure Conditions occur at the threshold of +0.40 m. 
In Area 2 Portfolio 3 is related to the retreat phases of Community Engagement (1), Planning and 
Preparing (2) and Enabling Investment (3). Associated Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are 
therefore Conditional Rules, Plan changes and no more development. 
 
Portfolio 4 – Pressurize the Drainage System 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include pressurizing sewers, increasing local infiltration and 
filtering and adapting pumping stations. Failure conditions occur when the pumps driving the system 
fail at the threshold of +0.50 m. In Area 2 Portfolio 4 is related to the retreat phases until Repurposing, 
at which point the area will be re zoned. Active Retreat (4) has a planning condition of closed zoning, 
meaning the community is actively being moved away from this area. 
 
Area 3 
Portfolio 3 – Maintain Gravity Based System 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include raising nodes and pipes, increasing capacity nodes and 
pipes and increasing local infiltration and filtering. Failure Conditions occur at the threshold of +0.40 m. 
In Area 3 Portfolio 3 is related to the retreat phases of Community Engagement (1), Planning and 
Preparing (2).  Associated Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are therefore Conditional Rules and 
Plan changes. 
 
Portfolio 4 – Pressurize the Drainage System 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include pressurizing sewers, increasing local infiltration and 
filtering and adapting pumping stations. Failure conditions occur when the pumps driving the system 
fail at the threshold of +0.50 m. In Area 3 Portfolio 4 is related to the retreat phases of Community 
Engagement (1), Planning and Preparing (2).  Associated Planning Conditions with this Portfolio are 
therefore Conditional Rules and Plan changes. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:169==
 
34 
 
Portfolio 5 – Replacing and / or Raising Pumping Stations 
Adaptation pathways in this portfolio include replacing pumps for increased capacity, raising the 
operating height of the pumps. Failure conditions occur when the pumps driving the system fail at the 
threshold of +0.80 m. In Area 3 Portfolio 5 is related to the retreat phases until Repurposing, at which 
point the area will be re zoned. Enabling Investment (3), Active Retreat (4) has a planning condition of 
closed zoning, meaning the community is actively being moved away from this area.  
7.3. Conceptual DAPP 
After the options were developed they were grouped in terms of costs and time needed for the 
implementation based on the lifetime and adaptive capacity of the options. This was done using the 
managed retreat components identified in Olufson (2019) in order to group the different phases 
displayed in Figure 9. This provides an accompanying ‘road map’ where each pathway indicates which 
component of MR is being initiated, and what the actions should be associated with this stage of the 
retreat.  
 
To illustrate changes in retreat phasing, phases are implemented alongside a traditional DAPP 
approach. Signals and Triggers are also implemented into each of the DAPP's for the different areas. 
These are not pathway signals and triggers, but specifically for retreat. This is why some pathways can 
have multiple signals on one pathway sequence. The trigger is the point where active retreat is 
initiated, signals indicate a change in retreat phase. Signals are included qualitatively as a result of the 
workshop. Triggers are linked to the mix of quantitative and qualitative thresholds established for the 
study area. Pathway triggers and signals are not included as the level of detail required would not be 
feasible for this study. It is decided to focus on the inclusion of retreat phasing into the phases. 
 
Failure conditions were determined by portfolio, rather than portfolio per area. Some loss of detail 
has occurred here as different portfolios with pathway options have different failure conditions within 
different areas. This is also noted in section 4.4.3. For example, Portfolio 5 would not be applicable in 
area 1 as the pump inundation at low SLR would cease the pumps as they will pump salt water into 
the system. It does not matter in this case how much the capacity is increased. By iterating and 
determining the strategy for each of the areas and accompanying it with possible portfolios 
(preselecting) the conceptual DAPP could be developed and used illustratively within the timeframe 
of the study. Another component not included in detail in the pathways is costing. Preliminary 
considerations were made during development of the portfolios but not enough to quantifiably weigh 
them in relation to other portfolios. How to improve on this and its relevance is outlined in the 
discussion. 
 
Area 1 
Area 1 has a retreat objective. These pathways are mainly feasible  short to medium term because of 
the low elevation of this area. The focus is therefore on protecting the current system until the point 
of retreat. Post retreat repurposing options are considered for this area. Due to the low elevation, this 
area would be suitable for creating extra flood detention, also with nature based options, in the two 
water system. This way the area repurposed both to provide community amenity by creating 
ecosystem and recreational benefits and have a positive effect on the discharge capabilities for the 
two areas. All portfolio options are outlined and a conceptual pathway outline is presented in Figure 
==PAGE:170==
 
35 
 
10. Threshold for this area is a SLR of +0.30 m as the current gravity-based system ceases to function. 
The retreat trigger is placed at +0.25 m where around this increment regular ponding and an inability 
to overcome tide for discharging is expected. 
 
 
Figure 10: Pathways Area 1 
Area 2 
Area 2 has a retreat objective, but at higher SLR increments than Area 1. This means that pathways 
should function above the ATP of area 1, which for area 2 is +0.50 m. This results in pathway 
portfolios that are more focused towards accommodating the existing infrastructure to longer term 
changes. This could be raising the level of the sewerage system and increasing capacity to the pipes 
and nodes, in conjunction with nature-based solutions like promoting local infiltration, or switching to 
a pressurized system. The conceptual DAPP is outlined in Figure 11. There are two approaches 
illustrated for this area. The first is to maintain the gravity based system as long as possible. Although 
costs are not quantified in this conceptual DAPP, raising the whole system is extremely expensive, 
causes major disruption for the community and is limited by the burial depth of the pipes. Before the 
retreat trigger there would have to be a change to the pressurized pathway portfolio. This is also an 
expensive option but would be able to maintain service until the retreat trigger for Area 2. Due to the 
proximity to the coastline, repurposing options could be a natural buffer or recreational zone in 
between the coast and retreated Area 1.  
 
==PAGE:171==
 
36 
 
 
Figure 11: Pathways Area 2 
Area 3 
Area 3 has the highest ATP for retreat, +0.80 m. Therefore, more long-term options, like combining 
longer term accommodating options, increased pumping station capacity with a pressurized system, 
are considered. The conceptual DAPP is outlined in Figure 12. Area 3 has initially a similar portfolio 
choice as Area 2, where a decision is made between accommodating the gravity based system or 
switching to a pressurized system. The lifetime of the pressurized system can be extended by 
initiating the portfolio to increase pump capacity and / or heighten pump elevation. The retreat 
trigger for this area is pump failure due to a combination of pump inundation and increasingly more 
saltwater being pumped through the system due to increases in GWL. 
 
 
Figure 12: Pathways Area 3 
Area Interaction 
The parallel implementation of pathway portfolios in each area and the interaction between the 
portfolios when implemented provides an opportunity to optimize the use of the different options 
across the whole study area. The possibility of having a visual overview between the different 
==PAGE:172==
 
37 
 
portfolios and pathways in each of the three areas enables the system to be adjusted using a range of  
different adaptation strategies to achieve the retreat. For example, implementation strategies in the 
higher elevated part of the study area allow for reduction in discharge in lower parts. This results in 
lower requirements for adaptation or buys extra time before a pathway in another area has to be 
changed. This increased flexibility  to influence one area by implementing other adaptation options in 
different areas is crucial of being able to buy more time across the Petone system while the planning 
and costing of the adaptations are developed and the engineering design undertaken for the retreat 
over time. 
 
 
Figure 13: Conceptual Pathways illustrating Synergies and Conflicts between pathways 
 
Implementation  of an interactive conceptual DAPP assessment for the Petone area is shown in Figure 
13.  All areas will retreat eventually, but sequencing will be different. The synergies and conflict 
between pathways in different areas are marked with the arrows showing Synergies (+) and Conflicts 
(-). Figure 13 shows a conceptual way of indicating the interaction between different pathways in 
different areas providing an overall dynamic strategy for the area. It first starts with a DAPP for each 
of the sub areas across the study area. These pathways are selected from  the portfolio pathways in 
==PAGE:173==
 
38 
 
Figure 9, based on the sub area strategy and pathway failure conditions. The thresholds identified for 
the Petone area are added to the x axis, indicating the need for pathway changes for the current 
drainage system. For the areas targeted for managed retreat, retreat phases are indicated also along 
the x axis of the DAPP. Aligning these pathways for each of the areas allows for the visualization of 
interaction between different areas. Figure 13 shows Synergies and Conflicts between pathway 
portfolios throughout different retreat phases in each sub area. 
 
This approached also allows for illustrating positive and negative feedback between different options 
and pathway strategies, depending on the phase of the retreat. For example, initial stages of retreat 
could create redundancy in the system by leaving the pipes in the ground, but not have the extra 
discharge from residential / commercial use. This offers a positive effect on the rest of the Petone 
drainage system. Over time the capacity of this system will decrease, and the assumption is that it will 
not be upgraded indefinitely because there will be a  retreat when conditions meet the trigger point, 
and there is no benefit from doing so. During repurposing however, retention space could be created 
to allow for increased water storage capacity that could have amenity and recreational value for the 
remaining and wider community in the Hutt valley. This again has a positive effect on the pathways 
implemented for the other areas.  
 
==PAGE:174==
 
39 
 
Bibliography 
Almeida, B. A. De, & Mostafavi, A. (2016). Resilience of Infrastructure Systems to Sea-Level Rise in 
Coastal Areas : Impacts , Adaptation Measures , and Implementation Challenges. (i). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su8111115 
Archetti, R., Bolognesi, A., Casadio, A., & Maglionico, M. (2011). Development of flood probability 
charts for urban drainage network in coastal areas through a simplified joint assessment 
approach. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 15(10), 3115–3122. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-15-3115-2011 
Bloetscher, F., Heimlich, B., & Meeroff, D. E. (2011). Development of an adaptation toolbox to protect 
southeast Florida water supplies from climate change. 417, 397–417. 
https://doi.org/10.1139/A11-011 
Butler, D., Digman, C., Makropoulos, C., & Davies, J. W. (2018). Urban drainage. 
Deltares. (2015). Cascading-effects in focus with the CIrcle model. 12–14. 
Deltares. (2017). Critical Infrastructures: Relations and Consequences for Life and Environment. 4. 
Retrieved from https://www.deltares.nl/app/uploads/2015/04/Productblad-CIrcle.pdf 
Fletcher, T. D., Shuster, W., Hunt, W. F., Ashley, R., Arthur, S., Trowsdale, S., … Viklander, M. (2015). 
SUDS , LID , BMPs , WSUD and more – The evolution and application of terminology surrounding 
urban drainage. Urban Water Journal, 12(7), 525–542. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2014.916314 
Friedrich, E., & Kretzinger, D. (2012). Vulnerability of wastewater infrastructure of coastal cities to sea 
level rise : A South African case study. 38(5), 755–764. 
Gallien, T. W., Sanders, B. F., & Flick, R. E. (2014). Urban coastal flood prediction: Integrating wave 
overtopping, flood defenses and drainage. Coastal Engineering, 91, 18–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coastaleng.2014.04.007 
Hounjet, M. W. A. (2014). Learning from flood events on Critical Infrastructure : Relations and 
Consequences for Life and Environment ( CIrcle ). 
Hu, H., Tian, Z., Sun, L., Wen, J., Liang, Z., Dong, G., & Liu, J. (2019). Synthesized trade-off analysis of 
flood control solutions under future deep uncertainty: An application to the central business 
district of Shanghai. Water Research, 166, 115067. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.115067 
IPCC. (2019). Special Report: The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. (September), in 
preparation. https://doi.org/https://www.ipcc.ch/report/srocc/ 
Joyce, J., Chang, N. Bin, Harji, R., Ruppert, T., & Imen, S. (2017). Developing a multi-scale modeling 
system for resilience assessment of green-grey drainage infrastructures under climate change 
and sea level rise impact. Environmental Modelling and Software, 90, 1–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.11.026 
Kulkarni, A. T., Eldho, T. I., Rao, E. P., & Mohan, B. K. (2014). An integrated flood inundation model for 
coastal urban watershed of Navi Mumbai, India. Natural Hazards, 73(2), 403–425. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1079-6 
Lawrence, J., Blackett, P., Cradock-henry, N., & Nistor, B. J. (2018). Climate Change : The Cascade 
Effect Cascading impacts and implications for Aotearoa New Zealand. 1–55. 
Lerer, S., Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K., & Mikkelsen, P. (2015). A Mapping of Tools for Informing Water 
Sensitive Urban Design Planning Decisions—Questions, Aspects and Context Sensitivity. Water, 
7(12), 993–1012. https://doi.org/10.3390/w7030993 
Lerer, S. M., Mikkelsen, P. S., Jomo, H., & Sørup, D. (2018). WSUD , SUDS , LIDs and all that jazz 
Introduction to alternative approaches to stormwater management for students in 12122 By 
Worldwide terminology. 
Lloyd, S., Wong, T., & Blunt, S. (2015). Water-Sensitive Cities : Applying the Framework to Melbourne 
Water-sensitive cities : Applying the framework to Melbourne *. 1583. 
Ministry for the Environment. (2017). Coastal Hazards and Climate Change: guidance for local 
==PAGE:175==
 
40 
 
government. In Ministry for the Environment (Vol. ME1341). Retrieved from 
http://www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/media/Climate Change/coastal-hazards-guide-
final.pdf 
Olufson, S. (2019). Sam Olufson 2018-19 Masters Thesis. 
Rosenzweig, C., Major, D. C., Demong, K., Stanton, C., Horton, R., & Stults, M. (2007). Managing 
climate change risks in New York City’s water system: Assessment and adaptation planning. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 12(8), 1391–1409. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-006-9070-5 
Rotterdam Climate Initiative. (2013). Rotterdam: Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. 1–70. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.rotterdamclimateinitiative.nl/documents/Documenten/20121210_RAS_EN_lr_versi
e_4.pdf 
Rudberg, P. M., Wallgren, O., & Swartling, Å. G. (2012). Beyond generic adaptive capacity: Exploring 
the adaptation space of the water supply and wastewater sector of the Stockholm region, 
Sweden. Climatic Change, 114(3–4), 707–721. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0453-1 
Schoen, M., Hawkins, T., Xue, X., Ma, C., Garland, J., & Ashbolt, N. J. (2015). Sustainability of Water 
Quality and Ecology Technologic resilience assessment of coastal community water and 
wastewater service options. Sustainability of Water Quality and Ecology, 6, 75–87. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swaqe.2015.05.001 
Siekmann, T., & Siekmann, M. (2015). Resilient urban drainage – Options of an optimized area-
management. Urban Water Journal, 12(1), 44–51. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2013.851711 
Stancu, M., Cheveresan, M., Zaharia, V., & Poienariu, T. (2017). ScienceDirect ScienceDirect Climate 
change adaptation in urban areas . Case study for the Tineretului area in Bucharest. Procedia 
Engineering, 209, 188–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.11.146 
Standard, D. (2019). ISO 14090 Dansk standard Tilpasning til klimaændringer – Prinicipper , krav og 
retningslinjer Adaptation to climate change – Principles ,. 
Su, X., Liu, T., Beheshti, M., & Prigiobbe, V. (2019). Relationship between infiltration, sewer 
rehabilitation, and groundwater flooding in coastal urban areas. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research, 2020(USEPAa 2002). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-06513-z 
van Roon, M. R. (2011). Water sensitive residential developments: Application of LIUDD principles and 
methods in the Netherlands, Australia and New Zealand. Urban Water Journal, 8(6), 325–335. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1573062X.2011.614695 
Wdowinski, S., Bray, R., Kirtman, B. P., & Wu, Z. (2016). Increasing flooding hazard in coastal 
communities due to rising sea level: Case study of Miami Beach, Florida. Ocean and Coastal 
Management, 126, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.03.002 
Wong, T. H. F. (2015). Water sensitive urban design – the journey thus far *. 1583(2006). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13241583.2006.11465296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:176==
 
41 
 
Appendix 1 – Adaptation Options 
Adaptation options Stormwater and Wastewater 
No Response 
Treat Emerging 
Threats  
Applicability 
Type 
Source 
Repair 
Locally fixes 
problem 
Short Implementation 
time, Short term 
effectiveness 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
  
  
  
Protect 
Protect/Isolate 
critical infra 
Applicability 
Type 
Source 
Plant vegetation 
around pumping 
station or critical 
nodes 
Locally lower the 
groundwater table 
Short term No regret 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
Waterproof 
underground 
structure 
pumping 
stations 
Protects electrical 
parts and could be 
accommodated with 
more corrosion 
resistant parts 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Dry-proof 
essential 
infrastructure 
Make sure no water 
is able to enter the 
perimeter of the 
critical infra, e.g. 
isolate outlets 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
wet-proof 
(controllable) 
infrastructure 
Allow controllable 
flooding, but makes 
sure critical 
infrastructure is wet 
proof 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
Real Time 
Control - RTC 
Real Time Control, 
optimize behaviour 
of important 
infrastructure, for 
example valves, 
based on certain 
levels, optimize 
overcoming tidal 
difficulties 
Medium Term, in 
tandem with upgraded 
infrastructure 
SW/
WW 
Lecture Slides / 
Workshop 
local floodwalls 
Protect important 
infrastructure 
Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
multifunctional 
dike 
reinforcement 
Protect important 
infrastructure 
Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
  
  
  
Advancing 
Polder 
Applicability 
Type 
Source 
Tidal Gate 
-form of advancing, 
controlling water 
levels 
Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
==PAGE:177==
 
42 
 
Move Seaward, 
reclaim and 
create buffer 
-Decrease 
Groundwater Table, 
decrease saltwater 
intrusion 
Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
  
  
  
Accommodate 
Accommodate 
Applicability 
Type 
Source 
Elevate / Raise Sewer / Re Engineer 
Raise minimum 
sewer 
connection level 
(for future 
developments) 
Makes sure the 
infrastructure is 
higher up 
Short term no regret for 
new development 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
elevate 
important 
infrastructure / 
use elevated 
zones 
Water doesn’t reach 
infra 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Re-engineering 
of Pipes,Canals& 
control 
structures 
Replace pipes, lift 
system outlets, lift 
house systems 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Pumping Stations 
Raise Pumping 
Stations 
Protects pumping 
stations from SLR 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Increase 
Pumping Station 
Capacity 
Increase capacity, 
energy intensive, big 
investment, 
increased 
vulnerability 
Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Modify Sewer 
Add a non return 
valve to prevent 
sewage overflow 
This could help with 
preventing water 
going up the pipes in 
early stages of SLR 
Short term  
SW/
WW 
Literature 
Pressurized / 
vacuum sewer 
Removes decreased 
drainage capacity 
due to change in 
hydraulic gradient 
Short - Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Septic Tank 
Closure 
Protects from 
overflow 
Short Term 
WW 
Literature 
Decentralize System / Treat and store more locally 
Facilitate 
Overflow to 
additional 
storage 
Delays discharge 
until system is 
normalized 
Short - Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
Water treatment 
at 
Source/decentra
lized 
Decentralizes the 
system 
Short - Medium Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
==PAGE:178==
 
43 
 
Increase 
imperviousness / 
Porous 
Pavement 
Increases filtration, 
however could 
result in increases in 
local groundwater 
tables 
Short Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
  
  
  
  
Ecosystem Based 
Adaptation 
Increase Natural 
Adaptive Capacity 
Applicability 
Type 
Source 
Wastewater Onsite Treatment / Grey Water Reuse/ Decentralize 
Onsite 
treatment of 
solids 
Eliminates need to 
move solids to 
centralized 
treatment 
Short - Medium Term 
WW 
Literature 
Wastewater 
reclamation and 
reuse 
Decentralized the 
system 
Short - Medium Term 
WW 
Literature 
Sewage effluent 
to water supply / 
Sand Filters 
Reuse for gray water
Short - Medium Term 
WW 
Literature 
Retention / Detention / Basins delay & store water 
Retention Ponds 
Allows for 
temporary storage 
capacity during high 
rainfall events 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Detention Ponds 
Allows for 
temporary storage 
capacity during high 
river discharge 
events 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Infiltration 
Basins 
Allows for local 
infiltration 
stormwater and 
collection 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
water butts/ 
water squares  
temporary storage 
and local infiltration 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
Constructed 
Wetlands and 
lakes 
Allows for 
temporary storage 
capacity during high 
river discharge 
events 
Medium-Long Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
implement tidal 
park 
Increase 
Biodiversity-
>Robustness 
Medium-Long Term 
SW  
Literature 
Reuse of of stormwater / Local Infiltration / Water Robust Streets/Blue Solutions 
Biofilters 
filter pollutions out 
of stormwater 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
(Bio) / Vegetated 
Swales 
Channels designed 
to filter pollutions 
out of stormwater 
Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
==PAGE:179==
 
44 
 
Adsorption 
Filters 
filter pollutions out 
of stormwater 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
Green Roofs 
Delay Rainwater 
infiltration into the 
system 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Raingardens 
Bioretention, locally 
infiltrates 
stormwater 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
water storage 
and reuse 
temporary storage 
and local infiltration 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Bioretention 
Planters 
filter pollutions out 
of stormwater 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
Vegetated 
buffers 
filter pollutions out 
of stormwater 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
Re-vegetation 
Promotes local 
infiltration 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
Rain tanks 
Provides Temporary 
storage 
Short - Medium Term 
SW  
Literature 
Sedimentation 
Tanks 
Storage 
Short - Medium Term 
SW 
Literature 
Urban Forests 
local infiltration 
Medium-Long Term 
SW 
Literature 
Retreat 
Retreat 
Applicability 
Type 
Source 
Retreat pumping 
stations 
Move them to an 
elevated location 
Medium-Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature 
close / 
compartmentaliz
e higher 
elevated parts 
system 
Close off lower lying 
parts and move 
Medium-Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
Sectoral Retreat 
Allow for 
intermediate retreat 
Medium-Long Term 
SW/
WW 
Literature / 
Workshop / 
Dialogue 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
==PAGE:180==
 
45 
 
Search Terms used: 
For Adaptation Options 
''SUD'' AND ''WSUD'' AND ''BMP'' AND ''LID'' AND ''Urban Drainage'' AND ''Climate Change'' 
‘’Water Sensitive Design’’ 
 
For the impact of SLR on Coastal Urban Drainage Systems: 
‘’Urban Drainage’’ AND ‘’Coastal Flooding’’ 
‘’Urban Drainage’’ AND ‘’Climate Change’’ AND ‘’Water Sensitive Design’’ 
‘’Urban Drainage’’ AND ‘’Integrated Coastal Zone Management’’ 
‘’Urban Drainage’’ AND ‘’Sea Level Rise’’ AND ‘’Climate Change’’ 
‘’Urban Drainage’’ AND ‘’Climate Change’’ AND ‘’Sea level Rise’’ OR ‘’Tide’’ OR ‘’Coastal’’ 
‘’Water Sensitive Urban Design’’ AND ‘’Sea level Rise’’ 
 
For Wastewater: 
''wastewater'' AND ''Adaptation'' AND ''Climate Change'' 
''wastewater'' AND ''Adaptation'' AND ''Climate Change'' AND ‘’Coastal’’ 
 
For Case studies Miami: 
''Miami'' AND ''Sea level rise'' AND ''Wastewater'' AND ''Stormwater'' AND ''Utilities'' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:181==
Preparing for Sea Level Rise
173
==PAGE:182==
Technical
University of
Denmark
and Akademivej , Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Victoria
University of
Wellington
Kelburn, Cotton Building, Wellington 6012 New Zealand
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
