==PAGE:1==
Experimental Investigation of 
Methanol Application in Compression 
Ignition Engines  
Thomas Berg Thomsen  
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Problem Statement
The aim of this study is to examine the possibilities of using methanol mixed with
additives in compression ignition engines for maritime usage. Experiments will be
performed on a fast four stroke compression ignition engine with direct injection, this
is a modiﬁed BUHK engine with one cylinder running on diesel fuel and one on the
experimental fuel. The experiments are performed with a parameter sweep to ﬁnd
ignition delay and heat release characteristics to study the premixed versus diﬀusion
combustion contribution. The swept parameters could be e.g. start of injection, engine
speed, and charging pressure.
The combustion quality is found by measuring the CO2, CO, THC, and NOx emissions
of the test cylinder and a net heat release analyses which is found from a mathematical
model using pressure measurements inside the cylinder during combustion and the
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics.
The mathematical model put up in this study includes the gas characteristics inside
the cylinder during combustion to increase precision of model. The analysis from this
model is compared to simpler models to identify if the additional work on this model
is worth including in future models.
This study is the foundation to further theoretical work of the combustion characteristics
of methanol.
i
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Abstract
In this study, the issues relating to use of methanol blended with an additive in a
diesel engine are investigated. Experimental results are combined with a mathemat-
ical model to describe the heat release rate which again is used to investigate the type
of combustion. Furthermore, the exhaust composition is measured for CO2, CO and
THC. The exhaust composition is used as an indicator of the combustion eﬃciency
of methanol-additive blends. The aim of this study is to achieve a stable combustion
of methanol in a compression ignition engine without costly modiﬁcations to the
engine itself.
Experiments with diﬀerent injection timings, loads and intake temperatures,
using methanol with 5%w additive have been conducted. Furthermore, methanol
blends with between 25% and 3.5% have been tested with respect to the necessary
intake temperature to reach stable combustion.
This study ﬁnds that methanol mixed with an additive can be used in a compres-
sion ignition engine without major modiﬁcations of the engine itself. Depending
on the possible injection strategy, it might be necessary to preheat the intake air to
obtain a stable combustion with high eﬃciency. For early injection, no additional
preheat was needed and the highest eﬃciency was found with a start of injection
at 45 CAD BTDC in a PPCI combustion. With late injection at 10 CAD BTDC and
low concentration of additive a high amount of preheat was required. For late injec-
tions the fuel burning rate is similar to normal diesel combustion. But the type of
combustion is neither premixed nor mixing controlled. It is presumed to burn in a
rich cloud followed by an after-oxidation. The eﬃciency for late injection was only
slightly lower than for early injections but higher concentrations of CO and THC
was found in the exhaust.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Indholdsfortegnelse
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Why Methanol? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Prior Work
4
3
Methanol
12
3.1
Production of Methanol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Usage of Methanol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Experimental Setup
20
4.1
The Engine Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Fuel and Fuelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Mathematical Model
28
5.1
Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Zero Dimensional Reactor - Cantera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Engine Model based on Measured Engine Pressure
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Results, Mathematical Model and M95 Mixture
36
6.1
Mathematical Model - Zero Dimensional Reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Start of Injection Sweep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Intake Temperature Sweep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Load Sweep
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Results of Varying Fuel Mixture and Late Fuel Injection
45
7.1
Combustion Characteristics of Diﬀerent Additive Quantities . . . . . . .
46
7.2
n-Heptane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
iii
==PAGE:5==
8
Discussion
59
8.1
Sources of Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9
Further Work
65
10 Conclusion
66
11 Nomenclature
68
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
1
Introduction
In the later years, new tighter regulations for emissions are planned to reach the goals
from the Paris Agreement to slow down the global temperature rise and International
Maritime Organization’s (IMO) goal to secure a healthy environment in certain areas
such as near the coast line or the so called Emission Control Areas (ECA). This has
started a wave of research projects to create and utilise renewable fuels for the maritime
sector with speciﬁc focus on bio- or electro-fuels.
IMO’s goal is to reduce CO2 emissions per transport work by at least 40 % within 2030
and pursuing a 70 % reduction by 2050 compared to the 2008 emissions. Further, it is
aimed to reduce the annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from shipping by 50 %
by 2050 and reverse the current development as fast as possible [1].
For long time, the focus has been on improving the known methods such as better
engines, reﬁned diesel with less sulphur, and after treatment to reduce NOx. These
solutions are only for the ECA and for reducing CO2 as well, more drastic measures are
to be taken to meet the upcoming regulations. To ﬁnd new solutions, alternative fuels for
compression ignition (CI) engines are investigated, such as liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG),
Dimethyl ether (DME), or bio-diesel. LNG and DME have obvious downsides regarding
storage as it must be pressurised and cooled. In addition, natural gas is a GHG itself
making causing even small LNG slips to have great consequences. Furthermore, today’s
LNG engines are based on a dual-fuel system which is very expensive to install as the
entire engine must be replaced with a new generation of engines. Bio-diesel is known
to work but is more expensive than traditional low grade fuel (heavy fuel oil) and is
currently based on ﬁrst generation bio mass using edible crops. As of now bio-diesel is
not CO2 neutral as it is only up to 30 % bio-fuel.
To have a realistic chance of introducing a new fuel, it must be combustible in a CI
engine without expensive modiﬁcations and the fuel itself must be cheap and globally
available. In addition, new fuels should be sulphur free, preferably be liquid at atmo-
spheric conditions and have no or very little environmental impact if leakage should
occur.
This study is the ﬁrst part of an EUDP (Energy Technology Development and Demon-
stration Program) supported project between Technological Institute Denmark (DTI),
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Nordic Green, MAN Energy Solution, Alfa
Page 1 of 71
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Laval and Nouryon. The project is called Marine Methanol Project. The entire project
stretches for two years and aim of increasing the Technology Readiness Level (TRL)
from TRL=3 (proof of concept) to TRL=6 (technology demonstrated in relevant environ-
ment). DTU is responsible for a parametric study and experiments on a 20 kW engine
to determine if methanol can ignite properly. The most important issue will be to verify
the heat release rate during combustion and estimate additive dosing at relevant oper-
ating conditions. In this study, the ﬁrst experiments are made to determine relevant
operating conditions and level of preheat required to get proper combustion. Further,
this study is providing a mathematical model as part of a parametric study.
1.1
Why Methanol?
Methanol is an attractive fuel candidate as it is already globally available, do not contain
any sulphuric compounds, and is liquid at atmospheric conditions. Moreover, the in-
jection ports in an internal combustion engine need, if any, small modiﬁcations only to
the injector nozzle securing the right amount of methanol into the combustion chamber.
As methanol does not contain any sulphur compounds, it is a desirable fuel for ships
operating in the cost near ECA. Furthermore, methanol can be produced as an electro
fuel from excess electric power, making methanol CO2 neutral when combusted. As for
now almost all methanol is made from natural gas or coal but if methanol becomes a
desired fuel, the technology exists to make it from excess electricity from wind farms or
other renewable sources. Though this technology has only been demonstrated in small
scale.
Methanol can compete with diesel fuels regarding pricing per energy content making it
more attractive for the shipping companies. However, as previous studies have shown,
see Section 2, an additive is needed to help overcome ignition problems of pure methanol
and the additive is expensive. Other downsides of methanol utilisation includes a low
energy density, only 19.6 MJ/kg or 16.0 MJ/l, versus marine diesel’s 35.9 MJ/l and a low
ﬂash point which might be a safety risk and lack of lubricity. An unrelated downside
to engine usage is the toxicity of methanol as methanol can be lethal if ingested even in
small amounts. An unexplored downside could be that the additional water vapour in
the exhaust could cause extensive wear of the cylinder liners but that is for other studies
to investigate.
Page 2 of 71
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
The main issue to overcome before methanol can become a good alternative for the
traditional heavy fuel is the ignition problems.
Methanol has a high octane number and is perfect for a spark ignition (SI) engine and
is already used as petroleum blends but as SI engines are only used for personal vehi-
cles, a great potential in making methanol work for heavy duty vehicles and marine
engines exist. As fuel, methanol is especially promising in maritime engines due to the
stable load during operation. The stable load increases the possibility of ﬁnding opti-
mal running conditions such as injection timing and compression temperature where
methanol can be combusted properly. Optimally it can be combusted pure or at least
with a minimal fraction of ignition improver also called additive.
In this study, it is chosen to look at methanol instead of other alternative fuels such as
DME or ethanol as methanol is the most promising fuel of those. Methanol is more
promising than DME due to the liquid state at atmospheric conditions and the fact that
methanol is already globally available makes it more attractive than any other alternative.
Furthermore, methanol can be made from a wide range of feedstocks making it possible
to make the maritime sector CO2 neutral in the future.
1.2
Content
This report goes through previous work relevant for methanol combustion in CI engines,
where the relevant results of previous studies are presented. This is followed by a
section regarding methanol, advantages and disadvantages of methanol, how methanol
is produced and how it is used as a fuel today. Later the experimental setup is described
together with an overview of conducted experiments. Then the mathematical model
used for designing experiments and result processing is described. This is followed by
the results, starting with pure model results used to design some of the experiments,
moving on to results based on the measured in-cylinder pressure. The results are more
or less presented in same order as the experiments were conducted. The ﬁnal part of
the report contain a discussion of presented results, a comparison to the previous work
and a view on future studies which could be done. Finally the report is rounded oﬀ
with a conclusion.
In this thesis a basic engine knowledge is assumed and, if necessary, details can be found
in Sorenson’s Engine Principle and Vehicle Applications [2].
Page 3 of 71
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
2
Prior Work
Methanol have only recently become an interesting fuel for compression ignition engines
as it as a starting point is a problematic substitution for diesel fuel because of a low cetane
number, a low energy density and a low ﬂash point. Therefore, only little work has been
performed on this subject. In 2013, MAN Diesel & Turbo, today MAN Energy Solution
started using methanol as part of the dual fuel concept in two stroke engines with a
main methanol injection and a pilot diesel injection to initiate ignition. The safety issues
with respect to the low ﬂash point is solved with double wall and leakage monitoring
for all methanol components and is still viewed as far easier to handle than LNG. In the
summer of 2019, the ﬂeet of Methanol Liquid Gas Injection (ME-LGI) vessels reached
50 000 operating hours on clean methanol, which is the reason only little is known
about additional wear in the cylinders or fuel system [3]. But the initial studies show
no additional corrosion in the combustion chamber using methanol versus diesel even
though alcohols are known to be corrosive. As the combustion chamber is already
an corrosive environment, it is designed to handle the extensive wear. No published
studies have worked with the additional wear water vapours can cause when using
methanol instead of diesel.
As only limited research has been performed for methanol with additive, ethanol studies
are used as reference as it is the closest alcohol with similar properties and limitations.
Scania have for a long time constructed engines with an increased compression ratio
designed for ethanol utilisation. Those engines are mostly used in busses and other
heavy duty traﬃc in Sweden and have now reached 35 years on the roads. The engines
are modiﬁed diesel engines with an increased compression ratio causing cylinder tem-
perature and pressure to be higher when the fuel is injected. The compression ratio is
increased to 28 whereas the non-modiﬁed diesel engines operate at a compression ratio
of 17. Furthermore, an additive is made speciﬁcally for ethanol and this is mixed into
the fuel and works as ignition improver and lubricant. The ignition improver secures a
steady combustion and without it, the combustion eﬃciency would drop dramatically.
In the alcohol engines made by Scania, it is recommended to use a mixture of 90 −95%w
ethanol and the rest being ignition improver and lubricant. Scania have made their own
research of the eﬀects of using alcohols versus diesel in their heavy duty engines. The
studies of ethanol with ignition improver show signiﬁcant reductions of particulate mat-
Page 4 of 71
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
ter, NOx formation and hydrocarbons compared to regular diesel fuel [4], see Figure 1
adopted from Stålhammer [4].
Figure 1: Emissions of Scania E95 Engine [4]
Scania have also studied at the ignition delay at diﬀerent conditions of diesel versus both
pure ethanol and methanol. Here it is seen that diesel ignites faster for all conditions
and can ignite at signiﬁcant lower pressure and temperature unless a minimum of 5%w
additive is mixed into the ethanol. With the ignition improver, the ethanol almost ignite
as well as the diesel. Further, it is seen that ethanol and methanol are highly temperature
dependent to create a fast ignition. Reference is made to Figure 2. Moreover, Scania
ﬁnds that with their used additive they get a more diesel-like combustion, without
the additive the combustion is mainly premixed homogeneously charged compression
ignited (HCCI) like or partially premixed compression ignited (PPCI). With the additive
a diﬀusion ﬂame is obtained which makes the combustion more diesel-like and reduce
the max pressure. In addition, the ignition improver advances the start of combustion.
A collaborative research project, Alcohol Application in Compression Ignition Engines,
Schramm et. al. [5, 6, 7], has been carried out under the IEA Advanced Motor Fu-
els IA to test alcohol utilisation in compression ignition engines. Experiments have
been conducted at Technical Research Centre of Finland - VTT (Valtion Teknillinen
Tutkimuskeskus), the Technical University of Denmark DTU and the Technical Institute,
Denmark - DTI. VTT used a Scania DC9 E02 270 Euro V/EEV certiﬁed ethanol engine
installed in an engine dynamometer, with a compression ratio of 28 and a rated power
at 200 kW (270 hp) at 1900 RPM. At DTU, a Bukh DV24 engine with a compression
Page 5 of 71
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
(a) Diesel
(b) Ethanol
(c) Methanol
(d) Ethanol with additive
Figure 2: Ignition delay mapped for diﬀerent cylinder gas conditions
[4]
ratio of 24.5 was used. The Bukh engine is designed with a compression ratio of 18 and
the increased compression ratio was obtained by changing the piston top which might
cause pressures over the design limit and hence, increase the risk of causing extensive
blow-by. The Bukh engine has a commercially power rating of 20 kW at 3600 RPM. DTI
also uses a Scania DC9 with a rated power of 226 kW at 1500 RPM but without the
alcohol modiﬁcations and a compression ratio of 16.
At VTT experiments have been performed with varying additive types and fuel mixtures
to see the eﬀects of the additive and if other fuels can be used with same combustion
eﬃciency, Nylund et. al, Testing of Various fuel and additive options in a compression-
ignited heavy duty alcohol engine, [5]. Their studies show that with a high compression
ratio and varying ignition improvers, diesel-like performance can be reached. Further-
more, it is seen that for all tested ignition improvers, the CO2-emissions are almost
Page 6 of 71
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
the same within expected standard deviation in these experiments. VTT also exper-
imented with ethanol/methanol blends and methanol with ignition improver. The
ethanol/methanol mixture had on mass basis ≈60 % ethanol and 30 % methanol the
remaining percentages was additive and water from imperfections in the ethanol. Here
is it seen that ethanol/methanol blends are reducing NOx and particulate matter emis-
sions and for methanol the particulate matter emissions increase slightly whereas NOx-
emissions are decreased further. It is expected that the additional particulate matter
can be removed in a simple manner with an oxidation catalyst. Further, as expected the
fuel nozzles do need a slight modiﬁcation to allow for the greater volume ﬂow required
for same amount of energy [5].
At DTU, experiments were performed on a smaller four stroke two cylinder engine,
as described in Schramm et. al, Detailed investigations of alcohol fuels in diesel-type
combustion [6]. The one cylinder ran at factory settings with a diesel injection and
the other was modiﬁed for ethanol usage. The modiﬁcations includes an increased
compression ratio of 24.5 and an external charging system where the intake pressure and
temperature can be controlled and most importantly, the fuel nozzle can be controlled
with respect to opening time, duration and needle lift to adjust fuel ﬂow. The fuel
injector can have up to ﬁve injections during the cycle. The fuel was pressurised from
a pressure vessel with nitrogen which provided a limitation of fuel injection pressure
to approximately 150 bar. The cylinder pressure was measured with a resolution of
10 samples per crank angle degree which was used to calculate the heat release and
therefrom, the combustion characteristics are found. Samples of the exhaust was sent
through a Fourier Transformation Infra-Red Spectroscope measuring the emissions. In
total four fuels were tested, three E95 (ethanol mixed with 5 %w additive) mixtures
with diﬀerent additives and one test with pure fuel grade ethanol. A sweep over the
injection timings was made to get diﬀerent degrees of PPCI combustion. It was seen
that early injection caused greater premixed combustion which again caused higher
combustion temperatures and therefore, a higher concentration of NOx was found in
the exhaust. In addition, it is found that in relation to the fuel conversion, illustrated
by the CO2-formation Figure 3, the optimal injection timing is around 2.5 CAD BTDC
for most of the fuel/ignition improver mixtures but for pure ethanol the combustion
fails at these late injection timings see Figure 3 taken from Schramm et al. [6]. The latest
point in time pure ethanol can be injected and complete a combustion is 10 CAD BTDC
Page 7 of 71
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 3: The CO2 formation for diﬀerent injection timings [6]
and the heat release curves are illustrated in Figure 4 taken from Schramm et al. [6].
Experiments were also performed with homogeneously charged compression ignition
(HCCI) combustion where the fuel was injected during the intake stroke. It was seen
that the additive did not inﬂuence the combustion or engine operation. The HCCI
performed poorly as a high amount of ethanol slip was measured and the eﬃciency
was low compared to the PPCI operation. The heat release occurs as a single spike just
before TDC as seen in Figure 5 [6]. Fuel 0 is pure ethanol and the other fuels are E95
mixtures.
The increased compression ratio was applied to ensure a higher compression tempera-
ture which gives a lower ignition delay where the ﬂame could be controlled as a diﬀusion
ﬂame. The ignition delay for the diﬀerent injection timings can be seen in Figure 6 [6].
DTI tested bio diesel with up to 30 % alcohol. This is reported in Pedersen, Testing of
diesel fuel blends with methanol ethanol and butanol [7]. The engine was tested in
idle mode at 25 % and at 50 % load. The results show that methanol blends can reduce
the particulate number but for idle load, NOx-emissions are slightly increased and
similarly, the CO and THCs. For high load conditions, the blends had no real eﬀects on
the emissions of NOx, CO or THC. The thermal brake eﬃciency was found to increase
Page 8 of 71
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 4: [6]
Figure 5: Net heat release rate for HCCI combustion [6]
Page 9 of 71
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 6: The ignition delay for diﬀerent injection timings [6]
for the alcohol blends.
In house (i.e. at DTU) studies have shown potential in M95 combustion in the modiﬁed
BUKH engine, Frausing, [8]. The experiments mostly test the eﬀects of diﬀerent injection
timings in a PPCI combustion. Theses studies have shown the methanol to ignite close to
the TDC and mostly combust in a premixed combustion. Diﬀerent mixtures regarding
additive amount (2, 5, 10 %w) was tested with sweeps over injection timing and load
to examine combustion behaviour. The combustion eﬃciency was found from heat
release curves and measurements on the brake. The emissions from these experiments
were not studied during this work. It was seen that the highest accumulated net heat
release occurs when the fuel was injected at 30, 35 and 40 CAD BTDC for the three
mixtures respectively with increasing additive. Both late and early injections were
aﬀected by additive amount as the 2 % mixture only had a stable combustion in the
range of SOI = 15 −35 CAD BTDC and the 10 % mixture had combustion in the range
of SOI = 10 −50 CAD BTDC [8].
At VTT, a study of methanol with ignition improver has been made where the cetane
numbers of diﬀerent methanol blends have been found, Aakko-Saksa et. al, Renewable
methanol with ignition improver additive for diesel engines [9]. Here, it is found that
Page 10 of 71
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
all the tested additives increase the cetane number to between 10 and 12. These are still
low compared to diesel fuels but none the less, an improvement from the initial cetane
number between 3 and 5. Further, the emissions are investigated and for certain ignition
improvers, a signiﬁcant reduction in particles is observed.
A study conducted at University Xi’an in People Republic of China by Huang et. al,
Combustion characteristics and heat release analysis of a compression ignition engine
operating on a diesel/methanol blend [10], ﬁnds that an increase in methanol blend in
diesel shortens the diﬀusion part of the combustion and increase the premixed share
of the combustion. Further, it is found that increase in methanol share of the blend
increase the ignition delay. These ﬁndings comes from experiments with injections in
the range of 25 −17 CAD BTDC creating a PPCI-like combustion. By examining the
pressure and pressure rise rate, it is found that increase in mass fraction of methanol,
lead to an increase in both the maximum pressure and pressure rise rate [10].
Page 11 of 71
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
3
Methanol
Methanol is the simplest form of alcohol consisting of a single methyl group and a
hydroxyl group forming CH3 −OH. At atmospheric conditions, methanol is a liquid
making it easy to store and handle. Furthermore, methanol does not contain any sulphur
and hence, making it an interesting maritime fuel for ships operating in environment
control areas with strict limitations on NOx and SOx emissions. Methanol is already
one of the most common chemical globally with an annually production capacity of
115 Mt and still increasing as it can be seen in Figure 7, taken from Methanol Institute
[11]. Chemical grade methanol is already competitive with diesel regarding pricing per
energy unit and raw methanol containing some impurities and water are even cheaper.
Most of the methanol is currently produced from methane or coal but other feedstocks
are available as discussed in Section 3.1. Methanol is an alcohol causing it to be corrosive
towards many metals so the materials used for piping and other components must be
compatible with the extra corrosion potential.
As for all combustible ﬂuids, safety is a concern regarding storing and handling methanol.
The safety concerns pertaining to methanol are; low ﬂash point, burns with an invisible
Figure 7: The global methanol production by region [11]
Page 12 of 71
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
ﬂame, can burn in very rich mixtures, and cause health issues if absorbed which can
happen by ingestion, through the skin or by inhaling vapours. The ﬂash point of 11°C
is lower than the IMO speciﬁcations for maritime fuels. IMO speciﬁes a minimum 60°C
ﬂash point. The ﬂash point can be increased when mixed with additive but it will not
reach the minimum of 60°C. Therefore, other actions must be taken to minimise this
risk. Even with the mentioned safety concerns, methanol is a safe fuel as it does not
spontaneously ignite without a spark or ﬂame source, less heat is formed than in a
gasoline ﬁre, and a methanol ﬁre can be extinguished using water. Methanol is miscible
with water and biodegradable with a half-life of only one to seven days meaning that
it does not persist in the soil or water in case of a leakage. In comparison, oil spillage
in the sea is often a major issue with local impact on wildlife and need for expensive
cleaning operations.
As mentioned in Section 2, only a limited experince with methanol as a maritime fuel
exsist due to the fact IMO have had concerns regarding above mentioned risks but
recently IMO is revising the safety protocols for the use of methanol as marine fuel. The
ﬁrst vessels testing methanol as marine fuel underwent severe risk assessments with
respect to the methanol installations before they were approved for operation. This
demonstrated that safety aboard vessels is not the barrier for methanol usage.
As methanol is not a lubricant on it own, some lubricant is needed for the fuelling
system. This can be a part of the ignition improver additive or something on its own
[5].
For further use in the present report, methanol can be described from the chemical
formula with the diﬀerent atoms per molecule, Carbon as x, Hydrogen as y and Oxygen
as z.
CH3OH =⇒
x = 1
y = 4
z = 1
The molecular weight can thus be calculated as MMeOH = x · 12.011 + y · 1.008 + z ·
15.999 = 32.04[g/mol].
Page 13 of 71
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 8: Pathways to green methanol production [11]
3.1
Production of Methanol
Methanol occur naturally from anaerobic metabolism but is oxidised in the atmosphere
in matter of days. Therefore, if methanol should be used for fuelling in any part of
the maritime sector it has to be produced industrially. Methanol can be made from a
wide array of feedstocks making it one of the most ﬂexible energy sources, see Figure
8. The most common way is using synthesis gas produced from methane or natural
gas but synthesis gas can be made from plants or things that ever was a plant through
gasiﬁcation. This is including both agricultural and municipal waste as well as biomass
etc.
Producing methanol is most commonly conducted in two steps, ﬁrst the synthesis gas is
made from a feed gas and water vapour, then the synthesis gas is led through a catalyst
to generate the methanol. The most widely used way of producing synthesis gas is
using steam and methane;
2 CH4 + 3 H2O →CO + CO2 + 7 H2
(3.1)
CO + CO2 + 7 H2 →2 CH3OH + 2 H2 + H2O
(3.2)
Page 14 of 71
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 9: Schematics of Haldor Topsoe’s SynCOR Methanol™[13]
If additional CO2 is present, it is possible to include in this reaction and generate more
methanol extracting CO2 from the atmosphere. As synthesis gas can be made from mul-
tiple renewable feedstocks so can methanol. The formation of methanol is an extremely
exothermic process. Therefore, the heat from methanol production can be used in the
process of producing synthesis gas which is an extremely endothermic process.
Haldor Topsoe have made SynCOR Methanol™which they claim is the most energy
eﬃcient way to create methanol where natural gas is cleaned from sulphur before it
is oxidised, see Figure 9. It has a low steam to carbon ratio at 0.6 making it is easy
to scale up to large productions. SynCOR Methanol™provides the lowest capital and
operational cost on the market from syngas production [12].
3.2
Usage of Methanol
Combusting methanol leads to the same products as burning any Carbon containing
fuel, carbon dioxide and water vapour. But as methanol can be seen as partly reacted
methane i.e. the water vapour concentration is very high compared to any other organic
fuel. Methanol’s energy density is less than half of maritime diesel, heavily decreasing
Page 15 of 71
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
the range of a full loaded vessel, see Table 1. As methanol contain oxygen in the fuel, less
air is needed to make a complete combustion which can be seen in the stoichiometric air
fuel ratio, Eq. (3.3) and Table 1. When less air is needed, more fuel can be injected into
the cylinder making the expected power a little higher for methanol versus diesel even
with methanol’s lower caloriﬁc value. All in all, more than double the fuel is required
for each cycle if the same excess air ratio is reached. When more fuel is injected into the
cylinder, more energy is needed to vaporise the fuel before ignition and as the heat of
vaporisation is four times as high for methanol than for diesel, it results in eight times
as much heat is needed for vaporisation. This cause the cylinder gas temperature and
pressure to drop or stagnate after injection even during compression. The adiabatic
ﬂame temperature for methanol combustion is lower than for diesel combustion and
thus, less nitric oxides are expected to be formed.
Methanol
Diesel
Liquid Density
798
840
[kg/m3]
Lower Heat Value
20.1
42.7
[MJ/kg]
Cetane Number
<5
38-53
[-]
Octane Number
109
15-25
[-]
Heat of vaporisation at 1 bar
1089
250
[kJ/kg]
Peak ﬂame temperature at 1 bar
1890
2054
[°C]
Stoichiometric air/fuel ratio
6.5
14.6
[-]
Flash point
12
52
[°C]
Lower ﬂammability limits
6
0.5
[vol %]
Higher ﬂammability limits
36
7.5
[vol %]
Energy per stoichiometric mixture
3.09
2.94
[MJ/kg]
Table 1: Fuel Properties Taken from MAN Energy Solution[3]
Methanol have already been used for fuelling SI engines where blends of gasoline and
methanol are sold as biofuels in great parts of the world. In USA, methanol was used
as racing fuel due to its high octane rating and have with less success been used as bio
blend. But during introduction of methanol as bio blend the gasoline prices decreased
to a level where methanol could not compete. Today methanol prices are competitive
with other hydro carbon fuels based on an energy basis [14]. In Europe, 3 % methanol
Page 16 of 71
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 10: The Development of diﬀerent methanol projects [11]
(M3) are allowed in gasoline blends. In China, a 15 % methanol (M15) is blended in the
gasoline and as of March 2019, China supports M100 vehicles [11, 15].
As seen in Figure 10, methanol as a maritime fuel is in the introduction stage when
regarded as technology development where the EUDP supported Marine Methanol
Project aims to move marine methanol up the curve to a Technology Readiness Level
(TRL) of at least 6 or into the growth zone with reference to the illustration in Figure 10.
Looking at the stoichiometric air fuel ratio for combustion of methanol, it can be found
as follows:
AFRs =
 x + y
4 −z
2
 · (1 + 3.76) · Mair
MMeOH
= 6.47
kgair
kgMeOH
(3.3)
The products from a stoichiometric combustion are found as:
CH3OH + 1.5 O2 + 1.5 · 3.76 N2 →CO2 + 2 H2O + 5.64 N2
(3.4)
This results in approximately 23 %vol water vapour compared to the diesel-like fuel
n-heptane which produces approximately 14 %vol. The calculated products are based
on a complete and ideal combustion at stoichiometric air fuel ratio. In the real situation
Page 17 of 71
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
the excess air ratio will be higher than one and the combustion is not complete and
therefore, byproducts such as carbon monoxide and nitric oxides will be formed. The
amount of water vapour in the exhaust is of importance as water vapour can cause
higher wear on the cylinder linings and may cause that more lubrication oil is needed to
run optimally. The water can condense on the colder cylinder walls and as next time the
piston passes the water ﬁlm, the water can enter the oil sump and ruin the lubrication.
For other mixtures than the stoichiometric air-fuel mixtures, it is important to look at
the lower ﬂammability limit and make sure that the mixture is rich enough for the
combustion to take place. For methanol, cf. Table 1, the lower ﬂammability limit is six
percent. To ﬁnd the matching excess air ratio, an example with a container of one cubic
meter, 1 bar absolute pressure, 300 Kelvin is made; First the total amount of moles are
found from ideal gas law.
ntot = pV
RuT = 100000 Pa · 1 m3
8.314
J
mol K · 300 K
= 40.09 moles
(3.5)
nMeOH = 0.06 · ntot = 2.41moles
(3.6)
nair = 0.94 · ntot = 37.68moles
(3.7)
The mass is found as
mMeOH = nMeOH · MMeOH = 77.1g
(3.8)
mAir = nAir · MAir = 1087.3g
(3.9)
This results in an maximum air/fuel ratio at
AFRmax =
mAir
mMeOH
= 14.11 kgair
kgf uel
(3.10)
This implies that for pure fuel grade methanol the highest excess air ratio for a com-
bustible homogeneous mixture is found as:
λmax = AFRmax/AFRs = 14.11/6.47 = 2.18
(3.11)
This excess air ratio is quite low for usual compression ignition combustion and can
lead to unburned hydrocarbons for low load conditions and early injection. Usually in a
compression ignition combustion, the fuel is injected late causing it to vaporise during
injection and form a take oﬀlength which again form a stationary ﬂame out the nozzle.
If this is the case for methanol combustion as well, the low ﬂammability limit would
Page 18 of 71
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
not be a problem as the ﬂame is expected to burn around stoichiometric conditions. But
earlier studies with ethanol shows that an early injection is preferred where all the fuel
is injected and mixed with cylinder gas before ignition for best fuel utilisation. This
might also be the case for methanol [5, 6].
The CO2 production based on energy content for methanol is the same as for diesel.
Therefore, the advantages shrinks to cleaner emissions regarding NOx and PM only
if the methanol is not produced in a renewable manner. So to summarise it can be
concluded that today’s production of methanol can help the maritime sector regarding
IMO’s ECA zones and, in the future if more methanol is produced in a green way,
the CO2 emissions can be heavily decreased from the entire shipping industry using
methanol provided that methanol becomes an attractive fuel.
CO2 production from combustion based on energy content can be found from carbon
atoms in the fuel times molecular weight of CO2, divided by molecular weight of the
fuel and, divided by the lower heating value of the fuel:
n-Heptane: 7 · 44 kg/kmol
100 kg/kmol · 1 kg
44 MJ = 0.07kgCO2/MJhept
(3.12)
Methanol: 44 kg/kmol
32 kg/kmol ·
1 kg
19.6 MJ = 0.07kgCO2/MJMeOH
(3.13)
Page 19 of 71
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
4
Experimental Setup
Computation models are a useful tool to examine a subject to a certain depth but they
need to be veriﬁed which best can be done by experiments. The experiments have
been a very important part of this study as this is an early state research study where
the combustion properties of methanol is examined. The experiments provide pressure
ﬁles from the experimental cylinder used in the mathematical model to ﬁnd combustion
characteristics. Furthermore, exhaust gas measurements can help to verify the model.
Previous studies at DTU have used the same engine and procedure for testing alcohol
in a CI engine [6, 8]. This study varies though from previous studies. First of all, the
charging system have been changed to make the ﬂow more controllable. In addition,
this study operates with methanol, the previous study with methanol did not include
exhaust gas measurements and a wider set of experiments have been performed.
4.1
The Engine Setup
The experiments are performed on a two cylinder four stroke compression ignition
engine, see engine data in Table 2. One cylinder is driven with conventional diesel to
overcome mechanical losses whereas the other cylinder is the experimental cylinder
ﬁred with experimental fuel. The engine is connected to a brake which controls the
engine speed and measures the torque. The diesel cylinder uses the original manufac-
turer’s speciﬁcation regarding injection timing and duration at full power whereas, the
experimental cylinder is controlled during experiments with respect to those param-
eters. The exhaust pipe is divided making it possible to examine the composition of
the exhaust gas from the experimental cylinder without it being mixed with the diesel
cylinder exhaust. The intake air for the experimental cylinder is divided into two lines,
the main ﬂow (yellow hose in Figure 12) from a pressurised line where an expansion
valve controls the intake pressure and air ﬂow and the heated line which can control
the intake air temperature. An overview of the measurements types which are done
can be seen in Section 4.1.2.
The experimental fuel is pressurised to the injection pressure by nitrogen and the ﬂow
is measured by a fuel ﬂowmeter. Inside the experimental cylinder, a pressure pickup is
placed which sends a voltage signal corresponding to a pressure. During experiments
Page 20 of 71
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 11: Sketch of the Experimental Setup
this signal is logged for 50 cycles with a resolution of 10 measurements per CAD. Beside
the cylinder pressure, the intake and exhaust gas temperature, cooling water exhaust
temperature, oil temperature and intake air ﬂow are measured. The pressure pickup is
placed between the cylinder head and the crank house which slightly lifts the cylinder
head. To secure the same compression ratio, the piston head is also lifted, see Figure
13. This is a coarse sketch with, among others, exaggerated crevices along new piston
head.
4.1.1
Contols
In LabView, it is possible to control the fuel injection of the experimental cylinder and
both start of injection and duration can be directly controlled from LabView. From
the measured airﬂow and fuel ﬂow, a excess air ratio is found. For experiments where
change of load was tested, the excess air ratio was used instead of actual load on brake
for simplicity reasons.
4.1.2
Possible Measurements
A summation of the measurements done before and after the experimental cylinder is
shown in Table 3. Further, the pressure inside the cylinder is measured during operation
Page 21 of 71
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 12: The Bukh Engine with Installed Modiﬁcations
Page 22 of 71
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 13: Sketch of pressure pick-up placement
BUKH Engine Data per cylinder
Bore diameter
B
85
[mm]
Stroke
S
85
[mm]
Connection rod length
L
160
[mm]
Geometric Compression Ratio
CRg
18
[-]
Eﬀective Compression Ratio
CRe
16.4
[-]
Displacement Volume
Vd
482
[cc]
Intake valve close
θclose
139
[CAD BTDC]
Exhaust valve open
θopen
126
[CAD ATDC]
Table 2
with a resolution of 10 samples/CAD. The acquisition process covered 48 completed
cycles where an average cycle pressure is found and used for calculating the heat release
rate. The torque and engine speed is measured continuously during the experiments.
The TDC is determined from motoring the experimental cylinder.
4.2
Fuel and Fuelling
Methanol used in this project has a purity of at least 99.8 % and containing less than
0.1 % water. As the additive used is a proprietary product, the composition is a secret
Page 23 of 71
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Table 3: Summation of measurement equipment
Intake
Exhaust
Pressure
Temperature
Temperature
CO2
Air Flow
CO
Fuel Flow
O2
Oil Sink Temperature
THC
Cooling Water Temperature
but it acts both as lubricant and of course ignition improver. When processing results
and calculating stoichiometric air-fuel ratio, the additive is assumed to be n-heptane.
The M95 was mixed using a new clean container, measuring glass, a scale with 0.05g
precision and a small single use pipette for precise dosing. The container was placed
on the scale and methanol was slowly dosed into the container until almost all the
desired methanol was dosed. The remaining methanol was dosed into the measuring
glass before added to the container. Afterwards, the measuring glass was cleaned with
dichloromethane (DCLM) and dried with paper towels. The empty measuring glass
was weighed after the cleaning. The additive was added to the measuring glass and
from the measuring glass transferred into the container and the empty measuring glass
was weighed again to see how much additive was left on the sides. The container was
placed on the scale and the pipette was used to add the rest of the needed additive.
After the mixture was made, the container was sealed and shaken gently in circular
movements before the fuelling cap was placed on the container and it was ready to ﬁll
the experimental fuel tank. All this was done in a fume hood and with plastic gloves to
avoid inhalation or absorption of the chemicals.
In Figure 14, the following is seen from the left: a ﬁnal mixture of ≈25 % additive
and 75 % methanol, the high precision scale, a measuring glass, a small container with
DCLM, the additive and last the large container with methanol.
The experimental fuel tank is a one litre pressurised vessel, see Figure 15, making it nec-
essary to reﬁll it with experimental fuel often. Before starting to refuel, it was important
to close oﬀthe valve for fuel delivery to the engine and the nitrogen valve delivering
Page 24 of 71
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 14: Scale and measurement glass for fuel mixing
Page 25 of 71
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
the pressure to the fuel tank, then carefully relieve the pressure through hoses to an
overﬂow plastic container. When the fuel tank had reached atmospheric pressure the
refuelling could begin. The refuelling took place by connecting the mixing container
to three diﬀerent hoses, A to an air pressurised system, B to the overﬂow tank and C
to the fuel tank. The right valves were opened and the mixing container was slowly
pressurised to overcome the pressure drop in the hoses. When the fuel started drop-
ping down the overﬂow tank all the valves were closed again, the mixing container was
disconnected from the fuelling system and placed in the fuel cabinet. The fuel tank was
pressurised again and the valve for fuel delivery was opened again.
Various kinds of experiments were carried out: a start of injection (SOI) sweep, intake
temperature with early injection sweep, air/fuel mixture sweep, and when diesel-like
combustion occurred with diﬀerent additive amount and compression temperatures.
The ﬁrst experiments were planned from the in-house studies showing early injection
provided the best combustion eﬃciency but from a meeting in the maritime methanol
project, it was learned that most of today’s ﬂeet have mechanical controlled injection
timings making early injection impossible. Therefore, late injection with a higher com-
pression temperature test to reach diesel like combustion was tried.
Experiments Performed in this Study are:
• Start of injection 15-60 CAD BTDC
• Intake air temperature with early injection
• Air-fuel mixtures with early injection
• Necessary compression temperature for diﬀerent additive quantities
• n-heptane engine performance and equipment test
Page 26 of 71
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Figure 15: The pressurised fuel tank
Page 27 of 71
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
5
Mathematical Model
Alongside the experiments, a mathematical model which is used for both designing
the experiments and calculate the heat release and the expected emissions was made.
The model is a cheap tool to help predict the outcome of the experiments and ﬁnd the
optimal conditions to get a fast clean combustion but without veriﬁcation of the model
or the used mechanisms, models are of very limitted use. Models can give an idea of
how the things occur inside an engine cylinder but the combustion is a very complex
reaction making it impossible to predict the exact outcome. In this case the model is set
up in Matlab with inputs from the open source program Cantera. Cantera consist of a
set of tools to solve chemical kinetics and thermodynamic problems making it useful
for combustion processes.
Two diﬀerent kinds of models have been made for this study: one in an ideal constant
volume reactor to examine the theoretical inﬂuence of pressure and temperature to
get methanol to combust and, one based on the measured pressure in the cylinder to
calculate chemical heat release. The ﬁrst is used to help designing the experiments
whereas the other is used for processing the results.
5.1
Assumptions
In order to establish a mathematical model some assumptions or simpliﬁcations are to be
made to be able to describe the combustion. All main assumptions and simpliﬁcations
are listed below:
• Single zone model
• Simpliﬁed heat transfer area
• Woshni’s heat transfer model and coeﬃcients
• Additive equal to n-heptane
• Stable torque from diesel cylinder
• Air mass in cylinder found from ideal gas law and Vd
Page 28 of 71
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
• Ideal gas law for each time step (only change between each integral step)
The ﬁrst simpliﬁcation done is to use a single zone model. As the model do not use the
ﬂame temperature to predict NOx or other emissions, a more complex model with an
estimated ﬂame temperature was not considered needed. The single zone model uses
an average temperature for all the cylinder gas. This could inﬂuence the estimated heat
transfer but as the temperature of the walls are estimated as well, the error could not be
decreased by more precise gas temperatures. Furthermore, the heat transfer area has
been simpliﬁed as the piston top is assumed as ﬂat without the combustion bowl.
Regarding the fuel, it is assumed that the additive is diesel-like with respect to lower
heating value and stoichiometric air fuel ratio. To calculate the indicated eﬃciency, the
brake torque during experiment is used. The brake torque delivered by the diesel cylin-
der alone is subtracted from the total brake torque during experiments. It is assumed
that the diesel cylinder delivers the same torque at all time during the experimental
day. This might be wrong as the brake torque was slowly decreasing throughout the
day. Furthermore, the brake cannot hold the engine speed when the experimental fuel
is added suggesting that the brake needs a correction to reach desired engine speed.
To ﬁnd the actual air amount in the cylinder is quite complicated as both valves are
open at the same time during a short time span. Therefore, an unknown ﬂow directly
from the intake side to the exhaust pipe takes places causing the measured air ﬂow to
be ﬂawed. Furthermore, a small amount of residual gas is left inside the cylinder which
is assumed to be 2.5 %. In the end, the mass of gas in the cylinder is calculated from
the ideal gas law. Even this is not precise due to the fact that the exact temperature
is not known when the intake valve closes as some of the air is already compressed
and therefore, already increased in temperature. This compression is the diﬀerence
between the geometric compression ratio and the eﬀective compression ratio, Table 2.
To decrease certainty of the cylinder mass further, the blow-by correlation is based on
guesses and the fuel injection is a based on a sinus curve where it might be more evenly
spread during the injection timing.
As the times steps used in the model are very small, it is acceptable to assume that the
gas inside the cylinder is an ideal gas and do not react within the time step.
Page 29 of 71
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
5.2
Zero Dimensional Reactor - Cantera
The aim of using Cantera is to study the ignition delay of methanol under various
cylinder gas conditions. For this, a pre-deﬁned function in Cantera called ideal gas
reactor is used where a premixed gas can be deﬁned and time can be advanced in small
time steps. As time is advanced, a spontaneous ignition and combustion will occur. In
the model, pure methanol from a GRI3.0 combustion mechanism is used. The GRI3.0
mechanism is used for methane (CH4) combustion but it includes methanol and other
species occurring during methanol combustion. It would be more optimal to have a
mechanism for a blend of methanol to simulate methanol with additve but the GRI3.0
is the best available.
Cantera works by deﬁning a mechanism containing the used gasses and reaction equa-
tions. When the mechanism is chosen, it is time to deﬁne the gas composition with a
"set" command where mole fraction, pressure and temperature of the gas is decided.
The command "advance" advances the time from the initial time to the absolute time, t(i).
It uses its own chosen time step to integrate until the absolute time t(i) is reached. The
reactor works with an ideal gas assumption and is an adiabatic system. Even with these
assumptions it is possible to get an idea of how the ignition of methanol occurs and
how to improve the combustion. After each of the deﬁned time steps, the temperature
is saved to see if the combustion has started yet and if it has started, how long was the
duration of the ignition delay. Here a combustion is considered started when the gas
have reached a temperature of 400°C higher than the initial gas temperature.
For the simulations, a compression temperature is found using the isentropic correla-
tions.
Tcomp = Tin ·
 pcomp
pin
(1−1/γ
,
(5.1)
where the compression pressure pcomp is found as;
pcomp = pin · (CRe)γ
(5.2)
For these simulation the eﬀective compression ratio is used. The ratio of speciﬁc heats,
γ is for the operational temperatures approximately 1.35.
This model can be found in its whole in Appendix B.
Page 30 of 71
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
5.3
Engine Model based on Measured Engine Pressure
A simple model to describe the piston movement inside the cylinder was made to es-
tablish the cylinder volume and a heat transfer area. The model assumes a ﬂat piston
top making the compression area a clearing height times the cross section instead of the
real combustion bowl. The piston position measured from the cylinder top was found
from the following correlation taken from Sorensen [2];
xpiston = hc + R · (1 −cos(θ)) + R2
2L · sin(θ)2,
(5.3)
where hc is the clearing height found from the compression ratio (hc = 4 Vd/((CR −
1)πB2), R is the crank radius and θ is the the crank angle degree (CAD) and L is the
connection rod length. With the piston position, the cylinder volume and heat transfer
area can be found:
V = xpiston · B2π
4
(5.4)
Aht = xpiston · B · π + 2 · B2π
4
(5.5)
When calculating the heat transfer, the heat transfer area is divided into two; the piston
top and the rest as it is assumed that the piston has a higher temperature than the walls.
The piston top is still assumed to be ﬂat and thus, the heat transfer area of the piston
top correspond to the cylinder cross section.
With the volume calculated, the mas of the cylinder content can be found using the ideal
gas law as all conditions are known or assumed when the intake valve close. The cylinder
mass is dependent on the crank position as a correlation for a blow by is estimated , see
Eq. (5.17), and an assumption about the fuel injection is included in the model.
The engine power can be found from the measured torque and engine speed, and from
the engine power is the indicated eﬃciency found using the measured fuel ﬂow. First
the actual torque from the test cylinder is found:
T = Ttot −Tmot
(5.6)
P = T · N · 2π
60
(5.7)
ηi =
P
˙m f uel · Hu
(5.8)
Page 31 of 71
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
A single zone gas model is used and this means that the average gas temperature to a
time step can be found from the diﬀerentiated ideal gas law (Eq. (5.9)) with respect to θ
as all other parameters are known.
pdV
dθ + V dp
dθ = RsTdm
dθ + mRs
dT
dθ + mTdRs
dθ
(5.9)
As each time step is taken to be very small, the new temperature is found using the
Eulerian method a summation of the old time step temperature and the modelled tem-
perature diﬀerence multiplied by the time step length.
T(i + 1) = T(i) + dT/dθ · dθ
(5.10)
Isolating the temperature diﬀerence in the diﬀerentiated ideal gas equation, Eq.5.9 and
assuming that the speciﬁc gas constant is actually constant, it becomes;
dT
dθ = p dV
dθ + V dp
dθ −RsT dm
dθ
mRs
(5.11)
As the pressure measurements are of the gas pressure the mass inside the cylinder must
be in gas form before it inﬂuence the pressure. Therefore, the fuel injected is assumed to
vaporise instantly after injection. In the real case, the fuel comes in as a liquid and take
heat from the gas to heat up and vaporise. This cause the heat release rate to be negative
around start of injection even though the internal energy in the cylinder increase with
the increased mass.
To get a better idea of the gas composition inside the cylinder, the initial chemical heat
release rate is used to ﬁnd out how much fuel have combusted at the given time. This
is inserted into the open source program Cantera which have diﬀerent combustion
mechanisms included, including the thermal properties of diﬀerent mixtures. Cantera
provided the gas composition which was used to ﬁnd an improved estimation of the
internal energy which again was used to ﬁnd a more precise heat release rate.
5.3.1
Heat Release Rate Model
The heat release is found from Eq. (5.13) using the pressure from the data collector
pressure ﬁles for each experimental run. The correlation is taken from G. Stiesch’s
[16]. This include the fact that mass is not necessarily conserved inside the cylinder
Page 32 of 71
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
and therefore, fuel injection, blow by and leaking from both intake and exhaust valves
must be taken into account. Leakage from the valves are neglected as the amount of air
leaving the cylinder this way is very small compared to the blow by or fuel injection
which both already are included in the model.
dU
dθ = ˙Qchem + ˙Qwall −pdV
dθ + dmairin
dθ
hairin −dmairout
dθ
hairout −dmbb
dθ hbb + dm f uel
dθ
h f uel
(5.12)
As it is assumed that no slip through the closed valves occur, the mass changes in and
out are neglected. Then by isolating for the chemical heat release, the equation becomes:
˙Qchem = dU
dθ −˙Qwall + pdV
dθ + dmbb
dθ hbb −dm f uel
dθ
h f uel
(5.13)
The unknowns are change in internal energy, the heat loss through the walls, the exact
fuel injection and the mass of the blow by now that leaks are neglected. The change
in internal energy can be estimated from a temperature and gas composition, the heat
loss can be estimated from Woschni’s heat loss correlation, see Eq’s. (5.14)-(5.16), with
guessed temperature for the wall. And the mass of blow by is found by Eq. (5.17).
5.3.2
Energy Loss Correlations
Woschni Heat loss correlation is found from Ferguson et al. [17] eq. (8.37) & (8.39). The
characteristic velocity, w is found from the mean piston speed with ﬁtted constants and
initial conditions for the compression stroke:
w = k1 · Sp + k2 · T0 · Vd · (p −pmot)
V0 · p0
,
(5.14)
where the subscript of zero is at the conditions when the intake valves closes. k1 and
k2 are constants, k1 = 2.28 at all modelled time steps and k2 is zero before start of
combustion (SOC) and 3.24· 10−3 after SOC. As the SOC is unknown from the beginning,
the model runs through multiple times with updated SOC. SOC is found from the
acceleration of heat release exceeding 1J/CAD2. Now the heat transfer coeﬃcient can
be found from Ferguson et al. [17] eq. (8.39);
h = 3.26 · B−0.2 · p0.8 · T−0.55 · w0.8 · dt
(5.15)
Page 33 of 71
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
The pressure used in the correlation for heat transfer coeﬃcient is in kPa even though
all other calculations are in SI units. dt is the time between each CAD.
dQwall = h · Aht(Twall −T)
(5.16)
As mentioned previously, the heat transfer area and wall temperature is divided into
two where the temperature is assumed diﬀerent at the piston top and the cylinder walls.
As a blow by from the cylinders is expected, a correlation was made to include the blow
by.
dmbb
dθ
= C f ·
p
ρdp,
(5.17)
where dp is the diﬀerence between cylinder pressure and the atmospheric pressure in the
crankcase and C f is a ﬁtted constant where the ﬁt tries to reach reasonable levels of blow
by studying the diﬀerence between measured and modelled exhaust temperature and
between intake and exhaust pressures. It involves some uncertainty to ﬁt this constant
in this manner, as the heat loss might inﬂuence the exhaust gas conditions. The blow
by is included as the model had a to high energy content in the exhaust gas compared
to measured. If the exhaust ﬂow was measured the blow by could be estimated more
precisely.
5.3.3
Fuel Mixtures
As the fuel used in the experiments was consisting of both a part methanol and a part ad-
ditive, the stoichiometric air fuel ratio is not the 6.47 found previously but dependent on
the blend, see Table 4. The additive is assumed to be n-heptane-like in carbon/hydrogen
ratio and lower heating value.
5.3.4
Exhaust gas Energy Content
From the measured air and fuel ﬂow, the equilibrium state after combustion can be
found and, in turn, the mean molecular weight of the exhaust gas can be calculated and
be used to ﬁnd the amount of moles in the exhaust. It is an assumption that the gas has
reached equilibrium even if this might not be the case. But ﬁnding the molecular weight
in this way is considered acceptable. As the emissions are measured in the Bosch gas
Page 34 of 71
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Fuel #
Weight %
MeOH
Weight %
ADD
LHV
[MJ/kg]
AFRs [-]
1-5,10
95
5
21.1
6.89
6
75
25
25.9
8.63
7
85
15
23.5
7.76
8
90
3.5
22.3
7.32
9
92.5
7.5
21.7
7.11
11
96.5
3.5
20.7
6.76
Table 4: Fuel Blends Used in Experiments
analyser, the exhaust gas energy can be found as:
Qexh = nexh

VOLCO/100 · MCO · LHVTHC + VOLTHC/106 · MTHC · LHVTHC

(5.18)
The Bosch gas analyser calculate the unburned thermal hydrocarbons (THC) as propane
therefore that the lower heating value (LHV) for the THC is 40.6 MJ/kg. For CO the
LHV is 10.1 MJ/kg.
5.3.5
Simulation of Higher Compression Ratio by Increasing Intake Temperature
As the engine is limited in the compression ratio, it is decided to simulate a higher
compression ratio by increasing the intake temperature which again will increase the
compression temperature. With higher compression temperature, the methanol ignites
easier. To calculate the corresponding compression ratio, the isentropic correlation is
used for simpliﬁcation. Many unknown factors is anyway present which imply that a
more complicated model would not necessarily provide a more precise result.
Tcomp = Tin · CRγ−1
(5.19)
which solved for the compression ratio is found as:
CR =
Tcomp
Tin

1
γ−1
(5.20)
Page 35 of 71
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
6
Results, Mathematical Model and M95 Mixture
The ﬁrst experiments were all carried out using a M95 mixture, i.e. 95 % methanol
and 5 % additive. Please refer to Appendix A for blending scheme. A delay in the
delivery from Nouryon forced the ﬁrst couple of experiments to be performed with
leftover additive from Frausings [8] experiments, the so called ECO-Fuid. Experiments
where Eco-Fluid was used was repeated with the additive from Nouryon and no clear
diﬀerence was observed therefore, it is not speciﬁed where each additive type is used
except in Appendix A.
6.1
Mathematical Model - Zero Dimensional Reactor
To get an idea of the diﬀerence in ignition parameters between diesel (n-Dodecane) and
methanol the programme Cantera is used. A constant volume reactor ﬁlled with a fuel
air mixture with a excess air ratio of 1.2 is made and it is simulated how long it takes
before the temperature has increased by 400 K. The start conditions is a compression
pressure of 40 bar and a range of compression temperatures are tested. The fuel air
ratio is close to stoichiometric in the simulations as it is expected in a diesel process
that around the ignition point, the excess air is expected to be one even though the
overall excess air ratio is higher. As it can be seen in Figure 16, methanol do ignite
signiﬁcantly later than diesel at the same compression temperatures. Further, from
Figure 16, it can be seen that the compression pressure inﬂuence the ignition delay as a
higher pressure advance the ignition and a lower pressure retards the ignition. To get
diesel like combustion from pressure increment alone, the pressure need to be raised
to unrealistic levels. It is clear that even for increased pressures the temperature need
to be elevated as well. The pressure increment can give the ﬁnal push to secure start of
combustion.
To get an idea of the diﬀerence between diesel and methanol, another reactor model
is set up. This time the temperature development over time is in focus where various
compression temperatures have been simulated. Temperatures are chosen close to the
expected compression temperature experienced by the cylinder gas in the BUHK engine
and steadily increasing it until methanol reach diesel-like ignition delay. The results are
presented in Figure 17 where it can be seen that to reach an ignition delay of 10 ms, the
Page 36 of 71
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
Temperature [oC]
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Ignition delay [ms]
Ignition Delay for Different Compression Temperatures at =1.2
Pure Methanol 40 bar
n-Dodecane 40 bar
Methanol 55 bar
Methanol 25 bar
Figure 16: Ignition delay at diﬀerent ambient conditions for both
methanol and n-dodecane
methanol blend must be heated an additional 150 °C at TDC compared to diesel. One
way to obtain this, is to increase the intake temperature. For a compression ratio of 16.4,
the intake temperature must be 160 °C for the compression temperature to reach 825 °C
if the intake pressure is 1 bar.
6.2
Start of Injection Sweep
The purpose of these experiments is to test the PPCI combustion of methanol as previ-
ous work shows great potential for early injections, see Section 2. Therefore, the ﬁrst
experiments is made with a sweep of the injection timing to get an idea of how injection
timing inﬂuences the combustion. All experiments are designed at high load conditions.
The load is controlled by the excess air ratio λ. To be independent of the variations in
ambient conditions, the intake air is slightly heated to 40 °C and charged to just above
1 bar for all experiments.
At ﬁrst, the delivered work and indicated eﬃciency of the methanol combustion was
investigated. Here, it is seen that integrating pdV and the measured brake power is not in
agreement with respect to power produced by the engine. In Figure 18, the two indicated
eﬃciencies are shown where it can be seen that the eﬃciency for the integrated pdV is
signiﬁcant lower than the eﬃciency found from the brake torque. This is worrying as
Page 37 of 71
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Time [ms]
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
Temperature [C]
Ignition Delay for Different Auto Ignition Temperatures
Methanol 800oC
Methanol 825oC
Diesel 675oC
Comression Temerature
Figure 17: Comparison between methanol and n-dodecane regarding
ignition delay
Page 38 of 71
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Start of Injection [CAD]
25
30
35
40
45
50
Indicated Efficiency, [%]
Pressure times Volume change
From Brake Torque
Figure 18: Comparison of the two diﬀerent ways of calculating indi-
cated eﬃciency
both can be used to ﬁnd the indicated work or power from the experimental cylinder.
For further results, the brake torque is used to ﬁnd power and eﬃciencies as these values
seem most realistic for this engine based on previous experience. This problematic issue
is further discussed in Section 8.
Figure 19 shows the heat release rate curves for a range of quite early injection timings.
It is found that for injections started at 45 −25 CAD BTDC, the ignition occur almost
at the same crank angle but for both earlier and later injections the ignition is retarded.
For the range of injections at 45 −25 CAD BTDC, the combustion seems to be an Otto
cycle which is a ﬂame propagation or a PPCI combustion. This can be seen by the single
intense peak in the heat release rate caused by a fast moving ﬂame after ignition. If
emission measurements of NOx were made, it could give a better idea of combustion
type as the PPCI is expected to produce less NOx than the Otto cycle.
As seen in Table 5 where the emissions are shown, it is clear that the CO and THC
increase with a late injection which tells us that the combustion is not complete. The
reason for the poor and late ignition observed for late injection can be that the fuel takes
time to vaporise causing the ignition to occur after TDC has been reached.
Page 39 of 71
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
0
50
100
150
[J/CAD]
55 CAD BTDC
45 CAD BTDC
35 CAD BTDC
25 CAD BTDC
15 CAD BTDC
Figure 19: Heat release rate for diﬀerent injection timings
In Figure 20, the heat release curves for an experiment with even earlier fuel injections
are shown. Here, it can be seen that the the earliest injections cause later ignition and
that the heat release rate curve becomes wider. The reason for early injections giving
rise to a delayed ignition could be because the temperature inside the cylinder is relative
cold when injected. This increases the take oﬀlength causing the fuel to possibly reach
the wall without suﬃcient vaporisation. When the fuel has reached the colder wall it
takes longer time before it vaporises and ignite and therefore, the combustion becomes
more incomplete increasing CO and THC formation.
A comparison between the diﬀerent experiments with a SOI sweep regarding indicated
and CO2 formation eﬃciency is shown in Figure 21. The CO2 formation eﬃciency is
based on the theoretical maximum of CO2 based on the fuel blend and measured air
fuel ratio. The magenta and green curve represent the ECO-Fluid additive blend 1
and 3 respectively. The blue and red curves are with Nouryon’s additive blend 4 and 5
respectively. From the fact that the curves basically are on top of each other, it is seen that
the experiments are reproducible and within expected standard deviation. Generally
for most of the tested injection timings, a high fuel utilisation is seen as almost all of
the fuel is converted into CO2 and therefore, only low concentrations of CO and THC
were measured. Furthermore, it is seen that indicated eﬃciencies as high as 50 % can be
Page 40 of 71
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
0
50
100
150
[J/CAD]
40 CAD BTDC
45 CAD BTDC
50 CAD BTDC
55 CAD BTDC
60 CAD BTDC
Figure 20: Heat release rate for early injection timings
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Start of Injection [CAD BTDC]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
η [%]
Start of Injection Sweep
Break Efficiency
CO2 Formation Efficiency Bosch
Figure 21: Measured indicated and CO2-formation eﬃciency for diﬀer-
ent SOI experiments
Page 41 of 71
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
SOI BTDC
[CAD]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
55
7.29
449
0.201
310
3.2
50
7.6
322
0.169
240
2.4
45
7.29
265
0.140
200
2.0
40
7.54
2701
0.239
225
2.2
35
7.35
275
0.410
375
3.9
30
6.82
234
0.646
510
5.2
25
6.71
206
0.779
585
6.0
20
6.21
224
1.27
910
9.3
15
5.61
350
1.72
1260
12.6
Table 5: Energy Content in Exhaust as Function of SOI
reached which is corresponding to previous results on this engine fuelled with alcohol,
Schramm et al. [6].
6.3
Intake Temperature Sweep
When an appropriate injection timing was found, the inﬂuence of the intake air temper-
ature was tested to simulate a higher compression ratio without a costly modiﬁcation to
the engine. By increasing the intake air temperature, the temperature reached at TDC
will also increase which can advance the injection. But increasing the intake temperature
lowers the air density which again means that the energy content in the cylinder drops
which might reverse the wanted eﬀect. The test was performed to see if an increment of
the intake air temperature could increase the fuel utilisation the last few percent. Again,
the excess air ratio at λ ≈2 is used which correspond to a high load condition. The
injection is started at 40 CAD BTDC to ensure a PPCI combustion.
From the heat release rate curves, Figure 22, it can be seen that the fuel ignite in a single
fast combustion and for that ignition timing, the intake temperature does not have a lot
of inﬂuence. Furthermore, it is seen that the combustion is fast causing a high pressure
rise rate and maximum pressure. This is very wearing on the engine piston and piston
rings and therefore undesired. Advantages of a fast combustion is that it can increase
Page 42 of 71
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
[J/CAD]
40
50
70
80
90
Figure 22: Heat release rate for diﬀerent intake temperatures
the eﬃciency. The expected higher eﬃciency is not seen on the brake eﬃciency but
this can be due to a lower energy amount in the cylinder with the lower air density. It
is further seen that the fuel utilisation is high for all intake temperatures and that the
experiment was reproducible, see Figure 23. The blue curves have a charging pressure
of 1.26 bar and the red curve have an charging pressure at 1.05 bar and from that, it
can be concluded that this change in charging pressure has very little inﬂuence in the
degree of CO2 formation and eﬃciency for these operating conditions. If anything, it
seems like the lower charging pressure increase both fuel utilisation and eﬃciency a
little but too narrow a study was made to conclude this.
6.4
Load Sweep
In the last series of the M95 experiments, the eﬀect of excess air ratio was studied. The
fuel was still injected to ensure a PPCI combustion with an early injection at 45 CAD
BTDC and a slightly heated intake air to 40°C.
By studying both Figure 24 and Table 6, it is obvious that the load pattern needs to be
narrow when early injections are used. It can be seen that when lambda is increased
above 2.5 the low ﬂammability limits becomes a problem and only because it is not
Page 43 of 71
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Intake Temperature [oC]
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
η [%]
Intake Temperature Sweeps
Indicated Efficiency
CO2 Formation Efficiency Bosch
Figure 23: CO2-formation and indicated eﬃciency for two individual
experiments with intake temperature Sweep
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Excess Air, λ [-]
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
η [%]
Brake Power Sweeps
Break Efficiency
CO2 Formation Efficiency Bosch
Figure 24: Measured indicated and CO2 formation eﬃciency for diﬀer-
ent loads
fully mixed, some combustion is seen but the fuel is not converted fully into CO2 and
the engines eﬃciency drop as well. It can also be seen from the heat release rate curve
(Figure 25) how the mixtures with highest excess air ratio have a late combustion without
a lot of heat release. Of course the higher excess air ratio means that less fuel is present
so a lower heat release is expected but not the retarded ignition.
Page 44 of 71
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
[J/CAD]
1.54
1.75
2.01
2.27
2.47
3.02
 3.5
Figure 25: Heat release rate for diﬀerent loads
Approximate
λ [-]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
1.5
8.83
393
0.406
430
3.6
1.75
8.21
365
0.219
290
2.8
2.0
7.03
355
0.164
250
2.7
2.25
6.34
345
0.166
245
3.0
2.5
5.69
345
0.164
245
3.2
3
3.96
673
0.311
465
7.5
3.5
2.36
1953
0.388
1015
19.0
Table 6: Energy content in exhaust as function of excess air ratio
7
Results of Varying Fuel Mixture and Late Fuel Injection
After the meeting with the Maritime Methanol Project, new experiments were planned
and performed. It was tried to initiate combustion using injection timings used in al-
ready installed diesel engines and reach a more traditional diesel-like combustion with
a lower share of premixed combustion, followed by a mixing control combustion. This is
Page 45 of 71
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
chosen because the introduction of methanol in marine engines will be done in already
installed engines. On most of the installed engines today, there is no option of desired
early injection timings. It is chosen to test later injection with increased intake tem-
perature to generate higher compression temperature simulating a higher compression
ratio. Well knowing that the air density decrease while heating demands less fuel to be
injected, it is hoped that the energy density still will be suﬃcient for ignition. From the
previous experiments, it is found that the standard intake air ﬂow at ≈22 kg/h can be
heated to ≈95°C which is not necessarily suﬃcient. To get suﬃcient temperatures, the
ﬂow was decreased by decreasing charging pressure implying a further decrease in the
energy amount in the cylinder.
7.1
Combustion Characteristics of Diﬀerent Additive Quantities
By running experiments with diﬀerent methanol additive blends, the type of combus-
tion is studied together with the possibility of getting a mixing controlled combustion
zone, also called the diﬀusion ﬂame. With this type of combustion, a lower max pres-
sure is reached compared to PPCI and the lower ﬂammability range is not a problem as
a stoichiometric air fuel ratio exists at the ﬂame. In this section, the needed compression
temperature to create the diﬀusion ﬂame is studied. The compression temperature is
increased by increasing the intake air temperature. For these experiments, the excess
air ratio was set at λ ≈3 and tested fuel blends ranged from 25%w additive and down
to 3.5%w additive. The reason for not testing methanol blends with less additive is that
the need for intake air heating became higher than possible to achieve with this setup.
As the additive part is reduced, the need for external heating increases and to achieve
the needed level of heating, it was in some cases necessary to decrease the ﬂow into the
cylinder. With decreased ﬂow into the cylinder, the charging pressure was decreased
which again decreased the compression pressure. As seen from the model made in
Cantera, Section 6.1, the compression pressure also plays a part in igniting the fuel
mixture.
Figures 26 to 31 show the heat release rate curves for the diﬀerent additive amounts
with diﬀerent intake temperatures and therefore, diﬀerent compression temperatures.
In some of the experiments the heat release rate curves for intake temperatures which
do not provide the necessary compression temperature for a stable combustion are
Page 46 of 71
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
0
10
20
30
40
50
[J/CAD]
34 ºC
50 ºC
70 ºC
90 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 26: Heat release rate for 25%w additive content in the methanol
mixture w. diﬀerent intake air temperatures as seen in ﬁgure legend
included. These are spotted by having a lower peak, being wider and ignite later. These
are formed due to the average being made over 48 cycles where multiple misﬁres were
experienced.
The heat release rate seen in Figure 26 shows a yet dominating short premixed com-
bustion with the peak between 5 and 0 CAD BTDC followed by a small period of time
with what could be a diﬀusion ﬂame shown in the area from 0 to 15 CAD ATDC. The
injection timing is seen by the black vertical lines where it can be seen that the diﬀusion
ﬂame is not present during injection, suggesting that it might be more an after-oxidation
than a true diﬀusion ﬂame.
Figure 27 shows the heat release curves for stable combustion at three diﬀerent intake
temperatures with a mixture of 15%w additive. Furthermore, it can be seen how the
ignition occur just before end of injection. The absence of the clear premixed peak tells
that a diﬀerent type of combustion is present. This will be discussed further later on.
In Figure 28, the heat release curves for the 10%w mixture can be seen. It shows how
the increased intake temperature advance the ignition and accelerate the heat release.
In both Figures 29 and 30, the curves where misﬁring occurred are shown for low intake
Page 47 of 71
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
[J/CAD]
40 ºC
70 ºC
80 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 27: Heat release rate for 15%w additive content in the methanol
mixture w. diﬀerent intake temperatures
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
[J/CAD]
60 ºC
80 ºC
50 ºC
70 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 28: Heat release rate for 10%w additive content in the methanol
mixture w. diﬀerent intake temperatures
Page 48 of 71
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
θ CAD
0
10
20
30
40
50
[J/CAD]
 80 ºC
 90 ºC
 70 ºC
 50 ºC
 40 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 29: Heat release rate for 7.5%w additive content in the methanol
mixture w. diﬀerent intake temperatures
temperatures. These resulted in higher amounts of THC and CO concentrations in the
exhaust gas telling that the fuel was not fully converted into CO2.
For the lowest amount of additive in the mixture tested, a less intense peak can be seen
even for completed combustion but from the emission measurements, it can be seen
that the fuel is almost fully converted.
As seen in Figures 26 to 31, the ignition delay is very depending on the fuel composition
and as expected, more additive does advance the ignition and less additive retard the
ignition. Further, it is seen that for the 25%w additive, the premixed combustion is
followed by some diﬀusion ﬂame but for the cases with less additive, only a single
peak is seen followed by something looking like an after oxidation. For most cases the
powerful combustion stops at 10-15 CAD ATDC where the after-oxidation starts.
Compared to the previous experiments with early injection, it is seen that the heat release
rate is wider. As the heat release rate forms a single peak it could seem like a premixed
combustion but this would be narrower than observed. Therefore, a diﬀerent type of
ﬂame is expected. A reason for this can be because methanol is already containing
oxygen and some of the fuel combust inside the fuel cloud in a rich combustion and
Page 49 of 71
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
[J/CAD]
 60 ºC
 80 ºC
100 ºC
110 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 30: Heat release rate for 5%w additive content in the methanol
mixture w. diﬀerent intake temperatures
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
[J/CAD]
110 ºC
118 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 31: Heat release rate for 3.5%w additive content in the methanol
mixture w. diﬀerent intake temperatures
Page 50 of 71
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Additive Amount in Fuel [%w]
750
800
850
900
950
1000
Compression Temperature [K]
Figure 32: Compression temperature needed for stable combustion as
function of additive content
not just at the cloud edge where diesel usually combust after fuel vaporisation. And
for the methanol combustion, when the fuel injection stops the after-oxidation begins
due to the rich combustion. This could be a very interesting topic to study further in
relation to NOx and particulate matter formation. It would be expected that a rich ﬂame
inside the fuel cloud could cause a higher PM formation but as methanol do not contain
carbon to carbon binding soot should not be formed. For this combustion, the excess
air ratio might be below one in some areas and one for other areas, and this would be
causing the ﬂame temperature to be higher compared to the early injections where the
excess air ratio was above one for all combustion areas. The higher ﬂame temperature
might cause a higher NOx formation but as most of the combustion is rich, less Oxygen
is present to form NOx.
In summary, the compression temperature at which stable combustion occurred for
each fuel mixture is shown in Figure 32. It can be seen that the needed compression
temperature increase rapidly when the fuel mixture becomes close to 100%w methanol.
From this, it can be concluded that the additive is eﬀective as an ignition improver as
expected. These compression temperatures are found from an isentropic compression
and based on ignition at TDC for all cases.
Page 51 of 71
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Additive Qauntity in Fuel [%]
5
10
15
20
25
30
Compression Ratio [-]
wo. Turbo charge (40ºC Intake)
w 1.5 bar Turbo Charge (75ºC Intake)
w. 2 bar Turbo Charge  (100ºC Intake)
Figure 33: Compression ratio required to reach desired temperature
with diﬀerent turbo charging from 40°C
As the intake temperature was raised to simulate a higher compression ratio, the com-
pression ratio needed to reach same compression temperature as Figure 32 with three
diﬀerent base intake temperatures which is reached by turbo charging 40°C air is shown
in Figure 33.
In the following, it is chosen to look further at the case with 5%w additive as this case
can best be compared to the previous experiments. For this mixture the intake air was
heated to 80°C which corresponds to a compression temperature just below 700°C before
stable combustion was observed. Here, it is seen that the indicated eﬃciency is around
43% for the case with best eﬃciency as seen in Figure 34. In addition, the emissions
measured by the Bosch gas analyser can be seen in Table 7. Compared to the early
injection cases, it is observed that the late injection causes a higher percent energy in
exhaust than many of the early injection with relative cold intake air indicating a less
complete combustion takes place even for increased compression temperature.
For high share additive mixed into methanol the measured eﬃciency is shown in Figure
35. It was expected to reach a high fuel conversion eﬃciency but this is not observed.
This is probably due to the fact that the additive is calculated as n-heptane and therefore,
a higher CO2 amount and fuel energy is used for the calculations. Instead, studying the
Page 52 of 71
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Intake Temperature[o C]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
η [%]
Efficiencies 5% Additive, Late Injection
Indicated Efficiency
CO2 Formation Efficiency Bosch
Figure 34: CO2-formation and indicated eﬃciencies for the 5%w addi-
tive/methanol mixture and late injection timings
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Intake Temperature[o C]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
η [%]
CO2 Formation Efficiency and Indicated Efficiency 25% Additive
Indicated Efficiency
CO2 Formation Efficiency Bosch
Figure 35: CO2-formation and indicated eﬃciencies for late injection
25% additive
Page 53 of 71
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Intake T
[°C]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
80
4.81
263
0.278
225
4.3
Table 7: Energy content in exhaust for 5%w additive in the methanol
mixture and late injection timing
emissions conﬁrms a high fuel conversion eﬃciency from the emission measurements
where low amounts of CO and THC are observed as seen in Table 8.
SOI BTDC
[CAD]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
10
3.97
148
0.216
170
3.8
Table 8: Energy content in exhaust for 25 % additive and late injection
7.2
n-Heptane
To help verifying the measurement equipment, experiments with n-heptane have been
performed. This is chosen because n-heptane is a diesel-like fuel where an almost
complete combustion is expected with a low ignition delay. All the experiments are
performed with an excess air ratio of approximately 3. Furthermore, injection timings
are late and if nothing else is stated, the fuel is injected at 10 CAD BTDC and the intake
temperature is 80°C. First, the inﬂuence of the intake air temperature is studied where
it can be seen in Figure 36 that increasing the temperature only decrease the ignition
delay very slightly. The combustion is a fast process in a premixed combustion followed
by some after-oxidation. It can be seen that the ignition of n-heptane occurs faster than
for methanol but the total fuel conversion is less which is also seen by the emissions,
listed in Table 9.
The eﬀect of the fuel injection timing is also studied. It is found that the ignition delay
is not aﬀected by the start of injection as for all tested operation modes the auto ignition
conditions for n-heptane are reached before injection. For all cases, the combustion is
Page 54 of 71
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
[J/CAD]
40 ºC
60 ºC
80 ºC
100 ºC
SOI
EOI
Figure 36: Heat release rate for n-heptane combustion
Intake T
[°C]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
40
3.65
240
0.683
490
8.7
60
3.73
268
0.607
440
8.1
80
3.81
146
0.551
350
6.6
100
3.91
175
0.453
300
5.9
Table 9: Energy content in exhaust for n-heptane w. varying intake
temperature
a fast combustion followed by some after oxidation even for injections at TDC where
a more mixing controlled ﬂame was expected to be observed. This can be because the
fuel nozzle installed in the engine does not atomise the fuel properly. This would retard
the ignition and result in higher amount of premixing as well as increasing the take
oﬀlength of the fuel droplet inside the cylinder which, in turn will increase the risk of
liquid fuel reaching the piston top. The emissions are alike but it seems like a better
mixture results in lower CO formation but still high compared to methanol combustion.
Page 55 of 71
==PAGE:61==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
[J/CAD]
0 CAD BTDC
2.5 CAD BTDC
5 CAD BTDC
7.5 CAD BTDC
10 CAD BTDC
12.5 CAD BTDC
15 CAD BTDC
Figure 37: Heat release rate for n-heptane combustion
SOI BTDC
[CAD]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
0
3.80
95
0.589
490
6.8
2.5
3.88
81
0.457
440
5.3
5
3.96
110
0.439
440
5.3
7.5
4.00
115
0.391
440
4.8
12.5
4.11
108
0.467
300
5.5
15
4.09
113
0.378
440
4.6
Table 10: Energy content in exhaust for n-heptane w. varying start of
injection
Lastly, the eﬀect of the fuel injection pressure was studied. This is done because a higher
fuel injection pressure is expected to increase the mixture rate and therefore, decrease
ignition delay and CO formation. From the heat release rate curves, no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence is spotted but the emissions conﬁrm a lower CO formation and a higher fuel
conversion. Higher pressures could not be reached with the installed fuel system.
Studying the CO2 formation eﬃciency, it can be seen that even for high injection pres-
Page 56 of 71
==PAGE:62==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
θ CAD
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
[J/CAD]
150 Bar
160 Bar
170 Bar
177 Bar
SOI
EOI
Figure 38: Heat release rate for n-heptane combustion
150
155
160
165
170
175
180
Fuel Injection Pressure [Bar]
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
η [%]
Fuel Injection Pressure Sweep
Indicated Efficiency
CO2 Formation Efficiency Bosch
Figure 39: Indicated and CO2-formation eﬃciency for n-heptane com-
bustion w. varying injection pressure
Page 57 of 71
==PAGE:63==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Fuel
Injection
Pressure
[Bar]
CO2 [%]
THC
[ppm]
CO [%]
≈Exhaust
Energy [J/s]
≈Exhaust
Energy [%]
150
3.81
146
0.551
350
6.6
160
3.83
142
0.511
325
6.2
170
3.95
147
0.483
315
6.0
178
4.00
95
0.377
240
4.5
Table 11: Energy content in exhaust for n-heptane w. varying fuel injec-
tion pressure
sures, the eﬃciency is much lower than for methanol. Moreover, it is seen that the
indicated eﬃciency is lower as well but as the exhaust contain high amounts of energy,
the indicated work is expected to be lower.
Page 58 of 71
==PAGE:64==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
8
Discussion
From all the performed experiments, it can be seen that methanol can deﬁnitely be
used for CI combustion provided the right conditions are established. High indicated
eﬃciencies are obtained for both early and later injection timings. It is observed that
the best fuel utilisation occurs with early injection and a premixed combustion but that
results in high pressures and pressure rise rates. The late fuel injections where a more
controlled ﬂame is created are possible but involves increasing the additive content and
this would destroy the business case. Late injection with low amount of additive is also
possible but the ﬂame is less controlled than a traditional diﬀusion ﬂame.
Comparing the late injection with the early injection, it is seen from the heat release
rate curves that two diﬀerent types of combustion prcesses form. For the early injection,
the conditions for a ﬂame propagation is present or a highly mixed PPCI combustion.
The heat is released in a rapid combustion which matches the combustion of a ﬂame
propagation but also a PPCI. This is seen by the narrow single peak in the heat release
ﬁgures, Figures 19, 20, 22, and 25. Methanol has good properties for ﬂame propagation
which also is seen by the high CO2 formation eﬃciency. For the experiment with later
injection, SOI at 10 CAD BTDC, a wider less intense peak is seen for all other mixtures
than 25% additive. The combustion of the other mixtures do neither seem like a pre-
mixed combustion nor a diﬀusion mixing control combustion. A possible explanation
for the wide heat release rate seen in Figures 27 to 31 could be the oxygen trapped inside
the fuel. The fuel contain up to 50% weight oxygen implying that it might make a rich
premix-like combustion even inside the fuel cloud just as it is injected as a lot of oxygen
is already present. The additive takes oxygen from methanol and itself to ignite when
auto ignition temperature is reached. Then, an after-oxidation follows with less intense
heat release but enough to remove most of THC and CO and produce a little additional
power. Diﬀerently from diesel, methanol can combust at very rich mixtures (36%vol in
air corresponding to an excess air ratio at λ ≈0.25) implying that only a little amount of
additional oxygen is needed to start the combustion and the after-oxidation can easier
continue. This could be the reason why much less CO is seen from methanol combus-
tion compared to n-heptane. As the methanol mixture is almost completely injected
before ignition it seems like some additional oxygen is mixed into the fuel cloud for
then to combust in the rich cloud.
Page 59 of 71
==PAGE:65==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
θ CAD
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
QHRR [-/CAD]
Early Injection
Late Injection
Figure 40: Heat release curves for early injection and late injection nor-
malised with repect to energy input
Comparing the early injection with late injection (Figure 40), it can be seen that the early
injection have been mixed well and ignite before TDC and have a rapid combustion. The
late injection uses some time to vaporise and mix before it as well ignites and combust
at a slower rate and an increased duration. More fuel is injected for the early injection
to be above the lower ﬂammability limit. The curves are normalised with respect to the
energy input to better compare rate and combustion eﬃciency.
The two diﬀerent types of combustion have diﬀerent advantages and disadvantages; the
early injection causing PPCI have a tendency to give a slight increase in the indicated
eﬃciency compared to the studied injections. But for the lower load settings, the energy
content in the exhaust increase with the early injection and for the higher load conditions
the max pressure inside the cylinder increases to very high levels which means that the
engine is exposed to much higher wear on the piston, piston rings and the cylinder in
general. These two conditions cause a narrow usable load range for the early injection.
For the late injection, a higher intake temperature is needed to obtain a stable combus-
tion but with suﬃcient preheat, it is possible for even low load conditions to make a
complete combustion. This implies that the combustion for the lower load conditions,
the energy content in the exhaust is lower compared to early injection at same load. A
Page 60 of 71
==PAGE:66==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
major advantage of the late injection is the possibilities for changing the load without
risk of reaching the lower ﬂammability limit. Though the greatest advantage of late
injection is the fact that the most maritime engines today already use late injections
making it easy to implement. A disadvantage of the late injection can be a higher ﬂame
temperature causing higher NOx formations and that the combustion is less complete
which again is causing higher fuel consumption for same energy output. However, this
needs a more thorough study to conclude anything ﬁrmly.
For the experiments performed to study the needed compression temperature to get sta-
ble combustion, intake temperature increments of 10°C were made and the combustion
should be stable before it was accepted as a suﬃcient compression temperature making
the end temperature an overestimation of the needed temperature. Also as mentioned,
the energy content in the cylinder is decreased as the air density decrease when heated
which can inﬂuence the needed ignition temperature. Moreover, a limit in the possible
intake air preheating did that lower concentrations of additive were not tested as these
were not expected to combust properly.
As the installed nozzle in the engine is a nozzle designed for gasoline injection, the
droplet sizes are bigger than they usually are in a diesel engine. This is useful for
decreasing injection timings since the injection pressure is limited for these experiments.
But the larger droplets increase the time it take to evaporate the fuel which also increase
the ignition delay and inﬂuence how the fuel is combusted. The larger droplets might
create a rich combustion cloud instead of making the expected diﬀusion ﬂame.
The rich combustion cloud inﬂuences the emissions for speciﬁcally n-heptane. n-heptane
cannot combust at very rich conditions but evaporates fast causing a lack of oxygen when
combustion starts. This cause the combustion to produce soot and when the combus-
tion is done, soot is left which might recombine into CO during the after-oxidation. For
methanol, the combustion is slowed down by methanol’s longer evaporation time and
the fact that methanol can burn at rich conditions causing methanol to produce CO and
less soot during the combustion which can after-oxidate into CO2.
Comparing the results found in these experiments with the previous studies within this
subject, it is found our results are in agreement with these earlier ﬁndings. Comparing
the heat release rate found by Schramm & Jørgensen [6] where E95 also combust in a
relative slow combustion with a slow after-oxidation at late injections correspond to the
Page 61 of 71
==PAGE:67==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
ﬁndings of methanol combustion in this study. This indicates a signiﬁcant similarity
between methanol and ethanol. Furthermore, comparing with the ﬁndings of Huang
et. al [10] on how methanol increase the premixed part of the combustion and increase
ignition delay is also in good agreement with the ﬁndings of this study where the early
injection cause a late auto ignition in a single premixed combustion. The study from
Scania which map the ignition delay for diﬀerent bulk temperatures also conﬁrms the
found tendencies in this study with respect to how small amounts of ignition improver
are needed to advance the ignition. As many of the previous studies have their main
focus on the emissions this study do not compare well with those due to the lack of
emission measurements done here.
8.1
Sources of Error
When conducting experiments, it is important to look at the sources of errors and un-
certainties which can explain diﬀerences between the theory and the observed results
or lead to false conclusions. These are:
• Inconsistencies between pressure and brake power
• Bosch gas analyser
• Additive composition
• Measurement equipment uncertainties
• Back-ﬂow through intake valve
• Pressure drift
For all results comparing the work done according to the pressure ﬁle versus the work
done on the axis, it is seen that the axis work is signiﬁcantly higher. This is very un-
expected as both should be the indicated work. The problem causing the diﬀerence
can be from either the pressure pickup or the brake but as the brake shows values in
the expected range, these values are chosen for eﬃciency calculations. The work calcu-
lated from the pressure pickup could be inﬂuenced by residue in the pressure pickup
channel or other issues, e.g. the calibration of the pressure pickup. If a problem with
Page 62 of 71
==PAGE:68==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
the pressure pickup was present, it inﬂuences all the results as the entire mathematical
model is based on the cylinder pressure. As the pressure curves look as expected, it is
assumed that the tendencies and the shape regarding heat release are correct even if
the absolute numbers might be oﬀ.
When measuring the back ground air on the Bosch gas analyser, the volumetric oxygen
level was slowly drifting upwards and increased to unrealistic levels above 21% whereas
the CO2 levels were below the expected. The background CO2 was measured to be
around 200 ppm where the expected value was around 400 ppm. It was tried to change
the oxygen sensor in the Bosch equipment but it made no diﬀerence for the back ground
measurements. Therefore, the study is more a qualitative than quantitative study and
the emissions are used as guidelines and to show tendencies. Furthermore, the Bosch
gas analyser values for THC used a long time to stabilise and for situations where no to
little combustion was seen, the THC values are relatively low compared to the expected
values.
The composition of the additive is an uncertainty in it self and seeing the results from
the experiments with high amount of additive mixed into the fuel conﬁrms this, re-
fer to Figure 35. It was expected to have higher combustion eﬃciency as the additive
should increase the CO2 formation eﬃciency but the opposite is observed which can
be explained by the fact that the additive does not have a n-heptane like carbon/hy-
drogen ratio. This also inﬂuenced the indicated eﬃciency as the fuel energy content
was calculated higher than the real energy input. In addition, it was observed that the
ﬁrst results after a fuel change could inﬂuence the results even though the injected fuel
corresponded to at least a forth of a tank before measurements were done. The reason
not to use the entire fuel tank and refuel with the same fuel was due to time limitations.
In hindsight it would have been a good investment to secure that no left over fuel was
used in the experiments.
All the used equipment is precise with a limit and have a range of where they can mea-
sure, increasing the margin of error when experiments are done close to the range limits.
As an example the fuel ﬂow-meter measured a negative fuel ﬂow at approximately 0.3
g/s when injection was not in progress.
During experiments with diﬀerent additive amount, it was tried to decrease the ﬂow to
increase intake temperature by decreasing charging pressure. When charging pressure
Page 63 of 71
==PAGE:69==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
became below atmospheric conditions, the cycle to cycle variation increased and the CO
and THC emissions increased. This could be because the air was pushed backwards
through intake valve and was reused for the next cycle causing problems for combustion.
This is possible as the intake valve opens before TDC has been reached during the air
exchange cycle.
An additional source of error was the pressurised system. When conducting experi-
ments, the intake pressure was not constant and had a tendency to increase during the
experimental day, increasing the airﬂow as well. Then it was necessary to increase the
fuel ﬂow as well but during each experiment the fuel ﬂow was constant which is why
the excess air ratio might have increased without noticing. Furthermore, the pressure
did ﬂuctuate a little. This could have been decreased if the engine had more than a
single cylinder.
Page 64 of 71
==PAGE:70==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
9
Further Work
As mentioned, this project partly work as an initial study for the Maritime Methanol
Project where further work is already planned. By the end of this study experiments are
to be performed on a larger test stand at a Scania heavy duty alcohol application engine
(220 kW). Here they will use ﬁndings from this study to further optimise methanol
combustion and study the emissions. The ﬁnal goal is to get a MAN 1.6 MW maritime
engine to run on methanol without expensive modiﬁcations.
If the equipment was installed and the time was available, it would be an interesting
study to examine the emissions of NOx and THC during the diﬀerent combustion types.
The emissions can tell something about the gas temperature reached in the cylinder
and the fuel air mixture of the combustion zone. In addition, it is important to study
the emissions to be sure that methanol can work as a low emission fuel in IMO’s ECA
zones.
Other experiments can be designed to study the inﬂuence of the mixture inside the
cylinder. For this study, the inﬂuence of fuel injection pressure have not been included
for methanol experiments but the fuel injection pressure can aﬀect the mixing between
the air and the fuel. A higher injection pressure can increase the mixing rate causing
a faster combustion but it can also risk to inject the fuel down on the colder piston
top causing a worse combustion and a higher CO formation. Furthermore, a higher
injection pressure can increase the ﬂame temperature and thereby, increase the NOx
formation.
It could also be an idea to make a load study for late injection in order to better under-
stand the diﬀerence between the early and late injection both regarding emissions and
eﬃciencies.
To get a better idea of the combustion process a combustion bomb could be used. It
is a constant volume reactor with transparent sides where it is possible to get a visual
impression of the combustion. This can also be used to study ignition delay at diﬀerent
bulk conditions.
On a long term basis, work can be done in making a higher production of green methanol
from biomass or excess electricity from renewable sources. But this is obviously beyond
the scope of the Maritime Methanol Project.
Page 65 of 71
==PAGE:71==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
10
Conclusion
This study consist of two independent studies, i.e. one purely mathematical and one
based on experimental work.
With the mathematical model, it is found that for pure fuel grade methanol the compres-
sion temperature shall be approximately 150°C higher than the one for diesel to get same
ignition delay inside a CI engine. Furthermore, it is found that compression pressure
can advance ignition but the temperature is the most important factor for advancing
the ignition.
Methanol blends with ignition improver have been tested in a small fast going four
stroke engine with a geometric compression ratio of 18. The purpose of the study is to
ﬁnd the combustion characteristics and the required air preheat to obtain complete com-
bustion. A variation of injection timings and various loads for an early injection timing
have been tested. It is found that for the M95 mixture, high load and early injections,
approximately 40 CAD BTDC, no additional preheat compared to the standard of 40°C
is necessary for a complete combustion. For these injection timings the heat release rate
is found to be a single rapid peak corresponding to a combustion from HCCI or highly
mixed PPCI. For injection timings 35-45 CAD BTDC, nearly all the fuel is converted into
CO2. If the intake air was preheated, the start of combustion can be slightly advanced
and further accelerate the combustion. With early injection, a lower load limit is found
as the fuel air mixture becomes too lean to complete combustion properly. The early
injection causes of the fuel air mixture to become overall lean and therefore, the lower
ﬂammability limit of methanol prevents a complete combustion with an excess air ratio
above 2.5.
Experiments with varying additive amount with a late injection and a lower load were
performed. Here it was found that for a high content of ignition improver, a fast ignition
and rapid combustion was obtained and for a low amount of ignition improver, the
required preheat to even obtain stable combustion was greatly increased. Furthermore,
the combustion characteristics were studied. Here it was found that the ﬂame burns in
a slow rich combustion and an after-oxidation occur afterwards resulting in little CO
and THC in the exhaust. The eﬃciencies for late injections were nearly as good as the
eﬃciencies obtained by early injection and PPCI combustion.
The lowest quantity of additive which could establish stable combustion was 3.5%w. This
Page 66 of 71
==PAGE:72==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
was obtained by increasing compression temperature to approximately 775°C which
was the limit for this particular setup.
All in all, methanol application in CI engines is possible without any engine modiﬁcation
provided that the intake air can reach certain temperatures.
Page 67 of 71
==PAGE:73==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
11
Nomenclature
Symbol
Unit
Name
Symbol
Unit
Name
˙Qchem
J/CAD
Chemical heat release
N
min−1
Engine Speed
˙Qwall
J/CAD
Heat transfer
n
mol
Moles
γ
-
Speciﬁc heat ratio
p
Pa
Cylinder Pressure
λ
-
Excess air ratio
P
W
Power
θ
°
Crank angle degree
R
m
Crank Radius
Aht
m2
Heat transfer area
Rs
J/kg −K
Speciﬁc Gas Constant
AFR
-
Air fuel ratio
Ru
J/mol −K
Universal Gas Constant
B
m
Bore
S
m
Stroke length
C f
-
Blow by coeﬃcient
Sp
m/s
Means Piston Speed
h
J/m2 −K −CAD
Heat transfer coeﬃcient
T
K
Temperature
h
J/kg −K
Speciﬁc enthalpy
T
Nm
Torque
hc
m
clearing height
U
J
Internal Energy
Hu
J/kg
Lower heating value
V
m3
Volume
k1
-
Woschni’s Fitted Constant 1
Vd
m3
Displacement Volume
k2
-
Woschni’s Fitted Constant 2
w
m/s
Characteristic piston velocity
L
m
Connecting rod length
x
-
Carbon atoms in molecyle
m
kg
mass
y
-
Hydrogen -||-
M
g/mol
Molarcular weight
z
-
Oxygen -||-
Subscripts
air
Air
ht
Heat Transfer
bb
Blow By
in
intake
c
Clearing
MeOH
Methanol
chem
Chemical
mot
Motored
comp
Compression
s
Speciﬁc
d
displacement
s
Stoichiometric
e
Eﬀective
tot
Total
exh
Exhaust
vol
Volume based
g
Geometric
w
Weight based
Page 68 of 71
==PAGE:74==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
Abbreviations
ATDC
After Top Dead Centre
BTDC
Before Top Dead Centre
CAD
Crank Angle Degree
CI
Compression Ignition
CR
Compression Ratio
DCLM
Dichloromethane
DME
Dimethyl Ether
DTI
Technical Institute of Denmark
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
E95
Ethanol blend with 5% Additive
ECA
Environmental Control Areas
EUDP
Energy Technology Development and Demonstration Program
GHG
Green House Gasses
HCCI
Homogenously Charged Compression Ignition
HRR
Heat Release Rate
IMEP
Indicated Mean Eﬀective Pressure
IMO
International Martime Organisation
LHV
Lower Heating Value
LNG
Liqueﬁed Natural Gas
M95
Methanol blend with 5% Additive
ME-LGI
Methanol Liquid Gas Injection
PPCI
Partially Premixed Compression Ignition
RPM
Revolution Per Minute
SI
Spark Ignition
SOC
Start of Combustion
SOI
Start of Injection
TDC
Top Dead Centre
THC
Thermal Hydrocarbons
TRL
Technological Readiness Level
VTT
Technical Research Centre of Finland
Page 69 of 71
==PAGE:75==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
References
[1] IMO.
Greenhouse
gas
emissions.
http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/
Environment/PollutionPrevention/AirPollution/Pages/GHG-Emissions.aspx,
2018.
[2] Spencer C. Sorenson. Engine Principles and Vehicles. Spencer C. Sorenson, draft
version edition, 2014.
[3] MAN Energy Solution.
Using methanol fuel in the man b&w me-lgi series.
https://www.mandieselturbo.com/docs/default-source/shopwaredocuments/
using-methanol-fuel-in-the-man-b-w-me-lgi-series.pdf, 2013.
[4] Per Stålhammar.
Scania – ed95 development,
alcohol ci combustion.
http://www.lth.se/fileadmin/mot2030/filer/11._Stalhammar_-_Scania_
ED95_development.pdf, 2015.
[5] Mårten Westerholm Christer Söderström Timo Huhtisaari & Gurpeet Singh Nils-
Olof Nylund, Timo Murtonen. Testing of various fuel and additive options in a
compression-ignited heavy-duty alcohol engine. The 21st International Symposium
of Alcohol Fuels, 2016.
[6] Jesper Schramm & Mads Carsten Jørgensen. Detailed investigation of alcohol fuels
in diesel-type combustion. The 21st International Symposium of Alcohol Fuels, 2016.
[7] Troels Dyhr Pedersen. Testing of diesel fuel blends with methanol ethanol and
butanol. 2016.
[8] Rasmus Frausing. In house experiments. Personal Conversation, 2017.
[9] Päivi Aakko-Saksa, Mårten T. Westerholm, Rasmus Pettinen, Christer Söderström,
Piritta Roslund, Pekka Piimäkorpi, Päivi Koponen, Timo Murtonen, Matti Niin-
istö, Martin Tunér, and Joanne Ellis. Renewable methanol with ignition improver
additive for diesel engines. Energy & Fuels, 2019.
[10] D. M. Jiang K. Zeng B. Liu J. Q. Zhang Z. H. Huang, H. B. Lu and X. B. Wang.
Combustion characteristics and heat release analysis of a compression ignition
engine operating on a diesel/methanol blend. 218, 2004.
Page 70 of 71
==PAGE:76==
Master thesis s143929
February 2, 2020
[11] Greg Dolan.
Methanol fuels:
Market and policy drivers.
https:
//brintbranchen.dk/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Greg-Dolan_
Int-Meoh-Conference-Copenhagen-8-May-2017.pdf, 2017.
[12] Per Juul Dahl. https://www.topsoe.com/products/syncor-methanoltm.
[13] C.V. Ovesen N.C Schjødt J. Sehested S.G. Thomsen K. Aasberg-Petersen, I. Dybkjær.
Natural gas to synthesis gas - catalyst and catalytic processes. Journal of Natural
Gas Science and Engineering, 2011.
[14] L. Bromberg & W.K. Cheng. Methanol as an alternative transportation fuel in the
us: Options for sustainable and/or energy-secure transportation. 2010.
[15] Kai Zhao. China issues methanol vehicle promotion policy. 2019.
[16] G. Stiesch. Modeling Engine Spray and Combustion Process. Springer, ﬁrst edition,
2003.
[17] Colin R. Ferguson & Allan T. Kirkpatrick. Internal Combustion Engines - Applied
Thermoscience. John Wiley & Sons Inc, second edition, 2001.
Page 71 of 71
==PAGE:77==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 4131
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk 
February 2020
