==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Report
Master of Science in Engineering
Estimation of shallow groundwater using ma-
chine learning methods
Shenghan Gao (s171980)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Estimation of shallow ground water using machine learning methods
Supervisor:
Morten Mørup, Associate professor of Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence at DTU
Julian Koch, Researcher at GEUS
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
Applied Mathematics and Computer science
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Project Period:
1 Oct, 2019 - 1 Mar, 2020
ETC:
30
Education:
M.Sc
Field:
DTU Compute
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Groundwater level prediction is essential in management of groundwater resources
because the water level directly influences our life on so many aspects, from agri-
culture, biology to ecosystem. This study models the depth to shallow water table
in wintertime extreme condition due to the fact that groundwater level is especially
close to terrain in wintertime, which poses a severe risk to groundwater induced flood.
In order to manage groundwater resource in winter and take measures in advance to
support decision making, a meaningful and accurate water lever prediction is neces-
sary and important.
In this project, Random Forest regression model, Gaussian Process regression model
and Artificial Neural Network regression model are investigated respectively. The
objective of this project is to seek any improvement on predictive accuracy by other
two types of regression model given random forest regression as premise by Julian
Koch[Koc+].
In this study there are 13163 data in total for model training, 87% of the data are
collected from borehole and the rest data from coast, stream or lake will be used as
additional training data to increase the robustness of the model. At the end of the
study, an additional independent data set will be predicted and mapped to visualise
the model performance.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
The two-year period of Master student life at Technical University of Denmark is
coming to the end. This period is a valuable journey as well as a memorial experience
in my whole life. It is the first time I come to a world-level institution to pursue
my dream and come across all these adorable passionate young students, devoted re-
searchers as well as experienced professors and brilliant engineers around me. These
glorious days at DTU are irreplaceable and does have sentimental value to me.
First of all, I kindly deliver my sincere gratitude to my parents Gao An and Ma
Zhiling who always support me and stand by my side with all their love. I am proud
of being your daughter. And also thanks my boyfriend Dou Yi for his company and
inspiration all the way whenever I could embrace a hopeful future or hit setbacks.
Moreover, I sincerely appreciate my supervisor Morten Mørup for his help and guid-
ance through this period. He guides and supports me with enough patience which
enables me to explore down the way. His ability and altitude impress me a lot. Fur-
thermore, I would also give my thanks to my stakeholder - Julian Koch who helps me
a lot no matter on thesis or on domain knowledge. He always try his best to support
me and my work.
I also give my thanks to the staff in Mathematical Modelling and Computation group
and the adorable classmates I met in the lecture. They help each other and also be
able to solve complex tasks in their own way. I learned a lot in all the group work
and it is really sparkling when we exchanged our ideas.
Finally, I would also like to thank my friend no matter if they stay at the same
place with me or not. Thanks for your company, encouragement and the love you
gave me to support me pursue my future even though I am confused and frustrated.
I will never forget the memorable period here, the experience I have here and all
the adorable people I met.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Study Area and Data Description
5
2.1
Study Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Data Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
9
3.0.1
Data visualisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.0.2
Data Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.0.3
PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Methodology
17
4.1
Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
Important Terminology and Method Illustration
. . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Regression Random Forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.3
Impurity measures and purity gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.4
Hyper-parameter Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Gaussian Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Kernel Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Kernel Choosing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.3
Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.4
Model selection and Parameter Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.5
Warped Gaussian Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.6
Sparse Gaussian Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.1
Basic Structure of Feed-forward Neural Network
. . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Back-propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.3
Output Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.3.1
Linear Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4.3.3.2
Softmax Units for Multinomial Output Distributions
31
4.3.4
Hidden Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.4.1
Rectified Linear Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3.4.2
Logistic Sigmoid and Hyperbolic Tangent . . . . . . .
32
4.3.5
Training Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.5.1
SGD Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.5.2
RMSprop Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.5.3
Adam Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.6
Architecture Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.6.1
1 output ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.6.2
2 output ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.7
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.7.1
L2 regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.7.2
Dropout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.8
Batch Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Result and Discussion
41
5.1
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Random Forest Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.2
Gaussian Process Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.2.1
Original database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2.2
Inverse transformation on output . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.2.3
Input transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.2.4
Sparse Gaussian Process - FITC . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.1.3
Neural Network Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.3.1
1 output ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.1.3.2
2 output ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Additional Application
59
6.1
Random Forest Regression Model Forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Gaussian Process Regression Model Forecast
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Neural Network Regression Model Forecast
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Conclusion
63
A Appendix A - Data correction by sine model
65
B Appendix B - Feature notion illustration
67
C Appendix C - Additional model result display
69
C.1 Additional Gaussian Process Model Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.1.1
Sparse Gaussian Process Model Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C.2 Additional Neural Network Result
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
C.2.1
1 output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.2.2
2 output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
D Appendix D - Transformed data visualization
75
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
The improvement of prediction accuracy in shallow groundwater level is essential in
hydrology due to the effect groundwater has on society and ecosystems which is be-
yond hydrology area itself. In paper [FLM13], the author stated that up to one third
of the terrestrial area is either directly or indirectly affected by groundwater, which
means human activities are heavily influenced by the shallow groundwater system
including crop yield, agricultural systems and drinking water supply.
For exam-
ple,paper [Zip+15] has shown the strong interrelationship between crop yield and the
groundwater system. They concluded that the groundwater have a huge influence on
the necessary water demands for crop growth, either the groundwater too close to the
surface or too far away could have a side effect on the agriculture which could lead to
reduced yields. Besides, the shallow groundwater is of great importance in the urban
area where high groundwater level can lead to urban groundwater flooding [Mac+12].
However, climate change gives rise to groundwater level fluctuation reflecting on
groundwater recharge or storage which could lead to the problems mentioned above.
As the fact of that, an accurate prediction of groundwater level not just can maintain
the functional operation of infrastructure in society as well as of ecosystem, it also
helps the related department protect local residents against groundwater flooding and
guide them how to take measures against it in advance.
Because of the high spatial and temporal variability, simulating fluctuated ground-
water level process is a difficult task. In order to train a proper model to achieve the
accurate prediction, enough data of good quality for the training process is essential.
At the same time, model flexibility is also important due to the highly spatial and
temporal variability of groundwater level.
Quite a few machine learning techniques have been employed to predict the dynamic
system of groundwater such as artificial neural network [DCT05], multiple linear re-
gression [sahoo2013groundwater]and ANFIS system [EMK14]. Regression model
based on Random Forest algorithm [Koc+] will form a starting point for this project.
The advantage of ANN is that in contrast to multiple linear regression, ANN can
learn feature representations potentially alleviating needs for features engineering.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
However, lack of interpretability is one of the drawbacks when employing ANN and
RF.
Uncertainty quantification is the endorsement for the model, which portray the qual-
ity of the model and is also the indicator of predictive accuracy showing how reliable
the result is to some extent. In paper [Koc+], two type of methods are used to quan-
tify uncertainty, named Random Forests Regression Kriging and Quantile Regression
Forests. The first one is a famous geostatistical approach for spatial interpolation
which could be able to capture the spatial correlation by variogram model.
The
kriging variance is computed by variogram model, which is low in vicinity area in
the data and increases when exceed the border. Latter one analyses the quantiles
of distribution of predicted target values which generates a prediction interval over
predictive values.
1.2
Literature Review
A comprehensive and feasible model is essential in order to tackle the problems men-
tioned above.The rapid development of machine learning broaden the way in which
it enables us to address the issue with diverse data-driven methods used to be impos-
sible before. Data-driven model is easier to construct than physical-based models as
well as be able to provide us a overall more accurate estimated results. With the de-
velopment of technology it is also much more convenient and efficient to conduct the
transformation from explicit physically process to compact data. In the meanwhile
data-driven model is able to allow us to extract the information with relatively low
cost comparing to physically based model.
Actually, a number of machine learning methods have already been successfully im-
plemented to predict temporal dynamics of groundwater level with time-series data
and attain a reasonable result such as multiple linear regression[SJ13]. Multiple linear
regression is one of the most common way to do regression task due to its simple pro-
cedure and straightforward interpretation which is easy to understand on a modular
level. However, in some cases where there is a bulk of variables and the interrelation-
ship of variable is nonlinear, it would be a tough one for multiple linear regression
cause it cannot explore the entwined correlation among variables.
As the limitation of multiple linear regression, neural network is another most pre-
vailing method among all of the regression algorithms due to its powerful ability to
capture the non-linear interrelationship of variables and its sparkling accurate per-
formance. Different architectures of ANN method can be found in [DCT05] [SJ13].
Despite the high accuracy and excellent performance that ANN could achieve, to
some extent lack of interpretation and point estimation are less convinced.
On the other hand, a huge majority of techniques have been employed with time-
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Thesis Outline
3
series data to predict temporal dynamic groundwater level. The importance of spatial
factor on groundwater level so far has not been fully investigated and the influence of
that is still waiting for exploring. This project aims to investigate variables at high
spatial resolution especially in extreme condition and the outcome will be used to
screen fluctuation of groundwater level in winter time as well as benefit for environ-
ment decision making and measure planning.
The scope of this project is
• Can the predictive accuracy of RF be improved by use of GP or ANN?
• Are there merits of the use of GP to quantify uncertainty in contrast to ensemble
uncertainty quantification using RF?
• Can data of other regions be formulated as independent validation set fed to
the RF,ANN and GP model?
1.3
Thesis Outline
The objective of this project is to implement Gaussian Process regression and Ar-
tificial Neural Network to solve the regression task regarding to groundwater level
prediction and investigate the merits and any possible improvement of these two
methods comparing to Random Forest regression.
Chapter 2 delivers the study area and data description. This chapter deliver a brief
study area for the data used in this project and describe the detailed information
with regard to data set such as attributes, data types and criteria we used to filter
data.
Chapter 3 is talking about data pre-processing and data visualisation. In this chapter
pre-processing of input for training data is described, talking about data transforma-
tion method for following training process and how the transformation affect the
distribution of input data. And then pictorial explanation will be showed as visual-
ization.
Chapter 4 includes Methodology illustration.In this chapter basic illustration of con-
cept over each method is discussed. From random forest, gaussian process to neural
network and parameter settings in this projected is also covered.
Chapter 5 displays the result of the predictive model upon three different regres-
sion methods, delivering a straightforward way to visualise the result and discussion
with regards to the model selection. Regression model evaluated by different criteria
introduced in this chapter and discuss their performance respectively. Feature impor-
tance of random forest model and GPs model is described and compared.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Chapter 6 is about additional forecast. This chapter is an application part of trained
regression model. With another independent data file, it is meaningful to apply model
into this new data file and map the forecast result to compare how three models per-
forms.
Chapter 7 is conclusion.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Study Area and Data
Description
2.1
Study Area
The study area covers a large part of the Danish peninsular, located in Northern
Europe (54.5 −57.8◦N and 8.0–10.9°E) and referred to as Jutland. The extent of the
studied area amounts to 15000km2 [Koc+]. The geological settings and surficial con-
ditions are illustrated by fig 2.1. The landscape of Jutland is covered by Pleistocene
glaciations and postglacial processes. The dominant landscape of the eastern part
is Weichselian moraine sediments with high clay content while the west is featured
by moraine sediments, traced back to Saalian age (Hill Island) intertwined by Weich-
selian sandy out-wash plains, as said in paper [Koc+].
2.2
Data Description
The data comprises total 26 variables describing the hydro-geological settings of a
well and outputs from a hydro-logical simulation of Danish national water resources
model (DK-model: Højberg et al., 2013). As introduced in paper [Koc+], in addi-
tion to the well observations, additional observations along streams, coastline and the
center points of lakes are also mixed in training data in order to provide critical infor-
mation for machine learning model rather than only borehole data. The groundwater
level was set to zero at those given locations.
Following figure 2.1 portrays the location of observations collected for training data
set.
Well data was extracted from the national database , Jupiter([HP11]). Groundwater
observations from wells less than filter depth 10m were preserved across 20-years pe-
riod from 1998 to 2017. Several constraints are imposed on the raw data set to form
a meaningful data set. (1) the mean water level may not be lower than filter depth
10m, (2) the water levels may not be higher 5 m above surface, (3) the standard
deviation of head observations may not be greater than 3 m and (4) the well may not
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Study Area and Data Description
Figure 2.1: The study site covers the north corner of Jutland in Denmark.
This
map is showed with 8 types of predominant geological landscape across this area.
Observations for training data set are detected across the whole area as red dots
shows. Additional data set along major coastlines, lakes and rivers are also painted
be in operation, from illustration in paper [Koc+].
At wells with several data recorded, the minimum will be used as input for train-
ing data.
On the contrary, wells with fewer observations will be transformed by
predefined sine model to an expected wintertime condition observation. The figure
A.1 illustrates how sine model works to capitalize rare extreme condition observations
in appendix A.
In fig 2.2 [Koc+], a list of variables are collected used to train the regression model.
This list comprises variable information including geology, topography, soil texture,
drainage condition, landscape type and coordinates etc, which are grouped by their
characteristics into 7 class.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Data Description
7
Figure 2.2: variable list
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Data Pre-processing
and Visualisation
Data pre-processing is an important step not just in machine learning, also in any
other areas wherever data analysis is needed. Data could exist in so many different
forms. In data pre-processing stage, what we need to do is to transform or encode
raw data into any form we need, or the model need, so model could parse it.
Data can be regarded as a collection of data objects, which are described by a number
of features. Features capture the characteristics of a data set, also called variables.
Features can be portrayed by different types. Fig 3.1 illustrates the category we most
come across.
Figure 3.1: Statistical Data Type
• Interval: Distance between objects can be measured
• Ratio: Absolute zero mean absence of measured objects
• Nominal: Objects belong to a category, like in our case
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
• Ordinal: Objects can be ranked
In this project, both two types of data are involved - numerical data and categor-
ical data. Before we dive into next level, categorical data needs to be addressed in
some way, which makes it meaningful to model.
A most common way addressing categorical data is called one-hot encoding, which
transform categorical data into a vector consisted of 0 and 1, indicating presence or
absence of an element.
Except encoding categorical variable into dummy variable, cleaning data with missing
values, duplicate values or extreme values is also essential.
This part delivers a raw data visualization by box plot and scatter plot to show
how the data distributes. PCA is implemented as well to show the linearly correla-
tion for the whole dataset.
3.0.1
Data visualisation
Figure 3.2a and 3.2b show the numerical data set distribution and figure3.4a and 3.4b
illustrate how the categorical data distributes.
High dimension of training data poses a risk of fuzzy figure vision. In order to
zoom in the scatter plot, first 8 variables are chosen to deliver a high resolution vi-
sualisation showed as fig 3.3. From the figure 3.2b it could be seen that most of the
variables are distributed scattered and do not show any trend except the clay variable.
It does follow a trend between four types of clay variables. Attributes elevation and
detrended elevation are sort of linearly correlated because the only gap between these
two variables is an intercept - mean elevation.
In fig 3.4 x axis indicates the types of classes of categorical variables and y axis is
the target values.
From the data points plot above, it is clear that the relation between variables and
target value is not so obvious and straight-forward.
3.0.2
Data Transformation
From the scatter plot of raw data set above, it could be seen in continuous data object,
part of features distribute with tail such as claya, clayb, clayc, clayd, topographic wet-
ness index, flow accumulation, slope, horizontal distance to water body, quarternary
thickness, clay depth, dk_model. Skewed distribution of data sometimes affects the
==PAGE:19==
3 Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
11
(a) visualization by box plot
(b) visualization by pairwise scatter plot
Figure 3.2: numerical data visualization
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
Figure 3.3: First 8 dimension of numerical data visualisation
model performance to some extent. In order to verify if these skewed data have ad-
verse effect on regression model, some ways transforming data will be applied on them.
Here are three types of transformation methods applied.
• log transformation, log(x + ϵ) where ϵ represent rounding negative minimum
value, avoiding infinity value in log transformation
• softplus transformation, log(1 + exp (x))
• inverse softplus transformation on target values, log(exp (y) −1)
==PAGE:21==
3 Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
13
(a) visualization by box plot
(b) visualization by pairwise scatter plot
Figure 3.4: categorical data visualization
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
It is the fact that distribution of numerical variable is changed due to data trans-
formation. Fig D.2 and fig D.1 in appendix D illustrate how transformed data dis-
tributes. In next PCA part, projected data on two dimensional principal components
also depicts how these transformations manipulate the data.
3.0.3
PCA
PCA (Principal Component Analysis) as we known, is a powerful tool for data pre-
processing, which could achieve the goal of dimension reduction by orthogonal trans-
formation to convert a huge data set of possibly linearly correlated variables into a
set of values of linearly independent, which keeps the most essential and influential
features in input data. This kind of pre-process method could be able to help save
computational time by removing the redundant variables especially in an enormous
database.
As mentioned above, due to the fact that our data set is a mixture of continuous
variables and categorical variables, it is essential to transform categorical variables
into numeric values to let the model be able to deal with. Here one-out-of-K-coding
is applied.
Fig 3.5, 3.6 and 3.7 plot the projected data onto two and three principal compo-
nents respectively. On the top left corner, the whole data set is projected onto three
principal components. The top right corner shows the projected onto two principal
components. Both figure are plotted against target value - groundwater level obser-
vations. The bottom figures illustrate how much the components contribute.
Figure 3.5: PCA projected visualisation for original data against. Top two figures
plot projected attributes against target values
==PAGE:23==
3 Data Pre-processing and Visualisation
15
Figure 3.6: PCA projected visualisation for log transformation. Top two figure plot
projected attributes against target values
Figure 3.7: PCA projected visualisation for softplus transformation. Top two figures
plot projected attributes against target values
In fig 3.5, 3.6 it could be seen after log transformation applied the input data
becomes less skewed as some points scattering at the corner in fig 3.5 are disappeared.
In 3.7, softplus function is applied, from the scatter plot it shows the distribution of
input data is warped by this type of transformation. The data at bottom left corner
is sharpened and overall distributed not as centered as above. However, the variance
contribution in three different data distributions looks similar.
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
4.1
Random Forest
4.1.1
Important Terminology and Method Illustration
Let’s start with explanation of some terminology in random forest:
• Root node: The top node where the splitting start from, containing all the
attributes
• Node: Represent a ’test set’ in attributes
• Leaf: A node no children, as we say it is pure
• Branch: Representing the outcome after each time split
Random Forest is an ensemble method where multiple models are trained instead
of only one model.
Besides, their outputs are combined to obtain an integrated
result which get a better predictive result than only use one model. The structure
of ensemble method is illustrate in figure 4.1 [HSM].
Random forest consists of
multiple decision trees where the sampled training data for each tree is selected by
bagging method which produce T data sets from original data set with N data sampled
randomly with replacement and then each decision tree trained by Ti sample data
set. In fig 4.2[Cha19], the working flow of random forest is showed. In this method
bagging method is applied in random forest which simply take prediction by average.
In bagging method, 36.8% data points named out-of-bag data set, of original data
set will be omitted because of sampled with replacement which is exactly the data
set used for testing.
In random forest, bagging method significantly reduces the influence of correlation
for training data selection which allows that each decision tree would not rely heavily
on one typical variable. As a result of that, it increases credibility for outputs and
makes less prone to overfitting.
==PAGE:26==
18
4 Methodology
Figure 4.1: Ensemble methods structure
Figure 4.2: random forest structure
4.1.2
Regression Random Forest
Random forest, as illustrated above, is a tree-based method working both for clas-
sification and regression. The aim of the project is to implement random forest for
regression where continuous value yi is what we seek.
In the tree-based method,
unlike other regression model such as logistic regression, we acquire the predictive
value yi here by asking a series of questions. A tree is constructed based on xi and
the answer of that questions. Next assign yi a constant value. Decision trees were
originally developed by Earl B. Hunt (and coauthors) in 1966 in his Concept Learning
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Random Forest
19
System where the construction of the sequence of questions was intended to model
human concept acquisition. Pseudo code of hunt algorithm can be seen as table 4.1.
[HSM].
4.1.3
Impurity measures and purity gain
So how do we choose the question when the tree is organized to acquire a better
result?
There are generally two components to select a good question:
• how balanced the question is ?
• how pure the split is ?
If the question is really specific and targeted, we can only get a branch containing
very few targets and therefore the branch will not be informative enough as well as
an unbalanced tree will increase the time complexity of the searching process.
On the other hand, we want to split into groups as pure as possible to contain only one
specific kind of target as we want. This can be accomplished by quantifying the impu-
rity at root and at the K potential branches using impurity measure. The impurity of
root is denoted as I(r) and of potential branches are denoted as I(v1), I(v2), ...I(vk).
The impurity for each branch is weighted by the fraction of observations at that
branch. By contrasting the impurity before the split to the impurity after the split
we can get the purity gain ∆for the specific question. The computation method is
formulated as following:
∆= I(r) −
K
∑
k=1
N(vk)
N(r) I(vk)
Hunt Algorithm for Regression Trees
Require: Initial tree T only containing the root node
Require: Dr : Data set associated with the current branch. Initially just the full data set
if The stop criteria is met then:
Add a leaf node to the tree which assigns every observation the mean value of the nodes
in Dr: y(r) =
1
N(r)
∑
i∈r yi
else
Try a number of different splits on Dr. For each split, compute the purity gain using
the sum-of-squares impurity measure and select the split Dr = {Dv1...Dvk}
with the highest purity gain
Recursively call the method on {Dv1...Dvk}
Table 4.1: Hunt Algorithm for Regression
==PAGE:28==
20
4 Methodology
High purity gain means the impurity of each individual branch is low. The weight
N(vk)
N(r) is to expand the influence for a larger groups in the split.
Following table 4.2 are four popular methods to compute the impurity I(v)￿
Entropy(v)
I(v) = −∑C
c=1 p(c|v) log2 p(c|v)
Gini(v)
I(v) = 1 −∑C
c=1 p(c|v)2
ClassError(v)
I(v) = 1 −maxc p(c|v)
MSE
I(v) =
1
N(v)
∑
i∈v where y(v) =
1
N(v)
∑
i∈v yi
Table 4.2: Methods of computing impurity I(v)
The top three methods in the table are for classification task and therefore here we
choose the last one: MSE error for the impurity function in regression mission.
4.1.4
Hyper-parameter Estimation
In this project random search cross validation is implemented to investigate best
combination of hyper-parameter in random forest. We provide different settings at
beginning and train model with different combinatorial settings to grab a best per-
formed one.
4.2
Gaussian Process
A Gaussian process is a collection of random variables, any finite number of which
have a joint Gaussian distribution [RW05] [Mac]. In other words, Gaussian Process
is a stochastic process where the collection of random variable indexed by time-series
or space have multivariate gaussian distribution and the class of normal distribution
is closed under linear operation [WIK].
Gaussian process is a non-parametric model which is determined by a mean func-
tion and a covariance function. Covariance function is also known as kernel function
which determine the relation between the attributes of inputs. As gaussian process
is not a parametric model, its regression model is flexible and adjustable according
to the change of input points. The more data points are given, the more posterior
uncertainty would reduce close to the observation and the mean function will adjust
itself to pass through those input points [WR96].
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Gaussian Process
21
Given a mean function and a kernel function, a prior from this specific gaussian
process can be determined and the pictorial process can be viewed like below 4.3:
Figure 4.3: Gaussian process prior distribution
In theory, we could regard gaussian process as an infinite dimensional distribution
over functions. It does not like other parametric model need to train exactly numbers
of parameters to fit a function like we want. In gaussian process, all of things matter
here is data given a mean function and kernel function. Gaussian process will auto-fit
the data. Here just a few samples are displayed.
After given training data points, the posterior could be derived given that the prop-
erty of gaussian distribution. Gaussian distribution is closed under linear operation,
which means the joint distribution, condition distribution over variables following
gaussian distribution are still sticking to gaussian distribution. And the posterior
distribution is illustrated by figure 4.4:
Figure 4.4: Gaussian process posterior distribution
Finally, the regression function, also the Gaussian Process prediction process with
uncertainty can be depicted by following figure 4.5:
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Methodology
Figure 4.5: Gaussian process prediction
Above three figures illustrate the whole process of how gaussian process regression
works.
4.2.1
Kernel Function
Kernel function, known as covariance function in gaussian process, is crucial which
determines the trend of the function and encodes our assumption for the model into
the function which we are going to learn. It is clear that in machine learning the
notion of similarity between data points is essential as the assumption if the input x
is close test input data, then we would believe their target value y would be highly
related to the training. Due to the assumption,the training data close to the test
points is informative about prediction. Kernel function is the typical tool here depict
the relation of data points and provide information given that training data for the
prediction process.
A great variety of kernel functions have been derived to deal with different trend of
function we would like to assume. One of the most popular and widely used kernel is
Square Exponential kernel, also called Radial Basis Function kernel. The other types
of most common kernel including periodic kernel, Mattern kernel, linear kernel and
constant kernel. These kernel have the form
Radial Basis Function kernel: kSE(x, y) = σ2 exp( x−x
′
2l2 )
Periodic Kernel: k(x, y) = σ2 exp(−2 sin2(π(x−x′)/p)
l2
)
Matter32 Kernel: k(x, y) = σ2(1 +
√
3|x−y|
θ
)exp(
√
3|x−y|
θ
)
Linear Kernel: k(x, y) = σ2xy
Constant: k(x, y) = σ2
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Gaussian Process
23
Figure 4.6: Radial Basis Function kernel
Figure 4.7: Periodic Kernel
Figure 4.8: Mattern32 Kernel
Kernel examples and associated samples are shown in fig 4.6, 4.7,4.8, 4.9 and 4.10.
Introduction about Kernels can be found at [Duv].
4.2.2
Kernel Choosing
Kernel has a significantly impact on prediction performance as it determines the prior
of the function for gaussian process. In other words, kernel encode our prior belief
about the function we are going to train to prediction approximation. As a result of
that, kernel can be chosen by several indicator:
• Is it stationary?
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Methodology
Figure 4.9: Linear Kernel
Figure 4.10: Constant Kernel
• Is it continuous?
• Does it follow some specific trend and pattern? (for instance, periodic)
Following is the list of kernel using in the model:
• SE kernel for continuous variable
• SE kernel for spatial variable
• Linear kernel for categorical variable
• Matter32 kernel for categorical variable
4.2.3
Prediction
Prediction with noise-free observation
As mentioned above, a gaussian process can be specified by a mean function and
a covariance function of a gaussian process f(x). The joint distribution of training
targets and test targets is specified by the function of:
(
y
y∗
)
∼N(µ, K)
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Gaussian Process
25
where
µ =
( m(X)
m(X∗)
)
,
K =
( K
K∗
K∗
K∗∗
)
Then
p(y∗|X, y, X∗) = N(µ∗, Σ∗)
µ∗= m(X∗) −KT
∗K−1(y −m(X)
Σ∗= K∗∗−KT
∗K−1K∗
where the µ∗and Σ∗is the mean function and covariance function for the poste-
rior distribution for gaussian process.
Above is the illustration under noiseless-free condition, which is an ideal system. Fol-
lowing will show how gaussian process works with noise observation
Prediction with noise observation In realistic problem, it is too ideal to set
the data noiseless. As a fact of that, the function under noisy observation will be
y = f(x)+ϵ. If the noise variable is added into mean function and covariance function
of gaussian process, it will looks like following:
µ =
( m(X)
m(X∗)
)
,
K =
(K + σ2I
K∗
K∗
K∗∗
)
Then
p(y∗|X, y, X∗) = N(µ∗, Σ∗)
µ∗= m(X∗) −KT
∗(K + σ2I)−1(y −m(X)
Σ∗= K∗∗−KT
∗(K + σ2I)−1K∗
where mean function keeps the same while the variance of the noise variable is
put into diagonal element in covariance function.
4.2.4
Model selection and Parameter Estimation
Model Selection Problem
The choice of the kernel (hyper)parameters has a great influence on the model per-
formance. In order to make the model become a practical tool in an application,
making a decision with regards to the details of specification is necessary. Some of
the properties maybe easy to specify while some are vague as only little information
is available. We use model selection and parameter estimation to set the tone of the
model. Actually, model selection can help improve the performance of the model and
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Methodology
give a valuable interpretation of the model regarding to a specific condition in reality
to users.
A great variety of covariance functions exist including squared exponential, ratio-
nal quadratic kernel, linear kernel etc. Each of it have their hyper-parameters whose
value also need to be optimized and determined. The selection of covariance and its
hyperparameter is refered as training process in gaussian process.
Except the noise level in the kernel function, there is a special kind of hyperparmater
l in the kernel function, named length scale parameter which determine how far do
you need to move in the feature space for the kernel function value to be correlated.
In such kernel function, the inverse of lenghscale which we called ARD (automatic
relevance determination) [WN08], is used to indicate how relevant an input is. In
ARD, instead of using the same length scale among all the features, each input has
its own unique length scale : if the length scale have a large value, the covariance will
be almost independent of that input. Otherwise the input with small length scale
value has a great influence on the covariance and the outcome. ARD could be used to
remove irrelevant input and has been successfully implemented by several authors, e.g
Parameter Estimation According to the brief introduction with regarding to the
model selection above, we now are aware how essential the choice of parameter is.
This part will elaborate the procedure of estimation and optimization of the parame-
ters.
The kernel parameter θ is estimated by maximizing log likelihood of the parameter
vector, given the input X and dependent variable y.
ˆθ = argmax
x
logp(θ|X, y)
=argmax
{
logp(θ) −1
2yT K−1
y y −1
2log|Ky| −n
2 log(2π)
}
here p(θ) is prior on the hyperparameter, n is number of observations, X is input
data, y is observations, Ky is covariance matrix derived from kernel function.
4.2.5
Warped Gaussian Process
In order to seek a way to improve predictive accuracy further, a method named warped
gaussian process is experimented [SGR04].
It warps observation space through a
nonlinear monotonic function to latent space. The true observation is mapped by a
monotonic nonlinear function to a latent space, here we use softplus function
ˆz = f(tn, ψ) where ψ parameterises the transformation. The log likelihood of warped
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Gaussian Process
27
observations become
L = 1
2log det CN + 1
2f(tN)T C−1
N ftN =
N
∑
n=1
log ∂f(t)
∂t
|tN + N
2 log2π
where C is covariance matrix. The distribution over observation space becomes
P(tN+1|xN+1, D, θ, ψ) = f ′(tN+1)
√
2πσ2
N+1
exp[−1
2(f(tN+1 −ˆzN+1)
σN+1
)]
4.2.6
Sparse Gaussian Process
Gaussian process is a popular Bayesian non-paramatric method for regression and
classification. Unfortunately, the nature of non-parametric method give rise to high
computational complexity problem for large data-set, because of unfavorable N 3 com-
putational complexity where N is number of data points. In order to generalise gaus-
sian process to large data sets as well as accelerate the computational process, there
have been many attempts to introduce sparse gaussian system against full GP with
inducing point M « N. This type of sparse gaussian system bring the full complexity
from N 3 down to M 2N, where M is inducing points far more less than full data set
[QR05].
Let’s recall the computational procedure for the full GPs. The joint GPs prior and
independent likelihood are both following gaussian distribution￿
p(f, f ∗) = N(0,
[Kf,f
Kf,∗
K∗,f
K∗,∗
]
), and
p(y|f) = N(f, σ2
noiseI)
(4.1)
In order to speed up gaussian process regression, we seek a way to modify joint distri-
bution prior p(f, f ∗) in equation 4.1. Let’s first introduce an additional set of latent
variables u = [u1, u2, ..., um] called inducing variables. In Snelson and Ghahramani
(2006) [SG06], they proposed a likelihood approximation to speed up Gaussian process
regression, which they called Sparse Gaussian Processes using Pseudo-inputs (SGPP).
Pseudo-inputs correspond to the location within the domain of input data X which
relax the constraint for the choice of pseudo points not must be a subset of training
data. It avoid the non-smooth selection problem optimization leading to difficulty
of selecting hyperparameters. The covariance function will be parameterized by the
location of inducing points.
The complete data likelihood for pseudo-inputs is
p(y|X, ¯X, ¯f) = N(Kf,uK−1
u,uu, diag[Kf,f −Qf,f] + σ2
noiseI)
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Methodology
where Qa,b = Ka,uK−1
u,uKu,b, ¯f is pseudo targets and ¯X is pseudo inputs. The op-
timization for parameter in order to find a suitable model involving finding pseudo-
inputs locations - good locations for pseudo-inputs could explain real data well and
they will be optimized by maximum likelihood(ML).
The approximated likelihood is reformulated by Quinonero-Candela and Rasmussen
[NH08] to obtaining an equivalent model based on inducing condition:
qF IT C(f, f ∗) = N(0,
[Qf,f −diag[Kf,f −Qf,f]
Qf,∗
Q∗,f
K∗,∗
]
)
The predictive distribution is :
qF IT C(f ∗|y) = N(Q∗,f(Qf,f + Λ)−1y, K∗,∗−Q∗,f(Qf,f + Λ)−1)
= N(K∗,uΣKu,fΛ−1y, K∗,∗−Q∗,∗+ K∗,∗−Q∗,∗+ K∗,uΣKu,∗)
where we define Σ = (Ku,u + Ku,fΛ−1Kf,uy) and Λ = diag[Kf,f −Qf,f + σ2
noiseI].
The computational complexity is M 2N which is much simpler than full GPs.
4.3
Neural Network
Neural Network is a thriving field with numerous research covered a wide variety of
area and applications in the development of artificial intelligence field. Neural network
performs extremely well in numerous areas which tackles and solves a lot of problems
difficult to human but relatively straight-forward way for machine - in a mathematical
way. Nowadays, scientists strive to make a robot ’understand’ human’s way of life
which is intuitive for human but it is of great difficulty to let a robot behave. [GBC16]
The goal of feed-forward neural network is to approximate a latent functionf ∗between
input and output [Spe+91]. Weight and bias parameters will be learned through train-
ing process in order to approximate a best result as the designer want. For example, in
classification problem, the neural network is mapping the input x to a category y, in
the meanwhile, regression problem is to map the input to a numeric result. However,
neural network is still a ’black box’ where lack of interpretability is the drawback of
the model.
In this part, feed-forward neural network is used to predict the groundwater level
and compare the result to what we get from RF model and GP model above. Pre-
dicted results by neural network is general a point prediction. However, except a
predicted result, we would also like to get a confidence interval to increase reliability.
In order to quantify uncertainty here two types of architectures are used and the
result will be compared.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Neural Network
29
4.3.1
Basic Structure of Feed-forward Neural Network
Feed forward neural network is widely applied in many problems with the advent
of back-propagation algorithm to optimize the parameter. The basic architecture of
feed-forward neural network is illustrated in 4.12 [Nie18].
Figure 4.11: Architecture of feed-forward neural network
Computation process:
• linear function z = ∑
i=1 wl
jixi + bl
• activation function: hl = ai(z) where ai is activation function
• output: y = c(h) c is cost function
The reason why this model called feed-forward neural network is the information
flow through the function evaluated by input x, through intermediate hidden layers
and finally to output layer. There is no feedback connection where the output infor-
mation is fed back into itself.
This figure give a clear illustration how a basic and simple feed-forward neural net-
work looks like. The neural network in practical problem is much more complicated
and enormous. The first layer is what we called input layer where the training data is
fed. The next two layer in the middle is hidden layer which decides how the parameter
will be trained. It does not show the desired output directly for each of these layer.
On the contrary, it determines how the net works and performs. It makes networks
behave as designer wanted out of their nets. The last layer is output layer where the
output is generated by the parameter trained by the model.
As we mention above, in order to measure uncertainty of the model, two types of
architectures are designed here to address the problem.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Methodology
4.3.2
Back-propagation
Back-propagation is the way in which how the neural network learn their weights and
bias using the gradient-based algorithm. It tells how the changing weights and bias
changes the cost. In this way, computing partial derivative could be able to quantify
the step how the hyper-parameter changes.
δl is defined as our error and following framework shows how back-propagation con-
tinues working:
• δL = ▽aC · σ
′(zl)
• δl = ((wl+1)T δl+1 · δ
′(zl)
•
∂C
∂bl
j = δl
j
•
∂C
∂wl
jk = al−1
k
δl
j
where C is our cost function, σ is activation function.
4.3.3
Output Units
The choice of cost function is accompanied with the choice of output unit.
4.3.3.1
Linear Units
A simple form of output unit is linear units, based on affine transformation without
non-linearity transformation. This type of units will produce a vector y = W T h + b
with given feature h from previous layer. The linear output units can be regarded
as generating the mean value of a conditional gaussian distribution p(y|x) over input
data. With the varying form of cost function different forms of output value will be
produced.
Maximizing the log-likelihood is equivalent to minimizing the MSE (means square
error). However, the form of cost function is flexible on the designers’ will.
Maximum likelihood framework enable the model to learn not only the mean of
gaussian distribution, but also the covariance of gaussian distribution which provides
a method quantifying the model uncertainty rather than just point prediction. One
thing needs to be pointed out is due to the property of covariance, the output of
covariance needs to be constrained as positive definite matrix. However linear output
units have limited ability to bound the covariance output value into a range as we
want. As the fact of that, some kinds of transformation on covariance output units
is essential. The technical information will be illustrated in architecture design.
Another benefit of linear output units is that less possibility of saturation poses less
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Neural Network
31
risk of gradient-based optimization algorithm and increase the robustness of being
widely used in variety of optimization algorithm.
4.3.3.2
Softmax Units for Multinomial Output Distributions
Any time when a multi-classifier is needed to determine a multi-class probability
distribution, softmax function is used [GBC16]. Softmax function is an activation
function that turns logits numbers into probability that sums to one. The output of
softmax function represents the probability distribution over multi-class task obser-
vations. Softmax is a core element to implement classification task in deep learning
if we wish the model to choose one among n classes.
Softmax function could be regarded as a generalization of sigmoid function which
produce binary classification result. In a binary problem, the output will look like
ˆy = P(y = 1|x)
To generalize to a multiple classification case the output will be formulated as
ˆyi = P(y = i|x)
Here the element of yi will not be required falling in the range between (0,1) but
need sum up to 1. First, a linear transformation will be applied z = W T h + b where
z = log P(y = i|x). And then the softmax function will exponentiate the log operator
such as
softmax(z)i =
exp(zi)
∑
j exp(zj)
4.3.4
Hidden Units
Design of hidden units is an highly flexible area and there is not too much definitive
theoretical guidance. Up to now a bunch of activation functions for hidden layer have
been developed
4.3.4.1
Rectified Linear Units
The function of RELU function is
g(z) = max(0, z)
which is the most popular activation function right now due to its property. RELU is
a such easy function just like linear function on the right side. The first derivative on
right-hand side on the domain is 1 which means it will not saturate and get gradient-
based optimization algorithm stuck. RELU activation function always used on the
top of affine transformation h = g(W T x + b).
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Methodology
Figure 4.12: non-linearity activation function
4.3.4.2
Logistic Sigmoid and Hyperbolic Tangent
Some other popular activation functions are sigmoid function:
σ(a) =
1
1 + e−a
and hyperbolic tangent(tanh) function.
tanh(a) = ea −e−a
ea + e−a
Unlike piece-wise linear activation function, sigmoid and tanh function are differ-
entiable everywhere. However, both of them easily gets into saturation at the high
positive value or negative value among the domain which makes the gradient-based
algorithm experience hardship. The units are only sensitive when z close to zero.
Because of that, using sigmoid or tanh function in hidden units is discouraged.
4.3.5
Training Algorithm
4.3.5.1
SGD Optimization
SGD is a basic gradient-based optimization algorithm [Rud16]. It works the same
as basic gradient descent algorithm while it only woks on a single sample instead of
a batch sample. This simplifies the complexity of the process and procedure time,
however, SGD is easy to fall into oscillation and the step range needs to be handled
with care.
θt = θt−1 −η ▽J(θ, xi, yi)
where η is learning rate, J is objective function and ▽J is gradient of objective
function.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Neural Network
33
4.3.5.2
RMSprop Algorithm
RMSprop is a unpublished adaptive learning rate optimization algorithm, proposed
by Geoff Hinton [Hin].
This method aim to resolve diminishing learning rate in
Adagrad over window. It keeps moving over average of root mean square gradients
and introduces decaying parameter to avoid the trend of infinitely small learning rate.
0.9 is a experimental reasonable default decaying value.
E[g2]t = 0.9E[g2]t−1 + 0.1g2
t
θt+1 = θt −
η
√
E[g2]t + ϵ
where g is gradient.
4.3.5.3
Adam Algorithm
Adam(Adaptive Moment Estimation) is a widely used optimization algorithm in deep
learning [KB14].
It could be seen as a combination of RMSprop algorithm and
Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithm with momentum. It applies square gradient
to scale the learning rate as the way does in RMSprop algorithm as well as takes the
previous gradients into consideration instead of just using gradient at current step
like SGD with momentum.
As RMSprop optimization does, Adam adapts the learning rate individually with re-
spect of each parameter. Square gradient quantifies the pace and updates frequency.
It not just stores an exponentially decaying average of past squared gradients vt like
RMSprop, Adam also keeps an exponentially decaying average of past gradients mt,
similar to momentum [Rud16]:
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
Because m and v are initialized as zero, it is unfair to the model not started with
0 and hence biased the iteration result. They will be corrected by bias estimator like
following:
ˆm =
mt
1 −βt
1
ˆv =
vt
1 −βt
2
As the iteration increase the influence of bias estimator will be eliminated as the
exponential power of beta with good default values 0.9 and 0.999 respectively.
And then parameter will be updated by formula:
θt+1 = θt +
η
√ˆvt + ϵ ˆ
mt
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Methodology
4.3.6
Architecture Design
In this part the architecture used in this project will be illustrated. Here are two types
of architecture to be used, as mentioned above basic one output regression network
and 2 output network to quantify uncertainty as sometimes we do not just want a
point prediction, instead, we would like to get a confidence interval to convince people.
The architecture of two types of neural network are similar. In 1 output network
and 2 output network, the number of neuron in hidden layer is the same, both have
128 neurons in first hidden layer and 64 in second hidden layer. However, the choice
of activation function and cost function could differentiate them from each other.
Following shows the framework of two types of neural network.
4.3.6.1
1 output ANN
In 1-output-network, as the following figure show, just forecasts the mean of ground-
water level. As the figure shows, at each neuron the data will be transformed by
non-linear function - activation function - to capture a more complex latent function.
In classification task, the final output normally use softmax function to generate prob-
ability distribution of each class and optimized given target. However, in regression
task, the final output neuron is a little bit different. What we want is not a probabil-
ity, instead, it is a numeric value as prediction. As a result of that, at final output
neuron activation function is not applied, only linear function is implemented in order
to generate numeric result.
A method call MC dropout had been proposed to measure uncertainty, which keep
dropout active even in evaluation mode to collect a bunch of result after loops [GG15].
However, in our project, this type of method to quantify uncertainty in 1-output-
neural network is not really helpful, so we will use another type of architecture to
quantify uncertainty.
In 1-output-neural network, RELU is used as activation function and cost function is
MSE error, forcing the deviance decreasing. Batch normalization is applied to accel-
erate the convergence.
4.3.6.2
2 output ANN
In this part, architecture of 2-ouput-neural network will be illustrated. As mentioned
above, in this model, the architecture of hidden layer is the same as 1-output-neural
network where 128 and 64 neurons are applied for hidden layer, whereas activation
function and cost function are replaced by Tanh and MAP problem.
Unlike point prediction in 1-output-neural network, 2-output-neural network is to
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Neural Network
35
Figure 4.13: 1 output network working flow
generate a distribution with mean and standard deviation so as to quantify uncer-
tainty of forecast [Bis94]. As a result of that, 2 output neurons are designed, one
for mean and another one for standard deviation.
Standard deviation cannot be
negative, so the output function for std is computed by softplus function, mean still
computed by linear function. In order to measure standard deviation of the predicted
distribution, MSE error needed to be replace by maximum likelihood function. In
the experiments, the results shows that just maximum likelihood cost function cannot
effectively capture the optimized step and the result can be easily out of bound. As
a result of that, a prior is added as constraint so the problem finally transformed as
MAP problem.
The prior of standard deviation is generated by a combination cost function of MSE
cost function and maximum likelihood function with annealing. MSE force the trained
model close to the target and meanwhile maximum likelihood measure the standard
deviation. After several times a group of standard deviation could be computed and
will finally be used as a prior in MAP problem.
4.3.7
Regularization
In neural network model it is easily to be noticed that the performance on training
data is incredibly well but not nearly as good on the test data. This is the sign of
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Methodology
Figure 4.14: 2 output network working flow
overfitting where the model have a high variance and cannot generalize well on test
data.
Trading between increased bias for reduced variance.
In order to overcome this issue and improve the generalization performance two
common types of methods are used.
• get more data
• regularization
A large number of the case in real world data is not always easy to grab. In some
image issues the data could be augmented by transformation or scaling to get more
data to improve the generalization performance and robust. However, most of the
time data augmentation is not an realistic way. Therefore, regularization is a common
way to reduce overfitting. In this section two most common way of regularization -
L2 regularization and dropout - will be posted.
4.3.7.1
L2 regularization
L2 regularization is one of the simplest and widest used parameter norm penalty
method, also known as weight decay. This strategy of this method is to drive weights
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Neural Network
37
closer to the origin by adding penalty term 1
2||w||2 to the objective function [GBC16].
It has been already used for a long time before the advent of deep learning. The aim
of the parameter norm penalty is to limit the complexity of the model to improve the
generalization performance on new input.
In deep learning what we would like is an algorithm let us find the best weights and
bias to approximate the result. In order to let neural network learn through training
and quantify how well the model could achieve,
the regularized objective function is defined as:
˜C(w, b) = C(w, b) + α
2 ||w||2
with corresponding parameter gradient
▽w ˜C(w, b) = ▽wC(w, b) + αw
The update of the weight based on gradient-based algorithm will be defined as:
w ←w −ϵ(▽wC(w, b) + αw)
←(1 −ϵα)w + ϵ ▽w C(w, b)
Here w is the collection of all weights in the neural network and b is all the bias,
n is the number of input variables, ˆy is the observation from the real world and y
is the approximated target through the model. α is the parameter that control the
relative contribution of norm penalty term. The choice of α will have influence on
the solution of network.
We could see the weight decay term changes the learning rules so as to shrink each
step by multiplying a constant factor. The cost function could be replaced by other
types of function according to specific case while in our case the MSE cost function
is the one we used.
4.3.7.2
Dropout
Dropout is another popular regularization method. Unlike L2 regularization adding
penalty term in cost function, dropout aims to reduce overfitting with varying ar-
chitecture in parallel[Sri+14]. During training process, part of units are randomly
ignored temporarily. This could allow the whole model to be trained by different
number of nodes in each layer during the training process and diverse connectivity
to the prior layer, which enables the unit within each layer to play different role and
randomly take on varying responsibility to the next layer. The concept suggests that
units may change in a way that they fix up the mistakes of the other units. This
may lead to complex co-adaptations. This in turn leads to overfitting because these
co-adaptations do not generalize to unseen data[Bro].
Following figure illustrates how dropout could regularize the model with varying
architecture in parallel and reduce overfitting [Sri+14]:
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Methodology
Figure 4.15: Dropout working flow
4.3.8
Batch Normalization
Batch normalization is an algorithm to accelerate the training process by reducing
internal co-variate shift. One of the difficulties to train a appropriate neural network
is that the distribution of the data will change through the training process at each
layer as the parameters will be changed. As a result of that, the choice of learning
rate needed to be handled carefully and the fact of saturation non-linearity hinders
the learning process. This is what we called Internal Co-variate Shift [IS15].
Following is the framework of batch normalization [IS15]: Scale and shift step is
Figure 4.16: Pseudo-code of Batch Normalization
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Neural Network
39
the core among the whole workflow. Normalization helps us fix the distribution and
decorrelate the input, however, it is not enough to present what the original data want
to and lack some of the information. In order to improve the training speed while
not lose too much information from normalization, it introduces two new parameters
γ and β which will transform normalized data back to deliver as much information
as possible as original data do.
Figure 4.17 delivers a simple example how batch normalization differentiate from
standard normalization:
(a) Normalization
(b) Batch Normalization
Figure 4.17: how batch normalization works
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Result and Discussion
5.1
Result
5.1.1
Random Forest Regression
This section post the predicted result in fig 5.1a of random forest regression model
and feature importance in fig 5.1b
RMSE: 1.2718
MAE: 0.8977
Predictive log-likelihood: -6892
Fig 5.2 depicts sensitivity analysis over each attributes based on paper [Koc+].
It could be seen the attribute importance in continuous variables corresponds to the
feature importance figure in fig 5.1b while categorical attributes not exactly follow
the trend. In random forest method, categorical variable will lead to high level of
dimension over input data, which could end up in a biased forest, resulting in a worse
performance. As a fact of that, the feature importance of dummy variables are not
entirely reliable.
5.1.2
Gaussian Process Regression
In this section the prediction result with Gaussian Process regression model will
be showed. In Gaussian Process regression model, three types of model are built
based on different ways of data transformation to investigate any further improved
performance.
• Model based on original data
• Model based on inverse transformation on target value by softplus function
ˆy = log(exp(y) −1)
• Model based on transformation on input data by softplus function ˆx = log(1 +
exp x)
• Model based on transformation on input data by log function
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Result and Discussion
(a) Random Forest regression prediction
(b) feature importance
Figure 5.1: Random Forest regression model
Figure 5.2: variable permutation
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Result
43
In second point-inverse transformation over target value- due to 0.0 value existing,
the transformation toward infinity. To address this problem, here are two ways to
proposed.
• Adding perturbation 1e-6 on 0.0 target otherwise it will be inf
• Remove 0.0 target and around 6000 training data is left. (works better than
adding perturbation one)
5.1.2.1
Original database
This section shows the result over original data with linear kernel and mattern32
kernel respectively.
Linear Kernel for original data
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.3: GP model with linear kernel over original data and model parameters
RMSE 1.2599
MAE 0.8484
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Result and Discussion
Predictive log-likelihood:-6677
Mattern32 Kernel for original data
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.4: GP model with Mattern32 kernel over original data and model parameters
RMSE: 1.2594
MAE: 0.8470
Predictive log-likelihood: -6688
According to the result, it could be seen two different kernel do not lead to a
varying performance over original data space given any criteria.
5.1.2.2
Inverse transformation on output
In this part the output target is inverse transformed by softplus function to uncon-
strained domain. Due to the fact that the inverse transformation of softplus cannot
deal with 0.0 value, we add a small perturbation 1e-6 in 0.0 target avoiding infinite
value. The figure shows the result of mattern32 kernel:
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Result
45
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.5: GP model with Mattern32 kernel over inverse transformation and model
parameters
RMSE: 1.5840
MAE: 0.9998
Predictive log-likelihood: -10871
The error remarkably increases under this condition. We would like to take a measure
to verify if perturbation strategy here is the cause of the enlarged error. This type of
method cannot achieve a high accurate predictive result, as a fact of that we do not
experiment more on linear kernel based on above results.
In order to reduce mean square error and increase the accuracy, another strategy is
taken. Targets equaling 0.0 are removed from input data base instead of adding a
small perturbation: RMSE: 1.2659
MAE: 0.8851
Predictive log-likelihood: -7056
According to the result we could see the accuracy of prediction is actually increas-
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Result and Discussion
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.6: GP model with removed zero value and model parameters
ing after removing 0.0 observations. The result prove that in the first method - adding
perturbation to 0.0 value - possibly enlarge the error through computation process.
5.1.2.3
Input transformation
Transformation by softplus function
In this part, the input variable is transformed by softplus function instead of inverse
transformation on output.
For categorical variable, we test 2 different kernels —
linear kernel and Mattern32 kernel:
Linear kernel
RMSE: 1.2556
MAE: 0.8416
Predictive log-likelihood: -6631
Mattern32 kernel
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Result
47
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.7: GP model of softplus input transformation with linear kernel and model
parameters
Result of mattern32 kernel on categorical variable based on softplus transformation
over input:
RMSE: 1.2737
MAE: 0.8542
Predictive log-likelihood: -6665
According to the result linear kernel performs a little bit better than mattern32 ker-
nel on predicted values in this softplus transformation case. After transformation by
softplus function, bias parameter in linear kernel is incredibly increasing to 41 which
is much larger than it in matter32 kernel.
Transformation by log function
Following shows the result of input transformation by log function.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Result and Discussion
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.8: GP model of softplus input transformation with mattern32 kernel and
model parameters
Mattern32 kernel
RMSE: 1.2617
MAE: 0.8481
Predictive log-likelihood: -6828
Log transformation is implemented on several variables of input data to adjust skew-
ness. But the result reflects a similar performance as other model does.
Linear kernel performance evaluation is collected in table 5.1. As they really do not
differentiate from each other so much, the scatter plot will not be shown.
5.1.2.4
Sparse Gaussian Process - FITC
Even though merits on tractability and uncertainty quantification make gaussian pro-
cess model its mark, computational complexity still hamstring its wide application.
To address this problem, sparse gaussian process is proposed and FITC is a popular
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Result
49
(a) GP prediction
(b) GP parameter
Figure 5.9: GP model with log transformation on input data with matter32 kernel
and model parameters
one now. Fig 5.10 shows the forecast result of sparse gaussian. It is obvious sparse
gaussian process can not be able to capture the latent function among complex data.
Another sparse GP system with mattern32 kernel is showed in appendix.
Figure 5.10: Sparse GP prediction
RMSE: 2.2037
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Result and Discussion
MAE: 1.3071
Predictive log-likelihood: -9987
5.1.3
Neural Network Regression
5.1.3.1
1 output ANN
(a) different dropout rate performance
(b) data type choosing
Figure 5.11: dropout rate choosing and transformation selection
Dropout rate of 0.1 and 0.4 both hit a bottom line from fig 5.11a. Taking it with
care is necessary. As a fact of that, both dropout rate are put into selection for data
transformation to make cautious decision. From fig 5.11b, softplus transformation
on input with 0.4 dropout rate and original data with 0.4, 0.1 respectively perform
relatively better. However, transformed data lead to a different scale on input space,
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Result
51
which means we cannot directly compare performance and select model over valida-
tion error. So we will choose one model from each type of transformation and train
them to make final decision.
To avoid falling into local minimum, validation error is taken average of 10-fold cross-
validation.
Fig 5.12 shows the 1-output-neural network predicted result with dropout 0.1
based on original data.
Figure 5.12: 1 output ANN prediction with 0.1 dropout based on original data
RMSE: 1.36
MAE: 0.92
The model fits training data very well while performs a opposite way on test data.
Neural network is easily overfitting and dropout is one of the method to reduce it.
Predicted performance with dropout rate 0.4 is also plotted at appendix chapter. The
train and validation loss in appendixC also delivers a straightforward way indicating
higher dropout helping reduce overfitting. However, a good trained neural network
model relies on varying conditions, size of training data is also one of them.
In
this case, higher dropout rate does not guarantee a model with well generalization
performance.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Result and Discussion
5.1.3.2
2 output ANN
For 2 output neural network, we train it in a similar way. In this model, 0.2 and 0.5
(a) different dropout rate performance
(b) data type choosing
Figure 5.13: dropout rate choosing for 2 output neural network
dropout rates are chosen. We could see 0.5 dropout rate keeps robust as iteration
times increasing. 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 perform in a similar manner while 0.2 was the one
converge fastest. So 0.2 and 0.5 will be used as experiments.
Fig 5.14 shows the forecast result with 0.2 dropout rate based on original data. Ad-
ditional model performances with 0.5 based on log and softplus transformation over
input are showed in appendix.
RMSE: 1.3607
MAE: 0.9071
Predictive log-likelihood: -7785
Even though two types of neural network regression model perform not as good
as random forest and gaussian process model in this case, it is hard to say if accuracy
of neural network model could be expected improved by increasing size of data set
due to the nature of it. A large data set enables network to be more generalized and
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Performance Evaluation
53
Figure 5.14: 2 output ANN prediction with dropout rate 0.2 based on original data
accurate. However, among three models, neural network is relatively more difficult
train due to the adjustment of architecture and choice of activation function and
hidden units.
5.2
Performance Evaluation
Model performance evaluation is proceeded by three criteria: RMSE(root of mean
square error), MAE (mean absolute error) and predictive log-likelihood, computing
the log-likelihood for predicted result, which could measure how close the predicted
distribution is to true observations.
RMSE
RMSE (root of mean square error) quantify the overall discrepancy between predicted
value and true observations.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(y −ˆy)2
MAE
MAE (mean absolute error) indicates the average of total error of the model.
It
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Result and Discussion
quantifies how close the predicted value are to the observations.
MAE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
|y −ˆy|
Predictive log-likelihood
Predictive log likelihood approximate the maximum likelihood of predicted inference
which quantify the predicted distribution.
L(M) =
∑
log(p(y|x, M))
Following is the table showing the model performance. Before going through the
result, let’s define the notion in the table.
As mentioned above, except the original data, different types of transformation of
both input and output are implemented. In order to simplify the table, some concrete
notion is used as following.
• O: Model based on original data
• OT1: softplus function on output with small perturbation
• OT2: softplus function on output with removed zero value
• IT1: softplus transformation on input
• IT2: log transformation on input
• FITC: Sparse Gaussian
Gaussian Process model
Linear Kernel
O
OT1
OT2
IT1
IT2
FITC (2000)
FITC (4000)
MSE
1.2599
-
1.2659
1.2556
1.2620
2.2037
2.5105
MAE
0.8484
-
0.8851
0.8416
0.8491
1.3071
1.3638
Predictive log-likelihood
-6677
-
-7060
-6631
-6828
-9987
-11199
Mattern32 kernel
O
OT1
OT2
IT1
IT2
FITC (2000)
FITC (4000)
MSE
1.2594
1.5840
1.2671
1.2737
1.2617
1.5774
1.6661
MAE
0.8470
0.9998
0.8842
0.8542
0.8481
1.1410
1.1536
Predictive log-likelihood
-6688
-10871
-7056
-6665
-6828
-8501
-9047
Table 5.1: GP model performance evaluation
5.3
Feature Importance
In order to investigate which feature has hugest influence on the model, feature im-
portance values are collected as following table. One of the advantages of Neural
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Feature Importance
55
Random Forest and Neural Network model performance
RF
NN 1out
NN 2out
RMSE
1.2718
1.3666
1.3607
MAE
0.8977
0.9236
0.9071
Predictive log-likelihood
-6892
-
-7785
Table 5.2: Random Forest regression and ANN regression performance evaluation
network is that it does not rely on feature selection to train the model, so it also
cannot provide us feature importance information. As a result of that, feature impor-
tance of random forest and lengthscale of gaussian process model are listed as below
5.3.
Feature importance table 5.3 rank the attribute like following. However, one thing
needs to point out is that due to the different kernel implemented in gaussian process,
the way ranking the attribute could be a little bit confusing. In linear kernel column,
categorical variable is portrayed by linear kernel in which variance of each attribute
indicate the weight of each feature counting, the larger, the more important.
In
the contrary, in Mattern 32 column, the lenthscale hyper-parameter provides us the
feature importance information. Unlike linear kernel variance, lengthscale is inverse
proportional to the weight, the smaller, the more important.
Feature Importance
Random Forest
O.Linear Kernel
O.Matter32
IT1.Linear Kernel
13
4 (0.18)
4 (0.23)
4 (0.11)
12
16 (0.29)
16 (0.31)
11 (0.16)
Continuous
Variable
16
13 (0.59)
13 (0.62)
16 (0.17)
4
5 (0.67)
11 (0.80)
5 (0.20)
18
12 (0.77)
12 (0.84)
13 (0.34)
17
17 (0.86)
17 (0.85)
17 (0.51)
33
33 (0.43)
24 (0.00000007)
0 (0.86)
31
24 (0.20)
33 (0.01)
24 (0.62)
Categorical
Variable
23
23 (0.15)
12 (0.11)
33 (0.56)
11
3 (0.11)
15 (0.27)
23 (0.43)
26
4 (0.09)
22 (0.44)
25 (0.39)
Table 5.3: feature importance comparison between GP model and Random Forest
regression model
Notion illustration with regards to table 5.3
• Continuous Variable
4 : elevation
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Result and Discussion
5 : detrended elevation
11 : precipitaion
12 : horizontal distance to waterbody
13 : vertical distance to waterbody
16 : dk_model
17 : horizontal coordinate
18 : vertical coordinate
• Categorical Variable
0,3,4 : georegion
11,12 : soil type
15 : landscape
23,24 : lands cover classification
31 : soil drainage classification
33 : waterbody classification
Tabel 5.3 list the top 6 features of continuous variable and top 5 in categorical
variable which have huger influence than any other features.
In gaussian process
model feature elevation_2015 ranking 4 in random forest model, ,top the charts for
importance among three types of model. On the contrary, for random forest model,
vdtostream - vertical distance to stream - is the most influential feature, which ranks
3 or lower in gaussian process regression model. However, eventhough the top 1 im-
portant features among four models in the table are not subject to each other, it
also could be seen overall these features are showed repeated in different order, which
means the domain of feature are on the same page among different model.
On the other hand, these four models agree with each other on the 6th important
feature is no.17 feature, utmx, the horizontal spatial property. The only difference is
about position of No.18 feature utmy. In random forest it appears one place above
horizontal spatial features whereas there is no such sign in gaussian process model.
Detailed information with regards to spatial property over gaussian process model is
showed in table 5.4.
In categorical variable it also displays the similar trend - important features are simi-
lar in different order, but relatively weaker than it shows in continuous variables. The
first two most important features in categorical variable is No.33 and No.24, belong-
ing to lakerivercoast2 and wetlands respectively, meaning waterbody classification
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Feature Importance
57
and wetland classification.
Spatial Feature Importance
x
0.00027
0.00030
0.00011
y
0.00096
0.0012
0.00066
Table 5.4: Feature Importance of spatial variable
As we mentioned at the beginning, what we would like to model is not a temporal
dynamic system.The model in this project is a prediction investigating the influence
of spatial property on water level. The feature importance table 5.4 of spatial vari-
ables over Gaussian Process model illustrates how the spatial variables influence the
groundwater level prediction. For spatial feature, a RBF kernel is used in Gaussian
Process model. According to the concept of RBF kernel, smaller lengthscale indicates
a sharp step of function in feature space. Over the result of three gaussian process
model we chosen here, it could be seen the horizontal coordinate has a relatively
larger influence on the prediction result than vertical coordinate as the lengthscale of
x coordinate is smaller than it of y coordinate.
==PAGE:66==
58
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Additional Application
In this section, Random Forest regression model, Gaussian Process regression model
and Neural Network regression model will be applied with additional data-set which
is independent of training data set. There are total around 5.8 millions data which
will be pre-processing like the way training data-set does and then forecast the corre-
sponding water level by regression model trained above.
Forecast results will be mapped onto a canvas with grid 50*50.
6.1
Random Forest Regression Model Forecast
Figure 6.1: Additional data forecast and uncertainty plot by Random Forest regres-
sion model
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Additional Application
Figure 6.2: Additional data forecast and uncertainty plot by Gaussian Process regres-
sion model
6.2
Gaussian Process Regression Model Forecast
6.3
Neural Network Regression Model Forecast
1-output-neural network does not include uncertainty quantification so just forecast
results are mapped onto canvas.
Figure 6.3: Additional data forecast by 1-output-neural network
Comparing the forecast result map on top of three different models, result of ran-
dom forest model distributes evenly in the middle level as the color appears while it
owns the largest uncertainty range up to 2.5. However, according to the color shows
on the map, the value of uncertainty gathers at intermediate level overall, similar
to gaussian process. Gaussian process model and 2-output-neural network forecast
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Neural Network Regression Model Forecast
61
Figure 6.4: Additional data forecast and uncertainty plot by 2-output-neural network
a relatively similar result as they paint like each other. However, they show the dis-
crepancy on uncertainty quantification map. Due to the fact 2-output-neural network
quantify uncertainty by a MAP problem, it is reasonable the variance converges to a
similar level. In gaussian process model, on the western part display a higher uncer-
tainty comparing to eastern region and the upper bound is in the middle level among
random forest uncertainty and 2-output-neural network uncertainty.
==PAGE:70==
62
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project, other two different types of regression model are illustrated and trained
to forecast groundwater level based on Random Forest regression model as starting
point.
The project starts with the objective to seek for improvements on predictive accuracy
by other types of regression model. Random forest as a classical ensemble method
generate reasonable predictive result as well as less overfitting because of average. It
is also easy to implement with less computational complexity comparing to gaussian
process model. However, due to the algorithm of random forest regression model, it
can only be used in similar data range because it take average over all result instead
of generate new values. As a result of that, a trained model by a specific type of data
is difficult to generalised to some other data which is not so similar to the original
one. Moreover, categorical variable lead to higher level data which could reduce the
performance of random forest.
Prediction result over gaussian process regression model performs a little bit better
than random forest regression in this project given performance evaluation criteria
as well as uncertainty quantification map. On original data, two types of kernel do
not show too much difference, whereas in softplus transformation in input data, the
model with linear kernel seems capture the trend a little bit better. Log transforma-
tion in this case does not play an important role here.
On the other hand, feature importance reflects their discrepancy.
Because of the
encoding of categorical variable increasing the dimension of input data, random for-
est are possibly biased due to higher level. As a result of that, lengthscale parameters
in gaussian process are possibly reliable as a measure for feature importance.
With regards to neural network, it is a highly flexible method while it does have
much more requirements to adjust during training. Even though it does not perform
as good as other two methods, it is still worth taking it into consideration if larger
size of data is available.
With regard to uncertainty quantification, a strong merit of gaussian process is the
tractable and direct uncertainty measure based on inference from joint distribution.
In random forest, the uncertainty is quantified by the average of results from all deci-
==PAGE:72==
64
7 Conclusion
sion trees. It is a straightforward way to understand and a easy way of interpretation,
however, the biased result from decision trees will influence the quality of uncertainty
quantification leading to less robustness. That is also the reason why uncertainty
range in random forest is larger than it in gaussian process. As to neural network,
the way measuring the quantification is by transforming the problem into MAP prob-
lem. It helps network measure the uncertainty whereas the approximated uncertainty
prior constrains the bound of it.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A - Data
correction by sine
model
Following figure illustrates how data is corrected by sine model from paper[Koc+].
Figure A.1: data correction by sine model
Fist two top figures show how sine model works at wells with more observations.
At this kind of condition, the minimum was chosen as input for training data. The
figure at bottom represents an opposed condition, well with low frequency data. Sine
model with predefined amplitudes traverses the observations into an expected winter
time observation.
==PAGE:74==
66
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B - Feature
notion illustration
Illustration of corresponding feature:
• Continuous Variable
0 : claya
1 : clayb
2 : clayc
3 : clayd
4 : elevation
5 : detrended elevation
6 : topographic wetness index
7 : SAGA wetness index
8 : flow accumulation
9 : slope
10 : percent of urbanization per grid
11 : precipitaion
12 : horizontal distance to waterbody
13 : vertical distance to waterbody
14 : Quarternary Thickness
15 : Depth to Clay
16 : dk_model
==PAGE:76==
68
B Appendix B - Feature notion illustration
17 : horizontal coordinate
18 : vertical coordinate
• Categorical Variable
0 - 4 : geographical region
5 - 13 : soil type
14 - 22 : landscape type
23 - 25 : lands cover classification
26 - 28 : wetlands classification
29 - 32 : soil drainage classification
33 : waterbody classification
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX C
Appendix C -
Additional model
result display
C.1
Additional Gaussian Process Model Result
C.1.1
Sparse Gaussian Process Model Result
Mattern32 kernel
Figure C.1: Sparse Gaussian Process FITC with 2000 inducing points
Figure C.2: Sparse Gaussian Process FITC with 4000 inducing points
==PAGE:78==
70
C Appendix C - Additional model result display
C.2
Additional Neural Network Result
C.2.1
1 output
Dropout 0.4
Figure C.3: 1 output neural network result with original transformation, dropout 0.4
==PAGE:79==
C.2 Additional Neural Network Result
71
training loss and validation loss comparison
Figure C.4: Effect of dropout visualised by training loss and validation loss
C.2.2
2 output
Dropout 0.2
Figure C.5: 2 output neural network result with log transformation, dropout 0.2
==PAGE:80==
72
C Appendix C - Additional model result display
Dropout 0.5
Figure C.6: 2 output neural network result with no transformation, dropout 0.5
==PAGE:81==
C.2 Additional Neural Network Result
73
Figure C.7: 2 output neural network result with log transformation, dropout 0.5
==PAGE:82==
74
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX D
Appendix D -
Transformed data
visualization
==PAGE:84==
76
D Appendix D - Transformed data visualization
Figure D.1: Training data visualization after log transformation
==PAGE:85==
D Appendix D - Transformed data visualization
77
Figure D.2: Training data visualization after softplus function transformation
==PAGE:86==
78
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[Bis94]
Christopher M Bishop. “Mixture density networks”. In: (1994).
[Bro]
Jason Brownlee. A Gentle Introduction to Dropout for Regularizing Deep
Neural Networks. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/dropout-
for-regularizing-deep-neural-networks/ (visited on December 3,
2018).
[Cha19]
Afroz Chakure. Random Forest Regression. 2019. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com/random-forest-and-its-implementation-71824ced454f (visited
on June 29, 2019).
[DCT05]
Ioannis N Daliakopoulos, Paulin Coulibaly, and Ioannis K Tsanis. “Ground-
water level forecasting using artificial neural networks”. In: Journal of
hydrology 309.1-4 (2005), pages 229–240.
[Duv]
David Duvenaud. Kernel Cookbook. url: https://www.cs.toronto.
edu/~duvenaud/cookbook/.
[EMK14]
Samad Emamgholizadeh, Khadije Moslemi, and Gholamhosein Karami.
“Prediction the groundwater level of bastam plain (Iran) by artificial neu-
ral network (ANN) and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS)”.
In: Water resources management 28.15 (2014), pages 5433–5446.
[FLM13]
Ying Fan, H Li, and Gonzalo Miguez-Macho. “Global patterns of ground-
water table depth”. In: Science 339.6122 (2013), pages 940–943.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning.
Book in preparation for MIT Press. MIT Press, 2016. url: http : / /
www.deeplearningbook.org.
[GG15]
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Dropout as a bayesian approxima-
tion: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.02142 (2015).
[Hin]
Geoff Hinton. Overview of mini-batch gradient descent. url: http://
www.cs.toronto.edu/~tijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_slides_lec6.
pdf.
[HP11]
Martin Hansen and Bjarni Pjetursson. “Free, online Danish shallow geo-
logical data”. In: Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland Bulletin
23.1 (2011), pages 53–56.
==PAGE:88==
80
Bibliography
[HSM]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. “Introduction to
machine learning and data mining”. In: ().
[IS15]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1502.03167 (2015).
[KB14]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[Koc+]
Julian Koch et al. “Modelling of the shallow water table at high spatial
resolution using Random Forests.” In: ().
[Mac]
David JC MacKay. “Introduction to Gaussian processes”. In: ().
[Mac+12]
David Macdonald et al. “Groundwater flooding within an urbanised flood
plain”. In: Journal of Flood Risk Management 5.1 (2012), pages 68–80.
[NH08]
Andrew Naish-Guzman and Sean Holden. “The generalized FITC approx-
imation”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 2008,
pages 1057–1064.
[Nie18]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. misc. 2018. url:
http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/.
[QR05]
Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela and Carl Edward Rasmussen. “A unifying
view of sparse approximate Gaussian process regression”. In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 6.Dec (2005), pages 1939–1959.
[Rud16]
Sebastian Ruder. “An overview of gradient descent optimization algo-
rithms”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04747 (2016).
[RW05]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Pro-
cesses for Machine Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learn-
ing). The MIT Press, 2005. isbn: 026218253X.
[SG06]
Edward Snelson and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Sparse Gaussian processes us-
ing pseudo-inputs”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems.
2006, pages 1257–1264.
[SGR04]
Edward Snelson, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Carl E Rasmussen. “Warped
gaussian processes”. In: Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems. 2004, pages 337–344.
[SJ13]
Sasmita Sahoo and Madan K Jha. “Groundwater-level prediction using
multiple linear regression and artificial neural network techniques: a com-
parative assessment”. In: Hydrogeology Journal 21.8 (2013), pages 1865–
1887.
[Spe+91]
Donald F Specht et al. “A general regression neural network”. In: IEEE
transactions on neural networks 2.6 (1991), pages 568–576.
[Sri+14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting”. In: The journal of machine learning research 15.1 (2014),
pages 1929–1958.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
81
[WIK]
WIKIPEDIA. Gaussian Process. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Gaussian_process.
[WN08]
David P Wipf and Srikantan S Nagarajan. “A new view of automatic
relevance determination”. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems. 2008, pages 1625–1632.
[WR96]
Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. “Gaussian pro-
cesses for regression”. In: Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems. 1996, pages 514–520.
[Zip+15]
Samuel C Zipper et al. “Untangling the effects of shallow groundwater
and soil texture as drivers of subfield-scale yield variability”. In: Water
Resources Research 51.8 (2015), pages 6338–6358.
==PAGE:90==
