==PAGE:1==
Reducing the Need For Strong
Supervision in Program Synthesis
Jacob Johansen
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to develop a method for reducing the need for strongly
supervised samples for program synthesis, since these samples are expensive
to obtain.
We take an already existing model, used for visual question an-
swering, which utilizes program synthesis, known as a Neural Module Network,
and aim to combine it with an algorithm known as Memory-Augmented Pol-
icy Optimization, in order to reduce the amount of strongly supervised samples
needed during training. We show that the original method used for training the
model is sub-optimal, when the amount of strongly supervised samples is low.
In order to circumvent this problem, we aim to utilize the Memory-Augmented
Policy Optimization algorithm for training. However, the algorithm is not de-
veloped for use on neural module networks and several assumptions made in the
Memory-Augmented Policy Optimization paper does not apply in our setting.
Therefore, we propose a novel modiﬁcation of the algorithm, which can be used
on our neural module network.
We show that our modiﬁed algorithm outperforms the original approach in all
cases, most signiﬁcantly when the amount of strongly supervised samples is low.
Our algorithm provides an improvement of upwards to 30%, when the amount
of strongly supervised samples is low. However, we are not able to reduce the
amount of strongly supervised samples signiﬁcantly, without loosing accuracy.
Overall, our modiﬁed algorithm greatly improves the accuracy of the model, if
the amount of strongly supervised samples are limited and slightly if strongly
supervised samples are plentiful.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at udvikle en metode til at reducere behovet
for stærkt supervised samples til program syntese, eftersom at disse samples er
dyre at indsamle. Vi tager en allerede eksisterende model, der bruges til visu-
elt spørgsmål og svar, som benytter program syntese, kaldet et neuralt modul
netværk, med mål om at kombinere denne med en algoritme kaldet Memory-
Augmented Policy Optimization. Formålet med dette er at reducere behovet for
stærkt supervised samples under træning. Vi viser, at den originale metode, der
bruges til at træne modellen, er ikke-optimal, når antallet af stærkt supervised
samples er lavt. For at overkomme dette problem, ønsker vi at benytte Memory-
Augmented Policy Optimization algoritmen i stedet for. Denne algoritme er dog
ikke udviklet til brug på neurale modul netværk, da ﬂere antagelser, der er brugt
i Memory-Augmented Policy Optimization artiklen, ikke er opfyldt af vores mo-
del. Derfor foreslår vi en modiﬁkation til algoritmen, der ikke før er set, således
at den kan benyttes på neurale modul netværk.
Vi viser, at vores modiﬁcerede algoritme overgår den originale tilgang uanset
antallet af stærkt supervised samples. Resultatet er dog mest signiﬁkant, når an-
tallet af stærkt supervised samples er lavt. Vores algoritme giver en forbedring
på op mod 30%, når antallet af stærkt supervised samples er lavt. Det er dog
ikke muligt at reducere antallet af stærkt supervised samples signiﬁkant uden
at tabe nøjagtighed. Alt i alt kan vores modiﬁcerede algoritme stærkt forbedre
nøjagtigheden af vores model, hvis mængden af stærkt supervised samples er
begrænsede, men nøjagtigheden forbredes kun en smule, hvis mængden er stor.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with reducing the amount of strongly supervised data needed
for program synthesis in neural networks for visual question answering.
The thesis consists of 7 chapters as well as a GitHub repository; https://
github.com/Jacobjohansen90/VQA
Lyngby, 01-April-2020
Jacob Johansen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Alexander Rosenberg Johansen for helping
develop the method and overcoming obstacles as they appeared. Furthermore,
i would like to thank DTU Compute for providing the necessary computational
resources needed for the thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Initial Theory
5
2.1
Feed-Forward Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Training Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Stochastic Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
The ADAM-algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Recurrent Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Training Recurrent Neural Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Pooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Activation functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.3
Training Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
The Data
21
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Related Work
25
4.1
Methods Published Before Beginning of Thesis
. . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Methods Published During the Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Methods
33
5.1
The Baseline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
The Program Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.2
The Execution Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Training the Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
Baseline Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
The MAPO Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Our model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.1
Training Our Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Discussion and Conclusion
55
7
Future Work
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This report contains the master thesis of Jacob Johansen in Mathematical Mod-
elling and Computing, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The
project ran from the 23rd of September 2019 to the 28th of March 2020.
The code for the project is available at https://github.com/Jacobjohansen90/
VQA.
In this project we explore a method for reducing the amount of strong supervi-
sion needed for program synthesis.
In order to understand the relevant topics and methods used in the report,
Chapter 2 is dedicated to introducing relevant deep learning methodology used
in the report. This chapter may be skipped, if the reader has a thorough under-
standing of deep learning. It should be noted, that even though we introduce
relevant concepts in this chapter, it is assumed that the reader is familiar with
the core concepts of machine learning and deep neural networks.
In Chapter 3, an overview of the CLEVR dataset used to train and evaluate the
performance of the model is presented.
In Chapter 4, we present and summarize related work, relevant for the project.
This chapter summarizes several relevant papers related to the project and list
their advances, advantages and shortcomings. Furthermore, the chapter con-
tains a part dedicated to papers released during the work on this thesis and the
implications these papers have on the further relevance of the method presented
in the thesis.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
In Chapter 5, the baseline model, which also serves as our initial model which
we expand upon, is introduced in detail. A training algorithm called Memory-
Augmented Policy Optimization (MAPO), which we will merge with the base-
line model, in order to reduce the need for strongly supervised data, is also
presented. The chapter ends with the introduction of our own version of the
MAPO algorithm, which we use to reduce the amount of strong supervision
needed in the initial model.
Lastly, in Chapter 6 & 7, we discuss the methods used and conclude on the ob-
tained results, as well as provide ideas for future work on the methods presented
within the thesis.
We start by motivating the problem we explore in the report.
1.1
Motivation
Program synthesis in deep learning, has shown to be a powerful tool for certain
problems and have been of particular interest since the introduction of A.I. in
the 1950s [9]. Unlike traditional deep learning architecture, where the input
is processed using the entire network, program synthesis allows us to only use
parts of a larger model, to solve the current problem. One area where program
synthesis has shown great potential is within Visual Question Answering, hence-
forth referred to as VQA. [19], [1], [2]
In VQA, an image is combined with a question related to the image, composing
a VQA problem. For instance we might have an image such as the one seen
below, combined with the question "How many round objects are to the left of
the purple square?", forming a VQA problem.
A traditional deep learning approach to solve the problem, would be to trans-
form the question into a vector representation and then feed this representation,
along with the image, into a neural network [32]. In this approach, the entire
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Motivation
3
neural network is utilized at every question-image pair. Recently a new type
of network architecture, known as neural module networks, has been proposed.
These networks use a subset of available modules to solve a problem. This means
that we only utilize a small part of our network, instead of the entire one. This
approach is beneﬁcial for our VQA-problems, as it allows us to exploit the fact
that natural language questions are compositional in nature, meaning we can
break them into a set of sub-problems. For instance, in our example above,
"How many round objects are to the left of the purple square?", we can break
the question into the following sub-problems; Identify the purple square, iden-
tify round shapes in the picture, identify the "left of purple square"-region and
count the round objects that fall within this region. Solving these sub-problems
will answer our question. In a neural module network this is the approach we
take. A so called program generator will the question as input and suggest a
composition of modules, performing the sub-tasks listed above, in order to an-
swer the question. These modules can either be pre-programmed or be neural
networks themselves, trained alongside the program generator. [1]
This neural module approach oﬀers two major beneﬁts; Firstly, this structure
reinforces our network to learn the meaning of sub-parts of the question, such
as "left vs. right", "square vs. circle" and so forth. In a traditional network
structure, we might reinforce the network to learn "round objects to the left of
the purple square vs everything else". This could cause a need for an exponen-
tial increase in training data, as we change sub-parts of our questions. Secondly,
if we introduce new unseen questions, we only need to ﬁne-tune the program
generator, and possibly train a few new modules. This makes neural module
networks ﬂexible, as extending them to deal with new questions is inexpensive
computationally. Furthermore neural module networks showed state of the art
performance on VQA problems at their release. [32], [1], [19]
The beneﬁts of these neural module networks, does not come free however.
In order to achieve a well performing program generator, which is critical for
obtaining good overall performance, we need a large amount of strongly super-
vised training examples. These examples must include not only the answer to
the question, but also a suggested module structure to solve it. This is necessary
since the program generator does not provide any input into the modules and
is therefore not able to be trained eﬀectively, without these strongly labelled
samples[1], [19]. These strongly labelled samples are costly to obtain, compared
to samples that only contain the answer to the question. Therefore, there is a
great interest in methods, that allow us to perform program generation well,
while using a minimal amount of strongly supervised samples. This is not only
the case for neural module networks dealing with VQA problems, but for all
problems where strong supervision is needed.
In recent years, new methods have been developed for reducing the amount
of strongly supervised samples on simpler problems.
One method in partic-
ular, called Memory-Augmented Policy Optimization (MAPO), have achieved
promising results when used on these simpler problems [24]. In this thesis we
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
aim to combine this method, with a VQA model, in order to explore if we can
reduce the amount of strongly supervised samples needed for our more advanced
VQA problem. We formulate the following problem statement.
1.1.1
Problem Statement
Is it possible to reduce the amount for strongly supervised sam-
ples needed for program synthesis, without loosing signiﬁcant accu-
racy/performance of the model?
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Initial Theory
In our VQA problem, the input data consists of a question and an image. Both
of these input data types, require specialized network structures to deal with, if
we want an optimal performance. In this chapter we will present two types of
neural network structures, specialized to deal with our input data. These are,
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which are used to deal with the questions
and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), which are used to deal with the
images. Before introducing these networks, we will introduce the simplest neu-
ral network structure, the feed-forward network. The feed-forward introduction,
will allow for an easier transition into recurrent- and convolutional neural net-
works, as both can be seen as a specialized version of a feed forward network.
This chapter will contain an introduction to these network structures, but lim-
ited to the concepts used in this thesis.
In this chapter we will also introduce the concept of back-propagation, which
is used to train all three structures, when all data is available. Lastly, we will
introduce reinforcement learning, which is used to train neural networks, when
the labels in the dataset are not available. We start by introducing the feed-
forward network.
==PAGE:18==
6
Initial Theory
2.1
Feed-Forward Networks
The most basic deep neural network, is the feed-forward network. The feed-
forward network consists of a collection, of so called neurons. Neurons consists
of a linear function and a non-linear activation function and can be described
mathematically as,
f(x) = σ(w · x + b),
(2.1)
where x is the input, possibly a vector, · is the dot product if x is a vector and
normal multiplication if x is a scalar, w and b are the trainable parameters of our
network, known as the weights and biases respectively and σ is the activation
function.
One common activation function, is the sigmoid function,
1
1+e−x , which is often
encountered in neural networks. However, we are free to choose any non-linear
function, as our activation function, σ. Throughout this chapter, we will intro-
duce diﬀerent activation functions, as they become relevant. The non-linearity
of the activation function, allows our model to learn more complex input-output
relations and a correct choice of activation function is essential for a well per-
forming model.
In a deep feed-forward network, we collect the neurons in sequence and/or par-
allel, allowing for a deep network structure. We refer to neurons in parallel as
a hidden layer. The amount of layers in sequence, determines the depth of the
network. A neuron in a layer, takes as input, all the outputs from the previous
layer, thus information is ’fed forward’ in this structure. A graphical representa-
tion of a feed-forward network with two hidden layers, can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Note that the ﬁrst layer represents the input, x, and the last layer represents
the output of our network, referred to as ˆy.
Figure 2.1: A graphical representation of a feed-forward network with neurons
in both sequence and parallel. Picture from here
The overall goal of our deep neural network, is to produce good outputs ˆy. For
instance, in our VQA problems, we would like ˆy to be the correct answer to the
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Training Neural Networks
7
question. Next we will see how to train feed forward networks, such that they
produce our desired outputs.
2.2
Training Neural Networks
Assuming that we have ﬁxed the overall structure of our network, we would like
to optimize the weights, w, and biases, b, such that our network performs well
under some chosen performance metric. In this section, we will assume that our
data is labelled, such that we can perform supervised training. This means that
for every sample xi, we have a label, yi, belonging to the sample. This label,
yi, is the desired output of our network, when given the input data xi. We call
the collection of inputs and labels the training set.
We may consider our neural network, as a single network function, Φ, which
is the composition of all aﬃne transformations and activation functions in our
network, i.e. the collection of all neurons. We assume there exists a function, f,
that fulﬁlls, that for every sample in our training data, xi, this function outputs
the correct label, f(xi) = yi ∀i. Our goal is now to ﬁnd weights and biases, such
that Φ best approximates f. The problem is that we do not know f explicitly,
but only the data samples, (xi, yi). The deﬁnition of ’best approximates’ in
this context, depends on our chosen performance metric. We shall denote the
collection of weights and biases in our network as θ, sometimes referred to
as the parameters of our network. We may also view this from a probabilistic
standpoint, assuming that our data pairs comes from an underlying distribution,
(xi, yi) ∼pdata. In this context, f, represents the true parametric model of this
distribution, which we wish to estimate using our neural network, Φ.
We now introduce the performance metric, L, generally called the loss function
in a neural network context. We require that this loss function satisﬁes the
following conditions,
L(x, x) = 0
(2.2)
L(x, y) > 0, x ̸= y
(2.3)
L ∈C1 (L is diﬀerentiable).
(2.4)
We want out network to minimize the so called generalization error, that is the
error on unseen or ’new’ data samples from outside the training set. Since we do
not have access to such samples, we instead minimize the error on the training
set, hoping that this will also minimize the generalization error.
Mathematically, we wish to minimize the generalization error, given as,
E(x,y)∼pdata[L(Φ(x, θ), y)].
(2.5)
==PAGE:20==
8
Initial Theory
But since we do not have access to pdata, we must instead minimize the error
over our empirical training set, ˆpdata. We can now formulate our minimization
problem as,
min
θ
E(x,y)∼ˆpdata[L(Φ(x, θ), y)] = min
θ
1
M
M
X
i=1
L(Φ(xi, θ), yi),
(2.6)
where M is the number of samples in our training set. We can solve this opti-
mization problem numerically. In deep learning we usually use a variant of the
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm, known as ADAM, for solving
this optimization problem. Next we will introduce both SGD and ADAM.
2.2.1
Stochastic Gradient Descent
The SGD algorithm is a variant of the gradient descent algorithm, commonly
used in optimization problems. The key diﬀerence between the two, is that SGD
estimates the gradient from a subset of all data, where gradient descent does not
use a subset. While it is theoretically possible to calculate the gradient using
every training sample in our training set, it is often infeasible due to memory
limitations of our implementation of the algorithm. Therefore we stochastically
estimate the gradient, using only m samples, known as a batch of samples,
instead. Our gradient estimate is therefore,
ˆ∇L = 1
m∇θ
m
X
i=1
L(Φ(xi, θ), yi).
(2.7)
With this estimate, we can change our parameters, θ, such that our new param-
eters perform better on this batch of samples, under our performance metric.
More precisily we change our parameters, θ into θ −ϵ ˆ∇L. Here the number ϵ
controls how much we alter the parameters and is manually chosen by us. We
refer to parameters that we must choose, as hyper-parameters. We sum up the
SGD-algorithm in Algorithm 1.
In this version of SGD we have introduced a learning rate, ϵ that is able to change
in the ﬁrst T iterations. We note that the learning rate, as well as the batch
size, inﬂuences the networks ability to learn and can be the diﬀerence between
a well performing and poorly performing network. However, the choice of loss
function, L, is often the key diﬀerence between a good performance and a bad
one. The algorithm continues until we fulﬁll a certain stopping criterion. This
stopping criterion is a hyper-parameter and is often chosen as a ﬁxed number
of batches, or a point where our performance metric does not improve over a
certain amount of batches. With the SGD algorithn introduced, we will now
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Training Neural Networks
9
Algorithm 1 Stochastic Gradient Descent
Require: Learning rate parameters, ϵ0, ϵT , loss functions, L, batch size, m,
initial parameter values, θ, stopping criterion.
t ←1
while Stopping criterion is not met do
Sample batch of m training examples
Compute gradient estimate: ˆ∇L ←1
m∇θ
Pm
i=1 L(Φ(xi, θ), yi)
if t ≤T then
α ←t
T
ϵt = (1 −α)ϵ0 + αϵT
end if
θ ←θ −ϵt ˆ∇L
end while
introduce the popular training algorithm known as ADAM, which is also used
in this project.
2.2.2
The ADAM-algorithm
In most neural networks today, a training algorithm called ADAM is widely
used. The algorithm was proposed by Kingma
Ba [21]. This algorithm is a
version of SGD, that employs both adaptive step size, as well as momentum.
Momentum means that the current gradient is inﬂuenced by the direction of
earlier estimated gradients. This allows a sequence of gradients to gain momen-
tum, which can signiﬁcantly speed up training. Momentum might also lead to
better performance in some situations. We introduce the ADAM algorithm di-
rectly in Algorithm 2, where we note that ⊙is the Hadamard product (element
wise product). We note that the algorithm is very similar to the SGD algorithm
from last section.
At this point we have introduced the most basic neural network, the feed for-
ward network. We have seen the optimization problem we wish to solve, in order
for the network to perform, as well as two algorithms to solve this optimization
problem. With these concepts introduced, we will now take a look at recurrent
neural networks.
==PAGE:22==
10
Initial Theory
Algorithm 2 ADAM
Require: Learning rate α, decay rates β1, β2 ∈[0, 1), loss function, L, batch
size, m, initial parameter values, θ, stopping criterion.
t ←1
Initialize mean estimate: ˆµ0 ←0
Initialize variance estimate: ˆσ0 ←0
while Stopping criterion is not met do
Sample batch of m training examples
Compute gradient estimate: ˆ∇L ←1
m∇θ
Pm
i=1 L(Φ(xi, θ), yi)
Update biased mean estimate: ˜µt ←β1ˆµt−1 + (1 −β1) ˆ∇L
Update biased variance estimate: ˜σt ←β2ˆσt−1 + (1 −β2) ˆ∇L ⊙ˆ∇L
Compute bias corrected mean: ˆµt ←˜µt/(1 −βt
1)
Compute bias corrected variance: ˆσt ←˜σt/(1 −βt
2)
θ ←θ −αˆµt/(√ˆσt)
end while
2.3
Recurrent Neural Networks
When dealing with our questions, we can think of these as a sequence of words,
which we can feed one at a time into our network. We can think of these words
as a time sequence, where we input a diﬀerent word at each time-step. In order
to correctly answer our questions, we must be able to somehow process word se-
quences and not just individual words. As an example, the word sequence "not
small", only makes correct sense, when we consider the entire sequence. We
say that our input data is correlated through time. It should be obvious that a
normal feed-forward structure, cannot capture this time correlation. We there-
fore need a neural network structure, that has a feedback mechanism through
the time dimension, in order to capture this correlation. This is exactly what
recurrent neural networks, from here on referred to as RNNs, are made for.
RNNs diﬀer from normal feed forward networks, by containing and updating in-
ternal hidden states. These hidden states can be thought of as memory buﬀers,
where we store information from previous time-steps. When we make a pre-
diction in an RNN, we do not only use the current input, xt, but also the last
hidden state, ht−1, in order to calculate the output. This allows our current
output to be inﬂuenced by both the current input, as well as the collective state
of all previous inputs. Mathematically we can describe an RNN neuron, or RNN
unit, by the following two equations,
ht = σ(Uxt + Wht−1)
(2.8)
yt = f(V ht),
(2.9)
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Recurrent Neural Networks
11
where σ is the sigmoid function, xt is the input at time t, ht−1 is the hidden
state calculated at time t −1, U, W, V are the weight matrices of the network,
which are learned during training and f is some appropriate function for calcu-
lating the output
This original RNN unit, described by (2.8)-(2.9), suﬀer from one major problem.
Because the hidden state is overwritten at every time step, the RNN unit has
a hard time dealing with long term correlation of the inputs. Therefore RNN
units, in their original form, are rarely used in modern neural networks. Instead
we use units that have so called gated memory. These units are able to control
whether to overwrite their memory at each time-step or not. This allows the
units to deal with long term correlations better. One such unit is the Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) unit, which is often used when dealing with text
inputs.
The LSTM unit was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber in 1997 [31]
and has proven superior to the RNN unit when dealing with long term tem-
poral correlation. See for instance Chung et al [7] for an empirical comparison
between diﬀerent units. In our network, we will use LSTM units exclusively
when implementing recurrent structures. An LSTM unit is described by the
following set of equations,
ft = σ(Wfxt + Ufht−1 + bf)
(2.10)
it = σ(Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
(2.11)
ot = σ(Woxt + Uoht−1 + bo)
(2.12)
˜ct = tanh(Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)
(2.13)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙˜ct
(2.14)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct),
(2.15)
where σ is the sigmoid function, tanh is the hyperbolic tangent function, t
is the current time step, ⊙is the Hadamard product (element wise product),
Wf, Wi, Wo, Wc and Uf, Ui, Uo, Uc, are the weights learned by the neural network
during training and bf, bi, bo, bc are the biases also learned during training, ct is
known as the cell state, with c0 = 0 and ht is the hidden state with h0 = 0.
A visual representation of the LSTM unit can be seen in Figure 2.2.
These LSTM units will allow us to deal with any long-term correlation in our
questions. Next we will see how to train our RNN.
2.3.1
Training Recurrent Neural Networks.
Before discussing how to train our RNN, we will make a key observation that
will signiﬁcantly simplify the problem; We can unfold our RNN through the time
==PAGE:24==
12
Initial Theory
Figure 2.2: Visual representation of equations (2.10)-(2.15), showing an LSTM
unit. A line splitting into two represents copying. Image from here.
dimension, essentially turning it into a feed-forward network. This unfolding will
allow us to reuse the results we derived for training our feed-forward network
earlier. A graphical representation of this is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Unfolding our RNN through the time dimension, turning it into a
feed-forward network with shared weights. Image from here
Using this unfolding, we can now process our RNN as a special feed-forward
network. We recall that our original RNN could be described by the following
relations,
ht = tanh(Uxt + V ht−1)
(2.16)
ˆyt = f(Wst)
(2.17)
We again introduce an arbitrary loss function, L, meeting the requirements of
(2.2)-(2.4). Because the weights are reused at every time step, we will here sum
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
13
up the gradients through time, such that,
∂L
∂W =
X
t
∂Lt
∂W
(2.18)
∂L
∂U =
X
t
∂Lt
∂U
(2.19)
∂L
∂V =
X
t
∂Lt
∂V
(2.20)
We notice that when unfolding our network through time, the case of updating
the weights W are straight forward, as these weights only depend on values at
the current time-step. If we consider an arbitrary time-step, t, and apply the
chain rule, we get,
∂Lt
∂W = ∂Lt
∂ˆyt
∂ˆyt
∂W = ∂Lt
∂ˆyt
∂ˆyt
∂Wht
∂Wht
∂W
(2.21)
The case is not the same for the weights U and V , we can again consider an
arbitrary time/step, t, and apply the chain rule to get,
∂Lt
∂V = ∂Lt
∂ˆyt
∂ˆyt
∂ht
∂ht
∂V
(2.22)
However, notice that ht = tanh(Uxt + V ht−1) which depends on ht−1, which
depends on ht−2 and V , etc. Thus we cannot treat ht as a constant. We need
to sum up the contributions of V at each time-step in order to calculate the
gradient, we get,
∂Lt
∂V =
t
X
k=1
∂Lt
∂ˆyt
∂ˆyt
∂ht
∂ht
hk
∂hk
∂V
(2.23)
The same applies for the weights U. We note that the principle shown here, is
the same for training an LSTM. However, the equations become more compli-
cated when considering LSTM unit, as they contain more parameters. Keeping
the derivations above in mind, we can now apply our training algorithms from
Section 2.2 to our RNN directly, as we can calculate the gradient of the loss
with regards to our parameters. Next we will see how to deal with our images,
using convolutional neural networks.
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks
The second half of our input data are the images that the questions relate to.
When dealing with images, we are often interested in looking for speciﬁc patterns
==PAGE:26==
14
Initial Theory
throughout the image. This is also the case in our problem, where the question
"How many squares are there?", requires us to identify all square patterns in
the image. Therefore, we wish to search for the same pattern throughout the
image. If we used a normal feed forward network for this task, each pixel would
have its own weight in the network. This means that identifying a square in the
lower left corner of the image, does not help us identify one in other places of
the image. This problem is addressed with convolutional neural networks, from
here on referred to as CNNs.
Instead of associating one weight with each pixel, we instead have a small ﬁl-
ter, known as a kernel, move through the image and applying the same ﬁlter
(computation) at each position. We often refer to this, as the ﬁlter convolving
through the image, hence the name of the architecture. We refer to the output
of the convolution operation as a feature map. Mathematically we can describe
this operation for a 2D input as follows,
O[m, n] = (I ∗K)[m, n] =
X
i
X
j
K[i, j]I[m −i, n −j],
(2.24)
where O is the feature map, I is the input matrix, K is the kernel, which
is learned doing training, ∗is the convolution operator and i, j runs over the
height and width of the kernel respectively.
Often we will convolve more than one kernel through an input. This will allow
us to check for multiple diﬀerent patterns. The kernel height and width, as well
as how many kernels to convolve through the image are hyper-paramters of our
CNN. A visual 2D representation of the convolution operation can be seen in
Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: A visual representation of a CNN. Here the kernel (in yellow) move
through the image producing an output at each step. In this step,
the kernel has produced the lower left 2. Picture from here.
Our input images are 3-dimensional since they contain color. This means that
the kernel will be 3-dimensional. We can rewrite (2.24) as follows, to obtain
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
15
convolution in 3 dimensions,
O[m, n, k] = (I ∗K)[m, n, k] =
X
i
X
j
X
l
K[i, j, l]I[m −i, n −j, k −l]. (2.25)
We note that we can continue this extension to obtain convolution in any di-
mensional space.
In the above examples, the kernel is moved one pixel at a time throughout the
image. However, this does not need to be the case. We might instead choose to
move the kernel multiple pixels at each step. This reduces the amount of com-
putations needed, as well as the size of the feature map. We refer to the amount
of pixels the kernel is moved at each step, as the stride. We may choose diﬀerent
strides for the height and width, in this case we will refer to the horizontal stride
and vertical stride respectively.
2.4.1
Pooling
We might wish to reduce the size of a feature map without increasing stride,
since a too large stride might skip past patterns in our input. In this case we can
use pooling. We can think of this as convolving a kernel over our feature map,
this time however, the kernel performs a preset operation instead of learning
one through training. In our network we will use max pooling, where the kernel
picks the largest feature map value within its scope. We can describe the max
pooling operation as follows,
O[m, n] = max
i,j I[m −i, n −j],
(2.26)
where O is the max pooled feature map, I is the original feature map and i, j
are bound by the scope of the max pooling kernel. A visual representation of
this operation can be seen in Figure 2.5, where both the kernel and stride is
2 × 2.
2.4.2
Activation functions
In most networks, we wish to stack CNN layers in order to obtain a deep con-
volutional network. When stacking CNN layers, the feature map produced by
one layer, is used as input to the next layer. Between two such layers, just as in
a feed forward network, we wish to apply a non-linear activation function. This
non-linear function, allows our network to learn more complex input-output
relations, which is often needed to obtain good performance. Between CNN
==PAGE:28==
16
Initial Theory
Figure 2.5: A visual representation of max pooling.
Here the max pooling
kernel is 2x2 and uses a stride of 2. Picture from here.
layers, the ReLU activation function is often used and this is also the case in
our network. The function is deﬁned as,
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(2.27)
We note that the ReLU function and the max pooling operation commutes,
MaxPool(ReLU(X)) = ReLU(MaxPool(X)).
(2.28)
this is true for any monotonically increasing function. However, note that if
we apply the ReLU function after the max pooling operation, we perform less
computations, making this the smarter choice.
In the beginning of this chapter, we saw that training the network requires
calculating the gradient, which requires that all our activation functions should
be diﬀerentiable.
This is not the case for the ReLU function at x = 0, as
the derivative does not exist. We can circumvent this problem, by setting the
derivative of the ReLU function at x = 0, to some constant.
Usually this
constant lies within the interval [0, 1]. We note that our input to the ReLU
function will rarely be exactly 0 and thus our choice will have minimal impact
on the network.
2.4.3
Training Convolutional Neural Networks
Even though it may seem complicated, training a CNN is very similar to training
a feed-forward network. The key diﬀerence being, that each weight contributes
many times to the output, meaning its derivative will become a sum of each
contribution. Let us consider the concrete example shown in Figure 2.6, where
a 3 × 3 input is convolved with a 2 × 2 kernel, creating a 2 × 2 output.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Convolutional Neural Networks
17
Figure 2.6: A 3 × 3 input is convolved with a 2 × 2 kernel creating a 2 × 2
output. Picture from here
From the ﬁgure, we have the following relations,
h11 = W11X11 + W12X12 + W21X21 + W22X22
h12 = W11X12 + W12X13 + W21X22 + W22X23
h21 = W11X21 + W12X22 + W21X31 + W22X32
h22 = W11X22 + W12X23 + W21X32 + W22X33
Let us assume we have calculated, ∂h11, ∂h12, ∂h21, ∂h22. If this layer is the
last convolution layer, we can calculate these partial derivatives either directly
from the loss function, or if these features are input into a feed-forward layer,
directly through the loss function and feed-forward layers. If this is not the last
convolution layer, we simply start our calculations at the last layer, working our
way backwards.
Given the partial derivatives, we can easily calculate the derivatives of the
weights, as a sum of their contributions,
∂W11 = X11∂h11 + X12∂h12 + X21∂h21 + X22∂h22
∂W12 = X12∂h11 + X13∂h12 + X22∂h21 + X23∂h22
∂W21 = X21∂h11 + X22∂h11 + X31∂h11 + X32∂h11
∂W22 = X22∂h11 + X23∂h11 + X32∂h11 + X33∂h11
This same principle can be applied to calculate ∂X. Given the derivatives, we
can now apply the same algorithms for training our CNN, as discussed in Section
2.2.
Lastly in this chapter, we shall consider a situation, in which we do not have
access to a training label for each of our predictions, but can instead evaluate if
a success criterion is met after a series of predictions. Such a problem is called
a reinforcement learning problem.
==PAGE:30==
18
Initial Theory
2.5
Reinforcement Learning
Consider playing a game of chess, the goal of the game is to win by setting
your opponent checkmate. In order to achieve this state, we must ﬁrst make a
series of moves, using our chess pieces. Now consider training a neural network
for this task. The network will take the state of the game as input and output
our next move. However, we cannot directly measure if each move is good or
not, unless it leads to a checkmate. This inability to evaluate each move, makes
training this network substantially more challenging, as we can only evaluate
one of our outputs. In terms of our previous discussing in this chapter, our
network makes a series of predictions, ˆyi, i = 1, . . . , N, but we have only the
label the prediction yN. In order to overcome this problem, we shall introduce
rewards based on the outcome of the game. The idea is, if a prediction is good
we give a reward and if a prediction is not good, we give no reward. We still
do not know how to evaluate if a prediction is ’good’ or not, unless it is the
last prediction. Before discussing how to evaluate our predictions, we start by
formalizing the problem
Formally we can describe a reinforcement learning problem as an agent inter-
acting with an environment, via a set of discrete actions. Each of these actions
transitions the agent into a new state and incurs a reward. A visual represen-
tation of this can be seen in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: An agent-environment feedback loop. Picture from here
This setup gives rise to a sequence of states, S, actions, A and rewards, R,
S0, A0, R1, S1, A1, R2, . . . , RN
(2.29)
In total we refer to this sequence as a trajectory. The goal is now to chose
actions, such that the reward is maximized. However, in our chess setup, we
have only the reward RN available, since we cannot evaluate if an action is good,
unless it leads to the game ending. We could simply deﬁne all rewards to be
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Reinforcement Learning
19
zero, unless they result in a win. However, this approach is problematic for one
key reason; When playing chess, winning is not achieved by one move alone. In
order to win the game, we must perform a sequence of correct moves, leading
to a checkmate. If we only reward the last move leading to the victory, we will
teach the agent to perform this move more often, but not the subsequent moves
leading up to it, resulting in a sub-optimal model. Instead, we will introduce a
discounted reward for each action, where we do not have a reward available. In
our chess game setup, this will be every action except the last. We deﬁne the
discounted reward, Gt, as,
Gt = Rt+1 + γRt+2 + γ2Rt+3 + . . .
(2.30)
Using our discounted reward, Gt, we will reward actions that lead to rewards
in the near future. The hyper-parameter γ ∈[0, 1] determines how far into the
future, we believe moves to be correlated to the reward. For instance, setting
γ = 1, would imply that every step is equally important to win. This could
be the case, in a game where we must remember a sequence and repeat it. In
such a game every answer must be correct, in order to win. On the other hand,
setting γ = 0 would imply that past actions, have no impact on winning. One
such example could be a game of battleships, with only one 1 × 1 ship on the
board. Usually we have a situation between these two examples, where winning
is caused by a ﬁnite amount of previous actions, such as our chess example.
The objective of our agent, can now be formulated as learning a policy, π, that
maximizes the expected reward. As with any other machine learning model,
this policy is parameterized through a set of parameters, θ, which are learned.
Deﬁning the total reward for a given trajectory, τ, as r(τ), allows us to state
our optimization problem,
max
θ
Eπθ[r(τ)].
(2.31)
As we saw earlier, one way to solve this optimization problem in a deep learning
model, is by using a variant of stochastic gradient descent, this is also what we
will do here. In order to apply stochastic gradient descent, we will need the
partial derivative, which is given as [33],
∇Eπθ[r(τ)] = Eπθ[r(τ)∇log πθ(τ)]
(2.32)
where π(τ) is the probability of the trajectory τ, under our current model. Since
we are making a ﬁnite amount of discrete choices in our model, we may write,
∇Eπθ[r(τ)] = Eπθ
"
r(τ)
 T
X
t=1
∇log πθ(at|st)
!#
(2.33)
If we replace r(τ), with the discounted reward, Gt, in (2.33) we get the well
==PAGE:32==
20
Initial Theory
known algorithm REINFORCE [36],
∇Eπθ[r(τ)] = Eπθ
" T
X
t=1
Gt∇log πθ(at|st)
#
(2.34)
We could now calculate the gradient and apply the learning algorithms from
Section 2.2.
However, training a model using reinforcement learning can be
notoriously hard in practice, due to a number of factors. Firstly, opposed to
our fully labelled training problems, if we produce a sequence of wrong actions,
resulting in no reward, we will discourage our model to make this choice in the
future. However, this does not guarantee that the model will produce a more
correct sequence instead, but simply a diﬀerent one. If the state space is large,
i.e. there exists a large amount of possible actions, with few correct actions in
between, we might never produce a correct sequence of actions, resulting in our
model learning nothing. Secondly, our gradients can be subject to large variance,
making stabilizing the model diﬃcult. One solution to this large variance, is
to introduce a baseline to the gradient estimate. This is done by subtracting a
baseline from the discounted reward, which reduces the variance of the gradient,
without introducing bias. The REINFORCE gradient estimate with baseline is
given as,
∇Eπθ[r(τ)] = Eπθ
" T
X
t=1
(Gt −b)∇log πθ(at|st)
#
(2.35)
The baseline is a hyper-parameter and can be chosen freely. Often we will use a
running average of the rewards received as the baseline, as this forces the model
to perform better as training progresses. Solving the challenges in reinforcement
learning is an open research subject. We shall return to the problems associated
with reinforcement learning in the next two chapters.
We have now introduced the diﬀerent neural network architectures used in this
thesis, as well as a method for training these architectures, both when labelled
data is available for all predictions and when it is not. Next we will introduce
the CLEVR dataset in detail, in order to understand the data we will be working
with.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
The Data
In this project we will be using the Compositional Language and Elementary
Visual Reasoning diagnostics dataset (CLEVR). This chapter summarizes the
dataset, in order to gain a thorough understanding of it. The CLEVR dataset
was released in 2016 by Johnson et al. [18], in a collaboration between Stanford
University and Facebook AI Research. The purpose of the CLEVR dataset, is
to have a VQA dataset without inherit biases. Before the release of CLEVR,
many datasets had underlying biases, allowing models to simply exploit this
bias, in order to obtain good results. CLEVR aims to eliminate such biases, by
having a large proportion of its questions be unique [18].
The dataset consists of 100k rendered images with approximately 10 questions
for each image. Out of these almost one million questions, 853.000 are unique.
Each image is composed of a rendered scene, containing objects of diﬀerent
shapes, sizes and colors. An example of such an image, along with some of its
questions, can be seen in Figure 3.1. Each sample, besides from a question,
an image and the answer to the question, contains a suggestion for a program
structure that would solve the problem. An example of such a structure for
the question, How many cylinders are in front of the tiny thing and
on the left side of the green object? can be seen in Figure 3.2. Besides
this information, the dataset contains a scene graph, which gives annotations
for training and validation images, with ground truth locations, attributes and
relationships for objects. We will not use the scene graph in our model. The
vocabulary for all the questions, consists of 92 words, including the four special
==PAGE:34==
22
The Data
Figure 3.1: An image from the CLEVR dataset along with some of its ques-
tions. Questions test aspects of visual reasoning such as attribute
identiﬁcation, counting, comparison, multiple attention and logi-
cal operations. Picture from [18].
Figure 3.2: A suggested program structure for answering the question, How
many cylinders are in front of the tiny thing and on the
left side of the green object?. Picture from [18]
tokens, <END>, <START>, <NULL> and <UNK>. These tokens are used
to indicate; the end of a sequence, the start of a sequence, padding and an
==PAGE:35==
23
unknown word respectively. The vocabulary is small, compared to the amount
of words in any language and allows us to train a word embedding from scratch
if we desire. The labels consists of 28 distinct answers, excluding special tokens.
The answers are distributed as seen in Figure 3.3. We note that this distribution
is very uneven. We should be aware that this bias in the answer distribution,
could be exploited in a model, allowing the model to obtain an artiﬁcially high
accuracy by learning the diﬀerence between common answers. We shall return
to this problem in Chapter 5.
Having explored the data, we now present an overview of the relevant methods
and papers related to the thesis.
Figure 3.3: Distribution of our answers in the CLEVR dataset.
==PAGE:36==
24
The Data
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Related Work
In this chapter, we will present the methods and papers related to the work
done in the thesis. The chapter is split into two parts. The ﬁrst parts presents
methods available at the start of the thesis. These methods inspired the problem
statement and initial work. The second part of this chapter, presents methods
that have been published during the work on the thesis. Some of these methods
have inspired the direction of the thesis, others have been published late in the
process and are only interesting in order to establish the relevance of the thesis.
4.1
Methods Published Before Beginning of The-
sis
General Visual Question and Answering Methods
Since the release of the CLEVR dataset, many diﬀerent methods for solving
the problem have been proposed. One of the more general models proposed is
the Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) method, suggested by Perez et al.
[29]. In this approach, an LSTM reads the question and turns it into biases and
element wise multipliers, which we then use directly as blocks in a deep resid-
ual convolutional network, as suggested by He et al. [12]. This rather simple
==PAGE:38==
26
Related Work
approach achieves a high accuracy of 97.7%. This high accuracy, inspired an-
other more complex method known as Memory-Attention Composition (MAC),
suggested by Hudson and Manning [17]. In this approach, a sequence of control
vectors are ﬁrst produced from the question, then a pre-processed version of
the image is recurrently processed by the network, conditioned on these con-
trol vectors. Lastly, a representation of the question, as well as our recurrently
processed image, is input into a classiﬁer in order to produce an answer. This
method produces a near perfect test accuracy of 98.94%.
Both models suggested above, have clear advantages compared to some of the
models we shall see. They achieve high accuracy without exploiting the CLEVR
datasets structure, meaning we could apply these methods to other VQA datasets
without large modiﬁcations. The methods are also fully diﬀerentiable, causing
training to be a simple matter of applying back-propagation.
Despite the simplicity and good performance of the model, they have not gained
signiﬁcant traction for application elsewhere. This is likely explained by two fac-
tors. The ﬁrst factor being, that these model-types has not been proven useful
for non-VQA datasets, thus limiting their scope. The second factor is, that the
VQA benchmarks has recently moved from being done on synthetic datasets,
such as CLEVR, onto more realistic datasets, consisting of real world images and
a greater range of questions. These new real world datasets are currently dom-
inated by data-augmentation models, where vast amounts of data from other
sources, are used to pre-train much larger models. These models are then ﬁne-
tuned on the actual dataset. One such method achieving state of the art results
on the VQAv2 dataset, is the transformer model, LXMERT, suggested by Tan
and Bansal [34].
Neural Module Networks
Another approach to solving VQA, is the so called neural module networks
(NMNs), originally proposed by Andreas et al. [1]. NMNs are based on the
idea, that we can break natural language questions into sub-parts. These sub-
parts can then be answered, in order to produce the correct answer to the
original question.
NMNs consists of two parts; A program generator, which
takes our question as input and suggests a sequence of operations that will an-
swer the sub-parts and an execution engine, consisting of modules and possibly
a classiﬁer. The modules performs the operations in the sequence suggested by
the program generator and the last output of the sequence is then processed by
either a feed-forward classiﬁer, or modules speciﬁcally designed to produce an
answer.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Methods Published Before Beginning of Thesis
27
In the original NMN paper by Andreas et al. [1], Deep compositional question
answering with neural module networks, the program generator is composed of
a pre-trained natural language parser. The parser takes the question as input
and returns a program structure.
The question is also feed into an LSTM,
which computes an attention map used as input in some of the modules. The
execution engine is composed entirely of modules. The modules perform both
intermediate operations and classiﬁcation at the end of the sequence. In order to
maximize performance, Andreas et al. suggest that each module have a unique
overall structure, based on the function it performs. For example, a module used
for identifying colors, consists only of a convolutional layer. A module used to
perform logical operations, such as the and or or function, is composed of a con-
volutional layer and an activation function. In principle, having modules tailored
to their functionality should increase performance, provided we can identify the
optimal structure for each operation. Besides the problem of ﬁnding an optimal
structure for each module, this approach also introduces signiﬁcant problems.
The uniqueness of the modules, causes each modules to have a unique output
dimension as well. This leads to certain program structures being invalid, if the
dimensions do not match between modules. In the paper they circumvent this
problem, by manually changing problematic program structures into valid ones.
This approach is non-optimal, since the manual change often defaults to a ﬁxed
structure, that rarely produces the correct answer. This defaulting is duo to the
amount of infeasible combinations possible. Another problem with this method,
is the parser. Since the parser is not trained on the current dataset, the perfor-
mance of the program generator depends strongly on the chosen parser. Lastly,
since each module is tailored to its individual function, we not only need to
choose the same module to perform a certain operation, we also need to choose
the module designed for it. Despite these shortcomings, the approach achieved
state of the art results on two VQA datasets, at the time of its publication.
Building on their ﬁrst success, Andreas et al.
published another NMN pa-
per [16], Learning to Reason: End-to-End Module Networks for Visual Question
Answering.
This approach builds on the last method with the major diﬀer-
ence being, that the pre-trained parser is replaced with an LSTM structure
trained from scratch. This change causes the quality of the program structure,
to no longer dependant on a pre-trained parser. The paper shows, that training
the program generator from scratch, instead of relying on a pre-trained parser,
causes a signiﬁcant improvement in accuracy. Compared to the last paper with
a pre-trained parser, this method performs signiﬁcantly better and achieves re-
sults similar to the state of the art method at the time it was published. The
approach introduces one large drawback however, since the program generator
does not provide any direct input to the execution engine, it cannot be trained
with normal back-propagation. This problem is circumvented by ﬁrst training
the program generator, using a suggested program structure. This requires that
the data used to train the program generator is strongly labelled, i.e. includes
==PAGE:40==
28
Related Work
the suggested program structure.
As we discussed in the introduction, such
strongly labelled data is expensive to obtain compared to weakly labelled data.
After initially training the program generator, the network is trained end-to-end,
using the REINFORCE algorithm to update the weights of the non-diﬀerentiable
parts. This new method still suﬀers from non-feasible program structures being
suggested at times and deals with them in the same way as the last paper, using
manual rules. The method was tested on multiple datasets, but achieved state
of the art results on the CLEVR dataset at its release, with an accuracy of 83.7%
Building on the work of Andreas et al., Johnson et al.
suggested a method
[19], Inferring and Executing Programs for Visual Reasoning, that eliminates
the non-feasible program structure problem completely.
This is achieved by
standardizing the module structure, including the input- and output dimen-
sions for every module. The method oﬀers several major advantages, compared
to that of Andreas et al. [16]. First of all, this change to the modules, allows us
to execute every program structure suggested. This is a signiﬁcant improvement,
compared to the case where we default to a pre-determined structure. Secondly,
should we need to introduce additional modules after initial training, we can do
this without much trouble, as we do not need to consider their compatibility
with other modules.
Lastly, when the modules have diﬀerent structures, we
need to not only pick the same module to act as a speciﬁc function, but also
the one designed for it. This requires special care during training, especially
if we have a large amount of modules in our network. When all modules are
standardized, we need only pick the same module to act as a speciﬁc function,
disregarding which speciﬁc module is picked.
This method still suﬀers from the program generator being non-diﬀerentiable
and therefore requires strongly labelled data for training as well. However, unlike
the other methods we have discussed, Johnson et al. recognizes the problematic
nature of needing strongly labelled data and performs experiments to determine
how few strongly supervised samples they need. They further try to improve
upon this issue, by testing a slightly diﬀerent training scheme, than that used
by Andreas et al.
After pre-training the program generator, using the strongly labelled data, John-
son et al. uses the program generator to suggest program structures, for all data
in the dataset. These suggested program structures are then used to pre-train
the modules and classiﬁer of the network, instead of directly doing end-to-end
training, as Andreas et al.. After the entire network is pre-trained, Johnson et al.
trains it end-to-end, using the REINFORCE algorithm for the non-diﬀerentiable
parts. Johnson et al. shows that they can reduce the amount of strongly su-
pervised samples needed, from 700.000 to 18.000 at a cost of 1.5% accuracy.
The method achieved state of the art results on the CLEVR dataset, at the
time of its release, with an accuracy of 96.9% when using all 700.000 strongly
labelled samples. This signiﬁcant accuracy improvement, as well as the alter-
native scheme for training and the slightly reduces accuracy when using only
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Methods Published Before Beginning of Thesis
29
18.000 samples, raises several questions; Firstly, the joint ﬁne-tuning provides
little improvement to the overall accuracy, at an increase of less than 1%. This
might suggest that there might exist a better way, to train the network end-to-
end, leading to a higher accuracy increase. Secondly, the fact that the accuracy
drops only 1.5%, when we reduce the amount of strongly supervised samples by
a factor of almost 39, raises the question of how few strongly supervised sam-
ples are actually needed. Lastly, since the modules are standardized, it might
be possible to apply the model outside a VQA setting.
The methods discussed until now, are general in nature and does not exploit
the underlying dataset heavily. One method that heavily exploits the CLEVR
dataset is that of Yi et al. [37], Neural-Symbolic VQA: Disentangling Reason-
ing from Vision and Language Understanding. The method tries to maximize
accuracy, while minimizing the amount of strongly supervised samples needed,
The model is a NMN, utilizing the scene graph included in the dataset. The
scene graph for a sample consists of pure information about the image. For
each object the scene graph contains information about; size, shape, material,
color and coordinates of any object. Furthermore, the scene graph relates the
object in the image to one another. The scene graph is used as input, along
with a pre-processed version of the image, to the execution engine. Opposed
to the methods mentioned before, the modules in this paper are not learned,
but pre-programmed. The paper obtains a near perfect accuracy of 99.8%, us-
ing only 270 strongly supervised samples. However, this method, both duo to
the pre-determined modules, as well as the use of scene graphs, is speciﬁc to
the CLEVR dataset and adapting it to another dataset is not straight forward.
Where this method is too speciﬁc to the CLEVR dataset to be of general in-
terest, it does prove that we can obtain good results, with a small amount of
strongly supervised data.
Reducing Supervision
Applying reinforcement learning for program synthesis is not only used in NMNs,
but has seen a growing interest in recent years [38], [11], [23], [6]. However, as
we discussed in Section 2.5, using reinforcement learning comes with additional
challenges, compared to regular back-propagation. There are three challenges
often encountered, when using a reinforcement learning approach; Firstly, in
order for the algorithm to work, we require both positive and negative rewards.
If our search space is large, it is not uncommon for situations, where the algo-
rithm cannot ﬁnd enough positive rewards. This lack of positive rewards, might
result in sub-optimal results or the algorithm not working at all. One solution
to this problem, is an experience replay buﬀer [25]. The replay buﬀer stores
past positive reward paths and reuses them. This assures, that both positive
==PAGE:42==
30
Related Work
rewards are seen during training and that these positive reward paths are reused
to maximize their inﬂuence.
Secondly, since we sample gradients using monte-carlo samples, often with a rel-
atively small sample size, the variance of the estimated gradient is often large.
This may cause issues, depending on the situation. There exists a vast amount
of proposed solutions to this problem, such as introducing a critic model [22],
supervised pre-training [14] or generating rewarding samples from supervised
data [26]. The use of these methods depends on both if supervised data is avail-
able, as well as the problem. Lastly, in reinforcement learning we often need to
perform exploration, in order to ﬁnd positive rewards. However, if our search
space is large, we might require a smart exploration strategy, in order to explore
positive rewards. There exists multiple proposed solutions to this problem as
well, ensuring that we perform exploration in an optimal way. These methods
are, at their core, based on adding an additional reward for performing correct
exploration [27] [35] [15].
A recent paper by Liang et al. [24], Memory Augmented Policy Optimization
for Program Synthesis with Generalization (MAPO), suggests a method that
deals with all of the problems mentioned above, speciﬁcally designed for pro-
gram synthesis problems. This method uses a memory buﬀer, which saves past
well performing program structures. The memory buﬀer acts as an experience
replay buﬀer dealing with the ﬁrst problem. Sampling from this memory buﬀer,
and introducing gradient clipping for the samples within the memory buﬀer,
reduces the variance of the gradient, dealing with the second problem. Lastly,
the method performs systematic exploration of the program structures parallel
to the training, ensuring that a vast amount of novel program structures are
generated and tested. The method achieves state of the art performance on the
WikiSQL dataset [39], while completely removing the need for strongly labelled
data. The WikiSQL dataset is composed of SQL tables along with questions
about them. The goal is then to propose an SQL query answering the question.
Unlike the methods discussed earlier, the MAPO papers contribution is an al-
gorithm which can be used on top of an existing model. This means that we
can pair the MAPO algorithm, with the model proposed by Johnson et al. [19],
in order to possibly reduced the amount of strongly labelled samples. Before
introducing the Johnson model and MAPO algorithm in detail, with the pur-
pose of merging the two, we will shortly discuss the work published after the
beginning of this thesis, as well as its implication on the purpose of the thesis.
4.2
Methods Published During the Thesis
Since the beginning of this thesis, several interesting and closely related pa-
pers have been published. We summarize these papers here, as well as their
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Methods Published During the Thesis
31
inﬂuence on the relevance on the problem statement and method taken in this
thesis. The ﬁrst paper is the CLOSURE paper by Bahdanau et al. [3]. This
paper aims to assess, whether the CLEVR dataset allows models to generalize
onto a new dataset. This is done by training models initially on the CLEVR
dataset and then testing them on the closely related CLOSURE dataset. This is
done both without any changes to the models and after ﬁne tuning the models
using few-shot transfer learning. The paper tests, amongst other models, the
neural module network proposed by Johnson et al.. The paper shows that all the
models trained on the CLEVR dataset, generalizes poorly onto this new CLO-
SURE dataset in both cases. However, the paper also shows that by changing
the internal representations between modules in the Johnson et al. model, from
a high dimensional tensor to a lower dimensional vector, the model is able to
generalize well.
These results are interesting, since they show that our model is able to generalize
onto new datasets by only changing the dimensions of the internal representa-
tions in the model. This is highly sought after, not only because it allows us to
use the model for transfer learning, but also because this is a necessary prop-
erty if we wish to introduce new modules to an already trained model. We do
not implement the changes in the paper into our model, since they should not
eﬀect the hypothesis that we are testing in this thesis. Furthermore, keeping
the model as closely to the one in the paper by Johnson et al. [19], allows us
to directly use the conclusions drawn in the paper, as well as allowing for easier
conclusions with regards to our method.
At the end of the work on this thesis, a paper was published trying to use NMNs
to solve regular question-answering problems. These problems are closely related
to our VQA problems, but instead of having an image, we instead have a para-
graph of text and the question is then related to this text. An example could be
a summary of a sports match and the question Who scored the most goals
in the second half?.
These questions are also subject to the assumption,
that we can break them down into sub-questions and answer these in order to
answer the original question. The Neural Module Networks for Reasoning over
Text paper, by Gupta et al. [10], uses the model by Johnson et al. [19] as
their initial model. The model is modiﬁed, in order to answer these types of
questions instead. The model shows state of the art performance, in several
categories on the DROP dataset [8]. One of the main challenges in the paper,
is that the amount of strongly supervised program structures, is not suﬃcient
and leads to an under-performing program generator. This paper is interesting
for two reasons; Firstly, their main problem is the one we are trying to solve
in this thesis. Secondly, this paper shows that NMNs can be used outside the
VQA domain, even though the two problems are closely related.
Having discussed the related work, we are now ready to introduce the model by
Johnson et al. in detial, as well as the MAPO algorithm.
==PAGE:44==
32
Related Work
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Methods
In this chapter, we will introduce our model used for reducing the amount of
strongly labelled data needed. We will start by introducing the model of Johnson
et al [20], which will serve as our initial model and baseline, i.e. the model we
will merge with the MAPO algorithm [24] in order to answer our thesis problem
statement, as well as the model we will compare our results to. As we saw in
Chapter 4, NMNs have shown great performance on VQA problems, where we
can break the problem into sub-problems, and then use program synthesis to
answer our sub-question. However, the models proposed by Andreas et. al.
[1] [16], suﬀered from signiﬁcant problems with program composition. Johnson
et. al. [20] proposed a model that eliminated these problems, by having each
module have the same input and output dimension.
We now introduce this
model in detail.
5.1
The Baseline
The model proposed by Johnson et. al. [20], can be split into four parts; A
program generator, a collection of modules, a classiﬁer and a feature extractor.
We will refer to the last three parts, the collection of modules, classiﬁer and
feature extractor, as the execution engine. Since this model serves both as the
==PAGE:46==
34
Methods
Figure 5.1: The model proposed by Johnson et. al. [20]. The program gen-
erator reads the question and suggests a program structure. The
execution engine executes the predicted program. The red CNN
net in the bottom, is a pre-trained network, in our case resnet,
that extracts features from the input image. The classiﬁer takes
the output of our last module network and predicts a distribution
over our answers, A. Picture from [20]
baseline and our initial model, we will refer to it as just our model from here
on. The overall architecture of the model is visualized in Figure 5.1.
5.1.1
The Program Generator
As we saw in Chapter 4, one challenge with NMNs is translating the question
into a sequence of modules, that solve the problem. In our model, we use an
LSTM encoder-decoder structure as our program generator.
The encoder consists of an embedding layer that takes a word as input and
converts it into a 300-dimensional vector. This vector is then processed by a
two-layer LSTM, with 256 hidden units per layer. The hidden state produced
at the last time step, is then used as input to the decoder, along with the last
module prediction.
The decoder also consists of an embedding layer. This layer converts the pre-
vious module prediction yt−1, of the program structure sequence, into a 300-
==PAGE:47==
5.1 The Baseline
35
dimensional vector. This vector is then processed by a two-layer LSTM, con-
sisting of 256 hidden units. The decoder also consists of a single feed forward
layer, which takes the last hidden states of the decoder as input and produces
a score for each module. This scores is then put through a softmax function,
producing a probability distribution over our possible modules. Unless doing
exploration of new paths, we will always choose the highest probability module,
when composing our program structure. Mathematically our program generator
can be described by the equations,
he
t∗= LSTM(Embeddinge(xt), he
t∗−1)
(5.1)
hd
t = LSTM([Embeddingd(yt−1), he
T ], hd
t−1)
(5.2)
Yt = Softmax(NN(hd
t ))
(5.3)
yt = Sample(Y Dt),
(5.4)
where he
t∗is the encoder hidden state produced at time t∗and he
T is the last
hidden state produced in the encoder, hd
t is the decoder hidden states produced
at time-step t, Embedding is the embedding layers, with e and d representing
the encoder and decoder respectively, YT is the probability distribution over our
modules, produced by our linear layer NN and the Softmax function and yt is
the predicted module at time-step t produced by sampling Yt by either random-
or max-sampling.
Our vocabulary consists of 92 distinct words, including the special tokens,
<START>, <END>, <UNK> and <NULL> used to respectively represent;
the beginning of a sequence, the end of sequence, a word not in the vocabulary
and padding. Because of this small vocabulary size, the embedding layer in the
encoder is learned from scratch, instead of using a pre-trained embedding like
GLoVe [28]. This allows the model to better ﬁt the embeddings to the problem.
5.1.2
The Execution Engine
Our execution engine consists of the module sequence, predicted by the program
generator, as well as a classiﬁer and feature extractor. We have three diﬀerent
types of modules. The ﬁrst type of modules are binary modules. Binary modules
takes the output from two modules as inputs. In Figure 5.1 the ’greater_than’
module is a binary module, as it needs two inputs to compare. The structure
of the binary modules can be seen in Table 5.1.
The second type of modules are unary modules.
These modules takes the
output from one other module.
In Figure 5.1 the ’filter_color[yellow],
filter_shape[cube] and count modules, are all unary modules. The struc-
ture of the unary modules can be seen in Table 5.2.
==PAGE:48==
36
Methods
Index
Layer
Output Size
(1)
Previous module output
128 × 14 × 14
(2)
Previous module output
128 × 14 × 14
(3)
Concatenate (1) and (2)
256 × 14 × 14
(4)
Conv(1 × 1, 256 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(5)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
(6)
Conv(3 × 3, 128 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(7)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
(8)
Conv(3 × 3, 128 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(9)
Residual: Add (5) and (8)
128 × 14 × 14
(10)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
Table 5.1: Structure for our binary modules, used in the execution engine of
the model.
Index
Layer
Output Size
(1)
Previous module output
128 × 14 × 14
(2)
Conv(3 × 3, 128 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(3)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
(4)
Conv(3 × 3, 128 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(5)
Residual: Add (1) and (4)
128 × 14 × 14
(6)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
Table 5.2: Structure of our unary modules, used in the execution engine of our
module.
Lastly, we have a special type of module called the Scene module. This module
takes the features extracted from our input image by a pre-trained CNN and
processes these features, so they become compatible as input into our other
modules. In our case, the pre-trained CNN is the ResNet-101 network [13], which
is pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset [30]. We can think of the ResNet-101
network as performing a feature extraction on our input images, transforming
them into an image embedding, more easily processed by our modules. The
structure of the scene module can be seen in Table 5.3.
It should be noted
that during training, the weights of the ResNet-101 network are not trained,
allowing the feature extraction to be done as part of our pre-processing. We use
the ResNet-101 network, as it is used by Johnson et al. in their model. We are
however, free to choose any network, as well as training one ourselves.
The output from our last module is then input into our classiﬁer. The classiﬁer
produces a probability distribution over our possible answers, A. The structure
of the classiﬁer can be seen in Table 5.4.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Training the Baseline
37
Index
Layer
Output Size
(1)
Input Image
3 × 224 × 224
(2)
ResNet-101
1024 × 14 × 14
(3)
Conv(3 × 3, 1024 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(4)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
(5)
Conv(3 × 3, 128 →128)
128 × 14 × 14
(6)
ReLU
128 × 14 × 14
Table 5.3: Structure of our scene module, used in the execution engine of our
module. This module extracts the features from the original im-
age, using the ResNet-101 [13] network and changes the dimension
through convolutional layers, such that they become compatible
with our unary- and binary-modules.
Index
Layer
Output Size
(1)
Finale module output
128 × 14 × 14
(2)
Conv(1 × 1, 128 →512)
512 × 14 × 14
(3)
ReLU
512 × 14 × 14
(4)
MaxPool(2 × 2, stride 2)
512 × 7 × 7
(5)
Flatten(512 × 7 × 7)
512 · 7 · 7
(6)
FullyConnected(512 · 7 · 7 →1024
1024
(7)
ReLU
1024
(8)
FullyConnected(1024 →|A|)
|A|
Table 5.4: Structure of our classiﬁer, used in the last part of our execution
engine. The classiﬁer produces a probability distribution over our
possible answers, A. |A| is the cardinality of our set of possible
answers.
The program generator and the execution engines composes our initial model,
which is also used as our baseline. Next we summarize how the model is trained.
5.2
Training the Baseline
In Chapter 5, we discussed how to train both an RNN and CNN using the
back-propagation algorithm. The execution engine can be trained using back-
propogation, as we can calculate the loss between our predicted answer, ˆy and
the correct one, y.
This loss, L(y, ˆy), can then be used to back-propagate
through the execution engine, updating the weights in the modules used, as
well as the classiﬁer. However, this is not possible in our program generator, if
==PAGE:50==
38
Methods
our training examples only include the input question, xQ, the input image xI
and the answer to our question, y. This is because the program generator, does
not provide any input to the execution engine. Therefore, there is no gradient
ﬂow from the loss function, L(ˆy, y), into the program generator, making it im-
possible to update its weights using back-propagation.
As we saw in Chapter 4, the common solution to this problem, is to use a large
amount of strongly supervised training samples, to pre-train the program gener-
ator. These samples include a suggested program structure, yp, which allows us
to calculate a loss between this suggested program structure and our predicted
one, ˆyp. This loss, L(yp, ˆyp), can then be used to back-propagate through the
program generator. This is the approach taken, when training the baseline.
After having pre-trained the program generator, we let it suggest program struc-
tures for all samples in our dataset. We assume these program structures are
correct and use these to train our execution engine using back-propagation. Af-
ter having trained both the program generator and execution engine separably,
we do joint ﬁnetuning on the model, using the REINFORCE algorithm intro-
duced in Section 2.5. The reward will be based on the model ﬁnding the correct
answer.
Because the goal of the thesis is to reduce the need for strongly labelled samples,
we use the same hyperparameters as Johnson et al. [19]. We pre-train the pro-
gram generator using a learning rate of 5 · 10−4 and a batch size of 64. We stop
the training of the model, when the validation accuracy has not improved after
training 5000 continuous batches. We pre-train the execution engine, using a
learning rate of 1·10−4 and a batch size of 64. Again we stop training the model,
when the validation accuracy has not improved after 5000 continuous batches.
For the joint ﬁne-tuning we use a learning rate of 5 · 10−5, batch size of 64 and
the same stopping criterion. The gradients are estimated using REINFORCE
with baseline. The baseline is an exponentially decaying average, of the moving
average, of past rewards and a decay factor of γ = 0.99.
5.2.1
Baseline Results
The results for the baseline model are summarized in Figure 5.2. We list the
results obtained by Johnson et al. in their paper, if the accuracy is better then
ours. Johnson et al. achieves a higher accuracy on the models trained with
18.000 and 700.000 strongly supervised samples, with an improvement of 0.3%
and 0.7% accuracy respectively. This increased performance is likely duo to
them either training the model several times, using diﬀerent initial weights and
biases in order to maximize performance, or them using a diﬀerent stopping
criterion than ours.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Training the Baseline
39
(a) Program Accuracy
(b) Answer Accuracy
Figure 5.2: Program- and answer accuracy for the baseline on the CLEVR
dataset. Answer accuracy for 18k and 700k is from the Johnson
et al [19] paper. We achieve 0.3% and 0.7% lower accuracy when
training the models ourself.
The results for the baseline model, shows some challenges with the baseline
approach. Firstly, the accuracy decreases heavily as we use less and less strongly
labelled data. This means that a reduction in strongly labelled samples, have
a large negative impact on the model. Furthermore, a signiﬁcant problem with
the joint ﬁnetuning is seen.
If the program generator and execution engine
does not achieve a high enough initial accuracy during pre-training, the joint
ﬁnetuning has a negative eﬀect on the model lowering overall performance. This
is problematic since we cannot guarantee a certain accuracy during pre-training,
especially if applying the model to other datasets. This will also act as a lower
cap on how much strongly labelled data we need. The decrease in accuracy,
is likely explained by the assumption on which the joint ﬁnetuning is based
on.
In the model we only consider two cases during joint ﬁnetuning; If the
model achieves the right answer, then both the execution engine and program
generator is reinforced to make this choice more often. This assumption makes
sense, since both the program generator and execution must be correct if the
answer is. However, if the model does not achieve a correct answer, we enforce
both the program generator and execution to make a diﬀerent choice in the
future.
However, since the wrong prediction might be caused by either the
program generator not predicting the correct program structure, or the modules
not execution the correcting function, but not necessarily both at the same time,
this approach is too simple. Therefore we might deter a correctly working part
of the model, from making these correct predictions going forward, using this
training method. This would also explain why a low accuracy causes the method
to fail, since we will deter the working parts of the model more often, the lower
the initial pre-training accuracy is. The overall accuracy does not seem to fall
under 55%, as we reduce the amount of strongly supervised samples. We saw
==PAGE:52==
40
Methods
# of strongly supervised samples
Training Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
500
100%
15.5%
3,000
100%
42.1%
1,000
100%
29.6%
9,000
99.2%
92.3%
18,000
98.6%
97.4%
700,000
97.2%
96.9%
Table 5.5: The baseline program generators training- and validation accuracy
for diﬀerent amounts of strongly supervised samples.
in Chapter 3, that our answer distribution was highly imbalanced. Manually
accessing the correct answers for the 500, 1, 000 and 3, 000 model, shows that
98% or more of the correct answers come from the 4 majority classes in our
dataset for all three models. This means that the models almost exclusively
learn to distinguish between these 4 classes, exploiting the imbalance in the
data. We conclude that, using the current training method, the imbalance in
the dataset is problematic when the amount of strongly supervised samples is
lowered. Furthermore, Table 5.5 shows the ﬁnal training and validation accuracy
of our program generator, for diﬀerent amounts of strongly supervised samples.
We see a clear problem with overﬁtting in the program generator, for all cases
except the ones with 700, 000 and 18, 000 strongly supervised samples.
Lastly, Johnson et al.
perform an error analysis in their paper [19], for the
18, 000 and 700, 000 models.
This error analysis ﬁnds that the model has a
consistent problem with long questions, requiring a long module sequence to
solve. An example of such a question is, Is the number of matte blocks
in front of the small yellow cylinder greater than the number of red
rubber spheres to the left of the large red shiny cylinder?, which has
a labelled ground truth program structure of 20 modules. They conclude, that
the problem is a consequence of the rather simple program generator, used
in the baseline model.
Since our goal is to decrease the amount of strongly
supervised samples, we will not change the baseline model, as this will make it
hard to test what causes an improved performance. This means that our model
is unlikely to answer these questions either. Therefore, we should not expect an
accuracy higher then 97.1%, since this is the accuracy achieved when using all
the suggested program structures in the baseline.
The results from the baseline has shown some signiﬁcant challenges, in reducing
the amount of strongly supervised samples, using the current model. We now
have a thorough understanding of our initial model and its shortcomings. Next
we introduce the MAPO algorithm [24] in detail, which we wish to use on the
initial model, instead of the ﬁne-tuning
==PAGE:53==
5.3 The MAPO Algorithm
41
5.3
The MAPO Algorithm
As we discussed in Section 2.5, there are several challenges when using reinforce-
ment learning; Exploration of the search space, gradient variance and ensuring
a suﬃcient amount of positive samples. We see that our initial model suﬀers
heavily in performance, when the amount of strongly supervised samples is low.
It is hard to say whether this is caused by gradient variance, lack of positive
samples, lack of exploration or the ﬂawed approach of training the entire model
in all cases. Therefore, it would be desirable to negate all these problems at once.
The MAPO algorithm, aims to provide a solution to all three problems com-
monly encountered in reinforcement learning at once; lack of positive samples,
gradient variance and exploration, leaving only the ﬂawed approach of training
the entire model. However, the MAPO algorithm relies on strong assumptions
about the model and dataset it is used on, not all of which are met by our model
and data. In order to understand the challenges of merging the MAPO algo-
rithm with our model, we will explore the MAPO algorithm and discuss how
to overcome the assumptions our model and data does not meet. The MAPO
algorithm makes the following assumptions about our reinforcement learning
environment. The environment consists of a ﬁnite number of discrete actions,
deterministic transitions and deterministic terminal returns. This means, that
the set of all possible action trajectories is, at worst, countable inﬁnite and re-
evaluating the same trajectory twice, results in the same reward. The MAPO
algorithm is depicted in Figure 5.3. The MAPO algorithm reduces the vari-
Figure 5.3: A depiction of the MAPO algorithm. Image from [24].
ance of the gradient, by using a memory buﬀer containing high reward program
structures. When a batch is sampled for learning, MAPO combines program
structures from inside the memory buﬀer, which lead to a reward, with program
structures not in the memory buﬀer, which may or may not lead to a reward.
This strategy assures that positive samples are seen and lowers gradient vari-
ance. We refer to these samples as high-reward samples and samples outside
memory respectively. These samples are found by actors, which are copies of
==PAGE:54==
42
Methods
our model, running exploration in parallel to the training.
The main model, here called the learner, is then trained using these sampled
batches and pushes the updated parameters to the actors, who in turn uses these
new parameters to ﬁnd more high reward samples. This process is repeated un-
til a stopping criterion is met.
In the paper by Liang et al. [24], where the MAPO algorithm is introduced, the
algorithm is merged with models used on the WikiSQL dataset [39]. This dataset
contains 2-dimensional tables and a question and answer related to these. The
goal is to suggest an SQL program, that extracts the relevant information, thus
answering the question. These SQL programs have two major advantages to
our VQA data. First of all, the program structure is short in sequence length
and contains a limited amount of possible functions to choose from. Secondly,
these SQL programs are cheap to execute and can thus be evaluated using a
single CPU. In comparison, our program structures in the VQA dataset are sig-
niﬁcantly longer and consists of signiﬁcantly more modules to choose from and
our execution engine cannot be feasible run on a single CPU.
The short program sequence and limited amount of modules has two major ad-
vantages; Firstly, in the MAPO paper, they can ﬁll their memory buﬀer before
training begins. This is done by testing random program structures until ﬁnd-
ing a successful one. Secondly, it allows for evaluation of the suggested program
structures inside the actors, as they suggest them.
Since the execution engine is stationary in their setup, there is no need to visit
past explored program structures for a sample and new program structures are
therefore sampled according to Algorithm 3, ensuring that program structures
are never revisited. In the MAPO paper, Liang et al. suggests using a bloom
ﬁlter [4] to keep track of which sub-program structures have been explored.
The bloom ﬁlter works by hashing the program structures and allows us to
store billions of program structures, using only several gigabytes of memory.
Because the memory buﬀer is ﬁlled before the model is trained, there might be
high reward program structures with low probability of being drawn. When we
introduced reinforcement learning in Section 2.5, we saw that the goal was to
maximize the expected reward, which was the product of the reward itself and
the probability of the action leading to it, under our current model. Since the
expected reward of the program structures in the memory buﬀer might be low,
Liang et al. suggests clipping these expectations in the beginning of training.
Since we cannot ﬁll our memory buﬀer from the beginning, as our execution
engine is not yet trained, this will not be relevant in our setup and we shall
not discuss its implications further. The MAPO algorithm is stated in Algo-
rithm 4 The MAPO algorithm oﬀers an interesting approach to dealing with
the common reinforcement learning problems. Furthermore, the algorithm has
shown great results on the WikiSQL dataset, while reducing the need for strong
supervision. However, the algorithm in its original form, is not compatible with
our model for the following reasons; Firstly, our execution engine is not station-
ary, breaking one of the key assumptions of the algorithm. Since the execution
==PAGE:55==
5.3 The MAPO Algorithm
43
Algorithm 3 Systematic Exploration
Require: data x, model π, fully explored sub-program structures Be, high-
reward program structures B
Initialize: empty sequence a0:0
while true do
V = {a|a0:t−1||a /∈Be}
if V == ∅then
Be ←Be ∪a0:t−1
break
end if
sample at ∼πV (a|a0:t−1)
a0:t ←a0:t−1 ∩at
if at == EOS then
if R(a0:t) ≥0 then
B ←B ∪a0:t
end if
Be ←Be ∪a0:t
break
end if
end while
engine is not stationary, we cannot ﬁll our memory buﬀer before training be-
gins. This might lead to problems with not seeing enough positive rewards and
large gradient variance. Furthermore, we cannot eliminate program structures
after one try, as the execution engine is continuously trained, possibly causing
an already tried program structure, to lead to a correct answer later on dur-
ing training. Secondly, our execution engine is large both in computation and
memory requirements. Therefore, we cannot execute the programs structures
directly in the actors, without signiﬁcant resources. Lastly, we note that even
though our program structure search space is ﬁnite, as we limit the program
structure length to 30 and our execution engine contains 42 diﬀerent modules,
the number of combinations of just length 30 program structures, is more than
1060, making our search space very large. This requires our program generator
to produce qualiﬁed program structures, as we cannot hope to randomly stum-
ble upon a correct one.
With these considerations in mind, we are now ready to present our model.
==PAGE:56==
44
Methods
Algorithm 4 MAPO
Require: data, {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, high-reward paths and explored program struc-
tures {(Bi, Be
i )}N
i=1, constant α which determines the clipping.
while Stopping criterion is not met - for all actors do
Initialize training batch D ←∅
Get a batch of inputs C
for (xi, yi, Be
i , Bi) ∈C do
Algorithm 3(xi, πold
θ , Be
i , Bi)
Sample a+
i ∼πold
θ
over Bi
w+
i ←max(πold
θ (Bi), α) (This is the clipping)
D ←D ∪(a+
i , R(a+
i ), w+
i )
Sample aiπold
θ
if ai /∈Bi then
wi ←(1 −w+
i )
D ←D ∪(a+
i , R(a+
i ), wi)
end if
Push D to training queue
end for
end while
while Stopping criterion is not met - for the learner do
Get a batch D from the training queue
for (ai, R(ai), wi) ∈D do
dθ ←dθ + wiR(ai)∇log πθ(ai)
end for
Update θ using dθ
πold
θ
←πθ
end while
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Our model
45
5.4
Our model
In this section we will present our model, which is a merge of the baseline model
and a modiﬁed version of the MAPO algorithm. We start by presenting the
modiﬁed MAPO algorithm and then explain the training process for the model.
In the last section, we saw that the MAPO algorithm build upon strong as-
sumptions, some of which our baseline model did not meet.
Since we do not have a stationary execution engine, we cannot disregard pro-
gram structures we have visited once, since they may be valid later on during
training. Since our execution engine is a neural network itself, we cannot feasi-
bly test program structures directly in the actors. We shall solve both of these
problems with the following modiﬁcation. Instead of the actors suggesting and
testing a novel program structure, they will instead suggest K program struc-
tures, of which kn are novel and K −kn are not novel, but is assigned a high
probability in the program generator. The novel program structures allows us
to do exploration and the non-novel program structures allows us to revisit high
probability program structures again, as the execution engine is continuously
trained. This means that program structures that have already been explored,
can be revisited if the program generator assigns them a high enough probabil-
ity.
We saw that the amount of possible program structures in our setup was very
large, compared to the WikiSQL problem in the MAPO paper. In the system-
atic exploration algorithm suggested in the MAPO paper, if an actor chooses
a module which leads to an already explored path, we simply choose another
module at this step and continue. This method of re-choosing is not optimal.
Consider the situation, where we at timestep t1,choose one module with a prob-
ability of 40%, over another module with probability 35%. Now at timestep
t2, we choose a module with 99% probability, but this leads to a fully explored
sub-path, forcing us to re-choose the module. Under the MAPO systematic ex-
ploration algorithm, Algorithm 3, we will now chose another module at timestep
t2, which will have at most 1% probability. A more optimal approach, would be
to return to timestep t1 and choose the module with 35% probability instead,
disregarding the choices of modules made between timestep, t1 and t2. We will
incorporate this into our systematic exploration algorithm, by calculating the
entropy of the probability distribution at each timestep and using this entropy
to return to timesteps when needed. We note that the entropy of a random
variable X, with possible outcomes xi, each with probability PX(xi), is given
as,
H(X) = −
X
i
PX(xi) log PX(xi)
(5.5)
==PAGE:58==
46
Methods
The entropy is maximized when the probability distribution of X is uniform and
minimized when there is a 100% probability of only one event occurring. The
entropy will allow us to measure, where the program generator is most uncertain
in its choices. If we arrive at a timestep where the chosen module leads to a fully
explored sub-path, we shall return to the timestep with the highest entropy and
choose the second most likely module in this timestep continuing from there.
We present our new systematic exploration approach in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Systematic Exploration with Entropy
Require: data x, model π, explored program structures Be, constants K, kn.
Sequence counter i ←1
Initialize: explored sequences E = ∅
Initialize: found sequences D = ∅
while i ≤K do
Initialize: Sequence a0:0 = <START>
Initialize: Entropy sequence H0:0
Initialize: Possible module choices V = ∅
while true do
while V == ∅do
V = {a|a0:t−1||a /∈E}
if V == ∅then
E ←E ∪a0:t−1
t = argmax
t
H0:t
end if
end while
sample at ∼πV (a|a0:t−1)
Ht = Entropy(πV (a|a0:t−1))
H0:t ←H0:t−1 ∪Ht
Set π(at) = 0 (We will not choose this module again, if t gets reversed)
a0:t ←a0:t−1 ∪at
if at == <EOS> then
D ←D ∪a0:t
E ←E ∪a0:t
break
else
t ←t + 1
end if
end while
i ←i + 1
if i > K −kn then
E = E ∪Be
end if
end while
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Our model
47
This new systematic exploration algorithm that incorporates entropy allows us
to do exploration more eﬃciently, as well as allowing for program structures to
be revisited during training.
Next we turn our attention to the memory buﬀer. In the MAPO paper, the
memory buﬀer is ﬁlled before training begins by using random exploration. This
is not possible in our setup, since our execution engine is learned. Therefore our
memory buﬀer will not contain high reward program structures for all samples.
Instead we will after pre-training the program generator and execution engine,
ﬁll the memory buﬀer using the pre-trained model. This means that all samples
we can solve after pre-training, will contain high reward paths in the memory
buﬀer and all samples we cannot solve, will not. We cannot solve this problem
any better under the current model and note that this will put a lower limit on
the amount of strongly supervised samples required during pre-training. Next
we explain the actual training procedure for the model.
5.4.1
Training Our Model
We saw two problems in Section 5.2 with the current training approach for the
baseline; Overﬁtting during pre-training and a sub-optimal joint ﬁne-tuning ap-
proach. Our modiﬁed systematic exploration approach requires the program
generator to suggest qualiﬁed program structures.
Therefore, overﬁtting the
program generator during pre-training, will likely have a very negative eﬀect on
our approach. In order to solve this problem, we simply introduce regulariza-
tion of the program generator during training. This means that we will add the
L2-norm of all the weights and biases in the program generator, to our perfor-
mance metric L. Furthermore, since we aim to reduce the amount of strongly
supervised samples signiﬁcantly, we ensure that these strongly supervised sam-
ples contain program structures for every possible answer in our dataset. This
means that we will speciﬁcally choose samples for pre-training based on their
answer, unlike the approach in the baseline, where strongly supervised samples
are chosen at random.
We saw that the execution engine strongly exploited the imbalance in the an-
swer distribution, when reducing the amount of strongly supervised samples. In
order to circumvent this problem, we will again use regularization, along with
oversampling, to ensure that this does not occur during pre-training. We will
oversample our data, such that every answer has an equal amount of datapoints
in the dataset. Buda et al. [5] showed that oversampling in CNNs have almost
no negative eﬀects, even when datasets are as imbalanced as ours. Oversampling
the data has the beneﬁt of completely eliminating the possibility for imbalance
exploitation. These changes to the pre-training should eliminate the overﬁtting
in the program generator and the exploitation of the dataset imbalance in the
execution engine.
==PAGE:60==
48
Methods
Next we will reﬁne the joint training of the model, as it showed to be un-optimal,
when reducing the amount of strongly supervised samples. We note that there
are three possible scenarios that can produce a wrong answer in our model. 1:
The program generator produces a wrong program structure. 2: The program
generator produces a correct program structure, but the execution engine does
not produce the correct answer. 3: Both the program generator and execution
engine produce wrong predictions. An optimal approach would only train the
wrong parts of the model at every step. This is not possible in our model, as
we cannot assign blame without a labelled program structure. Furthermore, we
saw that the reinforcement learning approach came with signiﬁcant challenges.
We can reduce the impact of both problems by using pseudo labeling instead of
reinforcement learning. We pseudo label our program structures and use these
labels to train the program generator. We consider the program structures in
the memory buﬀer ’correct’ and use them as pseudo labels to back-propagate
the program generator. However, this approach is only possible in the cases
where the samples contain a pseudo label, i.e. a high reward program structure
in the memory buﬀer. Just as in reinforcement learning, we need a large enough
amount of pseudo labelled samples, positive samples in reinforcement learning
context, in order for this approach to work.
This approach of pseudo labelling comes with the same drawbacks as the rein-
forcement learning approach. Firstly, the samples we cannot answer correctly
have no pseudo labels and thus we cannot train the program generator on these.
Secondly, the pseudo labels might be sporadic program structures that lead to
correct answers by coincidence, such as counting red squares when asked about
yellow triangles, but accidentally having the same amount of both, leading to
a correct answer. However, a pseudo label approach signiﬁcantly reduces the
amount of gradient variance, as we can train the program generator using back-
propagation, instead of the REINFORCE algorithm. Normally when using a
pseudo label approach, such as the one we suggest, a concern is exploration. We
need a way to perform exploration, since our pseudo label approach does not
encourage the model to explore alternative paths. However, our systematic ex-
ploration algorithm proposed earlier, will ensure that we explore diﬀerent paths
during training. We therefore choose to use pseudo labelling, instead of rein-
forcement learning, when training the program generator. With this choice, we
can now present our training procedure.
Just as we saw in the baseline model, we ﬁrst pre-train our program genera-
tor and execution engine. The program generator is ﬁrst pre-trained using the
strongly labelled samples. We then let the program generator suggest program
structures for all samples in our dataset and use these program structures to
train the execution engine, under the assumption the program structures gen-
erated are correct.
After pre-training both the program generator and execution engine, we run
inference on all our samples using the entire model once. Those samples which
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Our model
49
we can answer correctly at the time of inference, gets their program structure
put into the memory buﬀer and we use these program structures as pseudo la-
bels. This allows us to split our dataset, X, into two subsets; X+ which are the
samples we can currently answer correctly and X−which are the samples we
cannot answer correctly at the given training time. We now let our actors do
systematic exploration, using Algorithm 5, on the samples in X−continuously.
In the learner we load a batch of samples, which consists partly of samples from
X+ and their pseudo labels and samples from X−and their suggested program
structures from the actors. We chose to not enforce a ratio between the two, but
simply load the entire dataset once before re-shuﬀeling it and starting over. This
means that every sample is seen an equal amount of times by the learner. When
our learner loads a batch, it checks that all samples from X+, along with their
pseudo labels, provide a correct answer. The samples with a correct answer, is
then used to train both the execution engine and program generator. If there
are samples which we can no longer answer using the pseudo labeled program
structure, we consider these program structures sporadic and the samples are
moved from X+ into X−and systematic exploration is done on them. The
samples from X−have their suggested program structures tested in the learner
and if any of them provide a correct answer, the highest probability program
structure, leading to a correct answer, is then used as a pseudo label and the
sample is moved into X+. These moved samples are also used to train both the
program generator and execution engine. If the samples have no correct answers
amongst the suggested program structures, we consider the execution engine at
fault and train it using the highest probability program structure. This whole
approach is done continuously, until we meet a preset stopping criterion. We
summarize the training method in Algorithm 6.
5.4.2
Results
Before we present the results achieved when using our modiﬁed approach, there
is one important thing to note. The training time needed when using our ap-
proach, compared to the joint ﬁne-tuning used in the baseline, is signiﬁcantly
higher. The joint ﬁne-tuning can be done in less than two hours of training time,
using two GPUs and 16 CPUs. The modiﬁed MAPO approach takes over 100
hours, using the same amount of GPUs and CPUs. Because the training time
is this high, we cannot test a large amount of hyper-parameters. Therefore, it
might be possible to achieve even better results using diﬀerent hyper-parameters.
In this work, we have tested several hyper-parameters related to regularization
as this seems to have the biggest impact on performance. We have also experi-
mented with diﬀerent batch sizes and learning rates. Lastly, we have tried to use
reinforcement learning on the program generator for samples inside (X−, Y −),
in order to enforce the program generator to assign less probability to program
==PAGE:62==
50
Methods
structures leading to wrong answers. We note that the reinforcement approach
did not have a positive impact on performance and summarize the ﬁnal hyper-
parameters used in our model in Table 5.6. We note that regularization was not
used when training the baseline and that our learning rate for modiﬁed MAPO
is half of what was used for the joint ﬁne-tuning of the baseline.
Hyper-parameter
Program Generator
Execution Engine
Modiﬁed MAPO
Learning Rate
5 × 10−4*
1 × 10−4*
1 × 10−5
Regularization
0.0005
0.0001
0.0005/0.0001 (PG/EE)
Batch Size
64*
64*
64*
K
N/A
N/A
20
k_n
N/A
N/A
17
Optimizer
ADAM*
ADAM*
ADAM*
Table 5.6: Hyper-parameters for our model. *Same as used for training the
baseline.
The results for the baseline using the modiﬁed MAPO algorithm, along with
the methods to prevent overﬁtting, are presented in Figure 5.4 and Table 5.7.
We note that the baseline achieved an accuracy of 97.1% when every sample
was strongly labelled.
(a) Program Accuracy
(b) Answer Accuracy
Figure 5.4: Program- and answer accuracy for our model on the CLEVR
dataset.
Using our modiﬁed approach, we achieve improved results in all cases, except for
the fully supervised one, compared to the baseline. We see that the accuracy
decreases signiﬁcantly less when we lower the amount of strongly supervised
samples. This decrease is an important improvement, compared to the large
decrease we saw earlier.
We saw that the baseline, has signiﬁcant problems
with overﬁtting in the program generator, Table 5.8 shows that this is no longer
the case with our approach.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Our model
51
# of strongly supervised samples
Baseline
Our Model
500
57.2
71.2
1,000
58.0
88.2
3,000
60.9
91.8
9,000
88.6
94.4
18,000
95.4
95.8
700,000
97.1
96.9
Table 5.7: Our results compared to the baseline, as a function of strongly
supervised samples.
# of strongly supervised samples
Training Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
500
22.4
23.1
1,000
39.1
38.7
3,000
60.9
60.7
9,000
93.5
94.3
18,000
97.4
98.8
700,000
97.1
97.2
Table 5.8: Training- and validation accuracy of the program generator with
our modiﬁed training approach.
In Table 5.9 we show the signiﬁcance of regularizing the program generator.
Note that the accuracy listed is not for the program generator, but the entire
model. We see that avoiding overﬁtting during pre-training is important when
the amount of strong supervised samples is low in order for our modiﬁed MAPO
algorithm to work. As we stated earlier, there are a large amount of possible
program structures and we cannot hope to randomly choose one that works,
instead we need the program generator to provide feasible ones to test. Fur-
thermore, we manually test that imbalance exploitation does not occur, which
it does not for any of the models.
# of Strong Samples
Accuracy with
Regularization
Accuracy without
Regularization
1.000
88.2%
61.8%
3.000
91.8%
67.5%
18.000
95.8%
95.2%
Table 5.9: The impact on the answer accuracy of regularization in the program
generator, as a function of strongly supervised samples.
We see that our approach does not signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy, when we
have a large amount of strongly supervised samples. When we provide 18, 000
==PAGE:64==
52
Methods
and 700, 000 strongly supervised samples during pre-training, the wrong answers
are almost exclusively seen on questions where the suggested program structures
are longer than 20 modules. As we discussed earlier, this is most likely duo to
the program generator being too simple.
Manual error analysis of the model shows, that errors do occur on questions
with short suggested program sequences. This is the case for all models, regard-
less of the amount of strongly supervised samples, but is more common as the
number of strongly supervised samples decreases. These erroneously labelled
samples tested all have one thing in common, the associated suggested program
structure is given a low probability by our program generator. The reason for
the low probability is unclear, but might be caused by these program structures
not being seen during pre-training, or being seen rarely out of all the strongly
supervised samples used.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Our model
53
Algorithm 6 Modiﬁed MAPO
Require: data splits {(X+, Y +), (X−, Y −)}, program generator πpg, execution
engine πee, explored program structures Be, high reward structures B+ con-
stants K, kn.
while Stopping criterion is not met - for all actors do
Get an input sample xi from X−
D ←Algorithm 5(xi, πpg, Be
i , K, kn)
Push D to training queue
end while
while Stopping criterion is not met - for the learner do
Initialize empty training batch {C−, C+}
C−←(x−
i:i+k, y−
i:i+k, Di:i+k)
C+ ←(x+
i:i+k, y+
i:i+k, B+
i:i+k)
for (xi, yi, Di) ∈C−do
for p ∈Di do
if πee(xi, p) == yi then
X+ ∪xi, Y + ∪yi, B+
i ←p
X−←X−\ xi, Y −←Y −\ yi
C+ ←C+ ∪(xi, yi, B+
i )
C−←C−\ (xi, yi, Di)
break
end if
end for
end for
for (xi, yi, B+
i ) ∈C+ do
if πee(xi, B+
i ) ̸= yi then
X−∪xi, Y −∪yi, Be
i ←B+
i
X+ ←X+ \ xi, Y + ←Y + \ yi
C−←C−∪(xi, yi)
C+ ←C+ \ (xi, yi, B+
i )
end if
end for
for (xi, yi, B+
i ) ∈C+ do
dθpg ←dθpg + Backprop(πpg(xi), B+
i )
dθee ←dθee + Backprop(πee(xi, B+
i ), yi)
end for
for (xi, yi) ∈C−do
dθee ←dθee + Backprop(πee(xi, πpg(xi)), yi)
end for
Update θ using dθ
Push θ to actors
end while
==PAGE:66==
54
Methods
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Discussion and Conclusion
In this thesis, we aimed to reduce the amount of supervised samples needed
for program synthesis.
The results on the CLEVR dataset were promising.
We reduced the amount of strongly supervised samples needed, from 18, 000 to
3, 000, with a loss of 4% accuracy, compared to the more than 30% accuracy
loss we saw without the method. Furthermore, we achieved signiﬁcant accu-
racy improvements, compared to the baseline, when we reduced the amount
of strongly supervised samples even further. It is however important to note,
that the proposed training method in the baseline showed signiﬁcant problems,
exploiting the imbalance in the data. We can still conclude that our method
provides a signiﬁcant improvement, even if the original training approach was
ﬂawed. However, these improvements did not come for free, as we increased
our training time by a factor of 50. While it should be expected that heav-
ier exploration methods, such as ours, results in higher training complexity, a
factor of 50 is still high compared to the accuracy gain. Where some of this
increased training complexity is inevitably caused by non-optimal coding, the
approach does have a very high training complexity, requiring many CPUs for
optimal exploration. This may or may not be a problem, depending on avail-
able resources, but should be taken into account, if other methods are available.
The large training complexity, also complicated the process of hyper-parameter
tuning. It is possible that the results presented in the paper are not optimal,
since we cannot feasible test all the hyper-parameters conﬁgurations of interest.
This is perhaps the biggest drawback of our methods complexity.
==PAGE:68==
56
Discussion and Conclusion
One large unanswered question, is if the promising results can be transferred to
other domains or model conﬁgurations. Testing the method on more datasets
or models, would assure that our promising results are not a ’one-hit wonder’
and allow for a more robust conclusion, this was however not possible within the
time frame of the thesis. Furthermore, since the baseline model achieves a very
high result on the used dataset, one could argue that the model has been ﬁt to
the dataset. It is unclear whether or not this impacts our proposed method.
We saw that the baseline models program generator, was most likely too simple
to deal with long questions requiring long program structures. Obviously our
proposed method could not solve this problem, as it did not change the com-
plexity of the program generator, only the method for training it. However,
this did allow us to ’blame’ the failure of some of the hardest questions in the
dataset, on the program generators simplicity, rather than the method itself. It
is very likely that our methods performance is impacted by the program length,
since exploration on long sequences allows for exponentially more combinations.
Furthermore, we saw that the questions with short suggested program struc-
tures, that we could not answer, all had low probability associated with their
suggested program structures. We conclude that the program generators ability
to suggest good program structures, is key in achieving a high accuracy when
using the method.
Overall the method proposed in this thesis showed signiﬁcant improvements
on the tested dataset, when the amount of strongly samples where low. Con-
sidering the added training complexity, resource requirements and results, it
is infeasible to apply this method, whenever dealing with program synthesis.
However, if the amount of strongly labelled data is low and the resources are
available, our method seems to provide a large improvement compared to cur-
rent methods used.
In the problem statement, we asked if we could reduce the amount of strongly
supervised samples needed signiﬁcantly, without a loss of accuracy. We conclude
that our method cannot avoid a drop in accuracy, as we reduce the amount of
strongly supervised samples signiﬁcantly. Therefore, if we can obtain a large
amount of strongly supervised data, this will still lead to the highest accuracy.
However, if we do not have access to a large amount of such strongly super-
vised data, our method can provide a large boost to accuracy at the cost of a
longer training time and when we do have a large amount of strongly supervised
samples avaliable, our method can provide a small improvement compared to
the other methods used. Even though our method did not completely solve our
problem statement, it still provides a valuable performance boost where strongly
supervised samples are not readily available, which we consider an overall suc-
cess.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7
Future Work
There are several interesting approaches to further explore with this method.
These can be clustered into two groups; testing the method on other domains/models
and improving the method itself. For testing the method, it would be interest-
ing to apply the method to question answering datasets as well as testing the
method on other models. This would provide stronger evidence for the methods
applicability, possibly suggesting further improvements for the method.
We saw that avoiding overﬁtting in the program generator, as well as enforcing
the program generator to suggest good program structures, was key in order to
achieve good overall performance. It would be interesting, to further encour-
age this behaviour in the program generator during pre-training. One approach
could be to apply beam search to the program generator and use a beam aware
training method. This would allow the program generator to explore several
diﬀerent program structures without encouring a loss during training. Further-
more, it might be possible to do ensemble program generation, where multiple
high probability program structures are used for answering the question, since
every question should have several diﬀerent program structures leading to the
correct answer. In the MAPO paper, they continue exploration on samples they
can already answer, teaching the program generator several diﬀerent program
structures that can solve a problem. This approach would likely allow for better
program generation and generalization and could be interesting to test in order
to further improve the method.
==PAGE:70==
58
Future Work
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1] Andreas, J., Rohrbach, M., Darrell, T., and Klein, D.
Deep
compositional question answering with neural module networks.
CoRR
abs/1511.02799 (2015).
[2] Andreas, J., Rohrbach, M., Darrell, T., and Klein, D. Learning
to compose neural networks for question answering. CoRR abs/1601.01705
(2016).
[3] Bahdanau, D., de Vries, H., O’Donnell, T. J., Murty, S., Beau-
doin, P., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. Closure: Assessing systematic
generalization of clevr models, 2019.
[4] Bloom, B. H. Space/time trade-oﬀs in hash coding with allowable errors.
Commun. ACM 13, 7 (July 1970), 422–426.
[5] Buda, M., Maki, A., and Mazurowski, M. A. A systematic study
of the class imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks. CoRR
abs/1710.05381 (2017).
[6] Bunel, R., Hausknecht, M. J., Devlin, J., Singh, R., and Kohli,
P.
Leveraging grammar and reinforcement learning for neural program
synthesis. CoRR abs/1805.04276 (2018).
[7] Chung, J., Gülçehre, Ç., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Empirical eval-
uation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. CoRR
abs/1412.3555 (2014).
[8] Dua, D., Wang, Y., Dasigi, P., Stanovsky, G., Singh, S., and
Gardner, M. Drop: A reading comprehension benchmark requiring dis-
crete reasoning over paragraphs. In NAACL-HLT (2019).
==PAGE:72==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Gulwani, S., Polozov, A., and Singh, R. Program Synthesis, vol. 4.
NOW, August 2017.
[10] Gupta, N., Lin, K., Roth, D., Singh, S., and Gardner, M. Neural
module networks for reasoning over text, 2019.
[11] Guu, K., Pasupat, P., Liu, E. Z., and Liang, P. From language to pro-
grams: Bridging reinforcement learning and maximum marginal likelihood.
CoRR abs/1704.07926 (2017).
[12] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. CoRR abs/1512.03385 (2015).
[13] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. CoRR abs/1512.03385 (2015).
[14] Hester, T., Vecerík, M., Pietquin, O., Lanctot, M., Schaul, T.,
Piot, B., Sendonaris, A., Dulac-Arnold, G., Osband, I., Agapiou,
J., Leibo, J. Z., and Gruslys, A. Learning from demonstrations for real
world reinforcement learning. CoRR abs/1704.03732 (2017).
[15] Houthooft, R., Chen, X., Duan, Y., Schulman, J., Turck, F. D.,
and Abbeel, P. Curiosity-driven exploration in deep reinforcement learn-
ing via bayesian neural networks. CoRR abs/1605.09674 (2016).
[16] Hu, R., Andreas, J., Rohrbach, M., Darrell, T., and Saenko,
K. Learning to reason: End-to-end module networks for visual question
answering. CoRR abs/1704.05526 (2017).
[17] Hudson, D. A., and Manning, C. D. Compositional attention networks
for machine reasoning. CoRR abs/1803.03067 (2018).
[18] Johnson, J., Hariharan, B., van der Maaten, L., Fei-Fei, L.,
Zitnick, C. L., and Girshick, R. B. CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset
for compositional language and elementary visual reasoning.
CoRR
abs/1612.06890 (2016).
[19] Johnson, J., Hariharan, B., van der Maaten, L., Hoffman, J.,
Li, F., Zitnick, C. L., and Girshick, R. B. Inferring and executing
programs for visual reasoning. CoRR abs/1705.03633 (2017).
[20] Johnson, J., Hariharan, B., van der Maaten, L., Hoffman, J.,
Li, F., Zitnick, C. L., and Girshick, R. B. Inferring and executing
programs for visual reasoning. CoRR abs/1705.03633 (2017).
[21] Kingma, D. P., and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,
2014.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[22] Konda, V., and Tsitsiklis, J. Actor-critic algorithms. In SIAM Journal
on Control and Optimization (2000), MIT Press, pp. 1008–1014.
[23] Liang, C., Berant, J., Le, Q. V., Forbus, K. D., and Lao, N. Neu-
ral symbolic machines: Learning semantic parsers on freebase with weak
supervision. CoRR abs/1611.00020 (2016).
[24] Liang, C., Norouzi, M., Berant, J., Le, Q. V., and Lao, N. Memory
augmented policy optimization for program synthesis with generalization.
CoRR abs/1807.02322 (2018).
[25] Lin, L.
Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning,
planning and teaching. 1992.
[26] Norouzi, M., Bengio, S., Chen, Z., Jaitly, N., Schuster, M., Wu,
Y., and Schuurmans, D. Reward augmented maximum likelihood for
neural structured prediction. CoRR abs/1609.00150 (2016).
[27] Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T. Curiosity-
driven exploration by self-supervised prediction.
CoRR abs/1705.05363
(2017).
[28] Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D.
Glove: Global
vectors for word representation. In In EMNLP (2014).
[29] Perez, E., Strub, F., de Vries, H., Dumoulin, V., and Courville,
A. C. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. CoRR
abs/1709.07871 (2017).
[30] Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma,
S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein, M. S., Berg,
A. C., and Li, F. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. CoRR
abs/1409.0575 (2014).
[31] Schmidhuber, S. H. . J. Long short-term memoery. Neural Computa-
tion 9 (1997), 1735–1780. https://www.bioinf.jku.at/publications/
older/2604.pdf.
[32] Srivastava, Y., Murali, V., Dubey, S. R., and Mukherjee, S. Visual
question answering using deep learning: A survey and performance analysis,
2019.
[33] Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: An Intro-
duction, second ed. The MIT Press, 2018.
[34] Tan, H., and Bansal, M.
Lxmert: Learning cross-modality encoder
representations from transformers, 2019.
==PAGE:74==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35] Tang, H., Houthooft, R., Foote, D., Stooke, A., Chen, X., Duan,
Y., Schulman, J., Turck, F. D., and Abbeel, P. #exploration: A
study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR
abs/1611.04717 (2016).
[36] Williams, R. J.
Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning.
Mach. Learn. 8, 3–4 (May 1992),
229–256.
[37] Yi, K., Wu, J., Gan, C., Torralba, A., Kohli, P., and Tenen-
baum, J. B. Neural-symbolic VQA: disentangling reasoning from vision
and language understanding. CoRR abs/1810.02338 (2018).
[38] Zhong, V., Xiong, C., and Socher, R. Seq2sql: Generating struc-
tured queries from natural language using reinforcement learning. CoRR
abs/1709.00103 (2017).
[39] Zhong, V., Xiong, C., and Socher, R. Seq2sql: Generating struc-
tured queries from natural language using reinforcement learning. CoRR
abs/1709.00103 (2017).
