==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Computational Investigation of new OER
Catalysts
A Theoretical Study of Transition Metal Antimonates
Anders J. E. Bjerrum (s144109)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Preface
Within this thesis we will investigate the catalytic activity of a selection of transition
metal oxides towards the oxygen evolution reaction. The materials under study can
chemically be labelled as transition metal antimonates, consisting of a tri-rutile lat-
tice, with antimony and the transition metals occupying the metallic sites.
In this work we report on the transition metal antimonates MnSb2O6, NiSb2O6, and
Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6. These materials have previously been studied experimentally by
Moreno-Hernandez et al. The scope of this work is to gain a theoretical understand-
ing of these materials, which may reveal information on the active site and through
what mechanism OO coupling is the most likely to occur. The inquiry will be based
on GGA level DFT using the revised Perdew–Burke-Ernzerhof (rPBE) functional.
The surface structure of the materials under study may be configured in a large
number of ways, and the analysis will be restricted to certain configurations which
we consider more realistic than others. This decision making process will be guided
by known experimental results and considerations of the relevant thermodynamics.
In particular, effort is spend in finding the correct coverage of species adsorbed on
the catalyst surface, since this will guide our mechanistic understanding of the cata-
lyst and help find more reliable estimates for the relevant thermodynamic quantities.
Structure files, calculation parameters, calculation outputs, and scripts are uploaded
to the GitHub repository at https://github.com/ehlers-bjerrum/Transition-
Metal-Antimonates-OER
Kongens Lyngby, March 5, 2020
Anders J. E. Bjerrum (s144109)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Several persons were involved in making this work possible.
Thanks to my supervisor Vanessa J. Bukas of DTU Physics for invaluable discussion,
and for introducing me to several topics of theoretical surface science. I would also
like to thank her for always being quick to answer any question I might throw at her.
Thanks to Sudarshan Vijay of DTU Physics for introducing me to the Vienna Ab Ini-
tio Simulations package, and teaching me how to set up basic DFT calculations using
this package. Thanks to Sara Rois Kelly of SUNCAT at Stanford for useful discus-
sion and physical insight. I’d like to thank the remaining members of the CatTheory
group of DTU Physics for teaching me new physics almost every day, and giving me
insight into the frontier of theoretical electrocatalysis.
Finally I’d like to extend my gratitude to Professor Jens K. Nørskov, for the
warm welcome into his research group and for allowing me the computer resources
and freedom to write this thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Glossary and
Acronyms
SHE:
Standard Hydrogen Electrode. The common reference electrode used in
eletrochemistry.
OER:
Oxygen Evolution Reaction. The electrochemical reaction creating O2
from H2O
ORR:
Oxygen Reduction Reaction. The electrochemical reaction creating H2O
from O2
HER:
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction. The electrochemical reaction creating H2
from H+.
PEM:
Proton Exchange Membrane. Membrane used to selectively transport H+.
DFT:
Density Functional Theory. A mathematical framework for finding the
electronic structure of a material.
VASP:
Vienna Ab Initio Simulations Package. Package used for doing DFT
calculations.
rPBE Functional:
Revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof Functional.
CV:
Cyclic Voltammetry. Measurement technique in electrochemistry used to
benchmark the performance of electrocatalysts.
DOS:
Density of States. Density of quantum states as a function of energy.
IHP:
Inner Helmholtz Plane. The plane above the electrode that cuts through
the center of the closest approaching ions.
CUS Site:
Coordinatively Unsaturated Site. Site label referring to adsorption
==PAGE:8==
vi
Glossary and Acronyms
directly above a surface atom.
Bridge Site:
Site label referring to adsorption between two surface atom.
Overpotential:
The difference between the potential at which OER is catalyzed,
and the standard reduction potential for OER.
GP:
Gaussian Processes. Machine learning method.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Glossary and Acronyms
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Mechanisms for OO Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Known Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
7
2.1
Density Functional Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Statistical Physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Surface Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Results
33
3.1
Computational Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Clean MnSb2O6 (110) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.4
Search Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.5
Microkinetic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4
Discussion and Conclusion
75
4.1
Stability of the Bulk Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.2
Field Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.3
Role of Ni and Mn in Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.4
Further Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The on-going transition from fossil fuels to renewable energies has created an indus-
trial demand for new energy storage solutions. Hydrogen gas presents itself as a viable
candidate with the high specific energy of 142 MJ/kg released during the oxidation
reaction of hydrogen to water [1]. If the water splitting reaction can be catalyzed
efficiently, it paves the way for producing green hydrogen gas through the reaction:
H2O(l) −−→H2(g) + 1
2O2(g)
(1.1)
Thereby achieving energy storage in the form of chemical energy stored in the H2
molecule. The caveat to the high specific energy of hydrogen is the low energy density,
requiring either high pressure or large volume for energy storage. However, generating
hydrogen gas is a necessary step for synthesizing other electrofuels such as ammonia
with a specific energy of 18.6 MJ/kg and an energy density of 13.6 MJ/L at 10.3 bar
[1]. In this context green hydrogen production will also be necessary for reducing
agricultural CO2 emission due to the Haber-Bosch process. The industry standard
today for creating hydrogen gas is through the steam reforming reaction involving
methane extracted from natural gas [2]:
CH4 + H2O −−→CO + 3H2
(1.2)
Where the CO is further reacted via the water-gas shift reaction:
CO + H2O −−→CO2 + H2
(1.3)
The current industrial method of synthesizing hydrogen gas is therefore linked to CO2
production and cannot be claimed as green technology unless the CO2 is handled ap-
propriately.
Hydrogen may be generated by splitting water electrochemically in the oxygen
evolution reaction (OER) [3]:
H2O(l) −−→1
2O2(g) + 2 H+ + 2 e−
(1.4)
Followed by the anodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) running at the counter
electrode:
H+ + e−−−→1
2H2(g)
(1.5)
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The oxygen evolution reaction is up hill in energy with a standard reduction potential
of 1.23 V. If the energy used to drive the OER comes from renewables, we discover
that the reaction is not associated with the emission of green house gas, and may
form the foundation for producing green electrofuels.
From an industrial standpoint it is currently preferable to run the water splitting
reaction in strong acid as compared to alkaline conditions, due to the availability of ef-
ficient proton exchange membranes (PEMs) [4]. Solvated protons can travel through
the PEM while other molecules such as O2 cannot. This implies that we can separate
the HER side of the reaction from the OER side of the reaction thereby preventing
the mixing of O2(g) and H2(g). A mix of these gases is highly explosive, and the
separation of the two half-reactions is essential if water splitting should become the
industrial method for hydrogen production.
The only known materials to catalyze OER in acid at low overpotentials, and
without rapidly dissolving, are IrO2 and RuO2 [5]. These materials exhibit overpo-
tentials of 410 mV and 360 mV respectively at a current density of 10 mA/cm2. Both
iridium and ruthenium are amongst the scarcest metals on Earth, presenting a major
obstacle toward establishing water splitting industrially. A major challenge toward
catalyzing OER in acid, is that most metals go into dissolution at the high potential
and low pH. The transition metal antimonates investigated in this work were found
experimentally to be resistant to dissolution under the harsh conditions. The over-
potentials were modest at best, being around 700 mV for the materials containing
significant quantities of manganese. However the apparent corrosion resistance, and
the possibility of tuning the transition metal content, suggests that it’s worthwhile
to increase our understanding of these materials.
1.1
Mechanisms for OO Coupling
Several mechanisms have been proposed for coupling two oxygen atoms [3]. In this
work we’ll focus on the Eley-Rideal type mechanism and the Langmuir-Hinshelwood
type mechanism.
Assuming an Eley-Rideal mechanism, the intermediate steps in
OER can be written as:
(1)
H2O(l) + ∗←−→H2O∗
(2)
H2O∗←−→OH∗+ (H+ + e–)
(3)
OH∗←−→O∗+ H+ + e–
(4)
O∗+ H2O(l) −−→OOH∗+ H+ + e–
(5)
OOH∗←−→O2∗+ (H+ + e–)
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Known Experimental Results
3
(6)
O2∗←−→O2(g)
Where ∗is the catalyst surface, and H2O* for example represents chemisorbed water.
Within this work we’ll generally consider OO coupling (step 4) the rate determining
step for OER.
Assuming a Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism we can write the intermediate steps
in OER as:
(1)
2H2O(l) + ∗←−→2H2O∗
(2)
2H2O∗←−→2OH∗+ 2(H+ + e–)
(3)
2OH∗←−→2O∗+ 2 (H+ + e–)
(4)
O∗+ O∗−−→O2∗
(5)
O2∗←−→O2(g)
The two mechanisms are sketched in Figure 1.1.
1.2
Known Experimental Results
The transition metal antimonates described in this work were synthesized and charac-
terized by Ivan A. Moreno-Hernandez et al from the Lewis group at Caltech. Within
this section we report on the results obtained by the group. The authors used an elec-
trolyte of 1M H2SO4. We will reprint figures from the original article [6]. In Figure
1.2 (a) the authors investigate the stability of the catalysts and how the overpotential
changes with prolonged use. In most cases the overpotentials appear fairly constant
after 150 hrs of use, though this result should be compared with Figure 1.3 where
they observe significant initial leaching of manganese to the solvent. This leaching
appears to cease after 50hrs at which point the material appears stable. It should be
noted that the electrolyte is refreshed by the authors repeatedly to prevent a build
up of metal ions in solution.
Examining Figure 1.2 (b) we observe an oxidation reaction at 1.5 V vs RHE and a
reduction reaction at 1.4 V vs RHE. The authors show that this peak only appears if
manganese is present in the material. The peak is suggestively close to the standard
reduction potential of Mn(III):
Mn3+ + e−−−→Mn2+
E0 = 1.5V
(1.6)
Suggesting that Mn(III) is present in the catalysts under working conditions.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Two possible pathways for OO coupling. Oxygen is red, hydrogen is white,
and the catalyst is grey. (a): OO coupling through an Eley-Rideal mechanism. (b):
OO coupling through a Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism. The rate of the mechanism
will dependent on the probability of two oxygen atoms neighbouring eachother.
In Figure 1.4 (c) the authors demonstrate that the current drawn through the
electrode is consistent with the amount of oxygen evolved. This indicates that the
current shown in the CVs can be correlated with oxygen evolution, and not the re-
sult of some other oxidation process. In Figure 1.4 (b) the authors show the change
in overpotential at 10 mA/cm2 as a function of nickel content. Less nickel content
implies more manganese content. We see that a minimum appears, with 50% nickel
being best. The difference in overpotential between MnSb2O6 and Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6
is approximately 50 meV, a difference that will be difficult to capture using the rPBE
functional.
In Figure 1.5 the authors characterize the surface structure of the electrocatalysts
using transmission electron microscopy. The interference pattern and lattice fringes
observed are consistent with the (110) plane of the materials being exposed.
We’ve now explained the background of this work and will spent the next chapter
on reviewing relevant theory. After that we turn to our results section where we show
the output of a selection of DFT calculations. On the background of these calculations,
we will attempt to argue in favour of particular active sites and reaction mechanisms.
It has been the overarching goal of this work to establish a correspondence between
experiment and theory, and where experiment has failed to guide the theoretical
approach, we will use statistics to guide us instead. This idea will be implemented
in a regression routine designed to search for the groundstate coverage of oxide and
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Known Experimental Results
5
Figure 1.2: (a): Chronopotentiometric stability measurements of the catalysts. The
overpotential appears stable over extended periods of operation. (b): Cyclic voltam-
metry measurements of the catalysts performed after different periods of operation.
The redox peaks at ∼1.5 V vs RHE may be attributed to oxidation of Mn(II). Both
figures are reprinted from [6].
Figure 1.3:
Experimentally measured dissolution curves for the elements in the
Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6 catalyst. We observe that dissolution is significantly decreased after
50 hrs of operation. The figure is reprinted from [6].
hydroxide on the catalyst surface. Furthermore the routine will be implemented to
investigate whether a particular set of co-adsorbates may be particularly favourable
toward catalyzing OER.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: (a): CVs showing the relation between catalyst composition and overpo-
tential. (b): We see that an minimum overpotential is achieved when including 50%
Ni and 50 % Mn in the catalyst. (c): The oxygen evolution expected from the CV
matches the measured oxygen evolved. All figures are reprinted from [6].
Figure 1.5: TEM image of the surface structure measured in the experimental paper.
The lattice fringes are consistent with the (110) surface structure. Figure reprinted
from [6].
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
Within this chapter theory relevant to the results of this thesis will be examined.
Basic quantum theory and it’s relevance to surface science will be described giving
a brief account of density functional theory (DFT). Furthermore a brief account of
the statistical physics relevant for computing rate constants is given. Following this,
the physical effects and mechanisms underlying surface science and it’s relation to
catalysis will be examined from a qualitative and quantitative approach. The chapter
is concluded with a brief account of Gaussian Processes regression.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
2.1
Density Functional Theory
Here we attempt to give an account of the ideas and equations underlying GGA level
DFT. We’ll start by briefly introducing the concept of a quantum mechanical state
from a Bayesian perspective and then move on to the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem and
the Kohn-Sham equations.
2.1.1
The Quantum Mechanical State
Quantum mechanics is the branch of physics used to understand the behaviour of
microscopic phenomena. Within the framework of the theory, we postulate that the
system under study is isolated and can be described by a state |ψ⟩. This state should
contain all relevant information pertaining to the system. This information can be
represented in multiple ways, and in principle any representation that is capable of
encoding all types of information will do. The vectors associated with this encoding
is usually referred to as the basis set of the description, and if the basis set can encode
any type of information, we say that it is complete. These basis vectors could be a set
of complex numbers, or a set of bits written to a file, or a formal system for drawing
molecular orbitals. The state evolves in time according to an equation of the form
[7]:
i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂t
= H |ψ⟩
(2.1)
Where H is a Hermitian operator called the Hamiltonian of the system. The Hamil-
tonian operator can for an electronic system be written as:
H = T + Uee + vext
(2.2)
Where vext is the external potential applied to the system, T is the kinetic energy
operator, and Uee is the operator giving the electron-electron interaction energy. The
external potential could for example be the potential arising from a lattice of nuclei.
Assume we have a system consisting of 5 electrons. We encode the state of the
system into position vectors:
|ψ⟩= Σi,j,k,l,mψ(xi, xj, xk, xl, xm) |xi, xj, xk, xl, xm⟩
(2.3)
Where the vector |xi, xj, xk, xl, xm⟩correspond to each of the 5 electrons occupying
particular positions in space.
The amplitude ψ(xi, xj, xk, xl, xm) can be used to
calculate the probability that the 5 electrons occupy the positions {xi, xj, xk, xl, xm}
according to the rule:
P(xi, xj, xk, xl, xm) = |ψ(xi, xj, xk, xl, xm)|2
(2.4)
Assume the electrons can occupy points in a grid and that we have 10 grid points
in each direction. The total number of grid points will then be 103. The number of
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Density Functional Theory
9
possible position vectors |xi, xj, xk, xl, xm⟩is then number of ways we can distribute
5 electrons among 1000 boxes. This number is given from combinatorics as:
103 · (103 −1) · (103 −2) · (103 −3) · (103 −4)
5!
≈1013
(2.5)
For each of these position vectors we must compute an amplitude ψ(xi, xj, xk, xl, xm)
if we want to describe the total state faithfully. Assuming each amplitude can be
encoded in 1 byte, then we see that describing 5 electrons on a 10x10x10 grid, requires
several terabytes of storage space. Clearly then, the determination of the electronic
structure of molecules and solids, involving hundreds of electrons, is intractable using
the state |ψ⟩. For this reason, another formalism for describing microscopic system
must be developed, or we must turn to approximations.
2.1.2
The Adiabatic Approximation
The mass of a proton is about 1836 times the mass of the electron. As a result, the
electrons move far more rapidly than the nuclei. For this reason we can often assume
that the position of the nuclei are fixed, and solve the electronic structure problem
on this background of positive ions. Mathematically, this mean we can decouple the
wavefunction of the nuclei Θn(R, t) and the electronic wavefunction ϕ(R, r), and the
total wavefunction is given as the product:
Ψ = ΣnΘn(R, t)ϕ(R, r)
(2.6)
Where R is the positions of the nuclei, and r is the positions of the electrons. t is
time. The nuclei are very confined owing to the strength of the strong interaction.
The resulting width of the ground state is on the order 0.2Å [8]. Since the internuclear
distance is much larger than this in physical systems, we may neglect interference and
treat each nuclei as a point particle obeying Newtonian mechanics:
Mn
d2⟨R⟩
dt2
= −⟨∇ϵn(R)⟩
(2.7)
The force acting on the nuclei results from the distribution of the electronic density
and other nuclei. To evaluate this force we must solve the electronic structure problem.
The procedure for converging the position of the nuclei is then as follows:
• An initial guess for the position of the nuclei is implemented.
• The electronic structure is solved on this background of nuclei. This background
of nuclei will define vext.
• The electron density is used to evaluate the force on the nuclei.
• The positions of the nuclei are then updated based on these forces and the
particular choice of minimization algorithm.
• The electronic structure is then solved on the updated positions of the nuclei
and the routine loops until some convergence criterion is met
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
2.1.3
The Hohenberg-Kohn Theorems
The Hohenberg-Kohn theorems proves that it is possible to describe the electronic
structure of a material exactly via the electron density ρ. The electron density is a
function of 3 numbers, the coordinates along x, y, and z. The set of bytes required to
store the electron density on a grid of a 1000 points, is then in principle on the order
of kilobytes, and solving electronic structure problems becomes feasible. We will now
briefly describe the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems as presented in [8].
• Theorem 1:
The external potential vext is univocally determined by the electronic density
besides a trivial additive constant.
Since ρ(x) univocally determines vext, it also determines the ground state wave
function.
• Theorem 2:
We can write the groundstate energy E0 as a functional of the electronic density
ρ:
E0[ρ(r)] = F[ρ(r)] +
∫
ρ(r)vextdr
(2.8)
Where
F[ρ(r)] = ⟨Φ[ρ(r)]|T + Uee|Φ[ρ(r)]⟩
(2.9)
Φ[ρ(r)] is the ground state wavefunction. Assume we have a non-negative trial
density ˜ρ normalized to contain N electrons.
We can define the variational
energy Ev as a functional of the trial density:
Ev[ ˜
ρ(r)] = F[ ˜
ρ(r)] +
∫
˜
ρ(r)vextdr
(2.10)
Using this scheme, we have from the Rayleigh-Ritz variational principle that:
E0 < Ev[ ˜
ρ(r)]
(2.11)
Finding the ground state electronic density is then reduced to a variational
problem if the functional F can be found.
Finding the functional F then corresponds to solving the many-body Schrödinger
equation using nothing else but a trial electron density and the Rayleigh-Ritz varia-
tional principle. Different models for the functional F constitute the field of density
functional theory, and the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems can be said to form the math-
ematical basis of the theory. However, the complicated behaviour of many-electron
systems, is translated into a complicated structure of the functional F. For this rea-
son, a general functional, appropriate for all electronic structure problems, have not
yet been discovered. Within this thesis, we’ll use the rPBE functional developed as
a specialization of the PBE functional to reliably calculate adsorption energies [9].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Statistical Physics
11
2.2
Statistical Physics
2.2.1
Transition State Theory
Transition state theory, as developed by Henry Eyring and independently also M.G.
Evans and Michael Polanyi, constitutes a framework for deriving rate laws applicable
to chemistry [10]. The theory assumes that the reactants R proceed via an activated
complex R#, dubbed the transition state, before passing to the products P. The
transition state is located at the top of the energy barrier between reactants and
products. The conversion of reactants to products can then be written as:
R ←−→R# −−→P
(2.12)
By assuming the last step to be irreversible, we assume that no recrossing can oc-
cur. That is, the products never crosses the barrier and turns into reactants. This
assumption is false, and will lead to transition state theory overestimating the true
rate constants [10]. This error can be corrected for by introducing a transmission
coeffecient. From Equation 2.12 we get the rate law:
d[P]
dt
= 1
τ [R#] = 1
τ
q#/Z
q/Z [R]
(2.13)
Figure 2.1: The transition state boundary refers to the surface separating the product
region and reactant region along the PES surface. The lowest point along this bound-
ary, referred to as the transition state complex, will occupy a saddle point, being a
minimum along the transition state boundary, and a maximum along the coordinate
connecting the reactant and product regions.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
Where the rate constant is then given as:
k+ = 1
τ
q#
q
(2.14)
And τ is the life-time of the transition state. q and q# correspond to the partition
functions of the reactant and the excited complex respectively. Dividing the partition
function of the reactant states with the total partition function Z, gives the probability
that the chemical species can be categorized as a reactant. Likewise for the transition
state complex. The ratio then gives the equilibrium constant between the two species.
The partition function for each of the species will be given as a sum over Boltzmann
factors in the degrees of freedom describing the motion of the systems. The transition
state boundary, separating the reactant region and product region of the potential
energy surface, is shown in Figure 2.1. By transition state complex, we refer to the
point lowest in potential energy along this dividing surface.
It can be shown that the rate constant can be rewritten as [10]:
k+ = κkBT
h e−∆Gr/kBT
(2.15)
Where ∆Gr is difference in free energy between the product and reactant states.
Equation 2.15 constitutes Eyring’s equation. Eyring’s equation will be used in the
following chapters to derive rate laws for OOH formation. The difference in entropy
between the reactant and transition state can be approximated from harmonic transi-
tion state theory. We assume that the entropy is entirely given from the vibrational
modes of the state, giving the rate constant:
khT ST = Π3N
i
ν(i)
init
Π3N−1
i
ν(i)
T S
e−(E(T S)−E(init))/kBT
(2.16)
The harmonic approximation to the entropy fails when the transition state has other
degrees of freedom than vibrational. This is the case for adsorption where a weakly
bound precursor state preludes chemisorption [11]. This precursor state can move
across the surface, significantly increasing the entropy of the transition state. This
renders it difficult to establish rate constants for adsorption and desorption processes,
the relevant case being O2 desorption.
2.2.2
Entropy
Within this subsection we list some equations that will be used to calculate entropies
relevant for the adsorption process. The entropy of an ideal gas will correspond to
the configurational freedom associated with translating the particles. This entropy
can be found as [12]:
S = nV kB
[5
2 −ln
(
nλ3
th
)]
(2.17)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Statistical Physics
13
Where n is the number density of molecules, given from the ideal gas law as n =
P/(kBT). V is the volume of the gas. The thermal wavelength is:
λth =
h
√2πmkBT
(2.18)
The entropy of a collection of uncoupled harmonic oscillators is given by
S = kBΣi
{
β¯hωi
eβ¯hωi −1 −ln
[
1 −e−β¯hωi]}
(2.19)
The entropy associated with the different ways NA adsorbates can occupy N0
surface sites is given as [10]:
S = −kB ln
(θA
θ∗
)
(2.20)
Where θA = NA/N0 and θ∗= (N0 −NA)/N0 .
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
2.3
Surface Science
Within this section we’ll review some of the basics of surface science, and give a qual-
itative and quantitative account of the physical phenomena related to the adsorption
of molecules on a catalyst surface.
We’ll start by visualizing the tri-rutile lattice
structure shared by the materials studied in this work. We’ll then give a brief sum-
mary of the field of electrochemistry. In particular we’ll explain the electrochemical
setup and examine the electrochemical double-layer. Then we’ll give a qualitative ac-
count of the Newns-Anderson model and d-band model to gain some intuition for the
chemisorption process, followed by a quantitative account of how we actually calcu-
late adsorption energies. We’ll then explain the Pourbaix diagram and how it can be
used to understand the stability of a catalyst and the surface coverage under working
conditions. We’ll then describe chemisorption energy scaling relations, descriptors,
the limiting potential, and the kinetic overpotential of a catalyst.
2.3.1
Crystal facets
In this work we study the class of transition metal antimonates NixMnySb2O6. This
class of materials was observed experimentally to adopt the tri-rutile lattice of space-
group P42/mnm. The rutile structure is a common oxide lattice, adopted by several
other OER catalysts such as IrO2 and RuO2.
Before we can begin calculating the relevant adsorption energies, we face the problem
of deciding how to cut the tri-rutile lattice. The choice should be made such that
we establish a correspondence between experiment and theory. In the experimental
paper [6] the authors directly observe the (110) facet without reconstruction, and this
serves as the obvious starting point for our inquiry.
In Figure 2.2 we show different cuts of the rutile structure. In the figure we draw
the normal vectors to a selection of low miller index facets. We see that the (110)
facet is the most densely packed, and this facet is expected to be the most stable.
Most of the facets of the rutile structure are known to reconstruct [13]. Previous
studies on the TiO2 rutile system indicates that for TiO2 the (110) is the most stable
surface, though it does undergo some reconstruction at temperatures approaching a
1000K, with rows of titania being added or removed. More irregular facets such as
the (100) was found experimentally to undergo a major reconstruction, altering the
surface structure significantly.
This implies that an inquiry into the activity of other facets than the experimentally
observed (110) facet are at risk of being misguided. For this reason we will focus our
attention on the (110) facet throughout this work.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Surface Science
15
Figure 2.2: Different crystal orientation of the rutile type lattice with space group
P42/mnm. The family of facets having the (110) symmetry are most close packed.
Brown is antimony, grey is nickel, red is oxygen, and purple is manganese.
The
distribution of the metals is not necessarily as regular as presented in this figure. In
particular it may be that the surface layers are enriched with a particular metal if it
lowers the surface energy.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
2.3.2
Electrochemistry
The field of electrochemistry is the branch of chemistry concerned with the relation
between electrical and chemical effects [14]. Nowhere is the connection stronger than
on the surface of a conductor, where free electrons from the lattice can interact with
chemicals in the gas/liquid phase above the surface. The chemistry resulting from
this interaction is ubiquitous in our everyday life, and forms the foundation of battery
technology, sensors, and fuel cells.
The electrochemical cell consists of 3 electrodes and an electrolyte solution.
The
electrolyte contains ions capable of carrying a current through the solution, and also
contains solvated reactants that we wish to convert to products. The three electrodes
employed in an electrochemical setup are:
• Working Electrode (WE): The working electrode is the electrochemical in-
terface where a reaction occurs. Here solvated molecules may adsorb and be
oxidized or reduced to desirable products. The product selectivity, and poten-
tial at which the desired reaction occurs, will depend on the material of the
WE.
• Reference Electrode (RE): The reference electrode is at a fixed potential
across all electrochemical setups. This potential is fixed by a redox pair equi-
librium in electrical contact with the reference electrode. Establishing the po-
tential of our working electrode relative to a given reference electrode, we can
compare electrochemical setups across the globe, and rate the performance of
different working electrodes.
• Counter Electrode (CE): The counter electrode closes the electric circuit of
the electrochemical setup. If the working electrode withdraws electrons from
the electrolyte (oxidation), then to maintain charge neutrality, we must have
an electrode that deposits electrons in the electrolyte (reduction). This task
is facilitated by the counter electrode. The potential of the counter electrode
is regulated by a potentiostat, which can drive the CE up to arbitrary high or
low potentials in the pursuit of keeping the current going across the working
electrode.
Central to the action of the working electrode, is the electrochemical double-layer
forming at the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. Applying a positive
bias to the electrode will attract anions from the electrolyte to the electrode surface.
This forms the diffuse layer, characterized by an increase in the concentration of either
the anions or the cations near the electrode surface. We sketch the electrochemical
double layer in Figure 2.3 (a). Ocassionally an ion or solute will break out of it’s
solvation shell and chemisorb on the surfaces of the electrode (specific adsorption).
The plane passing through the center of the closest adsorbing ions, is called the inner
Helmholtz plane (IHP). In Figure 2.3 (b) we sketch how the electrostatic potential
changes as we go from the metal electrode to the bulk solution. Initially we have a
linear potential drop from the metal surface to the IHP. This drop can be dramatic in
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Surface Science
17
the case of significant specific adsorption (black curve). Passing from the IHP toward
the bulk solution, the potential drops off asymptotically toward the bulk solution
potential.
Figure 2.3: (a): Sketch of the electrochemical double-layer forming at the surface
of the working electrode. Specific adsorption of ions and solute molecules may occur,
resulting in a drastic potential drop when going from the metal to the IHP. (b): Sketch
of the electrostatic potential profile when passing from the metal surface to the bulk
solution. The blue curve corresponds to the case of no signifcant amount of specific
adsorption. The black curve corresponds to the case of a significant amount of specific
adsorption.
2.3.3
Chemisorption
Chemisorption occurs when electrons are shared between an adsorbate and the sub-
strate.
This leads to the formation of a bond.
To describe this process we now
qualitatively explore the electronic structure of a chemisorbed adsorbate. The elec-
tronic states of the total system can approximately be expanded in the lattice states
|k⟩and the adsorbate state |a⟩[10]:
|ϕi⟩= cai |a⟩+ Σkcki |k⟩
(2.21)
As the adsorbate approaches the surface, the adsorbate states cease to be eigenstates
of the joint system, and these states will no longer have well defined energies. To
map out how the adsorbate states evolve during the adsorption process, we instead
focus on the overlap between the eigenstates of the joint system |ϕi⟩and the original
adsorbate state |a⟩:
na(ϵ) = Σi| ⟨ϕi|a⟩|2δ(ϵ −ϵi)
(2.22)
Where ϵi is the energy of the state |ϕi⟩. As a bond forms between the surface and the
adsorbate, electrons are shared between the two systems. This results in several of the
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theory
eigenstates |ϕi⟩having a signficant overlap with the original adsorbate state |a⟩. na(ϵ)
then maps out what the energies are of the states that are significantly localized on
the adsorbate, in other words, na(ϵ) tracks the energy of the electron density localized
on the adsorbate. The overlap ⟨ϕi|a⟩will depend on the electronic structure of the
lattice, and for this reason we will now briefly describe the characteristics of the sp-
band and d-band of a transition metal solid. The 4s and 4p orbitals of the first row
transition metals are large and the electrons are loosely bound to the nuclei [2]. As
a result the sp electrons of a metal are strongly delocalized and will behave much
like a free electron gas. The DOS, D(ϵ), of a free electron gas can be found from the
dispersion relation of a free electron and goes as the square root of the energy:
D(ϵ) ∝√ϵ
(2.23)
The d-electrons are more tightly bound to the nuclei and the resulting band can be
shown to be more narrow in energy as compared to the sp-band [2]. We sketch the
sp-band and d-band in Figure 2.4 (a).
Figure 2.4: (a): We sketch the band structure of a transition metal solid. The strongly
delocalized sp electrons behave much like a free electron gas and the DOS of the sp-
band is roughly proportional to the square root of the energy. The d electrons are more
localized on the metal atoms and form a narrow band. The d-band is not filled except
in the case of group 11 and 12 metals, and so the d-band must straddle the Fermi
level of the system. (b): From molecular orbital theory, we expect that the interaction
between an adsorbate state |a⟩and the d-band must result in the formation of a bonding
and anti-bonding band. This behaviour is recovered in the Newns-Anderson model.
The Newns-Anderson model uses Equation 2.22 as a starting point for building a
qualitative picture of the bonding interaction between lattice and adsorbate.
Using the Newns-Anderson model, it can be shown that the interaction between
the sp-band of the lattice and the adsorbate states results in a stabilization, lowering
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Surface Science
19
the energy of the joint system. Since the sp-band is similar across the transition
metals, we can infer from the Newns-Anderson model that the difference in reactivity
between transition metals must then dependent mainly on how the d-band changes
across the metals. This is the basis of the d-band model for describing the reactiv-
ity of the transition metals [15]. The interaction between the adsorbate state and
the d-band results in the formation of an anti-bonding state and a bonding state,
in agreement with molecular orbital theory (see Figure 2.4 (b)). The filling of the
bonding and anti-bonding state depends on their location relative to the Fermi level,
since free electrons from the lattice will occupy any states below the Fermi level. If
both the anti-bonding and bonding states are filled, then the net energy change from
the interaction between the d-band and the adsorbate is small. However, if the anti-
bonding orbital is only partially filled, then the interaction may lower the energy of
the joint system, leading to a stronger bond between the adsorbate and the surface.
The location of the d-band relative to the Fermi level will influence the location of
the anti-bonding and bonding orbitals relative to the Fermi level. Since the energy of
the d-band varies considerably from metal to metal, then different metals will bind
adsorbates with different strength. The effects described here are collected in Figure
2.5 which shows how the adsorption process alters the adsorbate states. The figure
is reprinted from [15].
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theory
Figure 2.5: Qualitative picture of the adsorption process as predicted from the d-band
model. As the adsorbate approaches the surface, the molecular adsorbate state (shown
to the left) cease to be an eigenstate of the system and spread out in energy. The
adsorbate state is stabilized by interaction with the sp-band, moving down in energy.
Interaction with the d-band results in the formation of a bonding and anti-bonding
state. All states below the Fermi level are filled, and the filling of the anti-bonding
state depend on the location of the d-band relative to the Fermi level. Applying a
voltage to the metal will shift the Fermi level up or down. The Figure is reprinted
from [15].
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Surface Science
21
2.3.4
Energy of Adsorption
Moving on from the qualitative picture of chemisorption, we will now explain how
to quantify the interaction between the adsorbate and the surface. The approach is
based on [16].
We measure the interaction by calculating the free energy of adsorption. The free
energy of adsorption is defined as the energy change when a species adsorbs on the
catalyst surface from the gas/liquid phase. For the sake of demonstration we will now
go through the steps needed to calculate the adsorption energy of OH on the (110)
facet of MnSb2O6. This adsorption process correspond to the reaction where water
is electrochemically oxidized to chemisorbed hydroxyl. The reaction is then:
H2O(l) + ∗−−→OH∗+ (H+(aq) + e−)
(2.24)
Where ∗indicates the catalyst slab. The adsorption energy of hydroxyl is then the
energy change of the reaction:
∆GOH =
[
GOH∗
f
+ GH+
f
+ Ge−
f
]
−
[
GH2O(l)
f
+ G∗
f
]
(2.25)
Where Gf is the formation energy. We will reference all adsorption energies to water
and the lattice energy in this fashion.
In our simulation OH is adsorbed as a hydroxyl radical, but during the electronic
relaxation steps it is spontaneously reduced to an ion with a negative charge, and
we’ll refer to it as hydroxide. We also find that the adsorption of neutral O, results
in a partial negative charge on the oxygen atom after electronic relaxation. For this
reason we often refer to adsorbed O as oxide. These ions form by inducing a counter
charge in the lattice, and the adsorption of these species then result in a dipole normal
to the surface of the catalyst.
The free energies in Equation 2.25 are determined from a combination of experimental
values and DFT calculations. The free energy of liquid water is found by assuming it
is equal to the free energy of gas phase water at the vapour pressure of 35 mbar [17]:
GH2O(l)
f
= GH2O(g)
f
+ kBT ln
(35mbar
1bar
)
(2.26)
The free energy of gas phase water can be broken up into different contributions:
GH2O(g)
f
= EH2O(g)
elec
+ EH2O(g)
vib
+ EH2O(g)
rot
+ EH2O(g)
trans
+ EH2O(g)
int
−TSH2O(g)
(2.27)
Where EH2O(g)
elec
is the electronic energy of a water molecule. EH2O(g)
elec
will be found
using plane-wave DFT. The term EH2O(g)
int
is the energy resulting from the water
molecule interacting with surrounding water molecules. Using Equation 2.26 we as-
sume that the gas is ideal, and we’ll neglect Eint.
This simplification is not too
problematic, since water will simply serve as a reference state in our calculations.
The energy differences between intermediate steps will still be correct regardless of
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theory
any error in this reference.
EH2O(g)
trans , EH2O(g)
vib
, and EH2O(g)
rot
are the translational, vibrational, and rotational en-
ergies of gas phase water. Combining these dynamical terms, we get:
EH2O(g)
vib
+ EH2O(g)
rot
+ EH2O(g)
trans
= EH2O(g)
thermal + EH2O(g)
ZP E
(2.28)
Where EH2O(g)
ZP E
is the zero point energy.
From the equipartition theorem we can
evaluate the thermal energy EH2O(g)
thermal as [12]:
EH2O(g)
thermal = 3
2NkBT
(2.29)
Where N is the number of atoms. From Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle we can
infer that no physical system can be at complete rest. This leads to a vibrational
energy at 0K referred to as the zero point energy. This term can be large, and it is
important that we include it in our energy calculations.
The ZPE can be found from the vibrational spectrum of gas phase water by per-
forming a normal mode analysis within the harmonic approximation. This spectrum
is calculated in VASP, giving the vibrations shown in Table 2.1. Summing all the
ν [meV]
470
460
200
ν [ cm−1]
3800
3700
1600
Table 2.1: Gas phase vibrational spectrum of water calculated from DFT.
vibrations and dividing by two, we get the ZPE [7].
The entropic term SH2O(g) of a gas phase water molecule, can be found by summing
the translational entropy, the vibrational entropy, and the rotational entropy at the
given partial pressure. Formulas for computing these terms are given in section 2.2.
Doing this calculation we find TSH2O(g) = 0.60 eV, in agreement with the experimen-
tal value of 0.59 eV retrieved from [17]. The energy terms for the gas phase molecules
are shown in Table 2.2.
[eV]
ZPE
Ethermal
TS
Eelec
H2(g)
0.26
0.08
0.41
-6.99
H2O(g)
0.57
0.12
0.59
-14.18
Table 2.2: Contributions to the free energy of formation of H2O(g) and H2(g). The
entropic terms are calculated from experimental values taken from [17].
We then examine the chemical potential of the proton µH+ and the electron µe−.
The chemical potential of the proton can be found from the standard energy of for-
mation and the activity:
µH+ = µH+
0
+ kBT ln (aH+) = µH+
0
−
kBT
log10(e)pH
(2.30)
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Surface Science
23
The chemical potential of the electron is given as the local electrostatic potential:
µe−= E = ESHE + (E −ESHE) = ESHE + EW E
(2.31)
Where we’ve referenced the electrostatic potential in the working electrode E to the
SHE, giving the quantity EW E. The SHE is formally set as the standard state of the
electron µe−
0
= ESHE which can be arbitrarily set to zero ESHE = 0 [17].
Examining the reaction:
H+(aq) + e−−−→1
2H2(g)
(2.32)
Under standard conditions we have the reaction energy:
∆G(0)
r
= 1/2µH2
0
−µH+
0
−µe−
0
(2.33)
The potential ESHE is defined so that the reaction energy at standard conditions is
zero ∆G(0)
r
= 0. We then get:
µH+
0
+ µe−
0
= 1/2µH2
0
(2.34)
Putting it together, the chemical potential of the electron and proton in Equation
2.25 becomes:
µH+ + µe−= 1/2µH2
0
+ EW E −
kBT
log10(e)pH
(2.35)
Throughout this work we will study the systems at pH 0.
Turning our attention to the energy difference between the slab with hydroxide ad-
sorbed OH∗, and the slab without hydroxide adsorbed ∗, we can expand the difference
as:
GOH∗
f
−G∗
f = ∆Eelec + ∆Evib + ∆Eint + T∆S
(2.36)
Where the individual differences are given as:
∆Eelec = EOH∗
elec −E∗
e
(2.37)
∆Evib = EOH∗
vib
−E∗
vib
(2.38)
∆Eint = EOH∗
int
−E∗
int
(2.39)
T∆S = T
(
SOH∗−S∗)
(2.40)
The electronic energies EOH∗
elec and E∗
e are straightforward to find. We simply construct
the systems and relax them using plane wave DFT.
Under an assumption of weak coupling between the vibrational degrees of freedom of
OH and the lattice, we may decouple the vibrational energy as:
EOH∗
vib
= EOH
vib + E(∗)
vib
(2.41)
Where E(OH)
vib
is the vibrational energy of an adsorbed OH when we freeze the catalyst
lattice. This leads to the cancellation:
∆Evib = EOH
vib
(2.42)
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theory
The vibrational energy EOH
vib
is found computationally by freezing the lattice and
only allowing the adsorbate to vibrate. The resulting frequency spectrum of OH on
MnSb2O6 (110) is shown in Table 2.3. The vibrational energy is then given from the
ν [meV]
460
110
60
60
30
20
ν [ cm−1]
3700
900
500
500
230
180
Table 2.3: Vibrational spectrum of adsorbed hydroxyl as calculated from DFT.
equipartition theorem and the zero point energy:
EOH
vib = ZPE + EOH
thermal = 450meV
(2.43)
We then examine the entropy term. We decouple the entropy according to the ex-
pression:
SOH∗= SOH + S∗
(2.44)
Where SOH is the entropy of adsorbed OH when we freeze the lattice. By doing
this summation we implicitly assume that the allowed configurations of the joint
system is simply the product of the allowed configurations for each system. Using
this assumption, the entropy of the slab cancels:
T∆S = TSOH
(2.45)
We will assume that the adsorbate cannot translate across the surface. The entropy
of the adsorbate will have a contribution from the vibrational frequencies SOH
vib , given
by Equation 2.19. There is also an entropy associated with the number of vacant
adsorption sites on the surface SOH
conf, this entropy is given by Equation 2.20. At the
high bias where OER proceeds, most adsorption sites are covered and we choose to
neglect SOH
conf. Plugging the frequencies of Table 2.3 in Equation 2.19, we get the
entropic energy:
TSOH = 80meV
(2.46)
The difference in interaction energy ∆Eint is the change in the interaction energy
between the slab and the solvent as we adsorb hydroxyl. This energy has previously
been determined for hydroxyl on reduced graphene oxide (rGO) using MD simulations
with a phase of water molecules [18]. The interaction between water and the hydroxyl
had character of hydrogen bonding and dipole interactions. For this system Bukas et
al found the interaction energy:
∆E(rGO)
int
= −0.4eV
(2.47)
We make the simplifying assumption that this value also applies to our system:
∆Eint = ∆E(rGO)
int
(2.48)
All the terms in Equation 2.25 have now been understood and we are able calculate
the adsorption energy of hydroxyl once EOH∗
elec
and E∗
elec have been computed using
plane wave DFT. The free energy terms for the remaining adsorbed molecules H2O∗,
O∗and OOH∗are computed in section 3.2 and shown in Table 3.7.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Surface Science
25
2.3.5
Pourbaix Diagrams
A Pourbaix diagram is a phase diagram, showing what chemical species are thermo-
dynamically most stable at a given bias vs SHE and a given pH.
An underlying assumption in most Pourbaix diagrams, is that the solvent is water,
and that oxygen, water, hydroxide, electrons, and protons can be exchanged with
the environment. In this work we will compute the surface Pourbaix diagram for the
(110) facet of MnSb2O6. This diagram will map out what surface coverages are the
most favoured at the pH and bias. Such diagrams have previously been determined
for Pt, Ag and Ni(111) [19].
2.3.6
Energy Scaling Relations
In this section we outline the theory behind the scaling relations that will be central
to the majority of the analysis in this thesis. The review will be largely based on [10].
It has generally been found that the adsorption energies of different species that
bond the surface through the same element, tend to scale with each other. Examining
the particular case of OH* and O*, we assume a linear relation of the form:
∆GO = a∆GOH + b
(2.49)
The scaling slope turns out to be related to the number of electrons the adsorbate
shares with the surface. For example, since adsorbed oxide withdraws two electron
from the lattice, and adsorbed hydroxide withdraws 1 electron from the lattice, we
expect that any changes in the adsorption energy of OH are reflected twice in the
adsorption energy of O. a should then be close to 2 to reflect that behaviour. The
scaling parameter a is therefore largely independent of surface composition. The offset
b describes the remaining differences in adsorption energy. Since the intermediates
in OER coordinate the surface through the same element, we expect the adsorption
energies of the reaction intermediates to be related.
This enforces a limit on the
theoretical minimum overpotential that can be achieved using a catalyst that binds
the intermediates through a single element.
As will be seen in the results chapter in section 3.2, there exists a strong scaling
relation between adsorbed OOH and OH with a scaling parameter of a = 1. For
this reason we can for most purposes get away with never calculating the adsorption
energy of OOH, since we can simply infer it from ∆GOH. If we assume that the
rate determining step for OER is either the deprotonation of OH to form O or the
nucleophilic attack of O on water to form OOH. Then in either case, because of
scaling, the relevant energy difference to consider becomes:
D = ∆GO −∆GOH
(2.50)
D is said to be the descriptor for OER, and can be used as a measure of catalyst
activity.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Theory
Similar linear relationships exist between adsorption energies and activation en-
ergies, known as Brønsted-Evans-Polanyi (BEP) relations. Changes in the energy of
the transition state is correlated with the adsorption energies of similar species, and
we can write up a scaling relation, giving the transition state energy:
ET S = Σiai∆G(i) + b
(2.51)
Using this result, it follows that the activation energy of a reaction on the surface of
our catalyst, can be found from the adsorption energies of the reaction intermediates.
Since these adsorption energies are related, we can in principle find the activation
energy from knowing the adsorption energy of a single species.
However, as will
be shown in section 3.2, some scaling relations are stronger than others, and it is
advantageous to include multiple adsorption energies when trying to infer unknown
adsorption energies.
2.3.7
Thermodynamic Limiting Potential
It has generally been found that either the deprotonation of OH* or the nucleophillic
attack of O* to form OOH* are rate limiting for OER. Assuming no barriers separate
the intermediates of OER, then the minimum potential necessary for driving OER is
given as the largest of the two energy differences:
η = max
{
∆GO −∆GOH
∆GOOH −∆GO
−1.23eV.
(2.52)
This is referred to as the limiting overpotential. Which simply means, that for OER
to run, we must supply the potential to drive the most energy expensive of the two
reactions. Using the fact that OH and OOH scale with a slope of approximately 1:
∆GOOH = ∆GOOH + bOOH/OH
(2.53)
We can write:
∆GOOH −∆GO = ∆GOH −∆GO + bOOH/OH
(2.54)
Equation 2.52 then becomes:
η = max
{
∆GO −∆GOH
bOOH/OH −(∆GO −∆GOH)
−1.23eV.
(2.55)
The above equation sketches out a volcano in the limiting potential against descriptor
value. This volcano is sketched in Figure 2.6 and may be used to gauge the activity
of our catalyst.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Surface Science
27
Figure 2.6: Plot of the limiting overpotential for OER assuming all steps are run
reversibly. A minimum overpotential of ∼0.4 V vs SHE appears due to the scaling
between OOH and OH
2.3.8
Kinetic Overpotential
As discussed earlier, we can relate the energy of the transition state to the descriptor
value and thereby obtain activation energies. An electrochemical transition state may
have undergone a partial charge transfer to the lattice, and for this reason the energy
of the transition state becomes potential dependent. In [20] Dickens and Nørskov
model the energy of the OOH transition state complex relative to the energy of a
surface oxide and a water molecule. They relate the energy of the transition state
complex to the potential and descriptor value through a linear equation of the form:
Ga = αD + βUSHE + γ
(2.56)
Where β is a measure of how much charge has been transferred to the lattice in the
transition state. According to their result, we may calculate the barrier for OOH
formation with a mean absolute error of 0.06 eV by choosing the parameter values
shown in Table 2.4. This will be the method for determining the barrier for OOH
formation in this thesis unless otherwise stated.
The authors showed that if we assume OOH formation as the rate determining
step, then the reaction rate corresponding to an applied potential V can be estimated
as:
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Theory
α
β
γ
-0.5
-0.6 e
2.4 eV
Table 2.4: Best choice of parameters for evaluating the barrier through Equation 2.56
as was found by Dickens and Nørskov in [20].
r =
(kBT
h
)
1
1 + e(D−V e)/kBT e−Ga/kBT
(2.57)
Assuming a particular reaction rate r, Equation 2.57 will sketch out a volcano that
infers the necessary potential for driving OER at this rate at the given descriptor
value. The maximum rate occurs at the descriptor value D satisfying:
∂r
∂D = 0
(2.58)
Which can easily be shown to give the relation:
D = V e
(2.59)
Which implies that for a given potential, the reaction rate is the largest when the
descriptor value matches the potential.
We now turn to the problem of finding a reasonable value of r. In the experimental
paper [6] they drew a current of 10mA/cm2 from the working electrode.
When
assuming OOH formation as the rate determining step, we can infer the approximate
equality:
dNO2
dt
≈Nr
(2.60)
Where NO2 is the number of oxygen evolved and N is the number of active sites
on the surface. For each oxygen evolved, dNO2, 4 electrons are passed through the
electrode. We can then relate the rate for OOH formation, r, to the current drawn
through the electrode, if we assume all current stems from OER. The current density
is given as:
IOER/A ≈4Ne
A r
(2.61)
Later it will be relevant to assume a unit cell area of 65 Å2. Assuming one active site
per unit cell area we get N = A/Au.
Using Au = 65Å2 and a current density of 10 mA/cm2, we find a rate of r = 100 1/s.
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Gaussian Processes
29
2.4
Gaussian Processes
Within this thesis Gaussian Processes (GP) regression is used as a regression routine
to predict candidates for the most stable surface coverage of our catalyst. In this
section we review the theory behind Gaussian processes and how the technique is im-
plemented in a learning algorithm for determining surface Pourbaix diagrams. The
section is based mainly on [21].
Informally, Gaussian Processes (GP) regression can be understood as a method of
curve fitting, where we attempt to predict a function f based on a set of coordinates
x and known function values y. We demand that points that lie close in coordinates
x, must be correlated in the function values f(x). Introducing two points (x(1), f (1))
and (x(2), f (2)), the correlation between the points should be some function of the
distance between the coordinates:
corr(f (1), f (2)) ∝k(x(1), x(2))
(2.62)
With points lying close in x having strongly correlated values of the prediction f. Us-
ing GP regression, we can choose how strong this correlation ought to be. This can
result in very jagged functions, if the correlation decreases fast, or very smooth predic-
tions, if the correlation decreases more slowly. In GP regression we use a multivariate
normal distribution to relate the function values f through their correlations. In this
way the regression routine, doesn’t just relay a guess for the function values, but also
gives an associated confidence interval based on the width of the relevant normal dis-
tribution. The actual training of the regression routine consists of conditioning this
joint multivariate normal distribution on a set of known points (x, y). Graphically we
can think of this conditioning as drawing all functions from the normal distribution,
and removing the functions that don’t pass through the training points. The spread
in the remaining bundle of functions then gives the confidence interval and the mean
gives the prediction. This idea is visualized in Figure 2.7 (a).
Formally, a Gaussian process may be defined as a collection of random variables
f, any subset of which have a joint Gaussian distribution:
f ∼N (µ, K)
(2.63)
Where µ is the mean and K is the covariance matrix. In Figure 2.7 (b) we sketch
how strongly correlated points tend to have the same function value when we assume
the function is drawn from a normal distribution.
The covariance matrix K is built by specifying the kernel of the GP regression. In
this work we will use a kernel given by a decaying squared exponential:
k(x1, x2) = σ2
fe−|x1−x2|2/2l
(2.64)
Where l is the characteristic length scale on which correlations decay. The pre-factor
σf allows for changing the characteristic scale of the variance. The covariance matrix
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Theory
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: (a): Visualization of the conditioning process used in Gaussian Processes
regression. Curves are drawn from the joint multivariate normal distribution in the
function values f. Curves that don’t pass through the training points (black crosses)
are discarded (red). The mean of the bundle of accepted curves (blue) is given as the
GP prediction, and the spread in the curves give a confidence interval (shaded area).
The shape of the possible curves is dependent on the choice of covariance matrix. (b):
More strongly correlated points will have a narrower joint distribution, and will as a
result tend to have similar function values. If being close in x correspond to strong
correlation, then the functions drawn will be more smooth.
is then built according to the scheme:
K(X1, X2) =


k(x(1)
1 , x(2)
1 )
k(x(1)
1 , x(2)
2 )
. . .
...
...
k(x(1)
N , x(2)
1 )
k(x(1)
N , x(2)
N )


(2.65)
Where X1 and X2 are sets of points:
X1 = [x(1)
1 , x(1)
2 , ..., x(1)
N ]
(2.66)
Using the squared exponential kernel, we see that points close in x, will have cor-
related function values.
Using this choice of covariance function, we generate all
infinitely mean-square differentiable curves. Other choices of kernel would in general
result in different function spaces. One may for instance generate functions of a par-
ticular wavelength by having the kernel be periodic in the distance between x1 and
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Gaussian Processes
31
x2. Non-differentiable functions may likewise be generated by specifying a particular
kernel.
Conditioning our joint Gaussian distribution by drawing functions from it and
eliminating them based on whether they pass through a set of training points, is not
computationally efficient. Fortunately, it is straightforward to condition a multivari-
ate Gaussian distribution algebraically.
Given a set of training points (X, y), we attempt to predict a set of test points (X∗, f∗).
We assume that the joint set follow a multivariate normal distribution:
[ y
f∗
]
∼N
(
µ,
[ K(X, X)
K(X, X∗)
K(X∗, X)
K(X∗, X∗)
])
(2.67)
Where the mean µ is the best point prediction for the function values. Obviously
these are unknown to us at this stage, but a guess could in principle be made based
on prior knowledge of the system. Standardizing the data, a good guess for µ would
be zero, and it turns out that GP regression is sufficiently flexible that this choice
works out in most cases. This is because, as will be shown in a moment, the mean of
the posterior probability distribution used in GP regression is not zero, regardless of
the choice of prior mean µ. We make the simplification:
µ = 0
(2.68)
Assuming the training data has some noise in y, σn, we can include this by adding it
to the diagonal elements of the covariance matrix K(X, X).
The conditional distribution for f∗, that is the distribution of the test points given we
know the training points, can then be derived. It can be shown that this distribution
is also gaussian:
f∗|X, y, X∗∼N
(
bf∗, K
)
(2.69)
(2.70)
The mean and covariance function are given as:
bf∗= K(X∗, X)[K(X, X) + σ2
nI]−1y
(2.71)
K = K(X∗, X∗) −K(X∗, X)[K(X, X) + σ2
nI]−1K(X, X∗)
(2.72)
The best guess for the unknown function values f∗are then given from the mean
function, and the associated uncertainty can be found from the diagonal elements of
the covariance matrix. To illustrate Equations 2.72, we investigate the case of one
training point (x, y) and one test point (x∗, f∗). In this case the best guess for the
test point is:
f∗=
σ2
f
σ2
f + σ2n
e−|x−x∗|2/2ly
(2.73)
==PAGE:42==
32
2 Theory
We see that the best prediction tends to zero if the test point is far from the training
point, this is tied up on assumption 2.68. The variance can likewise be found:
var(f∗) = σ2
f
(
1 −
1
σ2
f + σ2n
e−|x−x∗|2/l
)
(2.74)
We see that if the test point is close to the training point then the variance is zero,
and the test point will have the same function value as the training point if the prior
uncertainty σn is small. If the prior uncertainty is large, then the best prediction of
any point close to the training point is also zero. Interpolating an unknown point
from all the known training points using this scheme, yields the prediction of the GP
regression routine.
Clearly, Equation 2.73 implies that GP regression with the chosen kernel and µ set
as zero, is not good for making predictions far from the training data. All function
values will then tend to zero, and the confidence interval will max out. This is because
the regression routine doesn’t know the relevant physics of the problem, and does not
have the knowledge necessary to make the extrapolation. This knowledge can be
imbued into the system by parametrizing the mean in terms of functions known to
roughly describe the physics of the system.
In this case the predicting equations
become:
bf∗= µ(X∗) + K(X∗, X)[K(X, X) + σ2
nI]−1(y −µ(X))
(2.75)
K = K(X∗, X∗) −K(X∗, X)[K(X, X) + σ2
nI]−1K(X, X∗)
(2.76)
Performing a fit using GP regression with the chosen kernel, corresponds to choos-
ing the set of hyper parameters (σn, σf, l) that maximizes the likelihood of getting the
training data. The likelihood p(y|X, σn, σf, l) is the probability of getting the training
data, given the model is true. The training data is assumed to follow a multivariate
normal distribution p(y|X, σn, σf, l) = N
(
0, K + σ2
nI
)
, from which the logarithm of
the likelihood can be evaluated as:
log p(f |X) = −1
2f T [
K + σ2
nI
]−1 −1
2 log |K + σ2
nI| −n
2 log 2π
(2.77)
Where n is the number of training points. The log-likelihood will be maximized in
Python using the Scipy package.
We’ve now reviewed the theory and considerations underlying GP regression.
We’ve skipped some of the details for brevity, such as the derivation of the condi-
tional probability Equation 2.72, while trying to relay the ideas behind the method.
The regression routine will be written by the author in Python 3 using the Scipy
package for minimizing the cost function. The training will be done assuming a prior
mean of zero µ = 0.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Results
This chapter discuss the computational setup used and give an account of the correc-
tions applied to our calculations.
Followed by the examination of the (110) slab with no oxide or hydroxide adsorbed
on the surface. This slab will be used to establish which surface sites that may be
active toward catalysis. This system will also serve to highlight interactions between
co-adsorbates and electronic changes in the slab associated with the adsorption of
oxygen containing species.
Quantities important for the calculation of adsorption
energies are then obtained. These include zero point energies, entropy terms, and
scaling relations.
Following the initial analysis, slabs having rows of oxide in bridge positions and
rows of hydroxide in the CUS sites will be investigated. This system will be used to
understand the relative importance and function of Mn and Ni in the catalysts under
study.
A search for the surface Pourbaix diagram of MnSb2O6 at a pH of zero is then
performed. From this search solid evidence is obtained of what coverages are likely to
occur. This evidence can then be used to argue in favour of particular mechanisms,
and investigate whether certain co-adsorbates may influence kinetics.
We then attempt to refine the microkinetic model build by Dickens and Nørskov
[20] to be more appropriate for our system. Developing Equation 2.57 the authors
considered surfaces entirely covered by oxide, hydroxide, or oxygen. We find that
our surface is covered by a mix of hydroxide, oxide, oxide vacancies, and water. We
will attempt to capture this by considering equilibria between all possible coverages.
Using this model we attempt to gauge the current drawn from different possible ac-
tive sites, weighing their rate constant against the fraction of the surface they are
expected to cover.
Based on the methodology we obtained a comparison of the overpotential associ-
ated with the 3 transition metal antimonates, MnSb2O6, NiSb2O6, and Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6.
We gained insight into the nature of the active site on MnSb2O6, and collected evi-
dence in favour of an Eley-Rideal mechanism.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results
3.1
Computational Setup
All simulations are performed using the plane-wave DFT package Vienna Ab Initio
Simulations package (VASP) version 5.4.4 running the rPBE functional. The calcu-
lations are initialized using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE). We use the
Materials Project recommended PAW potentials. Unless otherwise stated, we will
retrieve the bulk structures from the Materials Project database [22]. Re-relaxation
of the bulk structures retrieved from the Materials Project did not lead to significant
changes in the lattice constants, and the bulk structures retrieved from the Materials
Project database were used as they were. The retrieved bulk structures are then cut
to expose the (110) facet with 4 layers of transition metals. This facet is then allowed
to relax with the bottom two layers fixed. Adsorbates were positioned in different
sites on the surface and the system was once again allowed to relax, and electronic
energies were extracted from the relaxed structure.
3.1.1
Corrections
3.1.1.1
Dipole correction
The brunt of the calculations done in this work will involve asymmetric slabs. That
is, slabs where the top side will have one configuration, and the bottom side have
another configuration.
This difference in coverage creates a net dipole across the
height of the slab. The periodic boundary conditions imposed by plane-wave DFT
will repeat this dipole and thereby create a macroscopic field in the interslab region.
This field may lead to unphysical interactions with the periodic image of the slab,
and it may lead to slow convergence in the energy [23]. It is therefore desirable to
remove this field. This can be done in VASP by placing a planar dipole layer in the
interslab region. The dipole is created such that it exactly cancel any field in the
interslab region [23]. Throughout this work we apply a dipole correction when we do
calculations on an asymmetric slab.
3.1.1.2
Hubbard Correction
Many transition metal oxides are incorrectly predicted to be conductors by GGA
level DFT, and turn out to be insulators when measured in the lab [24]. This failure
is known to originate from an insufficient description of the Couloumb repulsion
between d electrons localized on the metal ions. In an attempt to model these on site
repulsions, Dudarev et al [25] introduced a model Hamiltonian of the form:
ˆH = U
2
∑
m,m′,σ
ˆnm,σˆnm′,−σ + U −J
2
∑
m̸=m′,σ
ˆnm,σˆnm′,σ
(3.1)
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Computational Setup
35
Where ˆnm,σ counts the number of valence electrons of orbital angular momentum m
and spin σ, ˆnm,σ = ˆa†
m,σˆam,σ. The first term of the Hamiltonian essentially adds a
repulsive energy for having two electrons on the same atom and of the same principal
quantum number and opposite spin. The second term effectively adds an exchange
energy and repulsive energy whenever we have two electrons of the same spin on the
same atom. This on-site repulsion, will make it energetically unfavourable for the d
electrons to delocalize and partially occupy several atoms, and the electrons will bind
tighter to the nucleus. Determining good values for U and J for the different elements
requires careful comparison between DFT predictions and experiments. We will use
the values suggested by the Materials Project database. These are shown in Table 3.1.
Element
U-J
Nickel
6.2
Manganese
3.9
Table 3.1: Values of U-J entering into the GGA+U correction applied in our calcula-
tions using Dudarevs approach.
3.1.1.3
Solvation Correction
Solvated water can stabilize surface adsorbates through dipole interactions and hydro-
gen bonding. Unfortunately, modelling solvation effects requires a large sampling of
different configurations of the solvent layer, and it was decided to not include explicit
water in the calculations. In [18] the authors modelled the interaction between a wa-
ter layer and oxygen containing species adsorbed on the surface of reduced graphene
oxide using MD simulations. The strength of the interaction was comparable to a
number of hydrogen bonds forming between solvent and adsorbate. We apply an
energy correction to our calculations based on the interaction energies they found
between the adsorbed species and water.
3.1.2
Convergence
Within this thesis we will use plane-wave spin-polarized DFT. Central to the code is
the maximum frequency that will be used in the plane wave expansion of the electron
density. The found adsorption energy will depend critically on how high this cutoff
energy is set, and the calculated energies must be converged with respect to this cut-
off energy. For us the interesting quantity to converge is the descriptor value for OER.
Working with a plane-wave code, many problems are solved in reciprocal space,
and it is often necessary to integrate over the Brillouin zone. For this reason it is
necessary to partition the reciprocal space into a set of points, on each of which the
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results
electronic problem is solved. The solution in the remaining part of the Brillouin zone
is then inferred from these grid points. It is therefore necessary to converge the ener-
gies with respect to the configuration of the grid in reciprocal space. Within this work,
we partition the Brillouin zone on a rectangular grid according to the Monkhorst-Pack
sampling method.
3.1.2.1
MnSb2O6
In Table 3.2 we show how the electronic energy of a selection of MnSb2O6 systems
change with the cut-off energy. The descriptor value converges already at 400 eV,
while the total electronic energy changes significantly until 500 eV.
Cutoff Energy
400
450
550
Site 3: Oxide
-405.899
-405.185
-405.06
Site 3: Hydroxide
-411.751
-411.050
-410.917
Difference
5.85
5.87
5.86
Table 3.2:
Tabel showing electronic energies as a function of cut-off energy for
MnSb2O6.
All energies are in eV. The site label references Figure 3.1, so ’Site
3: Oxide’ implies that an oxide is located in site 3. The descriptor values were con-
verged at a cut-off of 400 eV. However to get reliable adsorption energies we have go
up to 500 eV.
We also test for convergence in the number of grid points in reciprocal space. We
find that a grid of (3,3,1) is sufficient to converge the energies to within 10 meV. We
test grids of (3,3,1), (4,4,1), and (5,5,1). The total energy of the slab is listed in Table
3.3.
K-point grid
(3,3,1)
(4,4,1)
(5,5,1)
Electronic Energy [eV]
-401.15
-401.17
-401.18
Table 3.3: Convergence of the electronic energy of the MnSb2O6 (110) slab in the
k-point grid. A grid of 3 points in x and y and 1 point along z is sufficient to converge
the electronic energy to within 10 meV. The calculations were done at a cut-off of 400
eV.
3.1.2.2
NiSb2O6
For the NiSb2O6 system, the cutoff energy needs to be much higher as shown in Table
3.4. Convergence in the descriptor value appear to be reached at a cut-off of 650 eV.
Convergence in the k-point grid is reached using a Monkhorst-Pack grid of (3,3,1)
as shown in Table 3.5
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Computational Setup
37
Cutoff energy [eV]
550
600
650
700
Site 3: Oxide [eV]
-355.01
-354.7
-354.97
-355.08
Site 3: Hydroxide [eV]
-360.15
-360.59
-360.70
-360.79
Difference [eV]
5.14
5.89
5.73
5.71
Table 3.4:
Tabel showing electronic energies as a function of cut-off energy for
NiSb2O6. All energies are in eV. The site label references Figure 3.1. The descriptor
values and adsorption energies were converged at a cut-off of 650 eV.
K-points
(3,3,1)
(4,4,1)
(5,5,1)
Site 3: Oxide
-355.47
-355.55
-355.50
Site 3: Hydroxide
-355.47
-355.55
-355.50
Difference
5.56
5.41
5.52
Table 3.5: Convergence of NiSb2O6 in the k-point grid. A grid of 3 points in x and y
and 1 point along z is sufficient to converge the electronic energy to within 100 meV.
The calculations were done at a cut-off of 400 eV.
3.1.2.3
General Considerations
Within this section we investigated what the computational parameters must be set
to, in order to ensure convergence of the calculated energies.
We found that the
nickel antimonate requires the highest cut-off energy of 650 eV. This cut-off will also
be used for studying the mixed metal nickel manganese antimonates. A k-point grid
of (3,3,1) was sufficient to converge the calculations. For all calculations we use 4
layers of catalyst with the bottom two layers fixed to the bulk structure.
The interslab vacuum layer was around 20 Å for all calculations.
For most calculations the electronic energy was converged to either E-4 or E-5 eV.
The maximum allowed force was for most calculations set as 0.02 eV/Å.
All systems were relaxed twice using VASP. The first relaxation was done without
spin polarization and gave an estimate of the correct structure. This structure was
then relaxed again while including spin polarization. This procedure put the Mn(II)
atoms in a high spin state with a magnetization of 4.6 µB which we interpret as 4
parallel electron spins. Slight changes were observed with changing coverages. The
coverage can to varying degrees oxidize the lattice, and some Mn atoms were often
found as having a magnetization slightly below 4 µB.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Results
3.2
Clean MnSb2O6 (110)
The free energy of adsorption on clean MnSb2O6 (110) for O2, OOH, OH, and O is
now investigated. By clean, we mean that no oxides are adsorbed on the surface. This
is most likely not a realistic system, since oxidation of the lattice will probably happen
spontaneously under working conditions, leading to an oxygen containing surface cov-
erage. However, it is still worthwhile to investigate this slab as a model system, since
it allows us to build intuition for how adsorbates interact with the surface metals,
independent of their interactions with co-adsorbates. The various adsorption sites on
the surface are shown in Figure 3.1 where we visualize the (110) facet of the mixed
metal catalyst. To visualize the manganese structure simply replace the nickel atoms
with manganese.
3.2.1
Preparation of the slab
The bulk structure of MnSb2O6 with space group P42/mnm was retrieved from the
Materials Project database [22]. The rutile type structure was reported as having no
bandgap. The retrieved structure was cut to expose the (110) facet and allowed to
relax. 4 transition metal layers were used to model the slab, with the bottom two
fixed. To determine whether MnSb2O6 is metallic or semiconducting we calculate
the integrated density of states for the (110) surface. Increasing the k-point grid to
(20,20,1) and setting the smearing method as tetrahedron with Blöchl corrections
we calculate the DOS as shown to the bottom right in Figure 3.2. We see that the
catalyst does not have a bandgap, even with the applied Hubbard U correction. How-
ever, the DOS narrows around the Fermi level. This is an indication that part of
the lattice is deficit in free electrons. In particular it was found that the projected
DOS showed no free electrons located at the surface antimony atoms. This reflects
the high oxidation state of antimony in the material (+5).
3.2.2
Adsorption Energies
We then calculate the zero point energy (ZPE) of O, OH, OOH and H2O in CUS and
bridge positions, the result is shown in Table 3.6. The ZPEs are seen to agree well
with previous results [26]. The remaining important thermodynamic quantities are
listed in Table 3.7.
ZPE [eV]
O
OH
H2O
OOH
CUS
0.06
0.37
0.67
0.43
Bridge
0.08
0.38
-
0.43
Table 3.6: Zero point energies for the adsorbates considered.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Clean MnSb2O6 (110)
39
Figure 3.1: Symmetrically inequivalent adsorption sites on the clean MnSb2O6 surface
as found from Pymatgen. Green is antimony, blue is manganese, and red is oxide. OH
and O was found to adsorb in positions 3, 5, 7, and 9 across all catalysts investigated.
Water was found to adsorb only weakly, however as will be shown later, this changes
when hydroxide are co-adsorbed due to the formation of hydrogen bonds.
[meV]
ZPE
Ethermal
TS
Eint
H2O∗
670
120
150
-400(1)
OOH∗
430
120
200
-400(2)
OH∗
380
80
80
-400(2)
O∗
70
40
50
0
Table 3.7: Energy contributions to the formation energies of the adsorbates. Taken
together with the gas phase values in Table 2.2 we can compute adsorption energies.
The found adsorption energies for clean MnSb2O6 are shown in Table 3.8. (1) is
calculated from the vaporization enthalpy of water, (2) is taken from [18].
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Results
We calculate the adsorption energies for MnSb2O6 for the various sites using
VASP. We list the adsorption energies in Table 3.8. Often the adsorbate moves to
another site as the system relaxes. This is indicated by the arrow →. We generally
find that hydroxide and oxide stick in site 3, 5, 7, and 9, and we will focus on these
sites for the remaining part of this work. Using the found adsorption energies we can
Position
O [eV]
OH [eV]
H [eV]
O2 [eV]
OOH [eV]
Site 0
→9
→9
-
-
-
Site 1
→3
→3
-
-
-
Site 2
→3
→3
-
-
-
Site 3
2.5
0.3
-
4.8
3.5
Site 4
→3
→3
-
-
-
Site 5
3.4
1.2
-
5.3
4.4
Site 6
→7
→7
-
-
-
Site 7
1.4
0
-
4.9
3.5
Site 8
→9
→7
-
-
-
Site 9
1.3
0.6
-
-
-
Site 10
-
-
-0.6
-
-
Site 11
-
-
0.3
-
-
Table 3.8: Adsorption energies on the clean MnSb2O6 surface. Errors in GGA level
DFT makes the adsorption energies for O2 uncertain. Several adsorption sites are
seen to result in the migration of the adsorbate across the surface as indicated by the
arrow →.
construct scaling relations. These are shown in Figure 3.2. The legend entry refer to
whether the species were adsorbed on MnSb2O6 or NiSb2O6. We see a fairly strong
correlation in the adsorption energy of OOH and OH. The correlation is weaker for
O. This result indicates that OOH and OH follow a scaling relation on the surface,
whereas O does not scale linearly with either OH or OOH.
3.2.3
Adsorbate-Adsorbate Interactions
In order to estimate the interaction energy of adsorbates, we position pairs of oxygen
and hydroxide on each of the surface sites, we then compute the adsorption energy
of this pair, dubbed G(ij)
ad . From this adsorption energy we subtract the adsorption
energy of each of the adsorbates as it is when they are adsorbed individually (G(i)
Ad),
this difference is then defined as the energy of interaction between the adsorbates,
G(ij)
int :
G(ij)
int = G(ij)
ad −
[
G(i)
ad + G(j)
ad
]
(3.2)
Calculated interaction energies are shown in Table 3.9. We see that the interaction
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Clean MnSb2O6 (110)
41
Figure 3.2: Top left: Plot showing the relation between the adsorption energies of
OOH and O. We fit a straight line to the points giving a slope of 0.5 and an intercept
of 2.5 eV. The fit has a RMSE of 0.2 eV. Top right: Plot showing the relation
between the adsorption energy of OOH and OH. We fit a straight line to the points
giving a slope 1 and an intercept of 3.3 eV. The fit has a RMSE of 0.1 eV. Bottom
left: Plot showing the relation between the adsorption energies of OH and O. We fit
a straight line to the points, finding a slope of 0.5 and an intercept of -0.7 eV. The fit
has a RMSE of 0.3 eV. Bottom right: Spatially integrated DOS of MnSb2O6. Spin
up states are positive and spin down states are negative. The material does not have
a bandgap, but the DOS narrows at the Fermi level. This is an indication that part
of the lattice is deficit in free electrons.
energies G(12)
int are generally large and positive, indicating a repulsive interaction, with
some notable exceptions predicting negative interaction energies. In Figure 3.3 we
show the differential charge density of the slab as we add two oxides in the CUS sites
3A and 3B. The differential charge density is calculated by subtracting the charge
density of the slab without the oxides from the charge density of the slab with the
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Results
O3-O3
O3-O5
O3-O9
O5-O7
O7-O9
O9-O9
0.06
0.85
0.73
0.47
-0.36
0.68
OH3-OH3
OH3-OH5
OH3-OH9
OH5-OH7
OH7-OH9
OH9-OH9
-0.37
0.25
-0.34
0.24
0.18
-0.39
O3-OH3
O3-OH5
OH3-O9
OH5-O7
O7-OH9
O9-OH9
-0.70
0.11
0.17
0.34
-0.72
0.23
Table 3.9: Energy cost of having two coadsorbed species in different positions on the
MnSb2O6 surface. All energies are in eV.
oxides adsorbed. We see that the oxides do not change the charge state of antimony,
however charge is transferred from the neighbouring oxides and manganese atoms.
This results in a surplus of positive charge on top of the manganese atoms.
The interactions between co-adsorbates shown in Table 3.9 can then be understood
as consisting of at least three parts:
• Co-adsorbates change the density and distribution of electrons in the lattice,
making it harder or easier for an adsorbate to adsorb in a particular site.
• Electrostatic interactions between co-adsorbates. The strength of this interac-
tion will depend on the materials ability to screen an electric field, the adsorbate
dipoles, and the distance between co-adsorbates. This interaction can for met-
als often be modelled in terms of the coverage fractions of different adsorbates
[10] [27].
• Bonding interactions such as hydrogen bonding. The strength of this interaction
will depend on exactly how the OH are distributed among the adsorption sites,
and we do not expect that it can be modelled well in terms of coverage fractions.
3.2.4
Free Energy Diagram for Site 5
Using the adsorption energies in Table 3.8 we can construct a free energy diagram
for the intermediates in OER adsorbed on MnSb2O6 site 5. The result is shown in
Figure 3.4. Examining the free energy diagram we observe that the thermodynami-
cally limiting steps are hydroxide formation and oxide formation. Both don’t occur
until at 2.2 V, at which point the catalyst becomes active. However, coverage effects
may skew this result and change the stability of oxide and hydroxide on the surface.
Furthermore, kinetic effect may play a role since a significant barrier is expected for
OO coupling. The remaining section will therefore be devoted to investigating these
effects and improving our understanding of the catalysts.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Clean MnSb2O6 (110)
43
Figure 3.3: Plot of the differential charge density of the MnSb2O6 (110) slab. We add
two oxides in site 3A and 3B. From the resulting charge density, we subtract the charge
density of the slab without the oxides. Adding oxides in site 3A and 3B results in
charge depletion and polarization of the neighbouring atoms. Blue indicates negative
charge and red indicates positive charge. This charge depletion primarily results in
charge transfer from the surface manganese atoms. This result partly explains the
large difference in the O3-O5 and O3-O3 interactions shown in Table 3.8. We note
that the antimony atoms adsorbing the oxides do not change charge state.
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Results
Figure 3.4:
Free energy diagram of site 5 on clean MnSb2O6. We see that the site
becomes active at 2.2 V vs SHE with the adsorbed oxide becoming more stable than
adsorbed hydroxide. The proton concentration is 1M.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
45
3.3
CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
In section 3.2 we examined the clean (110) surface of MnSb2O6, corresponding to
the surface covered with oxide vacancies. We now consider a coverage expected to
be more in correspondence with the real system. We will examine the 3 transition
metal antimonates MnSb2O6, NiSb2O6, and Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6. Experimentally, the
materials requires an overpotential in the vicinity of 700 mV to catalyze OER. At
this high a potential we expect that the surfaces will chemisorb water, hydroxide and
oxide, and we also anticipate that different metals might segregate to the surface.
Recent investigations into the RuO2 system using crystal truncation rod experiments
and DFT calculations, found that coverage effects may play a crucial role in the
activity of the RuO2 catalyst [28]. It was proposed that hydrogen bonding from a
chemisorbed hydroxide to an adsorbed O-O species was important for the reaction
kinetics. For this reason we will spent the remaining sections investigating the cover-
age of the transition metal antimonates under operating conditions, and the resulting
impact on kinetics.
Examining Table 3.8, we expect that at a potential of ∼1.9 V vs SHE, the (110)
surface is covered with oxygen species, with hydroxide being in on-top positions and
oxide being in bridge positions. This configuration is shown in Figure 3.5.
In section 3.4 we’ll find the thermodynamically favoured surface coverage of MnSb2O6
using a guided search based on regression and statistics. We’ll find that the coverage
shown in Figure 3.5 is not entirely representative of reality at 1.9 V. Nevertheless, the
surface shown in Figure 3.5 is interesting as a model system for building up intuition
for the surface chemistry of the materials under investigation.
3.3.1
Manganese Antimonate
Covering the MnSb2O6 surface with hydroxide and oxide, as shown in Figure 3.5,
shifts the adsorption energies of the surface sites significantly as compared to the
clean surface.
All sites shift toward a larger descriptor value, corresponding to a
weaker binding of oxide. We show the limiting overpotential of the sites of the cata-
lyst in Figure 3.6 (a).
Examining the descriptor values in Figure 3.6 (a), we can deduce that the surface
we are investigating, is in fact not the ground state at the experimental conditions of
1.9V vs SHE, since it will spontaneously chemisorb hydroxide in site 9 at a bias of
1.9 V. However for now we make the simplifying assumption that Figure 3.5 is close
to the ground state in energy, and we’ll assume it is in fact the ground state. In this
case we can sketch a volcano incorporating kinetic effects according to Equation 2.57.
This is shown in Figure 3.6 (b). We observe that the bridge sites appear more active
towards OER than the CUS sites. Somewhat unexpectedly we find that the bridge
sites coordinating two antimony exhibit the lowest limiting potential. We generally
observe too low kinetic overpotentials for the bridge site, whereas the kinetic over-
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Results
Figure 3.5: We examine the surface where hydroxide occupies on-top positions, and
oxides occupy bridge positions. Manganese is blue, nickel is grey, and antimony is
green. This surface is investigated for MnSb2O6, NiSb2O6, and Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6.
Shown in the picture is one possible configuration of Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6, the remaining
are shown in Figure 3.8.
potential for the CUS site 5 is in agreement with experiment (700 mV). It may be,
that for the bridge sites, O2* desorption is the rate limiting step. In this case these
sites would be poisoned by the accumulation of O2* . Another possibility is that only
a smaller fraction of the catalyst surface is active. Assuming only one tenth of the
surface is active, we get a rate of 1000 1/s. Under this condition, the kinetic overpo-
tentials for the bridge sites become 0.7 and 0.6 V for site 7 and site 9 respectively.
3.3.2
Nickel Antimonate
We’ll now examine the nickel antimonate NiSb2O6. In this case, the Materials Project
report the bulk material as being a semi-conductor, having a band-gap of 0.9 eV [22].
Under reaction conditions the material performs as a conductor [6] so to increase the
availability of free electrons we adhere a sub layer of gold beneath the 3 layers of
NiSb2O6. The gold layer serves as a reservoir of free electrons, preventing charge
build up. The limiting overpotential for different sites on the surface is shown in
Figure 3.7 (a) and the kinetic overpotential is shown in Figure 3.7 (b). Hydroxide
was not found to be stable in site 7. In this case a proton transfer occurs from site 7
to site 5, generating adsorbed water in site 5.
==PAGE:57==
3.3 CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
47
(a) Reversible overpotentials
(b) Kinetic overpotentials
Figure 3.6: (a): Limiting potentials for the adsorption sites on manganese antimonate
as a function of descriptor values.
The coverage considered is shown In Figure
3.5.
(b): Volcano plot for the MnSbO6 catalyst when including kinetic effects as
described in [20] and section 2.3.7. The calculations ran at a cut-off 400 eV at which
point the descriptor values were converged. Note the large difference in overpotential
when considering the limiting overpotential and the kinetic overpotential. A solvation
correction was added based on [18], as described in section 3.1.
Comparing sites 9 in Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.6, we observe that oxide binds the
bridge site more weakly in NiSb2O6 as compared to MnSb2O6.
3.3.3
Manganese Nickel Antimonate
We now turn our attention to the mixed metal catalysts. We’ll in the following only
investigate Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6. This system was found to be the most active during
experiment [6], and it has a sufficiently rich chemistry that we should be able to
elucidate why the mixed metal catalyst posses higher activity than the pure nickel
antimonate.
Again we elect to add a gold sublayer to the 3 slabs of catalyst material, to ensure
that free electrons are available.
When we examine the mixed metal nickel manganese antimonate, we face the
problem of how to distribute the transition metals in the lattice. A particular transi-
tion metal may segregate to the surface as we submerge the material in aqueous 1M
H2SO4 and apply a bias in the vicinity of 1.9 V vs SHE. Such segregation phenomena
are well studied for alloys [2], and the metal with the most favourable interaction
with the gas/liquid phase will segregate to the top. However, it is possible that the
directional bonding induced by the oxygen atoms, lower the mobility of the transition
metals to the point where segregation is impossible.
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Results
(a) Limiting overpotential
(b) Volcano plot including kinetics
Figure 3.7: (a): Limiting overpotential for sites on the NiSb2O6 catalyst (110) facet
for the coverage considered (Figure 3.5) . (b): Volcano plot for the NiSbO6 catalyst
when including kinetic effects as described in [20] and section 3.5. The calculations
were performed in VASP using an energy cut off of 650 eV, at which point the
descriptor values converged..
A solvation correction was added based on [18], as
described in section 3.1.
Furthermore, the material undergoes significant dissolution during the initial phase
of operation, and it may be that a particular transition metal stabilizes the surface
and prevent further dissolution. In this case that metal would be enriched near the
surface.
Four possibly configurations are investigated. These are shown in Figure 3.8. Configu-
ration 1 and 2 correspond to positioning Ni and Mn in site 0 and site 5. Configuration
3 and 4 correspond to the situations where either nickel or manganese segregates to
the surface.
The limiting overpotential for the different possible surfaces are shown in Figure
3.9 (a) and the kinetic overpotentials are shown in Figure 3.9 (b). The superscript
correspond to the planes shown in Figure 3.8. We see that the bridge sites appear
more active towards OER as compared to the CUS sites. Site 72 could not adsorb
hydroxide, with a proton transfer to site 5 occurring spontaneously. We zoom in on
the transition metal CUS site, corresponding to site 5, in Figure 3.10.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
49
Figure 3.8: The exposed (110) plane of the Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6 catalyst may be configured
in 4 different ways.
Each configuration correspond to different placements of the
transition metals in the (110) unit cell. Blue is Mn, green is Sb, and grey is Ni. In
all cases the stoichometry is Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6
(a) Limiting overpotential
(b) Volcano plot including kinetics
Figure 3.9: (a): Limiting overpotential for sites on possible facets of the (110) sur-
face of Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6 for the coverage considered (Figure 3.5). The superscript
number indicates the facet corresponding to Figure 3.8 (b): Kinetic overpotential
corresponding Equation 2.57.
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Results
3.3.4
Comparison
We now compare the activity of the sites across the catalysts for the coverage consid-
ered (Figure 3.5). The change in the descriptor values for the transition metal CUS
sites are shown in Figure 3.10 (a). We observe a weak dependence on the catalyst
composition with no clear trend. We then plot the change in the descriptor value for
the bridge site 9 across the materials. A trend appears, with sites coordinating nickel
tending to bind oxygen weaker than sites coordinating manganese. Furthermore, the
inclusion of nickel shifts the sites coordinating manganese toward weaker binding of
oxygen. The sites coordinating nickel are likewise shifted toward stronger binding of
oxygen when we include manganese.
When considering bridge sites, we recover the experimental trend that the anti-
monates containing manganese are more active than the antimonates only containing
nickel. This trend is much weaker for the CUS sites.
We compare the overpotential for all sites across the catalysts in Figure 3.11 (a).
(a) Composition dependent trend for site 5
(b) Composition dependent trend for site 9
Figure 3.10: (a): The change in descriptor value for site 5 as it changes with catalyst
composition. No clear trend emerges. (b): The change in descriptor value for the
bridge site 9 as it changes with catalyst composition. Sites coordinating manganese
tend to bind oxygen stronger (9Mn, 92, 93 ) than the sites coordinating nickel (9Ni,
91, 94). Furthermore, the inclusion of nickel appears to shift the sites coordinating
manganese toward weaker binding of oxygen. Likewise the inclusion of manganese
tend to shift the sites coordinating nickel toward stronger binding of oxygen.
The Figure seems to suggest, that for the coverage considered, it is generally bridge
sites that are the most active towards OER. Specifically we find that the site bridging
2 antimony atoms is the most active. In general we observe too low overpotentials
for drawing 10 mA/cm2 as compared to experiment (700 meV). A possible source of
error in our analysis may be the applied solvation correction. Adsorbed hydroxide
will be stabilized by hydrogen bonding to co-adsorbates and water molecules in the
==PAGE:61==
3.3 CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
51
(a) With solvation correction
(b) Without solvation correction
Figure 3.11: Removing the solvation correction shifts all sites toward binding O more
strongly relative to OH. We still conclude that it is the bridge sites that are active
toward OER, however it appears that site 9 is more active. Specifically site 93 appears
the most active (see Figure 3.8 and Figure 3.5).
electrolyte. Using the solvation correction, we stabilize adsorbed hydroxide by implic-
itly assuming some degree of hydrogen bonding and polar interactions with solvated
water. However, adsorbed hydroxide can only form a limited number of hydrogen
bonds, two of which are already shared with neighbouring CUS adsorbed hydroxides
(see Figure 3.5). We will therefore to some extent double count the hydrogen bond-
ing when adding the solvation correction. To test this possible error, we remove the
solvation correction and examine how the volcano changes. The result can be seen
in Figure 3.11 (b). We recover the result that it is the bridge sites, and not the CUS
sites that are the most catalytically active, being the closest to the top of the volcano.
However, we now find that it is site 9 that is the most active. We expect that the
truth is probably somewhere in between Figure 3.11 (a) and (b).
We compare the lattice constants for the different materials in Table 3.10. We
observe that the lattice constants are smaller when we increase the nickel content.
We note that a change in lattice constant may shift the energy of the d-band for the
transition metals [2].
3.3.5
Electronic Structure
We now investigate the electronic structure of the various catalysts as it is with the
coverage shown in Figure 3.5. The catalytic activity of oxides is difficult to establish
using DFT calculations, since a lack of free electrons may lead to charge building
up in the lattice. For this reason we investigate the density of states (DOS) of the
catalyst, to see whether free electrons are available. The resulting spatially averaged
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Results
Lattice Constant [Å]
a
b
c
MnSb2O6
4.80
4.80
9.56
NiSb2O6
4.72
4.72
9.36
Mn0.5Ni0.5Sb2O6
4.80
4.80
9.51
Table 3.10: Lattice constants for the rutile unit cell.
We observe that the nickel
antimonate lattice is somewhat smaller than the manganese antimonate lattice, and
that the mixed metal lattice is in between.
density of states (DOS) are shown in Figure 3.12. The DOS were calculated using
a (20, 20, 1) k-point grid, at which point the DOS profile no longer underwent sig-
nificant changes. We employed tetrahedral smearing with a Blochl correction. The
cut-off was set at 650 eV for the nickel containing materials, and 400 eV otherwise.
We observe some electron density at the Fermi level in all cases. This hints that free
electrons are available in the systems, even with the applied Hubbard correction. We
plot the projection of the DOS onto the bridge site 9 manganese atoms, corresponding
to 9Mn and 92, in the bottom right of Figure 3.12. We observe some shifting of the
d-band when comparing the two materials. We attribute this to strain effects when
including Ni in the lattice.
3.3.6
Conclusions
Having investigated the chemisorption properties of NiSb2O6, MnSb2O6, and mixed
metal Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6, with the coverage shown in Figure 3.5. It is found that the
descriptor value for the segregated mixed metal catalyst, with manganese exposed,
was ideal for OER in the bridge sites. Assuming a solvation correction, site 7 is better,
and without the solvation correction site 9 has lowest overpotential. We observe that
site 9, when bridging a nickel and antimony atom, is not nearly as active as when the
site bridges a manganese and antimony atom. We observe a trend in the descriptor
value against material composition for the bridge site 9. We observe that when this
bridge site coordinates manganese, then the inclusion of nickel in the lattice, shifts
the descriptor value toward weak binding of oxide.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 CUS Hydroxide and Bridge Oxygen
53
Figure 3.12: The total density of states calculated for the materials investigated in
this section. The dotted line corresponds to the Fermi level The graphs shows the
spatially averaged DOS summed over all orbitals. We observe some electron density
at the Fermi level for all materials, indicating that some free electrons are present.
Top left: The DOS of a slab of MnSb2O6 containing 4 rows of material. Top right:
The DOS of a slab of NiSb2O6 containing 3 rows of material, and one sublayer of
Au.
Bottom left: The DOS of a slab of Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6 containing 3 rows of
material, and one sublayer of Au. Bottom right: Projected DOS for the d-band
on the manganese in site 0 as calculated in VASP. We observe that the inclusion of
nickel shifts the DOS. This may be due to strain effects (see Table 3.10).
==PAGE:64==
54
3 Results
3.4
Search Algorithm
The purpose of this section is to develop a machine learning algorithm for mapping
out the surface Pourbaix diagram of our catalyst. The algorithm will proceed by
using the prediction of a learning routine to predict the energy of a given surface
coverage. This prediction will then be used to infer whether a given coverage is a
potential candidate for the thermodynamic hull coverage. The search for the most
stable surface coverage may then proceed as follows:
1. An initial set of training coverages are generated. These surfaces are chosen to
sample as large a part of configuration space as possible.
2. A regression routine is then trained on this data. If the regression model predicts
that an unsampled coverage is likely to have an energy within some distance, σ,
from the groundstate then the algorithm continues. Otherwise the algorithm
terminates.
3. The candidate coverage is constructed and submitted for calculation using
VASP
4. The new surface coverage is added to the training data, and the regression
routine is retrained.
The sequence then loops until no new candidates are found, and the best guess for
the thermodynamic hull is found. The algorithm is also sketched in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Algorithm for searching through the possible surface configurations and
finding catalytically active surface coverages. The regression routine will be based on
Gaussian Processes (GP) regression.
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Search Algorithm
55
3.4.1
Regression Routine
Several different learning schemes have been proposed for predicting energies of quan-
tum mechanical systems [29] [30]. In [31] the authors use a Gaussian Processes algo-
rithm to search for the thermodynamically favoured adsorbate coverage on IrO2. The
authors argue that a Gaussian Processes based regression algorithm is powerful for
searching through a large configuration space, since the algorithm gives not only a
prediction but also an associated confidence interval for that prediction. In this work
we also choose to employ a Gaussian Processes routine in the search for the thermo-
dynamically favoured coverage. It should be stressed, that the we do not require the
predictions of the algorithm to be more accurate than to within a few hundred meV
of the DFT result. The algorithm will only serve to screen out surface configurations
that are unlikely to exist, but the actual formation energies of the configuration will
be determined by a DFT calculation in VASP. The fundamentals of GP regression
are described in section 2.4.
Ultimately we want to predict the formation energy of a surface, however it is
not clear what choice of parameters that should be used as input to the model. One
possibility is to use the mean field configuration as the input to our Gaussian Processes
model . This was done in [31].
The mean field configuration CMF is an array containing the number of adsorbate
species in the unit cell:
CMF = [n(H2O), n(OH), n(O), n(V)]
(3.3)
Where, for instance n(H2O), is the number of water molecules adsorbed in the unit
cell and n(V) is the number of oxide vacancies. This approach has previously been
shown to work well for pure metals [27].
However, for MnSb2O6 (110) we found that coverages that shared the same CMF
could differ significantly in formation energy. This spread can be as high as 1 eV,
significantly hampering the predictive power of the CMF . This spread is shown for
coverages obeying the constraint θO + θOH = 1 in Figure 3.14. A model based on the
CMF will therefore not effectively screen out high energy surface configurations, and
many iterations were necessary before a reasonable guess for the ground state was
found using such a model.
Based on the adsorption energies shown in Table 3.8, we expect that at the relevant
potential of 1.9 V either oxide or hydroxide covers the surface sites, with the transition
metal CUS site potentially being vacant or covered by water. Under this simplifying
assumption, we construct a model using as input an array containing the occupancy
of each adsorption site, we label this array as ψ and the occupancy of a site as o(site).
We will refer to ψ as the state of the surface. The six possible adsorption sites are
(3A,3B,5,7,9A,9B) as shown in Figure 3.1. We can then write the state as:
ψ = [o(3A), o(3B), o(5), o(7), o(9A), o(9B)]
(3.4)
==PAGE:66==
56
3 Results
Figure 3.14: We plot the formation energy of coverages satisfying the requirement
θO + θOH = 1. This allows us to visualize the change in formation energy as we alter
the oxygen coverage. Different surfaces with the same adsorbate coverage fractions,
θO and θOH, may have significantly different formation energies.
The formation
energies were referenced to water, the computational hydrogen electrode, and a slab
covered with oxide vacancies.
We label the adsorbates according to an ordinal encoding in an attempt to imbue our
chemical intuition into the learning algorithm. In general we want the encoding to
capture the increased hydrogen bonding when going from a vacancy to an oxide to
a hydroxide to water. It’s also desirable that the encoding captures the decreasing
oxidation of the slab as we go from oxide to hydroxide to water to a vacancy. Both
effects cannot be captured along a line, so we elect to encode the adsorbates as complex
numbers, with the imaginary part representing increasing hydrogen bonding, and the
real part indicating decreasing oxidation of the slab. We found that the learning
rate of the algorithm was critically dependent on the choice of encoding. Following
leave-one-out cross validation we found that the best encoding was close to the values:
O = 0
OH = 1 + 0.5i
H2O = 2 + i
V = 3
(3.5)
The GP routine will use the euclidean norm to measure dissimilarity between data
points.
==PAGE:67==
3.4 Search Algorithm
57
Occasionally VASP calculations do not converge to the true minimum, which leads to
some uncertainty in the training data σn. We estimate this noise by maximizing the
log-likelihood given by Equation 2.77. During the same optimization we also find the
characteristic length scale l and prefactor σf. The best choice of hyperparameters for
the GP regression routine when trained on the non-standardized data are shown in
Table 3.11.
Length scale l
Signal spread σf [eV]
Data noise σn [eV]
20.3
28
0.2
Table 3.11: Hyperparameters for the GP routine as found by minimizing the log-
likelihood Equation 2.77. The data noise σn implies that either some computations
didn’t converge to the global minimum, or some of the physical effects are not pos-
sible to capture using the squared exponential kernel. The data noise regularizes the
regression routine and prevents overfitting.
The sites on the (110) facet obey the symmetry, that if we swap the adsorbate in
3A and in 3B, and also swap the adsorbates in 9A and 9B, we arrive at the same sur-
face configuration. Defining a symmetry operation that does not change the energy
of the surface as ˆS, we implement this symmetry by stating in the code, that once
state ψ has been sampled, then we’ve also sampled state ˆSψ, and the energies of the
two states are set as identical.
A script was written for determining whether a proton transfer occurred between
adsorbates during relaxation. If this was found to be the case, the computation was
flagged for further analysis and excluded from the dataset. This was done to avoid
problems in the estimation of the zero point energy contributions.
3.4.2
Selection Criterion
Based on the fitted covariance matrix, the GP regression routine will estimate an
uncertainty in it’s energy prediction. This uncertainty will reflect the overall variance
in the data, and the distance from the predicted point to any previously sampled
points. Using this uncertainty σ, a coverage is selected for computation if the pre-
dicted energy is within σ from the hull. This selection criterion correspond to there
being a 95 % probability that we’ve found the hull state.
3.4.3
Results
We plot the performance of the model in Figure 3.15 using leave-one-out cross vali-
dation. We see that the model performs well after having sampled 20 different states.
==PAGE:68==
58
3 Results
For reference, the total number of states possible under the imposed constraints is
128. We note that the formation energies of different states span 12 eV at 0 V vs
SHE, yet the formation energies are on average predicted to within 200 meV by the
model.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.15: (a): Performance of the Gaussian Processes model. The performance
is evaluated by leave-one-out cross validation. On the x-axis is the energy calculated
from VASP and on the y-axis is the energy predicted by the model. (b): Here we
show the error of the model for all data points using leave-one-out validation. The
RMSE is found to be 0.2 eV.
After running, the algorithm converges to what is the best guess for the thermo-
dynamically favoured state. This groundstate is shown in Figure 3.16. We see that
the groundstate resembles the state studied in section 3.3, with the difference being
that a hydroxide occupies either site 9A or site 9B.
The 6 most stable states are shown in Figure 3.17 (a) with the solvation correction,
and (b) without the solvation correction. For the (110) facet of MnSb2O6 we find
that the lowest energy states generally have hydroxide in the CUS sites. Even at the
high bias of 1.9V the CUS sites (3A, 3B, and 5) are still covered with hydroxide. The
bridge sites however, are preferentially occupied by oxide. Considering a Langmuir-
Hinshelwood mechanism for OO coupling, we require that two oxides are adsorbed
in neighbouring positions. We expect that the barrier for coupling two CUS sites
oxides is low, whereas the barrier for coupling two bridge site oxides is expected to
be large. Considering the six most stable states in Figure 3.17, we see that in general
two oxides never occupy neighbouring CUS sites. Using the model, and assuming a
thermal distribution in the population of coverages, we calculate the probability of
two neighbouring CUS site oxides. We assume the coverages are thermally distribut-
ing according to a Grand-canonical ensemble with thermal energy kBT = 25 meV.
==PAGE:69==
3.4 Search Algorithm
59
Figure 3.16: Groundstate configuration of the (110) facet on MnSb2O6 as found by
the GP routine. Green is antimony and blue is manganese. This result taken together
with the surface Pourbaix diagrams in Figure 3.19, seems to suggest that OO coupling
cannot occur through a Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism. Even at 1.9 V we find
that the CUS sites are occupied by hydroxide, and only the bridge sites are occupied
by oxides. The large barrier for OO coupling between bridge sites, as shown in Figure
3.18, indicates that the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism is unimportant for the
kinetics of MnSb2O6.
This assumption hinges on the rate determining step being OOH formation. Consid-
ering a rate determining step, the steps leading up to the step may be assumed in
pre-equilibrium [17], thereby leading to a thermal distribution. The probability of
realizing a coverage ψ is approximately given as:
P(ψ) = e−(Gf (ψ)−G0)/(kBT )
(3.6)
Where G0 is the groundstate energy given as -12.1 eV from Figure 3.17. We consider
the configuration:
ψ = [O, O, OH, O, OH, O]
(3.7)
Where the oxides in 3A and 3B are highlighted to indicate that this is the oxygen
couple we are considering for the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism. The formation
energy of the configuration is predicted as -10.7 eV at 1.9 V vs SHE. We will assume
the best case scenario, where the model overestimates Gf(ψ) by 0.2 eV. In this case
the probability of realizing the coverage is:
P(ψ = [O, O, OH, O, OH, O]) < 10−20
(3.8)
Which implies that this situation almost never occurs. Considering coupling between
a bridge oxide and a CUS oxide, we estimate the probability for getting the state:
ψ = [O, OH, OH, O, OH, O]
(3.9)
==PAGE:70==
60
3 Results
Figure 3.17: The six most stable coverages at 1.9 V vs SHE as predicted by the GP
model. (a): The solvation correction is included. (b): The solvation correction is
omitted. The formation energy Gf is shown as referenced to an empty (110) surface
with no adsorbates. Assuming a thermal energy of 25 meV, we expect that the top left
coverage is far more abundant than the remaining.
Which has the formation energy -11.3 eV. This gives the probability:
P(ψ = [O, OH, OH, O, OH, O]) = 10−14
(3.10)
Which implies that any barrier for this coupling will make it an exceedingly rare
event. We consider all variations of the ground state that may enable OO coupling in
Table 3.12. The probabilities shown in Table 3.12, implies that OO coupling rarely
occurs between two CUS sites. Furthermore, the probabilities also indicate that OO
coupling rarely occurs between a CUS site and a bridge site. The only case that is
left to consider is coupling between two bridge sites. However, the barrier for OO
==PAGE:71==
3.4 Search Algorithm
61
[o(3A), o(3B), o(5), o(7), o(9A), o(9B)]
Gf [eV]
P
[OH,OH,OH,O,OH,O]
-12.1
≈1
[O,O,OH,O,OH,O]
-10.7
10−25
[OH,O,O,O,OH,O]
-10.7
10−25
[OH,OH,O,O,OH,O]
-11.5
10−11
[O,OH,OH,O,OH,O]
-11.3
10−14
Table 3.12:
Different states that may lead to OO coupling through a Langmuir-
Hinshelwood mechanism. We highlight the pair of oxygen considered to couple in bold.
P is the probability of realizing the state, which can be considered as the fraction of
the surface covered with the given state. Excluding the groundstate, we see that only
a small fraction of the surface is covered with states where a Langmuir-Hinshelwood
mechanism is possible. We include a solvation correction.
coupling between bridge sites is very large, as shown in Figure 3.18.
The barrier shown in Figure 3.18 was found using a nudged elastic band with inter-
polated images between the initial and final state. The initial state consisted of two
neighbouring bridge oxide, and the final state consisted of a desorbed O2 molecule.
The forward barrier was found to be almost 4 eV. The climbing image failed to con-
verge, making us unable to determine the entropy of the transition state. The inability
of GGA level DFT to capture electronic correlation effects correctly, renders the de-
scription of the O2 molecule erroneous, resulting in an error in the electronic energy
[32]. Furthermore, the desorbed state is expected to have a significantly increased
entropy, thereby lowering the free energy of the desorbed O2 molecule. This makes
the reverse barrier and the energy of the final state uncertain. The transition state
consisted of chemisorbed O2 and the forward barrier may be more reliable. Despite
these uncertainties, the very large barrier of almost 4 eV indicates that OO coupling
does not occur between bridging oxides.
Following the training of the model, we map out the surface Pourbaix diagram.
This is shown in Figure 3.19. Each line corresponds to a different state. As we increase
the potential, we observe a transition from hydroxide coverage to oxide coverage as
different states (lines) become lowest in formation energy. The potentials at which
the transitions occur depend on whether a solvation correction is applied or not. As
discussed in section 3.3 we expect that the stabilization following from interactions
with the solvent will be somewhat lower than what is indicated from the solvation
correction. Examining Figure 3.19 we observe that the spread in the bundle of lines
shrink at around 2V or 1.7V, depending on whether a solvation correction is included
or not. This is an indicator that the formaion energy of the coverages with many
hydroxides, approaches the energy of the coverages with many oxides. At this point
we have the relation:
∆GO −∆GOH ≈V
(3.11)
And the groundstate coverage approaches maximum catalytic activity, as revealed
==PAGE:72==
62
3 Results
Figure 3.18: Plot of the NEB band for OO coupling between bridge oxides. The initial
state (1) correspond to two neighbouring bridge oxides. The oxide then traverses an
antimony atom (2) and forms chemisorbed OO in the transition state (3). The final
state is desorbed O2 (4). As we approach the final state, GGA level DFT fails, and
we expect that the final state is more stable than indicated. This error has been found
to be as high as 1 eV for reactions involving O2 [32]. The forward energetic barrier is
quite large, being close to 4 eV, indicating that OO coupling between bridge sites does
not occur. The climbing image NEB algorithm failed to converge, making us unable
to determine the entropy of the transition state.
by Equation 2.59. This result is in line with the experimental paper [6] which found
that the catalyst became active at around 1.8 V vs SHE.
Suppose we have a surface with adsorption sites A and B, written as [A B]. We
can then calculate the descriptor value of site A by knowing the formation energy of
the surface with O in site A, and the formation energy of the surface with OH in site
A. The descriptor value will be given by:
D = Gf ([O B]) −Gf ([OH B])
(3.12)
Where B can be H2O, OH, O, and *. In Figure 3.20 we plot the descriptor value for
the ground state against the voltage. We generally only observe a weak dependence
of the descriptor value on the the changing coverage. One notable exception is site 7,
which changes dramatically as we increase the potential. The dotted lines correspond
to predictions from the GP regression routine and the 66 % confidence intervals are
indicated. We note that the descriptor value for site 9 splits as the potential hits 1.7
V. At potentials below 1.7 V both site 9A and 9B are occupied by hydroxide. At
1.7V it becomes favourable for the hydroxide in site 9A and 9B to deprotonate (see
Figure 3.19 (a)), but the deprotonation of one site 9 hydroxide leads to the relative
==PAGE:73==
3.4 Search Algorithm
63
stabilization of the remaining site 9 hydroxide, since the slab is now more oxidized.
This causes the splitting observed in Figure 3.20.
==PAGE:74==
64
3 Results
(a) Surface Pourbaix diagram at pH = 0 with a solvation correction.
(b) Surface Pourbaix diagram at pH = 0 without a solvation correction.
Figure 3.19: Surface Pourbaix diagrams at pH 0. Each line correspond to a particular
state. The formation energy of the states against potential have different slopes due
to the different number of adsorbed oxides and hydroxides. The formation energies
are referenced to a slab covered with oxide vacancies. (a): We observe a narrowing
of the bundle of surfaces at around 1.75V to 2V vs SHE. This hints that in this range
∆GO −∆GOH ≈V for the different sites, and the surface becomes catalytically active.
We observe that the CUS sites generally prefer hydroxide coverage up until at bias of
2.5V vs SHE. (b): Same as in (a) but without a solvation correction. We observe
that the bundle narrows at lower potentials.
==PAGE:75==
3.4 Search Algorithm
65
Figure 3.20: Change in the descriptor values of the ground state as we increase the
voltage. A solvation correction is applied. The dotted lines correspond to predictions
by the GP routine, and the 66% confidence interval for the prediction is indicated.
The shading indicates the current generated at that voltage and descriptor value. The
current was calculated from Equation 2.57 assuming one active site per unit cell area
(65Å2). We generally observe that the site bridging a manganese and an antimony
atom (site 9) is most active towards OER. The symmetry relating site 9A and 9B is
broken when the descriptor value for site 9 obeys ∆GO −∆GOH ≈V . At this point,
one of the hydroxide is deprotonated, changing the neighbourhood of the other site 9.
==PAGE:76==
66
3 Results
3.4.4
Conclusions
The search algorithm built within this section was found capable of predicting the
formation energy of a surface coverage on the (110) facet to within 200 meV after
sampling 20 different surface configurations. In general, increasing the training set
size will increase the accuracy of the model, however an accuracy of 200 meV was suf-
ficient to find the ground state surface configuration within a 95 % confidence interval.
The search indicated that the most stable state has hydroxide in all CUS sites at 1.9
V vs SHE. This in turn indicates that a Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism for OO
coupling can only occur through bridging oxide. The barrier for this coupling was
found to be approximately 4 eV, indicating that the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mech-
anism is not important for OER kinetics at the MnSb2O6 (110) surface.
Surface
Pourbaix diagrams were constructed and we examined how the changing groundstate
influenced descriptor values. The CUS sites’ descriptor values were found to be only
weakly dependent on the groundstate, and thereby the potential. The bridge sites
were however found to be more sensitive, changing by more than 0.5 eV as we increase
the potential. A major flaw in our analysis is the shift in formation energies result-
ing from interactions with the periodic image. In the true system, unlikely surface
configurations are neighboured by likely configurations, in a manner that minimizes
the energy of the total surface. Due to the periodic boundary conditions imposed by
plane wave DFT, we implicitly cover the whole electrode with the surface configura-
tion we are investigating. This leads to unrealistic energies when the configuration
differs too greatly from the groundstate. This problem could in principle be solved by
calculating the formation energies in increasingly larger unit cells, however the size
of the (110) unit cell makes this sampling computationally demanding, and it was
decided not to investigate this further.
==PAGE:77==
3.5 Microkinetic model
67
3.5
Microkinetic model
We will now attempt a refinement of the microkinetic model developed by Dickens
and Nørskov in [20]. The microkinetic model was developed for calculating the rate
constant for OO coupling through a Eley-Rideal mechanism where adsorbed oxide
and solvated water react. The authors considered the (110) facet of the IrO2 catalyst,
and considered the surface as either being entirely covered by hydroxide, or entirely
covered by oxide, or entirely covered by oxygen. This allowed them to relate the equi-
librium between adsorbed hydroxide and adsorbed oxide through a single equilibrium
constant. After having examined the behaviour of the surface coverage of MnSb2O6
(110) throughout the last few sections, we’ve come to the conclusion that our surface
will be covered by a mix of oxide, hydroxide, oxygen vacancies, and water. We will
therefore modify the proposed microkinetic model developed in [20] to consider equi-
libria between these different possible surface coverages. Throughout this section it
is assumed that the turnover frequency for the active site is sufficiently much higher
than the surrounding sites, that we can assume that the ’pocket’ of co-adsorbates
creating the active site can be considered unchanging. This idea is motivated by the
large difference in descriptor values for the different sites as found in section 3.3.
We assume that all reaction steps leading up to the formation of surface oxide are
equilibrated, that is we assume the following equilibria for all sites on the surface:
(1)
H2O(l) + ∗←−→H2O∗
(2)
H2O∗←−→OH∗+ (H+ + e–)
(3)
OH∗←−→O∗+ H+ + e–
These equilibria are only correct if the proton transfer between solvated water and
the surface species is facile. This assumption is confirmed in [20]. Strictly speaking,
these equilibria only exist when no Faradaic current is drawn through the electrode.
Because the electron transfer to the external circuit will necessarily be an irreversible
process. However, assuming that OO coupling is rate determining, then the above
equilibria represent pre-equilibria or quasi-equilibria ([17], chapter 20).
Following these steps is the rate determining step (4) and the desorption of O2.
(4)
O∗+ H2O(l) −−→OOH∗+ H+ + e–
(5)
OOH∗←−→O2∗+ (H+ + e–)
(6)
O2∗←−→O2(g)
==PAGE:78==
68
3 Results
We make the simplifying assumption that the coverage of OO species such as OOH
and O2 is negligible. This assumption can be challenged based on work on the RuO2
(110) facet [28], which indicated that the desorption of O2 might be rate determining,
resulting in a significant coverage of O2.
We expect that under working conditions, multiple different coverages, correspond-
ing to the states described in the previous section, may be realized on the surface.
To describe the population of the surface with these different coverages, we partition
the electrode surface into a set of smaller surfaces, each of area Au. Assume that we
assign Ni of these partitions to state i, then coverage i occupies a fraction θi of the
total surface, given by the expression:
θi =
Ni
A/Au
(3.13)
Where A is the electrode area. Each coverage has a surface energy per area ϵ(i), given
as:
ϵ(i) =
G(i)
f
Au
(3.14)
Where G(i)
f
is the energy required to cover the segment of area Au with coverage i.
Assuming all these segments are in thermal equilibrium, or quasi-equilibrium, and
can exchange elements with the electrolyte and electrons with the reference electrode,
then the probability of a surface segment being occupied by coverage i is given from
a grand canonical ensemble:
θ(i) = 1
z e−ϵ(i)Au/kBT
(3.15)
Where z is:
z = Σje−ϵ(j)Au/kBT
(3.16)
Knowing the rate constant for all active sites j for a coverage i, we can infer the
reaction rate for OOH formation for this coverage as the product ([2], chapter 3):
r(i) = θ(i)Σjθ(i,j)
H2Ok(i,j)
+
(1 −γ(i,j))
(3.17)
Where the sum runs over active sites j on coverage i. An active site will for the
Eley-Rideal mechanism consist of chemisorbed oxide. θ(i,j)
H2O is the probability that a
water molecule is close enough to react with the active site. This probability will be
related to the hydrophilicity of the facet.
The approach to equilibrium γ(i,j) contains the reverse reaction of OOH formation,
which is the formation of surface oxide. The approach to equilibrium is proportional
to the ratio of the forward rate constant k+ and backward rate constant k−:
γ(i,j) ∝k−
k+
(3.18)
==PAGE:79==
3.5 Microkinetic model
69
OOH formation will involve the transfer of one electron across the electrode. The
rate constants for this type of reaction is known from transition state theory, and we
have the proportionality [14]:
k−/k+ ∝e−F η/RT
(3.19)
Where F is Faraday’s constant. So the approach to equilibrium will decrease expo-
nentially in the overpotential η. At the relevant overpotential of 700 mV, we have
that e−F η/RT ≈0, giving:
γ(i,j) = 0
(3.20)
And we can ignore the reverse reaction of OOH formation (see Figure 3.4).
Summing over all possible coverages, we get the total rate for OOH formation:
r = Σ(i,j)θ(i)θ(i,j)
H2Ok(i,j)
+
(3.21)
In principle we can then find the activity of our catalyst via Equation 3.21 by cal-
culating the formation energy of all possible coverages, determining the descriptor
values, calculating the rate constant using Dickens barrier expression shown in Table
2.4 and then get the total rate through Equation 3.21
Since we are primarily interested in the order of magnitude for the catalytic rate, it
is sufficient to only consider the site with the highest rate. Labelling the most active
coverage as A, and the active site as α, the rate of our catalyst becomes:
r =
(kBT
h
)
θ(A)e−G(A,α)
a
/kBT
(3.22)
Where we’ve also elected to set θ(A,α)
H2O
as 1.
We define the equilibrium constant between coverages as the ratio of the Boltzmann
factors:
Ki→j = e−ϵ(j)/kBT
e−ϵ(i)/kBT = e−(ϵ(j)−ϵ(i))/kBT
(3.23)
We can then rewrite Equation 3.15 as:
θi =
1
Σje−(ϵ(j)−ϵ(i))/kBT =
1
ΣjKi→j
=
1
1 + Σj̸=iKi→j
(3.24)
Where the equilibrium constant Ki→i has been taken outside the sum and set as
unity.
The rate then becomes:
r =
(kBT
h
)
1
1 + Σi̸=AKA→i
e−G(A,α)
a
/kBT
(3.25)
Examining Equation 3.25 we recover the familiar volcano shape under certain assump-
tions.
==PAGE:80==
70
3 Results
When the descriptor value is increased, the reaction rate also increases by a lower-
ing of the activation energy according to Equation 2.56. However, an increase in
descriptor value will destabilize the oxide occupying the active site, and the equilib-
rium constants KA→i leading away from this coverage will increase, thereby lowering
the rate. It is clear from Equation 3.25, that any mechanism that destabilizes the
active state, and increases the equilibrium constants KA→i will in general decrease
the catalytic activity.
We introduce the equilibrium constant KO→OH to describe the equilibrium between
the most active state with oxide in the active site α, and the similar state with hy-
droxide in site α. We can then rewrite the rate expression by using the multiplicative
property of equilibrium constants:
r =
(kBT
h
)
1
1 + KO→OH
(
1 + Σi̸={OH,O}KOH→i
)e−G(A,α)
a
/kBT
(3.26)
The equilibrium constant KO→OH can be related to the descriptor value and potential
through Equation 3.23:
KO→OH = e(D−V e)/kBT
(3.27)
The equilibrium constants KOH→i are not expected to depend explicitly on the de-
scriptor value, and we can therefore find the ideal descriptor value for a given potential
by solving:
∂r
∂D = 0
(3.28)
The optimal descriptor value, D0 , correspond to the descriptor value that gives the
highest rate at the applied potential V :
D0 = V e + ln
(
−
α
(1 + α)K
)
kBT
(3.29)
Where
K = 1 + Σi̸={OH,O}KOH→i
(3.30)
From Table 2.4 we have that α ≈−0.5, we can then rewrite Equation 3.29 as:
D0 = V e −ln (K) kBT
(3.31)
If we can reasonably approximate the electrode surface as a two state system, with
the two states corresponding to (1) all active sites occupied by oxide and (2) the same
sites being covered by hydroxide. Then K will be unity and the second term can be
ignored in Equation 3.29. In this case the rate is given as:
r =
(kBT
h
)
1
1 + e(D−V e)/kBT e−G(A)
a
/kBT
(3.32)
Which is identical to the result of Dickens and Nørskov in [20], where the result was
obtained by another approach and shown to give a volcano curve.
==PAGE:81==
3.5 Microkinetic model
71
We will now attempt to construct a volcano for MnSb2O6 based on Equation
3.22. We’ll map out the volcano by doing a search for sites that are expected to be
particularly active. By sites we refer to particular configurations of co-adsorbates.
The partition function z is assumed to be reasonably approximated by the states
close to the hull as discovered in the previous section.
We use a partition area Au corresponding to the unit cell area (65 Å2), we have
that the formation energy per unit cell calculated from VASP, matches the surface
energy times Au:
G(i)
f
= Auϵ(i)
(3.33)
This assumption poses some problems for our models. It may be that a site is unsta-
ble when repeated periodically, as is done in VASP, but becomes more stable if other
coverages neighbour it. A rescaling of Au to be larger than the unit cell is then really
necessary for achieving the correct surface coverage. However, the (110) unit cell is
quite large, and computational limitation prohibits this rescaling.
The search for the active site will be based on the machine learning routine devel-
oped in the previous sections. Examining Equation 3.22, we find that a reasonable
criterion for performing a calculation is that site j on state i is predicted by the
routine to satisfy:
[
G(i)
f −G(A)
f
]
+
[
G(i,j)
a
−G(A,α)
a
]
< σ
(3.34)
Where σ is the uncertainty in the prediction. σ will have two contributions. One
from the error in the formation energy, and one from the error in the descriptor value
prediction.
The former is estimated straight forwardly from the GP routine, the
second we’ll estimate by error propagation as:
σ2
D = σ2
O + σ2
OH
(3.35)
Using Equation 2.56, the error in the activation energy then becomes:
σ2
a = α2 (
σ2
O + σ2
OH
)
(3.36)
The uncertainty in Equation 3.34 then becomes:
σ2 = α2 (
σ2
O + σ2
OH
)
+ σ2
O
(3.37)
Using this search criteria we find the six most active sites. These are shown in
Figure 3.21 with the active oxide colored grey. We generally observe that site 9 is
most active at 1.9V vs SHE.
Using the GP regression routine to infer knowledge about unsampled states, we
can sketch out a plot of the current drawn from different sites on the catalyst against
the descriptor value of that site. The current is calculated according to Equation 3.22.
The result is seen in Figure 3.22. Squares correspond to VASP calculations, circles to
predictions from the GP regression, and diamonds correspond to VASP calculations
==PAGE:82==
72
3 Results
Figure 3.21: The six most active facets with the oxide in the active site colored
grey. (a): The solvation correction is included. The active site closely resembles
the groundstate (see Figure 3.17) and site 9 is generally the most active. (b): The
solvation correction is omitted. The most active sites are now site 5 and site 9. The
formation energy Gf is shown as referenced to an empty (110) surface covered with
oxide vacancies. 3.17
were one of the two states involved in the descriptor calculation was unstable. By
unstable, we mean that a proton transfer occurred when the facet was allowed to
relax. In certain cases this proton transfer prevented a calculation of the descriptor
value, since oxides could not be formed in certain sites. In this case, the descriptor
value is given from the GP prediction. The current density was found by assuming
one active site per unit cell area (Au =65Å).
==PAGE:83==
3.5 Microkinetic model
73
(a) Current against descriptor value - with a solvation correction included
(b) Current against descriptor value - without including a solvation correction
Figure 3.22: (a): Current drawn from different sites on the surface. The applied
bias is set as 1.9V vs SHE and a solvation correction is included. The current is
estimated from Equation 3.22. We observe significant evidence pointing to the fact
that site 9 is generally most active toward OER. We observe a clear separation between
the descriptor values for the bridge sites and CUS sites, with bridge sites binding
oxide more strongly. The CUS sites are harder to distinguish with a large overlap of
descriptor values. (b): Same as Figure (a) but without the solvation correction. The
dotted line correspond to Equation 2.57
==PAGE:84==
74
3 Results
Referring to Figure 3.22, we observe that site 7 generally binds oxide too strongly
to be catalytically active at 1.9 V. Sites 3 and 5, the CUS sites, generally binds oxide
to weakly and are preferably covered by hydroxide, with some exceptions occurring
when we remove the solvation correction. With the solvation correction turned on
we observe that the descriptor value for site 9 is close to the ideal value of 1.9 eV.
Without the solvation correction, we generally observe that site 9 binds oxide too
strongly too be ideal toward OER at a bias of 1.9 V.
3.5.1
Conclusions
We have built a model for predicting the current drawn from a particular site. The
model highlighted the large spread in descriptor values associated with different con-
figurations of the surface coverage. This spread was found to be as large as 0.5 eV
for the bridge sites, and 0.2 eV for the CUS sites. The spread highlights the fact,
that to asses whether a given site can be responsible for the current drawn from the
electrode, we have to estimate the probability of that site occurring.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion and
Conclusion
Based on the obtained results, we construct a hypothesis for the roles of nickel and
manganese in the mixed metal antimonate. Before stating this hypothesis, we esti-
mate the importance of material dissolution and field effects.
4.1
Stability of the Bulk Materials
Understanding the dissolution of a material is made difficult by the vast number of
paths the dissolution process could follow. Investigating the tendency for the bulk
phase to dissolve we construct the Pourbaix diagrams for MnSb2O6 and NiSb2O6
using the Materials Project data [33].
These Pourbaix diagrams are constructed
by using experimental formation energies for the aqueous ions, and DFT computed
formation energies of the solids. We plot the Pourbaix diagram for MnSb2O6 in Figure
4.1 and for NiSb2O6 in Figure 4.2. We observe that MnSb2O6 is not stable under the
working conditions of pH 0 and a potential of 1.9 V vs SHE. The nickel antimonate
NiSb2O6 is stable under the working conditions. It was observed experimentally that
manganese leaches from the lattice for the first ∼50 hours of operation, after which
dissolution appears to stop (see Figure 1.3). In comparison, the antimony and nickel
leaching was significantly less.
4.2
Field Effects
The potential drop across the double layer leads to the formation of a very strong
field at the electrode surface. This field has previously been studied theoretically for
ORR on Pt(111) [34] where it was found to be 0.4 V/Å at 1.23 V vs SHE. This field
can alter the adsorption energies of adsorbates, and it was shown that the adsorption
energy of OH* shifted by 0.1 eV at 1.23 V when including the field, whereas the shift
for O* was smaller.
Getting the correct field at the electrode surface is contingent on getting the cor-
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Discussion and Conclusion
Figure 4.1: Pourbaix diagram for Mn and Sb.
We neglect to include phases only
containing antimony. We expect that the rutile structure MnSb2O6 is stable in the
voltage range 0.9 to 1.8 V at pH 0.
Above this potential manganese leaches into
solution as MnO –
4 . Below a bias of ∼0.9 V vs SHE we expect that the manganese
leaches from the lattice as Mn2+ ·
rect surface charge σ [35]. Finding the correct surface charge requires knowledge of
the electrode potential of zero charge (PZC), as well as the differential capacitance
of the electrolyte-electrode system Cd. Determining these quantities remain a com-
putational challenge.
The differential capacitance at 1.6 V vs SHE was reported
experimentally as 20µF/cm2 .
However, Cd is expected to be voltage dependent.
Assuming a PZC of 0 V vs SHE, we approximate the surface charge as:
σ = Cd · 1.9V = 1.5 electrons / unit cell
(4.1)
The potential drops across a distance that is dependent on the electrolyte concen-
tration. The authors used 1M H2SO4 in the experimental paper [6]. A reasonable
estimate is then that the potential of 1.9 V vs SHE drops to the solution potential
(0 V vs SHE) over a distance of 3Å [14] (chapter 13 Table 13.3.1). This distance is
in agreement with the choice made in [34] where the same distance was inferred from
==PAGE:87==
4.2 Field Effects
77
Figure 4.2: Pourbaix diagram for Ni and Sb.
We neglect to include phases only
containing antimony. We expect that the rutile structure NiSb2O6 is stable at bias
above 0.9 V at pH 0. Below this bias we expect that nickel leaches as Ni2+ ·
experimental results. Using these approximations the field at 1.9V vs SHE becomes:
E = 0.6 V/Å
(4.2)
From the MnSb2O6 data we found that the average change in dipole when exchanging
oxide for hydroxide was:
⟨∆µ⟩= 0.17 ± 0.01 eÅ
(4.3)
Which, with the assumed field, gives an average relative stabilization of:
⟨∆U⟩≈−E · ⟨∆µ⟩= −100 ± 10 meV
(4.4)
Implying that OH* is in fact 100 meV more stable than O* due to field effects. We
note that the corresponding shift in descriptor values will move the sites toward
weaker binding of oxide, much like the solvation correction. Considering Figure 3.22
(a) and (b), we expect that such a shift will not change the result, that it is site 9
that is the most active at 1.9 V vs SHE for MnSb2O6.
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Discussion and Conclusion
4.3
Role of Ni and Mn in Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6
The results of section 3.3 indicated that the adsorption sites coordinating manganese
in general had lower limiting overpotentials toward OER as compared to the adsorp-
tion sites coordinating nickel. This trend was observed for the CUS sites and more
strongly for the bridge sites with the nickel antimonate binding oxide too weakly.
This result is consistent with the experimental result that the manganese antimonate
catalyzes OER at a lower potential than the nickel antimonate. A hypothesis consis-
tent with this observation is then that nickel serves a supportive role in the catalyst,
and manganese acts as the catalytically active site. The Pourbaix diagrams shown
above, Figure 4.2 and 4.1, supports the interpretation that nickel serves to passivate
the material from dissolution. This passivation could proceed by the accumulation of
nickel at the dissolving parts of the surface during the initial break-in of the catalyst
shown in Figure 1.3. This accumulation would occur spontaneously since nickel deficit
phases would dissolve while nickel enriched phases would remain. The parts of the
surface structure resistant towards dissolution would then remain rich in manganese,
and it would be this fraction of the surface that is active toward OER.
Furthermore, we found that the inclusion of nickel shifted the bridge sites coordinat-
ing manganese toward weaker binding of oxide. It may be that this shift results in a
lowered overpotential of the mixed metal antimonate, as compared to the manganese
antimonate, thereby explained the result seen in Figure 1.4 (b).
The surface Pourbaix diagram discovered for MnSb2O6 in section 3.4 implies that
the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism is not a likely candidate for the OER reaction
mechanism for the transition metal antimonates under study. This implies that the
Eley-Rideal mechanism might be the dominating mechanism for OER for this class
of materials.
4.4
Further Developments
We’ll now discuss some of the steps that should be taken to improve upon the results
found in this work.
4.4.1
O2 Desorption
In section 3.3 we generally observed too low overpotentials for the bridge sites, and
it may be that O2* desorption becomes rate determining for these sites. In order to
better understand the reaction kinetics for OER, it would be worthwhile to attempt
to find an analytical expression for the rate of O2 desorption in terms of more easily
calculated material parameters, such as adsorption energies. Since the rPBE func-
tional describes oxygen poorly, then this expression would have to be developed using
a functional more suitable for handling oxygen. An obvious choice would be BEEF.
==PAGE:89==
4.5 Conclusion
79
4.4.1.1
Breaking the Symmetry
In [30] the formation energy of a Pt(111) surface with O and NO adsorbates is ex-
panded in terms of clusters such as pair interactions, triplet interactions (3 adsor-
bates), and so forth. The authors achieved high accuracy with their model for the
chosen system, with their results being within a few meV from the DFT results. The
idea of expanding the interactions between adsorbates in terms of clusters, allows us
to predict formation energies for non-periodic systems.
When calculating a set of formation energies of facets and their periodic images, we
implicitly sample many of the interactions occurring in non-periodic systems. This
is visualized in Figure 4.3. In the figure we show that many of interactions in the
non-periodic system shown to the right, are contained in the periodic clusters shown
to the left. This indicates that we may be able to interpolate the formation energy
of the non-periodic system from the formation energies of the periodic systems.
Figure 4.3: Interactions shared between periodic systems and a non periodic system.
Blue indicates hydroxide, red indicates oxide, pink indicates water, and green indicates
a vacancy.
We chose not to pursue this idea further at this stage. However, such a model
could be worthwhile to develop and verify for a smaller system.
4.5
Conclusion
This work aimed to understand the catalytic activity of the transition metal an-
timonates MnSb2O6, NiSb2O6, and Ni0.5Mn0.5Sb2O6 toward the oxygen evolution
reaction. The materials are known to adopt the tri-rutile structure, and within this
work the catalytic activity of the (110) facet was investigated. We estimated the
catalytic activity by considering the descriptor value of the catalytic sites, defined
==PAGE:90==
80
4 Discussion and Conclusion
as the difference in the free energy of adsorption of oxygen and hydroxyl. Multiple
effects were identified to influence the descriptor value. Amongst these were:
1. The coordinating transition metal.
2. Whether the adsorption site is a CUS site or a bridge site.
3. Adsorbate-Adsorbate interactions.
4. Solvent interactions.
5. Field effects.
Difficulties in the determination of the adsorbate-adsorbate interactions, the solvent
interactions, and the field effects, lead to significant uncertainties in the found de-
scriptor values. However, certain robust results were obtained:
1. Surface manganese atoms tend to have smaller descriptor values as compared
to surface nickel atoms.
2. Bridge sites coordinating manganese are shifted toward weaker binding of oxy-
gen upon inclusion of nickel in the antimonate lattice.
3. No clear trend in the descriptor value for the transition metal CUS site against
material composition was observed.
4. The bridge site coordinating manganese was generally found to have the low-
est overpotential toward OER when considering different possible coverages,
solvation effects, and field effects.
5. The chance of two neighbouring CUS adsorbed oxygen atoms was indicated to
be very low, increasing the likelihood that an Eley-Rideal mechanism is the
primary mechanism for OO coupling.
Based on these observations, we propose that bridge sites coordinating a manganese
atom constitute the catalytically active site.
A machine learning model was developed for predicting the formation energy of
a given coverage on MnSb2O6 (110). The coverage was allowed to contain adsorbed
oxygen, hydroxyl, water, and oxide vacancies. The model was based on Gaussian
Processes regression and was estimated to have a prediction error of 0.2 eV based on
results from leave-one-out validation. The model was trained on 20 coverages and
was used to infer the formation energy of the remaining 100 possible coverages. This
enabled a search for the surface Pourbaix diagram of MnSb2O6.
A microkinetic model was developed under the assumption that the different pos-
sible surface sites are thermally distributed. The model assumed OOH formation as
rate-determining and used the barrier expression developed by Dickens and Nørskov
==PAGE:91==
4.5 Conclusion
81
[20]. The microkinetic model was combined with the Gaussian Processes model to
estimate the current drawn from all the different possible surface sites on the (110)
facet. The predictive power of the model allowed us to obtain a robust estimate of
the variability in the descriptor values associated with different coverages. This vari-
ability was estimated as 0.5 eV for the bridge sites, and 0.2 eV for the CUS sites. We
found that the bridge site coordinating manganese had the lowest overpotential, and
gave the highest current at 1.9 V vs SHE. The current drawn from the site was 1-2
orders of magnitude too high as compared with the experimental data. This hints
that our analysis might overestimate the density of active sites, or that the site is
partially deactivated by slow O2 desorption.
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Goldmann et al., Energies, volume 11, page 392, 2018. doi: 10 . 3390 /
en11020392.
[2]
I. Chorkendorff and J. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of Modern Catalysis and
Kinetics. Wiley-VCH, 2013, isbn: 978-3-527-33268-7.
[3]
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan, and P. Strasser, Chem-
CatChem, volume 2, pages 724–761, 2010. doi: 10.1002/cctc.201000126.
[4]
M. A. Hickner et al., Chem. Rev., volume 104, number 10, pages 4587–4612,
2004. doi: 10.3390/en11020392.
[5]
N.-T. Suen et al., Chem. Soc. Rev., volume 46, number 2, pages 303–562, 2017.
doi: 10.3390/en11020392.
[6]
I. Moreno-Hernandez et al., Energy Environ. Sci., volume 10, pages 2103–2108,
2017. doi: 10.1039/c7ee01486d.
[7]
L. E. Ballentine, Quantum Mechanics: A Modern Development. World Scientific
Publishing Co., 2015, isbn: 978-981-4578-58-5.
[8]
J. Kohanoff, Electronic Structure Calculations for Solids and Molecules. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2006, isbn: 978-0-521-81591-8.
[9]
B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen, and J. K. Nørskov, Physical Review B, volume 59,
number 11, 7413(9), 1999. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.59.7413.
[10]
J. Nørskov, F. Studt, F. Abild-Petersen, and T. Bligaard, FUNDAMENTAL
CONCEPTS IN HETEROGENEOUS CATALYSIS. John Wiley and Sons, 2014,
isbn: 978-1-118-88895-7.
[11]
M. Dell’Angela, Science, volume 339, number 6125, pages 1302–1305, 2013. doi:
10.1126/science.1231711.
[12]
S. Blundell and K. Blundell, Concepts in Thermal Physics. Oxford University
Press, 2014, isbn: 978-0-19-956209-1.
[13]
U. Diebold, Surface Science Reports, volume 48, pages 53–229, 5-8 2003. doi:
10.1016/s0167-5729(02)00100-0.
[14]
A. Bard and L. Faulkner, ELECTROCHEMICAL METHODS Fundamentals
and Applications. John Wiley and Sons, 2001, isbn: 978-0-471-04372-0.
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[15]
A. Nilsson, L. G. M. Petterson, B. Hammer, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen,
and J. K. Nørskov, Cat. Lett., volume 100, number 3, pages 111–114, 2005. doi:
10.1007/s10562-004-3434-9.
[16]
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T.
Bligaard, and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, volume 108, pages 17 886–17 892,
2004. doi: 10.1021/jp047349j.
[17]
P. Atkins and J. de Paula, Atkins’ Physical Chemistry. Oxford University Press,
2014, isbn: 978-0-19-969740-3.
[18]
V. Bukas et al., ACS Catal., number 8, pages 11 940–11 951, 2018. doi: 10.
1021/acscatal.8b02813.
[19]
H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, and J. K. Nørskov, Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics, volume 10, pages 3722–3730, 2008. doi: 10.1039/B803956A.
[20]
C. Dickens and J. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, volume 123, number 31, pages 18 960–
18 977, 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b03830.
[21]
C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learn-
ing. MIT Press, 2006, isbn: 978-0-262-18253-9.
[22]
A. Jain and others., APL Mater., number 1, page 011 002, 2013. doi: 10.1063/
1.4812323.
[23]
J. Neugebauer and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B, volume 46, number 24, page 16 067,
1992. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.46.16067.
[24]
K. Terakura and A. R. Williams, Phys. Rev. Letters, volume 52, number 20,
page 1830, 1984. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.52.1830.
[25]
S. L. Dudarev et al., Phys. Rev. B, volume 57, number 3, pages 1505–1509, 1998.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.57.1505.
[26]
S. Kandoi, A. A. Gokhale, L. C. Grabow, J. A. Dumesic, and M. Mavrikakis,
Catalysis Letters, volume 93, pages 93–100, 2004. doi: 10 . 1023 / B : CATL .
0000016955.66476.44.
[27]
A. Lausche et al., J. Cat, number 307, pages 275–282, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcat.2013.08.002.
[28]
R. Rao, M. Kolb, N. Halck, et al., Energy Environ. Sci., number 10, pages 2626–
2637, 2017. doi: 10.1039/c7ee02307c.
[29]
R. Wexler, T. Qiu, and A. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. C, number 123, pages 2321–
2328, 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b11093.
[30]
J. Lym, G. Gu, Y. Jung, and D. Vlachos, J. Phys. Chem. C, number 123,
pages 18 951–18 959, 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b03370.
[31]
Z. Ulissi, A. Singh, C. Tsai, and J. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett, volume 7,
number 19, pages 3931–3935, 2016. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01254.
[32]
J. Wellendorff et al., Phys. Rev. B, volume 85, page 235 149, 2012. doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevB.85.235149.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[33]
K. Persson et al., Physical Review B, volume 85, number 23, page 235 438, 2012.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.85.235438.
[34]
G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, and J. K. Nørskov, Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics, volume 9, number 37, pages 5158–5161, 2007. doi: 10.1039/b705938h.
[35]
J. Gauthier, C. Dickens, H. Heenen, S. Vijay, S. Ringe, and K. Chan, J. Chem.
Theory Comput., number 15, pages 6895–6906, 2019. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.
9b00717.
==PAGE:96==
