==PAGE:1==
Tobias Thydal
Experimental validation and
uncertainty quantiﬁcation of
boundary conditions in high-order
ﬁnite element room acoustic
simulations
Master thesis, January 2020
==PAGE:2==
Tobias Thydal
Experimental validation and
uncertainty quantiﬁcation of
boundary conditions in high-order
ﬁnite element room acoustic
simulations
Master thesis, January 2020
==PAGE:3==
Experimental validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation of boundary conditions
in high-order ﬁnite element room acoustic simulations
Author(s):
Tobias Thydal
Supervisor(s):
Cheol-Ho Jeong
Finnur Kári Pind Jörgensson
Allan Peter Engsig-Karup
Department of Electrical Engineering
Acoustic Technology (ACT)
Technical University of Denmark
Akustikvej, Building 352
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 45 25 39 49
Release date:
29/02/2020
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve a MSc degree
in Engineering Acoustics at Technical University of Denmark. The
report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Tobias Thydal, 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to thank my two supervisors Cheol-Ho Jeong and Finnur Kári Pind Jörgensson for
their never-ending enthusiasm and for helping me understand diﬀerent acoustical concepts
and providing me insight into wave-based room acoustic simulations.
Thank you to Emil Strøm and Anders Melander for assistance with anything related to the
DG-FEM model and the DTU HPC. Whenever I would encounter bugs or errors caused
by the code or by myself you would have it ﬁxed in no time.
I also want to thank Henrik Hvidberg for assisting me in setting up all the diﬀerent absorber
conﬁgurations. Working with mineral wool is neither fun nor easy but Henrik was always
ready to help with a smile. Thanks to Andrew King for assisting with all the measurement
equipment and being kind on me when I broke a microphone.
Finally, much gratitude and appreciation to my family and my girlfriend for being ever
supportive and always lending an ear when I needed to vent.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
The continuous increase in computing power as well as advancements in algorithms for
numerical solvers have made wave-based room acoustic simulation models a viable option
and many diﬀerent implementations have emerged. Many of these simulation models
have been veriﬁed against analytical solutions or theortical cases but very few have been
validated against realistic room acoustic scenarios. This thesis presents a framework
that both validates the model and quantiﬁes the uncertainty in its output. It compares a
discontinuous Galerkin ﬁnite element method against experimental data in order to validate
the output of the simulation model. A quantiﬁcation of the uncertainty in the output of the
simulation model due to uncertainty in both the model inputs and the implementation of
the simulation model is also performed. The result of the study shows that the simulation
model is capable of accurately simulating the system response quantities in most cases, but
it does so with much overall uncertainty due to great uncertainty in one of the model inputs.
Overall the framework is succesful in validating the simulation model and quantifying
the uncertainty in the simulation model’s output; however a better control of the model
input uncertainty is needed before it is possible to determine whether the simulation model
produces results that are inaudibly diﬀerent from the measured results.
ii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
i
Abstract
ii
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The scope of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Impulse response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Sources of uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
System response quantities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Validation metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
11
3.1
Facilities and equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Flanking transmission room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Anechoic chamber
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Measurement equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
Absorption material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Impulse response measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Discontinuous Galerkin ﬁnite element method . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.2
Deterministic model inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.3
Uncertain model inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.4
Source too close to the boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
21
4.1
Validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Validation metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Reverberation time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.3
Early decay time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.4
Deﬁnition and Clarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Transfer functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Analysis and discussion
34
5.1
Time domain system response quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.1
Probability boxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Frequency domain system response quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
iii
==PAGE:8==
Table of Contents
5.3
Flanking transmission room as test environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Conclusion
37
7
Future work
38
7.1
Retesting with a less uncertain test environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Modelling arbitrary surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
References
39
A System response quantities for source 1
42
A.1 Reverberation time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.2 Early decay time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.3 Deﬁnition and clarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B System response quantities for source 2
54
B.1
Reverberation time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B.2
Early decay time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
B.3
Deﬁnition and clarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
iv
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Motivation
Room acoustic simulation methods have been around for several decades with the ﬁrst
publication describing a ray tracing technique for computing the time-energy response
of a room in 1968 [1]. Other energy-based methods, such the image-source method and
the beam tracing method, have emerged since then and they have all seen continuous
development [2, 3]. These methods are generally known as geometrical acoustics (GA)
simulation methods and they are widely used in both academia and the industry. The
diﬀerent GA methods are based on simpliﬁcations of how sound propagates and reﬂects
which allow for fast computations but comes at a cost of lower accuracy.
Wave-based simulation methods present a diﬀerent and theoretically more accurate way of
modelling the acoustical conditions in rooms by solving the governing physics equations
numerically [4].
Wave-based models have existed for many years but they have not
seen much use in the ﬁeld of acoustics because they have been too computationally
heavy [5]. However due to improvements in computational power in recent years along
with implementations on graphics processing units wave-based room acoustic simulations
methods now seem like viable options for practical use [6]. Many diﬀerent wave-based
methods have been proposed such as the ﬁnite element method (FEM), boundary element
method (BEM), ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) and spectral element method (SEM),
all with their individual advantages and disadvantages [7–10]. These new methods show
promising results for many diﬀerent uses within room acoustics such as improved low
frequency simulation in small-medium rooms, auralisation applications and design of
scatterers/diﬀusers.
However most of the publications have primarily looked at verifying the methods which is
to asses the correctness and accuracy of the results of the method against a mathematical
model.
While this is important to determine whether the implementation has been
done correctly it says very little about how well the method simulates realistic scenarios.
Determining how well the method captures the behaviour of realistic scenarios the method
must be validated which is most often done against experimental data. An additional
step which is of almost equal importantance is to quantify the uncertainty in the results
produced by the wave-based simulation method. Quantifying the uncertainty in the output
of the simulation will provide valuable data to the developer of the method as it can
provide an indication of how the assumptions made in the method inﬂuences the output
of the method. It will also provide valuable information to the end user because it will
describe how uncertainty in the data used in the simulation model will aﬀect the output.
This allows the end user to either attempt to obtain more accurate input data or account
for the uncertainty in the output due to uncertain input data.
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
1.2
The scope of the project
The goal of this project is to establish a validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation framework
that is applicable to room acoustics simulation method, both wave-based and geometrical
and then apply it to a state-of-the-art wave-based simulation method. The framework
used in this project is based on the work done by Christopher J. Roy and William L.
Oberkampf which they describe in [11,12]. The general procedure is to identify and quantify
the uncertainties present when performing the experiments against which the simulation
model will be validated against. These uncertainties will then be propagated through the
simulation model to produce a range of possible system response quantities (SRQ). The
simulated SRQs are then compared to the SRQs obtained from the measurements using
a validation metric. This validation metric will then determine whether the simulation
method captures the experimental results, and if not quantify the mismatch between the
simulated and measured SRQs. The end result is a probability box which describe both
the model input uncertainty and the model form uncertainty of the simulation method.
This project will consist of setting up a test environment in which the room impulse
response is measured for multiple source and receiver positions to be used as a validation
case for the simulation model under test. The model inputs and their uncertainty must
then be determined based on this test environment and subsequently propagated through
the simulation model. Once both the simulations and measurements have been performed
relevant SRQs will be calculated and the simulated and measured SRQs will be compared
using a validation metric. The result of this procedure should indicate the validity of the
simulation model and how uncertain the output of the simulation model is.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
THEORY
2.1
Impulse response
One way to approach room acoustics measurements is to assume that the room is a linear
and time-invariant (LTI) system allowing one to use system theory to characterise the
room’s acoustical properties. According to system theory when you apply a signal, x(t), to
a system, h(t), it will respond to the input in the form of an output, y(t). Stated diﬀerently
the output of the system when subjected to an input is the convolution of the input signal
with the system as shown in Eq. 2.1 [13],
y(t) =
Z ∞
−∞
h(τ) · x(t −τ)dτ = h(t) ∗x(t).
(2.1)
System theory further states that the impulse response (IR) of an LTI system contains all
properties of the system [14]. The IR of the system is obtained by exciting the system
with an impulse, which is a vanishingly short signal with a nonzero amplitude, i.e. a
delta or Dirac signal, and then deconvolving the output signal with the input signal.
However it is more common to ﬁrst perform the Fourier transform to both the input signal,
X(f) = F{x(t)}, and the output signal, Y (f) = F{y(t)}, because the deconvolution in
the time domain becomes a division in the frequency domain. This allows Eq. 2.1 to be
rewritten as
H(f) = Y (f)
X(f),
(2.2)
where H(f) is the frequency domain representation of the IR called the transfer function
(TF) of the system. Performing the inverse Fourier transform on the TF gives the IR in
the time domain.
Producing a short enough signal to be considered "vanishingly short" with an amplitude
large enough to excite a room well above the noise ﬂoor is not an easy feat and other signals
are thus more commonly used, such as white and pink noise or linear and exponential
sine sweeps. The exponential sine sweep was chosen for this project as it has certain
advantages over the other mentioned signals when it comes to properly exciting the room
and minimising measurement errors.
Sweeps have the advantage over deterministic noise signals that they need only be played
once to obtain the information necessary whereas the deterministic noise signals need to
be repeated periodically in order to obtain the desired spectral distribution. The reason
for choosing the exponential sweep over a linear sweep is due to the spectral distribution of
the signal. Linear sweeps have a constant power spectral density whereas an exponential
sweep has a power spectral density that is inversely proportional to the frequency. This
means that the exponential sweep will have more energy in the lower frequencies with
a −3 dB/oct towards the higher frequencies. This resembles typical background noise
encountered when performing room acoustics measurements and as such should result in a
better SNR compared with using linear sweeps [13].
3
==PAGE:12==
2. Theory
Inﬂuence of the loudspeaker
When attempting to compare the IR of a room obtained using diﬀerent sources, in this
case either a dodecahedron loudspeaker or a simulated source, it is important to correct
for any inﬂuence the source might have on the IR. This can again be done using system
theory where the loudspeaker can be seen as an independent system that alters the original
signal before it is sent into the room. This can be corrected for by deconvolving the IR of
the room with the IR of the loudspeaker, however it is more often done in the frequency
domain using the same principle as described in Sec. 2.1 leading to Eq. 2.3,
G(f) =
G′(f)
GLS(f),
(2.3)
where G(f), G′(f) and GLS(f) are the TFs for the room, the total system and the
loudspeaker, respectively.
Figure 2.1: Flowchart of the validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation procedure used in
this project.
Source: [11]
2.2
Validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation
The general process for validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation of a simulation model
that is used in this project is visualised in Fig. 2.1 where the starting point is a validation
experiment which provides both information for the model inputs as well as experimental
data necessary for comparison with the simulation model data. Once system response
quantities (SRQ) for both the experiment and the simulation model have been calculated
they are compared using a validation metric which serves the purpose of quantifying the
mismatch between the measured and simulated SRQs. Types of uncertainty, sources of
4
==PAGE:13==
2. Theory
uncertainty in the simulation model as well as the validation metric will be discussed in
the following subsections.
Aleatory uncertainty
Aleatory uncertainty is deﬁned by the inherent randomness of the uncertainty, i.e. from
a stochastic process. It can in theory be reduced through better control of the processes
that give rise to the randomness, such as an improved manufacturing process or better
measurement equipment. It is rarely possible to completely eliminate aleatory uncertainty
though. Aleatory uncertainty is generally described by a probability density function
(PDF) based on suﬃcient data that allow for the determination of both the form of the
PDF and the parameters describing the distribution. It can also be useful to instead
characterise the aleatory uncertainty as a cumulative distribution function (CDF) which is
the integral of the PDF from minus inﬁnity to the value of interest.
Epistemic uncertainty
Epistemic uncertainty is deﬁned as uncertainty due to the lack of knowledge or information
about the system itself or the simulation of the system. It is also sometimes referred
to as reducible uncertainty as the modeller is in theory able to reduce or eliminate the
uncertainty by obtaining the necessary knowledge or information. This is contrary to
aleatory uncertainty which cannot be fully eliminated due to its inherent random nature.
Epistemic uncertainty can be further divided up into recognised and blind uncertainty.
Recognised uncertainty is uncertainties where the modeller is either incapable or unwilling
to obtain further knowledge or information to reduce the uncertainty. This could be a case
where the equipment used to obtain experimental data used to describe an uncertainty is
limiting the resolution needed to reduce the uncertainty. It could also be that the modeller
is ﬁnancially or time limited and therefore has to decide what uncertainties are most
important to model with the least uncertainty. Blind uncertainty is when the modeller
is unaware of uncertainties in the system or the simulation of the system. Examples
of blind uncertainty include programming mistakes or incorrect understanding of the
underlying physics of the model. Knowledge is again key to reducing blind uncertainty but
obtaining this knowledge is quite diﬀerent from how it is done for recognised uncertainty
as one has to identify areas where ones knowledge is incomplete without knowing that it is
incomplete. Methods for discovering blind uncertainties include veriﬁcation of the system
model or submodels, use of expert opinions or use of diﬀerent data collection facilities.
Epistemic uncertainty is generally described as an interval in which there is no knowledge
regarding the likelihood of certain values occuring more often than others. The bounds
of the interval can be determined in diﬀerent ways, i.e. expert opinion or manufacturing
tolerances. Sampling such an interval can be done by representing the interval as a uniform
distribution with the interval bounds denoting the bounds of the uniform distribution.
Diﬀerent sampling schemes, such as random sampling, latin hypercube sampling and
importance sampling, can then be employed generally depending on the amount of samples
needed [15].
5
==PAGE:14==
2. Theory
Probability box
When propagating both aleatory and epistemic uncertainties through the simulation model
the resulting SRQs will consist of multiple CDFs conﬁned within the interval speciﬁed by the
epistemic uncertainties. If the middle CDFs are discarded so only the two outermost CDFs
remain they will make up the boundaries of a probability box (p-box). The magnitude of
the epistemic uncertainty is then given by the width of the p-box and the magnitude of
the aleatory uncertainty is given by the slope of the CDF. Often when dealing with small
quantities of data it can be advantageous to use emperical distribution functions (EDF)
instead of a CDF as the EDF is an exact representation of the data set while the CDF is
based on statistical properties of the data set. The EDF is a mapping of the output values
of the simulation model or the experiment to a probability scale ranging from 0 to 1. It is
a step function with a constant positive step size of 1/n, where n is the number of data
points in the data set [16]. Because of the small number of data points for each aleatory
uncertainty inputs, n = 20, EDFs will be used in this project instead of CDFs. Once the
p-box has been determined the area validation metric must be calculated as described in
Sec. 2.2.3, which is then appended to the sides of the p-box. The original p-box describes
the uncertainty related to the model input and the diﬀerence between the original p-box
and the expanded p-box is due to model form uncertainty. These source of uncertainty
will be described in Sec. 2.2.1.
2.2.1
Sources of uncertainty
Model input
Model inputs encompass all the parameters that the modeller can manipulate and enter
into the model, including the geometry of the system, the boundary conditions, initial
conditions, system excitation and other physical parameters. All of these inputs can be
uncertain and one of the most important tasks when performing validation and uncertainty
quantiﬁcation is to both identify all necessary inputs and determine whether they are
deterministic or uncertain inputs.
Model form
The model form uncertainty is the uncertainty that arises from the assumptions,
simpliﬁcations, approximations and abstractions made when developing the simulation
model. All of these factors will aﬀect the output of the simulation model and can lead
to incorrect results even when there is no uncertainty in the model inputs. The causes
for model form uncertainty might be known to the developer but cannot be reduced
or removed due to a lack of knowledge or understanding of the underlying physical or
mathematical principles or simpliﬁcations made due to computational constrains. Model
form uncertainty might also occur without the developers knowledge for instance if physical
or mathematical principles have been implemented incorrectly. If the uncertainty in the
inputs are minimised and well-understood the procedure used in this project can quantify
model form uncertainty and potentially hint to previously unknown model form uncertainty.
6
==PAGE:15==
2. Theory
Numerical approximations
Numerical approximations include aspects such as discretisation errors, rounding errors
and programming mistakes. These factors can also contribute to uncertainty in the output
of the simulation model, but they are beyond the scope of this project and will not be
discussed further.
2.2.2
System response quantities
The system response quantities chosen in this project have been selected because they are
well-established room acoustic descriptors described in ISO 3382-1 that all have established
perceptual limits, so-called just noticeble diﬀerences (JND) [17]. It is assumed that as long
as the mismatch between the simulated SRQs and the measured SRQs are less than one
JND the simulated SRQs are suﬃciently accurate.
Reverberation time
Figure 2.2: The energy decay curve (EDC) shown with the -5 dB and -35 dB points used
for the calculation of the approximated RT along with a linearly ﬁtted curve between the
two points tracing down to the approximated RT, T60.
The reverberation time (RT) of a room is one of the most important objective room
acoustic parameters. It describes the general decay of sound energy in a room and is
largely insensitive to the source and receiver’s positions in the room. Generally the RT is
the time it takes for the sound energy to drop 60 dB, however such a reduction in sound
energy is often diﬃcult to reliably measure due to the noise ﬂoor being too high. The RT
can instead be calculated as the time it takes the sound energy to drop from −5 dB to
either −25 dB, known as T20, or −35 dB, known as T30, and then multiply those time
values with 3 or 2 respectively [18]. The procedure for obtaining the energy decay curve
(EDC) used to calculate the −30 dB drop in sound energy is the one described in [19]
7
==PAGE:16==
2. Theory
where backwards integration of the squared impulse response is used as shown in Eq. 2.4,
E(t) =
Z ∞
0
p2(τ)dτ −
Z t
0
p2(τ)dτ =
Z ∞
t
p2(τ)dτ =
Z t
∞
p2(t)d(−τ).
(2.4)
Figure 2.2 shows the EDC of the IR in Fig. 2.3 along with a linear line cutting through
the −5 dB and −35 dB points to show the diﬀerence between the calculated RT and the
behaviour of the EDC. The ﬂattening of the EDC as time progresses might be due to
inﬂuence from the noise ﬂoor.
Early decay time
The early decay time (EDT) has been suggested by Jordan [20] to better describe the
perception of the reverberation in a room [21]. The EDT is found as the time it takes to
drop from 0 dB to −10 dB and multiply the number by 6. The EDT is inﬂuenced by early
reﬂections to a greater extent than the RT and is therefore more inﬂuenced by the source
and receiver positions as well as the geometry of the room.
Deﬁnition
Figure 2.3: The IR of the room under test obtained by exciting the room using an
exponential sine sweep and measuring the resulting pressure ﬂuctuations.
Figure 2.3 shows an IR where the initial sharp increase in amplitude signiﬁes the direct
sound with the following peaks being reﬂections of the direct sound reﬂecting oﬀof the
room boundaries. The time delay and relative amplitude of these reﬂection compared to
the direct sound impact how the direct sound is perceived and they can either be beneﬁcial
or detrimental to speech intelligibility in the room. One descriptor of speech intelligibility
in a room is called Deﬁnition. It is given as the amount of energy in the ﬁrst 50 ms of an
IR compared to the total energy in the IR in percent as described in Eq. 2.5 [17],
D =
"R 50 ms
0
[h(t)]2dt
R ∞
0 [h(t)]2dt
#
· 100%.
(2.5)
8
==PAGE:17==
2. Theory
The metric was proposed by Meyer and Thiele who showed a good relationship between
syllable intelligibility, a relatively reliable measure for speech intelligibility, and Deﬁnition
as shown in Fig. 2.4
Figure 2.4: The relationship between ’deﬁnition’ and syllable intelligibility.
Source: [14]
Clarity
Clarity is based on the same principle as Deﬁnition, however instead of being a descriptor
of speech intelligibility it describes how suitable a room is for music with diﬀerent values of
Clarity being ideal for diﬀerent music genres. Clarity is the logarithm of the ratio between
the energy of the IR in the ﬁrst 80 ms compared to the energy in the IR after 80 ms as
shown in Eq. 2.6 [17],
C = 10 · log10
"R 80 ms
0
[h(t)]2dt
R ∞
80 ms[h(t)]2dt
#
.
(2.6)
2.2.3
Validation metric
The validation metric is the metric that describes the mismatch between the experimental
data and the simulation results when they are being compared. This metric should ideally
fulﬁll certain characteristics to ensure a succesful assesment of the validity of the simulation
model under test. Some of those charactersistics include that it must be an objective
measure of mismatch between the two data sets being compared. This means that it should
not rely on the individual analysts subjective opinions. Another important characteristic is
that the metric should be both sensitive in diﬀerences in the entire statistical distributions
9
==PAGE:18==
2. Theory
as well as being robust enough that extreme outliers do not skew or muddle the results.
A more practical property of the validation metric would be if the metric retains the
physical unit of the data sets being compared instead of quantifying the mismatch as a
unitless and/or scaled number [22]. The Minkowski L1 norm quantiﬁes the area between
the simulated CDF, F(x), and the CDF of the experimental results, Sn(x), where x is the
SRQ [11],
d(F, Sn) =
Z ∞
−∞
|F(x) −Sn(x)|dx.
(2.7)
The area between the two CDFs indicates the disagreement between the two CDFs in
the unit of the SRQ and it is essentially unbounded, meaning that as the disagreement
increases so does the area. This allows for a more intuitive interpretation of the disagreement
compared to a interval-limited value.
10
==PAGE:19==
3
METHODS
3.1
Facilities and equipment
3.1.1
Flanking transmission room
The room IR measurements used for the validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation were
performed in a ﬂanking transmission room at DTU’s Acoustic Technology department.
The room is shown in Fig. 3.1. It is a 4.38 m by 3.27 m by 3.29 m rectangular room with
ﬂat concrete walls, ﬂoor and ceiling. This room was chosen due to its shape and rigid
boundary conditions. The geometry of the room simpliﬁes the simulation model and the
rigid boundaries should allow installed absorbers to have a larger impact on the overall
room acoustics.
Figure 3.1: Flanking transmission room at the Acoustic Technology department at DTU
as seen from each end. The shown setup is with the 100 mm absorber installed.
3.1.2
Anechoic chamber
The large anechoic chamber located at the Acoustic Technology department at DTU was
used for measuring the IR of the loudspeaker without any inﬂuence from the surroundings.
The chamber is anechoic down to approximately 50 Hz, which is suﬃciently below the
frequency range of interest for this project [23].
11
==PAGE:20==
3. Methods
Figure 3.2: Large anechoic chamber at the Acoustic Technology department at DTU.
3.1.3
Measurement equipment
The measurement chain used to obtain the room IRs of the ﬂanking transmission room
consisted of a laptop with Brüel & Kjær’s Dirac software installed, a power ampliﬁer, an
omni-directional loudspeaker, a pressure-ﬁeld microphone and a conditioning ampliﬁer.
The type of sweep, the sweep length and the number of repeated sweeps are conﬁgured
in Dirac which sends the appropriate signals to the power ampliﬁer. The ampliﬁer then
applies a linear, frequency independent gain to the signal before sending it to an omni-
directional speaker which in turn excites the room. The resulting pressure is captured
by the microphone, converted to a voltage and send back into the laptop where Dirac
handles the postprocessing required to obtain the IR. An overview of the equipment used
to measure the ﬂanking transmission room IR is listed in Table 3.1. The omni-directional
loudspeaker, shown in Fig. 3.2, has been constructed in accordance with the requirements
speciﬁed in ISO 3382-1 [17].
Table 3.1: The coordinates, in meters, for the two sources and the two receivers used
during the IR measurement
Equipment
Manufacturer
Type 4192 Pressure-ﬁeld Microphone [24]
Brüel & Kjær
Type 2690-A Nexus Conditioning Ampliﬁer [25]
Brüel & Kjær
Dirac Room Acoustics Software [26]
Brüel & Kjær
Lab 300 Power Ampliﬁer
Lab.Gruppen
Dodecahedron Omni-directional Loudspeaker
DTU
12
==PAGE:21==
3. Methods
3.1.4
Absorption material
Two diﬀerent porous sound absorbers from Ecophon were used in this project, the Industry
Modus and the Akusto Wall A. The Industry Modus used were 1200 mm by 1200 mm by
100 mm glasswool absorbers with a ﬂow resistivity of 10.9 kPa s m−2 [27]. The Akusto Wall
A used were 2700 mm by 1200 mm by 40 mm glasswool absorbers with a ﬂow resistivity of
47 kPa s m−2 [28].
Figure 3.3: Some of the 40 mm Ecophon
Akusto Wall A absorbers used.
Figure 3.4: Some of the 100 mm Ecophon
Industry Modus absorbers used.
3.2
Impulse response measurements
The IR measurements in the ﬂanking transmission room were performed for two source
positions and two receiver positions. The sources were placed with one source in one of the
corners opposite the wall with the sound absorber installed and the other source placed
more centrally in the room. The two microphone positions were then chosen to have a
suﬃcient distance to the sources to avoid the direct sound to dominate in the IR. The
coordinates for the source and receiver positions can be found in Table 3.2 and a top down
view of the ﬂanking transmission room is shown in Fig. 3.5.
x
y
z
Source 1
3.96
0.42
1.6
Source 2
1.8
2.25
1.45
Receiver 1
1.3
1.4
1.45
Receiver 2
2.78
1
1.6
Table 3.2: The coordinates, in metres, for the two sources and the two receivers used
during the IR measurement under empty room conditions
The IRs were measured using Brüel and Kjær’s Dirac room acoustic software which was
13
==PAGE:22==
3. Methods
y axis
x axis
S1
S2
R2
R1
Figure 3.5: Top down view of the ﬂanking transmission room. The red dots represents the
source positions, the blue circles represents the microphones and the thick bottom line
represents the sound absorbing boundary.
conﬁgured to perform 10 exponential sweeps for each source position while simultaneously
recording the resulting pressure at both receiver positions. The 10 measurements were
then averaged to improve the signal-to-noise ratio and converted from the microphone
inputs to an IR for each microphone position resulting in four source-receiver IRs. To
ensure consistency between the measurements of the diﬀerent sound absorbers the sources
and receivers were left at their positions until both sound absorbers had been measured,
including during the swapping of the sound absorbers.
Figure 3.6: The TF of the room under test, the anechoic TF of the dodecahedron
loudspeaker and the transfer function of the room under test normalised by the anechoic
TF of the dodecahedron loudspeaker. All three TFs have been normalised to 0 dB at 191
Hz
As described in Sec. 2.1 the loudspeaker can inﬂuence the measured IR of the room and
14
==PAGE:23==
3. Methods
this must be corrected for to allow for accurate comparisons between the measurements
and simulations. Thus, the loudspeaker was measured in the anechoic chamber described
in Sec. 3.1 to eliminate any inﬂuence the room might have on loudspeaker IR mesurements.
Multiple measurements were performed at diﬀerent angles to check the directivity, and
it was found that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the measurements in the
frequency range of interest for this project. Figure 3.6 shows the eﬀect of the loudspeaker
on the total system IR and what eﬀect applying Eq. 2.3 has.
3.3
Simulations
3.3.1
Discontinuous Galerkin ﬁnite element method
The wave-based numerical method tested in this project was the discontinuous Galerkin
ﬁnite element method (DG-FEM). This method works by dividing the room geometry into
small elements, collectively referred to as the mesh, and then solve the governing physical
equations in each of those small elements [29, 30]. Interaction between the elements is
handled by the numerical ﬂux from one element to the other. The DG-FEM has several
desirable properties for use in room acoustics simulations. The method is capable of
dealing with complex geometry such as curvilinear surfaces through the use of local
variable polynomial order and element sizes, which is crucial if the method is intended
to be relevant for realistic scenarios. Another important property is that the method
is well-suited for parallel computing which can be leveraged to speed up the simulation
time [31]. Such speed-up can be leveraged to for instance increase the frequency range
being simulated or to achieve real-time simulation for auralisation purposes.
Generating the mesh
Creating the meshes used for the diﬀerent room conditions was done using Gmsh. Gmsh
is an open source 3D FEM mesh generator that can generate sophisticated meshes for
complex geometries [32]. A mesh for one of the room conditions is shown in Fig. 3.7 where
the individual elements are tetrahedrons.
Given how large an impact the mesh resolution has on the simulation time a trade-oﬀ
must be made between the mesh resolution and in turn the accuracy of the results and
the simulation time. The resolution of the mesh used in this project was determined by
veriﬁcation studies performed by the developers of the simulation model, which had showed
that increases in the mesh resolution did not improve the results of the simulation to
any appreciable eﬀect. The mesh resultion used should provide suﬃcient accuracy to not
impact the validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation performed in this project.
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Methods
Figure 3.7: Mesh of the ﬂanking transmission room using Gmsh.
3.3.2
Deterministic model inputs
The deterministic inputs are assumed to be known to a high enough precision such that
any uncertainty in the input is small enough to not inﬂuence the output of the model. As
such the deterministic inputs are given by single value for all the simulations unlike the
aleatory and epistemic uncertainties which are given by a probability density function and
an interval respectively.
Two of the input for the model used in this project are the speed of sound, c, and the
density of air, ρ. Both of these values depend on the temperature in the room as shown
in Fig. 3.8. The temperature was measured at multiple points in the room between
each measurement and found to range from 19 ◦C to 21 ◦C. In this temperature range
c = 343 m s−1 ± 0.33% and ρ = 1.2 kg m−3 ± 0.67%. Given that the density of air and
speed of sound has a larger eﬀect at higher frequencies and since the uncertainty in the
temperature was so small it was determined that c and ρ could be considered deterministic.
16
==PAGE:25==
3. Methods
Figure 3.8: Speed of sound, c, and density of air, ρ, in relation to temperature.
The microphone position was deemed to be deterministic based on 25 IR measurements
spread over ﬁve microphone positions. The measurements were performed in the ﬂanking
transmission room with the Akusto Wall A installed and the omni-directional loudspeaker
positioned in the Source 2 position. The ﬁve micrphone positions were arranged in a ’+’
shape with each of the outer points being 10 mm away from the center position along one
axis. It is assumed for this project that the microphone positions for the measurements
used for the validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation is know to within 10 mm of the
intended position. The IR would be measured for one microphone positions, the microphone
would then be moved to the next position until all ﬁve positions had been measured. The
microphone would then be moved back to the original position and the procedure was
repeated another four times for a total of 25 measurements. The microphone positions
were located on the x-z plane meaning that two of the outer positions would alter the
microphone’s distance to the absorber while the other two outer position were placed
parallel to the absorber. Once the measurements had been performed the SRQs were
calculated for each of the measurements, the results for each of the ﬁve positions were
averaged and the diﬀerences between the SRQs for the center position and the four outer
positions was calculated. The diﬀerences can be found in Table 3.3 along with the JND
values as given in [17]1, which clearly shows that the uncertainty in the microphone position
is insigniﬁcant since there will be no audible diﬀerence.
1The JND values given in [17] are for the 500 Hz to 1000 Hz frequency band but they will be used here
due to lack of JND values for the SRQs in other frequency bands
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Methods
Table 3.3: Largest diﬀerences in the SRQs between microphone positions 10 mm away from
the center position compared to the JND for the SRQs.
Frequency band
Largest diﬀerence
JND
Reverberation time
125 Hz oct. band
0.025 s
0.0513 s
250 Hz oct. band
0.0216 s
0.0638 s
500 Hz oct. band
0.0374 s
0.0729 s
Deﬁnition
100 Hz-500 Hz
0.5084%
5%
Clarity
100 Hz-500 Hz
0.1098 dB
1 dB
The deterministic nature of the source position was based on the investigation of sensitivity
of the microphone positions and the reciprocity principle. The reciprocity principle states
that a source and a receiver position can swap positions and the resulting pressure at
the receiver position will remain the same [33]. While the application of the reciprocity
principle in this project was an approximation it was assumed that any uncertainty in the
source position was suﬃciently small allowing the source position to be a deterministic
model input.
The room dimensions were measured using a laser distance measure which has an accuracy
of 1.5 mm. Each axis was measured at ten diﬀerent positions and the diﬀerence between
the points was found to less than 0.5%. This was deemed to be suﬃciently small to classify
the room dimensions as deterministic.
3.3.3
Uncertain model inputs
Absorption coeﬃcent for the rigid boundaries
The absorption coeﬃcient, αrigid, of the concrete walls was initially intended to be a
deterministic model input estimated based on IR measurements in the ﬂanking transmission
room while no absorber was installed. Multiple IR measurements were performed from
which an average reverberation time was calculated for each of the 125 Hz, 250 Hz and
500 Hz octave bands. By using Sabine’s equation, shown in Eq. 3.1, absorption coeﬃcients
were calculated for the three octave bands.
α = 0.161 V
S · T ,
(3.1)
where α is the random incidence absorption coeﬃcient, V is the volume of the room, S is
the total surface area of all the boundaries of the room and T is the reverberation time in
the room. The surface impedance for the concrete walls was then calculated for each of
the relevant octave bands using the two following relations,
α = 1 −|R|2
(3.2)
Z = R −cρ
R + cρ.
(3.3)
The empty ﬂanking transmission room was then simulated using the calculated surface
impedance for the concrete walls, Zrigid, but the results showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between measurements and the simulation. These diﬀerences prompted an investigation of
the simulation results for the fully rigid case where all surfaces would have the same surface
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Methods
impedance for all frequencies. The expected results would be a similar reverberation
time for all the octave bands however the simulated results showed a decrease in the
reverberation time from the lowest octave band to the highest. It was hypothesised that
this was caused by numerical dissipation inherent in the ﬂux scheme used in the DG-FEM
implementation. This should not aﬀect the results under "normal circumstances" when
there is more absorption in the room as the eﬀect of the numerical dissipation is generally
small. However because all surfaces had very little absorption the numerical dissipation
might start to inﬂuence the results. Additional simulations were performed with both a
ﬁner mesh resolution as well as a smaller time step, but neither of those solutions seemed to
alleviate the problem. Based on those results it was decided that αrigid was best modelled
as an epistemic uncertainty and thus had to be represented as an interval. Since it was not
possible to obtain useful absorption coeﬃcients from the measurements it was decided to
instead obtain the values from the literature. The random incidence absorption coeﬃcient,
αrigid, was set to 0.02 for the 125 Hz oct. band, 0.02 for the 250 Hz oct. band and 0.03 for
the 500 Hz oct. band based on values found in [5,34,35]. Because these values might not
be fully representative of the rigid surfaces present in the ﬂanking transmission room the
interval limits were set to ±25% of the three αrigid values. This method of obtaining the
absorption coeﬃcient for the rigid surfaces adds additional uncertainty and caution will be
taken when analysing the results.
Another signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation lies in the extremely coarse frequency resolution and
lack of angle dependence. By modelling the surface impedance of the concrete walls using
only three random incidence values important information regarding frequency and angle
dependence was neglected which is expected to impact the results. This severe simpliﬁcation
was a result of a lack of either a mathematical model for calculating the frequency and
angle dependent surface impedance of the concrete walls or a reliable measurement method.
Flow resistivity
Due to the random distribution of ﬁbres in glasswool the uncertainty of the ﬂow resistivity
of the sound absorbers was assumed to be aleatory uncertainty. Ecophon was unable to
provide suﬃcient data for an estimation of the standard deviation of the ﬂow resistivity of
the two sound absorbers and the author was unable to perform the necessary measurements.
It was instead decided that the mean of the ﬂow resistivity, µ, was assumed to be equal
to the ﬂow resistivity stated by Ecophon and the standard deviation, σ, was based on
data from [36]. Based on that information the ﬂow resistivity was sampled from a normal
distribution which has a PDF given as
fx(x) =
1
σ
√
2π exp−(x−µ)2
2σ2
.
(3.4)
Absorber thickness
The thickness of the absorber was determined to be an epistemic uncertainty based on
the production tolerances set by the manufacturer, Ecophon. The company stated in an
email that their production tolerances for the absorbers used in this project are ±3 mm
and it is assumed that absorbers deviating from these tolerances will not be approved for
commercial use. The production tolerance were therefore suitable for marking the bounds
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Methods
of the interval of the epistemic uncertainty of the thickness of the absorbers. Only two
absorber thickness values were used for the validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation due
to the computation time, and in order to capture all the potiential uncertainty the two
interval limits were chosen as the two values to be used.
3.3.4
Source too close to the boundary
It was brought to the author’s attention at a late stage in the project that due to the way
the source was implemented in the DG-FEM undeﬁned behaviour might occur for source 1.
The simulated source has a certain "width" which dictates the frequency range simulated.
This width is ﬁxed irregardless of its proximity to a boundary, which means that if the
source is placed close to a boundary part of the source will exist outside of the boundary
and will not contribute in the domain of interest. Figure 3.9 shows this behaviour where
part of the source is missing at the bottom of the spike. The desired behaviour is shown in
Fig. 3.10 where the entirety of the source is contained within the domain of interest. The
eﬀect that this incomplete source has on the impulse response is unknown and as such
caution must be taken when examining the results for source 1. Being informed at such a
late stage in the project the author was unfortunately unable to redo the measurements
with a diﬀerent source position.
Figure 3.9: Undeﬁned behaviour for part
of source 1 with the source width used in
this project indicated.
Figure 3.10: Ideal behaviour for source
1 with narrower source width than what
was used in this project.
20
==PAGE:29==
4
RESULTS
4.1
Validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation
The results shown in the following sections are based on simulations where the ﬂow
resistivity, absorber thickness and absorption coeﬃcient of the rigid surfaces are treated as
uncertain inputs. The ﬂow resistivity was modelled using 20 samples derived from a normal
distribution with the mean, µ, set to 47.000 kPa m−2 for the 40 mm Akusto Wall A absorber
and 10.900 kPa m−2 for the 100 mm Industry Modus absorber. The standard deviation, σ,
was set to 12.5% for both of the absorbers. The thickness of the absorbers were both set to
±3 mm based on the manufacturing tolerances given by Ecophon. Simulations were thus
performed for 37 mm and 43 mm for the Akusto Wall A absorber and 97 mm and 103 mm
for the Industry Modus absorber. The absorption coeﬃcient for the rigid walls, αrigid, was
set to 0.02, 0.02 and 0.03 respectively for the three octave bands of interest. Simulations
were also run with ±25% of αrigid.
Both the simulated and measured IRs were ﬁltered using the built-in MATLAB ﬁlter,
bandpass, with the lower and upper cutoﬀfrequencies set to 100 Hz and 630 Hz respectively.
This was to ensure an even comparison between the simulated IRs and the measured IRs
since the frequency range of simulations was limited by the source width.
4.1.1
Validation metric
The area validation metric was calculated between the outermost EDF closest to the
measured value and the measured value where only the area between the outermost EDF
and the part of the measured value not inside of the p-box was considered. Table 4.1 shows
the area validation metrics for the the reverberation time, the early decay time, Deﬁnition
and Clarity for their respective frequency bands of interest.
Table 4.1: Area validation metrics for the four SRQs in the relevant frequency bands at
the four source-receiver positions and for both absorbers.
40 mm Akusto Wall A
100 mm Industry Modus
S1M1
S1M2
S2M1
S2M2
S1M1
S1M2
S2M1
S2M2
RT [s]
125 Hz oct.
0.01
0.03
0
0
0
0
0
0
250 Hz oct.
0
0
0.04
0
0.64
0
0.42
0
500 Hz oct.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
EDT[s]
125 Hz oct.
0.24
0.01
0.07
0.1
0
0.26
0.1
0.06
250 Hz oct.
0
0.03
0.01
0.03
0
0.05
0
0.11
500 Hz oct.
0
0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
D [%]
100 Hz-630 Hz
0
12.3
0.47
10.3
0
13.11
6.67
9.01
C [dB]
100 Hz-630 Hz
0
1.1
0
0
0
1.92
0.2
0.25
21
==PAGE:30==
4. Results
4.1.2
Reverberation time
This section presents the p-boxes for the reverberation time in the three octave bands,
125 Hz, 250 Hz and 500 Hz for the eight source, receiver and absorber combinations. These
p-boxes are derived from the two outermost EDFs for each of the source, receiver and
absorber combinations where the full black line indicate the model input uncertainty and
the red dashed lines indicate the model form uncertainty. The full collection of EDFs can
be found in appendix A and appendix B for source 1 and source 2 respectively.
125 Hz octave band
Figure 4.1: P-box of the reverberation time in the 125 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
22
==PAGE:31==
4. Results
Figure 4.2: P-box of the reverberation time in the 125 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
250 Hz octave band
Figure 4.3: P-box of the reverberation time in the 250 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
23
==PAGE:32==
4. Results
Figure 4.4: P-box of the reverberation time in the 250 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
500 Hz octave band
Figure 4.5: P-box of the reverberation time in the 500 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
24
==PAGE:33==
4. Results
Figure 4.6: P-box of the reverberation time in the 500 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
25
==PAGE:34==
4. Results
4.1.3
Early decay time
This section presents the p-boxes for the early time in the three octave bands, 125 Hz,
250 Hz and 500 Hz for the eight source, receiver and absorber combinations. These p-boxes
are derived from the two outermost EDFs for each of the source, receiver and absorber
combinations where the full black line indicate the model input uncertainty and the red
dashed lines indicate the model form uncertainty. The full collection of EDFs can be found
in appendix A and appendix B for source 1 and source 2 respectively.
125 Hz octave band
Figure 4.7: P-box of the early decay time in the 125 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
26
==PAGE:35==
4. Results
Figure 4.8: P-box of the early decay time in the 125 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
250 Hz octave band
Figure 4.9: P-box of the early decay time in the 250 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
27
==PAGE:36==
4. Results
Figure 4.10: P-box of the early decay time in the 250 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
500 Hz octave band
Figure 4.11: P-box of the early decay time in the 500 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
28
==PAGE:37==
4. Results
Figure 4.12: P-box of the early decay time in the 500 Hz oct. band for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
29
==PAGE:38==
4. Results
4.1.4
Deﬁnition and Clarity
This section presents the p-boxes for Deﬁnition and Clarity in the frequency range from
100 Hz to 630 Hz for the eight source, receiver and absorber combinations. These p-boxes
are derived from the two outermost EDFs for each of the source, receiver and absorber
combinations where the full black line indicate the model input uncertainty and the red
dashed lines indicate the model form uncertainty. The full collection of EDFs can be found
in appendix A and appendix B for source 1 and source 2 respectively.
Deﬁnition
Figure 4.13: P-box of Deﬁnition in the frequency range of 100 Hz to 630 Hz for both
absorbers at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model
input uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Results
Figure 4.14: P-box of Deﬁnition in the frequency range of 100 Hz to 630 Hz for both
absorbers at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model
input uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
Clarity
Figure 4.15: P-box of Clarity in the frequency range of 100 Hz to 630 Hz for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 1. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Results
Figure 4.16: P-box of Clarity in the frequency range of 100 Hz to 630 Hz for both absorbers
at both receiver positions using source 2. The full black lines indicates the model input
uncertainty and the dashed red lines indicated the appended model form.
4.2
Transfer functions
This section presents two simulated transfer functions that have been selected among the
IRs used for the validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation. They are compared against the
measured TF to show the mismatch present in the frequency domain.
32
==PAGE:41==
4. Results
Figure 4.17: Measured and simulated transfer functions for the 40 mm absorber at the
receiver 1 position using source 2. The simulated transfer function has been randomly
selected among the impulse responses used for validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
Both TFs have been normalised to 0 at the ﬁrst peak.
Figure 4.18: Measured and simulated transfer functions for the 100 mm absorber at the
receiver 2 position using source 2. The simulated transfer function has been randomly
selected among the impulse responses used for validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
Both TFs have been normalised to 0 at the ﬁrst peak.
33
==PAGE:42==
5
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
5.1
Time domain system response quantities
5.1.1
Probability boxes
The p-boxes for the reverberation time presented in Sec. 4.1.2 show practically no model
form uncertainty, except for the 100 mm S2M1 case in the 250 Hz oct. band. The model
input uncertainty is however signiﬁcant in most cases where the interval in which the
reverberation time is expected to lie in far exceeds the JND of the reverberation time for
the measured results. This means that even though the model is capable of capturing the
measured results the uncertainty in the model inputs leads to an uncertainty in estimated
reverberation time of up to approximately a second which is audible and far exceeds the
JND of the reverberation time.
The early decay time p-boxes presented in Sec. 4.1.3 show model form uncertainty for
about half of the cases although they are generally small in comparison to the model input
uncertainty. Again the model input uncertainty is dominating and leads to an estimation
range of up to a second. Like for the reverberation time this is diﬀerence is audible as it
corresponds to multiple JNDs of early decay time.
The Deﬁnition p-boxes presented in Sec. 4.1.4 show both a large model input uncertainty
leading to about a 10% estimation span. The model form uncertainty depends on the
receiver location as the receiver 1 position mostly show little model form uncertainty whereas
for the receiver 2 position the appended model form uncertainty is up to approximately
±10%. This leads to an estimation range of up to 40% essentially showing that the model
is completely incapable of estimating the Deﬁnition at the receiver 2 position.
The p-boxes for Clarity presented in Sec.
4.1.4 there is generally little model form
uncertainty, except for the source 1 receiver 2 source-receiver combination. The results
for the source 1 position should be analysed with caution due to the undeﬁned source
behaviour explained in Sec. 3.3.4. It is again the model input uncertainty that dominates
leading to an estimation range of about 2 dB in most cases which is equivalent to 2 JNDs
for Clarity.
The p-boxes of all the SRQs show little to no model form uncertainty for the reverberation
time and Clarity whereas the model form uncertainty for the early decay time and
Deﬁnition is ranging from small up to signiﬁcant in most of the source, receiver and
arbsorber combinations. This diﬀerence in model form uncertainty points to an inability
of the model to accurately capture the early parts of the impulse response. It is suspected
that one of the reasons for the model form uncertainty in the early decay time and Clarity
is due to the lack of frequency and angle dependent absorption for the rigid surfaces. The
early reﬂections are very sensitive to changes in the surface impedance and thus a better
characterisation of the surface impedance for the rigid surfaces should yield more accurate
results.
34
==PAGE:43==
5. Analysis and discussion
5.2
Frequency domain system response quantities
The validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation procedure has only looked at the behaviour of
the sound ﬁeld in the time domain, but the ﬁgures in Sec. 4.2 clearly show that mismatches
are present in the frequency domain as well. Disregarding the information present in
the frequency domain could mean that a model is validated despite being incapable of
accurately simulate the sound ﬁeld in the room. Many methods currently exist that
compare two transfer functions with each other to produce a single number that indicates
the match or mismatch between the two, but they all rely on a comparison between two
transfer functions [37,38]. Whereas the time domain SRQs are all derived from the impulse
response the transfer function comparison methods would require a reference transfer
function to compare against. At ﬁrst it might appear that the measured transfer function
could act as the reference transfer function since it would give a value of 1 when compared
against itself. The simulated transfer function should then ideally be as close to 1 as
possible when compared against the reference transfer function. However this is a ﬂawed
approach because it will only work in the case where there is a single measured transfer
function and is not necessarily always the case. Multiple measurements might be performed
to capture the inﬂuence of temperature ﬂuctuations in the room, repositioning of the source
or the receiver or some other factor that can inﬂuence the measured results. Another
important reason that the methods described in [37,38] cannot currently be properly used
for the validation of a room acoustic simulation method is because it is unknown whether
those comparison methods describe any relevant audible diﬀerences. They might show a
large mismatch between two transfer functions but if that diﬀerence is inaudible to the
human ear comparison methods likely serve little purpose. The time domain SRQs used in
this project are known to describe certain acoustical phenomena and much research has
gone into establishing limits to when the diﬀerence in those SRQs become audible. This
can then be used to determine how closely the simulated method must match with the
measured results in order to obtain suﬃciently accurate results.
5.3
Flanking transmission room as test environment
The ﬂanking transmission room used as the test environment has proven to be a more
diﬃcult case than initially anticipated. Marbjerg et al. [39] discusses the diﬃculties of
simulating a similar room using a geometrical acoustics simulation method and describes
the need for a more precise model which in turn requires more precise input data compared
to the generalised scatterings and absorption coeﬃcients. The wave-based method employed
in this project should theoretically be adequate to simulate cases such as the ﬂanking
transmission room as it does not rely on simpliﬁed boundary conditions such as the
scattering coeﬃcient to determine the sound ﬁeld in the room. The precision needed for
the model inputs was assumed to be suﬃcient for the porous absorbers using Miki’s model,
but the surface impedance of the rigid walls proved diﬃcult to accurately estimate. The
non-diﬀuse sound ﬁeld in the ﬂanking transmission room invalidates the core assumption
of Sabine’s equation, Eq. 3.1, that require a diﬀuse sound ﬁeld. This is normally not a
problem because most rooms usually contain furniture and other geometries that cause
scattering and help diﬀuse the sound ﬁeld. Being unable to accurately estimate the surface
impedance of the rigid walls was then ampliﬁed by the fact that ﬁve out of six surfaces
35
==PAGE:44==
5. Analysis and discussion
in the ﬂanking transmission room were rigid surfaces which means that despite the low
absorption of the rigid surfaces they still dominate the total absorption area and in turn
the behaviour of the sound ﬁeld. Furthermore, the lack of a frequency and angle dependent
surface impedance for the rigid walls as is used for the porous absorber adds additional
uncertainty to the output of the simulation model.
36
==PAGE:45==
6
CONCLUSION
The main goal of this project was to establish a validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation
framework that could be applied to any room acoustic simulation model. A suitable general
validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation framework was outlined in [12]. In order to test
whether the framework was usable in the realm of acoustics it was applied to a newly
developed wave-based model based on the DG-FEM that had only been veriﬁed but not
yet validatied.
The ﬁrst step of the test was to obtain room impulse responses of a test environment which
was chosen to be a small, rectangular room with rigid boundary conditions on all surfaces.
This room was presumed to be ideal as a controlled test environment but the non-diﬀuse
sound ﬁeld due to the small volume, simple geometry and rigid surfaces proved to be a
hindrance when attempting to determine the surface impedance of the rigid surfaces. The
room impulse response measurements were performed succesfully and most of the model
inputs were determined while performing the measurements. The remaining model inputs
were determined based on manufacturer speciﬁcations and data found in the literature.
All of the model inputs were propagated through the model and simulated room impulse
responses were obtained. The system response quantities were then calculated for both the
measured and simulated room impulse responses and compared using the area validation
metric. The results showed that the simulation model was capable of accurately capturing
the reverberation time and Clarity of the room but it struggled more when attempting to
capture the early decay time and Deﬁnition.
It was not possible to estimate the surface impedance of the rigid surfaces suﬃciently which
resulted in a very wide estimation range for the diﬀerent system response quantities. This
makes it diﬃcult to properly gauge the performance of the DG-FEM model because the
uncertainty in the model inputs currently dominate most of the results. In conclusion the
framework has managed to validate the DG-FEM simulation model within the uncertainty
bounds shown in Sec.
4, but the author encourages a second study in which a test
environment is used where the model inputs can be better controlled and ideally estimated
with both angle and frequency dependence. This should allow for a more accurate validation
of the DG-FEM implementation and better highlight potential model form uncertainties
that can either be improved upon or at least accounted for in future use of the simulation
model.
37
==PAGE:46==
7
FUTURE WORK
7.1
Retesting with a less uncertain test environment
The ﬂanking transmission room proved to be a diﬃcult test environment despite exhibiting
what appeared to be desirable traits, i.e. a simple geometry and rigid surfaces. This
resulted in an unexpected uncertainty in the characterisation of the surface impedance
of the rigid surfaces that turned out to be a dominating factor in the uncertainty of the
output from the simulation model. A new validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation study
is suggested where a much greater control of the uncertainties in the surface impedance
is obtained. One such scenario would be where all surfaces in the room are covered
in the same porous absorber. This allows for a frequency and angle dependent surface
impedance to be estimated which should reduce the model input uncertainty. The ﬂow
resistivity and thickness of this porous absorber would be measured beforehand to allow for
a more controlled characterisation of those properties. This should eliminate the greatest
uncertainties experienced in this project and it should allow for a better validation of the
simulation model tested in this project.
7.2
Modelling arbitrary surfaces
A general problem in the ﬁeld of room acoustic simulations is a lack of information or
models that describe the surface impedance of most materials present in most indoor
facilities. Porous absorbers have been thoroughly studied and both models based on
emperical data, such as Delany-Bazley’s model [40], Miki’s model [41] and Komatsu’s
model [42] and models based on the physical properties of porous absorbers, such as the
work done by Jean F. Allard and Noureddine Atalla [43], are commonly used used to
determine the surface impedance of porous absorbers. These models allow for estimation of
both frequency and angle dependent surface impedance which is important in the context
of wave-based room acoustic simulation methods. Models exist for helmholtz resonantor
and membrane absorbers as well but they only produce either normal incidence or random
incidence absorption coeﬃcient [?, 44]. While porous absorbers, membrane absorbers
and helmholtz resonators are the most common absorbers they usually make up a small
portion of the total surface area in most realistic rooms. Development of models capable
of estimating the frequency and angle dependent surface impedance of materials such as
concrete, brick, wood and plaster board would allow for the simulation of a much wider
range of realistic scenarios with a higher accuracy than is currently possible with random
incidence or normal incidence absorption coeﬃcients.
38
==PAGE:47==
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Krokstad, S. Strom, and S. Sorsdal, “Calculating the acoustical room response by
the use of a ray tracing technique,” Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 118–25, 118–125, 1968.
[2]
H. Lee and B.-H. Lee, “An eﬃcient algorithm for the image model technique,”
Applied Acoustics, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 87–115, 1988.
[3]
S. Laine, S. Siltanen, T. Lokki, and L. Savioja, “Accelerated beam tracing algorithm,”
Applied Acoustics, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 172–181, 2009.
[4]
M. Vorländer, “Computer simulations in room acoustics: Concepts and uncertainties,”
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 133, no. 3, pp. 1203–1213, 2013.
[5]
M. Vorländer, Auralization : fundamentals of acoustics, modelling, simulation,
algorithms and acoustic virtual reality. Springer, 2007.
[6]
L. Savioja, “Real-time 3d ﬁnite-diﬀerence time-domain simulation of low- and
mid-frequency room acoustics,” 13th International Conference on Digital Audio
Eﬀects, Dafx 2010 Proceedings, 2010.
[7]
T. Okuzono, T. Otsuru, R. Tomiku, and N. Okamoto, “A ﬁnite-element method
using dispersion reduced spline elements for room acoustics simulation,” Applied
Acoustics, vol. 79, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[8]
J. A. Hargreaves and T. J. Cox, “A transient boundary element method model of
schroeder diﬀuser scattering using well mouth impedance,” Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 124, no. 5, pp. 2942–2951, 2008.
[9]
D. Botteldooren, “Finite-diﬀerence time-domain simulation of low-frequency room
acoustic problems,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 98, no. 6,
pp. 3302–3308, 1995.
[10] F. K. Pind Jörgensson, M. S. Mejling, A. P. Engsig-Karup, C.-H. Jeong, and
J. Strømann-Andersen, “Room acoustic simulations using high-order spectral element
methods,” Euronoise 2018 - Conference Proceeding, 2018.
[11] W. L. Oberkampf and C. J. Roy, Veriﬁcation and validation in scientiﬁc computing.
Cambridge University Press, 1 ed., 2011.
[12] C. J. Roy and W. L. Oberkampf, “A comprehensive framework for veriﬁcation,
validation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation in scientiﬁc computing,” Computer methods
in applied mechanics and engineering, pp. 2132–2144, 2011.
[13] D. Havelock, S. Kuwano, and M. Vorländer, “Handbook of signal processing in
acoustics,” 2009.
39
==PAGE:48==
References
[14] H. Kuttruﬀ, Room Acoustics. Spon Press, 3 ed., 2009.
[15] J. C. Helton, J. D. Johnson, C. J. Sallaberry, and C. B. Storlie, “Survey of
sampling-based methods for uncertainty and sensitivity analysis,” Reliability
Engineering and System Safety, vol. 91, no. 10-11, pp. 1175–1209, 2006.
[16] S. Ferson, V. Kreinovich, L. Ginzburg, D. S. Myers, and K. Sentz, “Constructing
probability boxes and dempster-shafer structures,” 2012.
[17] ISO Central Secretary, “Acoustics - Measurement of room acoustic parameters - Part
1: Performance spaces,” Standard ISO 3382-1:2009, International Organization for
Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2009.
[18] ISO Central Secretary, “Acoustics - Measurement of room acoustic parameters - Part
2: Reverberation time in ordinary rooms,” Standard ISO 3382-2:2008, International
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2008.
[19] ISO Central Secretary, “Acoustics — Measurement of sound absorption in a
reverberation room,” Standard ISO 354:2003, International Organization for
Standardization, Geneva, CH, 2003.
[20] V. L. Jordan, “Acoustical criteria for auditoriums and their relation to model
techniques,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 408–12,
408–412, 1970.
[21] A. C. Gade, “Room acoustic properties of concert halls,” Acoustical Society of
America. Journal, vol. 100, no. 4, Pt. 2, pp. 2802–2802, 1996.
[22] S. Ferson, W. L. Oberkampf, and L. Ginzburg, “Model validation and predictive
capability for the thermal challenge problem,” Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, vol. 197, no. 29-32, pp. 2408–2430, 2008.
[23] F. T. Agerkvist, “Anechoic rooms,” 2013.
[24] “Brüel & Kjær type 4192 pressure-ﬁeld microphone.”
https://www.bksv.com/-/media/literature/Product-Data/bp2213.ashx.
Accessed: 2019-10-24.
[25] “Brüel & Kjær type 2690-a nexus microphone conditioner.”
https://www.bksv.com/-/media/literature/Product-Data/bp1702.ashx.
Accessed: 2019-10-24.
[26] “Brüel & Kjær dirac room acoustics software type.”
https://www.bksv.com/-/media/literature/Product-Data/bp1974.ashx.
Accessed: 2019-10-24.
[27] “Ecophon industry modus.” https:
//www.ecophon.com/dk/produkter/Modullofter/Industry/Industry--Modus/.
Accessed: 2020-01-27.
[28] “Ecophon akusto wall a.” https://www.ecophon.com/uk/products/
Vertical-applications/Akusto/Akusto--Wall-A/. Accessed: 2020-01-27.
40
==PAGE:49==
References
[29] J. S. Hesthaven and T. Warburton, Nodal discontinuous Galerkin methods :
algorithms, analysis, and applications, vol. 54. Springer, 2008.
[30] H. Wang, I. Sihar, R. Pagán Muñoz, and M. Hornikx, “Room acoustics modelling in
the time-domain with the nodal discontinuous galerkin method,” Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 145, no. 4, pp. 2650–2663, 2019.
[31] A. Modave, A. St-Cyr, and T. Warburton, “Gpu performance analysis of a nodal
discontinuous galerkin method for acoustic and elastic models,” Computers and
Geosciences, vol. 91, pp. 64–76, 2016.
[32] C. Geuzaine and J. F. Remacle, “Gmsh: A 3-d ﬁnite element mesh generator with
built-in pre- and post-processing facilities,” International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, vol. 79, no. 11, pp. 1309–1331, 2009.
[33] F. Jacobsen and P. M. Juhl, Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics. John Wiley
& Sons Ltd, 2013.
[34] L. L. Beranek and T. Hidaka, “Sound absorption in concert halls by seats, occupied
and unoccupied, and by the hall’s interior surfaces,” Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, vol. 104, no. 6, pp. 3169–3177, 1998.
[35] H. W. Bobran, Handbuch der Bauphysik :. Ullstein„ 1967.
[36] M. Garai and F. Pompoli, “A european inter-laboratory test of airﬂow resistivity
measurements,” Acta Acustica (stuttgart), vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 471–478, 2003.
[37] R. J. Allemang, “The modal assurance criterion - twenty years of use and abuse,”
Sound and Vibration, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 14–21, 2003.
[38] S. A. Ryder, “Methods for comparing frequency response analysis measurements,”
Conference Record of the the 2002 Ieee International Symposium on Electrical
Insulation (cat. No.02ch37316), pp. 187–90, 187–190, 2002.
[39] G. Marbjerg, J. Brunskog, and C.-H. Jeong, “The diﬃculties of simulating the
acoustics of an empty rectangular room with an absorbing ceiling,” The Journal of
Applied Acoustics, vol. 141, pp. 35–45, 2018.
[40] M. E. Delany and E. N. Bazley, “Acoustical properties of ﬁbrous absorbent materials,”
Applied Acoustics, vol. 3, pp. 105–116, 1970.
[41] Y. Miki, “Acoustical properties of porous materials - generalizations of empirical
models,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Japan, vol. 11, pp. 25–28, 1990.
[42] T. Komatsu, “Improvement of the delany-bazley and miki models for ﬁbrous
sound-absorbing materials,” Acoustical Science and Technology, vol. 29, pp. 121–129,
2008.
[43] J. F. Allard and N. Atalla, Propagation of Sound in Porous Media: Modelling Sound
Absorbing Materials. Wiley, 2 ed., 2009.
[44] P. D’Antonio and T. J. Cox, Acoustic absorbers and diﬀusers: theory, design, and
application. Taylor & Francis, 2009.
41
==PAGE:50==
A
SYSTEM RESPONSE QUANTITIES FOR
SOURCE 1
A.1
Reverberation time
Figure A.1: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 40 mm case at receiver 1 using source 1 compared with the single measured
result.
42
==PAGE:51==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.2: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 40 mm case at receiver 2 using source 1 compared with the single measured
result.
43
==PAGE:52==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.3: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 100 mm case at receiver 1 using source 1 compared with the single measured
result.
44
==PAGE:53==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.4: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 100 mm case at receiver 2 using source 1 compared with the single measured
result.
45
==PAGE:54==
A. System response quantities for source 1
A.2
Early decay time
Figure A.5: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 40 mm case at receiver 1 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
46
==PAGE:55==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.6: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 40 mm case at receiver 2 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
47
==PAGE:56==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.7: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 100 mm case at receiver 1 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
48
==PAGE:57==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.8: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 100 mm case at receiver 2 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
49
==PAGE:58==
A. System response quantities for source 1
A.3
Deﬁnition and clarity
Figure A.9: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 40 mm case at receiver 1 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
50
==PAGE:59==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.10: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 40 mm case at receiver 2 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
51
==PAGE:60==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.11: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 100 mm case at receiver 1 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
52
==PAGE:61==
A. System response quantities for source 1
Figure A.12: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 100 mm case at receiver 2 using source 1 compared with the single measured result.
53
==PAGE:62==
B
SYSTEM RESPONSE QUANTITIES FOR
SOURCE 2
B.1
Reverberation time
Figure B.1: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 40 mm case at receiver 1 using source 2 compared with the single measured
result.
54
==PAGE:63==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.2: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 40 mm case at receiver 2 using source 2 compared with the single measured
result.
55
==PAGE:64==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.3: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 100 mm case at receiver 1 using source 2 compared with the single measured
result.
56
==PAGE:65==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.4: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated reverberation
time for the 100 mm case at receiver 2 using source 2 compared with the single measured
result.
57
==PAGE:66==
B. System response quantities for source 2
B.2
Early decay time
Figure B.5: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 40 mm case at receiver 1 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
58
==PAGE:67==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.6: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 40 mm case at receiver 2 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
59
==PAGE:68==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.7: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 100 mm case at receiver 1 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
60
==PAGE:69==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.8: Emperical cumulative distribution functions of the simulated early decay time
for the 100 mm case at receiver 2 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
61
==PAGE:70==
B. System response quantities for source 2
B.3
Deﬁnition and clarity
Figure B.9: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 40 mm case at receiver 1 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
62
==PAGE:71==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.10: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 40 mm case at receiver 2 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
63
==PAGE:72==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.11: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 100 mm case at receiver 1 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
64
==PAGE:73==
B. System response quantities for source 2
Figure B.12: Emperical cumulative distribution functionses of Deﬁnition and Clarity for
the 100 mm case at receiver 2 using source 2 compared with the single measured result.
65
==PAGE:74==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Acoustic Technology (ACT)
Technical University of Denmark
Akustikvej, Building 352
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 45 25 39 49
