==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Circular Economy in the  
textile industry 
 
Evaluating post-consumer activities of 
textile producers 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Patricia M. Nicholson 
18th of March 2020 
==PAGE:2==
I 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
II 
Title page 
 
 
Title 
Circular Economy in the textile industry:  
Evaluating post-consumer activities of textile producers 
 
Danish Title   
Cirkulær Økonomi i tekstilindustrien: 
 
 
Evaluering af tekstilproducenters aktiviteter med brugte tekstiler  
 
Project  
 
MSc Thesis, 35 ETCS 
Submission 
 
18th of March 2020 
 
 
Author 
 
Patricia M. Nicholson 
Student ID s140567 
 
Design & Innovation  
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
Supervisor 
 
Professor, Tim C. McAloone 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patricia M. Nicholson 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
==PAGE:4==
III 
 
1. Acknowledgement  
 
The author would like to thank the people contributing to the creation of this report. Thank 
you to supervisor Tim C. McAloone for providing guidance on scoping of the research question, 
project management, determining methods, providing feedback and asking the right critical 
questions along the way.   
 
A further thank you to all interview participants for their time, advise and engagement: Kaj Pihl 
(UFF Humana), Nikola Kiørboe, Kerli Kant Hvass (Copenhagen Business School), Frank 
Engelbrecht (Lifestyle & Design Cluster), Jette Lindgaard (Dansk Mode & Tekstil) and Henrik 
Schmidt Hansen (Ege Carpets).  
 
Lastly, a thank you to all others for your support. You know who you are.  
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
 
IV 
 
Abstract 
 
Every second, one garbage truck of textiles is incinerated or landfilled worldwide and the 
responsibility of textile producers in solving issues related to post-consumer textile waste is 
rapidly gaining attention. This study identifies and evaluates current textile producer initiatives 
in collecting and utilizing post-consumer textiles, for their impact on increasing circularity in 
the current system of post-consumer textiles and recommends on what means should be 
implemented to enable textile producers’ transition.  
 
First, the study maps the current textile amounts, streams, qualities and actors in the system 
of post-consumer textiles in Denmark and identifies the challenges of utilizing textiles 
according to principles of Circular Economy, using secondary data. Identified challenges are: a 
clear lack of current repair and recycling activities, a loss of half of textiles in waste streams 
and the threat of an over-saturated global market due to an over-supply of used low-quality 
textiles.  
 
Secondly, the study maps the current landscape of textile producer initiatives, through desk-
top research, which reveals 34 initiatives of three distinct types: (1) Take Back, (2) Resales and 
(3) Recycle.  
 
Thirdly, the study evaluates the initiatives for their (1) utilization of textiles, (2) upstream 
changes and (3) rebound effects through the discussion of qualitative data collected through 
interviews. The evaluation suggests that the Resales initiative introduces activities of repair 
and remanufacturing which captures the quality of premium brands’ products. It is argued that 
the Take Back and Recycle initiatives might divert some textiles from waste streams but that all 
initiatives collect such relatively low amounts that it is the effect on upstream changes that 
holds the true potential. The Resales initiative potentially incentivise upstream changes for 
designing for slowing loops while the Recycle initiative might incentivise upstream changes for 
closing loops and limits the incentive for reuse. The Take Back initiative is evaluated as not 
incentivising upstream changes. The study further argues that the Resales initiative might 
impact consumer awareness of caring for textile products in the long term while Take Back and 
Recycle initiatives might enforce a consumer mindset of textiles as disposable. The use of 
discount vouchers as rewards are for all initiatives evaluated as triggering the negative effect 
of purchasing something new and the initiatives are all questioned for their buffering of 
external demands to change their core activities of linear value creation.  
 
Lastly, the study suggests twelve means to increase circularity and recommends strongly on 
the use of policy means to implement a mandatory EPR system supported by a resource tax on 
new fibres, minimum durability requirements and reduced VAT on repair services. The main 
limitation of the study is the number and profile range of interviewees for primary data 
collection and therefore more research should be performed before drawing conclusions on 
the presented findings.  
 
==PAGE:6==
V 
Contents 
 
1. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
III 
2. 
RC: INTRODUCTION 
1 
 
BACKGROUND 
2 
 
SCOPE 
4 
3. 
THEORY 
7 
 
SUSTAINABILITY & CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
8 
 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
9 
 
TEXTILE UTILIZATION 
11 
 
BUSINESS MODELS & REGULATIONS 
12 
 
CONCEPTUAL CIRCULAR TEXTILE TREATMENT ROUTE 
16 
 
REBOUND EFFECTS 
17 
4. 
METHODOLOGY 
19 
 
DESIGN RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
20 
 
RESEARCH CLARIFICATION 
21 
 
DESCRIPTIVE STUDY I: MAPPING OF CURRENT SYSTEM 
21 
 
PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY I: IDENTIFYING PRODUCER INITIATIVES 
23 
 
DESCRIPTIVE STUDY II: EVALUATION OF PRODUCER INITIATIVES 
25 
 
PRESCRIPTIVE STUDY II: RECOMMENDATIONS 
28 
5. 
DS I: MAPPING OF POST-CONSUMER TEXTILES 
29 
 
MATERIAL FLOW 
30 
 
INITIAL DISPOSAL 
30 
 
SYSTEM CASCADING 
34 
 
FINAL DESTINATION 
38 
 
QUALITIES 
39 
 
ACTORS 
41 
 
CHALLENGES 
42 
 
THE RELEVANCE OF TEXTILE PRODUCERS 
44 
6. 
PS I: PRODUCER INITIATIVES 
45 
 
PREVIOUS STUDIES 
46 
 
MAPPING OF CURRENT PRODUCER INITIATIVES 
47 
 
PRODUCER INITIATIVE TYPES 
47 
7. 
DS II: EVALUATION 
53 
 
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK 
54 
 
INTERVIEW FINDINGS 
54 
 
DISCUSSION 
58 
 
DISCUSSION SUMMARY 
65 
8. 
PS I: RECOMMENDATIONS 
67 
 
THE CASE FOR CHANGE 
68 
 
GOAL 
68 
 
MEANS 
69 
 
PRIORITIZATION 
72 
9. 
CONCLUSIONS 
75 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
 
VI 
10. 
REFLECTIONS 
77 
 
CONTRIBUTIONS AND LIMITATIONS 
77 
 
FUTURE RESEARCH 
78 
11. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
79 
12. 
APPENDIX A – DATA FOR MAPPING CURRENT SYSTEM 
82 
13. 
APPENDIX B – DATA ON CURRENT PRODUCER INITIATIVES 
84 
14. 
APPENDIX C – EXAMPLE INTERVIEW GUIDE 
88 
15. 
APPENDIX D – INTERVIEW EXTRACTS 
90 
 
==PAGE:8==
RC: Introduction 
 
Background 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. RC: Introduction 
 
This section presents background information on 
the challenges of the textile industry and narrows 
in on post-consumer textile waste and textile 
producers’ role in moving towards a Circular 
Economy. The scope of this study is presented 
through 
the 
main 
research 
question 
and 
contributions. 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Background 
 
RC: Introduction 
 
 
2 
 Background 
The textile industry is the fourth most polluting industry in the world after the food-, housing- 
and transport sector (European Environmental Agency, 2019). Crude oil is being extracted 
from infinite resources for the creation of synthetic materials like polyester, while the water 
and pesticide demanding crops such as cotton are being farmed on massive land areas. The 
spinning of yarn and weaving of fabric involves water-, chemical- and energy intensive 
processes and is often outsources to low income countries where occupational health is 
jeopardized in order to minimize costs of production. In 2015, the total amount of greenhouse 
gas emissions from textiles production equalled more than those of all international flights and 
maritime shipping combined (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017).  
 
During the two recent decades, the term fast fashion has emerged. Fast fashion dominantly 
operates on a take-make-dispose model where high volumes of resources are extracted to 
produce clothing to be worn a few times after which they are lost to incineration or landfill 
(Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017). The classic Spring/Summer and Autumn/Winter seasons 
of textile fashion has expanded to an additional three to five mid-seasons which forces 
immense pressure on suppliers and forces retailers to desire low cost and flexibility in design, 
quality, delivery and speed to market (Bhardwaj & Fairhurst, 2010).  
 
Since 1975, the global production of textile fibres has almost tripled while the price of clothing 
has fallen 30% relative to inflation in the EU and today, an average of 26 kg of new textiles is 
consumed per person per year (European Environmental Agency, 2019). Meanwhile, the 
number of garments purchased each year by the average consumer increased 60% (McKinsey, 
2016).  
 
Across nearly every apparel category, consumers keep clothing items about half as long as they 
did 15 years ago and some estimates suggest that consumers treat the lowest-priced garments 
as nearly disposable, discarding them after just seven or eight wears (McKinsey, 2016). This 
results in the average European discarding about 11 kg of textiles per person per year 
(European Environmental Agency, 2019). 
 
Post-consumer textiles are challenging to recycle into new yarn for textile production. The 
fibre length is rapidly shortened which decreases durability and the mixed material 
composition require many processes. Chemicals and virgin materials are therefore added, 
which makes the recycling process expensive. There is no real demand for recycled fibres on 
the market (Ljungkvist, Watson, & Elander, 2018) and currently, less than 1% of material used 
to produce garments is recycled into new garments (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017).  
 
The high production volumes, low price of new, short time of use and lack of recycling options 
result in amounts equal to one garbage truck of textiles being incinerated or landfilled every 
second worldwide while putting pressure on resources, pollutes and degrades ecosystems 
(Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017).  
 
 
==PAGE:10==
RC: Introduction 
 
Background 
3 
The fashion industry has witnessed large changes towards more sustainable practices over the 
past years and introduced the trending topic sustainable fashion, with synonyms such as eco-, 
green-, ethical- or slow fashion. Consumers’ awareness of sustainable fashion is growing and 
leads to an increase in consumers’ support towards brands with environmental concerns, 
forcing fashion brands to re-think their business models and switching to more sustainably 
responsible approaches (Khandual & Pradhan, 2018).  
 
There are five phases in a product’s life cycle to be considered for environmental 
sustainability; material, manufacturing, retail, consumption and disposal (Lee, 2016). The use 
of less environmental harmful materials such as organic cotton and recycled polyester and 
cleaner processes using less chemicals, energy and water in manufacturing are practices that 
many textile brands turn to.  
 
However, trajectories show that if growth continues as expected by particularly the emergence 
of new markets such as Asia and South America, total clothing sales could triple to 175 million 
tons in 2050, by that of 2017 (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017). Even though eco-design and 
eco-efficiency improvements have assisted in more sustainable practices such as reducing 
energy, emissions, resources and waste, increasing efficiency have been insufficient to solve 
the environmental challenges related to a rising resource use and population (Bocken, Short, 
Rana, & Evans, 2014). Furthermore, studies have shown that higher efficiency might lead to an 
increase of use due to the improvements making products and services more affordable and 
accessible, referred to as the rebound effect (Herring & Sorrel, 2009). 
 
Sustainable business models can serve as vehicle to coordinate innovations with system-level 
sustainability (Bocken et al., 2014). Fashion brands have in the last decade endeavoured into 
sustainable business models with the aim of extending the use phase of garments through 
collaborative consumption. These include concepts such as clothing libraries, leasing, renting 
and subscription-based clothing (Watson et al., 2014) through which the ownership of textile 
products partly stays with the retailer or brand. However, the collaborative consumption 
models remain a small-scale phenomenon due to conventional fashion consumption patterns 
(Pedersen & Netter, 2015).  
 
Traditionally, fashion brands’ focus has been on creating and capturing value from the sales of 
new products and not on the end-of-life and disposal of their products (Hvass, 2019). Today, 
the most dominant actors in post-consumer textile collection are charity organisations and 
private textile collectors (Watson, Trzepacz, & Pedersen, 2018a). Brands are designers, 
sourcers and marketers of textile garments that eventually become waste and therefore they 
have a role in resolving the problem of post-consumer textile waste (Hvass, 2014).  
 
Whether textile producers should be kept legally responsible for handling the growing 
amounts of post-consumer textiles is being debated. Currently, France is the only country with 
implemented policy regulations of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) on textiles. 
However, both Sweden and the Netherlands are discussing the potential implementation of 
the model as well (Watson, Aare, Trzepacz, & Petersen, 2018b).  
 
==PAGE:11==
Scope 
 
RC: Introduction 
 
 
4 
Some textile brands are already voluntarily engaging in post-consumer textiles through a 
diverse and rapidly developing landscape of business models of collecting and handling the 
post-consumer textiles (Watson et al., 2014). Although these initiatives generally are stated by 
brands to impact the move of the textile industry to a Circular Economy, initiatives are closely 
linked to brands marketing activities (Hvass, 2019). Furthermore, the voluntary engagement is 
suggested to allow textile brands to mitigate external demands while continuing their 
continuous linear production and that they are not aiming at reducing consumption but 
promote a circular growth of the industry (Corvellec & Stål, 2019).  
 
 Scope 
 Previous work 
Previous studies have investigated textile producers’ way of engaging in the collection and 
handling of post-consumer textiles. The Nordic Council of Ministers and the research program 
Mistra Future Fashion have both published reports during recent years with the aim of 
advising on governmental intervention to aid initiatives through evaluation of parameters such 
as extending active lifetime of garments, making profit, creation of green jobs and 
environmental gain through which some activities of brands have been questioned for having 
the right intentions. Research by Hvass (2014) on the opportunities and challenges from a 
brand point of view has provides some skepticism to how they are operated while others such 
as Stål & Hervé (2018) have questioned brands’ true intentions with engaging in initiatives as a 
way to keep business as usual.  
 
While previous studies have extensively explored producer initiatives, there is a lack of 
research which evaluates the initiatives by their activities in a holistic way by looking at how 
they directly and indirectly aid or contribute to the existing challenges of the current system of 
post-consumer textiles.   
 
 Objectives and research question 
The main research question of this study is: How does current post-consumer initiatives of 
textile producers impact the current system of post-consumer textiles in moving towards 
Circular Economy? 
 
The research question is explored by investigating how initiatives (1) utilize textiles (2) 
encourage upstream changes and/or (3) potentially bring along rebound effects. Data for the 
evaluation of producer initiative is collected through qualitative interviews and findings are 
discussed in relation to challenges of the current system of post-consumer textiles.  
 
The research provides a criticism of how textile producers currently engage in the collection 
and handling of post-consumer textiles and provides recommendation aimed at decision-
makers for future regulations on how textile producers should engage with post-consumer 
textiles. The study is secondarily directed towards textile producers who wish to engage or 
change how they engage with post-consumer textiles in a more circular manner.  
 
==PAGE:12==
RC: Introduction 
 
Scope 
5 
 Motivation 
The main motivation of the researcher is to take the opportunity to deep dive into the complex 
challenges of post-consumer textiles and the textile producers’ role to unfold the true effects 
of their initiatives to the public.  
 
 Contributions 
The study aims at making the following contributions: First, it adds to existing research in the 
field of post-consumer initiatives of textile producers by exploring the effects of producer 
initiatives in the context of (1) textile utilization (2) upstream changes and (3) rebound effects. 
This approach aims at creating a holistic framework for evaluating the initiatives and adds 
findings to the existing criticism of currently operated initiatives. Secondly, it outlines the main 
challenges of the current system and puts producer initiatives in the context of these with 
Circular Economy as the general framework of where the system should move to. Last, it 
recommends on means to move the system of post-consumer textiles closer to a Circular 
Economy enabled by textile producers.  
 
 Report Structure 
• 
Section 1 presents the background and relevance of the challenges of post-consumer 
textiles and presents the scope of this study.  
• 
Section 2 provides information of the applied theories. Firstly, how Circular Economy 
differentiates from sustainability and then a description of the circular framework 
applied. Current options for textile utilization from a technical perspective as well as 
their environmental benefits are presented. From these, a conceptual model of ideal 
textile treatment in a Circular Economy is created. Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR) is presented and lastly, the theory on rebound effects to be used in the 
evaluation.  
• 
Section 3 presents the methodological framework DRM and various methods applied 
in the study. 
• 
Section 4 unfolds a mapping of current textile material flows, amounts, qualities and 
actors constituting the current system of post-consumer textiles in Denmark and ends 
with a description of the challenges of the system.  
• 
Section 5 presents currently operated initiative types through descriptions and flow 
models, which are identified through previous literature and a mapping conducted 
through this study.  
• 
Section 6 presents evaluation of identified producer initiatives through a thematic 
analysis of the qualitative interviews and a discussion of producer initiatives in relation 
to Circular Economy and then in relation to the current system challenges.  
• 
Section 7 presents recommendations on means to enable textile producers to move 
the system of post-consumer textiles towards Circular Economy.    
 
 Boundaries, delimitations and definitions 
The study is as far possible delimited to post-consumer textiles in the current system and by 
textile producers. Therefore, business models for elongating the initial use phase is not 
incorporated such as clothing libraries and other services for prolonging the use phase. It is 
==PAGE:13==
Scope 
 
RC: Introduction 
 
 
6 
from the point of being discarded as post-consumer textiles that is relevant for this study due 
to the complex challenges of ownership, responsibility, possible treatment and value. 
 
The mapping of the current system of post-consumer textiles (section 4) is delimited to textiles 
from consumers within Denmark and the textiles exported from Denmark. The mapping of 
textile producer initiatives (section 5) is however not limited to Denmark as the textile industry 
is global and identifying only initiatives operating in Denmark would be difficult. The reasoning 
of this lies in the fact that it is the potential impact of textile producers’ initiatives in challenges 
identified in a given country (In this case Denmark) that is evaluated.   
 
Textiles refer to clothing and household textiles in a broad sense. Sometimes the term 
garments and clothes are use specifically, in contexts that allow it. 
 
Post-consumer textiles refer to the textile having been owned by a consumer prior to being 
discarded. Post-consumer textiles refer to the state of textiles as being discarded by a 
consumer but not necessarily the last consumer, as some textiles are adapted for reuse and 
might become post-consumer afterwards again.  
 
Discarded textiles refer to textiles which a consumer has forwarded in any of the mentioned 
streams and does not necessarily refer to being placed in the waste in which case the 
formulation discarded as waste is used.  
 
Textile waste only refers to textiles with a quality only suitable for incineration/landfill. Textiles 
found in waste streams can still be classified as having a higher quality than waste such as 
reuse and recycling. 
 
Textile producers is used as a common term for textile brands and retailers and are not 
necessarily the one producing the textiles but are sourcing textile material and products for 
sales.  
 
Quality of textiles is a difficult term to define and is used in various ways in previous studies. 
Here, it will mostly refer to the possible utilization option for the given textile on the global 
market such as reusable, recyclable and so on. In some places, quality will relate to fibre and 
material durability and in others, it might relate to the subjective opinion of the design. This 
study builds to a large extend on previous literature in which the definition varies which is 
transferred to this study.  
  
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Theory 
 
Scope 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Theory 
 
This section presents the theoretically framework 
of Circular Economy applied including slowing and 
closing resource loops and circular design and 
business model strategies. Utilization practices of 
textiles is presented and Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) provides insights into how 
upstream changes can be incentivized. These are all 
conceptualized in a figure showing the ideal system 
of circulating post-consumer textiles. Lastly, the 
application of theories on rebound effects is 
introduced.  
 
 
==PAGE:15==
Sustainability & Circular Economy 
 
Theory 
 
 
8 
 Sustainability & Circular Economy  
The term sustainability is documented from all the way back to the early 18th century as a 
conceptualization that the amount of wood harvested should not exceed the volume that 
grows again and was later transferred to the principle of respecting the ability of nature to 
regenerate itself (Geissdoerfer, Bocken, Savaget, & Hultink, 2016). Sustainability has been 
defined by many, the most commonly accepted definition being that of the Brundtland 
Commission (1987) (Geissdoerfer et al., 2016) “development that meets the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”.  
 
The increase in evidence of global-scale environmental risk, traced back to the 1960’s, raised 
questions about whether present prosperity trends could be maintained in the future. The 
dangers of humanity on finite resources and fragile ecosystems was first highlighted globally at 
the 1972 Stockholm Conference in the time that the book Limits to Growth warned of business 
as usual and interpreted development and environment as contradictory elements 
(Geissdoerfer et al., 2016). In this time, the big concern was that humanity would experience 
resource scarcity which would lower the level of economic activity and prevent economic 
growth (Sachs, 2015). Today, sustainability concerns are increasingly incorporated into both 
the agendas of policymakers and the strategies of companies (Geissdoerfer et al., 2016). 
 
The concept of Circular Economy has gained momentum since the late 1970s through various 
iterations and authors. The contemporary understanding of Circular Economy incorporates 
different contributions from a variety of concepts which all share the idea of closed loops such 
as cradle-to cradle, performance economy, biomimicry and the blue economy. The most 
renowned definition is provided by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (Geissdoerfer et al., 2016), 
which introduces the Circular Economy as an industrial economy that is restorative by 
intention and design. The linear and open-ended characteristics of the current economic 
system has been investigated through the description of natural resources’ influence on the 
economy by providing inputs for production and consumption while serving as a sink for 
outputs in the form of waste. Further research describes the earth as a closed and circular 
system with limited assimilative capacity and suggests that the economy and environment 
should coexist in equilibrium (Geissdoerfer et al., 2016).  
 
The concepts of sustainability and Circular Economy share the view on environmental risks and 
costs and the advantages of opportunities of value creation. While environmental aspects of 
sustainability focus on the long-term holistic issues, Circular Economy is conceptually simplified 
to resource input, waste and emission output with relative immediate results through input 
reduction, efficiency gains and waste avoidance. Sustainability focus on the triple bottom line 
(People, Planet, Profit) by benefiting the society, environment and economy while Circular 
Economy benefits the economic actors that implement it and focusses on environmental 
performance improvements (Geissdoerfer et al., 2016).  
 
While both concepts heavily rely on regulations and the design of incentive structures to guide 
stakeholder behaviour, sustainability perceives responsibilities as shared where Circular 
Economy views private business as holding a great responsibility. Literature frames Circular 
Economy as a necessary but not the only mean toward sustainable development.  
==PAGE:16==
Theory 
 
Circular Economy 
9 
 
In this study, the challenges of post-consumer textiles are viewed through the framework of 
Circular Economy, with a focus on the private businesses producing textiles. Post-consumer 
textiles are to be avoided from turning into waste and for this the circular principles are 
applied.  
 
 Circular Economy 
The following description mainly builds upon the Ellen Macarthur Foundation (2013). The last 
150 years of industrial evolution has been dominated by a one-way linear model of 
production, consumption and disposal, often referred to as the take-make-dispose model. This 
model has successfully provided affordable products and material wealth to billions. With 
trajectories of an increase in the global middle class from 2 billion people in 2011 to more than 
3 billion in 2030 (OECD, 2011) and higher consumption due to the increase of disposable 
income, the consumer goods industry is set to rise exponentially. As resource demands are set 
to rise with a rising population, radical resource efficiency will not be enough to solve the 
situation as efficiency can only limit the energy and materials used and fails to decouple 
degradation of resources from economic growth. 
 
Circular Economy goes further than just minimising waste and reducing the negative impacts 
of linear economies by providing a model of effective cycling of materials, environmental and 
societal benefits and economic opportunities. 
 
 Circular principles 
The Ellen Macarthur foundation (2017) condenses the Circular Economy into three core 
principles in their publication A New Textiles Economy as: (1) design out waste and pollution, 
(2) keep products and materials in use and (3) regenerate natural systems.  
 
The first refers to changing a system by designing out negative impacts that causes damage to 
natural systems. The second refers to favouring processes that circulate and preserve the 
highest value of energy, labour and materials by designing for durability, reuse, 
remanufacturing and recycling to preserve value and keep products, components and 
materials circulating. The last refer to avoiding the use of non-renewable resources and 
preserving to enhance renewable ones. 
 
 Circular cycles & loops 
In a Circular Economy, value is retained in either biological or technical cycles as illustrated in 
Figure 1. In the biological cycle (left side of the figure), natural feedback systems allow 
biologically-based materials to feed back into systems through e.g. composting and anaerobic 
digestion after consumption. The biological cycles cascade through several functions of re-use 
of a given material before re-entering the system as nutrients.  
 
Close to none of textiles produced today, are made purely from biodegradable materials as 
even the purely cellulose based products contain other materials in stitching, labels etc. This 
means that the biological cycle is not an option for the majority of clothes as produced today. 
==PAGE:17==
Circular Economy 
 
Theory 
 
 
10 
In the future, the development of biodegradable textile clothes might become more advanced 
(Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017).  
 
The technical cycle (right side of the figure) relates to materials that cause contamination in 
the biological nutrient flow and do not easily or at all degrade. The technical cycle makes use 
of strategies of sharing, repairing, reuse, remanufacture/refurbish and as a last resort, 
recycling to recover and restore products, components and the embedded energy after use 
before reaching the lowest value possible (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017). Opportunities 
for textiles thereby presents itself in the technical cycle. 
 
 
Stahel (1994) argues that reuse and recycling are among the strategies for waste minimization 
that should lead us to a more sustainable resource-saving economy. He further presents two 
kinds of loops that differ fundamentally: (1) reuse of products and (2) recycling of materials. 
Bocken et al. (2016) builds on this theory and defines the fundamental strategies: Slowing 
Resource Loops and Closing Resource Loops, respectively. These theories are adapted to one 
in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 1 - Circular Economy System Diagram. Source: Ellen MacArthur Foundation, drawing 
from Braungart & McDonough, Cradle to Cradle. 
Figure 2 - The reuse loop 1 (Slowing Resource Loops) and the recycling loop 2 (Closing 
Resource Loops). Source: Adapted from Stahel (1994) and Bocken et al. (2016). 
(Bocken, Pauw, Bakker, & Grinten, 2016) 
==PAGE:18==
Theory 
 
Textile utilization 
11 
The reuse loop means extension of the utilization of products through the design for a long 
life, service loops to extend existing products’ life through reuse, repair and reconditioning and 
technical upgrading. The result is a slowing of resource loops from production to disposal. This 
loop prevents waste not only of the specific product but also in production, distribution, 
transport and recycling/disposal. The logic behind this loop implies perfect quality and 
unlimited product liability by manufacturers.  
 
The recycling of materials loop refers to closing of resource loops between post-consumer 
waste and production and does not influence the speed in which materials flow through the 
economy. The nice thing about this loop is not its economic attractiveness but the exclusion of 
unlimited product- and material liability and the obligation to reuse.  
 
Bocken et al (2016) includes the narrowing of loops which is different from the other two. The 
narrowing of loops aims at improving efficiency by using fewer resource to achieve the same 
purpose as an eco-efficient material flow from production to disposal. The narrowing of loops 
is not aimed at the cyclic use of products and materials and will therefore not be incorporated 
further into this study.  
 
 Textile utilization 
Sandin & Peters (2018) presents a summary of current textile reuse and recycling routes in 
Figure 3.  
 
 
Textile reuse refer to the prolonging of the practical service life of textile products by 
transferring them to new owners, with or without modifications such as mending. Reuse 
routes are through swapping, borrowing, inheriting, renting and trading which can be 
facilitated through second hand shops, flea markets, online marketplaces, charities and 
clothing libraries. The smallest arrow indicate consumer to consumer(C2C) activities and the 
Figure 3 - A classification of textile reuse and recycling routes. Source: Sandin & Peters (2018) 
==PAGE:19==
Business models & regulations 
 
Theory 
 
 
12 
second-smallest includes the reuse through retailers, brands and producers. Maintenance 
during use refer to correct washing and minor repairs (Sandin & Peters, 2018). 
 
In Figure 1, the route preferred prior to recycling is refurbish and remanufacture which entails 
that a product is either repaired as much as possible or disassembled and assembled again 
while replacing components, respectively (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017). For textiles this 
would be mending and tailoring to fit or changing a component such as a button or zipper to 
keep them in use.  
 
Textile recycling refers to reprocessing of pre- and post-consumer textiles for use in new 
textiles (Close-loop) and non-textile products (Open-loop or cascade recycling). Sometimes, 
the term also refers to the recycling of non-textile material, such as PET-bottles, into textiles. 
Many different types of textile recycling exist such as fabric-, fibre -, polymer- and monomer 
recycling which are differentiated by the level of disassembly of the recovered material 
(Sandin & Peters, 2018).  
 
Textile recycling used today are in most cases downcycling in which case the recycled material 
is of lower value (or quality) and of another function than the original product through which 
clothing and home textiles are made into industrial rags for cleaning, low-grade blankets and 
insulation material for mattresses and upholstery (Schmidt, Watson, Roos, Askham, & Poulsen, 
2016). Fabric- and fibre recycling typically results in materials of lower fibre quality than 
materials from virgin thus typically considered downcycling (Sandin & Peters, 2018).  Close-
loop textile to textile recycling is hindered by a disconnect between design and recycling 
processes (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017). Currently 78 base materials exist that can be 
produced using 241 processes to create more than 165,000 possible material combinations 
(Higg MSI, u.d.) creating a complex landscape of textile materials which require various 
recycling technologies.  
 
Results of LCA studies have shown that reuse gives by far the greatest environmental benefit 
compared to recycling and incineration, in Nordic countries and RoW, if reuse fully replaces 
the purchase of a new item of the same type. Even when replacing only 30% of newly 
purchased items, reuse is still preferred. For all the recycling options considered, recycling is 
proven a better option than incineration, though by a relatively modest benefit compared to 
that of reuse. The energy use at transport, collection and sorting is relatively insignificant 
(Schmidt et al., 2016).  
 
Thereby, the environmental gain of the various treatment paths of textiles mainly follow the 
Waste Hierarchy (European Comission, 2008) and the smallest loops requires the least amount 
of energy (Sandin & Peters, 2018).  
 
 Business models & regulations  
The Circular Economy puts responsibility on private businesses to implement the changes 
needed to move towards circularity (Geissdoerfer et al, 2016). This can be done through their 
own realisation of opportunities of new business models or enforced by regulations through 
e.g. EPR-systems. 
==PAGE:20==
Theory 
 
Business models & regulations 
13 
 
 Circular business model strategies 
A business model is a conceptual tool to understand how a company does business by viewing 
the competitive strategy, cost structure, value proposition and more of the business 
(Rasmussen, 2007). The changes needed for more sustainable practices require a fundamental 
shift in the purpose of business and how it is conducted through business model innovation. In 
Sustainable Business Models, the value proposition provides ecological and/or social value in 
collaboration with economic value instead of the typical focus on economic return from a 
product or service (Bocken et al., 2014). Circular business models can enable economically 
viable ways to continually reuse products and materials (Bocken et al., 2016). 
 
Bocken et al. (2016) presents a framework of strategies for circular product design and six 
circular business models to slow and/or close resource loops to move from a linear to a 
Circular Economy. These should be implemented in conjunction and supported by an overall 
goal or vision focused on circularity as illustrated in Figure 4. 
  
 
 
Even though this study focusses on post-consumer textiles (i.e. after design, production and 
use) the design phase of a product greatly determines the utilization options after collection. 
Therefore, theories on how to design for circularity is included.  
 
Strategies for slowing the loop  
When aiming at slowing resource loops, long-life products and product-life extension should 
be designed for. Designing for long-life products is through the creation of products that will 
be loved and trusted longer while being reliable in terms of functionality and durability in 
terms of wear and tear. Designing for product-life extension focus more on the introduction of 
service loops. Here products are designed for ease of maintenance and repair, upgradability, 
compatibility and dis- and reassembly to easier enter service loops for reuse.  
 
The four business model strategies, presented by Bocken et al. (2016), for slowing resource 
loops are; access and performance model, extending product value, classic long-life model and 
encourage sufficiency.  
Figure 4 - Circular economy product and business model strategy 
framework. Source: Bocken et al. (2016). 
==PAGE:21==
Business models & regulations 
 
Theory 
 
 
14 
 
The access and performance model relate to providing a service of use instead of ownership 
through leasing, sharing and clothing hire models and is also known as Product-Service 
Systems as described by e.g. Tukker (2004). The model relates more to the use phase of textile 
products and how products are offered to consumers and less to the direct handling of post-
consumer textiles and is therefore not included further. (Tukker, 2004) 
 
Extending product value, is a model which exploits residual value of products. This model 
provides the value of used products “as new” through repair and remanufacturing of the 
products taken back ideally performed by the original manufacturer. The model should have 
no net consumption of materials other than transport and processes. This model is exemplified 
by Clothing return initiatives in the article by Bocken et al. (2016) and is used to assess the 
producer initiatives in this study. Whether the initiatives indeed follow this model or simply 
mimic parts of it will be investigated in the analysis. 
 
Classic long-life model entails high-quality premium products (high quality textile product), 
designed for durability and a high level of service such as repair and maintenance. The price 
follows the quality and is in the relative high range (Bocken et al., 2016). At the post-consumer 
stage of these products, more options to keep them in use might be a possibility due to the 
design.  
 
Encourage sufficiency also focusses on premium products while adding a “non-consumerist 
approach” to sales (Bocken et al., 2016). This model is not included further in this study as the 
activities are more related to “slower sales” then handling of the post-consumer textiles. 
 
Strategies for closing resource loops 
To design products for closing resource loops means designing for the technical cycle, 
biological cycle and/or dis- and reassembly. Designing for the technical cycle (Figure 1) refers 
to developing products in such a way that materials can be continuously recycled into new 
materials and products. Here, quality and value should be kept at its highest as downcycling 
does not enable cyclical flow of resources, but only delays the linear flow. Designing for the 
biological cycle is out of scope of this study as textiles are defined within the technical cycle. To 
design for disassembly and reassembly is about creating products which can be separated for 
recycling to ensure the highest value (Bocken et al., 2016). 
 
The two business model strategies for closing the resource loop are; Extending resource value 
and industrial symbiosis. The first focusses on exploiting residual value of otherwise wasted 
resources into new forms of value (Bocken et al., 2016). This model is potentially relevant for 
the collection of discarded textiles which can be recycled instead of wasted. The other model is 
industrial symbiosis which is out of scope for this study.  
 
As presented in the introduction, the textile industry is far from circular. Stål & Hervé (2018) 
suggests that the apparel industry appears particular unsuited for functional arguments to 
explain the adoption (or lack of) of circular models due to the sensitivity to socio-
environmental issues in general and the difficulty to capture value from used clothes as 
==PAGE:22==
Theory 
 
Business models & regulations 
15 
produced today. In the next section, EPR-systems are presented to see how a more regulated 
setup can enhance a more circular approach to post-consumer textiles.   
 
 Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR)  
The responsibility of producers traditionally lies in design, production and sales i.e. assuring 
worker safety, transportation emissions, handling environmental releases from production and 
production waste etc. Traditionally textile companies design, produce, market and sell textiles 
to customers. The fate of the textiles after use depends on the consumers habits, norms, 
practices and available channels to get rid of their textiles (Hvass, 2014). 
 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines EPR as an 
environmental policy approach in which a producer’s responsibility for a product is extended 
to the post-consumer stage of a product’s life cycle. EPR policy follow two related features: (1) 
shifting responsibility (physically/economically and fully/partially) towards producers and away 
from municipalities down-stream and (2) providing incentives for producers to incorporate 
environmental considerations upstream in the design of their products (OECD, 2001).  
 
For the fashion and textile industry, upstream activities are closest to production (from design 
to point of sale) and down-stream are closest to the consumer (from sale to end-of-life). 
Upstream changes of textile products may include; designing for durability through high-
quality materials, timeless styles, ease of repair and remanufacturing for reuse and ease of 
disassembly and pure material use for recycling (Watson et al., 2014).   
 
EPR schemes can either be mandatory (using legal mechanisms) or voluntary. Currently, France 
is the only country with a mandatory EPR scheme on textiles which has operated since 2007. 
Mandatory EPR-systems on other products have been operated for several years (Watson et 
al., 2014). In OECD countries, the most common waste streams of EPR practices include waste 
electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE), used lead acid batteries, EOL vehicles, used tyres, 
used oil and packaging waste (Gupt & Sahay, 2015). 
 
Voluntary EPRs are emerging in OECD countries. The drivers for engaging in voluntary EPR 
schemes can include economic incentives to recover high-value items, CSR policy and 
branding, means to avoid government intervention or to secure market share (OECD, 2001). 
There are many voluntary initiatives with EPR-like properties operating in the textile industry. 
These are generally introduced by the producers and can be driven by ambitious CSR targets 
in-house reflecting on their fundamental adoption to sustainability or pressure from the 
market, leading producers to brand themselves as being environmentally conscious to gain 
market share (Watson et al., 2014).   
 
To classify as an EPR scheme, producers need to not only collect their post-consumer products 
but must also take physical and/or economic responsibility of the treatment after collection 
(Watson et al., 2014). What differentiates EPR-systems from other systems which involve 
taking back product is the intended creation of a feedback mechanism between the 
downstream and the upstream phases of products (Tojo, Kogg, Kiørboe, Kjær, & Aalto, 2012). 
 
==PAGE:23==
Conceptual circular textile treatment route 
 
Theory 
 
 
16 
EPRs can either be individual or collective. In an individual EPR, a producer has the 
responsibility of collecting their own products while in a collective EPR systems, producers go 
together to pay a separate organisation to handle the collection. In France, textile producers 
can either organise their own individual reuse and recycling program that must be approved by 
French authorities or collectively contribute to a government-approved textile collector 
through annual contributions based on textiles volumes put on the market (Watson et al., 
2014).   
 
According to Watson et al. (2014), the differences between individual and collective EPR 
systems become important when looking at the aim of incentivising upstream changes. In 
many collective EPR systems producers pay the same for waste management regardless of the 
level they have incorporated design for end-of-life, providing them very little incentive for 
upstream changes. When producers individually manage their own post-consumer waste, their 
cost will decrease as they design for end-of-life. However, implementation of own 
infrastructure and logistics brings along challenges and higher costs.  
 
In summary, EPRs aim at moving responsibility of collection and handling of post-consumer 
textiles from municipalities to producers while equally incentivising upstream changes to the 
design of textile product.  
 
 Conceptual circular textile treatment route 
Theory of Circular Economy, textile utilization and circular design and business model 
strategies are summarized in the conceptual model in  Figure 5. The model illustrates an ideal 
treatment route for textiles based on principles of Circular Economy, with no restrictions of 
real-life complications.  
 
The vertical axis indicates the quality of the textiles divided in the treatment routes (first) use, 
reuse, refurbish and recycle. The horizontal axis indicates time. 
 
Figure 5 -Conceptual model of ideal textile treatment route according to circular economy. 
==PAGE:24==
Theory 
 
Rebound effects 
17 
The illustration shows the journey of the same textile (in this example a T-shirt) through its life 
cycle stages for each time it switches from one consumer or place in the system to another. 
The red arrows indicate when the quality decrease from one step to another and the dotted 
circular green arrows indicate where possible routes to re-circulate textiles exists. 
 
An optimal path of quality cascading is from the top left corner at the highest quality in the 
beginning of the lifetime and following the red arrows down to the far-right corner. The textile 
product is designed by circular principles to extend the lifetime by making it attractive for 
multiple reuses. The product is cared for through maintenance in the first use stage, but the 
focus of this study is on the post-consumer textiles. Textiles should recirculate by following the 
green arrows as far as possible, through circular business strategies to slow resource loops. 
This is through e.g. service loops of repair and refurbishment to keep the quality as high as 
possible and elongate the life-time.  
 
Inevitably, the textile will end at a low quality at the end-of-life where recycling should be 
performed to close resource loops. The textile product is designed for disassembly and made 
with materials fit for the technological cycle. Recycling happens preferably in cascaded 
recycling through which the fabric provides value once more through open-looped recycling as 
insulation or industrial rags before closed-loop recycling back to textile fibres which feeds into 
the production of new textile products.  
 
Following the aim of EPR-systems, textile producers, brands and retailers are actively involved 
in the reuse and recycling activities of post-consumer textiles from which they take learnings 
upstream and consider in the design and production of new textile products.  
 
 Rebound effects  
This study evaluates producer initiatives from the viewpoint of (1) utilization of textiles, (2) 
upstream changes and (3) rebound effect. To evaluate on the last of the three, theories on 
rebound effects is adapted and applied. 
 
Rebound effect is introduced in literature as the tendency of consumers increasing their 
consumption of a given service or product with an increase in efficiency, e.g. fuel efficiency in 
cars promoting more driving or consumers choosing to heat their homes for longer periods 
and to a higher temperature following the installation of loft insulation. This outcome is 
attributable to the fact that technological changes increase efficiency which decrease cost and 
thereby prize per unit (Mile, kWh etc.). The term rebound effects presents a flaw in the 
argument that energy efficiency is synonymous with ‘good’ as the increased demand and use 
might reduce or offset the net savings (Herring & Sorrel, 2009).  
 
The theory of rebound effects is often related to energy efficiency which does not fit within 
scope of this study. However, other literature presents rebound effects in the perspective of 
industrial ecology and sustainable consumption and states that differs from the energy 
economic: (1) a concern of a wide range of environmental problems and not only energy and 
(2) the reduction of environmental pressure does not necessarily imply a cost reduction and 
==PAGE:25==
Rebound effects 
 
Theory 
 
 
18 
increase. Sustainable consumption does not primarily focus on technical measures to increase 
efficiency, but on behavioral measures (Hertwich, 2005).  
 
The theory of rebound effects is adapted into this study in the evaluation of producer 
initiatives to provide a framework for addressing the indirect negative effects from the 
producer initiatives. Producer initiatives should be viewed as the a more environmentally 
beneficial product or service offered to consumers which may indirectly lead to less 
environmentally friendly behavior which causes the indirectly negative rebound effects.  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
Methodology 
 
Rebound effects 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Methodology 
 
This section presents the methodology framework 
Design Research Methodology and a chronological 
presentation of the various methods applied and 
the reasoning for their application.  
 
 
==PAGE:27==
Design Research Methodology 
 
Methodology 
 
 
20 
 Design Research Methodology 
The Design Research Methodology (DRM) as presented by Blessing & Chakrabarti (2009) was 
applied for structuring this study. DRM has emerged through a need for a more rigorous 
approach to make design research more effective and efficient. Design Research originally 
referred to the research of design practices but has developed to a broader scope including a 
research approach in the actual design process. DRM provides a framework for shifting 
between the descriptive and prescriptive states during research in a flexible ways as multiple 
types of design research exist.  
 
The use of DRM in this study has provided a structured approach to first describe the as-it-
system of post-consumer textiles, identify and develop three types of producer initiatives, 
gather data for a comprehensive evaluation of these in relation to the current system and 
lastly develop recommendations on means to enable textile producers to move the current 
system of post-consumer textiles towards more circularity. (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009) 
 
 Research type 
This study follows the research of type 4 through which the study focuses on a systematic 
evaluation of the usefulness of existing support (Producer initiatives) in the context of the 
current system and the development of suggestions for improvement through 
recommendations. Through the research clarification, an understanding of the producer 
initiatives as possibly ineffective was noted but the exact problems were not apparent. Current 
evaluations have had other focus than that of benefitting to Circular Economy in the current 
system and therefore, there is a need for a comprehensive evaluation. Table 1 presents an 
overview of how the methodological framework is applied in this study.  
 
Table 1 - Design Research Methodology type and specific activities of the study. 
Research  
Clarification 
Descriptive  
Study I 
Prescriptive  
Study 
Descriptive  
Study II 
Review-based 
Review-based 
Review-based 
Comprehensive 
Background and Scope. 
Understanding the system 
of post-consumer textiles 
in Denmark. 
Identifying and 
developing types of 
current producer 
initiatives. 
Evaluation of producer 
initiatives. 
 
Initial 
Recommendations. 
 
The first three stages are review based as no empirical data was collected. In the Research 
Clarification phase, background knowledge within the broader field of the textile industry was 
reviewed to determine the scope and boundaries of the study. In the Descriptive Study I, 
literature was reviewed to create an understanding of the current system of post-consumer 
textiles and the challenges of handling post-consumer textiles. In the first Prescriptive Study, 
current producer initiative types are developed through a review of previous literature and 
data collection of existing initiatives through desk-top research. In the Descriptive Study II, the 
==PAGE:28==
Methodology 
 
Research Clarification 
21 
identified producer initiative types are evaluated for how they move the current system 
towards Circular Economy through data collection of qualitative interviews. A return to the 
Prescriptive Study closes the study through the initial development of recommendations to 
prepare the results for use mainly by policy decision makers.  
 
 Research Clarification 
In this phase, a clear line from the main problem area to the research question. The 
background section was formulated through literature to explain the connection between the 
wider environmental challenges of the textile industry to the issues of post-consumer waste to 
the claim that producers do or should hold some responsibility in solving this and a suggestion 
towards the current initiatives not being enough.  
 
In this phase, the theoretical framework of Circular Economy was investigated and revisited 
along the research project to make sure that the right theories were applied. From this, the 
research question was defined and adapted in the research clarification phase to provide a 
concise formulation of the main subject of investigated and in what context.   
 
The theory was chosen to support the three topics that support the evaluation: (1) utilization 
of textiles, (2) upstream changes and (3) rebound effects. The first was through the section of 
textile utilization build upon the review of secondary scientific research. The second was 
through a mix of theory on circular design strategies from scientific papers and EPR systems 
which was mainly through grey literature. The third was through the theory of rebound effects 
and how it was adapted to this study.  
 
 Descriptive study I: Mapping of current system 
The first descriptive study provided a phase of investigation of the current system of post-
consumer textiles through reviewing previous literature.  
 
The mapping was divided into three stages; (1) Initial disposal, (2) Cascading in the system and 
(3) Final destination. The stages were defined from a chronological view and were not defined 
based on other practices of mapping methods. The division into stages only provided the study 
a way of walking the reader through the possible streams of textiles in an understandable and 
chronological way. The aim of the division into stages was to easier pinpoint where, why and 
by who challenges occurred in the system after the mapping. The mapping was separated into 
the initial disposal and cascading in the system stages to view where textiles end up as a result 
of consumer behaviour and systems design, respectively. The third stage was to evaluate the 
result of the first two stages by summarizing the final destination of the textiles, i.e. how 
textiles are utilized through the system.  
 
 Literature review for mapping the current system 
A mix of literature was used. The main report by Watson et al. (2018a) which provided up-to-
date data on the amounts and material streams of textiles circulating in the system. The report 
was published by the Environmental Protection Agency of Denmark and is grey literature.  
 
==PAGE:29==
Descriptive study I: Mapping of current system 
 
Methodology 
 
 
22 
Although grey literature may recognize as mainly inaccessible, grey literature within the field 
of post-consumer textiles was rapidly available due to the increase in focus from policies. The 
Nordic Council of Ministers has published a range of reports under several projects regarding 
the prevention of textile waste dating back to 2012. The research program Mistra Future 
Fashion has also published a range of publications regarding textiles from 2011 to 2019. 
Primary scientific papers were included where available for scientific evidence. 
 
 Calculations for mapping 
The percentages presented in the primary report by the EPA were calculated as an amount 
compared to the total amount of purchased new textiles in Denmark a year. In this report, the 
presented percentages were calculated as a percentage of the total amount of post-consumer 
textiles discarded in Denmark a year (Equation 1) and not considering the amount of newly 
purchased textiles.  
 
Equation 1 Calculation method of percentages in mapping of current system of post-consumer textiles 
% =
𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑎 𝑔𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑛 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑇𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑠)
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑟 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑠 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑑 (𝑇𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑠) 
 
The total amount of post-consumer textiles was calculated as the summation of amount of 
textile discarded from consumers, no matter destination.  
 
The reason for the re-calculation from the original data was to keep this study focused within 
the scope of post-consumer textiles only, during the mapping of the current system. The total 
amount can thereby be viewed as all textiles shifting from one owner to another place in the 
system every year.  
 
This way of presenting the amounts add some uncertainty as the amounts of textiles re-
circulating within the system (through various reuse streams) might be accounted for multiple 
times if recirculating more than once within the year of data collection. However, it was 
assumed that very few textiles will shift hands through reuse multiple times a year within 
Denmark and therefore the calculation method was still justified. A minor modification to the 
data is the thousand tons of textile stolen from separate collection containers each year which 
was by the study assumed exported and was therefore added to the total amount of exported 
textiles.  
 
The spreadsheet of the altered data on how percentages were calculated is attached in 
Appendix A. 
 
 Illustrations 
Figure 9 - Material flow of post-consumer textiles in Denmark.) was made through the open-
source webpage http://sankeymatic.com/ as well as the site https://htmlcolorcodes.com/ for 
colour codes. The reason for illustrating the amounts through a material flow analysis model 
was the fact that it is known and understood in the scientific world to provide an overview of 
material streams. Figure 10 to Figure 17 (Pie charts) were generated from the calculations on 
amounts of textiles in the various fractions, using Microsoft Excel. Figure 18 (conceptual model 
of the possible qualities in the current system and their relation) was created in Microsoft 
Power Point and no metric data should be read from it. It was solely intended to sum up the 
findings regarding the qualities of textiles in an illustrative manner.  
==PAGE:30==
Methodology 
 Prescriptive study I: Identifying producer initiatives 
23 
 
 Identification of challenges 
The challenges identified in section 4.7 arise from a comparison of how textiles are utilized 
through the current system and the ideal utilization of textiles according to Circular Economy. 
This was done by comparing if important practices in a circular system, as presented in the 
theory section 2, were partly or completely missing in the current system. Furthermore, inputs 
from validation interviews of the current system mapping and interviews for the qualitative 
data collection of producer initiatives added to the importance of the trajectory of post-
consumer textiles as a challenge.  
 
 Validation interviews  
Two interviews were conducted to validate the mapping of the current system of post-
consumer textiles and the challenges identified from it. One was with Kaj Pihl, Environment & 
Recycling Advisor at Humana People to People who has many years of experience as separate 
collector of post-consumer textiles and a broad field of knowledge within the field. The other 
interview was with Nikola Kiørboe, waste and resource specialist who is co-author of cited 
reports of this study and has broad experience with different actors in the system of post-
consumer textiles.  
 
No major changes were made to the mapping and small adjustments were implemented. The 
interviews were conducted to validate the understanding of how the system functions at the 
time of research and to add important nuances which was left out at the time. The interviews 
add to the credibility of the study as two experts within the field has read and agreed on the 
presented content.  
 
 Prescriptive study I: Identifying producer initiatives 
To evaluate how producer initiatives, affect the current system in moving towards Circular 
Economy, an understanding of how current producer initiatives operate was necessary. This 
was done in a three-folded method, illustrated in Figure 6:  
 
1. Identifying previous categorizations of producer initiatives 
2. Mapping current producer initiatives and their activities  
3. Developing current initiative types from the activities  
 
 
Figure 6 - Method of identifying current 
producer initiatives. 
==PAGE:31==
Prescriptive study I: Identifying producer initiatives  
Methodology 
 
 
24 
 Identifying previous categorizations 
A literature review on previous studies within grey literature and scientific papers which 
categorize producer initiatives was conducted to gather existing data within the field. This step 
provided evidence on the initiative types identified from this study as either agreeing with 
previous findings, contracting previous findings or adding to the findings within the field. This 
way, the initiative types developed in this study were easily compared to previous.  
 
 Mapping current initiatives 
The study conducted an independent mapping of current operating producer initiatives to 
collect and handle post-consumer textiles. The mapping was conducted through desk-top 
research where textile producers engaged in initiatives to collect and handle post-consumer 
textiles were searched for. Previous studies and grey literature were used to provide leads on 
producers to research as well as google searches for hits on word such as “brands” “take back” 
“textile collection”. Five main activities were described in previous literature to distinguish the 
initiatives from each other, and these used as guidance on what to collect data for in the desk-
top research:  
 
1. Type of textiles collected 
2. Collection channel 
3. Reimbursement 
4. Collaboration partner 
5. Utilization of textiles 
 
Figure 7 illustrates how the data was collected in a matrix 
form.  
 
 
The data gathered in the mapping in secondary data provided by the producers’ own 
communication channels. Data on the initiative was either available on the producer’s web-
page, their sustainability report or articles written about the initiative by third parties. Not all 
data was available for all initiatives which is indicated by a “-“ in the matrix. The desk-top 
research continued until the same producers appeared in searches and no more could be 
found. The amount of initiatives found were 34, which is evaluated exhaustive enough for the 
purpose of this study and is available in Appendix B.  
 
As the data was not collected first-hand by the author of the study, the validity of the data can 
be questioned. Data provided by the producers is assumed to favour positive activities of 
theirs and possibly disguise some activities. However, as the data elements searched for were 
relatively objective, most data of initiatives were found.  
 
Previous categorizations of producer initiatives could potentially have provided a starting point 
for the evaluation of this study without the mapping of current initiatives. However, both a 
validation of the contemporaneousness of the previous categorizations and data regarding 
occurrence of each type was included in this study to add to the contributions.  
 
Figure 7 - Link of method to map 
producer initiatives. 
==PAGE:32==
Methodology 
 
Descriptive study II: Evaluation of producer 
initiatives 
25 
 Identifying current initiative types 
From the matrix of 34 producer initiatives’ activities, patterns were pinpointed to identify 
initiative types. A complex method to sort the data was not needed for this, as the three 
initiative types revealed themselves through the comparison of two or three activities. The 
activities where generalised to compare across initiatives, e.g. if the initiatives stated to sort 
for reuse, recycle and incineration this was translated to “separate collection stream”. By 
filtering the activity “utilization of textiles”, it was quickly noted that the rest of the activities 
roughly followed a pattern. Since the activities had been generalised to a certain extent and 
since the data set was not longer than 34 initiatives, patterns unfolded naturally.  
 
The visual presentations of the initiative types Figure 22 where created and adjusted according 
to the qualitative interviews in the evaluation of them.  
 
 Descriptive study II: Evaluation of producer initiatives 
The initiative types to evaluate for their effect on the current system of post-consumer textiles 
to move towards Circular Economy were identified. How to collect data and what parameters 
to evaluate for were defined.  
 
 Defining evaluation topics 
To further elaborate on the wider research question and specifying the collection of data, the 
three topics where defined: 
1. How are the textiles utilized through the initiative? 
2. How are upstream changes encouraged through the initiative? 
3. What potential rebound effects does the initiative contribute to? 
 
The definition of topics follows a logic reasoning from the challenges identified in the current 
system and the theory of Circular Economy by evaluating the different roles of producers as 
collectors of used and producers of new.  
 
The topic utilization of textiles focusses on how producers enter the system of post-consumer 
textiles in parallel to traditional separate collectors. It investigates how textiles are reused, 
recycled or incinerated and can be compared to viewing the final destination of textiles in the 
current system.  
 
The topic upstream changes focus on the producers’ role as designing and producing textiles 
put on the market. The topic investigates how producer initiatives can affect the traditional 
production to better suit the current options of utilizing textiles.  
 
The topic rebound effects focus on identifying any other unforeseen effect that might 
contradict the goal of moving the system towards Circular Economy.   
 
 Data collection  
Data collected to answer the research question through the above topics was through 
qualitative interviews. Supporting data was gathered through literature to provide validation 
==PAGE:33==
Descriptive study II: Evaluation of producer initiatives
 
 
Methodology 
 
 
26 
of the collected data as well as the mapping of current initiatives to provide data on the 
popularity/occurrence of activities 
 
Three interviews were conducted for this study with four interviewees in total. Three 
interviewees were experts with a broad sense of knowledge regarding producers’ activities in 
collecting and handling post-consumer textiles and one was with a representative from a 
textile producing company. The overall aim of the interviews was to collect qualitative data 
from experts and actors within the field and to get real-life examples and experiences on the 
effect of initiatives.  
 
Interviewee 1 is researcher and post.doc Kerli Kant Hvass who finalized her PhD on business 
models of the fashion industry and Circular Economy in 2016 and works as External Lecturer at 
Copenhagen Business School. Interviewee 2 is Frank Engelbrecht from the innovation network 
Lifestyle & Design Cluster. He is a senior project manager working with Circular Economy, the 
Sustainable Development Goals and business development for lifestyle companies and more. 
In the same interview as Frank was interviewee 3 Jette Lindgaard from the industry and 
employers’ association for Danish textile and clothing companies, Dansk Mode & Tekstil. 
Interviewee 4 is Henrik Schmidt Hansen, Group CSR Director for Ege Group who provided 
insights into Ege Carpets’ activities in their Recover initiative through which they collect their 
own carpets after use and resell them. Henrik is responsible for the Ege Group concern’s work 
with quality, environmental, occupational health and sustainability. An overview of the 
interviewees is presented in Table 4. 
Table 2 - Interviewee overview 
Interviewee no. 
Name 
Organisation 
1 
Kerli Kant Hvass 
Copenhagen Business School 
2 
Frank Engelbrecht 
Lifestyle & Design Cluster 
3 
Jette Lindgaard 
Dansk Mode & Tekstil 
4 
Henrik Schmidt Hansen 
Ege Carpets 
 
The semi-structured interview approach was applied to steer through the initiative types and 
topics. The semi-structured approach was chosen to allow topics which diverted from the 
interview questions to unfold.  
 
Interviewee 1-3 were presented with similar interview questions and were presented with the 
illustrative illustrations of the identified producer initiatives (Figure 22a, b and c) one by one to 
evaluate them isolated according to the three topics of evaluation. A simplified example of the 
interview guide can be seen in Appendix C and interview extracts can be seen in Appendix D. 
Interview questions for interviewee 4 were re-formulated to collect data on the specific 
activities of the producer and therefore the evaluation of other initiative types was not 
investigated in this interview. Each interview lasted approximately one and a half hours and 
was recorded for analysis. Interviews were the primary and first-hand data collected for the 
study. Additional data was found in literature to support the findings or nuance them in the 
discussion section. The mapping of current producer initiatives conducted for this study 
provided data on the occurrence or popularity of the three initiative types.  
==PAGE:34==
Methodology 
 
Descriptive study II: Evaluation of producer 
initiatives 
27 
 
 Representativity 
As the results of this study relies on the statements of the interviewees, more interviews 
would have improved the robustness of the data and made it more representative. 
Furthermore, only one textile producer was interviewed which provides few statements from 
the producer site. Moreover, the textile producer available for interview produce carpets 
which vary in challenges from that of the fashion textile industry. More interviews with various 
textile producers and preferably a representation of all three initiative types would possibly 
have increased the nuances the results of this study. However, as the goal of the study was not 
to unfold the challenges that producers engaged in initiatives experience or to capture their 
specific activities, but to evaluate the general activities. Interviewee 1-3 provided a broad 
pallet of first-hand experiences with textile producers which provides representative, yet 
second-hand, data for the study.  
 
 Thematic analysis method 
The semi-structure interviews provided exploratory data, which the main research question 
intended for. This provided a need to organise the findings from interviews and the thematic 
analysis method as presented by Braun & Clarke (2006) was applied as following: (Braun & 
Clarke, 2006) 
 
The thematic analysis can be applied in various ways. For the analysis of data from interviews, 
the deductive or ‘top down’ approach was used to formulate themes in the theoretical interest 
of the researcher and less linked to the data itself. This approach allowed the researcher to 
seek out themes that contributed to the three topics and keep focus on other findings that 
arose but were out of scope. The proposed method steps were used through which the 
researcher familiarized herself with the data through re-visiting the summaries and sound 
recordings of the interviews, clustering in themes and defining names which explain them. The 
thematic analysis method provided a structured method for organising and presenting findings 
from the interviews in line with the three topics.  
 
Thereby, data was gathered through research of the three topics to answer the main research 
question as illustrated in Figure 8. The findings are firstly presented in themes, then as findings 
per producer initiative type and lastly, findings are discussed in the discussion session in 
relation to producer initiatives’ effect on the current system challenges.  
 
Figure 8 - Illustration of analytical framework 
used to evaluate the effects of producer
==PAGE:35==
Prescriptive study II: Recommendations 
 
Methodology 
 
 
28 
 
 Prescriptive study II: Recommendations 
The second prescriptive study was an initial study to close the project by formulating 
recommendations on the back of the discussion. To facilitate the development of 
recommendations, the framework of PESTEL is applied.  
 
The PESTEL framework is used in strategic management to group macro-environmental factors 
in which a business operated to help strategists look for sources of general opportunity and 
risk (Witcher & Chau, 2010). The true emergence of the framework is difficult to establish, and 
the first reference is traced back to the 1960’s as the term ETPS and has developed as STEP, 
PEST, PESTEL and STEEPLE since then. It is important to clearly define the subject of the 
analysis of this type because of the multi-faceted perspective (Kralj, 2009). The PESTEL 
framework consists of the six factors: Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental 
and Legal. Political matters concern the influence that governments have on industries. The 
economic factors concern cost-related matters for the organization. Social factors relate to 
changes in society and demographic structures. Technological changes concern trends in the 
technical foundation of an industry. Environmental matters concern trends in environmental 
aspects of resources and climate. Legal issues are those that relate to the changes in law and 
regulation.  
 
The framework is applied to develop recommendations that take into account the above-
mentioned factors while also focusing on the overall goal of circularity of post-consumer waste 
through engagement of textile producers. During the development of recommendations, the 
factors Environmental and Legal where found less relevant. Environmental aspects are 
addressed for all recommendations due to the overall aim being more environmentally 
friendly utilization of post-consumer textiles and was excluded. It was difficult to distinguish 
legal aspects from political and was therefore also excluded for simplicity. This left the applied 
framework as PEST: Political, Economic, Social and Technological.  
 
 
==PAGE:36==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
Prescriptive study II: Recommendations 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. DS I: Mapping of post-consumer 
textiles 
 
This section describes the current system of post-
consumer textiles in Denmark by mapping material 
streams, amounts, qualities and actors of post-
consumer textiles from exciting data. Lastly, 
challenges of the current system are described.  
 
 
==PAGE:37==
Material flow 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
30 
 Material flow 
83.500 tons of post-consumer textiles are circulating the system each year, and this amount is 
used as the total amount of post-consumer textiles of which percentages are calculated from. 
83% of the textiles comprise clothing and 17% comprise home textiles.  
 
Figure 9 provide an overview of the amounts by illustrating the material flow of the total 
amount of post-consumer textiles circulating in the system every year in Denmark. The figure 
accounts for all textiles shifting from a consumer’s ownership to another place in the system. 
The figure should not be read as input-output as the textiles going to reuse still circulates in 
the system. The figure illustrates the scale of magnitude of the various streams and the specific 
percentages are presented in the following sections through the three stages: (1) Initial 
disposal, (2) system cascading and (3) final destination, respectively. Each stream is illustrated 
in pie charts with subsequent data on amounts and, where available, quality.  
 
 
 
 
 Initial disposal  
When consumers in Denmark wish to get rid of their textiles, they have overall three options: 
C2C (consumer to consumer), separate collection stream or discarding as waste. The 
distribution of amounts in each of the three categories is illustrated in Figure 10, with the 
corresponding sub-categories that consumers have chosen to forward their textiles to. The 
chart presents the same data as the far-left side of the material flow model, Figure 9.  
 
Figure 9 - Material flow of post-consumer textiles in Denmark. 
==PAGE:38==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
Initial disposal 
31 
 
 
 C2C exchange 
9% of the total amount shifts owner through C2C exchange. Approximately 7.600 tons of 
textiles are changing owners through this flow every. This involves informal exchange (7%) by 
passing on clothes to friends and family or more formal exchange (2%) by selling clothes at flea 
markets and online platforms and swapping of clothes through swap markets year (Watson et 
al., 2018a). The distribution is illustrated in Figure 11, showing only the percentages exchanged 
C2C out of the entire amount of post-consumer textiles which is why all other fractions are 
greyed out.   
 
 
 
 Separate collection stream 
36.000 tons of textiles are collected through separate collection channels every year, 
representing 43% of post-consumer textiles (Watson et al., 2018a). A consumer can donate 
their textiles at drop off donation containers in the street or over the counter in second hand 
shops as illustrated in Figure 12. 
Figure 10 - Distribution of initial disposal streams of post-
consumer textiles by consumers. 
Figure 11 - Initial disposal into C2C streams. 
==PAGE:39==
Initial disposal 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
32 
 
Separate collection actors 
The dominating collectors are primarily charity NGO’s, such as Røde Kors and Frelsens Hær and 
secondarily, private collectors such as Trasborg and Den Permanente Tøjndsamling. Charities 
and private collectors are estimated to be responsible for more than 90% of collection with the 
other 10% represented by other collectors such as municipal waste companies and textile 
producers (Watson et al., 2018a) as seen in Figure 12.  
 
Municipal waste companies have begun to enter the separate collection in recent years, 
mainly through donation containers in municipal recycling centres.  Some test projects for 
kerb-side collection and collection through bulky waste has been conducted in some 
municipalities however challenges of communication, contamination of textiles and collection 
costs are challenging (Watson et al., 2018a).  
 
A less advanced actor in separate collection are textile producers and fashion brands who 
engage by for example offering in-store bins for consumers to drop off their used textiles by 
the exchange of a gift voucher on a future purchase (Hvass, 2014). H&M has been collecting 
textiles globally since 2014 in collaboration with private collector I:Collect and reached more 
than 400 tons a year in Denmark in 2016 (Watson et al., 2018a). 400 tons equals 0,47% (by 
own calculations) of the total amount of post-consumer textiles in Denmark a year. Even 
though this is from a single brand, H&M is identified as the brand collecting by far most in 
Denmark when looking at the number of stores and amounts of collected textiles. So even 
though other brands contribute a bit, it is assumed that producers collect less than 1% of the 
total amount of post-consumer textiles in Denmark a year. The importance and effects of 
producer initiatives is investigated in section 5 and 6.  
 
Donation qualities 
Just under half of the total amount of post-consumer textiles are donate to separate collection 
streams by consumers.  The quality of the separately collected textiles is various as it is the 
consumers sorting criteria that determines what ends up in the stream. 
 
Some data indicate that whether the textiles are donated in a container on the street or over 
the counter in a second-hand shop make a difference to the quality of the textiles donated. 
Figure 12 - Initial disposal into separate collection 
streams. 
==PAGE:40==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
Initial disposal 
33 
The charity Kirkens Korshær only accepts textiles over the counter and sell 90% of their 
received textiles in their Danish shops while Røde Kors and Frelsens Hær also collects through 
containers and only sell around 10% in Denmark. This could be due by the face-to-face 
meeting with personnel at the counter, making consumers only bring good quality clothing 
(Palm, et al., 2014). However, the textiles not chosen to bring to a charity which only allows 
over-the-counter collection might end in the waste as a result, but no data was found 
regarding this.  
 
 Discarding as waste  
39.900 tons corresponding to 48% of the total amount of post-consumer textiles are discarded 
in waste streams by consumers every year. Textiles are either left for bulky waste collection 
(7%), delivered to small combustibles in recycling centres (17%) or thrown out in the mixed 
household waste (24%) (Watson et al., 2018a) as illustrated in Figure 13.  
 
 
Economic value of textiles in waste 
A study by the Danish EPA in 2018 found that the discarded textiles had a five times lower 
economic value (0,36 Euro/kg) before being discarded, compared to the average value of 
textiles in separate collection streams (1,80 Euro/kg).  This shows that consumers to some 
extend are reasonable in their evaluation of the value of textiles. However, a significant value 
is still lost as consumers dispose of textiles into mixed waste in amounts corresponding to 
almost half of the total amount of post-consumer textiles (Watson et al., 2018a).  
 
Municipal initiatives 
Some municipalities have tested initiatives on how to collect textile from consumers through 
traditional waste channels. An example is Vejen Municipality in Jutland who carried out a pilot 
project to collect textiles in sealed plastic bags along with other dry recyclable waste streams 
through kerbside collection. In the pilot the Municipality encouraged consumers to use the 
system for non-reusable textiles or “textile waste” while keep donating their usable textiles to 
charities. Although communicated clearly, results showed that 60-65% of textiles collected 
where of reusable quality (Watson et al., 2018a). This shows the difficulty of establishing well-
functioning waste system to capture the value of disposed textiles by consumers.  
 
Figure 13 - Initial disposal into waste streams. 
==PAGE:41==
System cascading 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
34 
 Consumer aspects of initial disposal  
One study by UK Waste and Resource Action Plan (WRAP) (2019) surveying a thousand Danes 
in 2016 showed some differences in the choice of discarding different textile types, where 
socks more often ended up in waste and suits more often where donated or passed on to 
friends and family which follows the findings of lower economic value in the wasted textile 
fractions. (UK Waste and Resource Action Plan, 2019) 
 
Another study by Gwozdz, Netter, Bjartmarz & Reisch (2013) surveyed young Swedes about 
their discarding habits of textiles. The study showed that the main reasons for consumers 
discarding their textiles was more often because the garment was out of style or they were 
tired of the clothing than the case of it being damaged or worn out. (Gwozdz, Netter, 
Bjartmarz, & Reisch, 2013) 
 
National Swedish statistics indicate that garments are worn for a lot shorter service life than 
the garments technical lifespan demands (Ross, Sandin, Zamani, Peters, & Svanström, 2017). 
Due to this it is assumed that much of textile clothing is discarded by consumers after only a 
fraction of the possible uses. Consumers are assumed to use home textiles, such as clothes, 
towels and bedding, to a further extent until they are worn out. This is assumed mainly due to 
home textiles’ more practical functions (Watson et al., 2018a) as opposed to textile garments’ 
ever shifting nature in fashion trends.   
 
Thereby, discarding habits of consumers heavily impact what textile products and qualities end 
up in in the various streams.  
 
 System cascading  
The consumer has had a great impact on the future of their textiles, by evaluating their textiles 
as either suitable to give a friend or take to the local flea market, donate to charities or simply 
thrown in the waste. Here on, the quality of textiles is evaluated again, sometimes in multiple 
rounds, before reaching its final destination of utilization. Textiles are primarily evaluated and 
sorted in terms of monetary value on a local and global market and not primarily for their 
environmental potential.  
 
 C2C 
The textiles re-circulated through C2C exchange are utilized through a new consumer as seen 
in Figure 14, keeping the textiles at their highest value. They are however assumed to 
eventually end up in separate collection streams or waste streams as their value decrease with 
time when they fall out of style and wear out. The fraction is assumed as high quality as the 
fraction resold in Denmark through separate collection and potentially even higher. 
==PAGE:42==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
System cascading 
35 
 
 
 Separate collection 
The main interest of the separate collectors of used textiles is to raise money, either for profit 
by private collectors or for charitable projects by charities. Selling post-consumer textiles for 
reuse raises a far higher price per kg than selling for recycling (Watson, Palm, Brix, & Amstrup, 
2016). The sorting of textiles after the initial collection happens in multiple streams as 
illustrated in Figure 15 through a complex system described below.  
 
 
Reuse in DK 
Of the 36.000 tons separately collected textile, one third are separated for resales on the 
Danish market (Watson et al., 2018a) which constitutes 13% of the total amount of post-
consumer textiles. This fraction holds the highest value, as used textiles are sold at a higher 
price in Danish second-hand stores at 5 Euro/kg than those sold on the global market at 0,5 
Euro/kg (Watson et al., 2016). The fractions that cannot be sold to Danish consumers or that is 
not sorted in Denmark are either exported, recycled, incinerated.  
 
Export 
21.840 tons used textile are exported from Denmark every year (Watson et al., 2018a) 
corresponding to 27% of the total amount. Watson et al. (2016) mapped the pathway of used 
textiles from the four largest Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. This 
data provides a picture of how the Danish used textiles cascade in the sorting process when 
exported.  
Figure 14 – System cascading 
of C2C exchange streams. 
Figure 15 – System cascading of separate collection 
==PAGE:43==
System cascading 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
36 
 
About one quarter of exported textiles is pre-sorted within Denmark prior to export, for 
textile- and non-textile waste and for high quality textiles to keep in Denmark for resales 
where they can be sold at a higher price. The other three quarters of exported textiles are 
unsorted, apart from superficial removal of non-textile waste, and are exported mostly to 
Eastern Europe where workers at large sorting facilities sort the textile amounts further into 
domestic resale (in the country of sorting), further export of textiles for reuse and recycling on 
the global market and some for incineration/landfill. This is also supported in a newer study by 
Ljungkvist et al. (2018).  
 
In this way the used textiles cascade in terms of quality and value from rich countries down to 
poorer ones (Watson et al., 2016). Of the total amount of post-consumer textiles from 
Denmark, 19% are exported for reuse, 5% exported for recycling and 3% exported for 
incineration/landfill.  
 
Because of recent years supply to the market of used textiles, tight margins have led to 
efficient use. All fractions must serve a purpose by selling rags for recycling and even the 
plastic waste that come in the fractions for recycling despite the low price of these. The 
exported Nordic textiles’ value is thereby utilized as far as possible (Watson et al., 2016). This 
data however, stems from 2016 and a change in demand and supply is seen since then as 
described as a challenge of the system in section 4.7.  
 
End-of-life treatment of exported textiles is different from treatment in Denmark. Well-
functioning Danish incineration facilities enable energy recovery from the disposed textiles. 
When textile fractions are exported, the disposal of waste separated from the fractions follow 
the waste streams of the country it is sorted in. 3% of the total amount is incinerated or 
landfilled after export. Since most sorting happens in facilities within EU Member states in 
Eastern Europe where EU minimum standards comply, the waste is treated responsibly. Little 
information is however available on what happens to textiles when they are worn out in Africa 
and Asia where they might lead indirectly to local environmental impacts (Watson et al., 2016).  
 
Recycling in DK  
In most cases, recycling of textiles comprise downcycling in which textiles are used for 
upholstery, industrial rags or insulation and not for production of new textile products (Palm, 
et al., 2014). In Denmark, textile recycling rates are much lower than that of exported textiles 
due to a lack of local markets (Watson et al., 2018a). 0,4% of the total amount of post-
consumer textiles are sorted for recycling within Denmark compared to 5% exported and 
sorted for recycling on the global market.  
 
Incineration in DK 
Textile- and non-textile waste removed from the separately collected used textiles sorted 
within Denmark before export is send to incineration. This includes textiles not valuable for the 
current reuse- and recycling market and other materials such as paper or plastic bags. The 
textile waste incinerated in Denmark from the separately collected fraction comprise about 
2230 tons equivalent to 3% of the total amount.  
==PAGE:44==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
System cascading 
37 
 
The quality of the incinerated fraction in Denmark is assumed of the lowest quality, as 
professional sorters evaluate it from a set of criteria. The condition in terms of wear and tear 
makes it not even suitable for reuse in other countries where standards are lower. The 
material properties and size of the textile pieces do not meet requirements for recyclable 
textiles as industry rags must hold a certain size and material composition. However, these can 
also comprise of textiles put on the shelf in charity shops without being sold and ends in 
incineration.  
 
 Disposal as waste 
Textiles discarded in bulky waste, small combustibles and mixed waste fractions by the 
consumer mix with each other as some amounts of textiles picked up from bulky waste will 
end up in small combustibles when entering the local recycling centre for sorting. However, no 
textiles are recovered from these fractions and are defined as waste, which is incinerated in 
Denmark, as illustrated in Figure 16.  
 
 
 
Quality of wasted textiles 
Nørup, Pihl, Damgaard & Scheutz (2019) assess the quality of textiles found in residual/mixed 
waste and small combustibles of five regions in Denmark through a comprehensive sorting 
method. The study is part of a Phd project from the Technical University of Denmark in 2018. 
About 65% of the textiles found in both fractions was assessed of reusable quality (had they 
not ben discarded), consisting primarily of products that can definitely be resued and a large 
fraction of reusable rags for industry. A further 12-16% was assessed recycable and only about 
20%  of the textiles was considered actual waste. (Nørup, Pihl, Damgaard, & Scheutz, 2019) 
 
A study conducted by the Danish EPA in 2018, examined 235 kg of textiles separated from 
Danish mixed waste streams in seven municipalities. It estimates that 23% of textiles found in 
waste streams would have been reusable and 26% recyclable on the global market had it been 
donated in separate collections streams instead (Watson et al., 2018a). The studies present 
difference results, mainly due to different sorting methods and criteria. 
 
Textiles are instantly contaminated when mixed with residual waste through grease and wet 
food, and its value decrease instantly thereby. Therefore, waste management can hardly gain 
any value from the textiles after disposal, besides energy recovery at incineration. The only 
option is to try to prevent the textiles from ending up in any of the waste streams from the 
beginning as some municipalities have tried through pilot projects.  
Figure 16 - Cascading of disposal as waste stream 
==PAGE:45==
Final destination 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
38 
 
 Final destination 
Figure 17 illustrates the distribution of the final destination of the total amount of textiles 
discarded by consumers in Denmark each year. The chart shows the same distribution as the 
far-right side of the material flow model in Figure 9. The chart includes the destination of 
exported textiles as well because these add to our understanding of the quality and value of 
the textiles from Denmark, i.e. even though textiles are not reused in Denmark, at least a large 
share is reused in the rest of the world. The three main fractions of utilization: reuse, recycling 
and Incineration/landfill are summaries in the underlined headings on the chart.  
 
 
 
Reuse 41% 
22% of the total amount of post-consumer textile waste is reused in Denmark either through 
direct C2C exchange or platform sales and through separate collectors reselling donations 
through second-hand shops. An additional 19% is reused in the rest of the world. These 
amounts thereby recirculate in the system but will eventually end up in one of the other 
streams as they are discarded once again by new users.  
 
Recycling 6% 
Only 0,4% of the total amount ends up being recycled inside of Danish borders. This amount 
originates from the separately collected textiles which have been assessed not suitable for 
reuse or export and comprise of the right properties for recycling options available such as 
material composition for insulation and minimum size for cutting rags. An additional 5% is 
recycled after export which is a substantially higher rate due to a higher need to make profit, 
of the fractions and higher market demand.  
 
Incineration/landfill 53% 
The textiles discarded as waste within Denmark comprise 48% discarded by consumers in 
bulky waste, small combustibles and mixed household waste as well as 3% of the separately 
collected textiles not suitable for reuse, recycling or export. In Denmark incineration is the last 
Figure 17 - Distribution of final destinations of post-consumer textiles. 
==PAGE:46==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
Qualities 
39 
option for many material streams and only hazardous and contaminated materials end up in 
landfills (www.affald.dk, u.d.) and therefore this fraction is assumed incinerated only. The last 
few percentages stem from the incinerated or possibly landfilled textiles after export.  
 
 Qualities  
Figure 18 illustrated the possible qualities from the above mapping illustrated in the same 
format as the conceptual model of textile utilization in theory section 2.5. The vertical axis 
indicates the quality of the textiles divided in the groups Use, Reuse, Recycle and Waste. The 
qualities below Use are for post-consumer textiles. The horizontal axis indicates time without 
specific values. The red arrows indicate when the quality decrease from one step to another 
and the dotted upwards green arrows indicate where possible routes to re-circulate textiles 
exists.  
 
Each quality of post-consumer textiles, after the initial Use, are numbered and the priority of 
numbers do not indicate the level of quality but are simply to reference by. The colours used 
for the qualities follow the same colour scheme as for the material flow in Figure 9 and the pie 
chart of the final destination of textiles in Figure 17. It should be noted that the figure only 
illustrated the possible utilization options and their relation in terms of quality. The figure is 
not be viewed as a sequence of how textiles cascade in the system meaning that a piece of 
textiles in any of the streams mentioned above can originate from any quality. For example, 
new textiles might as well cascade immediately down to incineration and does not necessarily 
go through the other utilization steps priory.  
 
Quality 1 of reusing through C2C is evaluated high enough, by consumers, to either pass 
on or sell forward. The fact that this fraction is decided worthwhile spending time on 
forwarding to another user indicates that the monetary value of this fraction is relatively high, 
Figure 18 - Qualities in the current system of post-consumer textile.  
==PAGE:47==
Qualities 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
40 
however no data could be found on this. The fraction can both originate from new use, 
previous C2C reuse or separate collection reuse, as indicated by the arrows. The quality has 
the potential to re-circulate within this quality. From Figure 9 (- Material flow of post-
consumer textiles in Denmark.) and Figure 11- Initial disposal into C2C streams. we recall that 
this fraction is relatively small through.  
 
Quality 2 which is reused through the separate collection system is assumed a little 
lower than quality 1 due to the textiles not being worthwhile selling forward by the 
consumer themselves. Donating for charitable reasons only, could however eliminate this 
assumption. As the quality of reusable textile can be subjective from consumer to consumer, 
textiles ending up in reuse by separate collection can potentially be sold C2C next time it 
switches owner, indicated by the dotted green line between quality 1 and 2. The quality also 
has the potential to re-circulate within the same quality, being donated for separate collection 
again. 
 
The recycled textiles of quality 3 are illustrated by rags for industrial cleaning and not as 
a T-shirt which it originates from. This is to illustrate that downcycling is most common 
and that textile-to-textile recycling barely exist. Recycling/downcycling provides the possibility 
of utilizing non-reusable textiles through a new function (insolation, rags etc.) one more time 
before incineration. This downcycled textiles are assumed rarely re-circulating within the 
quality.  
 
Quality 4 represents two streams from the mapping: One stream is textiles which has 
been sorted according to separately collectors’ sorting criteria and evaluated not 
suitable for reuse on the global marked or recyclable and can thereby be argued to belong in 
incineration. Furthermore, this stream only represents 3% of the total amount. The other 
stream is textiles disposed as waste by consumers in which between 23-65% was shown 
reusable on the global market (quality 2 and 5) and 12-26% was shown recyclable on the global 
market (quality 3 and 6) and that only 20% actually was considered waste. The amount of this 
fraction corresponds to 48% and has no possibility of circulating back to the higher qualities 
due to contamination.  
 
Quality 5 is either pre-sorted as not suitable for reuse on the Danish market and 
exported or exported directly as the original fraction. This quality is sold for reuse on 
the global market where it can be re-circulated for reuse between various consumers and 
countries before worn out.  
 
The exported textiles that are recycled are in most cases downcycled and can hold the 
same quality as textiles recycled in Denmark due to the sorting sometimes taking place 
after export.  
 
The quality of the incinerated or landfilled exported textiles are assumed the lowest 
quality since these are not suitable for reuse or recycling on the global market. 
Furthermore, as the quality has the potential to be landfilled due to waste management 
practices of the country it ends in, the quality can course some environmental impact worse 
==PAGE:48==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
Actors 
41 
than that of incineration. However, this fraction only equals 3% of the total amount of post-
consumer textiles.  
 
Repair/refurbish 
No studies where found regarding consumers’ repair and refurbishment practices of textiles in 
Denmark. This is however an important phase to incorporate as a prioritization by consumers 
to get textiles repaired, add to the active lifetime of textiles and postpones having to get rid of 
the textile. According to Statistics Denmark, no more than 80 DKK has been spent a year in the 
category “Repair and hire of clothing” for any type of household through the year 2010-2016 
(Statistics Denmark, 2019). Through a rough comparison of prices for repairs at such services in 
Denmark, 80 DKK barely provides a single jeans repair. Data on consumers repairing textiles 
themselves or make use of repair services through retailers have not been found through this 
study.  
 
 Actors 
Figure 19 illustrates an actor network of 
the actor groups included in this 
mapping. The colour scheme partly 
follows the same as other figures in this 
mapping. The consumer is in the centre 
as the focus is on post-consumer textiles.  
 
The actor groups closest to the consumer 
are the ones most directly engaging with 
consumers such as facilitators of C2C 
exchange, separate collectors (mainly 
charities) but also textile producers as 
they engage with consumer through the 
traditional purchase of new textiles and 
are currently engaging in the collection 
of post-consumer textiles as well. Private 
and textile producers’ repair services are 
assumed close to the consumer, but the 
popularity is assumed very low.  
 
The ones further away are indirectly engaging with consumers or directly with one of the other 
actor groups such as municipal waste companies who collects and handle textile waste, sorting 
plants in the rest of the world and textile recycling facilities. The indirect actor groups Science 
& Research and Interest Groups are added as they have a great influence on the system but 
are not in direct contact with handling the post-consumer textiles and are not directly a part of 
this mapping.  
 
Figure 19 Actor network of the current system of 
post-consumer textiles in Denmark. 
==PAGE:49==
Challenges 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
42 
 Challenges  
The current system of post-consumer textiles in Denmark is a complex system which involves 
many different actors in various markets and handles large amounts of textiles. By comparing 
the current handling of textiles (Figure 18) to the ideal handling of textiles with respect to 
Circular Economy as described in the theory section 2 (Figure 5) some deviations are identified. 
Figure 20 presents the two figures alongside each other for comparison. This section states the 
challenges of utilizing the post-consumer textiles in the current system in order to evaluate 
textile producers’ role in mitigating some of these through their producer initiatives 
investigated in section 6.3.  
 
 
 
 Profitability & a changing global market  
LCAs have shown that the treatment routes of textiles of the highest environmental benefit to 
that of the lowest matches the waste hierarchy in the order of reuse, recycle and lastly 
incineration. Profitability, which is determined on a global market scale, also favours the waste 
hierarchy as the highest price lies in the reusable fraction, then the recyclable fraction and the 
lowest for incineration or landfill. Due to technological challenges, prices for recyclable textiles 
are low and can barely pay for transportation. The economic value lies almost exclusively in 
Figure 20 Comparison of: a) Conceptual model of ideal textile treatment route, 
Figure 5 and b) Qualities in the current system, Figure 18. 
==PAGE:50==
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
Challenges 
43 
the reusable textiles (Palm, et al., 2014). Thereby, market demands to some extend match 
environmentally beneficial criteria which incentivises sale for reuse by actors in the system of 
used textiles such as private collectors and charities. This implies that reuse will only happen 
over recycling and incineration when it is profitable. The profitability of qualities is however 
shifting due to a changing market.  
 
41% of textile amounts are reused in and outside Denmark. Of the separately collected textiles 
more is reused in the rest of the world through export (19%) than inside of Denmark (13%). As 
reuse is highly preferred over other treatments routes, export is enabling a higher utilization 
rate of the used Danish textiles. In Figure 20, export expands the reuse quality. Even though 
there are consequences of exporting great amounts of textiles from Denmark, such as 
transport and lower standard waste management when finally discarded as waste, export of 
textiles brings possibilities for a higher utilization rate when looking at the total amount and 
has been proven better regarding the environmental impact then recycling options and 
incineration.  
 
However, the amounts of used textiles on the global market has increased during recent years 
and trajectories show that they will keep increasing and saturate the global markets for used 
textiles. The larger volumes are partly a result of the general increase in consumption of 
textiles, the explosion in the supply of used textiles from China whose middle class is rising and 
a higher collection rates in Europe under the new Circular Economy agenda (Ljungkvist et al., 
2018).  
 
At the same time the quality of collected used textiles is reported to be decreasing due to an 
increase of low-quality fast fashion production and the collection of a wider range of quality as 
consumers donate more textiles due to awareness of material value (including old socks).  
Furthermore, second hand sales of textiles are increasingly competing with low-price new 
garments. Due to the increase in low-quality reusable textiles it is hard to find markets for and 
ends up sold for recycling instead of reuse which leads to recycling (or downcycling) markets to 
become saturated as well. As a result, some countries are discussing import bans for used 
clothing (Ljungkvist et al., 2018).  
 
Collectors are thereby experiencing a reduction in the kilogram price they can receive from 
wholesalers/sorters as global demand for used clothing cannot keep up with the increasing 
supply. The used textile collection is likely to accelerate alongside stronger policies from EU 
and a higher engagement from the fashion and textile industry which creates larger amounts 
of lower quality used textiles to handle (Ljungkvist et al., 2018).  
  
 Steep slope of cascading 
As seen in Figure 20a, the ideal treatment route comprises more options after reuse such as 
repair, refurbish and different types of recycling and ideally the final option for non-reusable 
textiles should be recycling into new textiles. Due to technological-, material- and production 
related challenges as described in the theory section 2, this is not what occurs in the current 
system. Downcycling options only add a single or a couple of utilization steps before inevitably 
ending up incinerated or landfilled. Furthermore, repair and refurbishment of textiles to keep 
==PAGE:51==
The relevance of textile producers 
 
DS I: Mapping of post-consumer textiles 
 
 
44 
them in use, are assumed not often practiced by consumers. Due to current production 
practices, it often costs the same to replace textiles by buying new than to have a garment 
repaired. This means that the lack of middle steps in the cascading possibly results in a fast 
track from the high quality of reusable textiles down to the lowest one of incineration with the 
options practiced in the current system.    
 
 Large loss at initial disposal  
Almost 50% of textiles going to waste is at the consumers initial disposal of textiles into waste 
streams. The fraction is not of the highest quality but is however still a great loss for lower 
reuse qualities or recycling purposes.  
 
Consumers subjectively evaluates their textiles to be worthy of wasting even though some of it 
holds the quality of reselling on the global market. Furthermore, research indicates that 
convenience and easy access to textile donation sites are among the most important factors 
for consumer to donate their clothes instead of discarding them as waste (Ha-Brookshire & 
Hodges, 2009). Consumers might simply find it more convenient to discard the textiles in the 
waste than having to find the nearest separate collection container or charity shop to donate 
to.  
 
Green looped arrows in Figure 20 indicate which qualities have the possibility of re-circulating 
in the same quality. These are only detected for the reusable qualities or fractions in and 
outside Denmark in the current system. Textiles downcycled to rags, contaminated in waste 
streams or incinerated cannot gain a quality of reuse or recycling afterwards. This means that 
once sorted for lower qualities than reuse, the qualities cannot return upwards. The 
consequence of this challenge is realized when looking at the 48% of textiles disposed as waste 
by consumers, even though most textiles are of a higher quality than that suitable for 
incineration. Only by engaging in activities such as wash, repair and maintenance, the quality 
can be kept or even increased from the previous state. This however, is also only possible prior 
to the cutting up, wasting or incineration of textiles.  
 
 The relevance of textile producers 
By solving some of these challenges, the system might move closer to circular principles. While 
challenges arise from various reasons, there is a clear link between how post-consumer textiles 
can be utilized and how they are produced. Textile producers are emerging as collectors of 
post-consumer textiles and even though they are relatively new and represent a small share of 
collected textiles, they also serve the purpose of producing what goes into the system in the 
first place. Therefore, this study investigates the role of textile producers in the collection and 
handling of post-consumer textiles.  
 
 
==PAGE:52==
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
The relevance of textile producers 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
This section zooms in on textile producers and their 
activities in the collection and handling of post-
consumer textiles. Previous studies on the topic 
reveals categorizations and desk-top research 
performed by this study maps currently operated 
initiatives. From this, three distinct initiative types 
are developed, described and illustrated before 
evaluated in section 6. 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
Previous studies 
 
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
 
46 
 Previous studies 
Initiatives to collect and handle post-consumer textiles by textile producers themselves are a 
landscape of intertwined constellations. Previous studies have identified and categorized 
existing initiatives to guide policy regulations to prevent textile waste and others have 
provided insights into the business models of the initiatives and how to operate them from a 
business perspective.  
 
Tojo et al. (2012) is one of the early authors on the topic of textile producers’ initiatives to 
prevent textile waste. Initiatives of collection are roughly categorized into two types; the 
collection for re-sale in own second-hand store and in-store take-back of discarded textiles in 
return of a voucher, in partnership of collection company.  
 
Watson et al. (2014) describes and evaluates EPR-systems and business models for policy 
guidance. Nine different types of EPR-systems and business models, relevant to this study, are 
identified under four main groups; mandatory EPR, voluntary EPR, product take-back and 
reuse & resell. These are stated not mutually exclusive as they can intertwine in many ways. 
EPR schemes are identified as either mandatory law or voluntary which can be arranged for 
the individual producer or collective. “Product take back schemes” are identified arranged as 
in-store collection with a partner, in-store collection without partners or as a donation 
partnership with a charity. The reuse & resell initiatives are identified as reselling in current 
stores, resell in separate stores or reselling online.  
 
Much research in the field of business models for post-retail responsibility of textiles in the 
fashion industry is conducted by Hvass (2014). She identifies three main ways in which 
companies can organize their post-retail initiatives as; partnering with a charity to facilitate the 
collection, implementing an in-store take-back schemes in collaboration with a third-party 
collector or management their own internal waste stream and post-retail initiatives.  
 
Elander, Watson & Gylling (2017) categorizes two main business models as; take-back of own 
products and resale which can be either in store collection, online collection or collection and 
resale with partner and the second is collection of all labels and resale either through in-store 
collection with partner, donation partnership with charity or other reuse platforms. (Elander, 
Watson, & Gylling, 2017) 
The definition of “take-back” varies in the literature as it for some relates to the in-store 
collection of all types of textiles and for others it can be take-back of a brand’s own 
production. The categorizations are also reflected by the focus of studies ranges from polices 
to business models. Whether the initiative is enforced by law or will not be included as it is 
evaluated to be more of a mean to implement and does not necessarily guide the effect of 
initiatives and how they should be designed.  
 
The interrelation between the previous categories are not of importance for this study as the 
aim is not to conclude on how they are operated but how they should be designed. Previous 
literature provides this study an offset in identifying current producer initiatives.  
 
==PAGE:54==
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
Mapping of current producer initiatives 
47 
 Mapping of current producer initiatives  
The landscape of current operated producer initiatives and the activities associated is mapped 
to provide an up-to-date identification of initiative types and validate previous categorization. 
What activities to collect data for was determined from what activities previous studies in 
most cases use to distinguish the initiatives. Five activities where identified: (1) What type of 
textiles are collected, (2) What channels they are collected through, (3) If an economic 
incentive is provided to the consumer, (4) Whether or not a collaboration partner is involved 
and (5) How the textiles are utilized and through which channels. Data on the above listed 
activities is collected for 34 textile producers’ post-consumer textile initiatives. The data can be 
seen in Appendix B which is a matrix, listing rows of producer initiatives and columns of 
activities. The mapping provides an updated picture of current initiatives to identify producer 
initiative types from.  
 
 Producer initiative types 
From the review of previous studies together with the mapping of current producer initiatives, 
three types of producer initiatives are identified and titled: (1) Take Back, (2) Resales and (3) 
Recycle. The term “initiatives” is used as oppose to business models, strategies or EPR systems 
as the activities related to the handling of post-consumer textiles do not appear to be the 
cores of the producers’ business. This aspect will be unfolded further in the evaluation.  The 
initiatives are illustrated in flow models in Figure 22 which illustrate how each is operated. The 
flow models are based on a model illustrating the relation between producers’ traditional 
activities (blue boxes) and the activities related to the handling of post-consumer textiles 
(brown boxes), in Figure 21.  
 
In a traditional sense, the producer influences 
how their products are designed, sourcing 
materials, production of products with the aim of 
sales. After use, arrows from the consumer 
indicates the choices of discarding as either 
giving or selling C2C (directly to reuse), donating 
for separate collectors (directly to collection) or 
discarding as waste (directly to incineration), as 
previously mapped in section 4.  
 
Figure 21 illustrates the traditional gab between 
the producer’s field of influence and the activities 
related to collection and handling of post-
consumer textiles, which is now changed in 
various constellations through the 
implementation of producer initiatives.  
 
An overview of the identified initiative types is presented in Table 3 and illustrated in flow 
models Figure 22a, Figure 22b and Figure 22c which illustrate how each is operated. 
Figure 21 - Relation between traditional 
activities of producers and activities related to 
the handling of post-consumer textiles. 
==PAGE:55==
Producer initiative types 
 
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
 
48 
Table 3 - Initiative types 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Name of 
initiative type 
Typical producer 
profile 
Type of textiles 
collected 
Collection 
channel 
Reward 
Collaboration 
Partner 
Utilization of 
textiles 
Number of 
initiatives 
% of 
initiatives 
Note 
Take Back 
Highstreet women & 
men’s' wear 
All types 
In-store collection* 
Yes** 
Private collector / Non-
profit 
Separate collection 
stream** 
17 
50% 
*Esprit only offers mail collection. 
**Zara does not. 
***Collector sorts for reuse, 
recycle and disposal.  
Resales 
Premium women & 
men’s' wear & outdoor 
gear 
Own brand only 
In-store collection* 
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own 
store 
11 
32% 
*Boomerang offers only mail 
collection. 
Recycle 
Product/material 
specialized producers  
Material/product 
specific* 
In-store collection/ 
Mail collection 
Yes** 
Private collector / Non-
profit 
Recycling 
6 
18% 
*Ex. All denim, All underwear and 
socks, Own tee-shirts only etc. 
**Except for Ikea (pilot project) 
and Nike. 
  
 Total 
  
  
  
  
  
34 
100% 
  
Figure 22 – Flow models of identified initiative types: a) Take Back, b) Re-sales and c) Recycling. Illustrated in relation to the traditional relation between producers and post-consumer textiles as illustrated in Figure 21. 
a) Take Back 
b) Resales 
c) Recycle 
==PAGE:56==
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
Producer initiative types 
49 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
Producer initiative types 
 
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
 
50 
 
 Flow models 
The arrows indicate the possible pathways of textiles and the different coloured boxes are 
activities related to the specific initiative type. The $-sign and solid green arrow indicate where 
monetary transactions are being directly made and dotted green arrows where they indirectly 
are made. The dotted orange arrow with a lightbulb symbol indicate where learnings from 
downstream might forward its way upstream. The activities related to each initiative type are 
described in the following sections. 
 
The three initiative types are described in the following sections. 
 
 Take Back 
 
The Take Back initiative is the most popular and is operated by 50% of the identified current 
initiatives. The initiative type is illustrated in Figure 22a. The type of initiative is mainly 
operated by Highstreet brands for women and men’s wear, following the fast fashion strategy. 
H&M is one of the first textile producers to implement the initiative back in 2013. Examples of 
other producers operating the initiative are H&M, Zara, KappAhl, Guess, Adidas and Marks & 
Spencer. 
 
The initiative collects any type of textile, from any brand and in any condition in their in-store 
bins after which the consumer receives a monetary reward for their donation, often in the 
form a discount voucher on their next purchase of the brand’s products (illustrated by the 
dotted green line). A few producers also offer collection by mail.  
 
The producer collaborates either with a non-profit organisation or a private textile collector 
who receives the collected textiles prior to sorting. The majority collaborates with the Swiss 
textile collector I:Collect (I:CO).  
 
The sorting and handling of textiles is handled exclusively by the collaboration partner 
immediately after the in-store collection. From the mixed batch of collected textiles, the 
partner sorts for reuse, recycling and lastly incineration to maximise their profit where most 
economic gain lies in the reusable part. The sorting of the partner very much replicates that of 
the separate collection in the current system of post-consumer textiles and is therefore named 
“separate collection stream”.  This is seen when comparing Figure 22a with Figure 21. The 
textiles sorted for recycling are primarily downcycled to rags and insulation material.  
 
The amounts collected through these initiatives vary between a couple to several thousand 
tons collected a year. H&M collects by far the largest amount of approximately 20.500 tonnes 
in 2018 (H&M Group, 2018) in about 48 countries, which equals and average of 430 tonnes per 
country. In perspective, the amount of post-consumer textiles collected for separate collection 
in Denmark is 36.000 tonnes per year. Other brands in the high-volume range are Zara with 
15.000, Marks & Spencer with 900 and C&A with 135 tonnes per year in all the countries they 
operate in.   
 
 
==PAGE:58==
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
Producer initiative types 
51 
 Resales  
 
32% of the identified current initiatives operate by this model. The initiative type is illustrated 
in Figure 22b. The initiative is mainly operated by brands producing premium women and 
men’s wear and sports- and outdoor gear. Examples of producers operating this initiative are 
FilippaK, Boomerang, Eileen Fisher, Patagonia and Ege Carpets. 
 
Through the initiative, producers collect post-consumer textiles of their own brand only 
through primarily in-store collection and also mail collection in the exchange of a voucher to 
use on a next purchase (all but one producer). Whether consumers are rewarded per 
donation, per piece or through consignment differs between the initiatives.  
 
Few producers facilitate the resale of their own brand products through the partnership with a 
C2C re-sale platform, as illustrated by the far-right box in Figure 22b. Producers can manage 
the resales themselves or through partnership.  
 
The collected textiles are primarily resold for reuse and often at a higher price than that of 
traditional charity shops. Producers usually prepare the textiles for resales through wash, 
repair and refurbishment. Those items that cannot be sold through their own channels might 
be donated to charity for resales. Some producers also engage in recycling partnerships of the 
fraction that cannot be resold for reuse, as secondary activities.  
 
The dotted orange line from the initiative activities up to Design & Development represent the 
possible changes made in upstream processes from experiences of reselling the used textiles. 
The collected amounts are smaller than that of the Take Back initiative and ranges from 100 
tonnes per year and down. Not much data on amounts was available. 
 
 Recycle 
 
The Recycling initiative occurred in the research as a clearly defined separate type but only 
represents 18% of the initiatives. The initiative type is illustrated in Figure 22c. The producers 
engaging in the initiative are Highstreet brands selling specific products such as only selling 
tee-shirts, jeans or underwear and examples are Knickey who collects all socks and underwear, 
jeans producer Madewell and tee-shirt producer For Days.  
 
The initiative type collects material- or product specific textiles through either in-store or mail 
collection in exchange for a reward in the form of a discount voucher. Most of the producers 
collaborates with private collectors or non-profit organizations to handle the textiles.  
 
The producers state that the textiles are recycled through the initiative and none of them 
mention reuse. Half of the initiatives downcycle into rags or insulation through the 
collaboration with a non-profit. A third claims to recycle into the production of their own 
textile products through the partner collaboration, e.g. For Days who state to recycle their tee-
shirts into new in a 70/30 blend of virgin and recycled, respectively. Amounts collected are 
rarely communicated and are not estimated here but are assumed low 
==PAGE:59==
Producer initiative types 
 
PS I: Producer initiatives 
 
 
52 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Producer initiative types 
53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. DS II: Evaluation 
 
In this section, the three producer initiative types 
are evaluated in terms of: (1) utilization of textiles, 
(2) upstream changes and (3) rebound effects. 
Results from the thematic analysis presents the 
main findings from the qualitative interviews. 
These are then discussed in relation to how the 
initiatives align with Circular Economy. Finally, 
initiative types are discussed in relation to their 
impact on solving current system challenges. 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
Analytical framework 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
54 
 Analytical framework 
Producers’ activities with post-consumer textiles are relevant to investigate as many of the 
challenges identified in the current system, relate to the vast linear production of fast fashion 
which competes with second-hand prices and saturates the second-hand market with large 
amounts of low-quality textiles. Meaning that the producers can engage in the utilization of 
used textiles alongside other actors in the system but also holds the opportunity of changing 
upstream processes to produce textiles better suited for the current utilizations streams. 
Previous studies have hinted towards textile producers’ activities being closely linked to their 
marketing activities and less with direct material circularity (Hvass, 2019) and therefore, the 
potential rebound effects are also investigated.  
 
Thereby, the various ways which producers engage in the current system of post-consumer 
textiles are evaluated according to the topics: 
• 
How post-consumer textiles are collected and utilized 
• 
If activities encourage positive upstream changes in design 
• 
If any rebound effects jeopardize the above 
 
 Interview findings 
This section presents the results from the thematic analysis of interviews, following the 
Thematic Analysis Method by Braun & Clarke (2006) used for organising the quantitative data 
from interviews. A total of three interviews are conducted and more information on the data 
collection is described in the method section 3. As the interview questions where directly 
aimed at gathering information regarding the three topics, the themes from the interviews 
naturally fits within this context. The themes from the interviews are summarised in Table 4 
and will be elaborated in this section before further discussed. An example of the interview 
guide can be seen in Appendix C and a summary of interview extracts of the various themes 
can be seen in Appendix D. 
 
Table 4 - Summary of themes gathered from qualitative interviews. 
Topic 
Theme 
Utilization of textiles 
Consumers must be incentivised to donate 
Following the entire waste hierarchy 
Recycling should not be the priority 
Quality of collected textiles determines utilization 
Upstream changes 
Using experience from collection in design 
Appreciation of textiles 
Need for high quality products  
Level of change in business & strategy 
Rebound effects 
Experience might trigger higher frequency of replacement 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Interview findings 
55 
 Utilization of textiles  
This topic investigates how the post-consumer textile amounts are collected and handled.  
 
Consumers must be incentivised to donate 
In order to collect the post-consumer textiles and keep textiles from being discarded as waste, 
it must be as easy as possible for consumers to hand them in. The Take Back initiative allows 
donation of a bag of all types of textiles in any condition in the collection bins and this offers a 
convenience for the consumer. 
 
Many fashion brands across the initiative types offer an economic incentive in the form of a 
voucher on a new purchase. Whether or not the consumers would donate without the 
reimbursement is questioned. A brand of the Resales type earns profit on your garment twice 
through the resales and the consumer might want an economic gain as well.  
 
Ege Carpets sometimes miss the collection of their used carpets if the customer replaces is 
with another brand due to the customers not feeling that they can allow themselves to deliver 
them back. Ege Carpets offers no economic incentive and instead communicates about the 
importance of reuse and recycling to the consumer.  
 
Following the entire waste hierarchy 
How textiles are sorted for utilization in the initiative type Take Back, depend on the partner as 
textiles are immediately handled by them after the initial collection. Charities and private 
collectors need to make profit of the used textiles and therefore sort the “best” off for resales 
within Europe. It is difficult to utilize the rest as there is little economic gain it the non-reusable 
part and therefore charities and private textile collectors cannot close the loop for producers.  
 
The importance of maintenance and repair was 
stressed. The Resales initiative type usually includes 
repairing and refurbishing prior to resale to capture 
the product value.  
 
It is Ege Carpet’s experience that the lack of 
maintenance in the use phase makes carpets non-
reusable after collection and therefore offer guidance and service on maintenance. 
 
The strategy to collect with the purpose of recycling through initiative type Recycle, does not 
make sense if the textiles could have been reused instead. Collecting for downcycling only 
makes sense if it replaces another material. The interviewees questioned the strategy of this 
type.  
 
Recycling should not be the priority  
It is experienced that producers prioritize the 
implementation of recycling fibres to use in their 
current production model. It is questioned to be 
possible for a single brand alone to close their loop of 
fibres unless their value chain is built for it. Some 
interviewees stated that recycling strategies also is a 
linear model due to the quality decreasing so rapidly.  
“What I hear from brands are that they 
need to recycle fibres in order to have 
plenty of material for their production. 
It is difficult to shake their linear 
mindset.” 
- Interviewee 3 
“Much more effort is put in the Resales 
initiative type in capturing the product 
value through washing and repairing 
prior to resale.” 
- Interviewee 1 
==PAGE:63==
Interview findings 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
56 
 
Ege Carpets however, do experience an equally high quality of their products made from 
recycled polyester fibres. 
 
But even high-quality products eventually wear out and will need recycling technologies that 
can source the fibres back. Therefore, it is not so clear cut which strategy to use.  
 
Quality of collected textiles determines utilization 
How consumers use their textiles has a great impact on the utilization possibilities after 
collection.  The quality collected by textile fashion brands depends on the information and 
incentive by consumers. If for example warm coats for homeless people are asked for, 
consumers won’t bring their trash.  
 
When a Take Back initiative asks for all types of textiles in any condition, customers can bring 
anything, and bags are usually not checked. The collection partners are struggling with their 
economy because less amounts of textiles are reusable. The traditional countries for exporting 
of textiles do not want discarded textiles to the same degree as previous because of an 
overflooded supply.  
 
For Ege Carpets, their customers often replace their carpets due to wear and tear after a long-
life time but also due to shifting trends and re-decoration of spaces. The economic viability of 
preparing carpets for resales in the condition they are collected in decides how they are 
utilized. Ege Carpets only collect their own brand carpets as they do not know what other 
brand put in their products and therefore cannot guarantee for their quality. 
 
 Upstream changes 
Upstream changes relate to changes in processes or activities that are not directly utilizing the 
textiles but create changes to other parts of the producers’ business, to consumers or to the 
industry.  
 
Using experience from collection in design 
The Take Back initiative decouples producers from the handling of post-consumer textiles as 
the textiles are immediately handed over to the collaboration partner. This decrease the 
incentive for upstream changes for producers.  The initiative Resales has the highest potential 
for incentivising positive upstream changes for the producers due to the in-house handling and 
focus on high quality products that are designed to circulate through multiple uses.   
 
Ege Carpet’s Recover initiative has shown that their 
carpets can be reused (if maintained correctly by 
customers) and are designed to last for a long 
lifetime. However, it is the recycling of non-reusable 
carpets they are struggling with. They state that 
designing for disassembly and material recycling will 
compromise carpets durability.  
 
Appreciation of textiles 
The consumer point of view and mindset was highlighted by the interviewees. Through the 
Resales initiative customers need discipline to bring back the specific brand textiles and 
“We have experimented with 
laminating carpet layers together for 
easier disassembly, but it already 
separates at the temperature used for 
cleaning. The goal is to make the 
carpets last.”  
- Interviewee 4 
==PAGE:64==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Interview findings 
57 
thereby show loyalty. It sends a signal of loving a brand and wanting to give the pieces new life 
and thereby creates awareness of how we consume textiles.  
 
The producer has a chance of caring, repairing and refurbishing it and reselling it instead of it 
ending up in the mixed larger piles at second-hand stores. As bags are usually checked at the 
counter, customers would be embarrassed to bring their dirty trash. In the Take Back initiative, 
the consumer can bring any bag of unwashed clothes in any condition.  
 
Need for high quality products 
There is a need for production of higher quality textile products, fewer pieces and that it 
should not be okay to produce low quality garments. High quality products are stated a 
prerequisite for reselling producers’ own products for reuse. Producers often think that 
producing higher quality products cost more, but they can also charge a higher price and 
potentially sell it multiple times.  
 
Level of change in business & strategy 
The Take Back initiative was questioned as a business 
model and defined more as an add-on campaign in 
the form of some sustainability added to a non-
sustainable strategy. The initiative type is still a linear 
model. 
 
Producers often claim to be working on it, by for 
example producing new certified products. However, 
when those products go out in their current stores, 
their customers will not buy them because they are a 
little bit more expensive than their usual products 
and then the project ends. Therefore, it must be a 
change of business model across departments of 
design, marketing, procurement etc.   
 
 Potential rebound effects 
Rebound effects investigates what unfavoured effects initiatives might bring. A couple of 
themes are deliberately merged together to one as they interrelate.  
 
Experience might trigger higher frequency of replacement 
The Take Back initiative creates foot traffic in stores through the communication of collecting 
all types of textiles.  
 
Producers are looking for a business case in the 
initiative and the voucher might bring customers 
back to the store. The Take Back initiative is criticised 
because it might motivate consumers to make a new 
purchase after getting rid of their textiles in a 
convenient way and with a clean conscience.  
The reason that producers try to tie together the 
experience of shopping and donating textiles, is to do 
business and make the customer purchase something new.  
“Sustainability cannot be sprinkled on 
top of the business. It must be 
integrated in the company.”  
- Interviewee 3  
“It very easily becomes green-washing 
when a brand engages in some small 
take back and voucher system to buy a 
clean conscience, but it is not the way 
forward. It might help a little, but not 
enough.”  
- Interviewee 2 
“I agree that the Take back initiative 
allows consumers to clean up their 
closets at a high frequency. You even 
get promoted for it and that can 
trigger a next purchase.” 
- Interviewee 1 
==PAGE:65==
Discussion 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
58 
 Discussion 
 
 Contribution to circularity 
In this section the findings from the thematic analysis are discussed in relation to literature for 
each of the thee initiative types to evaluate them for their alignment with Circular Economy.  
 
Table 5 presents a summary of the discussion topics and findings divided in the three topics; 
utilization of textiles, upstream changes and rebound effects. These are presented together in 
the discussion as many of the topics relate and for each initiative separately.  
 
Table 5 - Summary of evaluation of initiatives contribution to Circularity.  
 
Utilization of textiles 
Upstream changes 
Rebound effects 
Take Back 
• 
Provides convenience for consumers 
• 
Potentially diverts some textiles 
from waste  
• 
Partner must utilize large amounts 
of low quality, while trying to make 
profit 
• 
Largest amounts compared to others 
• 
Replicates Extending Product Value 
for slowing loops 
• 
Producer is decoupled 
from handling of textiles  
• 
Producers use few 
resources on initiative 
• 
Producer can keep focus 
on linear production  
• 
If wanting to slow loops, 
producers would design 
for circularity 
• 
Experience of consumer 
might trigger new 
purchase 
• 
Potentially increase 
frequency of replacing 
wardrobe with new items 
• 
Might enforce mindset of 
“disposable textiles” 
 
Resales 
• 
Repair and refurbishment activities 
slow the resource loop 
• 
Possibly better maintenance during 
use 
• 
Most is reused 
• 
Smaller amounts than Take Back 
• 
Replicates mix of Extending product 
value and Classic long-life model for 
slowing loops 
 
• 
Designing for long-life and 
life-extension are 
prerequisites  
• 
Incentivise upstream 
changes 
• 
Resemblance of EPR 
• 
Long-term impact on 
consumer awareness of 
textile value 
• 
High discount potentially 
triggers new purchase 
• 
Might incentivise 
premium purchase as 
investment 
Recycle 
• 
Downcycling is better than 
incineration/landfill 
• 
Potentially diverts some textiles 
from waste streams 
• 
Reusable textiles lose reusable value  
• 
Downcycling is not closing-the-loop  
• 
Recycled fibres enhance low quality 
• 
Replicate Extending Resource Value 
for closing loops 
• 
Incentive to design for 
closing loops 
• 
No incentive to design for 
slowing loops 
• 
Initiative is mostly 
decoupled from linear 
activity 
• 
Experience of consumer 
might trigger new 
purchase 
• 
Might enforce mindset of 
“disposable textiles” 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Discussion 
59 
Take Back 
The Take Back initiative aims at utilizing the current post-
consumer textiles through their partner. The acceptance 
of all types of textiles offers a convenience for the 
consumer and potentially redirects some textiles from 
waste streams and into the collectors’ stream. 
 
The Take Back model replicates the strategy of Extending 
Product Value for slowing resource loops by Bocken et al. 
(2016) by taking back any residual textile products from 
consumers. Even though textiles are initially reverted to 
the producer, they are immediately after forwarded to a 
third-party collaboration partner outside the textile 
production industry (charities and private collectors) for 
utilization.  
 
The collaboration partners are already struggling with large amounts of low-quality textiles, 
with low economic value and can almost only make profit on the reusable fraction. Because 
producers ask for any textiles in any condition, the partners only get more amounts of low-
quality textiles to handle. 
 
By collaborating with a partner, the Take Back initiative removes the responsibility of utilizing 
textiles from the producer and on to a partner. Stål & Hervé (2018) labels this “decoupling by 
outsourcing” and finds that it enables the initiative to take away very few internal resources 
from the linear value creation which remains the producers’ core activities and that this 
explains producers’ positive attitude towards collection. The research further states that the 
monetary arrangements between producers and the collaboration partner results in a 
consistent loss for producers which may explain why some producers are not eager to increase 
their collection volumes as this would increase their costs and effort (Stål & Hervé, 2018).  
 
Interview results agreed that the Take Back model resembles some sustainability added on top 
of a linear model. Interviewees appointed that producer initiatives most often lies in one 
department of the company and that circularity must be adapted throughout the company in 
all departments from design, to retail. 
 
High-street fast fashion products are generally not designed for long-life and reuse yet still, 
high-street producers engage in the Take Back initiative where reuse and downcycling are 
close to the only options for utilizing the textiles. These observations suggest that producers 
operate Take Back models to utilize textiles as they are currently produced but fail to look 
upstream and change their own design practices to suit reuse. If the Take Back initiative truly 
aimed at slowing the resource loop it should be supported through circular design strategies of 
designing long-life products and for product-life extension following the theories of Bocken et 
al. (2016). This way, even when outsourcing to a collaboration partner, more textiles might be 
of a reusable quality.   
 
Flow model of initiative type Take Back 
from Figure 22. 
==PAGE:67==
Discussion 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
60 
The experience for the consumer is a combination of easy disposal of unwanted clothes, a 
reward to spend on new and a clean conscience of donating which could trigger the purchase 
of newly produced textiles. Watson et al. (2014) states that the environmental benefits of 
collection are likely to be reduced with the use of vouchers and should be considered a 
potentially significant negative characteristic of the Take Back model.  
 
The theory on moral licensing might be applied in the scenario. Moral licensing theory is a 
behavioural phenomenon which propose that people who initially behave in a moral way can 
later display behaviour that is immoral, unethical, or otherwise problematic (Blanken, Ven, & 
Zeelenberg, 2015). Adopting this theory implies that consumers feel they have acted in an 
environmentally friendly way by donating their textiles which ‘allows’ them to treat 
themselves to purchase something new with the discount provided. 
 
The consumer experience might even increase the frequency in which consumers clean out 
their closet due to the righteous feeling and thereby extend the mindset of textiles as 
disposable. 
 
Stål & Hervé (2018) found that producers find it hard to change consumer behaviour without 
incentive and that they try to solve this through the communication of appreciation of textile 
products. However, they state that this communication tends to drown in messages of fast-
fashion, sales, new seasons and trends.   
 
To summarise, the Take Back initiative creates a disconnect in activities of post-consumer 
textiles and the linear production of new due to the outsourcing strategy and thereby provides 
no incentive for upstream changes. Furthermore, the experience of the consumer might 
enforce the mindset of textile products as disposable and increase the frequency in which 
consumers’ wardrobe is exchanged for new items bought on discount with a clean conscience. 
Due to this, the Take Back initiative is not characterized as following a circular business model 
strategy, but only resembles it.  
 
Resales 
The Resales initiative primarily collects textile 
products for reuse and some washing, repair or 
refurbishment is often needed to prepare for 
resales to maximise profit. 
 
The initiative aims at slowing the loop of 
resources through a combination of the 
Extending Product value model and Classic 
Long-Life model following Bocken et al. (2016). 
The initiative fits with the Extending Product 
value model as it takes back textiles to the 
original owner, put in effort to refurbish them 
and utilize them through resale. A prerequisite 
Flow model of initiative type Resales from Figure 22. 
==PAGE:68==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Discussion 
61 
for this is for the brand to initially follow the Classic Long-Life model through which a premium 
product is offered. 
 
The activities of repair and refurbishment invested in the collected textiles are evaluated from 
an economic perspective as they must be worth the time and cost. Brands operating these 
models are therefore those that sell premium products at a relative high price. To fit this 
strategy, products must therefore be designed for product-life extension for easier repair but 
also for long-life through timeless design as many users need to find the product attractive 
over a longer period. The in-house handling and resales of their own products incentivises the 
producers to design for high quality products that can circulate through multiple uses and be 
sold multiple times.  
 
The initiative seems somewhat profitable for premium brands by the research of Hvass (2015) 
whereas others have found it to make a loss (Elander et al., 2017). Stål & Hervé (2018) 
however suggest that it does not offer the same value to producers as selling new garments 
due to flows being too small and unreliable and that the initiative in the end supports the 
linear production through advertisement.  The same research appoints this initiative type to be 
“decoupled by internal separation” from the brands’ core activities of linear value creation, 
having no link to design however, interview findings suggest otherwise. 
 
The Resale initiative does however appear to be the closest resemblance to an EPR-system of 
the three types, by encourages producer responsibility through the creation of feedback 
between the handling of textiles and upstream changes and thus the prevention of waste (Tojo 
et al., 2012). 
 
As the Resale initiative also offers discount vouchers in reward, the initiative might still enforce 
the purchasing of new textiles. Interview results state that there is a logic in rewarding the 
consumer for the donated textiles when the producer will make direct profit. Stål & Hervé 
(2018) claims this to even be of quit substantial magnitude as e.g. a 10-15% discount on a 
premium 400€ or so product clearly exceeds the 5€ average of Take Back vouchers. Hvass 
(2015) however suggests that the initiative might entice the purchase of new high-quality 
products as the reuse value is seen as an investment. This ties strongly to the interview finding 
of the initiative potentially creating consumer awareness of the value of textiles and 
encouraging slow fashion.  
 
The level of maintenance by the consumer during use has a great effect on the condition and 
thereby the possible utilization of the textiles after collection. Therefore, the initiatives 
rewarding by an evaluation of the condition of each individual textile product might incentivise 
consumer to care for them during use. Donated textiles are often checked at the counter and 
therefore the initiative encourages a discipline of bringing a proper quality and only bringing 
the brand specific textiles back. 
 
The producer sends a signal of affection for their products and creates consumer awareness of 
how textiles should be cared for and used for a long time. The initiative potentially has long-
term impact through this as it creates awareness of caring for textiles to the consumer. This is 
==PAGE:69==
Discussion 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
62 
partly in line with the designing for attachment and trust (Bocken et al., 2016) as it may not be 
reflected in the specific product design, it is carried on to the product through the design of 
the collection and resales service.  
 
To summarise, the Resales initiative collects smaller amounts than the Take Back initiative, due 
to the brand specific collection, but has a more long-term impact on the quality of textiles 
through the influence on upstream processes in-house and on the consumer mindset through 
awareness of long-life textiles.  
 
Recycle 
Producers engaged in the initiative state that textiles 
are collected for recycling. This belong under the 
circular business model strategy of Extending Resource 
Value by exploiting the residual value from textiles from 
a material resource point of view (material recycling) 
and not from a product point of view (product reuse), 
following the literature of Stahel (1994). 
 
When researching further, three out of a total of six 
producers state to downcycle the textiles. These collect 
textiles within a specific material and/or product 
category but with more variety (all socks, all denim all 
blankets) then the few brands which claim to recycle 
(own tee-shirts only). Downcycling can be beneficial if 
the textiles replace the use of other fibres such as wood 
but still does not close a loop as the processing of textiles into other products (insulation or 
rags) is open-looped recycling according to Sandin & Peters (2018) as seen in Figure 3 in the 
theory section 2.  
 
Two out of six producers state to close-loop-recycle the fibres back into their own production. 
This can be possible if the producer uses one or few traditional materials and has control of 
their own supply chain as stated by an interviewee. However, the recycled fibres must still be 
mixed with a high ratio of virgin fibres (Producer For Days uses a 70/30 virgin/recycled mix). 
 
Extending resource value is about collecting and sourcing otherwise wasted materials (Bocken 
et al., 2016). Whether recycled or downcycled, if the collected textiles would otherwise have 
been incinerated or landfilled then this initiative extends the value. If the collected textiles 
could potentially have been reused instead, then the environmental benefit decrease. Because 
of environmental benefits, reuse should be one of the first steps for producers to take 
responsibility (Hvass, 2015). 
 
If fibres are sourced directly back into production of new textile products, the producer has 
the potential to change their upstream processes to better suit the recycling technology by 
designing for closing resource loops according to the technical cycle (Bocken et al., 2016) in the 
case of textiles through material composition and ease of disassembly. However, as the post-
Flow model of initiative type Recycle from 
Figure 22. 
==PAGE:70==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Discussion 
63 
consumer textiles are purely collected for their material value, there is no incentive to design 
for slowing the resource loops through long-lasting products. Findings from interviews suggest 
that using recycled fibres in production, rapidly decrease the quality of textile products which 
conflicts with the general need for producing higher quality products. 
 
The initiative rewards the consumer with a discount voucher which might incentivize the 
purchase of new. The experience of handing in textiles with the understanding that it is 
recycled into new textiles, for the consumer can encourage a mindset of textiles as disposal as 
it can be perceived that they will simply be made into new textiles. 
 
As the amounts of non-reusable low-quality textiles is growing on the second-hand market, 
the need for a separate collection only for recycling and downcycling purposes is questioned. 
Stål & Hervé (2018) states that it is not a matter of closing loops for producers as collected 
garments almost never are used to make new clothes, at least not by the producers who 
collect them.  
 
To summarise, the activities of the Recycle initiative is argues to be decoupled from the core 
activities of their linear production as with the other initiatives. It is therefore argued that 
collection of post-consumer textiles for recycling into their own production is a way to keep 
and source fibres for their linear model and that collection for downcycling is a way to cover 
their linear production activities up in an initiative which might appear circular.  
 
 Impact on current system challenges 
On the back of the discussion of the producer initiatives’ alignment with circular principles, the 
producer initiatives are now discussed for their impact on the current challenges of the system 
of post-consumer textiles. The discussion follows the headlines of section 4.7 in which the 
challenges initially are presented.  
 
Steep slope of cascading 
The steep slope of cascading relates to the lack of middle textile utilization options between 
reuse and incineration/landfill practiced in the current system such as repair, remanufacturing 
and recycling.  
 
The Take Back initiative appears to utilize textiles in the same way as in the separate collection 
stream in the current system. Therefore, the Take Back initiative can only provide the 
utilization options which profit the collaboration partner which essentially are the same for the 
separate collection actors.  
  
As repair and refurbishment activities were not found to be often practiced in the current 
system of post-consumer textiles, the Resales initiative introduces it to the system and has the 
potential to increase the quality and value of textiles which could otherwise be lost if ending in 
the separate collection stream. The producers have an advantage in this strategy as the resale 
initiative has proven itself economically profitable for brands producing high quality textiles. 
Thereby, there is a possibility for producer initiatives to mitigate the challenge of lack of repair 
==PAGE:71==
Discussion 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
64 
and refurbishment in the current system however, only for textiles that are worth it 
economically and only through premium brands.   
 
Findings regarding the effects of the Recycle initiative suggest that textiles are not utilized in 
any other way than that sorted for recycling/downcycling in the separate collection system, 
apart from two initiatives using recycled fibres as a percentage of input in their own 
production. The initiative thereby does not contribute with utilization steps of repair and 
refurbish and might even remove the utilization through reuse of reusable textiles collected 
through the initiative. The steep slope of cascading also implies missing recycling possibilities 
to source the textile fibres back into production.  
 
At some point in time, even the high-quality premium textile products will wear out and for 
these non-reusable products, the industry needs recycling options to source back these 
materials to close the loop. Therefore, focusing on recycling is still of value to the current 
system, but should not compromise the need for higher reuse as a priority.  
 
Larges loss at initial disposal 
About half of post-consumer textiles are discarded in the initial disposal in Denmark each year 
and the material value is lost forever. The quality of most of these are however proven 
reusable or recyclable on a global market (Nørup et al., 2019) at a much lower sales value than 
that of the average textiles in the separate collection stream (Watson et al., 2018a). 
 
It is a possible scenario that producers operating the Take Back initiative potentially could 
divert some of the textiles from the waste stream into their channels. Especially, the Take Back 
system has potential for this due to the higher amounts than the other initiatives and more 
varied range of collection criteria. This could also be a scenario for the Recycle initiative, but its 
lower volumes limit the impact. By collecting the textiles before contaminated with waste, the 
potential to utilize it might still be and this is captured through the initiative.  
 
Adding additional collection channels of the initiative might divert some textiles from 
incineration and in that case the textiles are utilized in a more environmentally beneficial way. 
However, even though the collection is to prefer over immediate incineration, the assumed 
lower quality of this fraction would only add to the existing overflow of low-quality textiles on 
the second-hand market which is already getting overflooded. This suggests that a higher 
collection rate through the Take Back initiative might not necessarily lead to higher utilization 
rates in the long run. For the Recycle initiative to capture these, otherwise discarded textiles, 
would mean higher utilization but would require higher volumes than currently collected. 
Furthermore, previous research by Stål & Hervé (2018) argues that producers are not 
interested in collecting larger amounts as this inflicts with their core activities of linear 
production.   
 
Also, to consider is the scenario in which producers and traditional collectors of the system 
might compete for the same textiles, i.e. producers collecting a fraction that before was 
collected by charities and private collectors. Hvass (2016) suggest that producers and charities 
might compete of the textile amounts as producers can use vouchers to incentivise consumers. 
==PAGE:72==
DS II: Evaluation 
 
Discussion summary 
65 
Charities however, have the advantage of voluntary workforce for the labour-intensive sorting 
process.  
 
These scenarios are not evaluated relevant for the Resales initiative as it is assumed to collect 
higher quality textiles than those otherwise discarded in the waste by consumers.  
 
Profitability & a changing global market 
The current system is facing challenges in the market of used textiles. Developed countries like 
Denmark has for the last decades exported textiles for reuse and recycle to other parts of the 
world where they could be utilized. Now, the market is saturating and the demand for the 
recycled fraction is close to zero due to a lack of economic potential. Furthermore, the demand 
on the reusable fraction is decreasing due to the overflow of supply and lower quality due to 
production and fast fashion trends. The roots of the challenge are complex, but one is strongly 
suggested to be the current production and retail methods of textile producers.  
 
Research has calculated that the potential amounts collected through initiatives similar to Take 
Back and Resales (if including all relevant stores and brands) would by assumptions only equal 
0,62% and 0,3% of the total textile consumption (In Nordic region perspective) respectively 
and that reuse- and recycling rates would increase with less than 1% in a scenario of 2014 
(Watson et al., 2014).  
 
Even though producers are engaging in initiatives to collect the used textiles, most of them are 
in parallel producing in a linear model contributing to these challenges. It is even argued that 
the convenient experience and reward for the consumer might even enforce an increase in the 
purchase of new products while the Take Back and Recycle initiative indirectly enforces a 
mindset of textiles as disposal in the long run.  
 
As the amounts collected through the producer initiatives are minimal compared to the 
current system, it is argued by this study that the impact on the utilization of current post-
consumer textiles is minimal. Furthermore, it is argued that it primarily is the upstream 
changes of producer initiatives that are impactful to solving challenges of the current system 
Following this analogy, the initiatives that do not encourage upstream changes might only be 
resulting in the negative rebound effects.   
 
 Discussion summary 
The discussion points out some positive contributions of producer initiatives to potentially 
capture post-consumer textiles for utilization in various ways. The Take Back initiative 
potentially offers some short-term impact in diverting some textiles from waste streams due 
to the larger amounts (relative to the other initiatives) and wider range collected. The Recycle 
initiative likewise might divert some textiles from waste streams to downcycling instead. The 
Resales initiative offers repair and refurbish and more long-term impact due to the creation of 
consumer awareness of textile appreciation.  
 
However, the collection practices are hard to justify in the light of producers’ core focus on 
linear value creation. As potential volumes of collected textiles have been proven minimal 
==PAGE:73==
Discussion summary 
 
DS II: Evaluation 
 
 
66 
compared to the current system, their impact on the utilization of textiles through circular 
business model strategies (or resemblances of these) is argued of low impact in solving current 
challenges. It is argued that the impactful aspects of producer initiatives almost exclusively lie 
in the creation of upstream circular design changes of which the Resales initiative is the only 
one identified to incentivise these.  
 
Negative rebound effects are identified for all initiatives in the use of rewards to consumers 
which might increase the purchase of new textile products. Furthermore, the Take Back and 
Recycle initiative are suggested to even enforce a mindset of textile products as disposable by 
consumers in the long run. 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
PS I: Recommendations 
 
Discussion summary 
67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. PS I: Recommendations  
 
This section presents recommendations of means 
to enable textile producers to move the system of 
post-consumer textile towards Circular Economy. 
The case for change and an overall goal is presented 
and various means are suggested using the PEST 
framework to increase (1) reuse and repair, (2) 
recycling activities and (3) circular design practices.  
 
 
==PAGE:75==
The case for change 
 
PS I: Recommendations 
 
 
68 
 The case for change 
The European Commission recently published their new Circular Economy Action Plan. In it, 
textiles are appointed as a focus product category along six others such as electronics, vehicles 
and packaging which emphasises the emerging focus on environmental challenges of the 
textile industry. The report emphasises the design of sustainable products as an enabler for all 
categories through the improvement of product durability, reusability, upgradability and 
reparability. Measures include boosting the market for textile reuse, possibly through 
regulatory measures such as EPR-systems, addressing fast fashion and drive new business 
models (European Commission, 2020).  
 
A study by Mistra Future Fashion shows that it is individual businesses, and branch 
organizations, rather than government that are setting agendas for more sustainable fashion 
and textile production and consumption and respondents stressed a lack of regulation and 
policy instruments promoting business models for increased reuse and prolonged life time of 
textiles (Watson, Gylling, & Thörn, 2017a). 
 
The research by Stål & Hervé (2018) show that the emerging pressure and demands from 
government on textile producers, prompt textile producers to engage in circularity by own 
initiatives, e.g. the initiatives identified in this study, but that they can do this is a way which 
does not inflict on their linear value creation and does not close loops.  
 
The interviewees stated that common guidelines should be provided for the industry to follow 
in collaboration, instead of producers working individually on finding ways for more circular 
practices. The interviewees all agreed that policy regulations most like will be implemented 
soon. This implies that textile producers are experiencing increased pressure by regulatory 
bodies to either find circular ways themselves or become subject to regulatory restrictions, 
demands and measures.  
 
 Goal 
The conceptual model of how textile product should be designed and utilized in a circular 
system, Figure 5 in section 2.5, represents a vision of a more circular textile utilization. To 
recap, textile products are designed by circular design principles for slowing and closing 
resource loops. The time from production to end-of-life is slowed down through circular 
business model strategies to keep the product in use and inevitably, the material is recycled 
back into the production through circular business model strategies of closing loops. More 
details are presented in the theory section 2.5.  
 
The Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2017) describes: “In such a new textiles economy, clothes, 
fabric, and fibres are kept at their highest value during use, and re-enter the economy after 
use, never ending up as waste”. It is however assumed that some textile material eventually 
will go to waste as fibres shorten through the multiple recycling processes. In the Circular 
Economy system diagram, Figure 1, this is defined as system leakage which is minimised 
through the circular principles.  
 
==PAGE:76==
PS I: Recommendations 
 
Means 
69 
The current way textiles are collected and utilized (down-stream) needs changes to slow down 
and close resource loops. It is argued in the discussion, that textile producers’ impact on 
collection and utilization of textiles is low as they are produced today and that changes must 
be made upstream.  
 
The goal for a more circular textile industry is divided into: 
• 
Increase reuse, repair and refurbishment  
• 
Enforce recycling activities  
• 
Implement circular design practices 
 
 Means  
The PEST framework, adapted from the PESTEL framework, is applied for structuring the 
development of recommendations as described further in the method section 3. The 
recommended means are summarized in Table 6.  
 
Table 6 - Overview of recommended means arranged through the PEST framework.  
Political 
Economic 
Social 
Technological 
Reduced VAT on repair 
and refurbishment 
service 
Repair and refurbish 
service through 
partner 
Including consumers in 
workshops for repair 
and refurbish 
Improving chemical 
recycling technologies 
Resource tax on new 
fibres 
Collaboration between charities and premium 
brands 
Fund projects for 
alternative use of 
downcycled textiles 
Minimum durability 
requirements 
 
C2C reuse of own 
brand through 
platform 
Industry funding 
research projects on 
recycling 
Mandatory EPR 
 
Durability labels 
 
 
 Increase reuse, repair and refurbishment  
This study assumes a low to non-existing culture of using repair services and textile producers 
need to move towards this. The need for more repair and refurbishment to prepare textile 
products for reuse instead of downcycling and incineration is needed. 
 
A study on policy instruments to extend the active lifetime of textiles by Mistra Future Fashion, 
evaluated that reducing value added tax (VAT) on services of repair and refurbishment would 
lower the cost for businesses providing these services and thereby a lower price for 
consumers. In Sweden VAT has already been reduced on clothes repairs (Watson et al., 2017a). 
The premium brands have shown that repair and refurbishment for resales can be somewhat 
profitable and would be even more so through reduced VAT through which more premium 
brands might engage.  
 
High-street brands are found more difficult to incentivise to repair and refurbish the collected 
post-consumer textiles due to the lower economic value and mixed range. Highstreet brands 
could instead include consumers in the repair and refurbish experience through providing in-
store repair shops and workshops to teach consumer how to take care or re-fashion their 
current textile products. The outdoor brand Patagonia offers products from their Recrafted 
==PAGE:77==
Means 
 
PS I: Recommendations 
 
 
70 
line which are products composing of parts from other products. Through the workshop, 
consumers could upcycle discarded textile products of the brand to their own one-of-a-kind re-
assembled textile product. This would create consumer awareness of the value of textiles 
while tying bonds between the consumer and the brand to create customer loyalty. The 
service could be free of charge for customers of the brand or charging participants a fee.  
 
Highstreet brands could also provide the repair and refurbishment service through a partner. 
As with the collection partner in the Take Back initiative, this model must be arranged in such a 
way that it still encourages upstream changes in design by creating a close link of knowledge or 
costs from the partner to the brand. E.g. feedback loops could provide the textile producer 
information on which of the producers’ products are handed in for repair most often and 
which products are more costly to repair than others and why. This accounts for the textile 
products still in use and not discarded by the consumer yet. Offering and pushing for repair 
might decrease the amounts of broken products being discarded. Products handed in which 
cannot be repaired can be exchanged for a discount on the service on another product and the 
textile product can be sorted for downcycling or recycling through the collection channels. 
However, offering repair and refurbishment on textile products currently produced by high-
street brands offer little incentive for customers as the price of new is so low and that the 
choice to get rid of a garment also can be due to shifting trends instead of the product being 
broken.  
 
A way to increase the competitiveness of costs on reuse, repair and refurbishment in relation 
to the cost of new fast fashion products is through a resource tax on new fibres. This can be 
implemented multiple places in the supply chain (material extraction, materials in production 
or as materials in final product (Watson et al., 2017a). The resource tax on new fibres would 
increase incentives for premium brands to collect their own products and re-sell them (as in 
the Resales initiative) due to new production becoming more expensive.  
 
This study identified positive contributions to circularity in the Resales initiative due to 
captured value of their textiles products to keep them from ending up in large amounts in 
second hand stores without being repaired or washed. The resource tax could increase the 
effort put into the collection of premium brands’ own products but research state that 
challenges of logistics and resources often occur. Hvass (2016) suggests a collaboration 
between charities and premium brands, where both their forces come together: brands can 
offer economic incentive to consumer and charities have the advantage of voluntary 
workforce. This would be through brand specific collection by charities for the individual 
producers with the aim of resales to increase the collection. Furthermore, the brand supports 
the charitable courses indirectly.  
 
For high-street brands, facilitating the reuse of their own products is more difficult due to the 
low value of products not making it worthwhile to set up infrastructure, the needed wash and 
repair and the fact that purchasing new already is so cheap. The resource tax potentially 
created some incentive for reselling their products but still seems unrealistic in the current fast 
fashion culture. A more suitable way could be by facilitating C2C reuse of their own brand 
through an online platform. For larger brands such as H&M and Zara, this could be 
==PAGE:78==
PS I: Recommendations 
 
Means 
71 
implemented as a platform for constant swopping in which consumers are awarded credits 
when handing over an item to another user which can be used on purchasing a new used 
textile product. In scale, the platform could create a community feeling of sharing between 
customers of the given brand. This setup should be geographically limited to keep textiles 
circulating locally and limit transport which the consumers arrange themselves. Each swop 
could be charged a small fee by the textile producer which provides economic incentive for 
producers to facilitate resales and design products suitable for resales. Smaller brands could 
take advantage of already established resale platforms like the Danish used clothes sales 
platform Trendsales to encourage reuse.   
 
 Enforce recycling activities  
More advanced recycling technologies that can result in more durable recycled fibres than 
today are needed. H&M states that they have found a ceiling of 20% mechanically recycled 
post-consumer textile content in their products before strength is compromised (Watson D. , 
Gylling, Andersson, Elander, & Heikkilä, 2017b). More advanced chemical recycling could 
potentially result in more durable recycled fibres. Furthermore, it is the pre-consumer textile 
waste (from production) that is being recycled today and not the large piles of mixed unknown 
material compositions of the post-consumer textiles. H&M foresees a future where chemical 
recycling allows designs without the need for mono-materials (Watson et al., 2017b).  
 
Recycling technologies for closed loop recycling need development. This could be speeded up 
through the industry funding research projects on sorting and recycling to create stronger ties 
between research institutions and industry. The industry actors could all be required to 
attribute financially to fund the research projects as an investment in their future sourcing of 
fibres. Furthermore, for developing recycling technologies, large volumes of post-consumer 
textiles are needed. This could be supplied by textile producers who collect post-consumer 
textiles. The resource tax on new fibres could potentially increase the demand for recycled 
fibres and thereby incentivising actors to invest and develop more advanced technologies.  
 
The process of sorting textiles for reuse is labour intensive work which require unavoidable 
manual processes. Sorting for recycling should be developed as more automatic processes 
such as the Swedish SIPTex project which researched in applying near-infrared and visual 
spectroscopy to detect the material composition. These projects should also be funded by the 
textile industry which could also supply the large volumes of post-consumer textiles needed 
for research. 
 
Open looped downcycling of textile material into other product categories could also be 
investigated. Identifying where non-reusable textiles could replace other materials such as 
wood could divert some textiles from incineration. Previous projects have investigated the use 
of textiles into sound insulation plates for office spaces such as the company Really. 
Government should fund projects for alternative usage of downcycled textiles. Projects 
should include mapping of other industries to map where non-reusable post-consumer textile 
waste could be utilized and replace the use of other materials. This approach requires a system 
and collaboration perspective and technical research into the material properties and 
==PAGE:79==
Prioritization 
 
PS I: Recommendations 
 
 
72 
possibilities. Examples of potential alternative use could be in the building and construction 
industry, in shelters for refugee camps, furniture, artistic projects and much more.  
 
 Implement circular design practices 
Changing how textile producers design products presents positive impact on all the other 
means. Watson et al. (2017a) finds that far most business models and initiative to extend the 
active lifetime of garments would be strengthened by an increase in quality and durability of 
textile products.  
 
To increase the reusability of textiles, policy regulated minimum durability requirements on 
newly produced textile products is suggested. The durability of textiles can be measured more 
objectively than designing for timeless design and trust. Durability should both be measured as 
the material thickness, composition and properties as well as ease of maintenance in washing 
and repair. Ideally the design for timeless design and ease of reparability should also be 
included in the requirements as these are equally important components to make reuse and 
repair attractive. Enforcing minimum requirements was also suggested in the interviews of this 
study. How to enforce and control this in the complex textile industry is difficult and 
potentially resource intensive. Clear guidelines should be created in collaboration of 
researchers, producers, repair services and separate collectors and published by government. 
The Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2017) states that driving high usage rates requires a 
commitment to designing garments that last through common guidelines, aligned efforts, and 
increased transparency. 
 
A less enforcing approach is by using the established guidelines as requirements for obtaining 
durability labels on textile products which would communicate to consumers that brands are 
taking circular design into their products. Eco-labels already exist within textile products such 
as the OEKO-TEX standard and the Nordic Swan label. The durability stamp could even be 
adopted to existing labels. However, consumer interest might be limited due to the existing 
landscape of labels to navigate.  
 
Implementing an EPR system in Denmark is recommended. Details of EPR systems are 
described in the theory section 2. Current voluntary producer initiatives are through this study 
argued not to impact the producers’ upstream processes and this could be incentivised 
strongly through an EPR system. Individual EPR systems (as opposed to collective) are stated to 
incentivise upstream changes in design and is therefore recommended. However, as an 
individual EPR is resource intensive regarding labour and logistics for brands, a collective EPR 
could also be carefully designed through which textile producers pay to a joined collection and 
utilization supplier which should be approved by government. To ensure that changes happen 
sooner rather than later, a mandatory EPR system is recommended with either an individual 
or collective approach or a mix of these.  
 
 Prioritization 
The means vary in terms of aiming at regulating through law-enforced requirements or 
through incentivises and support to the industry. This study suggests that producers’ current 
activities in addressing the environmental challenges of post-consumer waste are not moving 
==PAGE:80==
PS I: Recommendations 
 
Prioritization 
73 
the industry away from linear value creation. Even though textile producers are engaging in 
more circular activities, the industry is not moving fast enough towards the transition.  
 
For decision makers of regulatory enforcement, this study recommends a prioritization of 
implementing policy measures aimed directly at the textiles producers through the 
implementation of a mandatory EPR system supported by a resource tax on new fibres, 
minimum durability requirements and reduced VAT on repair service. These policy measures 
have the potential to change the quality of products through design which is evaluated to 
solve most critical challenges of post-consumer textiles in the long run. The three supportive 
policy measures are all evaluated as high relevance and high potential impact in previous 
research by Mistra Future Fashion (Watson et al., 2017a).  
 
For textile producers, this study recommends changing their linear design and business models 
to adapt a more circular approach as pressure from regulatory bodies are assumed to increase. 
Means to increase reuse, repair and more circular designed should be prioritized over 
engaging in recycling activities as these have potential for a more positive environmental 
impact. The collaboration between charities and premium brands to collect and resale used 
textiles, providing in-store repair shops even in high-street stores and providing repair services 
through a partner are recommended to increase the utilization of textiles. Facilitating C2C 
reuse of their own brand through an online platform could also potentially increase reuse and 
brand loyalty. Some means for engaging is presented in this study and the most suitable 
means should be developed through industry collaboration.  
 
 
This section provides some recommendations of means to move the current challenges of 
post-consumer textiles towards more circularity through the textile producers but should not 
be read as an exhausted list. Various other means might contribute to providing incentives for 
producers to engage in circular design and business models but either way, it is argued that 
law enforcement is needed for the transition.  
 
The means should be designed and implemented carefully to ensure the right behaviour and 
activities. E.g. a resource tax on new fibres might increase demand on recycled fibres in 
production prior to incentivising more reuse and repair. It is stressed that reuse and repair 
activities should be prioritized before recycling but that recycling activities are important for 
closing the loop of non-reusable textiles.  
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Prioritization 
 
PS I: Recommendations 
 
 
74 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Conclusions 
 
Prioritization 
75 
9. Conclusions 
 
 Current system mapping and challenges  
A mapping of the current system of post-consumer textiles in Denmark presents the various 
streams of post-consumer textiles from the initial disposal by consumers in: C2C reuse, 
separate collection (charities) for further sorting and discarded in waste for incineration. The 
cascading of textiles in the system until reaching their final destination results in 41% reused, 
only 6% recycled and 53% incinerated or landfilled. Exporting is an enabler for reuse of 
amounts almost equivalent to reuse within own borders. Few recycling activities consists 
mainly of downcycling and more than half of the total amount of post-consumer textiles per 
year in Denmark is wasted.  The mapping reveals challenges in current utilizing textiles being 
due to: (1) A steep slope of cascading due to a lack of utilization practices between reuse and 
waste, (2) larges loss being caused by initial disposal into waste streams which cannot be 
recovered and (3) a changing saturated global market due to an increasing supply of low-
quality used textiles. 
 
 Three initiative types identified  
Literature on previous studies of textile producer initiatives with post-consumer textiles and a 
mapping of the activities of 34 current producer initiatives results in the identification of three 
distinguished types of producer initiatives: (1) the Take Back initiative which collects all types 
of textiles and outsources the sorting and handling, (2) the Resales initiative which collects the 
producers’ own brand products, prepares them for resales through wash and repair and 
resales them either in their own store or through other channels and (3) the Recycle initiative 
which collects material- or product specific textiles for recycling or downcycling purposes only. 
Almost all current initiatives reward consumers with a discount vouchers to purchase a new 
item. The Take Back and Resales initiatives are argued to replicate models of slowing resource 
loops while the Recycle initiative replicates closing resource loops.  
 
 Evaluation of initiatives  
This study evaluated textile producers’ current initiatives to collect and utilize post-consumer 
textiles for their alignment with circular principles and their potential to move the current 
system of post-consumer waste towards Circular Economy.  
 
The evaluation of the three initiative types focus on the three topics: (1) utilization of textiles, 
(2) upstream changes and (3) rebound effects. Data gathered through qualitative interviews 
and a thematic analysis reveals findings that are discussed and compared to previous research 
through the evaluation of producer initiatives’ alignment with circular principles and their 
impact on solving challenges in the current system of post-consumer textiles. 
 
Utilization of textiles 
The Take Back and Recycle initiatives offer some short-term impacts in potentially diverting 
textiles from waste streams into collection. The Resales initiative introduces the, otherwise 
non existing activities of repair and refurbishment to the current system. The discussion argues 
that even though the initiatives offer some short-term impact, the utilization of post-consumer 
==PAGE:83==
Prioritization 
 
Conclusions 
 
 
76 
textiles is in such small amounts and in no impactful difference to that happening in the 
current system that it is the effect of initiatives on upstream changes and on rebound effects 
that are of true long-term impact to the challenges facing the current system of post-consumer 
textiles.  
 
Upstream changes 
The Resales initiative is evaluated to have potential to incentivise upstream changes in design 
as they themselves are engaged in the repair and resale activities due to the initiative only 
being applied by premium brands. The Resales initiative might enforce awareness of 
appreciating textiles and purchasing premium products as an investment. The Recycle initiative 
is evaluated to potentially incentivise upstream changes in designing for recycling, for the few 
brands that recycle into own production. However, this might hinder the incentive to design 
for reuse. The Take Back initiative is evaluated as not incentivising upstream changes in design 
for circularity due to the outsourced handling of textiles.  
 
Rebound effects 
The consumer experience of donating a bag of mixed used textiles in any condition and 
rewarded for it through the Take Back and Recycle initiatives is argued to potentially enforce 
the mindset of textiles as disposable. All three initiatives are argued to most likely trigger the 
purchase of a new textile product by using their discount voucher which potentially offsets the 
environmental gain.  
 
The initiatives are argued to appear in line with circular principles to buffer the outside 
pressure of making real changes to their core activities of linear value creation through sales of 
newly produced textile products.  
 
 Recommendations 
The goal of a more circular system of post-consumer textiles includes: Increasing reuse, repair 
and refurbishment, implementing circular design practices and enforcing recycling activities. 
Twelve means towards this goal are suggested. Findings from this study shows a need for 
common guidelines and regulatory enforcement since the producers’ current activities are not 
contributing to the change fast enough.  
 
A prioritization of the means: (1) implementation of a mandatory EPR system supported by (2) 
a resource tax on new fibres, (3) minimum durability requirements and (4) reduced VAT on 
repair are therefore appointed prioritized recommendations to policy decision makers. These 
are evaluated the most impactful to change the current damaging behaviour of the linear 
textile production to enable a more circular utilization of post-consumer textiles.  
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Reflections 
 
Contributions and limitations 
77 
10. Reflections 
 
 Contributions and limitations 
This study has evaluated textile producers’ initiatives of post-consumer textiles in the context 
of theories on Circular Economy and impact on challenges in the current system of post-
consumer textiles. Results from the interviews have already been discussed in relation to 
previous literature and given perspective to solving challenges of the current system. The 
relevance of the contributions of this study are here presented, alongside weaknesses and 
limitation for each of the four contributions: (1) Mapping of current system of post-consumer 
textiles, (2) producer initiative types, (3) evaluation of producer initiatives and (4) 
recommendations.  
 
 Mapping of current system of post-consumer textiles  
The study contributes with a comprehensive mapping of current amounts, streams, qualities 
and actors of the current system of post-consumer textiles in Denmark. Although generated 
from existing data from previous research the mapping contributes with a current overview on 
various aspects and sums up on the most critical challenges of utilizing post-consumer textiles 
according to circular principles.  
 
A weakness presents itself in the many assumptions which the mapping builds on due to 
limitations of existing secondary data. Especially, assumptions on qualities had to be made for 
the creation of Figure 18 which illustrates the qualities of textiles in the system.  
 
 Producer initiative types 
The study contributes with its own suggestion for three initiative types which cover the current 
operated activities of textile producers’ engagement with collection and handling of post-
consumer textiles. The Take Back and the Resales initiative types comply with previous. The 
Recycle initiative type is not found in previous studies as a separate initiative (without also 
sorting for reuse) and is new to the landscape of initiatives even though of low occurrence of 
less than 20% in the mapping. 
 
The desk-top research to collect data of 34 producer initiatives contributes with a current 
picture of the landscape of initiatives within scope. The data collection provides this study with 
validity and up-to-date information to identify the initiative types and distinguish and describe 
their actual activities. 
 
A weakness of the initiative types is the generalization of producers’ activities. From the desk-
top research, very general secondary data was available through the communication channels 
of producers. Had this study collected primary data on the activities through own data 
collection, a more varied image of the activities might had unfolded itself. 34 producer 
initiatives were identified which is evaluated representative enough to provide a current 
picture and distribution percentages of the three types.  
 
==PAGE:85==
Future research 
 
Reflections 
 
 
78 
 Evaluation of producer initiatives 
The study contributes to the existing critique of textile producers’ engagement with circularity 
through primary data from interviews. It further contributes by evaluating the producer 
initiatives’ impact on moving the current system of post-consumer textiles towards circularity. 
The analytical framework of evaluating the (1) utilization of textiles, (2) upstream changes and 
(3) rebound effects of the initiatives provides clear indicators that the highest impact of 
initiatives is in the upstream changes of designing for more circularity. 
 
The generalized initiative types provide some weakness to the evaluation as findings are 
extrapolated to a large extend. Due to the less specific nature of the initiative types, interview 
findings where as well very generalized as stated by interviewees and this is reflected on to the 
discussion.  
 
The evaluation is limited to build upon findings from data collection of four interviewees. As 
findings in the interviews were highly based on interviewees personal experience and views, 
the data is evaluated less representative. Had more textile producers been involved and a 
larger group of experts, the representativity would have increased.  
 
 Recommendations 
The recommendations contribute with a suggestion on what means should enable textile 
producers to move the current system of post-consumer waste towards Circular Economy and 
why this is relevant. The prioritization of recommendations contributes with a direct response 
of means to be implemented as a result of the findings and scope of this study.  
 
The recommendations are limited to the immediate means and aims and are not fully 
reflective upon for their possible side effects. Recommendations should be further 
investigated to be implemented with the desired aim.  
 
 Future research 
The research of this study builds on several assumption which indicate a potential for future 
research. First, not much data was found on the repair and refurbishment activities of 
consumer and this was assumed minimal. Both quantitative data on use of repair services, own 
repairing or through other channels and qualitative data on consumer behaviour towards 
using these services would be valuable for future research.  
 
Secondly, the use of vouchers to spark the purchase of a new textile item was assumed (as by 
other studies) and data regarding the actual effect of discount vouchers would provide 
scientific evidence of the negative effects of producer initiatives.  
 
Thirdly, no real data on the quality of textiles collected through the producer initiatives was 
available, i.e. percentage reuse, recycle and incinerated of the collected fractions. Whether 
this was of higher or lower quality than the amount collected for separate collection would 
contribute to the discussion of initiatives impact on the current system.  
 
Lastly, research regarding the effect of textile producers’ communication strategies in 
sustainability initiatives could provide insights to how the average consumer perceives the 
initiatives and why they chose to use them. 
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography 
 
  
79 
11. Bibliography 
Bhardwaj, V., & Fairhurst, A. (2010). Fast fashion: response to changes in the fashion industry. 
The International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research, 20(1), 165-
173. 
Blanken, I., Ven, N. V., & Zeelenberg, M. (2015). A Meta-Analytic Review of Moral Licensing. 
Personality and Social Psychology. doi:10.1177/0146167215572134 
Blessing, L. T., & Chakrabarti, A. (2009). DRM, a Design Research Methodology. Springer. 
Bocken, N. M., Pauw, I. d., Bakker, C., & Grinten, B. v. (2016). Product design and business 
model strategies for a circular economy. Journal of Industrial and Production 
Engineering, 33(5), 308-320. doi:10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124 
Bocken, N. M., Short, S. W., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2014). A literature and practice review to 
develop sustainable business model archetypes. Journal of cleaner production. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology, 77-101. 
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development. United Nations. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/07488008808408783 
Corvellec, H., & Stål, H. I. (2019). Qualification as corporate activism: How Swedish apparel 
retailers attach circular fashion qualities to take-back systems. Scandinavian Journal of 
Management. 
Elander, M., Watson, D., & Gylling, C. A. (2017). Evaluation of business models for increased 
reuse, collective use and prolonged life time og textiles. Mistra Future Fashion. 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2013). Towards the circular economy Vol. 2: opportunities for the 
consumer goods sector.  
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2017). A new textiles economy: Redesigning fashion's future. 
Retrieved from http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications 
European Comission. (2008). Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives (Text with EEA 
relevance). European Comission. Retrieved from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32008L0098 
European Commission. (2020). Circular Economy Action Plan: For a cleaner and more 
competitive Europe.  
European Environmental Agency. (2019). Textiles in Europe's circular economy. Retrieved 
December 10, 2019, from https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/waste/resource-
efficiency/textiles-in-europe-s-circular-economy 
Geissdoerfer, M., Bocken, N. M., Savaget, P., & Hultink, E. J. (2016). The Circular Economy - A 
new sustainability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Gupt, Y., & Sahay, S. (2015). Review of extended producer responsibility: A case study 
approach. Waste Management & Research, Vol. 33(7), 595 –611. 
Gwozdz, W., Netter, S., Bjartmarz, T., & Reisch, L. A. (2013). Survey Results on Fashion 
Consumption and Sustainability among Young Swedes. Mistra Future Fashion. 
H&M Group. (2018). Sustainability Report 2018.  
==PAGE:87==
 
 
Bibliography 
 
 
80 
Ha-Brookshire, J. E., & Hodges, N. N. (2009). Socially Responsible Consumer Behavior?: 
Exploring Used Clothing Donation Behavior. Clothing and textiles research journal, 
27(3), 179-196. 
Herring, H., & Sorrel, S. (2009). Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Consumption: The Rebound 
Effect. Palgrave Macmillan UK. doi:10.1057/9780230583108 
Hertwich, E. G. (2005). Consumption and the Rebound Effect: An Industrial Ecology 
Perspective. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 9(1-2). 
Higg MSI. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://msi.higg.org/page/learn-more#what-is-the-scope-of-
the-msi 
Hvass, K. K. (2014). Post-retail responsibility of garments - a fashion industry perspective. 
Emerald, Journal of Fashion, Marketing and Management. 
Hvass, K. K. (2015). Business Model Innovation through second hand retailing: A Fashion 
Industry Case. Journal of Corporate Citizenship(57), 11-32. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.9774/GLEAF.4700.2015.ma.00004 
Hvass, K. K. (2016). Weaving a path from waste to value - Exploring fashion industry business 
models and the circular economy. PhD School in Organisation and Management 
Studies. Copenhagen Business School. 
Hvass, K. K. (2019). Toward circular economy of fashion: Experiences from a brand’s product 
take-back initiative. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 23, 345-365. 
Khandual, A., & Pradhan, S. (2018). Fashion Brands and Consumers Approach Towards 
Sustainable Fashion. In Fast Fashion, Fashion Brands and Sustainable Consumption (pp. 
37-54). S,,pringer Singapore. 
Kralj, D. (2009). Sustainable green growth. Advances in marketing, management and finances. 
Lee, K. E. (2016). Environmental Sustainability in the Textile Industry. In Sustainability in the 
Textile Industry (pp. 17-55 ). Springer Singapore . 
Ljungkvist, H., Watson, D., & Elander, M. (2018). Developments in global markets for used 
textiles and implications for reuse and recycling. Mistra Future Fashion. 
McKinsey. (2016). McKinsey & Company. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/sustainability/our-insights/style-thats-sustainable-a-new-fast-fashion-
formula 
Nørup, N., Pihl, K., Damgaard, A., & Scheutz, C. (2019). Quantity and quality of clothing and 
household textiles in the Danish. Waste Management. 
OECD. (2001). Extended Producer Responsibility: A Guidance Manual for Governments. Paris: 
OECD Publishing. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264189867-en 
OECD. (2011). Perspectives on Global Development 2012: Social Cohesion in a Shifting World.  
Palm, D., Elander, M., Watson, D., Kiørboe, N., Lyng, K.-A., & Gíslason, S. (2014). Towards a 
new Nordic textile commitment: Collection, sorting, reuse and recycling. Nordic Council 
of Ministers. 
Pedersen, E. R., & Netter, S. (2015). Collaborative consumption: Business model opportunities 
and barriers for fashion libraries. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 
19(3), 258-273. 
Rasmussen, B. (2007). Business Models and the Theory of the Firm. Victoria University of 
Technology, Melbourne, Australia. 
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography 
 
  
81 
Ross, S., Sandin, G., Zamani, B., Peters, G., & Svanström, M. (2017). Will Clothing Be 
Sustainable? Clarifying Sustainable Fashion. In S. S. Muthu, Textiles and Clothing 
Sustainability. Textile Science and Clothing Technology. Springer, Singapore. 
Sachs, J. D. (2015). The age of sustainable development. Columbia University Press. 
Sandin, G., & Peters, G. M. (2018). Environmental impact of textile reuse and recycling - A 
review. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Schmidt, A., Watson, D., Roos, S., Askham, C., & Poulsen, P. B. (2016). Gaining benefits from 
discarded textiles. Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Stahel, W. R. (1994). The utilization focused service economy: Resource efficiency. In B. R. 
Allenby, & D. J. Richards, The Greening of Industrial Ecosystems (pp. 178-190). 
Washington D.C.: National Academy Press. 
Statistics Denmark. (2019). Retrieved December 9, 2019, from Statistics Denmark: 
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/saveselections.asp?MainTabl
e=FU51&PLanguage=1&TableStyle=&Buttons=&PXSId=2019129124642266706824FU5
1&IQY=&TC=&ST=ST&rvar0=&rvar1=&rvar2=&rvar3=&rvar4=&rvar5=&rvar6=&rvar7=
&rvar8=&rvar9=&rvar10=&rvar11= 
Stål, H., & Hervé, C. (2018). A decoupling perspective on circular business model 
implementation: illustrations from Swedish apparel. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
171, 630-643. 
Tojo, N., Kogg, B., Kiørboe, N., Kjær, B., & Aalto, K. (2012). Prevention of textile waste - 
Material flows of textiles in three Nordic countries and suggestions on policy 
instruments. Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Tukker, A. (2004). Eight types of product–service system: Eight ways to sustainability? 
Experiences from SusProNet. Business Strategy and the Environment,, 13, 246–260. 
UK Waste and Resource Action Plan. (2019). Consumer Research for ECAP 2015-2019.  
Watson, D., Gylling, A. C., Andersson, T., Elander, M., & Heikkilä, P. (2017b). Textile-to-textile 
recycling: Ten Nordic brands that are leading the way. Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Watson, D., Gylling, C. A., & Thörn, P. (2017a). Business models extending active lifetime of 
garments: Supporting policy instruments. Mistra Future Fashion. 
Watson, D., Kiørboe, N., Palm, D., Tekie, H., Harris, S., Ekvall, T., . . . Lyng, K.-A. (2014). EPR 
systems and new business models - Reuse and recycling of textiles in the Nordic region. 
Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Watson, D., Palm, D., Brix, L., & Amstrup, M. (2016). Exports of Nordic Used Textiles: Fate 
benefit and impacts. Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Watson, D., Trzepacz, S., & Pedersen, G. O. (2018a). Mapping of textile flows in Denmark. The 
Danish Environmental Protection Agency. 
Watson, D., Aare, A. K., Trzepacz, S., & Petersen, C. D. (2018b). Used Textile Collection in 
European Cities. Study commissioned by Rijkswaterstaat under the European Clothing 
Action Plan (ECAP) . 
Witcher, B. J., & Chau, V. S. (2010). Strategic Management: Principles and Practice. United 
Kingdom: Cengage Learning EMEA. 
www.affald.dk. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.affald.dk/da/7-10/deponi/artikler/277-
deponi-hvad-er-det-7-10.html 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
Appendix A – Data for mapping current system 
 
 
 
12. Appendix A – Data for mapping 
current system 
Spreadsheet of altered data for mapping of current system of post-consumer textiles in 
Denmark. Data altered from (Watson et al., 2018a). 
 
 
Tonnes
%
C2C reuse
7600
9%
Separate collection
36000
43%
Disposed as waste
39900
48%
Total
83500
100%
C2C exchange
6000
7%
C2C platforms
1600
2%
Charity donations
32400
39%
Other donations
3600
4%
Bulky waste
5600
7%
Small combustibles
14300
17%
Household waste
20000
24%
Tonnes
%
C2C exchange
6000
7%
C2C platforms
1600
2%
-
75900
Charity donations
32400
39%
Other donations
3600
4%
-
47500
57%
Bulky waste
5600
7%
Small combustibles
14300
17%
Household waste
20000
24%
-
43600
52%
Tonnes
%
Reuse
7600
9%
-
75900
91%
Total
7600
9%
DK Reuse
10600
12,7%
DK Recycling
320
0,4%
DK Incineration
2230
2,7%
Export Reuse
15988
19,1%
Export Recycling
4340
5,2%
Export Incineration/Landfill
2512
3,0%
-
47510
57%
Total
35990
43%
Incineration
39900
47,8%
-
43600
52%
Total
39900
48%
Total
83490
100%
Tonnes
%
DK Reuse
18200
22%
RoW Recycle
4340
5%
DK Recycle
320
0,4%
DK Incinerated
42130
50%
RoW Incineration /Landfill
2512
3%
RoW Reuse
15988
19%
Total
67502
81%
Separate collection
Disposed as waste
Separate collection
Disposed as waste
System Cascading
C2C
Final Destination
Destination in details
Initial disposal Overview
C2C
Separate collection
Disposed as waste
Initial disposal
C2C
==PAGE:90==
Appendix A – Data for mapping current system 
 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
Appendix B – Data on current producer initiatives 
 
 
 
13. Appendix B – Data on current producer initiatives 
 
Producer 
Producer profile 
Name 
Type of textiles 
Collection channel 
Reward 
Partner 
Utilization of textiles 
Reference 
Type 
H&M 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
Garment 
Collection 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://hmgroup.com/content/dam/hmgro
up/groupsite/documents/masterlanguage/
CSR/reports/2018_Sustainability_report/H
M_Group_SustainabilityReport_2018_%20
FullReport.pdf 
Take Back 
Inditex/ Zara 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
Join Life 
All types 
In-store collection  
 
Mail collection 
 
Street container 
No 
Non-profit 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.zara.com/dk/da/baeredygti
ghed-kollektionsprogram-l1452.html 
static.inditex.com/annual_report_2018/
en/2018-data.html 
Take Back 
FatFace 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
- 
All types 
In-store collection 
- 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.fatface.com/blog-
articles/ico-clothing-recycling.html 
Take Back 
Marks&Spencer 
Highstreet 
Shwop 
All types  
In-store collection 
Yes 
Non-profit 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.marksandspencer.com/s/plan
-a-shwopping  
Take Back 
The North Face 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' outdoor gear 
Clothes the loop 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Non-profit 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.thenorthface.com/about-
us/responsibility/product/clothes-the-
loop.html 
Take Back 
Esprit 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
Collecting 
Garments 
All types 
Mail collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.esprit.com/en/company/sus
tainability/reuse-recycle/collecting-
garments 
Take Back 
Guess 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
Resourced 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://sustainability.guess.com/protecting
-the-environment/ 
Page 67  
Take Back 
C&A 
High street, women and 
men's wear 
We Take It Back 
All types 
In-store collection 
 
Mail collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.c-and-
a.com/uk/en/corporate/company/sustai
nability/wetakeitback/ 
Take Back 
KappAhl 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
Responsible 
Fashion 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.kappahl.com/en-US/about-
kappahl/sustainability/you-can-do-your-
bit/our-textile-collection/  
Take Back 
Lindex 
Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
- 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Non-profit 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.fralsningsarmen.se/vad-vi-
gor/vuxna/nyheter/lindex-och-myrorna-i-
utokat-samarbete/  
Take Back 
Suitsupply 
Mens' suits 
- 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://a.suitsupplycdn.com/image/uplo
ad/v1/suitsupply/assets/circular_strateg
y_2020.pdf  
Take Back 
Columbia 
Sportswear 
High end, Women and 
mens' outdoor gear 
ReThreads 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.columbia.com/About-
Us_Giving-Back_Rethreads.html 
https://fdra.org/latest-news/columbia-
launches-rethreads-program/  
Take Back 
Asics 
Highstreet, women and 
men's shoes 
- 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.asics.com/us/en-us/mk/ico 
Take Back 
Levi Strauss & co. Highstreet, Women and 
mens' wear 
  
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.levistrauss.com/2015/07/21/
embracing-the-circular-economy/ 
Take Back 
==PAGE:92==
Appendix B – Data on current producer initiatives 
 
  
 
PUMA 
Highstreet sportsbrand 
Bring Me Back 
All types 
In-store collection 
- 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://about.puma.com/en/newsroom/co
rporate-news/2012/04-17-12-product-
recycling-program 
Take Back 
Friluftsland 
Outdoor gear retailer 
  
All types 
In-store collection 
- 
I:CO 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.friluftsland.dk/blog/beklaedni
ng-og-fodtoej-til-genbrug/ 
Take Back 
Adidas 
Highstreet sportsbrand 
Sustainable 
Footprint 
All types 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Separate collection stream 
https://www.adidas-
group.com/en/sustainability/products/en
d-of-life/ 
https://adidasshoescommoditychain.wo
rdpress.com/recycling/  
Take Back 
FilippaK 
High end, Women and 
mens' wear 
Collect 
Own brand only 
In-store collection 
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own store 
http://www.danskmagazine.com/breaking/
collect-by-filippa-k/  
Resales 
Boomerang 
High end, Women and 
mens' wear 
The Boomerang 
Effect  
Own brand only 
Mail collection 
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own store 
https://boomerangstore.com/boomeran
geffekten 
Resales 
Nudie Jeans 
Women and mens' 
jeans 
Re-use 
Own brand only 
In-store collection  
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own store 
https://www.nudiejeans.com/blog/re-use-
news  
Resales 
Eileen Fisher inc.  Feget 
Renew 
Own brand only 
In-store collection 
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own store 
https://www.eileenfisher.com/waste-no-
more/ 
https://www.voguebusiness.com/compani
es/fashion-brands-recycling-upcycling-
resale-takeback-sustainability  
Resales 
Patagonia 
High end, Women and 
mens' outdoor gear 
Worn Wear 
Common Threads 
Own brand only 
In-store collection 
 
Mail collection 
 
Pickup 
Yes 
-  
Reuse through own store 
https://wornwear.patagonia.com/ 
https://www.patagonia.com/static/on/de
mandware.static/-/Library-Sites-
PatagoniaShared/default/dw2ca0a0c1/PDF
-US/Patagonia-Global-Recycling-Strategy-
and-Upcycling-Policy.pdf 
Resales 
Egetæpper 
Carpet 
Recover 
Own brand only  
- 
- 
- 
Reuse through own store 
https://www.egecarpets.dk/baeredygtig
hed  
Resales 
Adidas 
Highstreet sportsbrand 
Infinite Play 
Own brand only 
Mail collection 
Yes 
Stuffstr 
Reuse through partner 
https://www.businessoffashion.com/articl
es/news-bites/how-adidas-plans-to-cash-
in-on-old-clothes 
https://www.adidas.co.uk/blog/396320-
trade-gear-in-and-pass-it-on  
Resales 
Houdini 
High end, Women and 
mens' outdoor gear 
Reuse 
Own brand only 
In-store collection  
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own store 
https://houdinisportswear.com/en-
eu/explore/our-services/houdini-reuse 
https://houdinisportswear.com/en-
se/sustainability/recycling-the-quest-to-
eliminate-waste  
Resales 
Burberry 
High street, women and 
men's wear 
- 
Own brand only 
- 
Yes 
Consignment 
platform 
Reuse through partner 
https://www.voguebusiness.com/compa
nies/burberrys-partnership-realreal-
secondhand  
Resales 
Theory 
High street, women and 
men's wear 
Theory for Good 
Own brand only 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Non-profit 
Reuse through partner 
https://wwd.com/fashion-news/fashion-
scoops/theory-introduces-garment-
recycling-program-10868439/  
Resales 
Arc'teryx 
High end, Women and 
mens' outdoor gear 
Rock Solid 
Own brand only 
In-store collection 
 
Mail collection 
Yes 
- 
Reuse through own store 
https://rocksolid.arcteryx.com/ 
Resales 
Knickey 
Womens' underwear 
- 
All underwear and 
socks 
Mail collection 
Yes 
Non-profit 
Recycling 
https://knickey.com/pages/recycle  
Recycle 
Madewell 
Highstreet, women and 
men's jeans 
- 
All denim 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Non-profit 
Recycling 
https://www.madewell.com/do-well-
initiatives.html#content 
Recycle 
For Days 
Highstreet, women and 
men's tee-shirts 
  
Own tee-shirts only 
Mail collection 
Yes 
  
Recycling 
https://www.fordays.com/how-it-works 
https://techcrunch.com/2018/11/13/sustai
nable-clothing-startup-for-days-raises-2-
Recycle 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
Appendix B – Data on current producer initiatives 
 
 
 
8m-for-its-closed-loop-manufacturing-and-
recycling-process/  
intimissimi 
Highstreet Womens 
intimites and pyjamas 
- 
All knitwear, pyjamas, 
underwear, bras 
In-store collection 
Yes 
Private collector 
Recycling 
https://www.intimissimi.com/uk/women/i
nt_woman_lp_en-
gb/intimissimi_goes_green/  
Recycle 
Nike 
Highstreet sportsbrand 
Reuse-A-Shoe  
All shoes 
In-store collection 
- 
- 
Recycling 
https://purpose.nike.com/reuse-a-shoe  
Recycle 
Ikea 
Furniture and home 
decorating  
Reclaim, Revive, 
Re-love, Repeat 
All blankets, towels, 
sheets, quilt covers 
In-store collection 
- 
Non-profit 
Recycling 
https://www.ikea.com/ms/en_AU/media/
pdf/terms_2019/Terms-Conditions-
IKEA-Tempe-Textiles-Take-Back-
RSPCA.pdf  
Recycle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
Appendix B – Data on current producer initiatives 
 
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
Appendix C – Example interview guide 
 
 
 
14. Appendix C – Example interview 
guide 
 
Structure:  
Go through model/illustration of each initiative type and validate findings so far.  
For each model, investigate: 
- 
Partnership and utilization (Utilization of textiles) 
- 
Incentives to make design changes (upstream changes) 
- 
Voucher/purchase of new (rebound effects).  
  
Take Back initiative 
- 
Regarding the utilization of textiles, what is the aim of collecting all types of textiles?  
(What do they get out of doing this?) 
- 
In parallel to the current system of post-consumer textiles, what is the 
difference/potential for higher utilization? Quality of collected textiles? 
 
- 
How does the producer remain responsibility when the partner collects and sorts?  
- 
How does it incentivise upstream changes in the design/production/material phase?  
- 
When there is a distance between utilization and design phase, can this initiative type 
still enforce changes in the design phase?  
 
- 
What advantages does the in-store collection channel provide the producer, if textiles 
are collected by partner anyway? 
- 
Do you see any site-effects of this initiative? 
 
Resales initiative 
- 
What type of producers/brands engage in this?  
- 
What is the difference between that and C2C reuse?  
- 
In Take Back, a lot of the collected textiles are also sorted for reuse. What are the main 
differences between the two types of reuse? 
- 
What is the potential for more reuse through the increase of use of this initiative? 
 
- 
Is there a potential for changes in the design & development phase through this 
initiative?  
- 
What changes do producers need to make in their business model?  
- 
What are prerequisites for making this type of initiative work?  
- 
What could that mean for the industry? 
 
- 
All the ones found offer vouchers for purchase of new as well; why this incentive?  
- 
Can you say something about the use of voucher?  
(Increase collection or increase purchase of new?) 
 
==PAGE:96==
Appendix C – Example interview guide 
 
  
 
Recycling initiative 
- 
I understand that only downcycling is happening. Is that correct? 
- 
Two out of six initiatives claim to close-loop recycle? 
- 
Why collect garments only for recycling and not sort for reuse first? (I understand that 
there is no lack of textiles for downcycling) 
 
- 
What changes does this require in their business model if not using fibres themselves?  
- 
What changes does this require in their business model if using fibres themselves? 
 
- 
If it is cheaper and more assessible to use already collected and sorted-for-
(down)recycle textiles, why do brands/producers create own campaign to collect?  
 
Summarising & comparing 
When looking at the initiative types:  
- 
What types appear more desirable than others? 
- 
Which elements have potential to change the current linear model?  
- 
Which increase utilization of textiles? 
- 
Which encourages upstream changes?  
o What incentivises producers to incorporate changes in design/production? 
- 
Which increase rebound effect?  
o And what is the trade off? 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
Appendix D – Interview extracts 
 
 
 
15. Appendix D – Interview extracts 
Interviewee 
no. 
Extract 
Theme 
1 
In Take Back , you can drop any bag of unwashed clothes in any condition. Where in the 
Resales you hand it over the counter and would be embarrassed bringing dirty trash. 
Resales requires more discipline for the consumer  
Appreciation 
of textiles 
 
1 
The brand value of Resales is important and that you love the brand and make the effort 
and remember to bring your clothes. It is more loyal customers that has more than one 
piece from the brand in the closet.  
3 
Ved at brands indsamler deres egne typer tænker jeg at der er større chance for at re-
sælge det og have et forhold til det som brand, i stedet for hvis det bare var alt de 
indsamlede. At de gerne vil tage sig af det og gøre noget for at re-sælge det   
3 
Desværre er det sådan at der skal lovgivning til, det har vi set før. Brands har fået lov at 
prøve i mange år men der sker ikke det der skal ske. Der er ingen tvivl om at der kommer 
lovgivning det er blot et spørgsmål om tid. Vi [Dansk Mode & Tekstil] går ud og siger til 
brands at de kan være forrest og have konkurrencefordelen eller hænge med røven i 
vandskorpen.    
Change 
must come 
through the 
industry and 
partnerships 
4 
I forhold til at producenter skal inkorporere læringer fra håndteringen af de brugte 
tekstiler hvad kommer så først hønen eller ægget? Vi har forstand på at producere tæpper.  
Så hvis vi sammen kunne finde ud af hvordan det gøres muligt at håndtere tæpperne så 
kan vi inkorporere det i design og måle på ”Recyclability” af tæpperne. Det vil rykke 
branchen i stedet for at vi arbejder i hver vores retning  
4 
Generelt med tekstil branchen om det er tøj eller tæpper så er det et brancheansvar der 
skal til. For at rykke branchen skal vi arbejde i samme retning i stedet for at vi hver især har 
én løsning. De enkelte kan ikke.  
Nogle i branchen må presses. Der skal være nogle vilkår og rammer omkring den ved vi skal 
arbejde. Jeg er ikke glad for ordet lovgivning men det kan godt være at det bliver nød til 
det for at man kan få alle med. 
1 
Collecting ‘All types’ and thereby all qualities allow for convenience for the consumer.  
Consumers 
must be 
incentivised 
to donate 
1 
From a consumer perspective, if you bring your clothes back and the brand earns profit on 
it twize for your donated garment wouldn’t you want a part of that? Unless it is a non-
profit of course.  
2 
I Resales gives der også voucher og det er nok fordi at der skal noget til for at trække 
forbrugere ind. De skal have en belønning. Men der skulle være mulighed for forbrugeren 
at give voucheren til noget andet som eksempelvis donere det til velgørenhed. 
3 
 Initiativer som disse gør det nemmere og der kan indsamles mere. Det skal være så nemt 
for forbrugeren som skraldespanden ude for døren.    
4 
Vi motiverer kunden til at aflevere de gamle tæpper tilbage ved at snakke meget om 
recycling med dem. Vi promoverer recycling i alt vores kommunikation. De brugte tæpper 
skal være lette at komme af med.   
4 
Vi tilbyder intet økonomisk incitament til kunden for at aflevere tæpperne tilbage. Vi har 
kigget på leasing af tæpper men det kostede for meget at gå ind i og vi er ikke store nok til 
det. Der er en enorm administrativ opgave.  
4 
Det er en udfordring hvis kunden erstatter de gamle tæpper med et andet mærke og 
derfor ikke føler at de kan tillade sig at aflevere de gamle tilbage til os. Men vi vil gerne 
have dem. Der har kunden for meget samvittighed.  
1 
 Collecting 'all types' in store also adds foot traffic in the store. 
Experience 
might 
trigger 
higher 
1 
From a brand perspective, many are looking for a business case within take-back. The 
discount as incentive creates foot-traffic and brings the customers back.  
==PAGE:98==
Appendix D – Interview extracts 
 
  
 
1 
Have not seen studies on the reason for donating as the voucher but is more an incentive 
to do it – In the study of my article there was one country where they used discount and in 
another they did not. In theory they say that the incentive is motivating people to bring 
their textiles.  
frequency of 
replacement 
1 
There is a critisism of this model  Take Back: You incentivies and motivate consumer to 
make a new purchase and get rid of old clothes in a convenient way and with a good 
conscious. I agree that this model allows consumers to clean up their closets very fast. You 
even get promoted for it and that can trigger a next purchase.  
1 
Usually, when brands take 'all types', they do not handle it themselves due to lack of 
competence and capacity. The correct handling and utilization depend on the external 
partner and garments can be indirectly reused. Charities cannot close the loop for 
producers either as the charities sort the ‘cream’ off for resales in EU and are not so 
transparent.  
Following 
the entire 
waste 
hierarchy 
 
1 
Brands in Resales upcycle in the sense as the garment is not in the original condition but 
bring the value through refurbish and repair through partly remanufacturing such as 
patchwork. This shows that they are thinking wider than resell and thinking of how to 
capture the product value. Usually they take everything from their own brand even the old 
tee-shirts, they want that aswell. What they can they sell in their own store they do and 
the rest they might donate to a charity. Filippa K collaborated with a charity for the re-use 
quality they could not sell themselves. Much more effort tis put in Resales in capturing the 
product value through the wash and repair prior to resale.  
1 
In theory, if the brand works with one fiber and has their own value chain there would be 
value in this as a closed loop production. It makes a lot of sense and keeps the material in 
the pure fractions in circle and there is a lot of value. But if the product is still reusable 
then that value has to be captured. So, the big question here is the reuse parts. It would 
not make sense to collect jeans and shred the reusable ones.  
4 
Tæpperne er som regel ikke slidte men er blevet så beskidte på grund af manglende 
vedligeholdelse at det ikke kan betale sig at få dem tilbage til et udseende hvor de kan 
sælges igen.  
1 
But  Take Back type is like “we need to do something, okay then we outsource” and it is a 
low hanging fruit.  Take Back type is the easiest model for brands because they take very 
little responsibility.  
Level of 
change in 
business & 
strategy 
1 
Whether the producers incorporate upstream changes depends on the company and what 
their strategy is. The initiative can be a corner in the business for marketing purposes or it 
can be to get feedback on the products and influencing the recycle market to get fibres 
back. It is important to see where in the business the initiative lies so see if it is a campaign 
or stays in the store and to see the seriousness of this.  
1 
The Resales is a very strategic model in the way that they have thought it through and 
engage in their own resale platform. It sends a strong signal of wanting to participating and 
taking responsibility of their products.  
1 
I do not think Recycle type is a model that is established on the market.  
2 
Den klassiske lineære model er der stadig i  Take Back . At man kan indsamle modsiger lidt 
sig selv i og med at det med det samme er outsoursed. Det er reklame og business-as-usual 
hvor vi skal tryllebinde forbrugerne med noget nyt.   
2 
Det er mindsettet hos brands vi skal ind og ændre. Det er et helt økosystem og vi er 
afhængige af hinanden. Vi skal distrubere den lineære tankegang og kan ikke bare drysse 
bæredygtighed ud over tekstil branchen og så er de bæredygtige. Det er ikke en masse små 
tiltag.    
2 
Begrebet ”Take-back” er mere ”Take-further”.  Take Back  demonstrere to lineære 
illustrationer og det er meget rammende da det er sådan det er. Der er ingen forkromet 
cyklisk ring.    
2 
Det kan godt være at man som brand midlertidigt har lukket et loop men jeg synes at man i 
sit roadmap skal arbejde ambitiøst. Som brand kan man ikke hakke de opgave af ved at 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
Appendix D – Interview extracts 
 
 
 
implementere dette. Det er et tog som kører mens man asfalterer og sådan vil det blive 
ved med at være. Nu har vi fået taget hul på problemet.    
2 
De her tre modeller kræver at hele virksomheden er med. Det er ikke kun design, salg eller 
direktøren der skal arbejde med det men alle. Man må se på hvilken værdikæde man har    
2 
Bæredygtighed må ikke være det der drysses ud over forretningen. Det skal være 
integreret i virksomheden. Det bliver meget nemt green-washing når man som brand 
fordyber sig i et eller anden lille take-back system og voucher og så køber man sig som 
brand til en god samvittighed men det er bare ikke vejen frem. Det kan godt være det gør 
en lille smule men ikke meget. 
3 
Brands fortæller os [Dansk mode og Tekstil] at ”vi er i gang!” når de får certificeret deres 
produkter. Så smider de det ud i butikkerne i deres lineære model men sælger ikke ligeså 
godt da den er lidt dyrere og så bliver det taget af hylderne igen. 
1 
High quality products is a prerequisit for Resales! Meaning production and fibres that has 
the value of reuse several times and does not fall apart after wash. H&M could never sell 
their products for the price like Resales.  
Need for 
high quality 
products. 
2 
Den kvalitet der leveres ud på markedet i dag den er ikke god nok. I må lave færre 
kollektioner og færre styk men i en kvalitet som ikke forgår og som også designmæssigt er 
mere neutralt end det der laves i dag. Det fashion vi sender på markedet i dag, så kommer 
Resales modellen ikke til at virke. Der skal laves færre produkter af højere kvalitet.  
2 
Der er forskellige vilkår for brancherne. Hvorfor tester man ikke tøj på samme måde som 
arbejdstøj inden produktion?  
3 
Det vi fortæller vores brands er at de skal producere noget som kan forblive i den form og 
til det formål der er tiltænkt fra starten. Det er ikke det der sker i dag for kvaliteten er så 
ringe. Brands skal forandre i den måde de laver forretning på. 
3 
Det skal op på det strategiske niveau. Det prøver vi [Dansk Mode & Tekstil] at tale med 
brands om. Og brands synes det er svært for de mener ikke at de kan tjene på det. Men vi 
mener at de kan tage en anden pris for højere kvalitetsprodukter.    
1 
The impact can be high if the external partner is competent and transparent regarding 
what happens to the clothes.  
Potential 
impact  
  
1 
The big impact is in the  Take Back , due to the volumes.  Take Back  is more mixed it goes 
for the volumes and the bigger masses.  But the long-term impact is in the Resales due to 
brands engaging and changing their business model 
1 
Definitely if there is more of Resales I think that would impact the consumption more in a 
different way also to capture the reuse value and repair and renew them and keep them 
locally. But we need both types as long as we have both types of producers  
1 
Adding new collection channels, definitely allows to collect more but quantities that 
brands collects are not very high. If brands collect with a charity it goes into the same pile. 
But having more channels increase the amount.  
2 
Forskel fra  Take Back  og det nuværende system er at forbrugeren ikke gør noget og 
smider det i skraldespanden og dermed ryger tekstilerne bare i forbrænding.  
1 
When brands collect all types, the reuse quality will be the same or lower compared to the 
current system. It is also connected to the incentive for consumers. If the brands 
collaborate with charities who ask for warm coats, the consumers won’t bring trash. It 
depends on the communication and incentive.  
Quality of 
collected 
textiles 
determines 
utilization 
 
1 
But off course the economy and business side of Take Back  is something to be questioned. 
It used to be that the collector pays the brand for the textiles, but what the collector earn 
from the reuse is not enough to support the recycle part. The communication is ‘bring your 
used socks’ so this is what the collectors get.  
1 
The market is changing. Initially this was not the plan for partners, but because the textiles 
volumes are so big, and the qualities are going down it has been challenging for the 
collectors to handle.  
==PAGE:100==
Appendix D – Interview extracts 
 
  
 
2 
I forhold til det eksisterende system - Vi skal ikke tro at vi kan sende vores tekstiler til 
Letland og så klappe i vores hænder. Som Else Skjold sagde så vil de ikke have mere 
tekstilaffald fra os og det vil Afrika heller ikke. Vi har mættet vores aftagere og vi må finde 
ud af hvordan vi bruger det her på en fornuftig måde.   
4 
Vi vurderer mulighederne for genbrug ved sortering og afvejer det økonomisk om det kan 
svare sig at gøre tæpperne i stand. Vi tør ikke tage andre producenters tæpper da vi ikke 
ved hvad de indeholder.  
2 
I forhold til indsamling til downcycling - det er igen spørgsmålet om hvorvidt noget er en 
smule bedre eller mindre slemt end noget andet? Men det er ikke nødvendigvis helt godt. 
Hvor mange hundetæpper har vi brug for?    
Recycling 
should not 
be the 
priority 
3 
Det jeg hører fra brands er at de bare skal recycle fibre og så de kan fortsætte som de 
plejer for så har de masser af materialer. Det er svært at få dem ud af den lineære 
tankegang som de ønsker at fortsætte med bare med genanvendte materialer. Vi fortæller 
dem at de ikke kan fortsætte som de plejer og at de må lave nogle andre produkter i en 
anden kvaliteter.  
3 
Vi kan godt lave nogle genanvendte fibre men de kan ikke stå alene da de skal blandes med 
noget virgilt. Hver gang du bearbejder et stykke tekstil og laver det til fibre så bliver fibrene 
kortere og dermed dårligere kvalitet. Og vi har lige fastsat at vi skal have højere kvalitet så 
det er noget skrammel. Jeg ved ikke om vi når frem til en teknologi der kan det her men vi 
er der ikke og det bliver bare dårligere kvalitet når man kradser det op.    
3 
Recycling bliver også et lineært system da kvaliteten falder så hurtigt.   
3 
Hvis alternativet til downcycling er at forbrænde det eller ”Termisk genanvendelse” så lad 
os hellere bruge det til isolation i bildøre    
1 
One thing is that the reuse part feeds back into the design – through changing a zipper or 
stronger stitching - but even these products become waste in the end, and we need to be 
able to source the fibres back. So, it is not so clear cut.  
Using 
experience 
from 
collection in 
design 
 
1 
In Resales, there is definitely a connection between the initiative activities and design 
phase. They are more aware of the fibres and production. Because it is in-house.  
1 
 When collecting all types and collaborating with a partner, It limits the way producers can 
engage with consumers on a product level compared to Resales for direct resale. 
3 
På grund af at partneren modtager og håndtere tekstilerne har man som producent 
afkoblet og ser ikke hvad der foregår og så må det være godt nok.  
4 
Der ligger en opgave i at vi skal designe og producere tæpper af noget materiale som giver 
værdi så der er nogle der er klar til at betale for det efterfølgende. Den måde er 
produceret på i dag gør dem enormt stærke hvilket gør at der er værdi i dem så de kan 
gensælges og den skal man sørge for at holde fast i. 
4 
Det kan være man kan lave noget der er lettere at skille ad. Vi har prøvet med laminering 
men det skilles ad ved 80 grader varmt vand som er det man bruger ved rensning. Og vi 
ønsker jo at tæpperne skal holde længe.  
4 
Designe til at kunne gensælge om 10 år eller designe specifikt til at kunden vil bruge det i 
10 år, så må det være det sidste. Det andet kan vi ikke leve af.  
4 
Tæppefliserne er sådan set ganske udmærket som de er til at tage tilbage og gensælge så 
der er ikke behov for at ændre noget. Det vi ville skulle ændre er genanvendelse af det som 
ikke kan gensælges.  
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
  
 
 
 
