==PAGE:1==
Mapping
the
hydrological
system
of
the
Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite prod-
ucts with a machine learning approach
Master Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite
products with a machine learning approach
Master Thesis
March, 2020
By
Kamil Piotr Kacperski
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Elektrovej Bygning, Building 327, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the National Space Institute, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. in Digital Media Engineering
There are various remote sensing products of Greenland ice sheet, of which only few
have sufficient resolution to capture meltwater streams and lakes that are so important
for the hydrology of the ice sheet. Older satellites could give some previous information
about the location of these features in 80s and 90s before the onset of warming, but their
resolution is not sufficient to visually recognize the pixels that contain these features.
The objective of this project is to set up a machine learning algorithm that will infer the pres-
ence or absence of meltwater features within each pixel of the coarse satellite products,
based on the data acquired over recent years available both from low- and high-resolution
satellites.
Kamil Piotr Kacperski - s180011
Signature
Date
ii
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
23/03/2020
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This paper utilizes supervised machine learning approach to infer presence of water fea-
tures in Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer imagery of Greenland ice sheet
in the area UPE_U PROMICE automatic weather station (AWS). Reference dataset con-
sisted of water feature mask was extracted from high resolution LANDSAT 8 images and
co-located with MODIS imagery to fit the Gradient Boosting Decision Tree model. Despite
a highly imbalanced dataset and difficult task, model obtained recall of 28.7% and preci-
sion of 40.1% for the water feature class and overall F1 Score of 96.5%. Then, the model
was used to produce water masks over the period of time from 2000 to 2012. Obtained
results showed a positive correlation with the average air temperature in-situ measure-
ments and moderate consistency along entire period with other research studies. The
study shows promising results for the use of machine learning for water feature extraction
and suggests using different approaches to enhance results.
The code accompanying this project is available in the author’s Github repository.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kamil Piotr Kacperski, MSc Digital Media Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Baptiste Vandecrux, Postdoctoral researcher, GEUS
Sebastian Bjerregaard Simonsen, Dr. Researcher , DTU Space
Horst Machguth, Senior scientist, University of Fribourg
For supervising this thesis and guidance throughout the whole timeline of the project
I would also like to thank my fionce Eliana for being very supportive throughout my whole
studies and especially during the months I worked on the thesis.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and my friends for being very supportive throughout
my whole studies, especially in the last weeks of my thesis.
iv
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Importance of monitoring of Greenland ice sheet hydrology change . . . . .
1
1.2
Growing importance of satellite imagery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Machine learning in remote sensing and contribution to monitoring GrIS . .
2
1.4
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Dataset and Platform selection
3
2.1
Data products selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Platform selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Area of interest selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Landsat 8 dataset acquisition and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
MODIS dataset collection and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Creating feature dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Initial findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Initial GBDT classifier results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Final GDBT classifier results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Water feature prediction from older MODIS data (2000-2012) . . . . . . . . 46
4.5
Methodology limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5
Future work and conclusions
53
5.1
Advanced very-high-resolution radiometer (AVHHR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.2
Deep Learning model application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography
55
A Fragmentation of Greenland
59
B Construction of a stacked water mask
60
C Training dataset - Feature dataset
61
D Gradient Boosting Decision Tree Model
64
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Importance of monitoring of Greenland ice sheet
hydrology change
Monitoring of Greenland ice sheet (GrIS) water features and their changes through time
is important for regional (flooding) and global hydrology (sea-level rise). Moreover, such
a monitoring system can serve as an independent climate trend detection, which is espe-
cially important, taking into account the rapid pace of global warming observed from the
80s.
1.1.1
Sea level rise (SLR)
A Recent IPCC report shows that from 2005 to 2016 GrIS was and currently is the largest
contributor to the global sea level rise world-wise (IPCC, Allen et al. 2019). In another
recent published report, it was stated with a very high confidence, that the summer melting
of the GrIS has increased since the 1990s and it is currently at the unprecedented level
(Meredith et al. 2019).
Despite of nearly 40 years of research the upper bound of future global-mean sea level
rise remains deeply uncertain (Örn Árnason 2012). Projections of SLR are still very vogue,
due to its complexity since it includes many different contributors (glaciers, ice sheets and
land water storage) to the Global Mean Sea Level (Wal et al. 2019), as well as unknown
dependency between the contributors (Le Bars 2018).
Hydrology of GrIS is abundant in supra-glacial water features and itself constitutes a com-
plex model that is not fully understood, but without understanding the processes driving
the hydrology, events like regional floods as well as global SLR estimates retain at the
lower quality level.
1.1.2
Global warming effect
The GrIS is sensitive to climate warming as surface melting is a major element of its mass
(Rignot et al. 2011, Van As et al. 2016). Global warming as an increase in combined
surface air and sea surface temperatures averaged over the globe and over a 30-year
period shows that human-induced warming reached approximately 1°C (likely between
0.8°C and 1.2°C) above pre-industrial levels in 2017, increasing at 0.2°C (likely between
0.1°C and 0.3°C) per decade (high confidence) (Allen et al. 2019).
1.2
Growing importance of satellite imagery
Most of the studies upon GrIS are currently utilizing high resolution remote sensing im-
agery, but the analyses are being conducted locally or for a short period of time (Smith
et al. 2015).In recent years, an increasing trend in usage of remote sensing product is
observed. This can be justified by many datasets that become open and placed in cloud
based platforms with easy access and processing support (Gorelick et al. 2017).
As more and more ground truth in-situ measurements are obtained and the remote sens-
ing data products become of a greater quality, the trained models are getting more precise.
Nevertheless, the potential of machine learning in this area was not explored extensively.
Having a good quality remote sensing datasets enable scaling the models to perform
inter-annual analysis that can be spatially expanded to Greenland wide area.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Machine learning in remote sensing and contribution to
monitoring GrIS
Nowadays, there are many different models utilizing remote sensing data for urban pur-
poses, agriculture as well as in hydrology (Weiqi He et al. 2008, Xian and Crane 2005,
Rhee, Im, and Carbone 2010). However, there are not many models that have been ap-
plied to quantify water feature distribution over Greenland. Therefore application of the
machine learning method using high quality resolution imagery co-located with MODIS
dataset to extract water features can show its potential, clear the trails and emphasize
problems and limitations.
1.4
Research objectives
The main purpose of this Thesis was to set up a machine learning algorithm that would
infer the presence of water features in low quality course pixels across GrIS .This can be
broken down into the following research objectives:
• Research and selection of remote sensing products and an appropriate platform for
data acquisition from the currently available solutions.
• Dataset preparation using tested approaches for data cleaning and preprocessing.
• Research and application of the state-of -the-art machine learning model and fitting
it to the dataset.
• Comparison of the obtained results with the other related academic work.
• Identify problems and propose suggestions for further improvements and future
work.
2
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:11==
2
Dataset and Platform selection
Materials in this chapter introduce the idea behind choosing from the available satellite
datasets, platforms providing the data and libraries facilitating data preprocessing and
machine learning training.
2.1
Data products selection
Using different machine learning techniques require different settings for the datasets.
Unsupervised machine learning impose the lowest level of requirements. To use unsu-
pervised machine learning only a clean (free from missing data, outliers and duplicates)
training dataset is needed.
Supervised machine learning techniques need additionally a ground truth dataset that
is including, possibly the best quality reference. The better labeling of the dataset is
provided, the higher quality model is obtained.
After an extensive datasets search, which was based on the previous studies, it was found
that used datasets were restricted to a certain time range, location or used sensors that
were not suitable for the project goals. Thus, it was decited to build a dataset from the
scratch using available data products.
Introduced approach allowed project executors to have a good overview on currently avail-
able data products. To make a concious choice a dataset requirements were established
and evaluation carried out.
2.1.1
Datasets basic requirements
Given the objective of this project, analysis ready dataset should be build upon the fol-
lowing satellite products:
• Reference dataset that provided a high spatial resolution information to produce
good quality water feature masks.
• Train dataset available in possibly the oldest period of time, before the era of high
spatial resolution sensors.
Moreover, products had to have a sufficiently long overlap in the timeline of availability to
provide enough data for training.
To produce the best case scenario for supervised machine learning, the reference and
train dataset should be synchronized in time. It is necessary because of all the factors
that may change in the scene between times of image acquisition. For example: position
and angle of the sun or presence of clouds and hillshades. If an image is not taken
from the same place on orbit, it introduces distortion, which is the aftermath of a different
perspective.
Another requirement is a basic pre-processing of the images. Raw satellite imagery can-
not be compared with each other until it has been placed in a geographic coordinate
system. After ortorectificion there has to be applied corrections for optical distortions from
the sensor and changes in the positions of the ground objects caused by the perspective
of the sensor view angle and ground terrain.
Considering a dataset from two seperate satellites makes both requirements impossible
to comply with entirely. Therefore, in this project, pictures acquired on the same day
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
3
==PAGE:12==
were considered as synchronized in time. Fortunately, most of the satellite products are
provided already after the basic pre-processing.
Available datasets
There are few optical/multispectral sensors that can reach far into the past and at the
same time are being used until today. Based on the information about timelines of the
major Earth observation satellites, there were selected three candidates for the reference
dataset and training dataset [Figure: 2.1].
Figure 2.1: Timelines of selected for evaluation major Earth observation satellites with
optical/multispectral sensors. (Kuenzer et al. 2014)
Training dataset
To reach the ultimate goal of this study The Multispectral Scanner System (MSS) data
collection should be used as the training dataset. The data acquisition for MSS started
in 1972 - the earliest from all existing multispectral sensors The Multispectral Scanner
System 2020.
MSS provides a moderate spatial resolution of 57 x 79 m per pixel, but on the other hand
temporal resolution of the LANDSAT satellites varies between 16 to 18 days. Such a long
period of time does not provide enough information to set up a precise monitoring system.
The time interval between the consecutive pictures is very long, and in case of any noise
introduced by clouds or other factors the time becomes doubled providing one picture per
month.
Therefore, The Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) was another dataset
taken into considiration. AVHRR currently offers revisiting time on daily bases, because
of its presence on multiple satellites. The sensor takes images, in the best case, at a
level of 1,1 km per pixel. Dealing with such an old and coarse imagery is challenging,
because of rare data availability and high task complexity. Taking into account the time
resources of the project it has been decided to start with a better quality images that are
widely available.
Fortunately, satellites Terra (EOS AM) and Aqua (EOS PM), collecting the data from ap-
proximately year 2000, are very suitable for the objective of this study. They are viewing
the entire Earth’s surface every 1 to 2 days, acquiring multi-spectral data at the spatial
resolution of 250 to 1000 meters (m). Most important, bands for this task have spatial res-
olution on a low level of 500m, which is already a big challenge. The images are always
4
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:13==
being taken at the same time of the day, which also decreases the noise possibly induced
by difference of solar positions. The same hour of data acquisition is possible, because
Terra’s and Aqua’s orbit around the Earth passes across the equator at the same hour in
the morning (Terra) and afternoon (Aqua).
Reference dataset
To detect the hydrological features and produce good quality water masks, the dataset
with high spatial resolution was necessary. The other factors taken into account were
accessibility of the dataset, Greenland coverage and overlap in timeline.
Currently, widely accessible the highest spatial resolution is provided by WorldView 2
where one pixel is reaching resolution from 0.46 (panchromatic) to 1.84 m (multispec-
tral) at nadir( WorldView-2 Satellite Sensor n.d.). It was used previously to detect water
features like supraglacial creeks and moulins with a good outcome Smith et al. 2015.
However, for the purpose of the thesis such a high resolution may not be necessary. En-
hancing resolution from 500m to 2 m does not seem realistic and it would require much
more computational power.
Recent Sentinel satellites provide data at a level of 10 m spatial resolution (Sentinel-1 SAR
User Guide Introduction 2020), but the timeline with MODIS dataset is very short. As the
first Sentinel satellite started operating in 2014 and easily accessible data are available
from 2017 it may not be enough data to apply some of machine learning techniques (e.g.
deep learning).
Therefore, a third evaluated sensor was LANDSAT 8. The data acquisition started in 2013
and it overlaps 7 years with the MODIS dataset. The resolution of the pictures ranges
from 15 to 100 meters (MarkhamLandsat8) and the dataset was used before to analyze
presence of supraglacial water features (Williamson et al. 2018).
2.1.2
MODIS sensor specification
MODIS instrument collects radiometric sensitivity in 36 spectral bands ranging in wave-
length from 0.4µm to 14.4µm. Two bands are available at a nominal resolution of 250m at
nadir, with five bands at 500m, and the remaining 29 bands at 1km.
The first MODIS sensor, ProtoFlight Model (PFM), is integrated on the Terra (EOS AM-
1) spacecraft that was launched on December 18, 1999. The second MODIS sensor,
Flight Model 1 (FM1), is integrated on the Aqua (EOS PM-1) spacecraft;that was launched
on May 4, 2002. These MODIS instruments offer an extensive look at terrestrial, atmo-
spheric, and ocean phenomenology. MODIS detailed specification of the bands was pre-
pared in a form of a table [Table 2.1].
MODIS data products are used extensively in many monitoring systems. It constitutes a
vital source of information for remote sensing of floods (Shi et al. 2007) or seaweed (Ma
et al. 2009), forest fires (Wang and Zhang 2008) and many others.
2.1.3
OLI and TIRS sensors specification
The Landsat 8 satellite payload consists of two science instruments—Operational Land
Imager (OLI) and Thermal Infrared Sensor (TIRS). These two sensors provide seasonal
coverage of the global landmass at a spatial resolution of 30 meters (visible, NIR, SWIR);
100 meters (thermal); and 15 meters (panchromatic) (Markham 2013).
OLI collects data for visible, near infrared, and short wave infrared spectral bands as well
as a panchromatic band. The Thermal Infrared Sensor (TIRS) measures land surface
temperature in two thermal bands. Band details attached in a table [Table 2.2].
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
5
==PAGE:14==
Band number
Primary use
Bandwidth
range
Spatial
resolution [m]
1 (red)
620 −670nm
250m
2 (NIR)
841 −876nm
3 (blue)
459 −479nm
4 (green)
Land,Cloud,Aerosols
545 −565nm
5 (NIR 2)
1230 −1250nm
500m
6 (SWIR)
1628 −1652nm
7 (SWIR 2)
2105 −2155nm
8 - 16
Ocean Color,
Phytoplankton,
Biogeochemistry
405 −877nm
17 - 19
Atmospheric,
Water Vapor
890 −965nm
20 - 23
Surface, Cloud
Temperature
3.660 −4.549µm
1000m
24 - 25
Atmospheric
Temperature
4.433 −4.549µm
26 - 36
Clouds, Water Vapor,
Ozone, Cloud Top
Altitude
1360 −1.390µm,
6.535 −14.385µm
Table 2.1: MODIS sensor bands specification Maccherone n.d.
Band number
Sensor
Bandwidth
range [µm]
Spatial
resolution [m]
1(Coastal/Aerosol)
0.433–0.453
2 (Blue)
0.450–0.515
3 (Green)
0.525–0.600
4 (Red)
OLI
0.630–0.680
30
5 (Near-IR)
0.845–0.885
6 (SWIR-1)
1.560–1.660
7 (SWIR-2)
2.100–2.300
8 (Panchromatic)
0.500–0.680
15
9 (Cirrus)
1.360–1.390
30
10 (LWIR-1)
TIRS
10.30–11.30
100
11 (LWIR-2)
11.50–12.50
Table 2.2: Landsat 8 sensor bands specification Landsat Data Continuity Mission n.d.
6
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:15==
2.1.4
Digital Elevation Model (DEM)
To bring more variance to the coarse MODIS dataset 30m spatial resolution timeless digi-
tal elevation model was incorporated. It is believed that thanks to the knowledge of degree
of slope of each datapoint the algorithms will be able to achieve better accuracy within
every of MODIS pixel.
2.2
Platform selection
In recent years peta-byte archives of remote sensing data have become freely available
from multiple organizations like National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) or
European Space Agency (ESA). In the next step these datasets were integrated into many
cloud based computational platforms like Google Earth Engine (Google n.d.), Geospatial
Big Data Platform (DigitalGlobe n.d.) or Sentinel Hub (SINERGISE n.d.). Using a plat-
form simplifies the datasets integration part and may save up a lot of time. Therefore,
it has been decided to choose a cloud based platform that was able to supply all nec-
essary datasets with regards to data availability and datasets limitations, methodological
feasibility and processing flexibility.
2.2.1
Google Earth Engine
Currently, the most popular platform is Google Earth Engine (GEE). GEE makes it easy
to access high-performance computing resources for processing very large geospatial
datasets, without a need to download it. Additionally, once an algorithm has been devel-
oped on GEE, any users can produce systematic data products. There are already more
than half a thousand public data sets and tools ready for use. Google Earth Engine is free
for research, education, and nonprofit use. There are many existing applications running
on GEE in the area of vegetation mapping, land cover mapping and agricultural applica-
tions (Mutanga and Kumar 2019). The only major drawback is that the user becomes
entirely platform dependent, which is not desirable when using customized solutions. In
this case the main restriction is imposed on the Python capabilities to use only Google
supported libraries (Tensorflow) and to use computation power of Google Cloud that is
unsure and may be expensive.
Available MODIS dataset
GEE offers many various daily MODIS datasets like: Nadir BRDF-Adjusted Reflectance,
Albedo, Surface Reflectance, Snow Cover and Land Surface Temperature and Emissivity
in different spatial resolution (MODIS Collections in Earth Engine 2020). Most of the
dataset are composites of 16 or 8 consecutive days and none of these datasets is coming
with a cloud mask.
Available Landsat 8 dataset
The platform shares Surface Reflectance (SR), Top of Atmosphere (ToA) and Raw Im-
ages of Landsat 8. Along with the basic dataset there are many different derived datasets:
Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI), Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), Nor-
malized Difference Snow Index (NDSI), Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) and
others (Earth Engine Data Catalog - Landsat 8 2020).
Available DEM dataset
GEE disposes multiple datasets and the best candidate is Greenland DEM - Greenland
Mapping Project (GIMP), which is constructed from a combination of ASTER and SPOT-5
DEM and AVHRR. The data was collected in the years 2003-2009 and was averaged, so
nominal year is denoted as 2007. The DEM has a spatial resolution of 30 m, although in
places covered by SPOT-5 it has a resolution of 40m and up to 500m in areas of AVHRR
photoclinometry. Root-mean-squared validation error relative to ICESat is +/-10 m (Earth
Engine Data Catalog - Greenland DEM - Greenland Mapping Project (GIMP) 2020).
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
7
==PAGE:16==
Limitations of the datasets
LANDSAT Collection 1 is using CFMask algorithm for cloud classification that has known
problems to correctly classify clouds over the bright surfaces like snow or ice (CFMask Al-
gorithm 2020). DEM dataset may have low spatial resolution in some places over Green-
land.
Methodological feasibility
GEE gives an opportunity to be resource agnostic as all the data can stay in the cloud,
which is an innovative solution that was not yet thoroughly checked. Primary scripting
language used in GEE is JavaScript. Integrating different datasets, filtering clouds cover,
setting date range and data-preprocessing is done in the console. Using Python requires
users to switch in between Google Earth Engine, Cloud Storage bucket and Google Co-
lab environment. Despite many advantages it is known that in case of Deep Learning
application not all libraries are supported in Google Colab cloud environment and it can
be expensive to work with big datasets as the monthly expenses are estimated based on
selected storage class and location, as well as expected data size and operations.
2.2.2
Sentinel Hub
Sentinel Hub (SH) is a cloud based Geographic Information System (GIS) providing an
engine for processing petabytes of satellite data (About Sentinel Hub 2020). The plat-
form supplies an extensive spectrum of tools to explore, visualize, analyse, import and
manage multispectral Earth Observation (EO) satellite imagery and geospatial datasets.
SH is facilitating easy data usage for machine learning projects and development of
applications. It provides several datasets based on Sentinel, Landsat and MODIS im-
agery and it is rapidly incorporating others. SH supports the EO-Learn Python library
(EO-LearnIntroduction), which gives an opportunity to get the data in a fast way and
makes it easy to process and carry out machine learning projects. Therefore, a platform
creates a good environment to filter, pre-process and build customised datasets and was
evaluated in details below.
Available MODIS dataset
SH discloses MODIS MCD43A4 Version 6 Nadir Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution
Function (BRDF)-Adjusted Reflectance (NBAR) (Sentinel Hub - LANDSAT 8 EO products
2020). It is a combined MODIS dataset produced daily choosing the best representative
pixel from the 16-day period of Terra and Aqua MODIS data at 500 meter spectral res-
olution. The view angle effects are removed from the directional reflectances, resulting
in a stable and consistent NBAR product. The dataset acquire stage 3 validation, which
means that the product accuracy has been assessed and the uncertainties in the prod-
uct well established and is suitable for data science analysis. The dataset is suitable for
machine learning processing.
Available Landsat 8 dataset
Landsat 8 Level-1 Tier 1 Digital Number (DN) designated with source file name:
'LC08_L1TP_PPPRRR_YYYYMMDD_YYYYMMDD_01_T1'
is the only Landsat 8 based data product available at SH (Sentinel Hub - LANDSAT 8 EO
products 2020).
Tier 1 dataset, the highest available data quality suitable for time-series analysis, includes
Level-1 Precision and Terrain (L1TP) corrected data that have well-characterized radiom-
etry and are inter-calibrated across the different Landsat instruments. L1TP correction
ensures radiometric calibration and orthorectification using ground control points (GCPs)
and digital elevation model data to correct for relief displacement (Landsat Level-1 Pro-
cessing Details 2020, Zanter 2019). It is also possible to convert Standard L1TP products,
8
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:17==
to Top of Atmosphere (TOA) reflectance (Bands 1–9) or radiance (Bands 1–11). Along
with the 11 bands comes as well 7 Quality Assessment masks from which some of them
were used to obtain cleaner dataset Table 2.3.
QA Bitmask and Description
1 - Designated Fill
2 - Terrain Occlusion
3 - Radiometric Saturation
4 - Cloud
5 - Cloud Confidence
6 - Cloud Shadow Confidence
7 - Snow/Ice Confidence
8 - Cirrus Confidence
Table 2.3: Landsat Collection 1 Quality Assessment Bitmask (Landsat Collection 1 Level-
1 Quality Assessment Band 2020)
Available DEM dataset
SH provides MapZen’s Digital Elevation Model comprising worldwide elevation data in a
raster tile format (Sentinel Hub - Digital Elevation Model — DEM 2017), that is available
to download directly from Amazon Web Services (AWS) (AWS Public Sector Blog Team
2016). Each square-shaped terrain tile contains a grid of elevation values, reaching from
10,994 m under sea level until 8,848 m above sea level. DEM aggregates elevation data
from several open data providers, ensuring maximum error within range of 10 m. The data
from the area of Greenland was collected during The Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
(SRTM) in 2000 (Hennig et al. 2001).
Limitations of the datasets
MODIS dataset does not come with a cloud mask, which may decrease data quality, but
taking into account specification of the dataset, where the best pixel from 16 days period
is selected, it is a rare event to see clouds in the dataset. MODIS bands from 8 to 36 are
not included inside the database, which decrease variance of the dataset, but the missing
bands in general are being used for clouds and atmosphere properties only, which lies
out of the main interest of this study.
LANDSAT Collection 1 Level 1 is using CFMask algorithm that has known problems to cor-
rectly classify clouds over the bright surfaces like snow or ice (CFMask Algorithm 2020).
Moreover, having Landsat 8 Dataset on a low level of processing where the water mask
is not available may create additional work to implement an algorithm extracting water
features.
Methodological feasibility
To download the satellite data a free trial account is necessary. In the cloud it is required to
set up an application instance and from the intuitive menu select data source and settings.
All these settings may be then overridden in the python script while using predefined or
customized EOTasks. Producing basic statistics from the pictures is also possible thanks
to the dictionary structure of each EOPatch. After calculations are made, on the patch
level, they are saved to metadata along with the patch. Filtering pictures that do not
sustain the quality requirements may be done at the moment of data download or later
while setting up a sampling method for the data. Thanks to the EOWorkflows custom
feature production has also become easy to perform. Producing water masks or other
indexes is a matter of writing a custom EOTask. In this environment where the water is
very rare compared to ice and snow it may be very hard to produce a balanced dataset.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
9
==PAGE:18==
Fortunately thanks to the spatial sampling algorithms, we can control how many of the
pixels will appear from each class in train and test dataset.
Processing flexibility - EO-Learn Python library
Recommendation from SH is to use the EOLearn Python library that constitutes a big help
while processing the data (EL-Learn - GIthub repository 2020). The basic element of the
library is an EOPatch, which is a dictionary data structure containing a set of predefined
names for data, masks and reference data[]. The structure may be appended with other
generated data as well as with additional metadata.
Thanks to predefined EOTasks it is easy to download a suitable amount of data. It is
also possible to filter the data by maximum cloud cover, to select just necessary bands,
to define the bounding box and the required time range. EOTasks can be organised into
EOWorkflows that makes pre-processing easily repeatable for each EOPatch.
Platform selection
In the end, after pros and cons analysis it has been decided to work with the Sentinel
Hub platform. It doesn’t provide too many datasets but the methodological feasibility
was evaluated with a positive outcome. DTU has available High Performance Computing
(HPC) Cluster ready for use if needed. The advantage of SH platform is the EOLearn
Python library providing much more flexibility that is crucial when developing a customized
dataset.
10 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:19==
3
Methodology
Materials in this chapter describe in detail the methods performed throughout the study
and the conception behind. In the first section the selecting area of interest in Green-
land was presented. Then, extracting the water features from LANDSAT 8 imagery was
described. This was followed by pre-processing and feature engineering of MODIS data
product. In the end of this chapter a supervised machine learning model - Gradient Boost-
ing Decision Tree was introduced.
3.1
Area of interest selection
Initially, the scope of area of interest (AOI) of this project was to collect multispectral im-
agery data of Greenland ice sheet from several locations all over the coast of Greenland,
where the supraglacial hydrology is present. For this, an algorithm fragmenting the ge-
ographical structure of Greenland into 10km square tiles was implemented. However, it
was challenging to develop an analysis from different locations in Greenland, because of
the time of data acquisition and processing. Therefore, the scope of AOI was narrowed-
down to one site only.
3.1.1
Selected projection
Greenland is situated far in the northern hemisphere of the globe. Its meridian extent
stands at 2670 km and the latitudinal geographical extent is 1050 km.
Greenland is
stretched over several lines of longitude (from line 12 until 73) and circles of latitude (from
circle 60 until 83) according to Mercator projection. Overall, there is no good projection
to divide 2 166 086 km2 of spherical shape into tiles without introducing distortion.
When using the Mercator static coordinate interval for the purpose of Greenland land-
scape fragmentation, Mercator produces tiles of a different surface. This is because the
same radian length corresponds to different lengths in kilometers, for various latitude val-
ues. The trend increases as higher latitude values are reached. In the case of Greenland
Mercator projection produces a big difference between southern and northern tiles. This
means that downloaded raster images would have different sizes in pixels, and this would
create additional problems with data pre-processing and modeling.
Consequently, it was decided to proceed with The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) -
a system of projections that divides the Earth into 60 zones, each 6° of longitude in width.
By using narrow zones of longitude (up to 668 km) the amount of distortion is held below
0.1% inside each zone (Hager, Behensky, and Drew 1989).
Greenland area stretches over more than 10 different UTM zones[Figure: 3.1].
The main part lies within the range from UTM_22N to UTM_26N [Figure 3.1]. The final
division resulted in around 25 thousand of 10 km tiles of the resolution of 333x333 pixels
per image. [Appendix A.1]
3.1.2
Site selection
Selected site should have a variety of different features to represent the most truthful
image of Greenland. Moreover, it should be suitable for a data science project with respect
to the amount of collected data, its quality and data variance. Therefore, the area of the
site should be big enough and the data should be cloud free and abundant in supraglacial
water features.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: UTM grid for Greenland
The selection of a site in the neighbourhood of a one of PROMICE automatic weather
stations (AWS) could provide access to additional in situ measurements (As, Fausto, and
PROMICE project team 2010).The AWS measure ice and air temperature, solar and in-
frared radiation, albedo, cloud cover and ablation estimate from pressure transducers (As,
Fausto, and PROMICE project team 2010).
After evaluating the different factors needed to select the right site for the further analysis
the best candidate for the project was selected; a site placed in the surroundings of UPE-
H PROMICE automatic weather stations in the central-west coast of Greenland [Figure
3.2]. This location is abundant in supraglacial water features and it is considered as a low
spatial cloud distribution area in comparison to other parts of Greenland [clouds,calipso].
Moreover, the included weather station provides additional input. This may be especially
helpful when analysing produced water masks.
The final area consisted of 55 tiles that in total covers 550km2 of Greenland. Picked area
also has a diverse altitude distribution. It reaches the coast as well as the altitude of 1800
m above the sea level. In fact, most of the pixels are from a moderate altitude of more
than 1000m [Figure 3.3].
3.2
Landsat 8 dataset acquisition and preprocessing
In order to produce good quality water masks, Landsat 8 imagery was downloaded. Water
masks were used as a reference dataset in the supervised learning method. Whole pre-
processing schema can be viewed below [Figure 3.4].In the following section a detailed
methodology description was placed.
3.2.1
Eo-learn data structures and objects
Usage of eo-learn, impose utilization of specific data structures that have their own names.
Therefore, in this section all basic elements were presented:
• EOPatch - It is a basic EOLearn structure, that is a container for many images having
the same boundary box. It stores a vector of images from a specific period of time.
EO Patch has a seperate sections for data, masks, timeless data and masks as
well as vectors, scalars and meta information. All of that creates a well designed
structure for data preprocessing [Figure 3.5].
12 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Visualization of the selected area of interest (AOI) along with locations of two
PROMICE weather stations (UPE-L, UPE-U). Retrieved from Google Earth Engine (left
picture).Fragmentation of area of interest into 55 tiles (right picture)
Figure 3.3: Distribution of the DEM altitude above the sea level in the UPE_PROMICE
area of interest.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Preprocessing of LANDSAT 8 dataset.
• EOTask - It is a Python class that enables to process the whole EOPatch at once.
Eo-learn has a library of pre-designed EOTasks, but the library is not developed
enough to cover all necessary pre-processing. Therefore, many custom EOTasks
were necessary to be designed and implemented.
• EOWorkflow- It is a structure that combines many EOTasks together for faster pro-
cessing purposes. Thanks to EOWorkflows it is possible to reprocess all data again,
using a couple of lines of code. Eo-learn library provides useful execution logs that
are helpful when identifying errors in code. In the following sections of this project
above mentioned structures were used to simplify explanation of the processes.
Figure 3.5:
Example of spatial data that can be stored in an EOPatch in raster
and vector format. Retrived from https://medium.com/sentinel-hub/introducing-eo-learn-
ab37f2869f5c
14 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:23==
3.2.2
Data collection
Landsat 8 mission started in February 2013. To maximize the reference dataset, images
of seven consecutive years have been downloaded. All 11 raw bands were fetched using
the predefined EOTask: L8L1CWCSInput. Along with the raw data, five Quality Assess-
ment masks, NDWI and MapZen’s DEM model were also downloaded. Acquisition of the
images from winter months was not necessary as the supraglacial water features occur
only in the summer season.
To determine the optimal range of months for the data download, the air temperature data
from UPE-U PROMICE AWS was used. Figure 3.7 shows the distribution of monthly aver-
age air temperature measurements over the last 10 years. Between May and September
the temperature amplitude may enable the process of ablation. Therefore, it was decided
to fetch the data from 1st of May until 31st of October for every year. October was in-
cluded since the accumulated water from previous months could be also visible in remote
sensing imagery.
3.2.3
Normalized Difference Water Index
Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) index is the most appropriate for water body
mapping(McFeeters 1996), Water body of land surfaces has a strong absorbability and
low radiation in the range from visible to infrared wavelengths. NDWI is usually calculated
using the normalized ratio of green and NIR bands (NDWI = (GREEN - NIR)/(GREEN
+ NIR)) or NIR and SWIR bands (NDWI = (NIR - SWIR)/(NIR + SWIR)) (Gao 1996).
These two indexes are both used for similar purposes, the former to monitor changes in
water content of leaves, the latter to monitor water bodies content. However, neither of
these methods is performing well for melting ice, snow or firm as all of these features
have low reflectivity in the NIR wavelengths[2013]. Therefore, it was proposed and tried
several times to calculate the normalized ratio of the blue and red bands in the glaciological
environment (Köhler et al. 2017, Moussavi et al. 2016, Miles et al. 2017).In addition, the
presence of water increases the absorption of the red band compared to the green and
blue band. However, this method is fragile to the ice impurities like cryonite. The reason
why ice impurities are important is because they increase the spectral properties of ice
and, consequently, the B/R ratio increases.
NDWI −ICE = (BLUE −RED)/(BLUE + RED))
Therefore, to the initial NDWI calculated from the GREEN and NIR bands, it was calcu-
lated and appended the NDWI-ICE index. Afterwards, a sanity check was performed to
compare the outcome of both indexes. In the selected Landsat 8 picture we can see an
area covered with the snow as well as the bedrock (Figure a 3.7). Following this picture
NDWI and NDWI-ICE indexes were provided (Figure b,c 3.7), where it can be seen the
difference between both indexes.
A clear difference was noticed in the area filled with snow and ice sheet. A darker color in
this area shows that this index behaves in a different way in both environments. It seems
that NDWI-ICE emphasizes better artefacts on the bright surfaces. On the other hand
NDWI-ICE index has a poor performance in the area of a bedrock. It is clearly noticeable
that along with the water features there are other artefacts marked with the same high
values.Due to the significant differences of provided insights from both indexes, it was
decided to compare their behavior in an area of supraglacial water features.
3.2.4
Water mask extraction
To obtain high-quality water masks a static threshold method was applied on the NDWI-
ICE product [Figure 3.8]. The method was replicated from a research study from 2018
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Distribution of the average monthly earth temperatures over the last 10 years
observed at the UPE_H AWS.
16 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7:
a) Exemplary Landsat picture,
b) DWI(GREEN,NIR), c) NDWI-ICE
(RED,BLUE).
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
17
==PAGE:26==
(Williamson et al. 2018).The value of the threshold was set at a level of 0.25. Along with
this pre-procesing, the same static threshold extraction method was applied on NDWI(Green,
NIR), and obtained results were compared.
From the NDWI products comparison it can be noticed that the deep lake situated in the
upper left corner of the picture a) is marked with a high value only in NDWI(Ice) images. On
the other hand, shallow lakes and creeks (picture a 3.8) are being underrated compared
to the NDWI Green/ NIR index, which is not desired. The masks produced both with the
same threshold of value 0.25 showed that the small water features are being skipped in
the NDWI(Ice) (picture d,e 3.8).
Exemplary LANDSAT 8 image with hillshades
he same procedure was applied to the image with bedrock water features [Figure 3.9].The
sanity check of the results showed that hillshades are being also classified as water fea-
tures for both NDWI products. The tendency of classification bedrock as a water feature is
present in extensive degree when using NDWI(Ice) index. Therefore, it was decided to go
with NDWI(GREEN/NIR) band for water mask extraction with a carefully picked threshold
of 0.25. Although most of the area is hillshade free, it was decided to filter out the areas
with high values of normalized standard deviation of DEM altitude values.
3.2.5
Cloud mask comparison
Even though only the LANDSAT-8 images with less than 5% of cloud coverage were
requested, many downloaded images came with clouds. Cloud mask for LANDSAT-8 im-
agery is calculated using the CFMask algorithm that has known issues with misclassifica-
tion of the clouds over bright surfaces like snow/ice. It was decided to follow the solution
from previously mentioned Williamson et al. study (Williamson et al. 2018), where the
cloud mask was calculated, based on the band 6 (SWIR-1) and values exceeding 0.100
were masked as clouds.
The difference between the method proposed by Williamson et al. and this work, is the
used dataset. In their study it was suggested to use Top of Atmosphere LANDSAT-8
product, whereas in this Thesis a dataset of raw digital numbers was selected. There
is a recommended procedure to calculate TOA dataset from the current product, but it
was decided to omit this procedure and apply the threshold on the current dataset with
necessary adjustments. Sanity check of the dataset was performed and one exemplary
cloudy picture is displayed below [Figure3.10].
In order to erase the clouds from the reference dataset, a cloud mask, based on the static
threshold of 0.150 , was produced. Pixels exceeding this value were masked as clouds.
Then, following Williamson et al. methodology, the cloud mask was dilated by 6 pixels
to reach all objects in an area up to 180-250 m. The difference in the range is the result
of the picked operator for dilations. It was decided that in every iteration all direct and
diagonal neighbour pixels were going to be masked. As a side effect, the sunny side of
the mountains were also masked as clouds. Nevertheless it is not considered as a big
problem since the supraglacial water features are rare to find in the mountains.
3.3
MODIS dataset collection and preprocessing
MODIS MCD43A4 was downloaded in a form of 7 primary bands and resolution of 500x500m
per pixel. On top of the downloaded data there were created several different indexes:
NDWI(Green, NIR), NDWI(Red, Blue), Euclidean Norm from all 7 bands, average and
variance of NDWI(Green, NIR) from neighbour pixels and DEM slope product. All the
processing was displayed in the schema below [Figure 3.11] as well as it was described
in details in the following sections of this chapter.
18 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.8: a) Landsat 8 exemplary image. b) NDWI(ICE) index, c) NDWI(GREEN,NIR)
index d)water mask obtained from NDWI(GREEN/NIR), e) )water mask obtained from
NDWI(ICE)
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.9: a) Landsat 8 image, b) NDWI(GREEN/nir) water mask, c) NDWI(ICE) water
mask
20 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.10: a) exemplary cloudy Landsat 8 image, b) SWIR band of Landsat 8 image, c)
cloud mask extracted with threshold of, 0.15 d) cloud mask dilated 6 times.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.11: Overall MODIS dataset preprocessing
3.3.1
Data Collection
Data download was performed with the predefined EOTask: SentinelHubWCSInput. All 7
available bands were downloaded for a period of time - from 2000 until 2019 in the months
between 26th of April and 5th of November. The date range was extended by 5 days from
both sides in case of necessity of following or preceding data in a temporal dimension [3,5
modis pixel combined from 5 consecutive days].
In order to match LANDSAT-8 resolution of 30m2 per pixel, the MODIS images were up-
sampled. Different available methods were evaluated [Figure3.12].The nearest neighbour
method was chosen since it saves angle of image acquisition and does not introduce any
additional interpolation, which may overshadow the true value of the MODIS pixel.
Moreover, the data was saved with the lowest compression level ( from 1 to 9 possible).
The upsampled data have always the same values inside every coarse MODSI pixel.
Therefore, this trick spares a great amount of a free disk space with a small processing
time overhead.
3.3.2
NDWI layers production
As NDWI products provide unreplaceable insights into water feature detection, it was de-
cided to follow both procedures for NDWI calculation applied on the LANDSAT-8 dataset.
NDWI(Green/NIR) calculation
Band 4 (Green) and band 2 (NIR) were chosen, as the most suitable for calculation of the
NDWI layer:
NDWI = (Band4(GREEN) −Band2(NIR))/(Band4(GREEN) + Band2(NIR))
NDWI(R/B) band production
For NDWI(Ice) calculation it was chosen to proceed with the bands 1 (Red) and band 3
(Blue):
NDWI −ICE = (Band1(Red) −Band2(NIR))/(Band1(Red) + Band2(NIR))
22 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.12: a) Landsat picture, b) MODIS without upsampling, c)MODIS upsampled with
nearest neighbour method, d)MODIS upsampled with linear interpolation of two nearest
pixels.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
23
==PAGE:32==
Exemplary MODIS image was provided to compare both bands [Figure3.13]
Figure 3.13: a)Landsat 8 picture, b) MODIS picture , c) produced NDWI(GREEN/NIR)
index, d) produced NDWI(RED/BLUE) index
As observed before for the LANDSAT 8 pictures, NDWI(Green/NIR) band emphasize shal-
low water features better than NDWI(Ice). On the other hand, also as expected, the
round deeper lake in the lower right part of the d) picture is much brighter than in the
NDWI(Greenn/NIR) picture.
3.3.3
Average and variance of NDWI layer for the neighbour pixels
It is well known that the water features usually occur in groups of pixels. If a prominent
water feature, like a supraglacial lake, is found in one pixel, probably the pixels around
will also own to some extent water features. Therefore, to get advanted of the spatial
distribution of the water features, a method was designed to extract such information.
24 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:33==
Designed methods focus on the NDWI(GREEN/NIR) layer as it strongly emphasizes water
features. First, the applied methods simply calculate the average value of the NDWI(Green/nir)
layer for all surrounding pixels. Second method puts focus on the variance of the NDWI
values. One could believe that in this way the model is able to reflect on the spatial distri-
bution of the NDWI values in surroundings and in result enhance model performance.
The problematic part is that after upsampling MODIS images it becomes a computation-
ally heavy calculation and it is not recommended for big datasets. Nevertheless, for the
purpose of this project both of the metrics were calculated applying a kernel of a square of
19 pixels (9 surrounding pixels in every direction ) . Such a big kernel was necessary since
all MODIS raster images were upsampled to the resolution of LANDSAT 8 before. The
current settings of the data acquisition did not allow downloading the MODIS dataset prior
to upsampling as the angle of image acquisition would be lost if the upsampling would be
done afterwards. In the figure [3.14] it was presented an exemplary MODIS image along
with the average of NDWI as well as variance of NDWI.
Figure 3.14: a) Modis image, b) MODIS NDWI, c) NDWI VAR, d) NDWI AVG
3.3.4
Euclidean Norm production
Euclidean Norm calculated from all available raw bands of the satellite may be a good
metric describing spectral signature of a pixel. It was used before in change detection
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
25
==PAGE:34==
in satellite imagery(Wei He 2010). This kind of feature transformation may reveal unique
artefacts that characterize water pixels better than any other band alone.
To calculate Euclidean Norm of all bands within an array the following expression was
used:
||X||2 =
2q
B2
1 + ... + B2
i
where Bi are the individual raw MODIS bands.
3.3.5
Digital elevation model (DEM) slope production
Digital elevation data of a pixel may bring a positive impact on the model performance.
Thanks to a fine resolution of the DEM, a machine learning model has more capability to
infer distribution of the water features inside each coarse MODIS data point. However,
due to the increasing tendency of the height of the observed water features over the
last 40 years[Inland advance of supraglacial lakes in north-west Greenland under recent
climatic warming], including raw DEM values among the feature set could bias the model.
Applying the model, that is trained on the dataset from last year, to the data acquired in
old times could discover fake water features at the high elevation areas.
Therefore, it was decided to use a DEM derived slope product that may be also a good
indicator of water feature presence. It is common knowledge that it is rather hard to find
water on a high degree slope, when compared to a flat area.
To produce the DEM slope product, it was chosen to apply Horn’s algorithm (Horn 1981)
as it performs well in various terrain as well as in flat areas (Jones 1998), and it is also the
default algorithm used for the slope geoprocessing tools like ArcMap (AWS Public Sector
Blog Team 2016).The algorithm used was imported from the ‘osgeo.gdal’ python library.
The Horn’s method calculates approximations of the derivatives – one for horizontal changes,
and one for vertical (Jones 1998).In total all 8 neighbour pixels are taken into account but
the nearest points have bigger weights than diagonal neighbors. The point itself has no
influence on the calculated slope. The method is also known as the Sobel operator ().
Displayed results show the exemplary DEM frame and the slope product [Figure 3.15].
The characteristics ‘paths’ of slope are the aftermath of a high jump from one to another
value of DEM values of elevation. In picture a) (3.15) it is noticeable that the dark blue
area on the slope image in high degree corresponds to the lake area. As the Horn method
requires the presence of neighbour pixels, it was necessary to mask the edge pixels of
every patch as unusable for model training. In this way around 1.1 % of the original
amount of data was filtered out.
3.4
Creating feature dataset
At the beginning of this section the process of filtering unusable data is introduced. Next, it
is shown a detailed information regarding application of the resampling method and some
of the datasets that were built. In the end of this section the Ensemble method of Gradient
Boosting Decision Tree algorithm was introduced and provided with applied settings and
metrics.
3.4.1
Filtering unusable data
Prior data quality inspections suggested cleaning the dataset from hillshades that are be-
ing classified as water features, undetected clouds and pixels with missing data. Without
dataset cleaning, trained models would produce low quality results by predicting water
features in place of hillshades or skipping water features, because the clouds in the ref-
erence image were present and the water features were not extracted.
26 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.15: a) Exemplary LANDSAT 8 picture, b) DEM model altitude data, c) produced
DEM slope product
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
27
==PAGE:36==
Hillshades filtering
All the methods that calculate hillshades require a digital elevation model as well as the
azimuth and altitude of the sun (Jones 1998).The data collected from Sentinel Hub plat-
form were raster pictures without this information. Therefore, a simple method to exclude
the scenes with high standard deviation was designed and performed.
In the first place, a distribution of the standard deviation of DEM altitude values per each
patch was obtained [Figure 4.14]. Based on the figure a threshold was chosen and applied
at the level of 125. In result 5 out of 55 EOPatches were discarded. All the pixels within a
range of 1 from the image edges were excluded, since in order to produce a DEM slope
product, it was necessary to have all directly aligned and diagonal pixels. The data aligned
with the edges are filled with an proximate slope value.
Figure 3.16: Distribution of standard deviation of all DEM altitude values within every of
55 patches
No data and cloud mask based filter
Downloaded raster Landsat 8 images came with a mask ‘IS-DATA’ that was merged along
with the produced cloud mask. The distribution of the mask coverage over all images was
plotted to determine appropriate threshold [Figure 3.17].
More than 20% of images in the collected dataset are free from any bad quality data.
Then, the distribution stays at the low constant level until it reaches a value of 100%
where another, smaller in magnitude, pick is observed. This can be explained by the
observation that many of the pictures come empty, or just with a small scrap of the data
in the corners. Based on the above data a threshold of less than or equal to 1% was set
as as inclusion criteria for the collected images.
Minimum water feature threshold
Many of the frames have no water data present and it is not suitable for resampling.
Therefore, a minimum water feature criteria was introduced not to allow resampling algo-
rithms to sample multiple times the same and only sparse number of water features from
28 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.17: Distribution of cloud coverage over all collected patches
the image. A small threshold at a level of 25 was set to filter out all frames without water
features.
3.4.2
Dataset basic statistics
The reference dataset along with the water features related data was summarized in the
table below[Table 3.1].
Images are distributed in different counts over the years and this is the result of application
of the cloud cover filter at the time of data acquisition. From the provided information it
is easy to see how sparse are the extracted water features. In total, only less than 2%
of all pixels were classified as water. From the calculation of the median of the extracted
water features pixel count per image it is visible that in 2013 and 2015 more than half of
the pictures were actually free from water features. In total 42% of images do not have
any water features detected.
3.4.3
Resampling the original dataset
A great imbalance between the classes of the dataset makes it problematic to handle
as the minor class gets underestimated and archives mere results. To overcome this
issue, resampling from the dataset was implemented. Resampling method is usually
done by oversampling the minority class or undersampling the majority class. In this thesis
random oversampling of the water feature class and undersampling non-water class were
combined. Even though EOLearn library does not support a resampling method that
would be suitable for the purpose of the project, EOlearn library provides a predefined
spatial sampling method that can serve as a resampling method substitute.
3.4.4
Created datasets
When using resampling techniques for imbalanced datasets, two approaches are used:
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
29
==PAGE:38==
Year
Total count
of images
(10x10km)
Water feature
coverage
[%]
Median of water
feature count
per image
Count of the
images with no
water features
Images with no
water feature
detected [%]
2013
472
0.48
0
355
75.2
2014
619
0.98
6
274
44.3
2015
969
2.23
39
394
40.7
2016
1437
1.39
0
773
53.8
2017
974
3.19
150
351
36.0
2018
805
1.42
4
373
46.3
2019
1568
1.84
330
358
22.8
Total
6844
1.77
24
2878
42.1
Table 3.1: Dataset basic statistics
Feature name
Short description
B01_RED
B02_NIR
B03_BLUE
B04_GREEN
7 Raw MODIS bands[Appendix C.2]
B05_NIR-2
B06_SWIR
B07_SWIR-2
NDWI
Calculated from B04_GREEN and B02_NIR band C.3
NDWI_AVG_19
Average of NDWI calculation for with a kernel of size 19 C.3
NDWI_VAR_19
Variance of NDWI calculation for with a kernel of size 19 C.3
EUCLD_NORM
Euclidean norm calculated from all bands C.3
NDWI_ICE
Calculated from B03_BLUE and B01_RED band C.3
DEM_SLOPE
Calculated using Horn’s method from DEM C.3
Table 3.2: Final feature dataset
a) Application of the oversampling before data Cross Validation b) Application of the over-
sampling within Cross Validation
From the recent paper- it was found that in approach a), by letting oversampled features
enter the test dataset, the results become overoptimistic. In approach b) the test set fol-
lows the same distribution as the original dataset and therefore the overoptimism does not
appear (M. S. Santos et al. 2018). To follow approach b) one of the prepared datasets fol-
lows original class distribution of collected data. In the next datasets different resampling
criteria was applied to increase the importance of the water feature class. A believable
score is provided only if a model is tested on the OD test fold.
3.5
Model training
3.5.1
Final feature dataset structure
Finally, it was chosen to go with 13 different features that are presented and briefly de-
scribed in Table 3.2. Additionally, In Appendix C.1 it can be found all raw and produced
indexes that were incorporated into one dataset.
3.5.2
Cross validation
In this study a k-fold cross validation was applied, where for each iteration one EOPatch
was left out. Test dataset was built from randomly selected 7 EOPatches, whích consti-
30 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:39==
tute around 15% of the data.For the remaining 85% of the data, there was K fold cross
validation applied, where each fold was built from the data from one EOPatch. K mod-
els trained in this manner provided a list of binary log loss score that was averaged and
assigned as an generalized validation error for the model. Selected loss function was is
presented by the following equation:
H(p, q) = −
X
x∈X
p(x)logq(x)
This method was applied for each dataset. Every dataset was tested with the same test
fold following original class distribution. The results obtained in this way are comparable
and were used to pick the best model.
3.5.3
Gradient Boosting Ensemble method from decision tree base
classifier
For tackling the problem of imbalanced class distribution it is recommended to use en-
semble methods (Guo et al. 2018, Rodríguez, Díez-Pastor, and García-Osorio 2011).
Ensemble methods are built from multiple classifiers, trained using the same learning al-
gorithm. Then, a set of hundreds of models with the same target are used together to
classify the observations.
When considering ensemble learning, there are two primary methods:
• Bootstrap aggregating (bagging) - training multiple independent predictors on a sub-
set of observations built by sampling with replacement from the original dataset. The
outcome is obtained through some form of aggregation (voting, averaging etc.). A
Popular model using a bagging ensemble is a Random Forest. (i.e. weak learners
come together to form a strong learner).
• Boosting - This method incrementally builds an ensemble by training each new clas-
sifier instance from the errors of the previous model, to emphasize the misclassified
observations. Starting with a weak base model to end up with a strong overall pre-
diction.
Both techniques are successfully used for imbalanced datasets, but having multiple mod-
els to produce an outcome may be computationally expensive, especially when gaving a
great amount of data like in the case of this Thesis.Therefore, the criterion of computation
performance leaned the decision towards boosting ensemble method. Once the model is
built, making predictions with a gradient boosted tree models is fast and does not use a
lot of memory.
Decision tree base classifier
As a base classifier for boosting, the decision tree was selected as it is fast to train and may
easily create many diverse models. Moreover, many machine learning models require
normalization and scaling the data, but the tree classifier method requires very little data
preparation. It can easily be applied to raw data, which is helpful as it spares time for
additional data processing.
The other advantage is that the results produced by a tree algorithm are easy to interpret
and reflect as the knowledge obtained by the classifier is formulated into a hierarchical
structure. It is also suitable for big datasets as the cost of using the tree for inference is
logarithmic in the number of data points used to train the tree. The biggest flaw of boosting
is a tendency to overfitting due to the nature of the training algorithm, that with every next
interation, focuses on the pixels that were miss classified before.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
31
==PAGE:40==
Gradient Boostin algorithm for classification problem
To understand the algorithm, first machine learning problem was stated.
Given a set of observations x and target variables y, denoted as {(xi, yi)}, where i =
1, …, n, the machine learning problem statement is to find a function approximation bf(x)
restoring the true dependence of y = f(x) and understanding which approximation is
better by introducing the loss function L(y, f), which is to minimize:
y ≈bf(x), where bf(x) = arg min
f(x) L(y, f(x)).
Gradient Boosting algorithm is explained in detail on an example of decisiontrees base
classifier below. Given:
Fm - be the m-th fit of the base tree classifier
byi = Fm(xi) - be a predicted value of a model for corresponding observation xi
and
L(y, F(x)) - a differentiable loss function that calculates residual ri of every byi with respect
to the target value of y.
The algorithm starts by the initialization of the model with a constant value F0 that is
calculated with the following expression:
F0 = arg min
γ
nP
i=0
L(yi, γ) , where γ refers to log(odds) value.
Simple analytical solutions for finding the optimal fit, directly minimizing residuals do not
exist, so the parameters are usually approximated in iterations. Therefore, for the next M
iterations, the algorithm follows four steps:
1. Calculate the pseudo residuals using discrete gradient formula of the lost function with
respect to the predicted γ (log(odds)) that we can call a predicted probability
The pseudo residuals here are the observed probability minus predicted probability:
rim = −[∂L(yi,Fm−1(xi))
∂Fm−1(xi)
] for i = 1, ..., n
2. Fit a regression tree to the pseudo residuals bθm values instead of target values and
create terminal regions Rjm, for j = 1, ..., Jm (leaves)
3. Calculate output values for the new tree, for each new leaf in the tree we compute the
output γ value following the expression:
γjm = arg min
γ
P
xi∈Rij
L(yi, Fm−1(xi) + γ)
4. Update predictions for each sample from the data-set based on the previous prediction
and the output values gamma from the new tree multiplied by learning rate:
Fm(x) = Fm−1(x) + η P
j=1
JmγjmI(x ∈Rjm)
where eta is a learning rate
The algorithm stops when a number of iterations is finished and the final tree is buit, for
predicting test values is going to be used just the newest tree
32 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:41==
4
Results and Discussion
In the first sections of this chapter the early findings and initial model fitted to the original
data distribution was presented. Then, a fine tuned model trained on a resampled dataset
was compared and analyzed in detail. In the second part of this chapter the focus was put
on the analysis of predicted water masks and calculated water feature count distribution
in comparison with air temperature for the years from 2000 to 2012.
4.1
Initial findings
Throughout the project conduction, during quality assessment steps, interesting insights
were found. Therefore, before the analysis of the final results, the results from evaluation
of the intermediate model are here presented.
4.1.1
Lack of variance within a MODIS pixel
As mentioned before, to make two datasets (MODIS, LANDSAT 8) of different resolution
comparable, the upsampling method was applied to each MODIS pixel, producing on
average 278 pixels with the same multispectral values. Comparison of these pixels to a
water reference mask brings confusion to the model, as classification of a single pixel as
water, imposes classification of all remaining 277 pixels as the same class. Visualization
of this phenomenon is presented in the Figure [4.1].
Presented results are obtained from a model trained on the raw MODIS bands only. De-
spite upsampling of all MODIS pixels to the resolution of 30x30m, whole areas corre-
sponding to the old sized MODIS pixels (500mx500m) are being marked. In this way the
model does not have any possibility to obtain a high value of precision. To bring variabil-
ity within the old sized MODIS pixels, DEM-SLOPE, NDWI-AVG-19 and NDWI-VAR-19
features were included to the feature set.
4.2
Initial GBDT classifier results
In the first place GBDT classifier was trained on the Original Dataset to have comparable
test results for the fine tuning of the model. The obtained test results can be found in the
table [4.1].
Even though the overall metrics seem successful, the class based metrics show that the
model prioritized class non-water, which is good for the score but fails to meet project
objectives. Value of recall for the water feature tells that only around 16% of the water
was being detected. On the other hand, 60% of precision tells that on average only 2 from
5 pixels were being misclassified.
The same results were shown in a form of a confusion matrix [Figure 4.2]. In the diagonal
cells of the first matrix, recall values are presented. Moreover, a clear trend to classify all
pixels as non-water class is noticeable. It is because of the imbalance of the dataset. In
Class I metric
Accuracy
F1 Score
Recall
Precision
Overall
97.3%
96.5%
-
-
Non-water
-
98.6%
99.7%
97.6%
Water
-
24.9%
15.8%
59.6%
Table 4.1: Test results of a model trained on the Original Dataset
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.1: Illustration shows 4 separate pictures: a) Landsat 8 NDWI band b) MODIS
RGB image c) water mask extracted from LANDSAT 8 NDWI index d) predicted water
mask. All pictures together show an insight into results obtained from a model trained
only on the MODIS raw bands data.
34 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:43==
the diagonal cells of the second matrix, precision values for each class are placed. Even
though the model does not predict many water feature pixels, it is hard to keep a high
score of precision, which shows the hardness of the task.
Figure 4.2: Confusion matrix of the results
In the next sentences a sanity check upon one of test images, with presence of supraglacial
water feature, was depicted to explain behaviour of the model [Figure 4.3]
In the pictures it is observed that the model, with caution and good intuition, depicts the
places of water feature presence. It does not find presence of supraglacial streams and
slush but with good precision identifies supraglacial lakes.
Therefore, the relatively low precision of the model is actually misleading and it is the after-
math of the machine learning approach design that was also explained in initial findings[].
Thus, as there is no possibility to get a high precision for a model in applied settings, it
is concluded that the precision performance metric does not reflect the true performance
of the model. On the other hand, a low but stable value of recall combined with a good
precision can serve as a good indicator of a trend in data over the time, which matches
with the project objectives.
However, looking at the comparison of LANDSAT and MODIS image above, it can be
noticed that many of the blue tone pixels were skipped by the model. Therefore, further
effort was taken to increase recall rate, simultaneously trying to not lower the precision
below the point where the results are becoming inconsistent.
4.3
Final GDBT classifier results
To increase the water feature recall rate, an undersampling of the non-water class, simul-
taneously with oversampling of the water class was performed and a model fitted to the
dataset, which description can be found in Table 4.2.
4.3.1
Performance metrics
Initially, model overfitting was observed, but after increasing the learning rate to 0.1, re-
stricting the number of tree depth levels to 5 as well as introducing regularization l1= 0.5
and l2=0.5 the following results were obtained Table [4.3].
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.3: a) Landsat RGB picture, b) MODIS RGB Picture, c)Reference water mask d)
predicted water mask.
Dataset
name
Total size
in pixel
count [mln]
Water class
sample
coun [mln]
Train water
class
sample [%]
Test size [%]
Test water
class
sample [%]
Original
Dataset
148,5
3.97
2.8
18.4
2.0
Water
Oversampled
Dataset
49,7
9.4
19.3
18,7
17,4
Table 4.2: Original Dataset and Water Oversampled Dataset
36 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:45==
Class I metric
Accuracy
F1 Score
Recall
Precision
Overall train
85.0%
83.1%
-
-
Overall test
85.0%
82.5%
-
-
Non-water
-
91.4%
96.9%
86.6%
Water
-
40.0%
28.7%
65.9%
Table 4.3: Train and test results of a model trained on the modified dataset.
In general, the Accuracy and F1 Score at the level of 85% are promising. The decrease in
accuracy below 90% was expected as the distribution of the classes is more balanced and
the task gets more complex. In the initial model, a simple baseline approach of choosing
majority class would yield a result of 98%. The same baseline approach for this model
would give around 80%. Therefore, any higher metric performance is satisfactory.Results
of recall and precision were also presented in the confusion matrix [Figure 4.4].From the
matrix it is noticeable that the recall rate for the water feature class is at the level of 29%.
Observed increase in recall rate to the score of the initial model is the aftermath of the
class balance change. The model puts more focus on water features as there are more
of them in the dataset. Precision for the water class that increased slightly by 6% may
actually be considered as a big change, considering complexity of the task.
Figure 4.4: Confusion matrix of the final model showing recall and precision scores
4.3.2
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis
The ROC Curve plot shows trade off between Sensitivity and Specificity of a model. The
closer the curve follows the left-hand border and then the top border of the ROC space,
the more confident the model is. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) is a measure of
model accuracy and it depends on how well the model separates the different classes.
Having binary classification is a perfect textbook example to plot only one ROC line for
positive class. Nevertheless, it was decided to plot both lines, also for negative class,
as it can give additional insights. The AOC measure above 80% indicates a good model
performance, but the excellent score is considered to be above 90
Below, the ROC curve obtained from the test fold of oversampled data set was plotted
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
37
==PAGE:46==
[Figure 4.5]. It shows that the model performance is considered as good, but closer to
a fair rate than excellent. Relatively, low performance can be the indicator of the hard-
ness of the task that was enhanced, when increasing the population of water class in the
oversampled dataset.
Figure 4.5: ROC curve for the final model on the oversampled dataset.
4.3.3
Feature importance analysis
Decision tree model through its hierarchical structure is easy to interpret. A full tree struc-
ture was included in the Appendix D. Based on all the features chosen for a split in the tree
structure of a model, it is possible to approximate the importance of separate features.
The figure below accents the importance of the feature in the final model [Figure 4.6]
Figure 4.6: Decision tree dataset feature importance.
The most important feature in terms of the quantity of usage in the model was the NDWI-
ICE index that was used in 6 splits. This index was obtained from the calculation of
Normalized Difference Index for B03-BLUE and B01-RED MODIS bands.It was also ex-
tensively used previously in the related work.
Among the features that were used 5 times in the decision tree it can be found:NDWI-
AVG, NDWI-VAR and DEM-SLOPE.All of these features were produced and included to
enhance the variability of the pixels within the coarse MODIS data points, which empha-
size the importance of differentiation between pixels having the same band and band
related features.
38 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:47==
The third group of bands used in the algorithm are B0-SWIR-2, B06-SWIR and B05-NIR-
2. One can believe it is surprising to see these bands in front of RGB bands but it is
actually understandable. Index NDWI-ICE is based on the B03-BLUE and B01-RED and
therefore, it follows similar behaviour and as the band NDWI-ICE was picked in the first
place, RGB bands do not bring unknown knowledge to apply. Thus, the most of new
knowledge comes from NIR and SWIR bands, which can be also justified. Water has
notable SWIR absorption (near 1150, 1450, and 1900 nm)[Review of short-wave infrared
spectroscopy and imaging methods for biological tissue characterization] and therefore
the water features look very dark in SWIR bands. On the other hand, ice and snow have
higher SWIR reflectance. The EUC-NORM feature is considered as the least useful from
the whole dataset and does not give any additional value to the dataset. Plots of all MODIS
bands to compare can be found in the appendix B.
4.3.4
The influence of feature engineering in enhancement of the data
variability inside MODIS sized datapoint
The initial raw MODIS band dataset was enriched with 6 other features extracted from
different sources and in different ways. In this subsection the focus is put on the features
increasing the variance within MODIS sized datapoint. That is: NDWI-AVG, NDWI-VAR
and DEM-SLOPE.
Impact of average and variance of surrounding pixels on the model performance
To show the impact on the model performance, a test picture was chosen and a single
NDWI index was presented along with the NDWI-AVG and predicted water mask on top
of it. In order to compare predicted and ground truth water mask, the same NDWI-AVG
feature matrix was displayed, but this time a reference water mask was plotted on the top
of it [Figure 4.7].
In the figure 4.7 we can see how the original NDWI index a) was chained to the shape of
the new feature NDWI-AVG b). Application of the square kernel of size 9 in every direction
works as a smoothing filter, which gives to the surrounding pixels important information
from their neighbourhood. From picture c) it can be observed that high values of NDWI-
AVG are overlapped with referenced water feature masks, but also filling all surroundings
which can be perceived as glow. In the picture d) it is noticeable that the model high-
lights some areas with high value of NDWI-AVG and it does it in an overoptimistic way,
decreasing the precision of the model.
Similarly, the same test image was compared with the NDWI-VAR feature in the next figure
[4.8].NDWI-VAR feature that is based on the same kernel size but instead of average,
variance of surrounding pixels is calculated. We can see that higher values of variance
are present near the pixels with a big difference of NDWI. In the picture b) a characteristic
shape of a bubble can be observed. It is the aftermath of application of the variance
kernel that will always have higher value on the edges of the coarser MODIS pixels. In
the picture c) it is noticed that high values of NDWI-VAR overlap with deep lakes. On the
other hand, it can be misleading for small water features as it seems to create a glow all
around them, leaving out the ground truth values of water features.
Impact of Digital Elevation Model derived Slope product on the model performance
Similarly, like in the previous sections a set of pictures was displayed [Figure 4.9]
In picture a) we can see the digital elevation representation of a test scene and a surface
slope representation, in degrees, right next to it. In picture b) the areas that are brighter
represent the high angle of the surface. Darker areas represent the absence of a slope
- flat surface. The characteristic contours are the aftermath of the Horn method applied
on the DEM model in order to produce slope distribution of a surface. In the picture c)
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.7: a)MODIS NDWI, b) NDWI_AVG c) NDWI_AVG with reference water mask, d)
NDWI_AVG with predicted water mask
40 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.8: a) MODIS NDWI, b) NDWI_VAR, c) NDWI_VAR with reference water mask,
d) NDWI_VAR with predicted water mask
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.9: a) DEM, b) DEM_SLOPE, c) DEM_SLOPE with reference water mask d)
DEM_SLOPE with inferred water mask
42 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:51==
Class I metric
Accuracy
F1 Score
Recall
Precision
Overall train
97.4%
97.4%
-
-
Overall test
96.8%
96.5%
-
-
Non-water
-
98.4%
98.8%
97.9%
Water
-
32.9%
28.7%
40.1%
Table 4.4: Train and test results of the final model trained on the original dataset
it is noticeable that all water features tend to lie on the flat area. On the other hand,
there are some flat areas and local depressions without signs of water. In the picture d)
it is observed that the model inferrs presence of the water features in the flat areas. This
tendency is so strong that even without any other sign of water, an area of local depression
in the central right part of the image was marked as water.
In addition, the contour lines from DEM-SLOPE feature tend to be visible in most of the
inferred water masks. This phenomenon can be observed in the bottom right corner of
presented pictures.This behavior can be explained through the decision tree architecture.
The final model sets multiple splits on DEM-SLOPE values and all values below a certain
threshold are marked as water, while the others are marked as non-water. Some of the
observed threshold values are 36.479, 45.434, 63.868 [Appendix - D.1 ] If an area will be
marked with a contour lines of a value more than 65 degrees and in between of contours
values lower than 35 will be found, the characteristic stripes are going to be observed.
Decision Trees classifiers work better with continuous data and therefore it is suggested
to apply a smoothing filter on top of the DEM-SLOPE feature. It will decrease contour
effect and improve overall performance
4.3.5
Validation of the model on the original dataset test fold
To provide comparable results with respect to the initial classifier, model validation was
performed on the same dataset that follows original class distribution. In table 4.4 the
results can be viewed.
From the table we can see that the recall rate retained its value, this is because no new
water features were introduced in the test dataset. The drop in precision rate can be
explained by undersampling of the non-water class, where pixels of many different char-
acteristics miss out in the training process and therefore were misclassified in the test
fold. From the water feature count information we can see that from 772 thousand of
water features in the test dataset 215 thousands were found. The initial model was able
to find 122 thousands of the features.
It seems like the most adequate metric for water features is F1 Score and it shows an
improvement from 24.9% to 32.9%.
ROC curves comparison for the test fold of original dataset
Below, the ROC curve for the final model was plotted [Figure 4.10].The score of AUC is
above around 88% which indicates good model performance.
The ROC curve is hard to analyze by itself but it creates a great source of information
when comparing others model ROC curves. Therefore in the second picture the ROC
curve obtained from the initial model was plotted [Figure 4.11].
From the comparison, it is notable that the initial model performs better on the original
dataset test fold than the final model. It acquires the AUC score above 90%, which claims
an excellent performance. Higher value of AUC is not surprising, as the initial model was
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.10: Receiver Operating Characteristic curve of the final model that was validated
on the original test dataset distribution that is different from the training dataset.
Figure 4.11: Receiver Operating Characteristic curve of the initial model that was validated
on the original test dataset distribution.
44 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:53==
trained on the train dataset that follows the same class distribution. Therefore, the initial
model was able to learn more and its behaviour is more confident now. It can also be an
aftermath of application of a smaller dataset for the training process of the final model,
where the train data did not have enough variance and the model was not able to extract
more knowledge.
Test picture sanity check
When validating the initial model, a lot was learnt from the sanity check of an exemplary
test picture. To make results more comparable, the same test picture was plotted here
[Figure 4.12].
Figure 4.12: a) Landsat RGB picture, b)MODIS RGB image, c) reference water mask, d)
predicted water mask
Obtained predicted image shows that the final model overall depicts the right places for
detection of vast water features, but the big difference is that the final model marks these
areas with an overoptimistic spatial tendency. Most of the small water features are still
being omitted. However, the final classifier makes attempts to mark them as well.
In the right bottom corner of the predicted water feature mask (d) there are some marked
areas that are not considered, as water features in the reference mask. They are neither
visible in LANDSAT 8 image (a). Nevertheless, when looking at the corresponding MODIS
picture (b), we can clearly see pixels in a more blue tone in this area.
To inspect this behaviour an image with a stacked water feature (Appendix) mask was
plotted [Figure 4.13]. In order to emphasize the differences, the predicted water mask
was projected on top of the picture, so the viewer can investigate the differences with
greater confidence. Along with this picture the MODIS reference picture was displayed,
with the same predicted mask on top of it.
The main difference that was noticed is situated in the bottom right corner. From the
left side picture we can see that the most blue pixel was omitted and only some of the
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.13: The left side image shows the test MODIS picture and its overlaps with the
predicted water mask. The right side picture displays the stacked water feature masks
extracted from LANDSAT 8 over the time of one season along with the predicted water
mask.
pixels around were marked. When looking at the right side picture, the presence of water
features in the bottom right corner over the season, is observed. Therefore, even though
in the LANDSAT 8 picture and water mask we do not observe any features, the model is
not totally wrong as it depicts an area where in general the water features occur. Lack of
presence of the water feature in the LANDSAT 8 image may be explained by the difference
in time of image acquisition. It may happen that the area will be partially covered by
clouds and therefore the LANDSAT 8 mask obtained from such an image is wrong. On
the other hand, there are small areas where the final model marked as water feature even
though, there were no water features observed throughout the season, but it is rather small
quantity.
To conclude, the low score of the performance metrics describing the model are not ad-
equate to the results that are produced. From all applied metrics it seems like F1 Score
per class, that is based on values of recall and precision, gives the most adequate score.
Overall conclusion is that the model has greater potential than it seems. Thus the model
was used to infer water features for the MODIS imagery over the years 2000-2012.
4.4
Water feature prediction from older MODIS data
(2000-2012)
In this section the inferred output of the final classifier was presented. Firstly, the inter-
annual trend was evaluated. Then, the results with daily predicted water feature count
obtained from processing of MODIS dataset in years from 2000 to 2012 was displayed.
The air temperature was plotted along with the results from the time of the very first mea-
surements taken at UPE_U AWS.
4.4.1
Inter-annual trends in predicted data
In this section the inter-annual total water count was plotted and analyzed [Figure].
From the barchart it is observed that the biggest total detected water feature count oc-
46 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.14: Interannual inferred total water feature count.
cured for 2002. High values were also observed for 2001, 2007 and 2012. Relatively
small values were obtained for 2000, 2004 and 2008. For the period of 12 years, a small
decreasing trend is observed.
There is no believable way to compare these results as the depicted area of study was
small. Only a general trends check was conducted to assess if the final classifier produced
results consistent with the other studies.
The results were compared to a research study from 2018 describing surface albedo and
multilayer surface temperature (Hall et al. 2018), where the maps of maximum annual
surface melt over the Greenland for the years from 2000 to 2016 were produced [Figure
4.15].Both results indicate the highest value obtained for 2002, and 2012. GBDT classisier
observed high values also for 2007 and 2001.
Figure 4.15: Maps of maximum annual surface melt on the Greenland Ice Sheet derived
from the MOD29 MODIS monthly ice surface temperature (IST) product of Greenland
(2000–2016). Retrieved from Hall et al. 2018
4.4.2
Daily supraglacial water features area evolution over a 12 years
period
In the figures below all predicted pixels with a presence of water feature were quantified
on a daily basis [Figure 4.16, 4.17, 4.18, 4.20]. In the years from 2000 to 2008 charts
without temperature we plotted. From the second half of August 2009 temperature data
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
47
==PAGE:56==
was also included in the graphs.
Figure 4.16: Seasonal evolution of total water features surface area from 2000 to 2003
calculated in terms of water feature pixel count.
From the data we can see that throughout the twelve summer seasons in Greenland
UPE_H area peak is usually observed in July - August. However in some seasons (2002,
2008-2010) the peak is observed in late summer/autumn months (September/October).
From the years plotted along with air temperature in-situ measurements, in 2011 and 2012
there is a visible positive correlation between air temperature and evolution of supraglacial
lake area. However, the data presented in 2010 are inconsistent, or even negatively
correlated.
These data were compared to a ten-year record of supraglacial lake evolution study in
West Greenland (Morriss et al. 2013). The graph from this study was attached[Figure
4.20 ] below. Both results are from the area of Central West of Greenland, but the area
of the reference study is a 20 km wide swath extending 80 km inland of the Sermeq
Avangnardleq ice shed located south from UPE PROMICE area. The UPE_PROMICE
area of study is approximately 3.5 times bigger. The evaluated range of months stretches
from June until mid September, which is shorter compared to this study.
From the seasonal evolution of the lakes it was observed that data are consistent in time
for some of the years (e.g. 2002, 2003, 2004 ). Some correlation can be also noticed
for all the other years, but no mathematical analysis can be made to assess degree of
correlation as thehttps://www.overleaf.com/project/5e73b089dce51f0001e92d82 specific
48 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.17: Seasonal evolution of total water features surface area from 2004 to 2007
calculated in terms of water feature pixel count.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.18: Seasonal evolution of total water features surface area from 2008 to 2011
calculated in terms of water feature pixel count.
Figure 4.19: Seasonal evolution of total water features surface area from 2012 calculated
in terms of water feature pixel count.
50 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.20: Evolution of total lake surface area all valid ETM+ and MODIS scenes for
each year of the study. Rapid drainage events are marked with red circles. Retrieved
from Morriss et al. 2013
data from the study were not shared in the study. In some of the seasons a shift in time
was present (2006, 2009).
Moreover, a data analysis was performed for the breaking record year of 2012. From
produced data it can be seen the predicted evolution of water melt features in UPE-H
PROMICE area over the summer season[Figure 4.18 ] is similar to the research study
conducted in 2012 [Figure 4.21 ].
To conclude, the results tend to keep general climate tendencies but greater area of study
is necessary. Small area is fragile, because of the bias introduced by the local factors.
4.5
Methodology limitations
4.5.1
Data pre-processing
Selected methodology incorporated upsampling of the MODIS imagery. Throughout the
conduction of the thesis it was noticed that this method is computationally expensive and
may cause moderate time overhead if several sites across Greenland were picked. It is
not recommended to use it for the entire area of Greenland.
4.5.2
Focus of high spatial resolution water feature mask
In the current solution an extensive focus was put on enhancing variability within MODIS
sized pixels. In this way high quality spatial resolution of water features distribution was
produced. This effort may be used to produce precise water feature distribution across
altitude values. Nevertheless, for the purpose of approximation of the evolution of an area
filled with water features, there are more suitable solutions.
One would believe that changing the classification problem to a regression problem when
only the percentage of water features presence is estimated inside each coarse MODIS
pixel, would produce better results. In this way the problem of invariance of data within
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.21: The graph above shows the daily extent of melt during 2012 on the Greenland
Ice Sheet surface as a percentage, compared to the average from 1981 to 2010. Data
are from the Greenland Daily Surface Melt 25km EASE-Grid 2.0 Climate Data Record.
MODIS pixel would be skipped creating an easier task to learn. Moreover, downsampling
modis pixels would not be needed and large areas of study would not create any problem.
The supervised machine learning regression approach would, based on the presence of
water features in high spatial resolution imagery, summarize the number of water features
present within the range of each MODIS pixel. The algorithm would yield only a value from
0% to 100%. Furthermore, it would be possible to apply different classes of water features.
From deep supraglacial lakes, through shallow creeks and ending at ice slush. Similar
approach but with a use of fuzzy logic approach was performed and it was concluded to
enhance quality of obtained outcome (Al Fugara, Pradhan, and Mohamed 2009).
52 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:61==
5
Future work and conclusions
5.1
Advanced very-high-resolution radiometer (AVHHR)
MODIS dataset provides the information from 21 century only. To go a step further, use
of the AVHRR dataset can be considered. The spatial ground resolution of 1,1 km may
be problematic, but with a proper design of the machine learning approach (predicting
portion of water features instead of spatial distribution) it may bring a positive outcome.
Dataset is not accessible in Sentinel Hub and therefore Google Earth Engine would be
recommended. If needed, a downloaded dataset can be fit to the EOPatches and the
utility of eo-learn library could be used.
5.2
Deep Learning model application
Pixel based methods usually do not utilize the spatial and context information of an object
and its surroundings. The problem of water features classification is suitable for Deep
Machine Learning models. Especially Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) would be
recommended as it takes into account the spatial context of a pixel(Nogueira, Penatti,
and J. A. d. Santos 2016). Moreover, thanks to the application of an activation function(Li
et al. n.d.) , non-linear transformations are being introduced to the model, and the need
of feature engineering is not necessary any more. However, deep learning models need
big amount of labeled data, and high performance computing resources, as an extensive
training time is needed.
5.3
Conclusion
In this study supervised machine learning Gradient Boosting Decision Tree was trained
in order to infer presence of water features in coarse MODIS dataset. It was presented
that the model could find proper MODIS pixels and struggled with inference of the distri-
bution of water features within the coarse MODIS pixels. Therefore, even though over-
all model performance is consistent with the other studies, the precision and recall val-
ues for water class are low. Created features supporting inference within the coarser
data (DEM_SLOPE, NDWI_AVR, NDWI_VAR) were successful, but further improvements
could be done. In order to enhance the result, it was suggested to change the statement
of the problem from classification to regression approach. It was recommended to ex-
pand the area of interest to several sites, as local results are hard to compare with other
studies. As the model produced results that are consistent to some degree with general
climate trends and there is space for improvement, it was recommended to use AVHRR
dataset from Google Earth Engine platform as a future work for this study. Other methods
like Convolutional Deep Networks should be considered to enhance quality of produced
data.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
53
==PAGE:62==
54 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Allen, M.R. et al. (2019). Framing and Context. In: Global Warming of 1.5◦C. An IPCC
Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5◦C above pre-industrial levels
and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthen-
ing the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and
efforts to eradicate poverty. Tech. rep.
Meredith, M. et al. (2019). Polar Regions. In: IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. Tech. rep.
Örn Árnason, Daníel (2012). “Seasonal and inter-annual evolution of supraglacial lakes
across the Greenland Ice Sheet during the period of 2000-2011”. PhD thesis. Køben-
havns Universitet.
Wal, R. S.W. van de et al. (Nov. 2019). Uncertainties in Long-Term Twenty-First Century
Process-Based Coastal Sea-Level Projections. DOI: 10.1007/s10712-019-09575-3.
Le Bars, Dewi (Sept. 2018). “Uncertainty in Sea Level Rise Projections Due to the Depen-
dence Between Contributors”. In: Earth’s Future 6.9, pp. 1275–1291. ISSN: 23284277.
DOI: 10.1029/2018EF000849.
Rignot, E. et al. (Mar. 2011). “Acceleration of the contribution of the Greenland and Antarc-
tic ice sheets to sea level rise”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 38.5. ISSN: 00948276.
DOI: 10.1029/2011GL046583.
Van As, Dirk et al. (2016). Placing Greenland ice sheet ablation measurements in a multi-
decadal context. DOI: 10.5167/uzh-131193.
Smith, Laurence C. et al. (2015). “Efficient meltwater drainage through supraglacial streams
and rivers on the southwest Greenland ice sheet”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112.4, pp. 1001–1006. ISSN:
10916490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1413024112.
Gorelick, Noel et al. (Dec. 2017). “Google Earth Engine: Planetary-scale geospatial analy-
sis for everyone”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 202, pp. 18–27. ISSN: 00344257.
DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2017.06.031.
He, Weiqi et al. (June 2008). “Water quality monitoring in a slightly-polluted inland water
body through remote sensing - Case study of the Guanting Reservoir in Beijing, China”.
In: Frontiers of Environmental Science and Engineering in China 2.2, pp. 163–171.
ISSN: 16737415. DOI: 10.1007/s11783-008-0027-7.
Xian, George and Mike Crane (July 2005). “Assessments of urban growth in the Tampa
Bay watershed using remote sensing data”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 97.2,
pp. 203–215. ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2005.04.017.
Rhee, Jinyoung, Jungho Im, and Gregory J. Carbone (Dec. 2010). “Monitoring agricultural
drought for arid and humid regions using multi-sensor remote sensing data”. In: Remote
Sensing of Environment 114.12, pp. 2875–2887. ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.
2010.07.005.
Kuenzer, Claudia et al. (Sept. 2014). Earth observation satellite sensors for biodiversity
monitoring: potentials and bottlenecks. DOI: 10.1080/01431161.2014.964349.
The Multispectral Scanner System (2020). URL: https : / / landsat . gsfc . nasa . gov / the -
multispectral-scanner-system/.
WorldView-2 Satellite Sensor (n.d.). URL: https://www.satimagingcorp.com/satellite-
sensors/worldview-2/%20https://content.satimagingcorp.com.s3.amazonaws.com/static/
satellite-sensor-specification/WorldView-2-PDF-Download.pdf.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
55
==PAGE:64==
Sentinel-1 SAR User Guide Introduction (2020). URL: https : / / sentinel . esa . int / web /
sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-1-sar.
Williamson, Andrew G. et al. (Sept. 2018). “Dual-satellite (Sentinel-2 and Landsat 8) re-
mote sensing of supraglacial lakes in Greenland”. In: Cryosphere 12.9, pp. 3045–3065.
ISSN: 19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-12-3045-2018.
Maccherone, Brandon (n.d.). MODIS Specifications. URL: https://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/
about/specifications.php.
Shi, Lijian et al. (2007). Oil Spill Detection by MODIS Images using Fuzzy Cluster and
Texture Feature Extraction. Tech. rep.
Ma, Long et al. (Oct. 2009). “Large-sized seaweed monitoring based on MODIS”. In:
MIPPR 2009: Remote Sensing and GIS Data Processing and Other Applications. Vol. 7498.
SPIE, p. 749824. ISBN: 9780819478092. DOI: 10.1117/12.832916.
Wang, Cheng and Qiuwen Zhang (2008). “Application of MODIS Remotely Sensed Datasets
to Automatic Detection of Forest Fire Point”. In: Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Information and Automation. Zhangjiajie, IEEE Xplore. ISBN:
9781424421848.
Markham, Brian (2013). Landsat Science - Landsat 8. URL: https://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/
landsat-data-continuity-mission/.
Landsat Data Continuity Mission (n.d.). Tech. rep. URL: http://earthexplorer.usgs.gov.
Google (n.d.). Google Earth Engine - Platform. URL: https://earthengine.google.com/
platform/.
DigitalGlobe (n.d.). GBDX Actionable insights. Global scale. URL: https://www.digitalglobe.
com/products/gbdx.
SINERGISE (n.d.). CLOUD API FOR SATELLITE IMAGERY. URL: https://www.sentinel-
hub.com/.
Mutanga, Onisimo and Lalit Kumar (Mar. 2019). Google earth engine applications. DOI:
10.3390/rs11050591.
MODIS Collections in Earth Engine (2020). URL: https://developers.google.com/earth-
engine/datasets/catalog/modis.
Earth Engine Data Catalog - Landsat 8 (2020). URL: https://developers.google.com/earth-
engine/datasets/catalog/landsat-8/.
Earth Engine Data Catalog - Greenland DEM - Greenland Mapping Project (GIMP) (2020).
URL: https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/OSU_GIMP_DEM.
CFMask Algorithm (2020). URL: https://www.usgs.gov/land-resources/nli/landsat/cfmask-
algorithm.
About Sentinel Hub (2020). URL: https://www.sentinel-hub.com/about.
Sentinel Hub - LANDSAT 8 EO products (2020). URL: https://www.sentinel-hub.com/
develop/documentation/eo_products/Landsat8EOproducts.
Landsat Level-1 Processing Details (2020). URL: https://www.usgs.gov/land-resources/
nli/landsat/landsat-level-1-processing-details.
Zanter, Karen (2019). LSDS-1656 Version 2.0 LANDSAT COLLECTION 1 LEVEL 1 PROD-
UCT DEFINITION Version 2.0. Tech. rep.
Landsat Collection 1 Level-1 Quality Assessment Band (2020). URL: https://www.usgs.
gov/land-resources/nli/landsat/landsat-collection-1-level-1-quality-assessment-band?qt-
science_support_page_related_con=0#qt-science_support_page_related_con.
Sentinel Hub - Digital Elevation Model — DEM (2017). URL: https://medium.com/sentinel-
hub/digital-elevation-model-dem-3c05141bb03d.
AWS Public Sector Blog Team (2016). Announcing Terrain Tiles on AWS: A Q&amp;A
with Mapzen. URL: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/publicsector/announcing-terrain-tiles-
on-aws-a-qa-with-mapzen/.
56 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:65==
Hennig, Thomas A et al. (2001). The Shuttle Radar Topography Mission. Tech. rep.
EL-Learn - GIthub repository (2020). URL: https://github.com/sentinel-hub/eo-learn.
Hager, W., J. F. Behensky, and B. W. Drew (1989). The universal grids: Universal Trans-
verse Mercator (UTM) and Universal Polar Stereographic (UPS), Technical Report TM
8358.2, Defense Mapping Agency. Tech. rep.
As, D van, RS Fausto, and the PROMICE project team (2010). Geological Survey of
Denmark and Greenland Bulletin 23, 2011, 73–76. Tech. rep. URL: www.promice.dk..
McFeeters, S. K. (1996). “The use of the Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) in
the delineation of open water features”. In: International Journal of Remote Sensing
17.7, pp. 1425–1432. ISSN: 13665901. DOI: 10.1080/01431169608948714.
Gao, Bo-Cai (1996). Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave. Tech. rep., pp. 257–
266.
Köhler, Iris H. et al. (2017). “Expression of cyanobacterial FBP/SBPase in soybean pre-
vents yield depression under future climate conditions”. In: Journal of Experimental
Botany. ISSN: 14602431. DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw435.
Moussavi, Mahsa S. et al. (2016). “Derivation and validation of supraglacial lake volumes
on the Greenland Ice Sheet from high-resolution satellite imagery”. In: Remote Sensing
of Environment 183, pp. 294–303. ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2016.05.024.
Miles, Katie E. et al. (July 2017). “Toward monitoring surface and subsurface lakes on the
Greenland ice sheet using sentinel-1 SAR and landsat-8 OLI imagery”. In: Frontiers in
Earth Science 5. ISSN: 22966463. DOI: 10.3389/feart.2017.00058.
He, Wei (2010). “Application of Euclidean norm in multi-temporal remote sensing image
change detection”. In: Proceedings - 2010 3rd International Congress on Image and
Signal Processing, CISP 2010. Vol. 5, pp. 2111–2115. ISBN: 9781424465149. DOI:
10.1109/CISP.2010.5647300.
Horn, Berthold K.P. (1981). “Hill Shading and the Reflectance Map”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE 69.1, pp. 14–47. ISSN: 15582256. DOI: 10.1109/PROC.1981.11918.
Jones, Kevin H (1998). A COMPARISON OF ALGORITHMS USED TO COMPUTE HILL
SLOPE AS A PROPERTY OF THE DEM. Tech. rep.
Santos, Miriam Seoane et al. (Nov. 2018). “Cross-validation for imbalanced datasets:
Avoiding overoptimistic and overfitting approaches [Research Frontier]”. In: IEEE Com-
putational Intelligence Magazine 13.4, pp. 59–76. ISSN: 15566048. DOI: 10.1109/MCI.
2018.2866730.
Guo, Huaping et al. (2018). “Ensemble of rotation trees for imbalanced medical datasets”.
In: Journal of Healthcare Engineering 2018. ISSN: 20402309. DOI: 10 . 1155 / 2018 /
8902981.
Rodríguez, Juan J, José F Díez-Pastor, and César García-Osorio (2011). Ensembles of
Decision Trees for Imbalanced Data. Tech. rep.
Hall, Dorothy K. et al. (Apr. 2018). “A multilayer surface temperature, surface albedo,
and water vapor product of Greenland from MODIS”. In: Remote Sensing 10.4. ISSN:
20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs10040555.
Morriss, B. F. et al. (Dec. 2013). “A ten-year record of supraglacial lake evolution and rapid
drainage in West Greenland using an automated processing algorithm for multispectral
imagery”. In: Cryosphere 7.6, pp. 1869–1877. ISSN: 19940416. DOI: 10.5194/tc-7-
1869-2013.
Al Fugara, Akif Mohammed, Biswajeet Pradhan, and Thamer Ahmed Mohamed (Dec.
2009). “Improvement of land-use classification using object-oriented and fuzzy logic
approach”. In: Applied Geomatics 1.4, pp. 111–120. ISSN: 18669298. DOI: 10.1007/
s12518-009-0011-3.
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
57
==PAGE:66==
Nogueira, Keiller, Otávio A. B. Penatti, and Jefersson A. dos Santos (Feb. 2016). “Towards
Better Exploiting Convolutional Neural Networks for Remote Sensing Scene Classifi-
cation”. In: DOI: 10.1016/j.patcog.2016.07.001. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01517%
20http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2016.07.001.
Li, Tianrui et al. (n.d.). Proceedings of the 2017 12th International Conference on Intelli-
gent Systems and Knowledge Engineering (ISKE) : IEEE ISKE 2017 : November 24-26,
2017, NanJing, JiangSu, China. ISBN: 9781538618295.
58 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:67==
A
Fragmentation of Greenland
Figure A.1: Fragmentation of Greenland to 25.000 of tiles with a special resolution of
10km per tile
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
59
==PAGE:68==
B
Construction of a stacked water mask
Figure B.1: All single mask from the EOPatch are stacked together to create a seasonal
water mask
60 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:69==
C
Training dataset - Feature dataset
Figure C.1: a) LANDSAT RGB image, b) MODIS RGB image, c) Annual water mask, d)
DEM model
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure C.2: Six MODIS raw bands
62 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:71==
Figure C.3: Produced bands from the feature engineering process
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
63
==PAGE:72==
D
Gradient Boosting Decision Tree Model
Figure D.1: Final architecture of Gradient Boosting Decision Tree model
64 Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
==PAGE:73==
Mapping the hydrological system of the Greenland ice sheet in coarse satellite products with a machine
learning approach
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej Bygning, Building 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 9500
www.space.dtu.dk
