==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
Scaling of SaaS Companies
Challenges and Recommendations
Author:
Nanna Pollas Bjerg Basa
Supervisor:
Kathrin Kirchner
March 10, 2020
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis is completed as a part of obtaining a Master of Science
in Engineering within the ﬁeld of Management Engineering. The workload is
30 ECTS points and the work was carried out at the Technical University of
Denmark. This is the extended version to the original thesis that was conducted
over the time period from the 1st of July, 2019 to the 1st of December, 2019.
This extended version was conducted over the period from the 20th of December,
2019 to the 10th of March, 2020.
The project was supervised by Associate Professor Kathrin Kirchner. I thank
her for her guidance and encouragement throughout this project.
DTU Management, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, 10th of March, 2020
Nanna Pollas Bjerg Basa
==PAGE:3==
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This project studies the transition Software as a Service (SaaS) startups go
through in order to scale their business. It is estimated that there are currently
a few hundred Danish companies using the SaaS model but they lack the relevant
knowledge in order to scale. Due to limitations in existing theories, I developed
my own wholesome theoretical model for SaaS startups. The model is called
The Six Dimensions of Transitioning and outlines the challenges of the tran-
sition that a SaaS startup has to make within strategy and culture, customer
responsiveness, product oﬀering, ﬁnancial capability, systematising processes,
and setting up a team. The model focuses solely on what is within the control
of the founders. The model was applied to three diﬀerent case studies of Danish
SaaS companies through a qualitative approach. It was found the model pro-
vided a solid foundation to understand the main elements and challenges that a
SaaS startup goes through in order to scale. Additionally, it was discovered all
case studies perceived their greatest challenges were within strategy and culture,
and setting up a team. Finally, recommendations for SaaS companies seeking
to scale was outlined.
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
2.1
The ﬁrst four Marmer stages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Picken’s eight hurdles of the transition period (Picken, 2017,
p. 589). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Left: Cohan’s four stages of development (Cohan, 2019, p. 3).
Right: Cohan’s seven levers available for a CEO to accelerate
growth (Cohan, 2019, p. 4). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
The Six Dimensions of Transitioning that a company controls. . .
18
2.5
The technology adaption life cycle. (Fallarme, 2017) . . . . . . .
20
2.6
The whole product model for SaaS companies.
. . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1
Peakon’s growth of employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
2.1
The Marmer stages and their correlation with traditional perfor-
mance indicators (Max Marmer, 2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
The Marmer stages and the founders perception of advantages
and challenges (Max Marmer, 2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Startup Genome showing startups progression depending on how
they move through the Marmer stages. (Max Marmer, 2012)
. .
14
4.1
Overview and comparison of the three case studies (Basa, 2019,
p. 33). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Clio’s challenges and solutions within direction and culture. . . .
35
4.3
Clio’s challenges and solutions within customer responsiveness. .
36
4.4
Clio’s challenges and solutions within product oﬀering. . . . . . .
37
4.5
Clio’s challenges and solutions within ﬁnancial capability.
. . . .
38
4.6
Clio’s challenges and solutions within systematising processes. . .
39
4.7
Clio’s challenges and solutions within setting up a team. . . . . .
40
4.8
Artland’s challenges and solutions within strategy and culture.
.
43
4.9
Artland’s challenges and solutions within customer responsiveness. 44
4.10 Artland’s challenges and solutions within product oﬀering. . . . .
45
4.11 Artland’s challenges and solutions within ﬁnancial capability. . .
45
4.12 Artland’s challenges and solutions within systematising processes.
46
==PAGE:9==
viii
LIST OF TABLES
4.13 Artland’s challenges and solutions within setting up a team. . . .
47
4.14 Peakon’s challenges and solutions within strategy and culture. . .
52
4.15 Peakon’s challenges and solutions within customer responsiveness.
52
4.16 Peakon’s challenges and solutions within product oﬀering. . . . .
53
4.17 Peakon’s challenges and solutions within ﬁnancial capability.
. .
54
4.18 Peakon’s challenges and solutions within systematising processes.
54
4.19 Peakon’s challenges and solutions within setting up a team. . . .
57
D.1 The project plan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
D.2 The actual project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
==PAGE:10==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Software as a Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Scaling Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Purpose Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
The Startup Life Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Development of Theoretical Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
The Six Dimensions for Transitioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Methodology
27
3.1
Deduction and Induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Case Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Research
33
4.1
Clio Online . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Learnings from Clio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Artland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Learnings from Artland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Peakon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Learnings from Peakon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Discussion
61
5.1
Research Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Further Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conclusion
65
6.1
General Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Personal Lessons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
74
A Interview Case Study 1 - Clio Online
75
==PAGE:11==
2
CONTENTS
B Interview Case Study 2 - Artland
83
C Interview Case Study 3 - Peakon
89
D Project Plan
95
==PAGE:12==
Acronyms
The complete list of acronyms used throughout the report.
APAC Asia-Paciﬁc
CAC Customer Acquisition Cost
CEO Chief Executive Oﬃcer
CFO Chief Financial Oﬃcer
CGO Chief Growth Oﬃcer
CMO Chief Marketing Oﬃcer
COO Chief Operating Oﬃcer
CRM Customer Relationship Management
CSO Chief Strategy Oﬃcer
CTO Chief Technology Oﬃcer
DTU Technical University of Denmark
HR Human Resource
IP Intellectual Property
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MVP Minimum Viable Product
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
ROI Return on Investment
SaaS Software as a Service
UX User Experience
VP Vice President
==PAGE:13==
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter provides an introduction to scaling of SaaS companies. First, a
description of SaaS companies is provided and scaling as a term is discussed.
Finally, the purpose statement, learning objectives, and the thesis outline is
given.
1.1
Software as a Service
Since the 1960s, SaaS companies have taken oﬀand left traditional on-premise
software installations behind. SaaS is crucial to most businesses today and it
is predicted that 73% of enterprises will run almost entirely on SaaS in 2020.
(Smale, 2019) (Rayome, 2017)
SaaS is a way of oﬀering applications over the internet via cloud computing
and resides in a multi-tenant environment providing lower costs compared to
traditional on-premise software. The SaaS provider is responsible for running
the servers, security, availability, and performance of the application. The SaaS
provider is able to make upgrades to their software more frequently with a lower
risk of loosing customers and with a lower cost of adoption than traditional busi-
ness software that has to be downloaded and installed locally. Developers do
not need to put in eﬀort to maintain older versions with outdated code. As a
result, the user won’t have to deal with complex installation, maintenance and
managing the hardware. The customers beneﬁt from location independence,
fast access to functionality, lower costs, free ﬂow of information, and ease of
use. This means the customers only have to worry about having an internet
connection - the rest is taken care of. The business model for SaaS companies is
typically based on a monthly or annual subscription where users pay for access
to the SaaS application online. The subscription based license fee allows for a
==PAGE:15==
4
Introduction
cheaper, upfront payment. Typically, diﬀerent subscription options are avail-
able providing the customer with the ﬂexibility to change the subscription as
the company grows. Traditional software deployment takes a long time whereas
SaaS has already been established and deployed as the application is already in-
stalled and conﬁgured via the cloud. The responsibility of making upgrades lies
with the SaaS provider. As the application is located on the cloud, the applica-
tion can be accessed from various devices from all over the world. (Salesforce)
(Nibusinessinfo)
SaaS applications also go under the names web-based software, on-demand soft-
ware, and hosted software. Various business applications are delivered through
the SaaS method such as (Nibusinessinfo):
• Oﬃce and communication software.
• CRM software.
• Payroll and accounting programs.
• HR management.
• Enterprise resource planning programs.
• Corporate performance management programs.
• Email and collaboration software.
• Editing and creation software.
• Document handling.
• Mobile applications
1.2
Scaling Up
The SaaS model provides the possibility of creating rapid scaling if done right.
The model itself is extremely scalable since the cost of providing one more
customer access to the software is incredibly low. This low marginal cost makes
SaaS companies appealing to investors. For a software company, growing fast
means everything for winning in the long run. Unlike most other industries, if a
software company grows at a rate of 20%, there is a 92% risk of it ceasing to exist
within a few years (Eric Kutcher, 2014). For businesses using a SaaS model,
there will typically be a long period of time before proﬁts are generated as it
typically is reliant on a larger volume of customers. The time for recovering
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Scaling Up
5
CAC can be months and typically results in negative cash ﬂow. For a SaaS
company to become proﬁtable, scaling is inevitable. The SaaS model has proven
to be extremely successful by creating some of the world’s fastest growing IT
companies such as Dropbox, Salesforce, and Adobe. (Kjær, 2018)
There is no doubt that these SaaS companies have been able to scale enormously.
However, scaling as a term is broadly understood since it relates to the rapid
growth of a company and growth comes in many diﬀerent verticals. Merriam-
Webster deﬁnes the word scale up as to grow or expand in proportional and
usually proﬁtable way referring to increase the amount, size or extent of some-
thing (Merriam-Webster). Reviewing the publicly understood opinion on a scale
up demonstrates how broad the perceptions are. Amongst LinkedIn debaters
the following perceptions are put forward (Jensen, 2019). Companies become
scale ups after having proof of idea, proof of concept, and proof of business, and
they are able to show they can compete with the competition in the market or
even better than the competitors, and win market share. This requires their
business model to have been tested and be ﬁnancially sustainable. When the
companies are in this phase it will demand they challenge themselves and their
internal processes for obtaining competitive advantage. Others amongst the de-
baters deﬁne it based on number of employees, some based on what funding
stage the company is at, and others base it on turnover. Scale ups focus on
growth whereas startups focus on getting started. Some debaters refer to the
number of years for deﬁnition and others the number of employees. Finally,
some debaters outline the importance of putting it into it geographical context.
Denmark is a small country where a startup is a hand full of people whereas
overseas it can be hundreds. (Basa, 2019, p. 5)
These geographically relative comments illustrate the many diﬀerent verticals
and complexity of the term, as they include everything from business model,
internal processes, employees, funding, turnover, and life time as determining
factors for deﬁning a scale up. The closest to a quantiﬁable deﬁnition has been
provided by Eurostat that deﬁnes a high-growth enterprise as: All enterprises
with average annualised growth greater than 20% per annum, over a three year
period should be considered as high-growth enterprises. Growth can be measured
by the number of employees or by turnover that is outlined in the OECD Manual
on Business Demography Statistics in 2007 (Eurostat, 2007, p. 61).
As this thesis focuses on scaling of SaaS companies, it is therefore important
to understand that the word has diﬀerent meanings for the individual and the
transition of when a company becomes a scale up is therefore also cluttered and
diﬃcult to quantify.
For a small country like Denmark, the market for a speciﬁc solution is typically
so small that the company is forced to think globally from the beginning com-
==PAGE:17==
6
Introduction
pared to for example, the USA. The SaaS companies, Zendesk, Unity, Tradeshift,
Falcon.io, and Sitecore, who have all started out of Denmark managed to grow
extremely fast and reached the 1 billion dollar valuation milestone that cate-
gorises them as a so called unicorn. It is estimated that there currently are a
couple of hundred Danish companies using the SaaS model but they lack the rel-
evant experience (Kjær, 2018). Without the right experience and knowledge, it
can be far between creating another exceptional growth journey. (Kjær, 2019a)
(Lee, 2019)
1.3
Purpose Statement
This qualitative study explores the challenges that SaaS companies face when
scaling. Insights from three diﬀerent case studies are given and lastly, general
recommendations for SaaS companies seeking to scale is outlined.
1.4
Learning Objectives
The learning objectives for this master thesis are the following:
• Describe SaaS companies.
• Discuss scaling as a term.
• Review relevant literature on scaling.
• Develop a wholesome theoretical framework that illustrates the challenges
for SaaS companies when scaling.
• Apply a qualitative research methodology.
• Select relevant case studies to collect qualitative data.
• Apply the theoretical framework on the selected case studies.
• Evaluate limitations of the theoretical framework.
• Provide general recommendations for SaaS companies seeking to scale.
==PAGE:18==
1.5 Thesis Outline
7
1.5
Thesis Outline
The structure and an overview of what is represented in the diﬀerent chapters
is shown below:
Chapter 1 - Introduction
An introduction to SaaS companies were provided and scaling as a term has
been discussed. Furthermore, the purpose statement and learning objectives for
this report were given.
Chapter 2 - Theory
Theoretical insight into the life cycle of a startup and the Marmer stages it must
pass through in order to scale successfully is provided. The literature The Eight
Hurdles of the Transition Period by Picken and The Seven Levers Available for
a CEO by Cohan was reviewed as a foundation for me to develop a wholesome,
theoretical framework. The theoretical framework includes six dimensions of
challenges a SaaS company experiences when transitioning into a scale up.
Chapter 3 - Methodology
Present the methodology of the research for this thesis by outlining the use of
an inductive and deductive approach and setting up criteria for the selection of
case studies and describing the qualitative data collection.
Chapter 4 - Research
The three case studies are presented and analysed through the theoretical frame-
work I developed. The ﬁndings of the individual cases are elaborated.
Chapter 5 - Discussion
Discussion of the research results and limitations of the theoretical framework
and methodology. Suggestions on further studies are also provided.
Chapter 6 - Conclusion
A summary of the knowledge obtained through this thesis is provided. General
recommendations for SaaS companies wanting to overcome the challenges of the
transition into a scale up are given. Finally, my personal lessons are reﬂected
on.
==PAGE:19==
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2
Theory
This chapter provides theoretical insight into the life cycle of a startup company
and the Marmer stages it evolves through. This will give a common understand-
ing of what the startup looks like and which major activities are at the core focus
at each stage during their life cycle. The development of my own framework for
the transition that startups have to go through to become a scaleable business is
presented.
2.1
The Startup Life Cycle
The think-tank, Startup Genome, analysed data from more than 650 web based
startups and published a report in 2012 with its ﬁndings (Max Marmer, 2012).
The purpose was to ﬁnd patterns of successful startups in order to enlarge the
future success rate of startups as well as accelerate their growth. Having an
understanding of the reasons a startup succeeds or fails allows entrepreneurs to
improve their abilities. It was discovered that the web based startups develop
through similar thresholds and milestones that could be grouped into stages.
For example, a milestone could be to build a MVP and a threshold could be a
set user retention rate. There are six stages of development that makes up the
life cycle of the startups and they are labelled the Marmer stages after Startup
Genome founder, Max Marmer. The traditional way of assessing a startup’s
stage is typically done by looking at tangible measures such as funding, team
size, user growth etc. Startup Genome worked closely with Steve Blank in the
development of the Marmer stages and based it on Blank’s customer develop-
mental theory which is also considered as one of the pillars of the lean startup
approach (Blank, 2013). Hence, the Marmer stages provide a modiﬁcation to
Blank’s customer developmental theory as they have incorporated the ﬁndings
==PAGE:21==
10
Theory
from analysing more than 650 startups. The outcome became a product ori-
ented theory that allow the assessment of startups based on their main progress
at each stage. The six stages of the life cycle are 1) Discovery, 2) Validation,
3) Eﬃciency, 4) Scale, 5) Proﬁt Maximisation and 6) Renewal. The ﬁrst four
Marmer stages will be explained in the following and are illustrated in ﬁgure
2.1. Stage 5) and 6) are not covered as it is outside the scope of this thesis.
The transition from one stage to the next happens gradually and not from one
day to another.
The Marmer stages provide a general model for web based
startups but naturally the thresholds and milestones of the Marmer stages will
vary depending on the type of startup. (Max Marmer, 2012)
Figure 2.1: The ﬁrst four Marmer stages.
2.1.1
Stage 1) Discovery
The ﬁrst Marmer stage a startup goes through is discovery, where the founding
team is established and an idea is assessed to ﬁnd out if it solves a meaningful
problem. An early validation if people hypothetically are interested in using
the solution is carried out.
Market and customer research is done, a value
proposition is determined, and a MVP developed. Funding is typically coming
from sources such as bootstrapping or family and friends. Startup Genome has
determined the average time period for a startup to go through this stage is
between ﬁve to seven months. (Max Marmer, 2012)
2.1.2
Stage 2) Validation
The second Marmer stage is validation where the entrepreneurs create proof of
concept from demonstrating willingness from customers in terms of payment or
==PAGE:22==
2.1 The Startup Life Cycle
11
attention. At this stage the initial user growth will lead to adjustments of core
functionalities and features. Pivots from the original idea can be necessary in
the pursuit of getting the product market ﬁt right. Hires of key employees are
made and metrics and analytics on the company’s performance are established.
At this stage, the startup is normally able to raise seed funding. Seed funding
is the ﬁrst oﬃcial equity funding stage and most commonly consists of angel
investors that are willing to take higher risks with a startup that has little
proven track record (Reiﬀ, 2020). The time period for a startup to go through
this stage is usually between three to ﬁve months. (Max Marmer, 2012)
2.1.3
Stage 3) Eﬃciency
The third Marmer stage is eﬃciency which is the stage that lays the foundation
for the scaling of the company. The value proposition and business model is
reﬁned, user experience is improved, optimisations are made to the sales funnel
and customer conversion in order for them to run eﬃciently and be able to be
replicated. The time period it takes for a startup to go through this stage is on
average between ﬁve to six months. (Max Marmer, 2012)
2.1.4
Stage 4) Scale
The fourth Marmer stage is scale where the startup drives growth very ag-
gressively. Driving growth aggressively consists of adding resources as well as
leveraging processes. Partnerships are typically created for the purpose of ob-
taining competitive advantage and gaining sustainable market leadership. The
company hires executive people and departments and processes are put in place.
Many improvements will be made behind the scenes to make sure the company
is ﬁt for scaling. Funding typically comes from a series A investment round.
A startup can attract series A investment from venture capital ﬁrms when it
has a substantial user base and shows consistent metrics like revenue (Reiﬀ,
2020).
Additionally, a series B investment round can be raised to take the
startup further and expand their market reach by ramping up development,
sales, advertising, tech, support, and employees (Reiﬀ, 2020). The average time
period for a company to go through this stage is between seven to nine months.
(Max Marmer, 2012)
==PAGE:23==
12
Theory
2.1.5
Company performance, advantages, challenges, and
progress during the Marmer stages
The Marmer stages can be compared to traditional indicators of company per-
formance. Table 2.1 shows the average of funding raised by the startup, the
number of employees, and the user growth percentage of the last month at each
of the four Marmer stages. There is a large jump in all three performance in-
dicators as the startup reaches the scale stage which is due to the aggressive
growth the company drives. The numbers in table 2.1 are based oﬀStartup
Genome’s average for the 650 startups they analysed. (Max Marmer, 2012)
Marmer
Avg. funding
Avg. no. of
Avg. user growth
Stage
raised
Employees
in last month
Discovery
$ 227,000
1
6%
Validation
$ 800,000
4
21%
Eﬃciency
$ 900,000
4
29%
Scale
$ 3,000,000
17
43%
Table 2.1: The Marmer stages and their correlation with traditional perfor-
mance indicators (Max Marmer, 2012).
Table 2.2 shows what the startups believed to be their main competitive ad-
vantages and challenges at each of the four Marmer stages. The table is based
oﬀthe results from Startup Genome’s analysis of 650 startups. (Max Marmer,
2012)
==PAGE:24==
2.1 The Startup Life Cycle
13
Marmer Stage
Top Competitive Advantages
Top Challenges
Discovery
IP
Customer acquisition
Technology
Over capacity
Validation
Partners
Customer acquisition
Insider info
Product market ﬁt
Problem solution ﬁt
Eﬃciency
Traction
Customer acquisition
IP
Team building
Insider info
Fundraising
Scale
IP
Customer acquisition
Traction
Team building
Technology
Table 2.2: The Marmer stages and the founders perception of advantages and
challenges (Max Marmer, 2012).
At the discovery stage the startups consider IP and technology to be their top
competitive advantages which aligns with the focus on idea development and
the building of the MVP. Over capacity was considered a top challenge. Over
capacity refers to startups ﬁnding they have too little time or they had to take
on too many diﬀerent roles within the company. The explanation can be found
in the founders still exploring how they should prioritize at this stage.
During the validation stage the startup considers partners and insider infor-
mation to be their main competitive advantage. Partners create validation for
concepts that do not have a lot of traction yet and at this stage the startup gains
a lot of market knowledge and understanding from customers. Many startups
found problem solution ﬁt to be a challenge despite this being a key element
of the discovery stage. This meant the startups had created a product without
knowing if customers even wanted it. As a result, most of these startups would
have to pivot and go back to the discovery stage.
At the eﬃciency stage traction is believed to be the main competitive advantage
amongst the founders. The activities evolve around making the customer acqui-
sition processes running as smoothly as possible. Additionally, traction matters
to many investors which at this point the startup would already start prepping
for closing their series A round.
Besides fundraising the scale stage has the same top challenges as eﬃciency. At
this point the fundraising has already been sorted as the funds will be released
==PAGE:25==
14
Theory
during the scale stage in order to drive aggressive growth. Additionally, if the
startup has made it as far as the scale stage, it is easier to ﬁnd willing investors
due to a promising future.
The top challenge for startups during all of the four Marmer stages are perceived
by them to be customer acquisition. Most startups fail due to lack of gaining
customers.
However, the root cause to lacking customer acquisition during
the ﬁrst three Marmer stages are problem solution ﬁt, product market ﬁt, and
feature development. Hence, these must be addressed to ﬁx the lack of customer
acquisition. Explanations for lacking customer acquisition can be found from
startups focusing on building features or they put in a lot of eﬀort on creating
brand awareness for a product that is not working properly. Investors often
want the startup to show customer traction which can make the startup focus
their attention on the wrong metrics for the stage they are at. (Max Marmer,
2012)
Lastly, it was discovered that startups that develop through each Marmer stage
in an inconsistent manner progress less compared to those that move through
the stages consistently. Table 2.3 shows a comparison between the inconsistent
startups and the consistent startups. The inconsistent startups had to pivot
more and only raised one third of the amount of funding that the consistent
startup did at the Marmer stage of scale. Additionally, the average number of
employees were more than ﬁve times higher for the consistent startups. The
Marmer stages can provide startups with relevant parameters to follow so they
know whether or not they are on the right track to become a successful scale
up. (Max Marmer, 2012)
Startup
Avg. no. of
Pivot
Avg. Funding
Avg. no. of
Pivots
Variance
Raised at Scale
Employees
Inconsistent
1.6
5.0
$ 1,100,000
3
Consistent
1.2
2.0
$ 3,400,000
20
Table 2.3: Startup Genome showing startups progression depending on how
they move through the Marmer stages. (Max Marmer, 2012)
The above outlined Startup Genome’s ﬁndings from more than 650 startups
provides quantitative insight and understanding of how a startup should develop
through each stage when they want to scale. The startups analysed were all web
based and therefore also apply for SaaS companies. All startups were located
in Silicon Valley, the number one startup ecosystem in the whole world. Having
a condensed area of a highly experienced startup ecosystem attracts a high
number of startups, skilled people, investors, competition, and drives cost prices
and valuations up. There are more than 150 companies in Silicon Valley with
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Development of Theoretical Framework
15
a valuation above 1 billion dollars. Not only in Denmark but all over the world
startups look toward Silicon Valley for trends and best practices. The amount
of research conducted on Danish founded SaaS companies is extremely limited
and the ﬁndings have provided a great foundation that can also be applied for
Danish founded SaaS companies. Naturally, there are variations that should be
kept in mind. (Max Marmer, 2012) (Bjarke Wiegand, 2015)
2.2
Development of Theoretical Framework
The Marmer stages has already shown a startup must develop through each
stage of its life cycle and transition into a scale up. Limited research and theory
has been done on the transition of the startup to become a scale up and I have
therefore developed a theoretical framework for this purpose. The theories by
Dr. Joseph C. Picken The eight hurdles of the transition period and Peter S.
Cohan The seven levers available for a CEO to accelerate growth has laid the
foundation for the development of my theory. Each of these theories and their
short comings will be elaborated in the following.
2.2.1
The eight hurdles of the transition period
Picken is a clinical professor of entrepreneurship and executive director at the
Institute for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the University of Texas. Ad-
ditionally, he has more than 30 years of business and consulting experience.
He has held CEO, COO, and CFO positions in two NASDAQ companies and
Fortune 500 corporations (Dallas). In 2017, Picken published an article called
From Startup To Scalable Enterprise: Laying The Foundation where he out-
lines the eight hurdles of the transition. An overview of the eight hurdles in
his article is shown in ﬁgure 2.2. His theory outlines the transformation from
a nascent startup to a structured organisation with a proﬁtable growth and
which obstacles the entrepreneur faces and how he or she must grow into the
role of a CEO. For his development of the theory, Picken has used literature
and theories of others as well as his personal experience. For example, Geoﬀrey
A. Moore and his book Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling High-Tech
Products to Mainstream Customers as well as ﬁve scenarios from his personal
experience. Additionally, he illustrates most of the challenges the founder will
face is within his or her own control. Picken focuses on the overall building of
an organisation but does not go into depth on the right job roles that can come
about by hiring, promoting or letting go of employees. He mentions building
ﬁnancial capability but neglects the importance of creating growth trajectories
==PAGE:27==
16
Theory
in doing so. The last hurdle he mentions is the management of risk and vulner-
abilities. This is not speciﬁc to companies looking to scale but is an important
element throughout the whole life cycle of the company. However, the risks and
vulnerabilities arise from sources such as inexperienced employees or inadequate
infrastructures. Since these are already mentioned as hurdles, the risks and vul-
nerabilities are merely sub categories of his already mentioned hurdles. (Picken,
2017) (Picken, 2016)
Figure 2.2: Picken’s eight hurdles of the transition period (Picken, 2017,
p. 589).
2.2.2
The seven levers available for a CEO to accelerate
growth
Peter S. Cohan is a startup investor, and 3 out of 6 companies which he has
invested in have sold for USD 2 billion combined.
In 1994, before founding
his consultancy, Peter S. Cohan & Associates, he worked with strategy guru
Michael E. Porter. Cohan writes columns in magazines such as Forbes and has
written several books within the startup strategy, growth, and leadership. In
==PAGE:28==
2.2 Development of Theoretical Framework
17
Figure 2.3: Left: Cohan’s four stages of development (Cohan, 2019, p. 3).
Right: Cohan’s seven levers available for a CEO to accelerate
growth (Cohan, 2019, p. 4).
2019, he published his book called Scaling Your Startup. The book is written
for CEOs to help them managing the organizational change in order to grow.
He deﬁnes scaling to be ..how leaders transform a business idea into a large
company. Leaders accomplish this transformation by positioning the company
to capture growth opportunities while reinventing the company as it grows. A
startup draws resources from outside stakeholders, and the relationships with
those stakeholders vary depending on the startup’s stage of development (Co-
han, 2019, p. 3). Figure 2.3 (left) depicts the four stages as winning the ﬁrst
customer, building a scalable business model, sprinting to liquidity, and run-
ning the marathon. At each stage Cohan describes how the relationship with
the stakeholders: customers, employees, partners, and investors evolve as the
company scales. The CEO has seven levers available to overcome each of these
stages and accelerate growth. The seven levers are building growth trajectories,
raising capital, redeﬁning job functions, hiring, promoting and letting people
go, holding people accountable, coordinating processes, and creating culture as
shown in ﬁgure 2.3 (right). Despite Cohan’s extensive experience in the industry,
his theory is not built on empiricism to support it. While he uses case studies
as examples throughout the book, those cases have been selected to support
the narrative presented. The book provides some good insights but it fails to
recognise the lever available to a CEO within the customers that he considers
only as a stakeholder. Additionally, levers from a product point of view are not
taken into account either. This leaves the model incomplete. (Cohan, 2019)
(Forbes) (Inc.)
==PAGE:29==
18
Theory
Picken and Cohan both provide valuable points but not a thorough and complete
theory on their own. Hence, I will in the following provide a wholesome model
that contains a mix of theories from both Picken and Cohan but further includes
a SaaS point of view where relevant. I have called this model The Six Dimensions
for Transitioning.
2.3
The Six Dimensions for Transitioning
The six core operational dimensions that a startup can control consists of strat-
egy and culture, customer responsiveness, product oﬀering, ﬁnancial capability,
systematising processes and setting up a team. The startup must synchronise
these in order to achieve proper scaling. As the startup develops through the
Marmer stages the level of complexity of its activities increase.
The six di-
mensions of transitioning provides an overview of the most crucial elements to
achieve scale and what challenges it yields for SaaS startup founders. Figure 2.4
shows the six domains overlapping with each other to demonstrate the coherence
between them and how they are all interlinked and impact one and another. In
the following the individual domains are explored.
Figure 2.4: The Six Dimensions of Transitioning that a company controls.
==PAGE:30==
2.3 The Six Dimensions for Transitioning
19
2.3.1
Strategy and culture
A clear direction of the company’s strategy must be outlined and communi-
cated to the employees to ensure everyone works towards the same goal and the
startup sticks to their critical path. If the strategy is not being communicated
or adopted by the all employees, it will lead to a waste of time and resources as
they will have to guess and ﬁgure out what makes sense to do strategically. If
there is a lack of clear direction and execution, founders can move to the next
Marmer stage prematurely where they tend to spend their eﬀorts incorrectly,
for example, on further product development. Priorities and goals must be put
forward and the steps of how to get there must be broken down and understood.
The direction and strategy shapes the identity of the company which the culture
evolves around. What is commonly understood and implicitly communicated
among the people working at the startup during their initial stages is under
threat as more and more people are brought onto the team and the need for
articulating the company values explicitly in formal writing increases. These
values are useful as guidelines for hiring the right team and rewarding employ-
ees. If the culture is neglected, not communicated, nor adopted by the growing
team members, it can lead to failure of the company. Such failure can also occur
if it is the wrong culture that is selected to be nurtured. (Picken, 2017) (Cohan,
2019)
2.3.2
Customer responsiveness
For a SaaS company to scale it is crucial for them to acquire customers by ap-
pealing to a larger segment. Firstly, it is necessary for the startup that seeks
rapid growth to realise not all customers are the same and they have diﬀerent
needs and compelling reasons to buy. The product adaption life cycle is a so-
ciological model used for understanding the customer acceptance of a product.
Geoﬀrey A. Moore demonstrates in his book, Crossing the Chasm, the varia-
tions between the diﬀerent customer segments for a technological product and
the gap that a scaling startup face when they go for the mainstream market
(Moore, 2014). Figure 2.5 shows the diﬀerent progression of the customer seg-
ments that a product will go through during its life cycle. The cycle shows the
size of the diﬀerent customer segments and has a shape of a bell curve. The
customer segments that the product goes through are innovators, early adap-
tors, early majority, late majority, and laggards, and is brieﬂy characterised in
the following.
Innovators are technology enthusiasts and the ﬁrst to adopt a new product.
They are driven by technological interest even before formal marketing measures
==PAGE:31==
20
Theory
Figure 2.5: The technology adaption life cycle. (Fallarme, 2017)
are put into practice. Within a market segment there are only few innovators
but their opinion provides reassurance to other players that the technology is
onto something.
Early adopters follow after the innovators and respect their opinions but are
not driven by the technology itself but are visionaries that can imagine and
understand the beneﬁts of a new product easily. Hence, they do not need a well
documented user opinion in order to make a purchase.
Early majority know many new technological products become passing fads
and are driven by practicality. Hence, they wait for other people to buy it before
they do. Nearly one third of the complete adoption cycle are in this segment
which makes them essential to get on board for a business to grow.
Late majority are not comfortable with handling technology and have the
same concerns as the early majority. Hence, they will wait until the technology
has become an established standard.
Laggards are not worth pursuing for a business as they do not want anything
to do with a new technology for personal and economic reasons.
Figure 2.5 illustrates a gap between early adopters and early majority - the so
called chasm. The startup has to cross the chasm if they want to succeed and
get to the Marmer stage of scale by obtaining a larger market share. If a startup
fails to recognise the transformation of the customer segment and appeal to their
needs, it can become an obstacle for them to scale the customer base. The strug-
gle of the transition from the visionary early adopters to the pragmatic early
majority is that they are fundamentally diﬀerent which requires the startup to
adopt. The visionaries consider themselves as bright and believe they are able
to foresee the trends before others and that this will give them a competitive
advantage if only they know about it. On the other hand, the pragmatists rely
on an extensive reference base of customers that are within the same industry
as themselves to make a purchase decision. This creates a tricky situation since
==PAGE:32==
2.3 The Six Dimensions for Transitioning
21
there are only few visionaries in each industry and a large reference customer
base, it is therefore diﬃcult to provide for the pragmatists. To alleviate this,
the startup has to select a beachhead for entering the market in order to build
up as big of an industry reference base as possible. Additionally, the compelling
reason to buy for a pragmatist must be expanded. This impacts the product
oﬀering that must be adjusted to ﬁt the expanded needs. The customer must
be thoughtfully considered and the startup must adjust its internal activities
such as sales channel, marketing, service, support, and product to align with
their needs. This demands a fast and ﬂexible customer responsiveness. The
customer feedback loop initially goes to the founder directly but as the startup
grows and layers are added in the organisational structure, it is necessary to
implement processes for this. The customer feedback will typically ﬂow to a
customer representative to a manger and from one manager to another up to
top management and then back down to the team responsible for product de-
velopment who will then address the problem. The pragmatist customer has
high expectations to both the product but also the customer support and can
be very dissatisﬁed and frustrated if they have to wait for what feels like a long
time for them. The customer feedback at this stage can easily go through a
ﬁltering process which clutters the message and the level of urgency might get
lost in the process. A customer focus must be implemented from the top to
the bottom of the company to ensure a high level of customer responsiveness.
(Picken, 2017) (Moore, 2014)
2.3.3
Product oﬀering
During the Marmer stages of discovery and validation the startup oﬀers a sim-
ple product to fulﬁll the needs of a core customer. When the startup wishes
to scale, it is essential for them to expand on their core product oﬀering so it
becomes a whole product oﬀering. This happens due to the expansion into the
mainstream market where the customers simply demand a whole product oﬀer-
ing. A whole product oﬀering includes complementary services and software.
The expectations and demands of the customers in the mainstream market is
very diﬀerent from those in the early market. Failure to recognise this change
and not re-positioning the product can lead to a company’s inability to scale.
A whole product oﬀering for a SaaS company includes complementary software
and complementary services as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.6. Figure 2.6 is my own
speciﬁc SaaS version of Moore’s model of a whole product oﬀering for technology
(Moore, 2011). A whole product oﬀering includes basically anything else than
the core product that provides the customer with a compelling reason to buy.
Complementary software is apps, ancillary software products, features for more
advanced users, and third party plugins such as payment solutions. Comple-
mentary services demanded by the mainstream market include a help center or
==PAGE:33==
22
Theory
chat. Furthermore, training can be necessary and done through webinars, and
an intuitive UX helps the user navigate easier. Being able to provide a whole
product oﬀering involves contributions from the diﬀerent company departments
such as development, customer support, sales, marketing and so forth. (Picken,
2017) (Moore, 2011)
Figure 2.6: The whole product model for SaaS companies.
2.3.4
Financial capability
The SaaS model is attractive to many startups and investors since the multi-
tenant environment creates low cost per user at a large scale. To generate rapid
growth a startup is depending on resources that cost money. Taking in an in-
vestment is the most common way for a scaling startup to fund its activities.
As illustrated previously in table 2.1 the amount of capital raised is based on
the Marmer stage of the startup and as the company progresses through the
stages, more and more funding is raised. At the discovery stage the capital
typically comes from bootstrapping, friends and family. Some startups utilise
crowd sourcing or early stage angel investors to build an MVP for a target group
of customers. When the product market ﬁt is obtained at the validation stage,
a customer base has been established and capital from angel investors can be
raised for the purpose of acquiring new customers. At the scale stage a startup
needs a substantial amount of revenue to gain a market leading position which
typically comes from venture capitalists. Bringing on investors can also enrich
the startup with more than just capital such as providing knowledge or help
==PAGE:34==
2.3 The Six Dimensions for Transitioning
23
establishing partnerships and generally opening doors for the entrepreneurs.
However, it also means the startup has to report to people which they might
not always agree or get along with. At the end of the day, the investors have put
in money to receive ROI and want their money to be spend eﬃciently. Hence,
the founders must create growth trajectories that include how the startup is
going to win customers and selling more to existing ones. A scaleable business
model that provides a sustainable growth trajectory must be implemented. As
mentioned earlier, the SaaS model itself is highly scaleable but the sales cycle
can be lengthy, especially for SaaS companies targeting enterprises. Hence, once
the customer has been converted, the next step is up-selling by oﬀering comple-
mentary products or oﬀering feature based plan upgrades. The founders must
prove to investors that they are spending the money on the right activities and
utilise resources eﬃciently. Reliable ﬁnancial projections must be put forward
and executed for the founders to maintain their credibility. If the founders fail at
building reliable growth trajectories or reaching their milestones, it will impact
the ability to receive funding or create a diﬃcult situation with current investors.
The price of giving away equity in the company should be out weighed by the
gain of being able to accelerate the business faster towards growth. (Cohan,
2019) (Picken, 2017)
2.3.5
Systematising processes
In order to scale the informal and loosely structured company, startups must ma-
ture into a disciplined business with structures and processes within a relatively
short period of time. At the beginning of the startup’s life cycle the founder
has the complete overview of all daily operations and processes and controls are
ad hoc. However, as the company is going to drive growth aggressively, more
and more employees are hired and the complexity of the company’s operations
increases. The people with generalist roles are turned into functional roles. The
functional specialisation is necessary in order to implement eﬀective structures
and formal processes so it is clear to everyone who is responsible and takes care of
diﬀerent projects and activities within the company. The functional specialists
are grouped into diﬀerent departments that are responsible for managing activ-
ities such as product development, customer relationships, and ﬁnance. Each
functional department has the responsibility of achieving the corporate goals
of the company. Such goals could be, for example, getting new customers, in-
crease revenue per customer, or hiring and motivating top talent. Setting goals
and holding individual team members accountable is a main motivational driver
for working towards and contributing to the startup’s growth. Delegating re-
sponsibility can encourage individuals and make them feel accountable. Various
metrics depending on job functions are used for measuring performance. Some
job positions are easier to measure the exact output value that they provide for
==PAGE:35==
24
Theory
the company than others. Take sales for example, it is possible to measure how
much growth in revenue is attributed to. Employees in functions that deliver
value that are not directly linked to revenue are measured on other metrics. The
metrics are individual to the startup and can change as the startup progresses
through the Marmer stages. The metrics should align with the values set out
by the management team. It must be recognised that the product itself is not
going to make a startup competitive. The way that the product is delivered and
the support of the customers has to be eﬀective as well. To attract customers
and create long lasting relationships, the customer activities must have a high
degree of ﬂexibility, responsiveness, and customised attention. The previously
suﬃcient ad hoc processes has its limitations when the volume of sales increases
and yields for structure and standard processes to follow to keep eﬃciency up.
The creation of functional departments can compromise the ﬂow of communica-
tion if the management is not aware of encouraging and ensuring collaboration
across boundaries in order to create a single, coherent company. Failure of sys-
tematising processes and developing the company infrastructure can lead to loss
of sales and customers, poor allocation of resources as well as compromising the
control over operations and ﬁnancial projections. Eﬀective processes are funda-
mental to combat the chaos and complexity when rapid growth overburdens the
existing systems in place as they allow for fast responses to change. (Cohan,
2019) (Picken, 2017)
2.3.6
Setting up a team
The team is the backbone of the startup and crucial to its success or failure.
It is the management’s responsibility to set the right team of people and the
founder’s responsibility to have a highly competent management team. As it
has previously been mentioned, the startup changes over time and such changes
demand careful planning as well as ﬂexibility so that the competences of the em-
ployees matches the strategy outlined. As a result, the jobs change from being
generalised where employees have to perform a broad set of job functions into be-
ing more narrow in the form of specialised functions. Hence, new jobs functions
are created and existing job functions are changed or terminated and employees
will therefore be hired, promoted, or let go. As an example, the job function
for the person in charge of HR will be divided into several job functions such
as recruiting, administration, and compliance with multiple people responsible.
Existing team members that show great leadership capabilities can be promoted
into leadership positions. People with a strong track record of succeeding in a
speciﬁc job function are brought onto the team to help the startup excel faster.
The big transformation of a startup will also lead to some employees no longer
ﬁtting into the new organisation. It can be a challenge to let go of people that
have been there for many years and stuck with the company through thick and
==PAGE:36==
2.4 Summary
25
thin. The performance of the job roles should be observed by the management
team so if changes are necessary they are discovered fast. If the startup fails to
set up the right team it can mean the required skills are not within the company
at the time needed and an internal crisis can occur. Additionally, it will also
eﬀect existing key employees that will be stretched thin. (Picken, 2017) (Cohan,
2019)
2.4
Summary
This chapter was preluded by exploring the startup life cycle and its ﬁrst four
Marmer stages of discovery, validation, eﬃciency, and scale. The Marmer stages
were based on an analysis of more than 650 startups done by Startup Genome.
The Marmer stages provided a deeper understanding of the evolvement a startup
must go through to transition into a scale up company.
To understand the
challenges of that process, the two theories from Picken’s eight hurdles of the
transitioning period and Cohan’s Seven levers available for a CEO to accelerate
growth were evaluated. On their own, the theories did not provide a wholesome
theory of the challenges a startup will face when seeking to scale. Hence, I devel-
oped a theoretical framework called The Six Dimensions for Transitioning based
on the theories of Picken and Cohan. The Six Dimensions for Transitioning are
strategy and culture, customer responsiveness, product oﬀering, ﬁnancial capa-
bility, systematising processes, and setting up a team. These are all within the
control of the startup and crucial to get right in order for it to scale.
It is crucial to set out a clear direction for the company and develop or maintain
an appropriate culture. Failure to do so can make employees go rogue and work
towards diﬀerent visions. The startup must realise the change in needs when
going from the early adopters to early majority customer segment in the pursuit
of targeting a larger market. To cater for this segment it is necessary to set up a
proper customer feedback loop and have a high level of customer responsiveness
throughout the organisation.
The core product oﬀering should be expanded
to provide a whole product oﬀering that includes complementary services and
software solutions. SaaS provides an attractive business model when having a
large amount of users as the cost per user gets lower. To achieve rapid growth
and reach a large user base, funding is necessary and the startup must be able
to execute and deliver on its growth trajectories. Structures and processes must
be put in place with a growing amount of employees. Functional departments
are established and goal setting that can be measured via metrics are used for
delegating responsibility. Hence, ﬂow of communication across departments is
crucial for the company working as a whole. Additionally, it requires a skilled
management team and employees to accelerate the growth of the startup. It
==PAGE:37==
26
Theory
requires hiring, promoting and letting people go to establish the right team. All
of the dimensions have to work in harmony and are overlapping and inﬂuencing
each other.
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3
Methodology
This chapter presents the methodology of the research for this thesis.
First,
the chapter will elaborate on how induction and deduction was used to collect
data. Secondly, the use of case studies is explained and ﬁnally, reﬂections on
the quality of the research is made.
3.1
Deduction and Induction
To collect empirical data for this thesis both inductive and deductive research
was applied.
The inductive method is deﬁned as a study in which theory is
developed from the observation of empirical reality; thus general inferences are
induced from particular instances (Jill Collins, 2003, p. 15). A generalisation is
made based on an observation. In terms of data collection this means a certain
amount of data is collected for the purpose of making a generalisation or theory.
The deductive method is deﬁned as a study in which a conceptual and theoretical
structure is developed and then tested by empirical observation; thus particular
instances are deduced from general inferences (Jill Collins, 2003, p. 15). This
means existing knowledge is used as an assumption which is then being tested
to make new statements.
During the preliminary phase of this thesis the inductive method was used by
collecting literature within the general topics such as scaling, IT, and software
companies. Additionally, a meeting was held with consultant and industry ex-
pert, Hans Christian Andersen from Copenhagen Business Hub. Andersen has
developed solutions within IT that he sold both national and internationally
as well as helped more than 100 growth companies scale. Andersen provided
insight to a presentation he did at a conference about scaling of Danish software
companies that outlined some of the fundamental topics about scaling.
==PAGE:39==
28
Methodology
This collection of knowledge provided insight into the topic of scaling from where
general assumptions were made. The knowledge was then organised for the pur-
pose of delivering a wholesome and generalised model from where I created an
initial model that I used for the ﬁrst version of my thesis. The ﬁrst version
focused on the ﬁve aspects of scaling as the customer, product, team, ﬁnancial,
and business model. These provided the foundation for my interview questions.
However, as this thesis is an extended version to the previous, the model pre-
sented was made with adjustments from the initial version in order to make it
more speciﬁc. Since this thesis focuses on SaaS companies it has been reﬂected
in the relevant parts of the theory where the initial model was general. Addi-
tionally, the dimensions have been more reﬁned in this extended version of the
model where the initial model contained a very broad team dimension. This is
why it was split into smaller dimensions of strategy and culture, systematising
processes, and setting up a team. Additionally, business model was too small
of a dimension on its own and is a part of creating ﬁnancial capability. The
rest of the research in this thesis was set out as deductive where the extended
theoretical model I developed was applied to the case studies.
3.2
Case Studies
The deﬁnition of a case study is an extensive examination of a single instance
of a phenomenon of interest (Jill Collins, 2003, p. 68).
In this instance the
phenomenon of interest was the challenges that SaaS companies face when they
have to scale. The study used three SaaS companies as case studies.
3.2.1
Selection of case studies
The criteria for the selection of case study companies were they had to be Danish
founded SaaS companies and worked with scaling to some capacity, and the
interviewee would have been a part of the company through the transition the
company had been on. From articles, it was clear that Peakon is on an incredible
growth journey and at the Marmer stage of scale. Clio had already taken over
the entire Danish market and was at the Marmer stage of proﬁt maximisation.
When Artland was contacted, their current Marmer stage was not known at
the time but after the interview had been carried out it was assessed they were
at the late stage of eﬃciency and have already put fundamentals into place for
driving growth aggressively. An interview with the company BoardPlace was
also carried out but not included in this thesis due to them being at validation
of the Marmer stages. As a result, three diﬀerent SaaS companies were used
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Case Studies
29
as case studies in this thesis. All of them were on a diﬀerent journey and at a
diﬀerent Marmer stage. As this thesis explores the challenges of transitioning
into a scaling company, it was relevant to look at case studies who at a minimum
would be at the Marmer stage of eﬃciency. The individual interviewee selected
had to be a founding member as well as having a chief executive position from
when the company was founded to a reasonable level of scaling. This criteria for
the interviewee was established due to the deep level of knowledge and insight
such person would have from the journey of the company. Due to the complexity
of the research of this thesis it was necessary to select people that have been
behind making the strategic decisions broad across the company and have been
a driving force in pushing the company forward. Additionally, this person has
knowledge about all aspects of the company and not just one single area or
department.
First, a comprehensive list with 48 potential case studies were created. The
list put together was based on companies I already were aware of as well as
companies I found during the preliminary research. I found them via secondary
sources such as the Danish newspaper Børsen, through networks such as Copen-
hagen Business Hub and DTU Skylab, and from friends and family members.
Of these companies, 11 were contacted via LinkedIn or email except for one that
was a family contact. Three never answered, three could not ﬁnd the time, one
dropped oﬀ, and four wanted to do the interview, and three turned out to be
relevant. The one who dropped oﬀwas contacted right at the beginning while
the preliminary work for the thesis was carried out. He was ready to do the
interview straight away but the foundational work for the interview had not
been done at the time. It was found that most of the people who agreed to
do the interview were ready to schedule it in the next day. However, I also
experienced having to schedule in an interview for more than a month out in
advance through a personal assistant.
3.2.2
Qualitative data collection
The data was collected qualitative through interviews, that followed a semi-
structured process. Questions had been prepared before the interview based on
the initial version of the theory developed. However, since each company was
diﬀerent, there was a variance in the questions from case study to case study.
From secondary data collected about the companies before conducting the inter-
views it was possible to develop more speciﬁc questions since the fundamentals
of the company were already understood. This also helped eliminating ques-
tions that had already been answered. The secondary data was collected from
articles, company websites, and public company registers like www.virk.dk and
www.proﬀ.dk. Some case studies were easier than others to ﬁnd information on
==PAGE:41==
30
Methodology
depending on their media presence. The more media coverage they have had
or in depth their website was, the easier it was to dig straight into the main
questions. Examples of general questions looked like the following (Basa, 2019,
p. 30-31):
• Has your customer type changed since you started?
• Which structures and processes did you implement to cope with your large
increase in employees?
• How did the company culture change as more and more new people joined?
During the interviews new questions arose or some became obsolete based on
the information provided by the interviewee. Sometimes, the order of which the
interview had been structured changed as well due to the interviewee themselves
jumping to another topic. With some people, you cannot foresee what they
will respond to, so reﬁnements and modiﬁcations during the conduction of the
interview were made to create a more dynamic ﬂow. Furthermore, the semi-
structured approach allowed for a broader understanding of the company. Even
though the questions were developed around the theory, it was relevant to get a
broader perspective in order to see if any adjustments to the theory should be
made.
Scheduling the interviews in such a long time in advance was diﬃcult as the
interviewees are all very busy people that like executing fast. There was little
time between when I contacted interviewees, Louise from Clio and Mattis from
Artland, to when we had a conversation. With Kasper from Peakon, he passed
me on to his assistant for scheduling in a meeting a month or two later.
I
experienced a large variety in how the interviewees answered the questions.
Some provided straight, on point answers where it was easy to cover all of the
questions within 30 minutes. On the call with Mattis from Artland, he said
he only had 10 minutes available, however, after 20 minutes, I was still able to
keep him on the phone answering questions. Others took a longer time to think
about the questions or gave very long answers which made it diﬃcult to get
succinct responses. Some of the interviewees were particularly time restraint as
they have top executive positions and convincing them to put time aside for an
interview can be hard.
The interviews were carried out via phone or Zoom conference call. With per-
mission to record the interviews it was easier to ensure none of the data from
the interview got lost. All the interviews has been transcribed and can be found
in appendix.
They were conducted in Danish and parts have been removed
or reworded during the translation. The translation was carried out manually
==PAGE:42==
3.3 Summary
31
by typing what was being said. The parts that have been removed from the
transcription are mainly words or sentences due to poor phone or internet con-
nection. Filling words like uh, um, ah, like, okay, right and so on, have been
removed since they have no relevance for what is being said and make the in-
terview diﬃcult to read. Additionally, small talk at the beginning and end of
the interviews have been removed from the transcription since they provided no
relevance to the case studies. The audio recording can be found via dropbox
link1. Upon completion of this thesis the link will be inactive due to respect of
the interviewee and company privacy.
This qualitative approach is useful for developing an understanding of social and
human activities but has the weakness of a subjective nature. Additionally, the
interviews were very time constraint and more data would have been collected if
the interviewees had more time available that could have improved the depth of
the data collected. Furthermore, the validation of the data could be increased if
several people in the company had been interviewed. This could include other
founding members that also held executive positions or employees at diﬀerent
departments to hear their experience and see whether or not it aligns with those
of the interviewees.
3.3
Summary
This chapter described the inductive method applied for collecting data for
the purpose of creating a wholesome theory myself. From here, a deductive
method was used to test out the theory on three case studies. The case studies
selected were Clio, Artland, and Peakon, as they fulﬁlled the criteria of being
a Danish founded SaaS company that had already implemented practices for
making the transition into scale. Hence, the companies would have to be at
the eﬃciency Marmer stage or further. Qualitative data was collected through
semi-structured interviews. Additionally, the criteria for the interviewee were
that he or she had been a part of the growth journey from the beginning in order
to have experienced the changes and challenges of transforming the company
and had held a position at an executive level in order to have the insights into all
aspects of the company. The selected methodology had the weakness of being
subjective in nature. Furthermore, the interviewees were very time constraint so
future improvements are suggested to include collection of data by interviewing
diﬀerent founding members.
This would provide a greater validation of the
ﬁndings and contribute to a deeper and more comprehensive understanding.
1https://www.dropbox.com/sh/m06o7aguwile0aq/AABkWgeGpoRxBnrkAOjPJIh8a?dl=0
==PAGE:43==
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4
Research
This chapter presents the research results of three case studies of Danish SaaS
companies.
First, an overview of the case studies is provided and then each
individual case study is explored based on the theoretical framework I developed
prior in this thesis.
Table 4.1 provides a brief overview of the three case studies, Clio Online, Art-
land, and Peakon. The case studies are all Danish founded and provide SaaS.
They are either currently focusing on scale at some capacity or have already
done it. Therefore, they are also way past the Marmer stages of discovery and
validation. However, as table 4.1 shows they are all very diﬀerent from each
other.
Case
Year
Life
Number of
Geographical
Marmer
study
founded
time
employees
markets
stage
Clio Online
2006
13 years
200
DK, SE
Proﬁt maximisation
Artland
2016
3 years
20
International
Eﬃciency
Peakon
2014
5 years
250
International
Scale
Table 4.1: Overview and comparison of the three case studies (Basa, 2019,
p. 33).
The research has explored the performance of each company from the point
of view of The Six Dimensions for Transitioning. All insights and information
below has been provided from the interviews conducted unless stated otherwise.
==PAGE:45==
34
Research
4.1
Clio Online
Clio Online was founded in 2006 by friends Louise Herping Ellegaard, Janus
Benn Sørensen, and Lasse Guldsborg. They all ran Clio together for 12 years
but resigned from their positions last year as Bonnier Business to Business pur-
chased their shares. Bonnier Business to Business is a subsidiary of the Swedish
owned publishing group, Bonnier AB, and had already owned the majority of
shares since 2015. After Bonnier joined, they entered the Swedish market and
today, they are located in ﬁve diﬀerent locations in Denmark, three in Sweden,
and one in Ukraine where their developers are located. Clio is at the Marmer
stage of proﬁt maximization as Bonnier has acquired Clio with a strategy of
expanding the reach and operations to Sweden in order to grow proﬁts. Clio
has been on an exceptional growth journey and are market leaders in Denmark
with a 90% market share. The Børsen Gazelle prize is given to companies in
Denmark that during a ﬁnancial period of four years, have achieved positive
growth each year and doubled its turnover over the four year period (Børsen,
2019a). Clio has been awarded this prize four years in a row and generates 100
million kroner in revenue annually. Clio targets high schools for which they pro-
vide a learning platform for teachers to integrate as a part of the lesson for their
students. They have nearly launched 100 learning portals containing everything
from educational text, interactive learning activities, quizzes, and much more.
(Clio, 2018)
Co-founder and former executive director, Louise Herping Ellegaard was inter-
viewed the 24th of October, 2019 and the transcription of the interview can be
found in appendix A. In the following, Clio’s performance from a perspective of
The Six Dimensions of Transitioning has been investigated.
4.1.1
Strategy and culture
As the number of employees grew, Clio experienced the challenge of communi-
cating the strategy to everyone and get them to buy into it. For some people,
teaching is a call in life and that was also the case for some of the employees work-
ing at Clio. Those employees had their own vision and idea of what Clio should
be. Having people working towards diﬀerent goals and getting side tracked did
not work out well. Clio was making great learning material for children but
at the same time it was necessary to be proﬁtable. This commercial way of
thinking was a struggle for the employees who felt it compromised the quality.
According to Louise, the quality was never compromised and she emphasises the
importance of completing the product and getting it on the market. To mit-
igate this issue, Louise discovered the more transparent she was and involved
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Clio Online
35
the employees in the process from the beginning, the more support she got. By
including the employees, it became clear to them why she had the ideas she had.
Louise did not provide the employees with the solution and instead, let them
actively come up with solutions themselves for then ﬁnally selecting amongst
the solutions. To communicate the strategy and get the organisation to work
together, Clio introduced Summer Summit and Christmas Summit where they
ﬂew in all employees and spoke about the vision and what they were working
towards as well as having diﬀerent workshops that addressed actual problems
Clio had. All of the founders had some strong personalities and it was impor-
tant for them to make it fun to go to work. For example, they would always be
ready to spend money on champagne if there was a reason for celebrating. They
were in their late 20’s when they founded Clio and their youthfulness was a big
part of the culture. Internally, they referred to the term as ”Clio Crazyness”
and maintained that spirit throughout the years. As the number of employees
grew and Bonnier came into the picture, they naturally became more corporate.
Louise said she could even see it from the way she dressed, the older she got,
the more corporate her clothes became. After the founders left in 2018, a lot
of the employees also left as they said the Clio spirit was not there anymore.
When employees have left, the founders never took it personal. The employees
had the founders full support in their own pursuits.
Challenge
Mitigation
Employees had their own vision
Involve employees in the decision process
Table 4.2: Clio’s challenges and solutions within direction and culture.
4.1.2
Customer responsiveness
At the time when Clio started, the internet wasn’t everywhere so initially, Clio
sold to librarians since this was where the schools digital systems were run.
Later, computers moved into the classrooms and became a part of the lecture
and ended up replacing school books. The digitisation trend and computers be-
coming mainstream meant a change in the the target customer group from school
librarians to teachers and communes. Across the 98 communes in Denmark, it
varies whether the purchase decision is on a commune level, school management
level or budgets are handed down to the individual subject teams. Sales to the
target group were done through phone calls and going out and conducting pre-
sentations. Clio became more reﬁned in the sales process to their customers by
dividing their sales people according to who were better at appealing to the top
commune level customer and the ones who had a lot of patience in dealing with
the teachers via phone. The sales people were distributed to the diﬀerent com-
munes depending on who the buying person was. The Danish government gave
==PAGE:47==
36
Research
grants for purchasing digital learning materials from 2012 to 2017. Initially, it
was only for Danish and mathematics and later it became for all subjects. As
the schools would receive a 50% refund, this naturally had a great impact for
Clio as it provided an incentive and compelling reason for the schools to buy.
However, it also made the market attractive for competitors such as Gyldendal
and Egmont. Louise said Gyldendal copied Clio’s products so Clio diﬀerentiated
themselves on the content they oﬀered and also from a technical perspective.
In their content diﬀerentiation, Clio had caught onto the need of the teachers
to decide themselves in which order they wanted to teach the diﬀerent topics
in. Some preferred teaching according to themes and some chronologically. Clio
provided the ﬂexibility for them to do so and thereby embraced all the diﬀerent
types of teachers. As Clio wanted a larger chunk of the market, they had to
adapt their product to suit the broader range of needs. Firstly, they developed
products that could be used by the older students and later on, they developed
their product so it could be used by younger students. This was due to the
level of reading as the product did not cater for those that were unable to read.
At the beginning, the founders handled the customer support themselves but
as the inquiries increased, a support team was hired to handle them. Clio put
a lot of eﬀort into systematising the customer feedback loop and hired a per-
son responsible for channeling the feedback to the right people in the company.
Initially, the feedback came through sales that received information and then
the founders reacted to it. However, that was problematic in the sense that
the feedback was not necessarily representative for all customers as it typically
ended up being the person that made the loudest noise was listened to. This
worked as a small company but as Clio grew, it was necessary to be more data
driven in order to make the best decisions. Hiring one person in charge and im-
plementing a systematic approach helped Clio with providing a high customer
responsiveness as they grew.
Challenge
Mitigation
Changing target group
Adopted to the new target group
Diﬀerent customer types
Making their sales team focused.
Large amount of customer feedback
Systematisation of customer feedback loop.
Table 4.3: Clio’s challenges and solutions within customer responsiveness.
4.1.3
Product oﬀering
First, Clio made just one product for history and then expanded the core oﬀering
to include a whole product oﬀering. The schools demanded more products so
Clio began to make more products for other subjects. They expanded on their
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Clio Online
37
product oﬀering both across the subject category but also the diﬀerent learning
levels so now they have almost 100 learning portals. They also expanded on
the features so they included quiz functions, a reading guide to ensure the text
was understood, a homework tool, and educational and interactive activities. In
developing the product, Clio’s focus was on making it as intuitive as possible so
the user felt guided through and needed as little assistance as possible. Other-
wise, it would demand too much manual labour and time for Clio so by making
their products intuitive, they would free up more time. Initially, the platform
was very simple and easy for everyone to use but as more and more features were
added, the complexity increased. Along the way Clio added complementary ser-
vices to its whole product oﬀering. They added customer support and customer
service when the number of inquiries grew to more than what the founders could
handle themselves. Simultaneously, the teacher’s preparation time was reduced
due to the Danish school reform1 in 2013, making it diﬃcult for them to ﬁnd
the time to sit down and learn the system. Therefore, Clio started on customer
success or implementation consultants that came to the schools and showed how
to best use the product. They could see the customers that had the implemen-
tation consultants come by had a wider use of the products. It was important
for Clio to follow the current trends on UX and design and they even fully re-
designed their platform to make it more contemporary. Louise said the tricky
thing about dealing with software is making the code foundation in a way so it
also works when you scale. Clio experienced whenever new things needed to be
built that 6 months would have to be put aside before seeing any results.
Challenge
Mitigation
Increased level of user complexity
Implementation consultants
Table 4.4: Clio’s challenges and solutions within product oﬀering.
4.1.4
Financial capability
Clio oﬀers customers a 30 day free trial and a subscription plan for one, two, or
ﬁve years. Clio were able to get the sales going from the beginning and the three
founders had a well matched set of skills to get them oﬀthe ground and they
were all willing to live on as little as possible to get Clio to take oﬀ. Additionally,
the school and commune budgets for learning materials are quite substantial so
Clio were able to make a lot of money from just a single sale. Furthermore, they
incentivised customers to purchase more by granting discounts for the longer
time period the customer committed and the more products they purchased.
1folkeskolereformen.
==PAGE:49==
38
Research
The founders were able to get the company up and running without taking in
any investment for the ﬁrst 9 years of Clio’s life. The money they made was
reinvested into making more products. Even though Denmark is a small country,
they had found an attractive target market with large budgets and since they
were able to completely dominate it, they were able to succeed without going
outside the boarders of Denmark until Bonnier came along. In Denmark, Clio
developed its products along with the Danish market. At the time there was a
shift in the computers moving from the school library into the classrooms. It
took some time for the teachers to change from analog to digital and this process
could not have been forced according to Louise. She says, it was good for Clio to
grow organically as the teachers simply would not have been ready if it had been
forced at a higher pace. Louise believes if they had taken in investment in order
to speed up the process, it could very likely have been a waste of money. When
Bonnier invested in Clio in 2015, and they entered into the Swedish market, a
product portfolio for major subjects was made fast but the sales were very slow.
At the time of the interview, they still had not been able to establish themselves
completely in Sweden, and were about to close down the editorial department.
Challenge
Mitigation
Capital necessary for growth
Growth through sales and business model
Table 4.5: Clio’s challenges and solutions within ﬁnancial capability.
4.1.5
Systematising processes
The management was shared between the three founders and all three of them
were executive directors. Louise pointed out there sometimes could be a bit
discrepancy between the departments as the two other founders were not always
as transparent as her in their methods. However, she sees it as a natural thing
that founders do not always manage their departments in the same way. This
challenge could maybe have been limited if the founders had mapped out a
strong set of values that they all believed in and lead their departments according
to them. The founders met minimum once a week to update each other on what
was going on in their departments and discuss any matters that had come up.
This meant all of them had the full overview of what was happening in the
whole company. Louise explains that empowering and delegating responsibility
to employees is crucial because a) they have skills you don’t have and b) your own
workload would simply be too big. Freedom with responsibility has been a key
part for Louise and was expressed throughout the organisation. Additionally,
platforms such as Slack and their intranet were used as tools for spreading
information to everyone in the organisation. Since the team is spread over nine
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Clio Online
39
diﬀerent locations, it was necessary to implement these communication systems
and meeting up every half year for Summer Summit and Christmas Summit to
enhance communication and collaboration across the organisation.
Challenge
Mitigation
Discrepancy between departments
Weekly meetings
Large amount of workload
Delegation
Flow of communication
Summits and communication systems
Table 4.6: Clio’s challenges and solutions within systematising processes.
4.1.6
Setting up a team
Initially, the three founders complemented each other very well with their skill
set and competences. As they grew, new competences were needed such as UX
and marketing. First, the challenge was to identify there was a need for having
UX and marketing competences within the company. It took a little while for
them to realise and then the second challenge was ﬁnding the right ones to hire
for the job. Initially, they had a person in the marketing role where they were
unable to really see any impact but after they found a new CMO, they saw big
changes. According to Louise, he has been one of the best hires in Clio. He was
able to create a signiﬁcant change in the branding and market awareness. He was
excellent on executing on everything he had laid out to the management team
where he made a road-map presentation. He established business intelligence
and hired some very good content marketing people. Overall, he made Clio’s
marketing very professional and streamlined. It is even evident by looking at
a simple thing such as the exhibition stand for Clio before and after he joined.
After Clio hired their CMO and HR manager, a lot of new people were hired
as each of these positions brought many new people to the team. Clio found it
diﬃcult to ﬁnd developers locally so halfway in their journey they set up an oﬃce
in Ukraine with developers. Louise explained the company changes according
to the number of employees and whether you are 10, 40 or 100 people. It is
very few people who have been with Clio throughout the whole journey, as
Clio experienced people are driven and motivated by diﬀerent things. Some
employees thought when Clio reached 40 employees, the company had grown
way too big and then the same thing happened again when they became 100
people.
==PAGE:51==
40
Research
Challenge
Mitigation
Identifying the need for skills
The need grew large enough to realise it
Table 4.7: Clio’s challenges and solutions within setting up a team.
4.2
Learnings from Clio
The challenges within each of the diﬀerent dimensions of scaling were explored
as well as how they were dealt with by the founders. Below is the summary the
key learnings from Clio as a case study.
Strategy and culture
• They had a challenge with employees having their own vision for the com-
pany but by being transparent and involving the employees in the decision
making process gave Louise larger support.
Customer responsiveness
• Their target group changed from the school librarians to the school teach-
ers. Clio adopted its activities of sales and product to support the needs
of the teachers.
• Clio was selling to both communes and teachers that are fundamentally
diﬀerent as customer types. They made sure their sales team was focused
so some were dealing with the communes and some with the teachers.
• As the amount of customer feedback grew, Clio had to systematise the
feedback loop and hired one person responsible for channeling the infor-
mation to the right person within the organisation.
Product oﬀering
• As the product evolved with more features and functions and the level of
user complexity grew, Clio began to use implementation consultants to
ensure a good user experience. They found the teachers that had help
from implementation consultants had a wider use of their product.
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Learnings from Clio
41
Financial capability
• Clio needed capital for growing their business and managed to create this
through their organic growth via sales. Their business model incentivised
schools to commit long term and purchase many products at once where
they paid up front which secured a high cash ﬂow and enabled them to
reinvest the money into expanding on developing new products.
Systematising processes
• There was a bit of discrepancy between the diﬀerent departments. Louise
sees it as inevitable that the founders will run their departments a little
bit diﬀerently. Weekly meetings amongst the founders kept everyone up to
date with what was going on. A suggestion on improving the discrepancy
is getting the founders to align on a shared set of values for the company
from which they should all be operating based on.
• As the company grew, the activities increased and Clio managed this by
delegating the work and giving their employees the freedom with respon-
sibility to take charge of activities.
• To ensure a good ﬂow of communication across the diﬀerent functional
departments, Clio holds Summer Summits and Christmas Summits every
half year for the whole organisation. They also uses internal communica-
tion systems such as Slack and intranet.
Setting up a team
• Having the right management team is crucial to drive the company for-
ward. The three founders complemented each other well in terms of their
set of skills.
• The identiﬁcation of the need for marketing and UX skills within the
company took time to realise. Eventually, the need grew big enough to
become obvious for the founders to realise. Had this been identiﬁed earlier,
Clio might have been able to accelerate faster within some areas of the
business.
The challenges of the transitioning Clio went through was explained by using the
model of The Six Dimensions of Transitioning. The challenges Clio experienced
were aligned with those of the model. Clio was able to make the transition
within each of these dimensions and build a successful company.
==PAGE:53==
42
Research
During the interview, other points of relevance to the journey Clio has been
on were pointed out such as the importance of timing. Louise mentioned she
did not think it would be possible to start Clio today due to everything be-
ing online and digitised. Back when they started, there was limited internet
compared to today. It was a diﬀerent era and they invented something totally
new. Timing gave them ﬁrst mover advantage and contributed positively to
their market position. The entrepreneur must be able to spot an emerging need
in the market and be ready to scale along with it. Additionally, market forces
have an external impact on businesses and the founders must try to adapt in
a changing environment. In 2012, the government gave grants to to schools by
giving a 50% refund for digital learning materials. As the government pushed
for digitisation, it gave the communes and schools a big economical incentive for
using learning materials. This provided the opportunity for growth but it also
made the market attractive for established companies such as Gyldendal and
Egmont to enter. Clio were able to compete by having a better understanding of
their customers and providing a better product oﬀering in terms of technology,
content, and UX.
Clio scaled within Denmark and dominated the market with a 90% market
share.
Their products were developed for the Danish schools and therefore
in the Danish language. This meant when Bonnier came on board and they
wanted to expand into Sweden, resources had to go into the development of
new products and content in Swedish before they had something to sell. Today
in Sweden, the sales are going slow and they had to close down their editorial
department where only sales and marketing departments are left. Sweden was
selected as the country of entry due to Bonnier being Swedish whereas the
founders had the Netherlands in mind or the United Kingdom. The Netherlands
had a high level of market readiness due to them being digitally very far ahead
and a large spend on learning materials. Additionally, the Dutch are culturally
more similar to the Danes.
They make fast decisions whereas in Sweden, a
lot of consensus and support internally is needed before they make a decision.
For Sweden, the barriers of entry were cultural and product development. In
Denmark, the products were developed along with the market demand enabling
them to grow at their own rate. Clio has most deﬁnitely been very successful in
Denmark but the lack of an international vision from the beginning has limited
its internationalisation.
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Artland
43
4.3
Artland
Artland was founded in 2016 by brothers, Mattis Curth, and former professional
football player, Jeppe Curth.
Artland provides a two-sided platform for art
collectors and galleries where the diﬀerent parties can have conversations and
conduct sales through the platform. Artland also hosts events and activities for
its network and publishes articles and news in its magazine. It is community
oriented as it enables art lovers to show their collections and network with other
collectors as well as galleries. The platform is available through the Apple App
Store and the Google Play Store. At the time of the interview, Artland had
50,000 art collectors and 500 galleries on the platform with a global presence
of customers. Artland is at the Marmer stage of eﬃciency as they are making
reﬁnements to the sales process and the customer acquisition and preparing to
drive growth aggressively. (Artland, a) (Appetize, 2018)
Co-founder and CEO Mattis Curth was interviewed on the 24th of October, 2019
and the transcription of the interview is found in appendix B. In the following,
Artland’s performance is assessed from the point of view of The Six Dimensions
of Transitioning.
4.3.1
Strategy and culture
At the beginning, Artland experimented a lot with their strategy to ﬁgure out
what works and what does not work in order to iterate their idea. They had to
convince the best employees to buy into the vision of Artland becoming the next
big thing as they did not have the funding to go out and attract the best people.
The culture has been inﬂuenced by the people that work at Artland and with
a turnover of diﬀerent people within the ﬁrst three years, the culture has also
changed. Initially, the enthusiasm was at a high but over time, the work days
become routine for the employees. Mattis is very much aware of the challenge
of working with people and setting up a company culture. Mattis does walk
and talks with the employees to discuss their tasks and make sure it is clear
to them what they are doing and to ﬁnd out if there is something they are in
doubt about or need help with. Mattis expressed their next focus is on winning
New York as it would mean they will win the rest of the market.
Challenge
Mitigation
Building company culture
Walk and talks
Table 4.8: Artland’s challenges and solutions within strategy and culture.
==PAGE:55==
44
Research
4.3.2
Customer responsiveness
Since Artland started, their target customer group has changed. Initially, they
had made a platform only for art collectors and later on the galleries joined. The
galleries sell art and the buyers are the art collectors. On their website, they
state We believe everyone can transform from an aesthetician to a collector. We
believe everyone can take part in art. No matter if you are an artist, amateur,
collector, connoisseur, fan or challenger, we believe everyone deserves to be
moved (Artland, b).
This shows how Artland is now focusing on a broader
target market to gain a larger market share. Artland has focused on generating
organic customer growth to receive a lot of inbound interest by creating word
of mouth through social media to get people to share their art and talk about it
as well as building a brand and oﬀering a good product. Users are asked their
opinion of the product in order to make it better and the feedback is written
down in their CRM system. The sales team also enters their feedback into the
CRM system when they talk to galleries.
This provides the right person to
immediately access and deal with the feedback.
Challenge
Mitigation
Changing target group
Adopted to the new target group
Understand customer feedback
Systematisation of feedback loop
Table 4.9: Artland’s challenges and solutions within customer responsiveness.
4.3.3
Product oﬀering
Artland started out making a product that was built for the art collectors but it
changed as the galleries also wanted to join the platform. They have expanded
their oﬀering into a whole product with complementary software and services.
They oﬀer a network for collectors to share their art pieces, a marketplace where
art can be sold, a membership club, online 3D art exhibitions, and an editorial
section with art related articles and news. They have tried to automatise the
on-boarding as much as possible by providing material and a help center. The
galleries are oﬀered more personalised support with an account manager that is
available at their request. On the software side, improvements and new features
were made on various levels as it all came down to the customer feedback when
testing. It is important to Artland to make a better product than their com-
petitors and deliver more value in order to gain more market share. (Artland,
b)
==PAGE:56==
4.3 Artland
45
Challenge
Mitigation
Target mainstream market collectors and galleries
Whole product oﬀering
Table 4.10: Artland’s challenges and solutions within product oﬀering.
4.3.4
Financial capability
Artland has taken in capital over three rounds and have attracted money from
Danish celebrities such as the world famous handball player, Mikkel Hansen,
Olympian dressage rider, Andreas Helgstrand, and singer, Shaka Loveless. They
have done a co-investment together with other investors for around six million
DKK where the money is primarily used to pay salaries (Qureshi, 2018). Due to
their investors’ celebrity status, Artland has gained more exposure. For example,
Mikkel Hansen is a passionate art collector and promotes Artland through his
own social media. Mattis and Jeppe’s main focus was to build a cool product
ﬁrst that people love and then ﬁgure out the business model afterwards. That
was the same strategy used by Facebook founder, Mark Zuckerberg. The plan
was to keep testing and adjusting the business model until they would be able
to ﬁnd one along the way. The monetising comes from the galleries that want
to pay a subscription to be a part of the platform where they have access to a
large network of potential customers. Artland makes money from the galleries
that can choose between three diﬀerent types of packages, basic for 45 euro a
month, premium for 152 euro a month, and a tailored version that is oﬀered upon
inquiry. There is a 30 day free trial period and long term commitment discounts
of 15% oﬀfor billing quarterly and 30% oﬀfor billing annually (Artland, a).
Artland chose the SaaS model since getting a large amount of users on the
platform can be highly lucrative in the long haul. Artland is not even concerned
about break even at this point in time as they know if they can build up a large
and satisﬁed user base, the money will come at the end. However, this has also
meant it was necessary for Artland to take in funding. If they want to make
money further down the road, then a larger amount is needed upfront to be able
to get there.
Challenge
Mitigation
Capital necessary for growth
Capital raised through investors
Table 4.11: Artland’s challenges and solutions within ﬁnancial capability.
==PAGE:57==
46
Research
4.3.5
Systematising processes
Initially, Artland did not have structures and processes in place and dealt with
the problems as they rose. There were overlaps where employees took part in
everything and had to do a lot of diﬀerent functions within the company. As
Artland has developed through the Marmar stages, it was necessary to make
the functions more specialised and deﬁned so employees now focus on smaller
parts of the business in order to do really well. Artland uses Slack internally
where all their employees have access to the program as it is used as their system
of communication. If employees hear about, experience, or witness a problem,
they report it in the system. From there it goes to the person responsible, for
example, if there is a problem on the website or with the app, then the CTO will
be the one responsible for the prioritisation, decision making, and distributing
of what needs immediate attention and what should be handled later. Mattis
wants to ensure his team members work in the right direction and it makes
sense for them what they are working on. He has implemented two diﬀerent
processes for doing this and ensuring the accountability for employees. The ﬁrst
is by looking at numbers and KPIs weekly. From here it is possible to identify
if anything stands out and needs extra attention. Secondly, the walk and talks
are also used to assess how things are going and how people are doing. This
helps discovering a lot of problems before they emerge fully. At the time of
the interview, the metrics they were focusing on were to dive deeper into the
diﬀerent parts of the sales funnel such as the number of gallery sign ups.
Challenge
Mitigation
Employee overlaps
Created specialised functions
Streamlined work eﬀort
KPIs and walk and talk
Table 4.12: Artland’s challenges and solutions within systematising processes.
4.3.6
Setting up a team
Artland found it a challenge to set the right team from the beginning due to
lack of funding. This lead to changes in staﬀover the years. As Artland grew
over time, the competences that were already in the company did not match
what was needed.
The speciﬁc employees felt this too and the turnover of
the employees came as a natural part of the process. People have been hired
for technology and marketing and various other areas necessary to keep up
with growth. Additionally, there is a lot of behind the scenes like ﬁnancial and
contracts that Artland also needs people for. The role of Mattis himself has also
changed over time. At the beginning, there was a lot of executing and very little
==PAGE:58==
4.4 Learnings from Artland
47
managing. This has completely changed where now there is a lot of managing
and less executing. Having a highly experienced team is very important for
Mattis. On their board is one of the ﬁrst employees from the company Vivino
who has also been with the company through their journey over the years. The
knowledge and experience he has helps Artland accelerate faster as he can tell
what will and won’t work since he has already experienced it.
Challenge
Mitigation
Change in competences needed
Hiring and ﬁring
Need for experienced management
Experienced board members
Table 4.13: Artland’s challenges and solutions within setting up a team.
4.4
Learnings from Artland
The challenges within each of the diﬀerent dimensions of scaling were explored
as well as how they were dealt with by the founders. Below is the summary the
key learnings from Artland as a case study.
Strategy and culture
• Building up the company culture is diﬃcult and a turnover of employees
does not make it easier. Mattis does walk and talks with his employees so
he always know how they are doing.
Customer responsiveness
• The target group changed to include galleries as well as a broader market
of art collectors. Artland adopted their whole product oﬀering and internal
processes to fulﬁll the need of the galleries and a broader market.
• To understand the users, a customer feedback loop has been implemented
to improve their experience.
Product oﬀering
• The oﬀering was expanded to a whole product oﬀering to cater for the
galleries and the art collectors by adding complementary software and ser-
==PAGE:59==
48
Research
vices. The support for the art collectors is made as automated as possible
where the galleries have personal support from an account manager.
Financial capability
• Artland needed capital for growing as their strategy is to build up volume
ﬁrst and then make money in the future. They were able to raise capital
through investors.
Systematising processes
• When there were no structures and processes, the employees were over-
lapping each other and many were involved in everything. To have a clear
deﬁnition of what diﬀerent employees were doing and who was responsible
for what, specialised functions were created.
• Tracking the progress of the startup and making sure employees are aligned
on the strategy is done by a combination of looking at company metrics
and KPIs as well as doing walks and talks.
Setting up a team
• As Artland grew, the competences needed changed and created more be-
hind scenes work than before. Funding was also necessary in order to be
able to hire skilled employees.
• Experienced board members have been brought into the team to help
management accelerate growth faster.
Since Artland is at the eﬃciency stage, they are already working on the transi-
tioning into a scale up. All the dimensions from The Six Dimensions of Transi-
tioning have been applicable for Artland in their transition.
Mattis, described elements of how they had done things during the validation
stage where they focused on trial and error and kept iterating. This meant the
customer, product, and business model all had to evolve until a product market
ﬁt was created. The clear focus on the processes has helped Artland to stay
focused and not to scale pre-maturely. Artland caters for both art collectors
and galleries and are aware of appealing to them diﬀerently in terms of how
they are targeted, their product oﬀering, and business model. Getting collectors
==PAGE:60==
4.4 Learnings from Artland
49
onto the platform is done by providing a great product and a brand that users
like in order to create word of mouth on social media. For many people art
is a hobby and appeals to the self actualisation all of which they like talking
about and sharing with others. Artland has identiﬁed the need for the galleries
to sell their art to the collectors so it made great sense to add them onto the
platform and create the business model around them. The galleries receive value
in the form of being able to tap into the large network of potential customers.
Furthermore, Mattis, emphasised the importance of having experienced people
on board that can tell you what is not going to work in order to accelerate the
growth process. One way of doing that is through board members.
==PAGE:61==
50
Research
4.5
Peakon
In late 2014, former colleagues Phil Chambers (CEO), Kasper Hulthin (CGO),
Christian Holm (CTO), and Dan Rogers (CSO), founded Peakon, a company
that’s been on an incredible growth journey since its inception. Today, they
have 250 employees and oﬃces in Copenhagen, London, Berlin, New York, and
Auckland. According to an article in March 2019 from the Danish newspaper
Børsen, Peakon had received 450 million DKK in total investment from diﬀerent
venture funds and had a valuation of more than 1 billion DKK (Børsen, 2019b).
Peakon is in the Marmer stage of scale as they are driving growth very aggres-
sively and establishing a market leadership position. Peakon provides a platform
that helps measuring and improving employee engagement through regular em-
ployee surveys, real-time insights, bespoke manager training, and collaborative
action planning. In 2019, more than 20 million survey responses were submitted
to Peakon from 150 diﬀerent countries (Chambers, 2019).
An interview with Kasper Hulthin was carried out on the 20th of November,
2019. The transcript of the interview can be found in appendix C. Unless stated
otherwise, the information collected has been obtained from the interview. In
the following, Peakon’s performance is researched through the framework of The
Six Dimensions of Transitioning.
4.5.1
Strategy and culture
Right from the start, the founders had a large vision for Peakon, wanting to make
a change and build a big company. According to Kasper, having a mindset of
thinking big is an important part if you want to scale globally, however, he says
that many people overlook this. To accomplish global domination, execution is
also necessary but the vision has to be there ﬁrst. Going global was always the
plan and it was only a matter of when and how. Additionally, the big vision and
the founders being able to sell it was what made them able to attract people
to work for them even though there was not much capital and the salaries were
low compared to what staﬀcould get paid elsewhere. For many, it made sense
to be a part of helping other people becoming more engaged in their work. The
experienced founding team created a large vision so people believed that the
vision was possible to execute. In the early days, Peakon had a ﬁxed salary
policy with three diﬀerent levels. As an intern, you would get paid 13,000 DKK
a month, as a graduate 23,000 DKK a month, and as a senior 33,000 DKK a
month. Everyone including the founders got paid the same since that was what
the company could aﬀord at the time. This was due to everyone knowing there
was not enough money to pay them more and because everyone got paid equally,
==PAGE:62==
4.5 Peakon
51
it created the feeling of being on a shared mission. However, this changed when
Peakon told staﬀthey had raised a lot of money. Then the score of being fairly
rewarded went straight down as it was relative to how much capital the company
had. This was ﬁxed with a new salary model and after a couple of months the
score went back up.
The foundation of the company culture and their values are proudly written on
their website. A brief overview of their seven values are (Peakon, a), (Basa,
2019):
Transparency is Our OS: Transparency is our operating system, the basis of
all our functions.
Life ﬁrst: We give you the ﬂexibility to deal with your life ﬁrst, and work
second.
Build for tomorrow, today: We develop solutions that will scale for years,
not months.
WIT: Winning with Integrity and Tenacity.
Serious, not seriously: We believe humour and humility help to establish
a trusting environment.
We care: We act with kindness and respect for each other, our customers,
and the community.
Be you.
Be more.: Peakon is a journey for all of us.
We want you to
become part of our story.
Kasper explained Peakon launched these values in January 2019 as the values
they had previously were too broad and they did not completely focus on the
team, thus no longer matching what was said and done within the company.
The old values did not give a full set of guidelines for making decisions within
Peakon and they did not encapsulate the company spirit. The founders decided
to go back to the drawing board and discover what Peakon really was. The
team had grown and it was important to the founders to write down the values
so everyone knew what foundations they are operating on.
When the seven
values were presented to the employees, the feedback was that those were not
new values, which according to Kasper, was the best possible response as it
demonstrated the values were there all along, they just weren’t written down or
expressed in words. According to Kasper, the best managers are those that fully
adopt these set of values and operate based on them. The values help employees
understand why things are said and done in a certain way. Every now and then
==PAGE:63==
52
Research
some employees can take the values too literally but according to Kasper, this
will always happen.
As mentioned in their seven values, the employees mean a lot to Peakon. They
are not only oﬀering companies help with their employee engagement and satis-
faction, they have also made an eﬀort of implementing measures internally for
themselves. Peakon’s terms of employment are quite extraordinary, for example,
there is no upper limit of how much vacation employees can take and for every
child the employee has they will receive 1500 DKK extra in their monthly salary.
Despite giving employees so much time to take holidays, the highest amount of
holidays an employee has ever taken in a year was eleven weeks and the average
is just six weeks at Peakon. Christian says it’s more a matter of some people
actually forgetting about taking holiday and they have to be reminded. Peakon
view their employees as their biggest asset and want to cater for a high job
satisfaction so it makes sense for them to give employees the ﬂexibility to take
holidays without limitations. According to Christian, the average age in Peakon
is 30 years and paying them extra per child shows that Peakon want to attract
and keep people that have experience and a family. (Frie, 2019)
Challenge
Mitigation
Formulating the right values
Redeﬁned the values
Table 4.14: Peakon’s challenges and solutions within strategy and culture.
4.5.2
Customer responsiveness
Peakon’s initial customers were similar to themselves. They were fast growing
tech and personal network companies. Today, they are signiﬁcantly larger and
their biggest customer has over 218,000 employees. The industries that Peakon’s
customers ﬁt in is quite broad. However, retail companies have become a larger
customer group for Peakon because they have a high turnover of staﬀ.
Challenge
Mitigation
Changing target group
Adopted to the new target group
Table 4.15: Peakon’s challenges and solutions within customer responsiveness.
==PAGE:64==
4.5 Peakon
53
4.5.3
Product oﬀering
As Peakon grew, they have expanded to provide a whole product oﬀering by
adding complementary software and services. They provide ancillary products
to their main solution of employee engagement. Their complete set of products
are employee engagement, employee experience and retention, leadership devel-
opment, and diversity and inclusion. Additional services such as a help center,
webinars, a blog, eBooks, guides, and events are amongst their complete oﬀer-
ing. There are three diﬀerent plans available to select from including business,
essential, and premier, that caters for a broader target market with diﬀerent
needs. (Peakon, b)
Challenge
Mitigation
Satisfy enterprise customers
Expand to a whole product oﬀering
Table 4.16: Peakon’s challenges and solutions within product oﬀering.
4.5.4
Financial capability
Having an experienced and skilled founding team has been an advantage in
establishing ﬁnancial capability. Kasper explained in order to be a growth com-
pany, they are racing against time as time is money. It is therefore all about
optimising the time with the capital available. Besides looking at things such
as market, traction and so on, investors look at the team and assess if they
are capable at delivering what they set out to do and decide whether or not
they want to invest their money. In the early days when Peakon did not have
a lot of money to pay employees, they gave warrants in exchange for a proper
salary meaning that if the company did well in the long run, the employees
would greatly beneﬁt. Peakon has raised several rounds of investment and were
amongst the top 10 of the largest investment rounds in Denmark in 2018 (Capi-
tal und Association, 2019). They raised 30 million euro as the ﬁrst part of their
series B investment and additionally 18 million euro in March 2019, bringing the
total series B investment to 48 million euro. Investment has come from Atom-
ico, IdInvest Partners, Sunstone, EQT Ventures, and Balderton. The ﬁrst part
of the money was used to grow their team across Europe, North America, and
APAC with a large emphasis on product development. Taking in investment
has also meant getting experienced people on the board that will help drive the
company forward. For example, Mattias Ljungman who founded Atomico to-
gether with Niklas Zennstrom that helped grow some of the leading companies
in Europe, joined their board after the extended series B round. The capital
==PAGE:65==
54
Research
was announced to be spent on growing Peakon’s teams even further, to increase
the customer support in North America, continue expanding on the capabilities
of the Peakon platform by investing in the engineering team, and double their
presence in Europe and APAC. (Chambers, 2019)
Challenge
Mitigation
Capital necessary for growth
Capital raised through series A and B round
Table 4.17: Peakon’s challenges and solutions within ﬁnancial capability.
4.5.5
Systematising processes
In the early days of Peakon, the organisation structure was quite loose. Kasper
describes it as “At the beginning, every individual contributes. We didn’t even
have a CEO. Everyone just did what they did”. At the second year a ’Head
of Something’ layer was added in the company and in the third year a layer of
directors were introduced. It is diﬃcult to build an organisational structure that
can scale as it is a race against time. For Kasper, even half a year is a long time
for a company like Peakon. They believe in the numbers they have put forth
and go full steam ahead. In order to build a scalable organisation, they have
hired experienced and talented people for the major positions. Kasper mentions
this is something that they might not even have done early enough.
Peakon uses their own tool internally once a week to measure the employees
engagement and to see how satisﬁed they are. Using this was how they ﬁgured
out the change in the employees feelings towards their salary. This helps Peakon
always keep their ﬁnger on the pulse and knowing how their employees are doing
which is extremely useful since the company is expanding several times a year.
Challenge
Mitigation
Loose organisational structure
Added managerial layers
Scalable organisational structure
Hiring experienced key employees
Table 4.18: Peakon’s challenges and solutions within systematising processes.
4.5.6
Setting up a team
The four founders have experience as serial entrepreneurs and have held top
positions in growth companies such as Podio, Gumtree, and Qype. This meant
==PAGE:66==
4.5 Peakon
55
1
2
3
4
5
50
100
150
200
250
Year
Number of Employees
Figure 4.1: Peakon’s growth of employees.
the management team already consisted of strong proﬁles from the beginning.
The mindset of thinking big has had an important impact on setting the right
team. This meant they had to establish themselves in London early on to ﬁnd
the top people within their ﬁeld as it simply was not possible to ﬁnd in Denmark.
Kasper explained Denmark is too small to ﬁnd people that have been on the
journey before, as there are very few Danish companies with more than 100
employees. The number of employees over the life time of Peakon is illustrated
in ﬁgure 4.1 (Basa, 2019).
The people who were hired early for key positions were highly skilled and expe-
rienced in order to help accelerate Peakon’s growth. The number of employees
there were at Peakon was much lower than at the companies these people came
from. They were basically hired above the curve illustrated in ﬁgure 4.1, so
Peakon would have to grow in order to ﬁll their shoes and not the other way
around. These people knew the steps to bring Peakon forward on their journey
as they had already been a part of making it big in other company journeys. It
is diﬃcult to scale the company to the next level, according to Kasper. Hiring
in the process is hard and then it changes so fast so the person that was hired
to be HR manager at 50 employees has the experience of running a company
with a 100 employees but six months later there are 110 employees. On the
other hand, it is also diﬃcult to hire a person that has run a company of 2,000
people when there are only 50 as the numbers do not add up. The key is to get
the right people in the right positions so Peakon can make the right decisions.
These people who are at the top of their career must have the suitable mindset
==PAGE:67==
56
Research
and the willingness to take on the challenge of the Peakon journey. Opening up
new oﬃces in diﬀerent locations requires the best employees to be brought along
but that leaves a gap from where they left, that then has to be ﬁlled by someone
else. Bringing the best employees along ensures the culture, spirit, and practices
of Peakon are kept alive at the new location but it also demands hiring new em-
ployees that know the culture and the market. From the outside, it seems the
growth of Peakon has gone extremely fast, however, as Kasper said he would
still have liked it to go even faster. According to him, even though they hired
key employees early on, it still had not been done early enough. A challenge
for Peakon was that many of the people they hired such as sales and customer
success come in at the level they were at, however, they end up being below the
curve of the graph in ﬁgure 4.1. Kasper expressed they had been too slow at
identifying that nobody is able to go from being an individual contributor to a
VP in an organisation with 250 employees in three years. If the employees at
the company is continuously below the curve of the graph the company will be
dragged down. Hence, it is necessary to have employees that help lifting the
curve upwards, so Peakon hired a VP product, VP customer support, and VP
sales for the US and so on. According to Kasper, not doing this can make it go
terribly wrong for a company.
Kasper’s own role has also changed a lot. At the beginning, Kasper was COO
and was responsible for hiring their ﬁrst HR team and their CFO, Simone.
Peakon built up new markets and last year Kasper moved to the US and hired
people there to run Peakon. Furthermore, Kasper has also focused on building
culture and executing on Peakon’s operating mechanisms and on a strategical
level as a founder and board member. He believes his interchangeable role has
been a beneﬁt in order to make things run around, as it can be diﬃcult being
four founders that all have to agree on everything.
When bench marking Peakon with other companies within the industry, very few
employees leave. Peakon also uses their own software in order to measure their
employee engagement, that shows the company is amongst the top 10% of tech
companies worldwide (bench marked against 800 companies) when it comes to
employee satisfaction (Frie, 2019). The result is the same when it comes to the
employees believing Peakon matches their own personal values and workload.
People have joined Peakon because they want to be a part of the big growth
journey and feel proud in contributing to the company’s success. Generally, most
employees are positive about new people joining them. Furthermore, it creates
the opportunity of personal growth for the employees.
When the company
grows, their roles get bigger and new internal positions that would have taken
them 10 years to get to at other companies, suddenly become available. If the
employees do well, they are given a lot of responsibility and the possibility to
grow. Kasper mentions there is of course some nostalgia where some employees
think it is no longer the same and that the organisation changes with more
==PAGE:68==
4.6 Learnings from Peakon
57
processes, people, and more structured operating mechanisms than when there
were only 50 employees. However, this is a part of the journey as Peakon would
not be able to operate without making that change. Some employees think this
is exciting and others do not.
It is Kasper’s experience that people ﬁt into
diﬀerent stages of the journey. It is inevitable not having people resigning but
historically speaking, there have not been that many. When it happens, it is
normally a shared decision as the person cannot see themselves in the speciﬁc
role or a new person with more experience takes over part of the role.
Challenge
Mitigation
Attracting experienced employees
Selling the vision and opening up outside DK
Not growing fast enough
Hiring highly skilled people for key positions
Table 4.19: Peakon’s challenges and solutions within setting up a team.
4.6
Learnings from Peakon
The challenges within each of the diﬀerent dimensions scaling were explored as
well as how they were dealt with by the founders. Below is the summary the
key learnings from Peakon as a case study.
Strategy and culture
• The values did not encapsulate the Peakon spirit so the founders sat down
and redeﬁned the values so they were more orientated towards the employ-
ees. The values are used as a basis for operations and decision making.
Customer responsiveness
• The initial customers were diﬀerent from the ones Peakon is currently
targeting. Today, they are targeting enterprises and their largest customer
has 218,000 employees.
A company that size has large demands that
Peakon deliver on.
Product oﬀering
• The oﬀering was expanded to a whole product oﬀering to cater for the
needs of the enterprises.
==PAGE:69==
58
Research
Financial capability
• Peakon needed capital in order to grow fast and has raised large amounts
of capital including most recently closing a series B round. In order to
grow fast, Peakon focuses on optimising time as time is money.
Systematising processes
• In the early days, they had a loose organisational structure, however,
as the company grew, they added in diﬀerent managerial layers to the
organisation.
• Building a scalable organisational structure was diﬃcult due to the com-
pany growing so fast that employees quickly came up short on their level
of experience. Highly skilled employees were therefore hired for key posi-
tions.
Setting up a team
• For Peakon to attract highly experienced employees, they had to look
outside of Denmark as well as selling the vision and getting employees to
buy in and wanting to become a part of the journey.
• Peakon was not growing as fast as they desired and to speed up the process,
employees with the skills and knowledge they needed to accelerate their
growth were hired.
The challenges of the transitioning Peakon went through was explained by us-
ing the The Six Dimensions of Transitioning model. Peakon has been extremely
successful at making the transition within the dimensions and is one of the few
Danish companies that has managed to hyper scale. First of all, the founders
had a big global vision for Peakon and the experience and skills to make it hap-
pen. The strong background as serial entrepreneurs and having held executive
positions at successful companies before has undoubtedly giving them a head
start, compared to for example, a 25 year old entrepreneur that is doing his or
her ﬁrst startup. Their knowledge and skills have had a big impact on how fast
they have been growing, as they already have experienced common pitfalls and
know how to steer clear of them. Additionally, it has also provided leverage
when convincing investors and employees that they are capable of delivering
on what they say. Kasper thinks there are many other important aspects than
raising capital. During his entrepreneurial career, he has raised 15 successful
==PAGE:70==
4.6 Learnings from Peakon
59
rounds of capital (Østerby). Since he already has a lot of experience within this
area he can spend less time on it than other startups would.
The challenges Peakon experienced were aligned with those of the model. How-
ever, the interview with Kasper ended up with a strong focus and emphasis on
the team aspect as the biggest and most crucial element in order to scale at
the rate they have done. By hiring people that have already been through the
journey before, they have optimised on the time it takes for them to get where
they wanted to be. For example, what would have taken Peakon two years to
do only took one year with the right person in charge. The largest challenge for
Peakon has been scaling the organisation to the next level as it is diﬃcult to
put the employees in place who have experience to push Peakon forward faster
when the company has out grown the person six month later. On the other
hand, hiring a person that has been running a company with 2,000 people when
there are only 50 does not work either. It has therefore been crucial to put
the the right people in the right positions at the right time. Peakon’s product
is measuring and improving employees engagement for companies to help them
making better people decisions. Thus, they also need to live up to this belief
themselves and advocate for it by having high employee satisfaction themselves.
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5
Discussion
This chapter presents a discussion of the research results from the three case
studies by applying the theoretical framework I developed. Additionally, limita-
tions of the model and method is discussed and further studies are outlined.
5.1
Research Results
The theory of The Six Dimensions of Transitioning outlined six areas of where
the startup has to evolve in order to scale. The research examined three in-
dividual case studies to discover how they transitioned. All of the cases have
made transitions within the individual dimensions. By analysing the three case
studies, it was found that the model ﬁts and provides a solid foundation of the
dimensions that the startup needs to transition in if they want to scale. However,
the two dimensions, strategy and culture, and setting up a team, was discovered
to provide the biggest challenges for the case studies. Both of these are at their
core about dealing with people. Dealing with people can be complex as they are
motivated by diﬀerent things, have diﬀerent needs and wants, and come from
diﬀerent backgrounds. In all the case studies the need for bringing experienced
and skilled people on the journey was emphasised since key employees or board
members help accelerate business growth. The model I developed was based on
general theories applicable for all diﬀerent types of companies and as this thesis
demonstrated, it is also applicable to use on SaaS speciﬁc companies. Hence,
the framework is also relevant for other types of companies to use.
The three case studies were at diﬀerent parts of their journey and at diﬀerent
Marmer stages. Artland is in the late stage of eﬃciency and have already im-
plemented processes and infrastructures as well as optimising their sales funnel
in order to drive growth aggressively as they take over New York. Peakon is at
==PAGE:73==
62
Discussion
the stage of scale and are driving growth extremely aggressively. From 2018 to
2019, they grew their revenue by more than 200% and increased the number of
employees by more than 50% (Kjær, 2019b). Clio is expanding their operations
and geographical market in order to increase revenue and are therefore at the
stage of proﬁt maximisation. The stage of the startup naturally impacts the
interviewee’s perspective when answering the questions. For example, when the
interview was carried out with Louise, she was no longer a part of Clio. She was
extremely clear and reﬂected in her answers and on Clio’s journey as a whole
and not being a part of it and looking at it from the outside could potentially
have given her another perspective. As she pointed out, it took a long time for
Clio to realise they needed marketing and UX skills. Other factors for the three
case studies, such as customer type, geographical markets, amount of funding
raised, founding team composition, founders level of previous entrepreneurial
experience, number of employees, and so on were also very diverse. It was also
found that the level of experience within the founding team had an impact on
how fast they are able to scale. Peakon was founded by very experienced en-
trepreneurs and has a constant focus on speed, whereas Clio was founded by
three friends from non entrepreneurial backgrounds and they developed along
with the market. Furthermore, what really stood out was the importance of a
startup having a global vision for the company from day one. Clio was based on
the idea of providing learning materials for the Danish market where Artland
and Peakon have had the world in mind from the beginning. This strategy was
decided from the companies conception and impacts all of the dimensions. For
example, if the company wants to be global, the product oﬀering needs to be
vast, support multiple languages, process diﬀerent currencies, have local servers
to ensure speed etc. On the other hand, if the vision is to build a Danish com-
pany, the product oﬀering must be suited to the Danish market and cultural
mentality. For most SaaS companies, Denmark is too small of a market and
they are forced to think global from the beginning if they want to scale. Having
diﬀerent types of case studies naturally creates a broader perspective during the
analysis but can limit the ability to make generalisations.
5.1.1
Limitations to the model
The Six Dimensions of Transitioning provided a simple yet wholesome frame-
work for SaaS startups transitioning into scale ups. The nature of startups is
extremely complex and the model only focuses on matters that are within the
control of the startup when scaling. It was found the dimensions were overlap-
ping and interlinked and they therefore all need to work together. For example,
if there are not the right systematisation of processes, the customer feedback
loop will suﬀer and lead to poor customer responsiveness. The company must
therefore be considered as a whole when applying the model.
==PAGE:74==
5.1 Research Results
63
External factors that have an impact on the ability of a startup to grow were also
discovered, such as market forces, governing bodies, and competitors, however,
these were not considered as a part of the theory. For example, when the Danish
government provided a 50% refund for learning materials, it created a strong
incentive in the market that impacted the demand for Clio’s products. Since this
is outside the control of the startup, it was not included in the model. There
are already existing and broadly accepted frameworks such as the PESTEL
analysis and Porter’s ﬁve forces that focuses on the external environment and
the competitive forces. These are non speciﬁc to the transitioning challenges
a startup goes through to scale and therefore not relevant as a part of the
theory. However, it is still important to recognise their inﬂuence. Additionally, a
prerequisite to being able to scale, is that the startup has succeed in the discovery
and validation stage. If the market is not mature enough and there is no demand
from customers, it will be extremely diﬃcult to get the momentum needed.
Getting the timing right therefore plays a big role. As previously mentioned,
the nature of startups is very complex and even if a SaaS startup manages to
make the transition within each of the dimensions, there is no guarantee of
succeeding with scaling. However, following the framework does indeed provide
them with a better foundation for scaling and handling the challenges ahead.
5.1.2
Limitations to the method
The time for interviewing the case studies was very limited and more data could
have been collected if the interviewee’s could have allocated more of their time.
This meant I had to collect secondary data in order to fully investigate the
case studies. With some of the interviews it was also diﬃcult to make sure we
stuck to the relevant questions as people’s personalities played a role. Some kept
talking and took a long time to think about their detailed answers, whereas with
others, it was more diﬃcult to get a response. Due to the subjective nature of
qualitative studies, if the right questions were not asked, I would not be able to
collect relevant data. Additionally, there was a bias when asking the interviewee
about their challenges. While there may have been challenges, the interviewee
could be completely unaware of them. For example, Louise did not explicitly
state it was a challenge to channel the customer feedback to the right person
in the organisation. However, she did say they hired one person who had to
be in charge of that speciﬁc function. Maybe it did not end up becoming a big
problem for Clio as they took actions as soon they realised the need.
==PAGE:75==
64
Discussion
5.2
Further Studies
Due to the limited interview time further interviews should have been conducted
in order to dive deeper into the speciﬁcs of all of the dimensions. If further
studies are to be carried out, it is recommended ﬁnding case studies that are
able to put more time towards giving interviews as well as interviewing diﬀerent
people within the company. That way a broader perspective can be obtained
and the validation of the research will be improved.
Those people could be
other co-founding members or key position employees that have been at the
company long enough to experience the transition.
Non founding members
would not have any emotional bias like founders have when it comes to their
company. Additionally, it could also be interesting to apply the theory of The
Six Dimensions of Transitioning to non SaaS companies and see if the same
discoveries are made.
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the main points of this report and provides general rec-
ommendations for a SaaS startup seeking to scale. Lastly, my personal lessons
during the completion of this thesis are given.
This qualitative study explored the challenges that SaaS companies face when
scaling. SaaS companies oﬀer online applications via cloud computing and reside
in a multi-tenant environment that result in lower costs. The SaaS model is
attractive due to its high degree of scalabilty as the software cost of providing
one more user access is extremely low. Scaling refers to the rapid growth of
a company and has a diﬀerent meaning for the individual. The startup must
develop through the Marmer stage of discovery, validation, and eﬃciency before
reaching the stage of scale. For the startup to be able to scale it has to transform
itself into a disciplined organisation. The current theoretical models within the
topic of how a startup transforms into a scale up was found to be limited in
their framework which is why I developed a wholesome theoretical model myself
based on a mixture between the theories from Picken’s eight hurdles of the
transitioning period and Cohan’s seven levers available for a CEO to accelerate
growth. The model I developed was called The Six Dimensions of Transitioning
and outlined the dimensions that a startup can control in order to scale. The
dimensions are:
Strategy and culture: When the number of employees grow it can become
diﬃcult to nurture the culture and communicate a clear strategy to everyone.
If the culture is neglected and the strategy is not communicated, employees will
be working in diﬀerent directions and wasting precious time and resources.
Customer responsiveness: In order to scale the customer base, the startup
must target a broader market. The mainstream market is demanding and the
compelling reason to buy must be enhanced. The supporting activities such as
==PAGE:77==
66
Conclusion
sales channel, marketing, support and product must be adjusted to align with
those needs. This demands a fast and ﬂexible customer feedback loop to ensure
a high level of customer responsiveness otherwise it will lead to frustrated and
dissatisﬁed customers.
Product oﬀering: The product oﬀering must be expanded to cater for the
needs of the mainstream market. This includes oﬀering complementary software
such as ancillary products, features, apps, and diﬀerent plugins. Complementary
services are also necessary such as customer support, training, and a good user
experience.
Financial capability: To achieve rapid growth, capital is necessary for the
startup to be able to execute and deliver on its projections. Reliable growth
trajectories must be laid out and the business model considered.
Systematising processes: Eﬀective processes are essential to deal with the
chaos and complexity that rapid growth creates by overburdening the existing
systems. The creation of functional departments can compromise the ﬂow of
communication. Management must encourage collaboration across the depart-
ments for the company to work as a whole. Failure to do so can lead to the loss
of sales and customers, poor resources allocation, and compromising ﬁnancial
projections.
Setting up a team: It requires a skilled management team and employees to
accelerate the growth of the startup. It requires hiring, promoting and letting
people go to establish the right team.
A deductive research approach was followed by applying the theory on three
diﬀerent case studies. The data collection was quantitative and done through
semi-structured interviews. The criteria for the case studies were they had to
be Danish founded SaaS companies and have implemented practices for making
the transition into scale.
They would therefore have to be at minimum, at
the Marmer stage of eﬃciency. For the interviewee, he or she would have to
have taken part in the growth journey from the beginning and either hold or
previously held an executive position in order to experience the transition and
the challenges of the company. The three case studies were very diﬀerent to each
other. Artland was at the late stage of eﬃciency, Peakon in the middle of scale,
and Clio at proﬁt maximisation. Many other factors, such as customer type,
geographical markets, amount of funding raised, founding team composition,
founders level of previous entrepreneurial experience, number of employees and
so on was also very diverse. By analysing the case studies through The Six
Dimensions of Transitioning, it was discovered all of them had been able to make
the transition within each of the diﬀerent dimensions.
However, the biggest
challenges were emphasised on the two types of people-oriented dimensions,
==PAGE:78==
6.1 General Recommendations
67
strategy and culture, and setting up a team. It was concluded that the model
provides a solid foundation of the dimensions the startup needs to transition
in if they want to scale. However, the model only focuses on matters that are
within the control of the startup but due to the complex nature of startups,
other external factors impact the ability to scale as well.
Fundamentals for
scaling is laid earlier in the life cycle of the startup since how successful they are
during their discovery and validation stage sets the base line for the scaling. It
is important to recognise this impact as it inﬂuences the ability for the startup
to scale. However, the model still provides a good foundation for scaling and
how to overcome challenges if followed. Finally, general recommendations for
SaaS companies seeking to scale is outlined in the following.
6.1
General Recommendations
The theoretical model proved to give an accurate picture of the dimensions a
startup needs to transition in for them to scale. Hence, the model can provide
a guideline for startups to know what they have to steer towards when seeking
to scale. It is therefore recommended that SaaS companies use this model to
deﬁne where they have to make changes. Below is a list of recommendations for
startup founders to follow.
Strategy and culture
• Write down the company values and use them as a guideline the employees
can steer towards.
• The vision of big growth comes ﬁrst, second comes executing on it.
• Get employees to buy into the vision and be transparent and include them
in the process.
Customer responsiveness
• To grow the customer base a transition to the mainstream market must be
made. The founder must be aware of the diﬀerent customer segments of
a mainstream market and adjust the company’s product, sales, branding,
customer support, and so on to suit the needs of those.
• Prioritise setting up a systematic customer feedback loop internally to
channel the information to the right people in the organisation.
==PAGE:79==
68
Conclusion
Product oﬀering
• Make the product as easy and intuitive to use as possible to create a good
user experience.
• Expand the oﬀering to a whole product with complementary software and
services that are required by the mainstream market.
Financial capability
• Set out reliable growth trajectories for generating revenue based on the
business model and raise funding when necessary.
• Optimise the time it takes to get to the next milestone as time equals
money.
Systematising processes
• Empower and delegate responsibility.
• Create specialised functions and formal structures.
• Enhance the communication and ﬂow of information by using systems so
all employees are always informed.
Setting up a team
• Set a strong founding team with well matched competences that have tried
the growth journey before.
• Get highly experienced employees and board members that can help ac-
celerate the growth.
• Diﬀerent people belong at diﬀerent stages of the journey. Make sure the
employees - especially in key positions - always have the right experience
and knowledge to drive the company further.
• As the startup evolves it will require the founder to take on a diﬀerent
role. The founder must be aware of where he or she is needed to ﬁt into
the organisation and willing to adapt.
==PAGE:80==
6.2 Personal Lessons
69
6.2
Personal Lessons
Initially, my master thesis was set out to be completed by the 12th of December,
2019, hence, this version is an extension of the previous. Even though I handed
the previous version in, I decided not to defend it as I wanted to redo it and put
more eﬀort in. Next to writing my thesis, I have been running my own SaaS
startup currently at the validation stage and therefore had a personal, genuine
interest in knowing what challenges were ahead and how I could overcome them.
My experience within a startup has provided me with practical knowledge for
a SaaS startup and I have experienced how tough it is ﬁrst hand. I was so
lucky to interview all of the founders whom have my deepest respect and grat-
itude for putting their limited time aside for me. The draw back of running a
startup myself has deﬁnitely been balancing the time to also writing my thesis.
Startups are so unpredictable and urgent matters tend to come up at the most
inconvenient times. As soon as I started getting behind on my project plan, I
should have been more realistic and taken actions earlier in trying to catch up
or look into the process of applying for dispensation instead. Additionally, the
scope of the thesis was quite unstructured when I began and it took longer than
expected to get the right angle. Initially, I wanted to investigate the diﬀerence
in what made software companies successful or unsuccessful in their pursuits of
scaling. It turned out to be diﬃcult to ﬁnd unsuccessful companies, as they do
not get a lot of media coverage and the entrepreneurs ﬁnd the topic to be very
sensitive. Secondly, reading and selecting in the literature on the topic took
longer than expected which postponed the interviews. The initial project plan
and how it actually played out can be found in appendix D.
==PAGE:81==
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[Appetize
2018]
Appetize:
Artland
lander
millioner
i
investering
fra
danske
sportsstjerner
og
kultur-kendisser.
2018.
–
URL
https://www.appetize.dk/artland-lander-millioner-i-investering-
fra-danske-sportsstjerner-og-kultur-kendisser/. –
Accessed 10-11-
2019
[Artland a]
Artland:
Start your free trial today. –
URL https://
partners.artland.com/. – 28-02-2020
[Artland
b]
Artland:
What
we
believe
in.
–
URL
https://
www.artland.com/about. – 28-02-2020
[Basa 2019]
Basa, Nanna Pollas B.: Scaling of Software Companies. 2019
[Bjarke
Wiegand
2015]
Bjarke
Wiegand,
Elizabeth
B.
T.
L.:
Vækst Danmark 2025.
2015. –
URL https://www.mm.dk/pdffiles/
Vaekstdanmark2025.pdf. – Accessed 10-11-2019
[Blank 2013]
Blank, Steven G.: Four Steps to Epiphany. K&S Ranch, 2013
[Børsen 2019a]
Børsen: Ofte stillede spørgsmål om Børsen Gazelle. 2019.
– URL https://borsen.dk/konferencer/gazeller/om_gazellerne.html.
– Accessed 25-11-2019
[Børsen 2019b]
Børsen:
Virksomhed med ﬁre år på bagen rejser 230
millioner.
2019. –
URL https://borsen.dk/nyheder/virksomheder/
virksomhed-med-fire-aar-paa-bagen-rejser-230-millioner-66k37.
–
Accessed 02-03-2020
[Capital und Association 2019]
Capital, Danish V. ; Association, Pri-
vate E.:
Udlandet løfter danske startups til unicorn-status.
2019.
– URL https://dvca.dk/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Notat-udlandet-
l\T1\ofter-danske-startups-til-unicorn-status.pdf. –
Accessed 29-
11-2019
[Chambers 2019]
Chambers, Phil: We’ve Raised Another €30m in Funding -
Here’s What We’re Going to Do with It. 2019. – URL https://peakon.com/
da/blog/uncategorized-da/peakon-atomico-funding/. – Accessed 02-03-
2020
==PAGE:83==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Clio 2018]
Clio:
Mediegigant køber dansk techsucces – næste skridt er
udlandet.
2018. –
URL https://www.clio.me/dk/mediegigant-koeber-
dansk-techsucces-naeste-skridt-er-udlandet/. – Accessed 20-10-2019
[Cohan 2019]
Cohan, Peter: Scaling Your Startup. Apress, 2019
[Dallas ]
Dallas, UT:
Joseph C. Picken, Ph.D.. –
URL https://
personal.utdallas.edu/~jpicken/. – Accessed 23-02-2020
[Eric Kutcher 2014]
Eric Kutcher, Kara S.: Grow fast or die slow. 2014.
–
URL https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/technology-media-and-
telecommunications/our-insights/grow-fast-or-die-slow. – Accessed
03-03-2020
[Eurostat 2007]
Eurostat:
OECD Manual on Business Demography
Statistics. 2007
[Fallarme 2017]
Fallarme, David: Crossing The Chasm – A Quick Summary
(With Examples).
2017. –
URL https://themarketingstudent.com/
crossing-the-chasm-summary/. – Accessed 20-09-2019
[Forbes ]
Forbes:
Peter Cohan. – URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/
petercohan/#29a3c96e3b61. – Accessed 15-02-2020
[Frie
2019]
Frie:
Fri
ferie
og
bonus
pr.
barn.
2019.
–
URL https://www.frie.dk/medlemstilbud/magasin/4-udgave-2019/fri-
ferie-og-bonus-pr-barn/. – Accessed 21-02-2020
[Inc. ]
Inc.:
Peter Cohan The Hungry Start-Up. –
URL https://
www.inc.com/author/peter-cohan. – Accessed 15-02-2020
[Jensen 2019]
Jensen, Kenneth: Hvad er deﬁnitionen på et scale up? 2019.
–
URL https://www.linkedin.com/posts/kennethbojensen_hvad-er-
definitionen-på-et-scale-up-activity-6582564411549069313-fSL9/.
– Accessed 29-08-2019
[Jill Collins 2003]
Jill Collins, Roger H.:
Business Research.
Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003
[Kjær
2018]
Kjær,
Sebastian:
SaaS-vækst:
Danmark
mangler
folk
der
kender
formlen
bag
Unity
og
Falcon.io.
2018.
–
URL
https://techsavvy.media/saas-vaekst-danmark-mangler-folk-der-
kender-formlen-bag-unity-og-falcon-io/. – Accessed 03-02-2020
[Kjær
2019a]
Kjær,
Sebastian:
David
Helgason:
Fra
kuldsejlet
spilprojekt til softwarepakke i unicorn-klassen.
2019. –
URL https:
//techsavvy.media/david-helgason-fra-kuldsejlet-spilprojekt-
til-softwarepakke-i-unicorn-klassen/. – Accessed 03-02-2020
==PAGE:84==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[Kjær
2019b]
Kjær,
Sebastian:
Peakon
i
ny
mega-investering:
Lander 230 millioner fra Skype-stifters venturefond.
2019. –
URL
https://techsavvy.media/peakon-i-ny-mega-investering-lander-
230-millioner-fra-skype-stifters-venturefond/. –
Accessed 29-11-
2019
[Lee 2019]
Lee, Louise: The Rules You Can Break, The Ones You Can’t With
Tradeshift (Video + Transcript). 2019. – URL https://www.saastr.com/
rules-you-can-break/. – Accessed 03-02-2020
[Max Marmer 2012]
Max Marmer, Ertan Dogrultan Ron B.:
Startup
Genome Report - A new framework for understanding why startups succeed.
2012
[Merriam-Webster ]
Merriam-Webster:
What Does ’Scale the Business’
Mean?
How a common word became a staple of business jargon.
–
URL https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/scale-the-
business-meaning-origin. – Accessed 01-09-2019
[Moore
2011]
Moore,
Geoﬀrey:
Geoﬀrey
Moore
Slide
Set
from
the
Berkeley
Digital
Media
Conference.
2011.
–
URL
https:
//www.slideshare.net/rstrad1/berkeley-digital-media-conference/
5-The_Whole_Product_Outsourcing_Hardware. – Accessed 23-11-2019
[Moore 2014]
Moore, Geoﬀrey: Crossing the Chasm. Harper Business, 2014
[Nibusinessinfo ]
Nibusinessinfo:
Computer software for business.
–
URL https://www.nibusinessinfo.co.uk/content/advantages-and-
disadvantages-software-service-saas. – Accessed 30-01-2020
[Peakon a]
Peakon. –
URL https://peakon.com/life-at-peakon/
values/. – Accessed 22-11-2019
[Peakon b]
Peakon: Peakon website. – URL https://peakon.com/. – Ac-
cessed 03-03-2020
[Picken 2016]
Picken, Joseph C.: From founder to CEO: An entrepreneur’s
roadmap. In: Business Horizons (2016), Nr. 60, S. 7–14
[Picken 2017]
Picken, Joseph C.: From startup to scalable enterprise: Laying
the foundation. In: Business Horizons 60 (2017), Nr. 5, S. 587–595
[Qureshi
2018]
Qureshi,
Michael:
Jeppe
Curth
og
brormand
vælter
kunstverdenen:
Henter
millioninvestering.
2018.
–
URL
https://migogaalborg.dk/jeppe-curth-og-brormand-vaelter-
kunstverdenen-henter-millioninvestering/. – Accessed 13-11-2019
[Rayome 2017]
Rayome,
Alison D.:
73% of enterprises will run
==PAGE:85==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
almost
entirely
on
SaaS
by
2020,
report
says.
2017.
–
URL
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/73-of-enterprises-will-
run-almost-entirely-on-saas-by-2020-report-says/.
–
Accessed
05-01-2020
[Reiﬀ2020]
Reiff, Nathan:
Series A, B, C Funding:
How It Works.
2020.
–
URL
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-
finance/102015/series-b-c-funding-what-it-all-means-and-how-
it-works.asp. – Accessed 05-03-2020
[Salesforce ]
Salesforce:
New to SaaS? Welcome!. –
URL https:
//www.salesforce.com/in/saas/. – Accessed 05-01-2020
[Smale 2019]
Smale, Thomas:
Building Success: Insights from 7 Leading
SaaS Companies. 2019. – URL https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
342627. – Accessed 10-01-2020
[Østerby ]
Østerby, Esben B.: Peakon - Kasper Hulthin - fra 4 stiftere til
+80 medarbejdere på 3 år. – URL https://ivaerksaetterhistorier.dk/
peakon/. – Accessed 20-02-2020
==PAGE:86==
Appendix A
Interview Case Study 1 - Clio Online
Louise Herping Ellegaard, co-founder and former director of Clio Online,was
interviewed on October 24, 2019 via phone.
The interview was carried out
in Danish and has therefore been translated into English. Additionally, parts
of the interview has been removed due to irrelevance or rephrased during the
translation. (Basa, 2019, p 63-70)
1. Nanna: When did Clio start growing and what lead you to that?
Louise: In general or what do you mean? In regards to becoming inter-
national?
Nanna: When you start it takes some time before you really get started
and get the ﬁrst customers. So I was wondering when did this exponential
growth start in relation to revenue and everything else that follows?
Louise: At the beginning we made a digital product for history as a sub-
ject in folkeskolen1. The sales actually took oﬀquite well early on so it
wasn’t necessary for us to take in investors. Then the schools started call-
ing us and asking if we were going to make something for the two related
subjects, religion and social studies. We started doing that and as rev-
enue was coming in, we reinvested our money in new products and then
of course the more products on the market the more money to reinvest in
other new products. Instead of making one product at the time we made
maybe three new products simultaneously and then ﬁve new products
simultaneously.
2. Nanna: When you say new products was it then history and then for
example, physics and mathematics?
Louise: Yes, exactly. Also the Danish folkeskole is split into pre-schooling,
1Danish type of school equivalent to high school.
==PAGE:87==
76
Interview Case Study 1 - Clio Online
intermediate and schooling2.
So for example, for the subject Danish
we had three products for respectively pre-schooling, intermediate, and
schooling. So it ended up becoming quite a lot of products. At the be-
ginning it was a lot of products for the older students and then later we
developed for the smaller students. To use digital learning resources you
have to be able to read and our platform wasn’t built for those who are
still learning to read. We developed such a platform later on. We just
re-invested all revenue into new products. I think that is the reason it was
possible at the time where there wasn’t internet everywhere. If we were
to start Clio today it wouldn’t be possible because everyone is so used to
everything being online and digitised. I think the time and era of when
we founded Clio has deﬁnitely had a major impact.
3. Nanna: Would you say there was a need for the product back then or did
you create the need?
Louise: We created the need. We invented something completely new.
4. Nanna: Who are you selling to and how do you get in contact with
them?
Louise: That changed.
At the beginning we sold to school librarians
because digital systems were run at the school libraries. Then later on
it became a part of the lecture and actually replaced the school books.
The school teachers started buying and so did some communes. It is a
bit diﬀerent if it is centralised on a school management level or commune
level. In other communes, the budgets are handed down to the individual
subject teams. It is a bit diﬀerent in the 98 communes in Denmark. This
is something you have to keep and eye out for as a company so you know
if you should put your focus centrally or contact the individual schools.
We used at lot of marketing. Digital marketing, exhibitions and the like.
However, it changed over the years who our customer was. It is quite
interesting.
5. Nanna: Regarding the customers you started out with, how did you
convince them to buy your product? Which of their needs did you meet?
Louise: We did something completely new. Our competitors Gyldendal
and Egmont meet their customers at book exhibitions. We started calling
out and telling them about the product. When they then sat down in
front of their computer we helped them with logging in so they could
test it. They had a 30 day trial period and then we followed up. That
was something new in the industry to make phone calls and actually cold
canvassing.
6. Nanna: In terms of your customer support and customer service, was it
something you had from the beginning or did it come later on?
2Known as indskoling, mellem-trin and udskoling in Denmark.
==PAGE:88==
77
Louise: It came more and more later on. At the beginning we handled
it ourselves. As we got more and more customers, we got more and more
inquiries, and we hired a support team that received all these inquiries.
7. Nanna: Was there a need for training of your customers in how they
should use the platform?
Louise: At the beginning the platform was very simple so everyone could
use it. As we developed all sorts of fun features it became more complex
and at the same time the preparation time for teachers were cut down
drastically so they didn’t have the time to sit down and learn the system
themselves. Therefore, we made a customer success or implementation
consultant who came to the schools and showed how to best use the prod-
uct. The customers who had the implementations consultants coming by,
had a wider use of the products.
8. Nanna: At the start when you received all this customer feedback I as-
sume you as founders were handling it yourself where you could respond
quickly. As you have grown, how have you made sure the customer feed-
back got channelled out to the right people in the company and how was
it dealt with?
Louise: We systematised our user feedback a lot and ended up hiring
Malene who had the job of channeling it out to the right people.
At
the beginning, sales heard some things and then we often reacted on it
and often it would maybe be the ones who were the loudest, which does
not necessary represent every customer. Therefore, we became more data
driven for making decisions. At the beginning, it was gut feeling and lis-
tening to the loudest, which you can do as a small company but as you
grow bigger and bigger, it becomes more data driven.
9. Nanna: How did the product start out and how did it evolve? I un-
derstand you started oﬀering the history part and then more and more
subjects were added on diﬀerent levels according to the grade. You also
started oﬀering some services around this product with your implementa-
tion consultants. What did the whole package look like and how does it
look today?
Louise: I stopped in Clio in spring 18 so I don’t know what it looks like
today.
Nanna: Yes, just when you stopped.
Louise: It was to hold their hand.
There was a homework tool.
We
always tried to make solutions as intuitive as possible so users needed as
little help from us as possible. That way we gave more time to ourselves.
We have always tried to search for solutions which would demand the least
amount of manual labour otherwise it is all you will be doing.
10. Nanna: Has the way you contacted customers also changed?
Louise: It has been sales via phone and do presentations all the time.
==PAGE:89==
78
Interview Case Study 1 - Clio Online
We just became more specialised during the years. There were some sales
people who were better at speaking the top commune level lingo and then
there were some who had the patience to pick up the phone and speak
with the teachers. So you were distributed to the communes who had
the diﬀerent systems. We just became more specialised and reﬁned our
methods. It was more or less the same product and same way of selling
during the years. We did not change that particularly. We became better
on the UX part since it wasn’t a competence amongst us three founders and
we became better at our marketing. All the other things in the company
were competences which me, Janus and Lasse had. Not to sound smug
but I think we were a very good combination. We complemented each
other well.
11. Nanna: Did you have to hire new people for your UX and marketing?
Louise: Firstly, it was to identify the need we have. It actually took a
little while and then to hire the right ones. For example, the ﬁrst person
who was responsible for our marketing didn’t really create any eﬀect but
then we found one who was unbelievable at what he could do. He is also
the current CMO in Clio and probably one of the best hires we made at
Clio. He made a signiﬁcant change in the way Clio was branded and made
market awareness. That is deﬁnitely due to him.
Nanna: So what did he do?
Louise: He had made a PowerPoint presentation on many slides and said
if it was him who was responsible for Clio’s marketing, this is what he
would do. It was a kind of road-map and he executed all of it. He got
business intelligence up and running and hired some really good content
marketing people. He made it very professional. You can also see it on
the Clio’s exhibition stand before and after Thomas came. It has become
way more streamlined and professional to look at.
12. Nanna: How did the company culture change as more and more new
people joined?
Louise: If you are 10 people, 40 people or 100 people, it is very few peo-
ple who have been with Clio throughout the whole journey since people
are driven by diﬀerent things. Regarding being a startup, we had some
employees when we became 40 people who resigned as they thought we
had become way too big and then again when we became a 100 people.
I think we, Janus, Lasse and I have had some strong personalities. We
always made it fun to go to work and have never been saving money on
champagne. Remember we were in our late 20’s when we started Clio so
it was very youthful and only later when Bonnier came, it became more
corporate. I can even see it on photos the way I dressed. I became more
corporate the older I got. We had this thing called Clio Craziness. The
Clio spirit was there the whole time. A lot of people left after we weren’t
there anymore because they said the Clio spirit was missing. There is a
==PAGE:90==
79
big diﬀerence between being a founder of company and a subsidiary to the
Bonnier Group. This is something we have been very aware about and
never taken it personal or anything when people left because we became
too big. We have always helped them and they have had our full under-
standing. We had a lot who also wanted to be entrepreneurs and you can
only support that decision. Of course, it went very fast at the end and it
was diﬃcult for me remembering the names of everyone, which was quite
annoying.
Nanna: Has Bonnier mainly been responsible for making it more corpo-
rate? Did they implement it?
Louise: No, it is not because of them. It is just when you become more
than 200 people you get more corporate. I also think Thomas from mar-
keting was good at hiring a tonne of people where I thought, is it really
necessary to be that many? At the same time we had a HR manager, it
took oﬀ. They say that when you hire a HR manager and a marketing
manager then you have to ﬁnd new oﬃces and I totally agree. Then it
grows.
13. Nanna: Did you face any challenges when you suddenly became so many
people?
Louise: Yes. To communicate the strategy for the company where we
are going and make sure everyone is on board on what is going to happen
and want it to happen.
Teaching is a call in life for many and it was
within Clio. That meant some had their own vision for what Clio should
be doing and that just doesn’t work out when they aren’t the ones who
own the company and they get side tracked.
That was something we
struggled with. Clio had to be proﬁtable. That was why we were there
but at the same time create good learning material for children. It was
the commercial way of thinking we were battling with as some employees
felt they were compromising on quality, but I never agreed on that. You
also have to ﬁnish your product and get it on the market.
Nanna: How did you handle it with these employees?
Louise: I found a method where the earlier on I could involve them and
the more transparent I was, the more it made sense why I had these
ideas. I invited them into the process early on and didn’t give them the
answer but selected in all the answers they had proposed for what we
could do together and then make a decision and I think that gave way
more support. The more transparent I was the better support I got. I
had two co-founders who weren’t always as transparent which created a
bit discrepancy between our departments. That was a bit of a shame.
It has also sometimes been a challenge if we as founders didn’t manage
our departments in the same way. But I think in other companies they
experience that too.
14. Nanna: How did you then get the communication to ﬂow in the organi-
==PAGE:91==
80
Interview Case Study 1 - Clio Online
sation?
Louise: We introduced something that was called Summer Summit and
Christmas Summit where we ﬂew in everyone and spoke about what was
going to happen and had diﬀerent workshops focusing on real problems
we had. Using Slack and our intranet were good tools to spread what is
going on. In Denmark they were sitting in ﬁve diﬀerent places, Sweden
three diﬀerent places and an oﬃce in Ukraine too. So to get everyone on
board we used tools such as Slack and intranet and that worked very well
and then meeting in person once in a while.
Nanna: Why Ukraine, are you in that market too?
Louise: No, it is our developers that sit there. It is impossible to ﬁnd
developers in Denmark so we had to ﬁnd some there.
Nanna: Was that from the beginning or when in the process did that
happen?
Louise: About half way I think but we have had it in place for many
years.
15. Nanna: At the beginning you have the complete overview and control
yourself.
How do you distribute the control to more people when you
grew?
Louise: We all have it. Freedom with responsibility. I feel really good
about that. We also had a lot of shared management. We didn’t have one
CEO in Clio. All three of us were. Janus, Lasse and I met minimum once
a week and held a meeting to orientate each other and discuss things. We
therefore had complete overview of what was going on. We delegated a
lot of responsibility. That is something you learn as an entrepreneur very
fast that you have to ﬁnd someone who can do what you can’t and then
delegate otherwise you would work yourself to death. Empowerment and
delegation is key to success.
16. Nanna: In regards to not having to raise capital and growing organically,
how do you think your journey would have been if you took an investment?
Would you have been able to get where you wanted to faster or how do
you think it would have impacted you?
Louise: With Sweden we had capital and made a product portfolio fast
for all the main subjects as selling is extremely slow there. I think this
is a good example that lots of money, investments, and products doesn’t
necessary mean it is a success. In Denmark, we developed products along
with the market in a pace where we learned about moving computers into
the classrooms. I think that has been good. You couldn’t be forcing this.
It would maybe just have been a waste of money I think. I think it was
good for us not having that extra capital to push the buttons faster. The
teachers weren’t there and that is also why we didn’t sell to the teachers of
3General secondary upper school.
==PAGE:92==
81
the Danish gymnasiums3. They were even more analog than the folkeskole
teachers.
Nanna: Are you selling to them now or where you when you stopped
working at Clio?
Louise: No, there are also other players. Systime has entered that market
and makes digital learning resources. We focus on folkeskolen which I think
is ﬁne.
17. Nanna: When you started I assume you didn’t have that many competi-
tors but they have come along the way. How have you ensured to maintain
your position as market leader?
Louise: In 2012 to 2017, the government gave grants for purchasing dig-
ital learning resources. In the beginning there were a lot of restrictions
such as only mathematics and Danish and then later on they opened up
for all subjects. So when a school had purchased a subscription on our
Danish portal they would receive a 50% refund by the government. That
made it very attractive for Gyldendal and other players to start making
digital learning resources. Gyldendal actually copied our products and we
thought this can’t be right. At the time, 2011-2013, it became trendy to
make websites that display whether you have a large screen or a small
screen. There were also some designs trends. It had to be without shad-
ows. There shouldn’t be a button with shadows, it had to be completely
ﬂat. I don’t know if you remember that Facebook changed their look and
we caught on to that and redesigned our products completely and added a
lot of new features too. For example, a read guide where when you read the
text and could press a drop down with a question which ensured you had
understood the main points of the text. We called the project platform 2.0
even though it was third time we rewrote our code. We diﬀerentiated from
our competitors from a technical point but also on our content. There are
some traditions in all industries for example, in the subject history, there
are some who believe you should have the king row and some who believe
you should teach according to themes and some chronologically. Our com-
petitors were very narrow focused where we embraced all types of history
teachers in one product and they hadn’t seen that. I think that was one
of the reasons too. Both the content, technology, and look was just cooler.
This is also what you should do today since Clio is struggling a lot with
competition today. If it was my company then I would have redesigned
and made the products again so it became more contemporary.
18. Nanna: How is your business model compared to your competitors?
Louise: How we position ourselves for our customers or what do you
mean?
Nanna: What you are oﬀering. Is it a combined deal to a school where
you go get a full package and if you pay upfront for 12 months you will
get this discount or how does it work?
==PAGE:93==
82
Interview Case Study 1 - Clio Online
Louise: You can do a 1 year, 3 year, and 5 year subscription and the
more products you put in your shopping basket the large discount. If you
purchase on a commune level then it is some diﬀerent prices but that is
the way it is structured.
Nanna: Is it diﬀerent from what your competitors do?
Louise: No, our competitors copied us. We had created this model. They
just copied it and started making digital from there.
19. Nanna: When you entered Sweden what was the determining factor of
choosing that country?
Louise: Our buyer is from Sweden. We had actually the Netherlands and
United Kingdom in mind. I think we would have chosen the Netherlands
if it wasn’t because our new owners insisted on Sweden.
Nanna: Why would you have chosen the Netherlands?
Louise: They are very far ahead digitally. When you buy a subscription
for Clio you can give access to all students and teachers simultaneously
with a uniﬁed login system to get started quick.
You can do that in
Denmark and in the Netherlands. They don’t have that in Sweden plus
the Swedish purchasing mentality is diﬀerent. There are a lot of consensus
and they don’t make a decision without having the full company support
whereas the Dutch are more culturally like Danes.
Fast decisions and
they spend way more money on learning materials in the Netherlands.
They are digitally further ahead so it would have been ideal to enter the
Netherlands. But we didn’t and it was Sweden. Yesterday, I heard rumors
that they have removed a part of their editorial department so it will only
be sales and marketing they keep in Sweden. They had to cut down in
Sweden. It is a shame it didn’t work out.
20. Nanna: Is there anything you would have done diﬀerently or knowledge
you wish you had at the time?
Louise: I think it could have been smart to make our platform in a way
so it could be updated faster with new technology because everything goes
so fast. At the end, whenever you needed new things built, we had to put
aside 6 months before anything happened. We should have spend more
time on making the code foundation a little bit better. On the other hand,
you can say we wouldn’t have grown so fast if we didn’t put layers of code
on code on code. It was just pushing the problem in front of you the whole
time.
==PAGE:94==
Appendix B
Interview Case Study 2 - Artland
Mattis Curth, CEO and co-founder of Artland, was interviewed on October 24,
2019 via phone. The interview was carried out in Danish and has therefore been
translated into English. Additionally, parts of the interview has been removed
due to irrelevance or rephrased during the translation. (Basa, 2019, p 71-75)
1. Nanna: How many users do you have?
Mattis: We have approximately 50.000 users registered and approxi-
mately 50.000 that visit our website a month.
2. Nanna: How many employees are you?
Mattis: About 20.
3. Nanna: In which geographical markets are you present?
Mattis: We are global now. We have customers from Seoul to New York
but primarily in Europe and USA.
4. Nanna: What are your plans for the future?
Mattis: We will focus on New York. If you win New York you win the
rest of the market.
5. Nanna: Who are the users on your platform?
Mattis: We get money from the galleries. We are a two sided platform.
The galleries sell art and the buyers are art collectors. The galleries pay
a monthly subscription for being visible to collectors on the platform.
6. Nanna: Has your customer type changed since you started?
Mattis: Yes, everything has changed.
Nanna: How?
Mattis: It has changed in many diﬀerent ways. Both target group, prod-
uct etc. We started out building a platform for the collectors and then
==PAGE:95==
84
Interview Case Study 2 - Artland
later on we invited the galleries. We had no plans for a speciﬁc business
model. We had to test it out to ﬁnd one. There aren’t any speciﬁc factors
but processes which determines whether you gain enough momentum and
succeed. We discovered the galleries were willing to pay to become a part
of it. Then we made our business model.
7. Nanna: So it evolved along the way?
Mattis: Yes.
8. Nanna: Has the customer need changed?
Mattis: Both yes and no. There is an ultimate need that people want to
sell more. That doesn’t change. Then there are a lot of ways to do so and
that changes. During the years we have been at it the market has changed
as well. Some things work better now than back then and the other way
around.
9. Nanna: Do you mean the maturity of the market?
Mattis: Take for example Instagram. Back then it wasn’t a place where
you could sell art. Today it is. The need for selling art doesn’t change.
10. Nanna: How do you carry out your sales?
Mattis: It is a mixture of diﬀerent activities. First of all, you need to
build up a brand. To scale your company properly you have to create
some sort of organic growth so you receive a lot of inbound interest. It is
a mixture of our product works well and people spread the word and put
it on social media.
11. Nanna: Is that the model you have been doing from the beginning or has
it developed?
Mattis: It has developed. At the beginning we did not have anything
to do with the galleries then we just focused on building a product for
collectors.
12. Nanna: How about customer support and training of these galleries in
how they use it. Is that something you do?
Mattis: It is an automatised part with a lot of material, a help center,
on-boarding and so on. Then there is an account manager for the galleries
so if they have any problems they have access to help through there.
Nanna: Has that also developed after the galleries joined?
Mattis: Yes, exactly.
13. Nanna: How about the customer feedback?
At the beginning it was
only you and your brother but now when you are 20 people how do you
make sure the relevant people in the company receive the feedback? For
example, if something doesn’t work for your customers with your website
or app how does the information end up at the IT department?
==PAGE:96==
85
Mattis: Overall there are two elements. It is about to keep a ﬂat structure
in the organisation. Number two is to create a system for it. Everybody
is taught how to report in the communication system if they hear about
a problem, have a problem themselves or witness a problem. It will then
go directly to the CTO who distributes what should be handled now and
later. Everyone has access to it. There is also user feedback challenge
which everyone has access to if there is anything. It automatically gets
under the skin of people.
Nanna: Are you using a particular system for this?
Mattis: I don’t know if you know Slack.
It is what many people in
companies use.
You can make certain alterations for it.
For example,
we ask our users all the time what they think about the product. We
then write what they have said in the same way the sales team write their
feedback in our internal feedback system on what the galleries say about
our product.
14. Nanna: In regards to your product, was it the market that asked for it?
Did the galleries say hey can we do something together or was it you who
contacted the galleries and created this need for them?
Mattis: It is a bit of both. It was the collectors and then the galleries
came by themselves. There are always some that come by themselves.
No matter how wild what you make is, you always have to kick start it.
The idea came from a lot of conversations with collectors and building a
product with them and then the galleries came half cold calling afterwards.
15. Nanna: How has the company culture changed from the beginning to
now as you have grown?
Mattis: There are more structures and systems which has made things
more streamlined.
In that sense some things become more clear, such
as deﬁning roles and distribution of work, where at the beginning the
direction was something you experimented with. What works and what
doesn’t and almost everyone were involved in everything. The further you
get the more deﬁned it becomes. People are still having many diﬀerent hats
on but is is distributed into diﬀerent roles where you work with smaller
parts of the company to be able to do really well.
Nanna: What challenges have you had in relation to this?
Mattis: It is always a challenge when you work with people and are
building a culture no matter how exceptional of a leader you are. At the
beginning you almost do not have any money to do it and you need the
best people to succeed. You don’t have money to pay the best people so
you need to convince the best that this long term thing is going to be the
wildest thing to be a part of. This is of course always a challenge so there
will be changes within the ﬁrst 3 years with juniors and maybe some get
better. This is how it develops and then the culture changes according
==PAGE:97==
86
Interview Case Study 2 - Artland
to the type of people you have. It doesn’t keep being new and wild. It
becomes routine for the employees too.
16. Nanna: Which competences did you need as you grew?
Mattis: All kind of competences. We have both been growing on aspect
of tech, marketing, and market speciﬁc. So in all areas that is where you
need to grow. You have to keep up and hire some that can do ﬁnancial,
contracts and so on.
17. Nanna: So at the beginning it was only you and your brother, who was
in charge of all this?
Mattis: Yes, at the beginning you just close your eyes and move ahead.
Then you deal with the problems as they come.
18. Nanna: So what is your role now and compared to when you started? Is
it more speciﬁc now?
Mattis: Yes at the beginning is was leading 10% and executing 90%. Now
I am leading 90% and executing 10%.
19. Nanna: How do you keep and maintain and overview of 20 people?
Mattis: It depends on what the purpose is. Overview for the purpose
of controlling doesn’t make sense. Overview to ensure you are going in a
certain direction and everyone is working makes more sense. There are
some diﬀerent ways to do it. First of all you can look at KPIs and numbers.
If you lay it out properly you can look at them on a weekly basis to ﬁnd
out what works and what doesn’t and dive into that. It is also important
to have conversations with your employees before it goes wrong. Do some
walk and talk and take it as it comes as a part of the process to ﬁnd out if
people are on the right track, if they understand the task and those sorts
of things. If they are happy and it makes sense or if they need any help.
It is a combination of working with people and our KPIs and numbers.
20. Nanna: Which KPIs are relevant for you?
Mattis: Right now we are working with the number of gallery sign ups
and then some KPIs to understand the funnel for that.
21. Nanna: How many rounds of capital have you raised?
Mattis: We have done 3 rounds.
Nanna: What are you going to use the capital for?
Mattis: Salaries.
22. Nanna: Is it to grow faster?
Mattis: When you have a consumer case like we do you need a large
amount of money up front to be able to make a larger amount later. You
can make money long term.
==PAGE:98==
87
23. Nanna: Is break even important to you at this point?
Mattis: No, not at all.
24. Nanna: Which competitors do you have and what are you doing to out
perform them?
Mattis: There are some diﬀerent competitors within this market. The
majority primarily focus on e-commerce for galleries and we are more
collector focused. Artsy and Artnet are the largest competitors. You are
trying to gain market share and make a better product. Those are the two
things done in order to diﬀerentiate. It is about who creates most value
at the end who wins.
25. Nanna: When you try and improve your product what do you try to
improve?
Mattis: What do you mean?
Nanna: Is it for example, user experience? What you oﬀer together with
the core product - sometimes you have more sales and other services to
sell together with the product.
Mattis: We are testing that so it can be on all levels. We are trialling
continuously.
26. Nanna: Is there anything you would have done diﬀerently or some knowl-
edge you wish you had beforehand?
Mattis: Yes, heaps. When you build up this thing you make many mis-
takes which would have been nice to avoid. If there is a factor that matters
to succeed then it is to have experience in your team who has failed before.
We now have one of the ﬁrst employees from Vivino who has been a part
of the company during all their years. He is on our board and can tell us
some of the things which won’t work because they have also done them
and failed. So you make a lot of mistakes that you want to change.
27. Nanna: What are some of the biggest challenges according to you?
Mattis: Most companies will never ﬁnd a product market ﬁt and you
might have to do many things along the way and then the need is com-
pletely diﬀerent. That is the biggest challenge. This is something that
comes with experience. It is important to have your process in order and
working fast. You have a hypothesis and veriﬁes it constantly by iterating,
building, and changing what you do as many times as possible until you
feel now this is something people want to pay for.
28. Nanna: Some people I have spoken with mention when they get further
with their company some employees can’t see themselves ﬁt into the new
role the company requires and the company has changed from what is was
at the beginning. Is that something you have encountered?
Mattis: Yes, it happens gradually that the competences you have do not
completely match and it is not only the company that feels that way but
==PAGE:99==
88
Interview Case Study 2 - Artland
the employees do as well. So it is a very natural process that occurs.
Nanna: So you have had a change of staﬀ?
Mattis: Yes, deﬁnitely.
==PAGE:100==
Appendix C
Interview Case Study 3 - Peakon
Kasper Hulthin, CGO and co-founder of Peakon, was interviewed on November
20, 2019 via Zoom conference call. The interview was carried out in Danish and
has therefore been translated into English. Additionally, parts of the interview
has been removed due to irrelevance or rephrased during the translation. (Basa,
2019, p 85-90)
1. Nanna: Which elements do you think have been key to your massive
growth in such a short period of time?
Kasper: Number one, we thought big from the beginning.
That was
never up for discussion. It was a premise from start we wanted to be a
global company and not the Danish version of something. There was only
one way. When people ask why did you enter USA? It has never been a
question, of course, you need to enter USA. There is no way for you to
win if you aren’t in the USA. It was a question of when and how we were
going to enter the USA. One thing is the mindset. Even though you can
have a lot of plans of taking on the world but it doesn’t help just thinking
about it. There weren’t enough people with the experience to take the
company to the next level so we set up a commercial oﬃce in London and
found people there. The mindset matters more than what people think.
There are some companies where it feels more safe going to Aarhus than
to London even though it is faster to take a plane to London than it is
to take the train to Aarhus but it is a matter of mentality. There is a
mental aspect in thinking big. Number two, timing in the sense there was
a market that was ready to buy what we are selling and timing is the
biggest thing. Then there are some goals and vision. We hired some very
experienced people, a sales director, CFO some people who had done it
before. As a growth company you are racing against the time as time is
money. You don’t make any money at the beginning, you spend money.
==PAGE:101==
90
Interview Case Study 3 - Peakon
You have 100 kroner left and you spend 10 kroner every month so you
have 10 months left before you run out. So it is about optimising the
time. Experience is good but you have to go though it a couple of times
on a timeline. We hired some people who have already been through it.
It would have taken us two years to get to what took them one year.
2. Nanna: Which competences did you need since you are a very solid found-
ing team on paper?
Kasper: In that sense it’s kind of unfair if you compare us with someone
who is 25 and starting their ﬁrst company (which I did some years ago),
then you have an advantage. We have received a lot of investment and
it helps when you have some experience. They look at market, traction,
and team. Is the market there in terms of timing? Is their a team that
can execute it? Then you can get pretty far. The most important hires
are Sales Director, Head of Customer Support and we also needed a CFO
so we hired one with a lot of experience. You can look up Simone on
LinkedIn and you can see her background. She has been running King
who makes Candy Crush which was the craziest growth story in Europe.
I think she was hired as employee number 100 and two years later they
went on the stock exchange in New York with a billion dollars in the bank.
So experience is important. When you grow you need all sorts of people.
Now we have people internally to help others ﬁnd their passwords and we
have oﬃce managers and a lot more behind the scene. I think the key is
to ﬁnd people who have been on the journey before. The problem with
Denmark is not many people have been on such a journey. If you look
at Danish startups, relatively few have been more than 100 employees.
Maybe 20 or so that have grown to more than that.
3. Nanna: How has your role changed from when you started until now?
Kasper: My role has changed quite a lot. It has been by design. As
you said, we were four people. Christian was CTO, Dan was CMO, and
Phil has done product in the early days and put on the CEO hat when we
needed it. I had sales and hired Neil. When he was in place I was COO
and hired our ﬁrst HR team and hired Simone to do ﬁnance. Luckily,
they were better than me. Then we built up new markets and I moved
to the US last year and hired someone who can run the US instead of
me.
In reality, I have done three things.
One, taking on the projects
that are so big that they don’t ﬁt in anywhere, we need to open a new
market, or we need to build a ﬁnance or HR, or a new country. Two, is
culture and executing a lot of these operating mechanisms. And three,
more strategically as a founder, member of the board, and in regards to
investments and so on. My role has been ﬂuid but I think that has been a
beneﬁt. As long you can make it work it will always be diﬃcult being four
that have to agree on everything but it has worked out well. With the US,
when you take your best people and move them over it creates a gap when
==PAGE:102==
91
they disappear. Some of the most diﬃcult is building up the organisation.
Looking at Peakon, we were 10 people at the Christmas lunch year one,
25 people year two, 75 people year three, 165 people year four, and now
maybe 250 people. So it is a new company every year in many ways.
4. Nanna: So when you go from so many employees every year what struc-
tures and processes do you need to implement for it to succeed with sud-
denly becoming that many?
Kasper: It is the classic case where you are building the bridge while
you are running across it and you have to believe your numbers. Some of
the things we have done and maybe also some of the things we haven’t
done early enough is to build an organisation which can scale. As I said,
we hired people very early and built a broad management team with ex-
tremely talented and experienced people in the important roles. We hired
a large team. It is a graph where you have number of employees on your
y-axis and time on your x-axis then if you plot the number of people you
have 10, 25, 75, 165 it grows quite steep. Then you plot in the hire and
what they have experience for. Neil he was in a organisation with 200 peo-
ple and we hired him when we were 15 so he was hired above the graph.
Then there was Simone who was also hired above the graph and so on. If
you then on your x-axis plot time intervals year one, two, three, and four.
Then at the beginning, everyone contributes individually. We didn’t even
have a CEO. Everyone just did what they did. Year two, then you started
having a kinda ’Head of The Organisation’. Three, then we started hav-
ing director level and four, ﬁve, and now we have started to have another
layer. The challenge for us was many of the people we hired were sales,
customer successes, and so forth. But a lot of them you hire are below
the line. A lot of people come in but they are at the level they are. We
were probably too slow at identifying that nobody can go from being an
individual contributor to VP in a 250 person organisation in three years.
It is simply not possible. How do you lift the organisation? You have a
graph showing your growth and then a lot below and you will constantly
be dragged down if you don’t have a level to pull it up. So what we did
this year was hiring a new wave of very experienced people. We hired a
VP product and a VP CS, VP sales for US and so on. So you get a new
level of very experienced people coming in. It is a lot of this that goes
wrong. How do you do it while you run so fast. I know on the outside
then Peakon has been extremely fast but on the inside we would have
liked it to go even faster. There is a lot in terms of constantly building
structure that is scalable and when it goes so fast a year is a long time for
a company like ours. Half a year is also a long time.
5. Nanna: I assume you have used your own tool internally in the company.
What did you discover?
Kasper: Yes. We have found heaps of things. We are using it once a week
==PAGE:103==
92
Interview Case Study 3 - Peakon
and have a lot of data from it. It has helped us a lot. It has helped us in
terms of keeping a ﬁnger on the pulse while we have been growing. Our
company expands way more than once a year. Having a constant pulse
has been very interesting. For example, in the early days we had a ﬁxed
salary policy so you could have three kinds of salary. You could be an
intern then you would receive 13,000, you could be a graduate and then
you would receive 23,000, or you could be a senior and then you would
receive 33,000. For most of those who where seniors it was signiﬁcantly
less than what they had earned earlier but it was what we could aﬀord.
Everyone was paid the same so we didn’t have to discuss it. We were
measuring, am I fairly rewarded for my contribution to the company?
Which we actually had a high score even though people were paid a lower
salary than they would be paid else where. Because they knew we didn’t
have more money they then thought everyone gets the same and it is fair
and we are all on the same mission. It worked very well until the day when
we told the team we now have a 400 million investment and our graph just
went totally down because now everything was relative. Now it is not fair
that I’m only receiving 23,000. We got it sorted and after a few months
we had made a new salary model and it came back up again. We have
seen it with this but also other things afterwards. It is a good example of
ﬁguring out the problem when it occurs and solving it immediately. I’m
not saying we would never have known if we didn’t have Peakon, but it
would probably have taken longer to believe this actually was the cause as
it would then become a rumor. Mads is always upset about his salary or
whatever but can that also be right? Here it was very clear that everyone
was upset about their salary.
6. Nanna: What have you done in order to make people want to work for
you even though their salary was lower than what they could get else
where?
Kasper: I think it comes back to some of the core elements we spoke about
in the beginning. There is a big vision to make a change and building a
big company. There’s an interesting market and a management team that
has experience, so it becomes more credible and things become possible.
Many join us because they think it makes sense what we do, helping people
to become more engaged in their work. The vision has been a major part.
In the early days there are some warrants. You exchange you salary for
a smaller carrot. You receive a smaller salary but gain a lotto ticket so if
everything goes as we dream about then it will be really good.
7. Nanna: These values you have on your website, were they some you had
when you started Peakon and were you aware of them or is it some you
developed along the way?
Kasper: We launched these values to the team in January this year. At
the beginning, we could solve the problems by us founders. Because we
==PAGE:104==
93
had grown to the size where you have to operate with values, you need
some values you can operate from. For example, what is alright and what
is not? How do I make decisions? We didn’t think the values we had
gave us enough and it didn’t feel like Peakon. We had an oﬃcial set of
values, and then we also had what we said, so we took a step back and
talked about what is Peakon and then launched these seven new values.
The feedback was these aren’t new values, they are our values, and that
was the best response you could get. I think those values we developed
had always been there, we just hadn’t put it into words. I’m a big fan of
deﬁning these things, it really helps people. Sometimes someone takes it
too literally but that is just a part of it. Our best managers are those who
manage based on a set of values. If you a really up front with your values
then people understand why you say what you are saying. For example,
Neil in our sales team has a big thing about when you send an email, you
do it at the right time and you don’t make spelling mistakes and those
sort of things. That means the day when someone sends out an email with
a lot of spelling mistakes then he doesn’t need to say anything. Do you
think this lives up to our expectations? No I don’t. So there is a lot of
this.
8. Nanna: As the number of employees grew, how did you prepare the
current employees on the changes that were about to happen? Typically,
you hear about when you go from these diﬀerent stages, a lot of employees
can’t see themselves in the role. How have you handled that?
Kasper: That is a good question. A lot of the people who works for us
have joined because they think this type of journey is fun. In many ways,
then it is positive more and more people are coming. I think people here
are proud to be here and that new people are coming. Then there is some
personal growth in it. How can I see my role getting bigger and how can
I see myself growing? The good thing about growing so fast is you create
a lot of opportunity internally. Some people grow into a much bigger role
than what they could have gotten if they were in a normal job in a big and
settled company. It would then have taken you 10 years to go through all
these steps to become director or whatever. Here, it’s like, hey James, you
are so good, we will give you a lot of responsibility. Then there are also
some who live in the nostalgia, now it’s not the same. The organisation
changes. We have many more processes and many more people and are
building way more structured operating mechanisms now than when we
were 50. We have to otherwise we can’t operate. Some people think it is
exciting as we become more structured and scale more where others don’t.
Diﬀerent people ﬁt into the diﬀerent steps in this journey and you have to
be transparent about that.
9. Nanna: Have you had a large turn over of employees due to these things?
Kasper: No, not historically. Maybe a bit more last year. You can talk
==PAGE:105==
94
Interview Case Study 3 - Peakon
about regrettable and non regrettable. Some of it is totally fair. You have
been a big part of Peakon the ﬁrst year but that was it and what you were
good at then, doesn’t make sense anymore. I don’t know how many have
quit because of it. When this happens it is typically a shared decision. I
cannot see myself in this role or now a new manager is coming and taking
over my part due to more experience.
10. Nanna: Have the customers you targeted changed since starting?
Kasper: Yes, they have become signiﬁcantly larger. At the beginning
it was some who looked like us. Fast growing tech companies, personal
networks, and the like. Now, our largest customer has 218,000 employees.
They have deﬁnitely become way bigger.
11. Nanna: What about industry category?
Kasper: It is still relatively spread. Retail has become quite big for us.
These kind of companies are changing more than others. It is not like
we just sat down one day and said Peakon is only for retail. It probably
comes one day when you scale but it has mainly been on the size.
12. Nanna: What has been the biggest challenge for Peakon?
Kasper: The largest challenge is what we have talked about. How can
you scale your organisation in order to cope with the next stage while
you are where you are at now. It’s a simple thing, it is diﬃcult to hire a
CFO when you are very early. It changes so fast, the person you need is
a HR manager when you are 50 people and the person has maybe run a
company of 100 people. Six months later you are 110, you know? But the
other way around it is also diﬃcult to hire someone who has been running
a company of 2,000 when you were 50 people as it doesn’t ﬁt together. If
you get the right people in positions you will also make the right decisions.
A lot of it depends on the people you have.
==PAGE:106==
Appendix D
Project Plan
The initial project plan for the hand in of the ﬁrst version of the thesis.
Objective
Timeline
Write introduction
1/7/19 - 14/8/19
Write theory
1/7/19 - 14/8/19
Collection of company case data
1/7/19 - 30/9/19
Write research methodology
15/8/19 - 30/8/19
Write ﬁndings
1/10/19 - 30/10/19
Write conclusion
1/11/19 - 14/11/19
Write abstract, preface, acknowledgements, reread and rewrite
1/11/19 - 14/11/19
Prepare for hand in
15/11/19 - 30/11/19
Hand in
1/12/19
Table D.1: The project plan.
==PAGE:107==
96
Project Plan
What the actual project plan looked like after having handed in the ﬁrst version
of the thesis and then doing the extended version.
Objective
Timeline
Write introduction
1/7/19 - 30/9/19
Write theory
1/7/19 - 30/9/19
Collection of company case data
1/10/19 - 25/11/19
Write research methodology
1/9/19 - 25/11/19
Write ﬁndings
1/10/19 - 25/11/19
Write conclusion
25/11/19 - 30/11/19
Write abstract, preface, reread and rewrite
25/11/19 - 30/11/19
Prepare for hand in
25/11/19 - 30/11/19
Hand in
1/12/19
New thesis registered
20/12/19
Rewrite introduction
21/12/19 - 12/1/20
Rewrite theory
13/1/20 - 1/2/20
Rewrite research methodology
2/2/20 - 14/2/20
Rewrite ﬁndings
15/2/20 - 29/2/20
Rewrite discussion and conclusion
1/3/20 - 5/3/20
Rewrite abstract, preface
5/3/20 - 9/3/20
Prepare for hand in and reread
5/3/20 - 9/3/20
Hand in
10/3/20
Table D.2: The actual project.
