==PAGE:1==
Response reduction by tuned liquid
damper
Author:
Ana Maria Bogdan
Supervisors:
Evangelos Katsanos, Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
Rune Brincker, Professor of Structural Dynamics, Department of Civil Engineering,
DTU
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Postdoc, Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
Pernille Lysgaard Andersen, Ph.d.-student, Department of Civil Engineering, DTU
MSc. Eng. Thesis
September 02, 2019 - March 04, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is completed by Ana Maria Bogdan, student at the Technical University
of Denmark. It is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering. The project period stretches from the 2nd
of September 2019 to the 25th of March 2020 and is credited to 35 ECTS points.
The project is supervised by Professor Rune Brincker, Assistant Professor Evangelos
Katsanos, Postdoc Sandro D. R. Amador and Ph.d.-student Pernille Lysgaard An-
dersen. Their input, advice and feedback along the project is highly appreciated. A
special thank you is addressed to Pernille Lysgaard for sharing her knowledge and
always keeping her door open.
Besides the supervisors, I would like to thank the staﬀmembers of the test facilities at
the DTU Department of Civil Engineering four their assistance in the construction of
the damper and preparing of the experimental set-up. This includes Ian Rasmussen,
Brian Løvenholdt Rasmussen and Klaus Myndal. I would also like to give a thank
you to Ph.d.-student Tobias Friis for oﬀering assistance with the ﬁnite element model
and sharing knowledge related to the functioning principles of tuned liquid dampers.
Last but not least a special thank you is sent to my family and close friends for moral
support and encouragements during this project.
Ana Maria Bogdan
Kongens Lyngby, March 25, 2020
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Newly developed high strength, lightweight materials unlocked the possibility of de-
signing taller, more ﬂexible structural systems without excessive monetary burden.
Nevertheless, such structures, when exposed to lateral loads (e.g., wind- and/or wave-
induced vibrations), are often susceptible to signiﬁcant deformations. The latter is
further ampliﬁed by rather low structural damping. Along the lines, by targeting
the enhancement of damping and hence, lowering the structural vibration response
of such structures, passive damping mechanism in the form of tuned liquid dampers
(TLD) have been already investigated and proposed as an eﬀective countermeasure to
mitigate excessive vibrations. Within this framework, the current study aims to inves-
tigate the eﬀect of a liquid damper, tuned to the ﬁrst frequency of a mast structure,
exposed to natural wind loading. Speciﬁcally, the structure consists of a wooden mast
of 3.60m height with a steel girder box as a top-site. Vibration-based, triaxial sensors
with low noise-ﬂoor are utilized to acquire high quality structural response. At the
same time, the TLD, positioned in the steel girder box, is constructed as a watertight,
plexiglas tank, designed to incorporate ﬁx supports for the laser sensors. This set of
laser sensors can measure the water movement inside the tank as the whole structure is
oscillating. They are connected to the triaxial geophone sensors through an analogue
input resulting in one synchronized measuring system. A signiﬁcant set of recorded
measurements is analyzed by exploiting the quite robust Operational Modal Analysis
(OMA) theoretical background and the associated system identiﬁcation techniques.
Such an analysis scheme leads, among others, to identifying changes in the natural
frequencies and modal peaks of the structural system upon the addition of the TLD.
Additionally, the vibration response of the structure is found to be reduced due to
the eﬀect of the TLD while a quite interesting relationship is emerged between the
eﬃciency of the TLD (i.e., response reduction) and the wind speed.
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
E
Young’s modulus of elasticity, page 17
FD
Free decay, page 32
G
Shear modulus, page 17
G0
Gap between the water level during standstill conditions and the roof of the
tank, page 21
H(ω) Frequency response function, page 24
IPi
The ith input parameter to the FDD identiﬁcation technique, page 24
K
Bulk modulus, page 17
Lt
Length of TLD tank, page 10
NHan Number of data point of the Hanning window, page 24
Ndec
Decimation factor, page 24
T
Period of the mast, page 33
V600
Mean wind speed over a period of 600 s, page 39
W(ω) Frequency domain Hanning window, page 24
Y (ω) Fourier transform of displacement response, page 24
Ω
Tuning ratio, page 21
µ
Mass ratio, page 11
ν
Poisson’s ratio, page 17
A
Mode shape matrix, page 8
Gq(f) SD matrix of the modal coordinates, page 8
an
Experimental mode shape vector, page 5
q(t)
Modal coordinate column vector, page 8
y(t)
Structural response quantiﬁed in displacements, page 8
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
vi
b
Width of the damper, page 21
fs
Sampling frequency, page 30
fw
Fundamental natural frequency of a liquid, page 10
f1,x
Frequency of the ﬁrst bending mode of the mast along X direction, page 19
f1,y
Frequency of the ﬁrst bending mode of the mast along Y direction, page 19
f2,x
Frequency of the second bending mode of the mast along Y direction, page 19
f2,y
Frequency of the second bending mode of the mast along Y direction, page 19
fν
Nyquist frequency, page 30
ft
Frequency of the torsional mode of the mast, page 19
fw1.a
First frequency of the TLD determined analytically, page 20
g0
Gravitational acceleration, page 10
h0
Water height under standstill conditions, page 10
kd
Stiﬀness coeﬃcient of the damper, page 9
md
Mass of the damper, page 9
y(t)
Displacement response, page 24
DOF Degree of freedom, page 18
ζn
Damping ratio, page 5
fn
Natural frequencies, page 5
OMA Operational Modal Analysis, page 5
bn
Mode shape vector of the FE-model, page 18
γ
Ratio of liquid sloshing frequency to structural frequency, page 3
µ
Ratio of liquid mass to structural mass, page 3
FD
Frequency domain, page 7
FDD Frequency domain decomposition, page 7
NSD
non-linear-stiﬀness-damping model, page 3
TD
Time domain, page 7
==PAGE:7==
vii
Nomenclature
TLD Tuned liquid damper, page 9
TMD Tuned mass damper, page 9
CF
Correlation function, page 6
FRF
Frequency response function, page 31
FT
Fourier transform, page 7
SD
Spectral density, page 7
SVD
Singular value decomposition, page 8
WMO World Meteorological Organisation, page 31
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the art
3
3
Theoretical Background
5
3.1
Operational modal analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
Correlation functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.2
Spectral densities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.3
Identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Tuned Liquid Damper (TLD)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Structural concept and experimental setup
12
4.1
Design considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
FE-model and simulations
16
5.1
FE-model - deﬁnition and assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2
Eigenvalue analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Tuned liquid damper
20
6.1
Design considerations and construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Tuned liquid damper-experimental investigation . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2.1
Test setup and signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2.2
OMA-based identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Tuned liquid damper - Numerical investigations . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Measurement system and signal processing
28
7.1
Sensor type, number and location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.2
Measurements speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.3
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
Experimental results and discussions
32
8.1
Free decay tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8.2
OMA-based identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.3
Modal response reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9
Discussions
42
10 Conclusions and Future perspectives
44
10.1 Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:9==
ix
Contents
A Appendix
49
A.1 Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Theoretical formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B
Appendix
51
C Appendix
52
C.1 Work-ﬂow of the mounting process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:10==
Introduction 1
The number of slender, ﬂexible structural systems designed nowadays has signiﬁcantly
increased as a result of urbanisation and industrialization. Structures like bridges,
oﬀshore wind turbines, light houses or even oil platforms built using lightweight, high-
strength materials. While this type of structures can today be constructed without
too many economical restrictions, they still present a fairly high sensitivity to lateral
dynamic loadings. They are hence, prone to signiﬁcant deformations or may present
vibration levels that exceed their serviceability limits.
Several ways of controlling the lateral vibrations of a structure are available in the
form of active, passive or semi-active damping mechanisms.
One of the passive-
energy dissipating mechanisms being investigate with interest in the last years due
to its economical advantages, ease of installation and little maintenance requirements
is the Tuned Liquid Damper (TLD). This damper has similar functioning principles
to the ones of the well known Tuned Mass Damper (TMD). They both rely on an
additional mass being added to the initial system, with the main diﬀerence between
the two being the state of the added mass.
While the TMD is based on a rigid
mass, attached to the structural system trough an additional stiﬀness and a dashpot,
extracting energy trough the latter, the TLD employs a ﬂuid mass and dissipates
energy trough the sloshing movement oﬀthe liquid and its interaction with the walls
of the container.
However, the fact that the TLD utilises a ﬂuid mass leads to complex movement in-
side the tank, and consequently to complex, diﬃcult to compute connections between
the liquid mass and the walls of the container. As a result, the water movement is
described by an inﬁnite number of frequencies and its dampening eﬀect is highly de-
pendent on the excitation load, making it diﬃcult to analytically predict the inﬂuence
of the TLD on the structure.
Several numerical and experimental studies were conducted with the purpose of deﬁn-
ing the dynamic properties of a TLD and a series of reliable models have been success-
fully created. Among others, J. T. Wang [1], conducted real-time hybrid simulations
to investigate the eﬀect of TLDs on controlling seismic responses of multi-story build-
ings. J. K. Yu [2] introduces a non-linear numerical model of the TLD by modeling
it as an equivalent solid mass damper with non-linear stiﬀness and damping. Y. Fu-
jino [3] experimentally investigates the tuning parameters for shallow water TLDs.
Furthermore, K. Fujii [4] executed a study on two real structures, investigating the
response reduction as an upon installation of several TLDs in the two controlling
towers.
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
2
With that in mind, the main purpose of this study is to experimentally investigate
the eﬀect of a TLD on a structure and thus ﬁnd the answer to the following question:
Can a tuned liquid damper be eﬃciently designed and implemented to reduce wind
induced vibrations of a mast-like structure?
In order to do that, a wooden monopile-like structure is considered and a rectangu-
lar TLD is constructed to dampen its ﬁrst natural vibration mode. The damper is
designed based on the linear theory of liquid surface motion inside a tank and tuned
to the ﬁrst natural frequency of the structure. Forced random vibration tests are
conducted on the damper to experimentally determine the natural frequencies and
damping ratios of the TLD.
The monopile-like structure is chosen here as it represents a type of structure that
was vastly analysed in structural dynamics and presents well deﬁned modal responses.
The system is investigated experimentally both prior and post damper installation.
As it is desired to observe the eﬀect of the TLD under a wide range of excitation
amplitudes, each system is monitored for a period of approximately one week. The
structural response is recorded by vibration-based, triaxial sensors with low noise-
ﬂoor. They are chosen due to their low noise-ﬂoor as high quality data is required to
assure proper estimation of the modal parameters.
In the end, the modal parameters of the systems are identiﬁed using the extensive
Operational Modal Analysis theoretical background and the eﬀect of the TLD on each
vibration mode is analysed.
==PAGE:12==
State of the art 2
A container partially ﬁlled with liquide started to be investigated as a potentil Tuned
Liquid Damper in the 1980s. A. Kareem el al. [5] investigates the eﬀect of a ﬂuid
containing appendage on the dynamic properties of a multy degree of freedom system
and concludes that an optimally tuned tank could act as a tuned mass damper in
reducing the response of the building for both stationary and non-stationary base-
excitations. Subsequently, numerous numerical and experimental investigations have
been conducted with the purpose of better understanding and deﬁning this type of
passive damper.
Y. Fujono et al. [3] experimentally studied the eﬀect of a cylindrical TLD by free
vibration tests of a tall, SDOF steel structure. This study focused on parameters like
ratio of liquid mass to structural mass (µ), gap between liquid surface and roof of
the tank (G0) or ratio of liquid sloshing frequency to structural frequency (γ) and
concluded among other that high additional damping is attained for a frequency ratio
of about γ = 1, in particular for small amplitudes. Another important observation
the authors made is that the optimal G is found for a gap to liquid height ratio of
1 ≤G/h ≤1.5.
L. M. Sun et al. [6], successfully shows that the properties of a TLD can be described
by eﬀective mass, damping ratio and natural frequency through a SDOF TMD analogy
as a function of the TLD base amplitude. The study concludes that the damping ratio
is dependent on the tank shape at small amplitudes but, for large ones, the diﬀerences
become unnoticeable. D. Reed et al. [7], [8] conducts a similar study focusing on a
larger loading amplitude range and supports L .M. Sun’s ﬁnding, conﬁrming that the
damper behaves as a hardening system and pointing out that the frequency increase
is not linear.
The need of ﬁnding an theoretical formulation that can facilitate designing a TLD
is addressed by J. K. Yu et al. [2]. The study develops an eﬀective design tool that
allows the calculation of optimal tank size and water depth by the use of a non-
linear-stiﬀness-damping model with the goal of damping the peak displacement of a
structure, for a given fundamental structural frequency.
J. T. Wang et al. [1] applies real time hybrid simulations to evaluate the eﬀectiveness
of TLDs on response reduction of multi-story structures by conducting full-scale tests
of the dampers and considering the numerical parameters of ﬁve buildings to simulate
their response prior and post damper installation.
It is here concluded that the
eﬀectiveness of the TLD increases with the height of the building and is found to
be more suited for structures with low structural damping ratio. A numerical model
==PAGE:13==
2 State of the art
4
based on shallow water theory developed by J. M. Tait [9] is found to precisely predict
the eﬃciency of several structure-TLD systems with focus on tuning parameters like
height of water to length of tank ratio, mass ratio, µ and tuning ration γ. The study
concludes that the TLD can be adequately used for reducing vibrations occurred due
to random loading like wind. Furthermore, T. Wakahara [10] initiates the investigation
of vibration control of a real life structure,the Shin Yokahoma Prince Hotel, by the
use of a multi-layer circular TLD. The structural behaviour under wind loading is
investigated by a wind tunnel test that uses a scaled model of the real structures and
the urban conditions within a 300m of the building. The eﬃciency of the TLD was
then numerically simulations and it was concluded that the wind induced vibrations
can be reduced by a factor of 2.
Additionally, real life measurements of two control towers were conducted by K. Fujii
et al. [4] prior and post installation of TLDs with the purpose of reducing the vibration
response of the structures below the serviceability limits. Upon analysing the resulted
structural responses, the authors concluded that the displacement of the two towers,
on gusty days, were reduced by more than 50%.
==PAGE:14==
Theoretical
Background 3
As the physical properties of the experimental model are here identiﬁed by the use
of Operational Modal Analysis a short introduction to the basic concepts of OMA
are presented. Even though OMA presents several identiﬁcation techniques, only the
frequency domain decomposition, FDD, identiﬁcation is introduced here as it is the
one applied when estimating the modal parameters. Furthermore, the passive Tuned
Liquid Damper is also here introduced.
3.1 Operational modal analysis
Operational modal analysis (OMA) is developed around the idea that the modal prop-
erties of a system such as natural frequencies, fn, damping ratios, ζn and mode shapes,
an, can be determined from the correlation functions (CF) and spectral densities (SD)
of the structural response when subjected to random loading (e.g. ambient vibrations
or normal operating conditions). In order for the OMA to be successful and provide
valid, reasonable results, knowledge related to data acquisition systems, signal pro-
gressing techniques, random vibration concepts and application-speciﬁc simplifying
assumptions are required. In this sense, Brincker and Ventura [11] present a complex,
comprehensive guideline into the applications and methods of using OMA. The OMA
techniques utilized within this study are brieﬂy presented in the chapter along with
the most relevant principles and assumptions.
OMA is designed to evaluate the operational responses of structures under random,
white noise-like excitations with energy distribution spanning over a frequency range
wide enough to assure that all interest modes are suﬃciently excited. In other words,
broadband loading that covers the frequencies range of the modal characteristics of
the system will ensure valid identiﬁcation of the desired modal parameters. At the
same time, according to [11], exact white noise characteristics for a load are not a
mandatory requirement for the OMA to be successful.
3.1.1 Correlation functions
In principal, all dynamic response of systems obtained under random loading are
approximately Gaussian. Since a Gaussian signal can be entirely deﬁned by its cor-
==PAGE:15==
3 Theoretical Background
6
relation function (CF), without any physical information being lost, the CF becomes
a key part of OMA. The CF of a single, time varying signal describes the relation
between adjacent points in that signal, resulting in its autocorrelation function. If
several signals are being considered, the cross-correlation function of any two of them
(yi(t) and yj(t)) can be deﬁned as the mean value of the product between the two
signals, yi(t) · yj(t + τ), where the second one has a time oﬀset equal to τ. The CF
between two distinct responses is called the cross-correlation function.
In practice, when dealing with real structures, their dynamic response is described by
several data sets recorded at the same time and thus, the movement of this systems
is described by a response vector y(t) = [y1(t), y2(t), . . . , yN(t)]. The CF matrix of
this response vector can then be deﬁned as:
R(τ) = E

y(t) yT(t + τ)

=
1
T
Z T
0
y(t) yT(t + τ ) dt
(3.1)
where E denotes the expectation and T denotes the duration of the signal. As a result,
the N x N CF matrix collects all the autocorrelation and cross-correlation functions
of the N measured responses in the diagonal, respectively oﬀ-diagonal elements.
An important property is observed when looking at CF for a time lag τ = 0. In this
case, the autocorrelation is equal to the variance σ2
y as:
Ry(0) = E [y(t)y(t + 0)] = E

y(t)2
= σ2
y
(3.2)
It should be noted that, in OMA, is common practice to remove the mean of the
signal and thus, in equation Equation 3.2 E[y] = 0.
Another important property concerns the correlation when the time lag τ →∞. Two
variables that are close to each other have a higher correlation level than two variables
that are far apart leading to them being independent when τ →∞. In other words,
the CF decays as the time lag between the two signals increases. It naturally follows
that for τ →∞, a random process with zero mean will be uncorrelated and so:
lim
τ→∞Ry = 0
(3.3)
However, it should be noted that real measurements have ﬁnite length and thus, their
correlation functions will not reach 0 and present instead a noise tail. This can be
kept to a minimum by using an adequate sampling time.
3.1.2 Spectral densities
Random responses of linear systems are represented by functions of time, but an
important physical characteristic of this response is contained by their frequency
composition. For that, the Fourier analysis can be used to obtain the corresponding
frequency domain pair of almost any time function.
==PAGE:16==
7
3.1 Operational modal analysis
However, random response functions are not periodic, meaning that they can not
be described in the frequency domain by a discrete Fourier transform. To solve this
issue the correlation functions of the time series can be analyzed instead of the series
itself. Therefore, the spectral density (SD) of any data set is deﬁned as the Fourier
transform (FT) of the CF matrix as:
Gy(ω) =
1
2 π
Z ∞
−∞
Ry(τ) ei ω τ dτ
(3.4)
where Gy(ω) is a function of the angular frequency that represents the frequency do-
main pair of CF matrix and, as a consequence, they have the same size. The inverse
Fourier transform gives:
Ry(τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
Gy(ω) ei ω τ dω
(3.5)
A paramount property of the SD becomes apparent when considering τ
= 0 in
Equation 3.5 [12]:
σ2
y =
Z ∞
−∞
Gy(ω) dω
(3.6)
This states that the variance/covariance of a stationary process is equal to the area
under the spectral density of the same response. The identity can be applied for any
band width B and is known as the Parseval theorem [11]:
σ2
y = 2
Z ∞
−∞
Gy(ω) dω
(3.7)
The Fourier analysis assumes that the processed signal is periodic. However, as seen
above, the CF of a response that is limited in time presents a noise tail resulting in
bias being introduced in the frequency domain.
3.1.3 Identiﬁcation
At the center of OMA we have the identiﬁcation techniques. They provide essential
tools for estimating modal parameters and can be divided in two categories: identiﬁ-
cation in the time domain (TD), and identiﬁcation in the frequency domain (FD).
In this study, due to the fact that the analysed structure presents closely spaced
modes, the frequency domain decomposition (FDD) technique is utilized. The tech-
nique resembles the classical FD approach, presenting the advantage of a natural
modal decomposition directly by looking at the diﬀerent frequency bands where spe-
ciﬁc modes are dominant [11]. This implies that the inﬂuence of each speciﬁc mode
outside of this band has a small contribution on the results. Another noteworthy
beneﬁt of the FDD technique is that it provides good separation of noise and physical
content. This results in easy to interpret visuals that show the number of mechanical
modes present in any particular band width.
==PAGE:17==
3 Theoretical Background
8
The FDD begins with the assumption that any random response y(t) is described in
terms of mode shape vectors, ai, and modal coordinates, qi(t):
y(t) = a1 q1(t) + a2 q2(t) + . . . + an qn(t) = A q(t)
(3.8)
Here, the mode shape vectors are collected in the mode shape matrix A = [a1, a2, . . . , an]
and the modal coordinates in the modal coordinate column vector, q(t). By applying
Equation 3.1 and Equation 3.4, Brincker and Ventura show in [11] that:
Gy(f) = A Gq(f) AT
(3.9)
where Gq(f) is the SD matrix of the modal coordinates . Observing that the SD matrix
is Hermitian, its conjugate transpose, AH, is next used instead of AT. Furthermore,
if assumed that the modal coordinates are uncorrelated, the oﬀ-diagonal elements of
both the CF and the SD matrices become zero and thus, Equation 3.9 develops into:
Gy(f) = A

g2
n(f)

AH
(3.10)
where g2
n(f) denote the diagonal elements of the Gq(f), the auto spectral densities.
By looking at the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the SD matrix (which is as
already mentioned complex, Hermitian and positively deﬁned), Brinker and Andersen
[13] showed that Equation 3.10 can be expressed as:
Gy(f) = U S UH = U

s2
n

UH
(3.11)
where the singular value, s2
n, in the diagonal matrix S is interpreted as the auto
spectral density of the modal coordinates and the columns in U should be seen as
mode shapes.
A disadvantage of the FDD identiﬁcation can be here observed. The data contained
in the SD matrix presents bias due to the fact that the SVD, given by Equation 3.11,
does not completely correspond to the theoretical decomposition of the SD matrix.
For that reason, the justiﬁcation of the modal extraction is not as straightforward as
in the case of the TD identiﬁcations. Additionally, the SVD leads to geometrically
orthogonal singular vectors, while, as known from structural dynamics, they should
be in turn orthogonal with respect to mass. This bias can be kept to a minimum
by estimating the eigenvectors at a frequency line where the singular value of the SD
peaks and has the largest distance to the second singular value. For further discus-
sions and concise examples related to the topic of modal extraction with the FDD
[11] should be consulted.
==PAGE:18==
9
3.2 Tuned Liquid Damper (TLD)
3.2 Tuned Liquid Damper (TLD)
A Tuned Liquid Damper is a passive damping mechanism that employs a ﬂuid in
order to reduce vibrations. It is a rather straightforward device, consisting of a tank
partially ﬁlled with liquid. The geometry of the tank can vary from a rectangular
parallelepiped, cylindrical or annular, to almost any desired shape. The liquid that it
is ﬁlled with can also be of diﬀerent types.
With its near-zero acceleration trigger and economical advantages, the TLD is con-
sidered to be an accessible, practical and valuable tool when it comes to damping
vibrations at a low frequency.
Furthermore, since liquids are incompressible, the
TLDs will actively damp only horizontal vibrations. For the purpose of this study,
the damper is composed of a rectangular shaped tank, containing water as the damp-
ing liquid. The reasoning for this design decision is given in chapter 6 and, accordingly,
the theoretical background concerning other tank shapes or employed liquids will not
be further discussed.
The operating principle of the TLD is very similar with the one of the tuned mass
damper (TMD). Both consist of an additional mass (md), added to the structure
through suitable stiﬀness (kd) and a viscous dashpot (cd). Under the inﬂuence of
external loads, the structure vibrates and, due to structural interaction, the tuned
damper will counter-vibrate and dissipate energy through the additional dashpot. The
main diﬀerence between the TLD and the TMD is the state of the added mass. The
latter was vastly analyzed and can be precisely deﬁned using analytical formulations.
However, the fact that TLD has a liquid mass leads to complex movement inside
the tank, and consequently to complex, diﬃcult to compute connections between the
liquid mass and the walls of the tank. The motion of the water is aﬀected by the dis-
turbance of the tank and can result in linear, weakly/strongly non-linear behaviour of
liquid as depicted in Figure 3.1, depending on the intensity of the tank’s disturbance.
Figure 3.1: Generic liquid motion types in rectangular containers [14]
There are two types of movements that the liquid undergoes inside the tank and
thus exercises pressure on its walls. First, the sloshing motion, refers to the motion
of the free liquid surface and it is related to the convective pressure that the liquid
exerts on the upper region of the tank walls [14]. The second hydrodynamic pressure
==PAGE:19==
3 Theoretical Background
10
component refers to the part of the ﬂuid that moves with the same velocity as the
container and is, thus, directly proportional to its acceleration.
The sloshing motion, for excitation frequencies near resonance, manifests diﬀerently
depending on the height of liquid to length of tank ratio (h0/Lt). Two types of water
regimes are deﬁned in this sense. First, for a shallow water regime (also known as low
ﬁll), associated with containers that have a h0/Lt ≤0.15, the sloshing movement is
dominated by traveling waves that can exercise high impact pressure on the walls of
the tank. Second, deep water regime (high ﬁll) is considered for tanks with h0/Lt >
0.15. The sloshing movement in this conditions is characterised by large standing
waves.
Figure 3.2: Wave formation for shallow (left) and deep (right) water regimes [14]
The liquid motion inside a partially ﬁlled container is deﬁned by an inﬁnite number of
frequencies, with the lowest ones being of most interest when considering the response
reduction of a structure like the one analysed here.
[14].
To compute the linear
fundamental natural frequency, fw, for a TLD with a liquid height h0, and a tank of
length Lt, Lamb’s linear theory of liquid surface motion [15] is used:
fw =
1
2 π
s
π g0
Lt
tanh
π h0
Lt

(3.12)
where g0 denotes the gravitational acceleration and Lt is the dimension of the tank
in which the liquid moves.
To ensure optimal vibration reduction of the structure, the sloshing frequency of the
TLD needs to be calibrated with respect to the ﬁrst vibration mode. In that sense
fw is chosen so that it ensures the synchronization of the structural vibrations with
the ones of the absorber.
Ω= fw
f
(3.13)
Here, Ωdenotes the tuning ratio of the damper.
After extended experimental tests conducted on rectangular, circular and annular
tanks, L. M. Sun et. al. [6] propose an amplitude related formulation for the mass,
stiﬀness and damping of the TLD based on a TMD analogy. Furthermore, J. K. Yu et.
al. [2] models the TLD as an equivalent TMD with non-linear stiﬀness and damping
==PAGE:20==
11
3.2 Tuned Liquid Damper (TLD)
after enlarging the range of the loading amplitude. One of the assumptions made
by J. K. Yu [2] states that all the liquid present in the tank is active at all times,
independent of the excitation amplitude [14].
However, this is not true when the structural excitations are low. To ensure optimal
damping in such cases, the linear model developed by Housner [16] is considered here.
According to Housner, the damper can be modeled as two separate masses, one passive
mass rigidly connected to the structure (mb), and another, (ma) acting as the active
mass, connected to the structure trough stiﬀness, ka as depicted in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Housner’s linear model of the TLD [14]
The active and passive mass of the TLD are computed according to Housner as pre-
sented in Equation 3.14 while the stiﬀness coeﬃcient, ka is described by Equation 3.15.
ma = m
 
1
3
r
5
2
a
h0
tanh
 r
5
2
h0
a
!!
, mb = m tanh
 √
3 a/h0

√
3 a/h0
(3.14)
kL = 3 m2
a g h0
m a2
(3.15)
where a = Lt/2 and m denotes the total mass of the water.
Another important calibration condition ensures that enough mass is added to the
structure to extract maximum energy out of the system without adding too much
additional weight to it. This can be controlled through the mass ratio, µ:
µ = ma
mj
(3.16)
Since enough liquid has to be active under both low and high excitations, ma is here
used when computing µ instead of the total mass of the damper.
==PAGE:21==
Structural concept
and experimental
setup 4
The aim of this study is to analyse the response reduction of a structure, under wind
loading, upon the addition of a tuned liquid damper. For that reason, the structure to
be analysed should present well deﬁned vibration modes and be properly excited by
the dynamic loading conditions. Furthermore, the structure needs to ensure adequate
spacing and ﬁxing conditions for the damper to be installed. As a result, a monopile-
like structure with a stiﬀtop-site is found to satisfy these requirements and is chosen
as the subject of the investigation. The following chapter describes the design of this
mast structure along with material considerations and dimensions. It should be noted
that the design of the structure was conducted during a previous health monitoring
study carried out by Nielsen S. T. and Andersen P. L. [17] and, hence, the technical
drawings of the structure can be found attached to [17].
This structure is mounted outside in order to have natural wind loading as main
excitation force and is monitored for two weeks with the purpose of capturing the
eﬀect of the damper under a wide range of wind speeds. The exact location of the
mast and the two considered experimental setups are also described here.
4.1 Design considerations
The structure consists of a slender wooden pile, ﬁxed to a concrete block at the bottom
and having a steel girder box as a top-site. Together, these three elements create a
vertical cantilever structure, a type of structure that was vastly analysed in structural
dynamics and has a well established modal behaviour.
The body of the mast structure, the wooden pile, has a length of 3.6 m and a cross
section of 0.1 m x 0.1 m. This results in a slender, ﬂexible mast that will oscillate
under low wind excitations, but is still strong enough to carry the top-site weight and
withstand strong storms. To ensure that, load carrying capacity calculations were
conducted by Nielsen S. T. and Andersen P. L. [17] where the self weight of the steel
top-site and the wind are considered as load cases.
The top-site of the structure is a steel girder box, as seen in Figure 4.1. The box has
a rectangular base of 1 m x 0.8 m, with a height of 0.8 m and is composed of tubular
==PAGE:22==
13
4.1 Design considerations
Figure 4.1: Sketch of the steel girder box top-site. Left: without the wooden panels; Right: with the wooden panels
steel elements. The whole steel structure is welded together resulting in a stiﬀ, rigid
body that will not introduce modes of its own in the global system. Moreover, wood
panels are attached to the sides of the box to ensure a large enough area for the wind
to be captured. The placement of the wood panel can be observed in Figure 4.1. The
conﬁguration of the top-site provides ideal conditions for the damper to be placed in,
as it allows free space inside the box and has a wooden top-plate that will protect the
damper from rain.
The concrete block that acts as a foundation for the structure has a 1 m x 1 m base and
a height of 0.8 m. It is an in situ cast concrete block, constructed with 35MPa White
Portland Cement and has an approximate weight of 1.9 t. A sketch of the structure
with respect to the global coordinate system can be seen in Figure 4.2 where the
dimensions are presented in meters. At the same time, Table 4.1 sums-up the main
dimensions of the mast.
Table 4.1: Dimensions of the mast structure
H
[m]
ht
[m]
lt
[m]
wt
[m]
hb
[m]
lb
[m]
wb
[m]
3.6
0.8
1
0.8
0.8
1
1
Another important aspect in the design of the structure is represented by the connec-
==PAGE:23==
4 Structural concept and experimental setup
14
tions between the three elements. As depicted in Figure 4.4, both the pile to top-site
connection and the one between the pile and the concrete block are bolted connec-
tions. Using bolts that go all the way through the pile and steel angular proﬁles, ﬁxed
connections are created. All the connection plates and angular elements are made out
of steel with a strength class of S235, while the bolts are class A4.
Figure 4.2: Sketch of the mast structure with dimensions in [m]. From left to right: front, side and isometric view of
the mast
The structure is constructed and mounted respecting the above presented design
concept. The work-ﬂow of the mounting process is described in Appendix C.1 and
the ﬁnal structure is depicted in Figure 4.3. It should be noted that the experimental
model is placed across the street from Building 119, DTU campus Lyngby, as depicted
in Figure 4.5. This is a favorable location as the climate station that provides the
required weather information for this study is positioned on the roof of Building 119.
With the purpose of capturing the eﬀect of the TLD on the structure, the latter is
monitored both with and without the damper. This results in two experimental se-
tups, one including the TLD and one without it. Is should be noted that the tank
of the damper, designed and constructed as described in chapter 6, is ﬁxed inside the
steel box at all times. As a result, the only diﬀerence between the two setups is the
==PAGE:24==
15
4.1 Design considerations
presence/absence of water inside the tank.
Figure 4.3: Left: Experimental model of the mast;
Figure 4.4: Fixed bolted connections; Top: Pile to steel top-
site connection; Bottom: Pile to concrete block connection;
Figure 4.5: Starlit view of the experimental setup location including the placement of the structure and the placement
of the weather station
==PAGE:25==
FE-model and
simulations 5
The dynamic properties of a system can be ﬁrst described by its free vibration charac-
teristics: natural frequencies, fn, and mode shapes, an. The ﬁrst denotes the frequen-
cies at which the structure is susceptible to resonance, while the later deﬁnes the load
distributions that will excite these resonances [18]. These dynamic characteristics,
deﬁning the movement of a structure, are of critical necessity as the frequency of the
ﬁrst natural vibration mode is required when tuning the TLD. In that sense, a numer-
ical model is here created by the use of the ﬁnite element method in the structural
engineering software, Ansys - provided by ERDMedesco.
The stiﬀness and mass
matrices are extracted from the Ansys model and further analysed in Matlab .
5.1 FE-model - deﬁnition and assumptions
The design of the model starts with the geometry of the two main structural compo-
nents, the wooden pile and the steel girder box. They are deﬁned as beam elements
with appropriately assigned cross-sections and materials. The wooden pile is mod-
eled as being ﬁxed at the bottom. The dimensions of the FE-model respect the real
dimensions of the structure as presented in Chapter 4. Figure 5.1 depicts the beam
element model of the structure. It should be noted that the wooden pile is modeled
as being ﬁxed at the bottom.
To create a precise FE-model, the materials assigned to each element and their proper-
ties are of paramount importance. First, the steel box can be assumed to be inﬁnitely
stiﬀ. Because of that, and the fact that structural steel has an isotropic behaviour,
the material properties considered for the steel box are taken here in accordance with
the Eurocode[19] for steel of strength class S235.
Next, the main component of the structural stiﬀness is provided by the wooden col-
umn. It is hence necessary to accurately model the material properties of this struc-
tural element. For that reason, the values provided by the Eurocode are found here
not to be satisfying, as they are aﬀected by a set of safety coeﬃcients and thus, they
present an underestimate of the material stiﬀness. Consequently, a free vibration test
was conducted on the wooden pile with the purpose of precisely determining the value
of the Young’s modulus, E, for this particular wood beam. The test is detailed in
Appendix A. It should be note that the experimental values of E are found to be
approximately 30% higher than the ones suggested by the Eurocode.
==PAGE:26==
17
5.2 Eigenvalue analysis
Figure 5.1: FE-model created in Ansys and its position with respect to the global coordinate system. From left to
right: front, side and isometric view of the mast
An essential assumption made when creating the FE model is the representation of
the connection between the pile and the steel top-site. As seen in Chapter 4, the
two are combined by rigid bolted connections. This was found to be best simulated
numerically by a beam element that has its material properties altered. The stiﬀness
of the beam element is hence enhanced to simulate a stiﬀconnection by a signiﬁcant
increase of E. At the same time, the density of the element is calculated so that
its mass compensates for the mass of the wooden plates attached to the box. The
properties deﬁned for the three materials described above are listed in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Properties of the three materials used when modeling the structure. Here: S235 is assigned to the elements
deﬁning the steel girder box and S235adapted is assigned to the connection element between the box and the wooden
pile
Material
name
Material type
ρ
[kg/m3]
Ex
[MPa]
Ey
[MPa]
Ex
[MPa]
ν
S235
Isotropic
7.85 · 103
2.10 · 105
2.10 · 105
2.10 · 105
0.30
S235adapted
Isotropic
1.39 · 104
2.10 · 1011
2.10 · 1011
2.10 · 1011
0.30
Wood
Orthotropic
3.80 · 102
1.17 · 104
1.20 · 104
9.00 · 103
0.35
Note that the shear modulus, G, and the Bulk modulus, K, are further derived from
the known values of Poisson’s ratio, ν, and Young’s modulus E by:
G =
E
1 + ν
K =
E
3 (1 −2 ν)
(5.1)
5.2 Eigenvalue analysis
To make the problem solvable by Finite Element Method, each beam element is
divided into smaller components using a mesh size of 0.1 m. All the nodes deﬁning
==PAGE:27==
5 FE-model and simulations
18
this components have 6 degrees of freedom (DOFs): three describing the transverse
movement of the nodes along the Cartesian axis and three describing their rotation
around the same axis.
In total, the system has 3246 DOFs, out of which 6 are
constrained as the structure is considered ﬁxed at the base.
By considering free undamped conditions, the eigenvalue problem of this system can
be solved and the mode-shapes, bn, and their associated natural frequencies, fn,
are determined. If the physical properties of the system, concentrated in the mass,
stiﬀness and mapping matrices are extracted from Ansys, the Matlab implemented
function eigs can be used to solve the same eigenvalue problem of this system and
obtain the same bn and associated fn. This is done to later facilitate the addition of
the TLD to the numerical model.
Figure 5.2: Mode shapes, bn from FE-model. The mode shapes are plotted in increasing order from left to right and
from top to bottom
In the case of this structure, it can be seen from Figure 5.2 that the ﬁrst two mode
shapes are represented, as expected, by the ﬁrst bending modes along axis Y and
axis X respectively. They have a dominant contribution to the total response of the
structure. Due to the fact that the system is almost symmetric, these ﬁrst two modes
==PAGE:28==
19
5.2 Eigenvalue analysis
are very closely spaced. As it can be seen in Table 5.2, the percent increase between
the frequencies of the two modes is of only 0.83%.
The next three modes have a smaller modal participation to the total response but are
still presented here to create a more comprehensive image of the dynamic behavior of
the structure. As seen in Figure 5.2, the third mode is found to be a torsional mode
while the forth and ﬁfth one depict the second bending mode of vibration along axis
Y and X respectively.
Table 5.2: The ﬁrst 5 natural frequencies of the FE-model
fw/o,1,y,FEM
[Hz]
fw/o,1,x,FEM
[Hz]
fw/o,t,FEM
[Hz]
fw/o,2,y,FEM
[Hz]
fw/o,2,x,FEM
[Hz]
1.21
1.22
4.70
10.89
12.83
==PAGE:29==
Tuned liquid
damper 6
As mentioned in section 3.2 for the damper to extract the maximum energy out of
the system and thus, damp the desired mode, its frequency has to be tuned to the
frequency of that particular vibration mode.This, together with the second calibration
condition that ensures that enough water is active at all times in the damper, are the
principles based on which the dimensions of the tank are computed.
To conﬁrm that the resulted damper acts as expected and its analytically determined
natural frequencies match the real ones, forced random vibration tests were conducted
using a shaking table. The results of these tests, together with the design considera-
tions, are further presented in this chapter.
6.1 Design considerations and construction
The ﬁrst design consideration concerns the shape of the tank. An investigation ran
by L. M. Sun et. al. [6] shows that the energy loss in a TLD does not vary much
from a rectangular tank shape to a cylindrical or annular one. For that reason, and
because a rectangular shaped tank requires a two-dimensional ﬂuid ﬂow analysis while
a cylindrical one would demand a three-dimensional one, the former container shape
is here chosen.
A second important design decision concerns the type of liquid employed by the
damper. According to research conducted by Y.Fujino et. al. in [3], higher additional
damping is obtained from a TLD that employs low viscosity liquids. Due to that,
water is here chosen to be the damping liquid.
The TLD is here designed to damp the vibrations of the ﬁrst bending mode along the
longitudinal direction of the mast and thus, the ﬁrst frequency of the damper, fw1.a,
is tuned to fw/o,1.y,FEM:
fw1.a = Ωfw/o,1.y,FEM
(6.1)
Here fw1.a deﬁnes the analytical value of the water movement in the longitudinal
direction of the tank. The tuning ratio, Ω, is deﬁned according to the TMD analogy
as:
Ω=
1
1 + µ
(6.2)
==PAGE:30==
21
6.1 Design considerations and construction
Nevertheless, Y. Fujino et. al. remarked in [3] that the additional damping is highly
dependent on the magnitude of the structural amplitudes. The authors conclude that
the tuning ratio, Ω, is especially important when low amplitude loadings are excit-
ing the structure. When it comes to large amplitudes, the same moderate additional
damping is obtained regardless of Ω. However, for low amplitudes the highest damp-
ing percentage is obtained for Ω= 1. Thus, considering that both low and high
loading amplitudes should be properly damped, the tuning ratio is chosen as Ω= 1.
Consequently, Equation 6.1 gives:
fw.L = 1 · 1.21 Hz = 1.21 Hz
(6.3)
Next, container length and water height are chosen to satisfy Equation 3.12 and
Equation 6.3:
fw.L =
1
2 π
s
g π
0.40m tanh
0.12m π
0.40m

= 1.20 Hz
(6.4)
This leads to a h0/L ratio of 0.3 and thus, the damper is analysed under the high
water regime.
The second tuning condition presented by Equation 3.16, is used to determine the
last dimension of the tank, the width (b). This is dependent on the mass ratio, µ.
According to Fujino et al. [3], a mass ration between 1% and 4% was shown to bring
the most additional damping to the system. The damping due to TLD was shown to
increased by a factor of 2 when the mass ratio µ is increased from 1.0% to 2.0%. As a
result, µ = 3% is used here and the required active mass in the longitudinal direction
is:
ma,L = µ mj = 2.64kg
(6.5)
where mj denotes the modal mass of the mode to be damped, the ﬁrst bending mode
along y. Thus, according to Equation 3.14, for b = 0.12m condition 6.5 is satisﬁed.
Consequently, the active and passive masses and the stiﬀness coeﬃcients in the two
directions of the damper are computed and summed-up in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Analytically determined parameters of the TLD
Direction
fw,n,anal.
[Hz]
ma,n
[kg]
mb,n
kg
kn
[N/m]
Longitudinl
1.20
2.63
3.3
190.77
Transverse
2.55
0.84
5.33
217.84
Since the structure together with the damper are placed outside, the water container
is designed to incorporate a lid in order to make it watertight. A closed container can
inﬂuence the movement of the water inside the tank. For a small gap between the
liquid and the container roof, G0, the water movement can be restrained and thus,
the original energy dissipation mechanism is suppressed. Y. Fujino et. al. found
==PAGE:31==
6 Tuned liquid damper
22
that the additional damping provided by a TLD can be enhanced for a gap ratio
of 1.0 ≤G0 ≤1.50, but this enhancement is not signiﬁcantly high by comparison
with the case without a roof. As a consequence, the ﬁnal height of the TLD is set to
HTLD = 0.27m, resulting in a liquid to roof gap ratio of G0/h0 = 1.25.
This being considered, the ﬁnal design of the tank has the dimensions summed-up in
Table 6.2 while the technical drawings of it can be found in Appendix B. Figure 6.1
shows the tank of the TLD together with the 3D printed lateral supports for the laser
system used to monitor the movement of the water.
Table 6.2: TLD tank dimensions
L
[m]
b
[m]
h0
[m]
h
[m]
0.4
0.12
0.12
0.27
The water container is constructed out of plexiglass.
This is a stiﬀmaterial and
thus, assures the construction of a tank that can be bolted to the structure without
any problems, but is still light enough not to bring too much additional mass to the
system. Another advantage of this material is that it is transparent, allowing the
movement of the water to be visually observed.
Figure 6.1: Plexiglas watertight TLD tank with attached 3D printed supports for the lasers and lid
6.2 Tuned liquid damper-experimental investigation
With the purpose of experimentally ﬁnding the ﬁrst two natural frequencies of the
damper, a set of tests are conducted using a shaking table. During the tests, the
TLD tank is ﬁxed to the shaking table with screws to prevent any relative movement
between the two. The sloshing movement of the water is captured in four points by
a set of displacement laser sensors and the OMA-based identiﬁcation is conducted
using the FDD technique.
==PAGE:32==
23
6.2 Tuned liquid damper-experimental investigation
6.2.1 Test setup and signal processing
The lasers are attached to the walls of the TLD through 3D printed supports ﬁxed in
the middle of each side of the tank as depicted in Figure 6.2. Due to the measuring
limitations of the sensors, they are located 10 cm above the still liquid level, from
where they can detect crests and troughs of the water surface in the range of ±3.5cm.
These sensors record data in the range of 1-5 V by emitting a laser light that has to
be reﬂected back to them by the surface of interest. Because water does not have
a reﬂetive surface, a solution must be found for the lasers to be able to capture its
movement. Diﬀerent possibilities have been investigated by Thunbo L. F. and Ørum-
Nielsen N. C. [20] and a polystyrene plate with humid paper on top of it was found to
be the most eﬃcient one. This plate ﬂoats on top of the liquid and inhibits the water
breaking phenomenon due to its high stiﬀness. As a result, the sloshing movement of
the water becomes more linear.
Figure 6.2: Shaking table test setup for the TLD. Left: side view of the tank emphasizing the polystyrene ﬂoating
roof; Right: top view of the tank emphasizing the placement of the lasers
Two tests are conducted where random, white noise-like excitations are applied to
the damper through the shaking table. First, the excitation load is applied parallel
to the longitudinal direction of the damper in order to determine its lowest sloshing
frequency, fw.L.exp. The position of the tank is then ﬂipped, the excitation load being
now applied parallel to the transverse direction, and, thus, the TLDs second sloshing
frequency, fw.T.exp, is determined. Both excitations have a duration of T = 1500s to
assure that the dynamic behaviour of the water is properly capture.
It is common when recording measurements for OMA to sample the data with a higher
sampling frequency, fs than the required one in order to reduce noise level. Because
==PAGE:33==
6 Tuned liquid damper
24
of that, it is essential to post-process the signals and bring them to a lower fs by
decimation. This process is also known as down-sampling and can be accomplished
by FFT ﬁltering.
According to Brincker and Ventura [11], the idea behind FFT
ﬁltering is derived from the fact that any digital function has a FRF function, H(ω).
Furthermore, the eﬀect of a FRF on a time domain signal, y(t) can be determine by
multiplying the Fourier transform of the signal, Y (ω), with this FRF. Consequently,
the frequency domain ﬁltered signal (Yf(ω)) can be determined by:
Yf(ω) = H(ω) Y (ω)
(6.6)
The decimation process is here conducted by the use of function ﬀtﬁlt1 from the
Matlab toolbox OMAtoolsA1_8. This toolbox is a development of OMAtoolsA1_6,
published by Brincker and Ventura together with [11] and provided by supervisor
Rune Brincker. The function converts the recorded signal to the frequency domain by
Fourier transforms, multiplies it with a Hanning window with 50 % overlap deﬁned
in the frequency domain, W(ω), and converts the resulted ﬁltered frequency domain
signal, Yf(ω), back to the time domain, yf(y).
The two tests are recorded with a diﬀerent sampling frequency and thus are decimated
with diﬀerent decimation factors. Table 6.3 presents the initial Nyquist frequency,
fν,0, the decimation factor, Ndec, and new the Nyquist frequency, fν, for both tests.
It should be noted that the Hanning window is set to NHan = 512 data points for
both tests.
Table 6.3: Nyquist frequency before and after decimation for TLD tests
fν,0
[Hz]
Ndec
[−]
fν
[Hz]
Longitudinal
750
128
5.85
Transversal
500
64
7.81
6.2.2 OMA-based identiﬁcation
OMA-based identiﬁcation on the two ﬁltered signals, yf,L(t) and yf,T(t), is then per-
formed by the FDD technique presented in subsection 3.1.3.
First, the SD matrices are estimated using function ﬀtspec from toolbox OMA-
toolsA1_8.
This applies the Welch averaging technique using a Hanning window
with 50% overlap. The number of data points in each segment is again set to N = 512
and the singular value plots of the SD matrices are presented in Figure 6.3 for both
the longitudinal and the transverse test. The FDD identiﬁcation is performed using
function id_fdd. This requires the user to set the number of physical modes present
by setting the initial frequency guess as a ﬁrst input parameter, IP1. From here, the
mode shape is estimated as the ﬁrst singular vector at IP1 over a bandwidth of IP2
centered at IP1. The natural frequencies and damping ratios are then estimated from
==PAGE:34==
25
6.2 Tuned liquid damper-experimental investigation
0
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency [Hz]
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
dB rel. to m
Singular values of spectral matrix
0
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency [Hz]
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
dB rel. to m
Singular values of spectral matrix
Figure 6.3: Singular value decomposition of the SD matrix of the TLD responses. Left: response produced by excitation
in the longitudinal direction of the tank; Right: response produced by excitation in the transverse direction of the
tank
the auto-CF that has IP3 points in the time domain. The rest of the CF is considered
to be a noise tail. These three input parameters are depicted in Figure 6.4 for iden-
tiﬁcation of the ﬁrst water sloshing frequency. The input parameters used for both
identiﬁcations and the identiﬁed frequencies are then summed-up in table Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Input parameters required for identiﬁcation with FDD and estimated modal parameters of the TLD
Excitation
direction
Input param.
Modal param.
IP1
[Hz]
IP2
[Hz]
IP3
-
fw,n,exp.
[Hz]
fw,n,anal.
[Hz]
∆fw
-
Longitudinal
1.19
1.5
100
1.205
1.199
0.50%
Transversal
2.44
1.5
100
2.494
2.55
-2.22%
As already mentioned, the polystyrene ﬂoating-roof forces the water behaviour to be
more linear and thus brings it closer to the theoretical assumptions. As a result, the
FDD estimates of the sloshing frequencies, fw,n,exp., accurately align with the analyt-
ical ones, fw,n,anal., showing a percentage diﬀerence of only 0.50 −2.22 %. However,
the same ﬂoating-roof induces additional frequency in the system though the contact
surfaces between the plate and the walls of the tank and, therefore, the identiﬁed
damping estimates do not show the eﬀect of the water movement alone. To reduce
the contact surface between the two, sewing pins are attached at the end of each side
of the ﬂoating roof before the damper is attached to the structure.
==PAGE:35==
6 Tuned liquid damper
26
Figure 6.4: Identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst water sloshing frequency. Left: Singular value of the spectral matrix with IP1
depicting the initial frequency guess and IP2 the band width; Right: Autocorrelation function with IP3 denoting the
noise tail cut-oﬀ
6.3 Tuned liquid damper - Numerical investigations
To create an initial idea on the eﬀect the TLD has on the mast structure this is at-
tached to the FE-model through the analytically computed active and passive masses
and stiﬀness coeﬃcients. These values, computed in section 6.1 and summarized in
Table 6.1 are added to the initial mass and stiﬀness matrices (M and K) of the FE-
model. The new M and K matrices are obtained as illustrated below. Here i and
j denote the DOF of the node in the FE-model where the mast is connected to the
steel box, in the longitudinal, respective the transverse direction of the structure.
M =


m11
0
· · ·
0
0
0
m22
· · ·
0
0
...
0
· · ·
mnn
0
0
0
· · ·
0
ma,L
0
0
· · ·
0
0
ma,T


(6.7)
K =


k11
· · ·
0
0
· · ·
0
0
...
0
· · ·
kii + kL
0
· · ·
−kL
0
0
· · ·
0
kjj + kT
· · ·
0
−kT
...
0
· · ·
knn
0
0
0
· · ·
−kL
0
· · ·
0
kL
0
0
· · ·
0
−kT
· · ·
0
0
kT


(6.8)
==PAGE:36==
27
6.3 Tuned liquid damper - Numerical investigations
By considering free undamped conditions, the eigenvalue problem of the new system
can be solved and the mode-shapes and their associated natural frequencies are de-
termined. Figure 6.5 depicts the ﬁrst six modes of the new system. It can be noticed
that ﬁrst two modes are again the ﬁrst bending modes of the structure, with their
frequencies being slightly changed by comparing to the ones of the mast without the
damper. Then, the third and forth modes present no movement now, suggesting that
those would be vibration modes of the damper. And last, the torsional mode and the
second bending modes maintain the same frequency after the addition of the TLD,
implying that the damper does not aﬀect them.
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 1.2
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 1.21
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 1.43
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 2.12
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 4.7
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 10.98
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
0
2
1
Z
1
f = 12.83
X
4
0
Y
0
-1
-1
Figure 6.5: Mode shapes, bn from FE-model after the addition of the TLD and their associated frequencies. The
mode shapes are plotted in increasing order from left to right and from top to bottom
==PAGE:37==
Measurement
system and signal
processing 7
As mentioned already, the aim of this study is to experimentally investigate the re-
sponse of a mast structure pre- and post- installation of a TLD. For that to be
accomplished, the dynamic response of the structure must be captured and its ﬁrst
ﬁve vibration modes should be clearly identiﬁed. In that sense, the number of utilised
sensors, their type and placement, as well as adequate measurement speciﬁcations and
data processing tools represent parameters that must be carefully chosen to assure
high quality data in all data sets.
7.1 Sensor type, number and location
Judging by the analytically computed natural frequencies and mode shapes presented
in chapter 5, four three-axial sensors placed in the top-site of the mast structure
are found to be suﬃcient for capturing the operational response of the structure at
all times. To assure proper separation between the two closely spaced ﬁrst bending
modes of the structure, the sensors are placed on the steel top-site box as depicted
in Figure 7.1. Each sensor records the translation movement of the structure and has
its own local coordinate system as presented in Figure 7.2.
According to Brincker and Ventura [11], the minimum number of channels needed for
a successful measuring campaign should be greater than the rank of the problem, Rp.
Here the rank of the problem is deﬁned as the number of closely spaced modes present
in a frequency band (two in the case of this mast structure) plus the number of noise
sources. It is thus safe to say that the four 3D sensors, resulting in 12 monitoring
channels, provide suﬃcient input data for OMA to be successful.
Structural responses are expected to be quite weak and thus, a high quality measure-
ment system, that provides a good signal-to-noise ratio must be utilized for OMA to
properly identify the modal parameters of the ﬁve modes. For that reason, geophone
type sensors are chosen. This type of sensors convert the relative velocity of a spring
wire coil moving within the ﬁeld of a permanent magnet to voltage. No power is
required for these sensors to create output as the signal is produced exclusively by
coil movement [11]. The velocimeters are manufactured by CAP2 Aps and present
==PAGE:38==
29
7.1 Sensor type, number and location
Figure 7.1: Location of the four sensors on the top-site
Figure 7.2: Schematic representation of the translational
DOFs of each sensor
an analogue-to-digital converter that utilises the sigma-delta technology. Because of
that, the sensors provide measurements with a low noise-ﬂoor.
The geophone sensors come together with a base station that controls the data logging.
The four sensors, together with the data logging system are connected in a chain, are
referred to as the SenseNet system. The base station together with one sensor can be
seen in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Geophone sensor together with the base station
==PAGE:39==
7 Measurement system and signal processing
30
7.2 Measurements speciﬁcations
The measurement speciﬁcations concern parameters like the number of measurements
to be conducted, their frequency range, the length of each measurement and the fre-
quency at which the data should be sampled. These parameters are further discussed
in this section and the utilised values are summed-up in Table 7.1.
The frequency range of the measurements refers to the lower and upper limit of the
recorded frequencies and assured that the ﬁve modes of interest are captured during
all measurements.
For that, according to [11], the following condition should be
respected:
fν > 1.2 fmax
(7.1)
Here, the Nyquist frequency (fν) describes the upper limit of the frequency range and
fmax denotes the frequency of the highest mode to be captured. As deﬁned by the
principles of the Fourier transform, the Nyquist frequency is expressed in terms of the
sampling rate of measurements, fs, as:
fν = fs
2
(7.2)
The sampling rate is measured in samples-per-second and represents the number of
data samples to be recorded in a second:
fs =
1
∆t
(7.3)
It is common for measuring systems to sample with a standard frequency of 50 or 100
Hz, and consequently, fs = 100 Hz is here chosen for all measurements. According to
the FE-model presented in chapter 5 the highest frequency that needs to be identiﬁed
lays below 15 Hz. This means that fν = 50 Hz, given by a sampling rate of 100 Hz
respects condition 7.1. However, this sampling frequency is higher than the minimum
required value and thus leads to oversampling.
This can result in a lower noise-
ﬂoor level and hence to clear identiﬁcation of the modal parameters, but it requires
additional processing of the data in the form of decimation.
Next, Brincker and Ventura [11] give a criteria for setting the minimum test duration
of a measurement, T ≥, 10/(ζ fmin). This relation is dependent on the damping ratio
of the model, ζ. As the damping is only estimated in the FEM model, the exact value
of minimum T can not be reliably determined analytically. Instead, preparatory test
measurements are conducted and a ﬁnal measurement duration of T = 600 s was
found to be suﬃcient for proper identiﬁcation.
This measurement duration is also chosen due to the fact that, when dealing with
horizontal wind velocity, it is common to average its speed over a period of 10 min-
utes. In practice, any time duration can be considered for picturing the mean value of
the wind speed. However, short term time spans can lead to unstable average values
with larger variance, and, hence, make it diﬃcult for one to know if the acquired data
does in fact realistically depict the truth or not. According to the guideline from the
==PAGE:40==
31
7.3 Signal processing
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) [21] a 10-minutes average is considered
standard time duration for estimating the mean wind speed. This period is found to
be long enough to smooth over short term wind turbulence that naturally occur and
yet short enough to be viewed as a period of almost constant wind-ﬂow.
Last, but not least, with the aim of capturing the structural response during diﬀerent
loading conditions with diﬀerent intensities, the structure was monitored for six days
pre-installation of the damper and for another seven post-installation. The total num-
ber of data sets can be seen in Table 7.1 together with a summary of the measurement
speciﬁcations.
Table 7.1: Overview of measurement speciﬁcations and total recorded data sets
fs
[Hz]
fν
[Hz]
T
[s]
no. of data sets
w/o TLD
no. of data sets
w/ TLD
100
50
600
110
158
7.3 Signal processing
To obtain meaningful information from the recorded data sets, a number of signal
processes are applied.
First, the raw signal is converted to voltage by the following relation provided by the
documentation of the SenseNet system [22]:
sV
=
5 sraw
gain · 233
(7.4)
Here, gain = 1 and represents the ampliﬁcation factor of the signal. As it is common
to do in OMA, the mean value of the signals is removed.
The main disadvantage of the geophone sensors is the fact that their natural frequen-
cies ranges from 4.2-4.6 Hz.In other words, their eigenfrequency lays in the structural
frequency range of interest, implying that the recordings made by the sensors around
4.2 −4.6 Hz are disturbed. However, this can be corrected by inverse ﬁltering of the
signal with the use of the frequency response function (FRF) of the geophones, Hgeo.
Second, the voltage signal is converted to velocity by division with the sensor sensitiv-
ity constant, cgeo and converted to displacements by integration. All these corrections
are done by:
S0 =
Sv
cgeo Hgeo
WHan
Hint
(7.5)
Here, WHan is a Hanning window, and Hint denotes the FRF used for integration in
the frequency domain. These corrections are implemented in the Matlab function
geocor2, developed and provided by supervisor Rune Brincker.
Finally, to prevent the cross-talk between the three signals provided by one sensor the
following correction is applied, where, MCT denotes the cross-talk matrix:
s = s0 MCT
(7.6)
==PAGE:41==
Experimental results
and discussions 8
In order to investigate the eﬀect of the TLD on this mast structure and quantify
the structural response reduction of the ﬁrst longitudinal bending mode of the mast,
a series of analysis are performed on the date sets captured pre- and post-damper
installation as presented in chapter 7.
As the TLD is designed to actively damp only one of the structural vibration modes of
the mast, clear identiﬁcation of the modal parameters is required for both systems to
allow the estimation of the modal response. These modal parameters are determined
with the help of the OMA’s frequency domain decomposition (FDD) technique from
all recorded data sets.
However, as seen from the FE-model, the two ﬁrst horizontal bending modes, domi-
nating the total response of the structure, are very closely spaced. Because of that,
identifying their mode shapes through OMA alone can be challenging without an ini-
tial overview of the expected dynamic behaviour. This ﬁrst insight is here obtained
by performing a set of simple, free decay tests that allow the estimation of natural
frequencies and damping ratios of the ﬁrst two horizontal bending modes.
Furthermore, it is essential that the damper has a positive impact on the structure
independent on the intensity of the wind excitation. For that reason, information
related to the wind load is utilised to determine a modal response to wind speed
relation.
8.1 Free decay tests
The free decay (FD) tests are conducted both on the structure without the damper
and on the structure with the damper. They are accomplished by manually applying
an initial displacement to the top-site of the mast and releasing it to free vibrate until
stationary. The structure presents geometrical symmetry about the two horizontal
axis of reference: the x axis, referred to from here on as the transverse axis, and y
axis, referred to as the longitudinal one. As the FE-model shows that the ﬁrst two
bending modes follow these axis, the initial excitations of the FD tests are applied in
the longitudinal respectively transverse direction of the mast.
The structural response is recorded by the 12 channels of the SenseNet system, they
are processed as described in section 7.3 and integrated to displacements. To ensure
==PAGE:42==
33
8.1 Free decay tests
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
x0 [m]
Node 0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
y0 [m]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
z0 [m]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.05
0
0.05
x0 [m]
Node 0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.05
0
0.05
y0 [m]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
-0.05
0
0.05
z0 [m]
Figure 8.1: Free decay response of the mast in displacements, recorded by Node 0 pre- damper installation. Left:
Excitation applied along the y-axis of the mast; Right: Excitation applied along the x-axis of the mast
consistency, the tests are repeated ﬁve times in each direction of the mast.
As expected, the maximum response is recorded in the direction of the excitation.
However, is noticed that a response of smaller amplitude occurs in the orthogonal
direction, showing that the initial excitation does not perfectly follow one of the axis.
The recordings show smooth free decays of the structure, without noise input or incon-
sistencies, and thus, it can be concluded that the SenseNet system provides reliable
measurements and the data processing techniques converts them into meaningful in-
formation, representing the physical behaviour of the structure.
Figure 8.1 presents the response of the mast in displacements, y(t), prior to TLD
installation, as recorded by Node 0 for one longitudinal and one transverse test. All
four sensors recorded similar responses during all ﬁve repetitions of the tests, and,
thus, the presented ﬁgure is found representative for all data recordings.
An initial guess of the natural frequencies in the two directions is then found by
considering the inverse proportionality between the period, T, and frequency, f =
1/T. Here, the period of the mast is identiﬁed by measuring the time between every
second zero crossing of the free response as depicted in Figure 8.2. As a result, the
natural frequency in the longitudinal direction of the mast is found to be fw/o,1y,FD =
1.14 Hz and the one in the transverse direction fw/o,1x,FD = 1.11 Hz.
The two
frequencies are determined by averaging over the results from all ﬁve conducted tests.
5
10
15
Time [s]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
y0 [m]
Figure 8.2: Zero crossings and amplitude peaks of the FD response when excitation in the longitudinal direction of
the mast is applied (y.direction)
==PAGE:43==
8 Experimental results and discussions
34
It is noticed that the ﬁrst two bending modes have switch places. In other words, the
lowest natural frequency is now associated with the transverse bending mode and not
with the longitudinal one as suggested by the FEM simulations. This direction shift
occurs due to asymmetric connection between the wooden-pile and the steel girder-
box. If the FEM models simulates this connection as ﬁxed, for the real experimental
setup the two elements are joined by bolted connections executed using steel angular
elements on only two sides of the wooden mast (see Figure 4.4). This results in a
bigger stiﬀness value along y and thus, in a higher natural frequency in this direction.
The damping ratio of the two modes is also computed by logarithmic decrement
between two adjacent amplitude peaks by:
ζ =
δ
2 π =
ln

aj
aj+1

2 π
(8.1)
This results in a ﬁrst damping ratio estimate of ζy,FD = 1.4 % for the longitudinal
direction and of ζx,FD = 1.2 % for the transverse one.
Additionally, FD tests are conducted upon addition of the TLD. The response in this
case is presented in Figure 8.3. An error occurred during the data processing did not
allow for the measurements to be converted from voltage to velocity. This error was
later found to be related to the sampling frequency with which the measurements
were recorded. However, the response is still present here as it shows that the damper
inﬂuences the structure mostly in the longitudinal direction as intended.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.5
0
0.5
x0 [V]
Node 0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.5
0
0.5
y0 [V]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
z0 [V]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.5
0
0.5
x0 [V]
Node 0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.5
0
0.5
y0 [V]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
z0 [V]
Figure 8.3: Free decay response of the mast in voltage, recorded by Node 0 post- damper installation. Left: Excitation
applied along the y-axis of the mast; Right: Excitation applied along the x-axis of the mast
The eﬀect of the TLD in the y direction results in a modulated beat decay of the
response instead of an exponential one (see Figure 8.3). It is common knowledge in
structural dynamics that this beat phenomena occurs when two frequencies are close
to each other. S. K. Yalla et al. [23] investigates the beat phenomena in coupled
structure-liquid damper systems and concludes that phenomena occurs due to the
coupling term that appears in the mass matrix of the combined system.
==PAGE:44==
35
8.2 OMA-based identiﬁcation
8.2 OMA-based identiﬁcation
Long term measurements of the structure with and without the TLD are performed as
described in section 7.2. These measurements are here analysed in order to determine
the exact modal behaviour of the structure trough OMA. The identiﬁcations are con-
ducted with the FDD technique, considering all 12 signals captured by the SenseNet
system. The signals are inverse-ﬁltered, converted to velocity and then integrated to
displacements by Equation 7.5 as described in section 7.3.
As mention in section 7.2 all data sets are recorded with a sampling frequency of
fs = 100 Hz, leading to fν = 50 Hz. According to Brincker and Ventura [11], for the
modal parameters to be properly estimated the frequencies of the identiﬁed modes
should lay outside of the ﬁrst and last 10 % of the Nyquist frequency. Because the
ﬁrst bending modes of the structure are found around 1.10 −1.25 Hz and, thus, they
are close to the edge of the spectrum, keeping them out of the recommended 10 %
limitation requires a fν below 11 Hz. This however, results in a spectrum that does not
include the second bending modes (fw/o,2y,FEM = 10.89 and fw/o,2x,FEM = 12.83).
For that reason, the estimation of the ﬁve modes is made in two separate groups, with
diﬀerent decimation factors. First, the signals are down-sampled with a factor of 8
resulting in fν = 6.25. This allows the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst bending modes of
the mast together with the torsional one. Further, for the estimation of the second
bending modes the signals are not decimated. Instead, a Hanning window is applied
in this case in order to force the ends of the signals to approach zero and hence,
minimize the edge eﬀect contaminating the power spectrum. It should be noted that
this approach was followed both when analysing the structure pre-installation of the
TLD and post.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Frequency [Hz]
-180
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
dB rel. to m
Singular values of spectral matrix
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency [Hz]
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
dB rel. to m
Singular values of spectral matrix
Figure 8.4: Singular value of the SD matrix of the structural response of the mast without the damper. Left: as
applied in the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst bending modes and the torsional one; Right: as applied in the identiﬁcation
of the second bending modes
==PAGE:45==
8 Experimental results and discussions
36
The singular value decomposition plots of the SD matrices pre-installation of the
damper are depicted in Figure 8.4. They are estimated using function fftspec from
the Matlab toolbox OMAtoolsA1_8. The vibration modes and the poles are es-
timated by FDD as described in subsection 3.1.3, implemented in function id_fdd
that uses the Welch averaging technique with a Hanning window of 50 % overlap. As
already described in subsection 6.2.2, a set of input parameters are required for the
identiﬁcation to be performed. This, together with the resulted modal parameters are
presented in Table 8.1.
The power SV decomposition of the SD matrix shows the number of physical modes
present in a speciﬁc frequency band. In the case of the mast without the damper,
depicted in Figure 8.4, when looking at the SVD plot of the SD computed for the
decimated signals, three peaks can be identiﬁed. Two in the 1.00 −1.30 Hz range,
peaking almost one on top of the other, showing the presence of two closely spaced
structural modes, and the third around 2.15 Hz representing a torsional mode. Be-
cause the ﬁrst two bending modes are so closely spaced the SVD can only identify the
presence of one of them in the ﬁrst SV line, the inﬂuence of the other one being seen
in the second SV line.
Next, from the SVD plot of the SD matrix computed without decimating the signal,
the peaks of the second bending modes can be seen around 9.50 Hz and 12.20 Hz. It
can also be noticed that these two modes are not as excited as the ﬁrst ones (the
second bending modes have peaks around −65 dB while the ﬁrst ones peak at almost
−30 dB).
Table 8.1: Input parameters for the FDD identiﬁcation technique and corresponding identiﬁed natural frequencies
(fw/o.,exp) and damping ratios (ζw/o.,exp) from the structural response recorded pre- damper installation
Mode:
Input parameters
Identiﬁed parameters
IP1
[Hz]
IP2
[Hz]
IP3
[-]
fw/o,n,exp
[Hz]
ζw/o,n,exp
[%]
First bending mode - x
1.14
0.15
100
1.14
0.90
First bending mode - y
1.15
0.10
100
1.15
0.70
Torsional mode
2.12
0.30
100
2.11
1.07
Second bending mode - x
9.50
1.00
100
9.34
0.80
Second bending mode - y
12.10
1.00
100
11.86
0.70
The singular value plots of the structural response post- damper installation are il-
lustrated in Figure 8.5. The third singular value in this case is not ﬂat, suggesting
that three physical modes are now present in the 1.00 −1.35 Hz frequency band. In
other words, the longitudinal bending mode is now split into two modes, one on each
side of the transverse bending mode, clearly depicting the eﬀect of the damper on
the structure. Additionally, it can also be noticed that the damper is not perfectly
calibrated to the desired mode, as a diﬀerence of about 8 dB is observed between the
ﬁrst and the second peak. This miss-calibration can be motivated by the fact that
the TLD is tuned to the frequency of the longitudinal bending mode determined by
==PAGE:46==
37
8.2 OMA-based identiﬁcation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Frequency [Hz]
-180
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
dB rel. to m
Singular values of spectral matrix
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency [Hz]
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
dB rel. to m
Singular values of spectral matrix
Figure 8.5: Singular value of the SD matrix of the structural response of the mast with the damper. Left: as applied
in the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst bending modes and the torsional one; Right: as applied in the identiﬁcation of the
second bending modes
the FE-model, fw/o,1y,FEM = 1.21 Hz, which diﬀers from the frequency of the ex-
perimental model, fw/o,1y,exp = 1.15 Hz. Further calibration of the damper can be
performed until a plateau is observed between the two peaks.
Again, to describe the structural behaviour FDD identiﬁcation is performed using the
input parameters presented in Table 8.2, resulting in the identiﬁed natural frequen-
cies, fw.,n,exp, and damping ratios, ζw.,n,exp summed-up in the same Table.
Table 8.2: Input parameters for the FDD identiﬁcation technique and corresponding identiﬁed natural frequencies,
fw.,exp, and damping ratios, ζw.,exp, from the structural response recorded post- damper installation
Mode:
Input parameters
Identiﬁed parameters
IP1
[Hz]
IP2
[Hz]
IP3
[-]
fw.,n,exp
[Hz]
ζw.,n,exp
[%]
First bending mode - x
1.08
0.06
100
1.05
0.08
FST bending mode - y
1.11
0.07
100
1.09
0.04
Damper mode
1.27
0.10
100
1.24
1.20
Torsional mode
2.12
0.35
100
2.09
1.30
Second bending mode - x
9.38
2.00
100
9.47
0.90
Second bending mode - y
12.3
2.00
100
12.28
0.80
The modal parameters are estimated by FDD from all the recorded measurements
sets. The spectra presented in Figure 8.4 and Figure 8.5 are representative for the
two setup situations and the poles summed-up in Table 8.1 and Table 8.2 are obtained
by averaging over all the identiﬁed values. Figure 8.6 shows the frequencies of the
ﬁrst horizontal bending modes pre- damper addition in blue, both oscillating around
==PAGE:47==
8 Experimental results and discussions
38
almost the same value and being closely spaced and then, the splitting of the longitu-
dinal bending mode into the two similar modes upon damper installation. It can also
be seen that the frequency of the ﬁrst transverse bending mode is slightly decreased.
This can be a result of the additional mass brought to the system by the TLD. At
the same time, both Figure 8.6 and Figure 8.7 show the estimated frequencies from
all data sets emphasising that their identiﬁed values are mostly constant, with only
little oscillations around the mean values.
Figure 8.6: Identiﬁed frequencies of the ﬁrst bending modes with the TLD (red) and without the TLD (blue), along
all data sets showing, the splitting of the bending mode along y
Figure 8.7: Identiﬁed frequencies of the second bending modes and the torsional modes along all data sets. Mast
without the TLD (blue) and mast with the attached TLD (red)
8.3 Modal response reduction
Since the purpose of this study is to damp the vibrations of the ﬁrst bending mode
in the longitudinal direction of the mast, the total response of the structure, y(t), is
decomposed here into modal responses of the ﬁrst ﬁve vibration modes. This is done
in order to analyse the eﬀect of the TLD on each vibration mode. The total response
of the structure can be written as:
y(t) = A · q(t)
(8.2)
==PAGE:48==
39
8.3 Modal response reduction
where q(t) denotes the modal coordinates of the system. The mode shape vectors,
identiﬁed through FDD and collected in the mode shape matrix A have a tendency
of mixing with each other, especially if they are closely spaced. It is thus important
to ensure that they are properly separated. This separation can be accomplished
by modal alignment and it requires a reference towards which the modes can be
aligned to. For the purpose of this study, the mode shapes of the FE-model, B, are
chosen as the reference modes as they are not aﬀected by structural imperfections
or measurement noise. Consequently, the OMA identiﬁed mode shape vectors, A,
are aligned to the FE-model ones by considering that any FEM mode shape can be
described as a linear combination of A:
B ≈A · t
(8.3)
where t denotes the transformation vector and can be estimate by:
ˆt = A+ · B
(8.4)
It should be noted that here, A is ﬁrst taken as A = [a1bm,x, a1bm,y, at] and then as
A = [a2bm,x, a2bm,y] in order to compute the alignment in two groups. As a result,
the aligned mode shapes, AB = Aˆt, can be inserted in Equation 8.2 and the modal
coordinates, q(t), can be estimated as:
ˆq(t) = A+
B y(t)
(8.5)
Finally the response of the mast associated with mode i is computed:
ym,i(t) = ai qi
(8.6)
The modal response, ym,i(t), determined from each data set are quantiﬁed in terms
of root mean squares (RMS) and related to the mean value of the wind speed over
a time period of 10 min, V600. The wind data is provided by the Solar Thermal Re-
search Group at DTU’s department of Civil Engineering and, due to the fact that the
weather station is located in proximity to the experimental setup (see Figure 4.5), it
is assumed that the wind characteristics at the two locations are correlated. More
speciﬁcations related to the weather station can be found in [24].
Figure 8.8 depicts the modal response of structure associated with the ﬁrst bending
modes along the two horizontal axis of symmetry of the structure, x and y, as a
function of wind speed squared, before and after damper installation.
These two
horizontal vibration modes of the mast appear as a pair of closely spaced modes due
to the quasi-axisymmetric structural form. This pair of modes has a high contribution
to the total response of the system. As it can be seen from Figure 8.8, the recorded
data is quite scattered and the ﬁtted regression line shows a wind speed to modal
response relation that has a correlation of about 55 % −64 %. Various factors can
aﬀect this correlation and the most relevant one is the diﬀerent location of the weather
data relative to the actual experimental setup. While these two are close enough to
==PAGE:49==
8 Experimental results and discussions
40
Figure 8.8: Modal response of the structure as a function of mean wind speed, V600, squared, before and after the
addition of the TLD. Left: Modal response of the ﬁrst bending mode along the transverse direction of the mast; Right:
Modal response of the ﬁrst bending mode along the longitudinal direction of the mast
allow the assumption of a constant wind ﬂow between the two, it is obvious that
their diﬀerence in altitude also plays an important role here. If the wind ﬂow at the
weather station is mostly constant, not interrupted by nearby trees or taller buildings
not the same can be said about the mast structure.
Nevertheless, Figure 8.8 clearly shows that the TLD is actively extracting energy
out of the system when the ﬁrst longitudinal bending mode is excited and does not
inﬂuence almost at all the dynamic behaviour of the structure in relation to the ﬁrst
transverse bending mode. In other words, the TLD is found to eﬃciently dampen the
mode it is tuned to and have no impact on the others. A response reduction factor
of 1.84 is recorded for the ﬁrst longitudinal bending mode, while the transverse one
is 1.05.
Figure 8.9: Torsional modal response of the structure as a function of mean wind speed, V600, squared, before and
after the addition of the TLD
The eﬀect of the damper on other three higher modal responses, the torsional one and
the two second bending modes, is also evaluated. Response reduction factors ranging
from 1.4 for the torsional mode and 1.5 for the longitudinal second bending mode are
recorded. It should be noted that these three higher modes have a small contribution
==PAGE:50==
41
8.3 Modal response reduction
Figure 8.10: Modal response of the structure as a function of mean wind speed, V600, squared, before and after the
addition of the TLD. Left: Modal response of the second bending mode along the transverse direction of the mast;
Right: Modal response of the second bending mode along the longitudinal direction of the mast
to the total response of the structure. A maximum displacement of about 4 · 10−3 m
is registered for the modal response of the ﬁrst bending modes, a displacement 10
times higher than the maximum 4 · 10−4 m, recorded for the three higher modes.
==PAGE:51==
Discussions 9
Trough the conducted study it is shown that a Tune Liquid Damper can be eﬀectively
utilised to reduce vibrations of a structure being exited by wind with mean amplitudes
ranging from 1.5 (m/s)2 to 77 (m/s)2, resulting in a reduction factor of 1.84.
The TLD is found eﬃcient considering that, as seen from Figures 8.8, 8.9 and 8.10,
it has a positive impact on the modal responses of the mast structure independent
on the amplitude of the excitation load. The damper extracts the most energy out
of the system when the ﬁrst longitudinal bending mode of the mast is exited and has
almost no impact on the transverse bending mode. The recorded reduction factor of
1.84, being the equivalent of a 46% reduction, agree with the previous ﬁndings of K.
Fujii et al. [4]. K. Fujii et al. monitored two control towers pre- and post- damper
installation and found a response reduction of 50% of the longitudinal displacements
of the towers and of about 30% in the transverse one. Comparing to this results,
the transverse displacement of the here investigated mast are only reduced by 5%.
This diﬀerence occurs because the two studies employ tanks with diﬀerent shapes,
accordingly resulting in diﬀerent water movement inside the containers. While K.
Fujii utilised cylindrical shaped containers the present study employs a rectangular
tank, designed to have the longitudinal direction as the main direction of the water
movement.
The results from the singular values plots of the SD matrix, pre- and post- damper
installation (Figure 8.4 and Figure 8.5), show the eﬀect of the TLD on the ﬁrst
longitudinal mode of the structure. The interaction between the two, results in the
splinting of the structural mode into two modes with similar mode-shapes, each on one
side of the transverse bending mode. This mode splitting complies with the ﬁndings
of L. F. Thunbo and N. C. Ørum-Nielsen [25] that showed that the eﬀect of a TLD
on a structure is similar to the one of a TMD, both resulting in splitting of the initial
structural mode.
The same SV plot of the structure with the TLD shows a diﬀerence of about 8 dB
between the two peaks deﬁning the split of the initial longitudinal bending mode. Ac-
cording to the calibration theory behind the TMD the damper is optimally designed
when a plateau is fount between the two peaks. As commonly done in Civil Engi-
neering, the damper was here tuned to the natural frequency of the mast structure
determined numerically, by the FE-model. This frequency is slightly higher than the
real frequency of the experimental model and hence, the occurred miss-tuning of the
TLD can be justiﬁed.
The analytical value of the TLD’s frequency, computed assuming Lamb’s linear theory
==PAGE:52==
43
of liquid surface motion [15], is in accordance with the one identiﬁed experimentally
trough random vibration tests. This can be motivated by the presence of the ﬂoating-
roof on the surface of the water.
Added to the damper for measuring purposes,
the polystyrene plate tampers with the movement of the water inside the container,
prevents the water breaking phenomena or other turbulence in the ﬂuid from arising,
and thus, brings the movement of the liquid closer to the analytical assumptions.
Furthermore, the mass and stiﬀness parameters of the damper are computed based
on a TMD analogy according to Housner’s model [16] and are proven to properly
deﬁne the eﬀect of the TLD on the structure to a certain degree. Both the FE-model
and the experimental structure show that the peak of the torsional mode stays at
approximately the same value and the splitting of the ﬁrst longitudinal bending mode
happens on both side of the transverse one. However, the FE-model suggests that the
frequency of the ﬁrst transverse bending mode is not aﬀected by the damper while the
experimental model records a decrease in the frequency of the same mode. This can
be a result of the deﬁned mass parameter of the TLD. While only the active mass of
the water is being added to the FE-model the total mass added to the real structure
is higher. This mass addition can produce a frequency decrease.
As already mentioned, a structural response reduction of a factor of 1.84 is attained
upon the addition of the TLD. This displacement reduction can be further increased
by a optimisation of the damper. The optimisation can be accomplished by ﬁnding
the ideal tuning ratio and mass ratio to be used when designing the damper. This
study utilised Ω= 1 as found optimal by Y. Fujino et al. [3] and µ = 3% according
o the same study. However, Y. Fujino et al. reached this conclusions b investigating
TLDs under shallow water regime and the here constructed TLD is placed in the high
water regime. According to Hong-Nan Li et al. [26] damping properties of the TLD
decrease as the water regime transits from shallow to deep.
==PAGE:53==
Conclusions and
Future
perspectives 10
The current study investigates the eﬀect of a TLD on a mast-like structure when the
later is subjected to random, naturally induced wind vibrations and aims to quantify
the response reduction produced by the damper in relation to the ﬁrst longitudinal
bending mode of the structural system.
The TLD is attached to the bottom of
the steel top-site of the mast and the structural response is recorded by four three-
axial, geophone type sensors. OMA investigations are conducted on the captured
measurements with the purpose of estimating the modal parameters of the system
before and after damper installation. The following conclusions can be drawn.
• The installed TLD acts as an eﬃcient passive damping mechanism, reducing
the modal response of ﬁrst longitudinal bending mode of the mast structure by
a factor of 1.84.
• The eﬀect of the TLD on the structural mode to which this is tuned leads to
splinting of the initial structural mode into two similarly shaped modes.
• The OMA FDD identiﬁcation technique can be successfully applied to identify
the eﬀect of the TLD on the structure
• Lamb’s linear theory of liquid surface motion can accurately estimate the fre-
quency of the water when a polystyrene plate is added at the surface of the
damper, acting as a ﬂoating-roof
• The TLD can be numerically simulated as a 2DOFs system and attached to the
FE-model of the structure through appropriately computed stiﬀness coeﬃcients
and active masses.
10.1 Future perspectives
Even though this study shows that the horizontal vibrations of a structure can be
eﬃciently reduced by the use of a properly designed TLD future investigations in
this direction should be conducted.
Among others, the following things could be
considered for a future study.
==PAGE:54==
45
10.1 Future perspectives
• During the conducted measurements a set of three displacement lasers was
utilised to monitor the movement of the water inside the tank. The system
was connected to the geophone sensors and thus, the two are synchronised. Due
to calibration complications the data was not investigated during this study.
However, future investigations could be made to better understand the modes
associated with the water movement.
• The design of the TLD can be further optimized by tuning the damper to
the natural frequency of the experimental model and observing the change in
response by comparison with the here found results. Furthermore, the various
tuning parameters can be changes and observations on their inﬂuence on the
response reduction can be made.
• A better correlation of the recorded data can be obtained if the excitation force
can be measured closer to the experimental model. As a result, the response
reduction could also be investigated as a function of wind direction
==PAGE:55==
List of Tables
4.1
Dimensions of the mast structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.1
Properties of the three materials used when modeling the structure.
Here: S235 is assigned to the elements deﬁning the steel girder box
and S235adapted is assigned to the connection element between the box
and the wooden pile
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
The ﬁrst 5 natural frequencies of the FE-model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.1
Analytically determined parameters of the TLD . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
TLD tank dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.3
Nyquist frequency before and after decimation for TLD tests . . . . .
24
6.4
Input parameters required for identiﬁcation with FDD and estimated
modal parameters of the TLD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.1
Overview of measurement speciﬁcations and total recorded data sets .
31
8.1
Input parameters for the FDD identiﬁcation technique and correspond-
ing identiﬁed natural frequencies (fw/o.,exp) and damping ratios (ζw/o.,exp)
from the structural response recorded pre- damper installation . . . .
36
8.2
Input parameters for the FDD identiﬁcation technique and correspond-
ing identiﬁed natural frequencies, fw.,exp, and damping ratios, ζw.,exp,
from the structural response recorded post- damper installation
. . .
37
==PAGE:56==
List of Figures
3.1
Generic liquid motion types in rectangular containers [14] . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Wave formation for shallow (left) and deep (right) water regimes [14]
10
3.3
Housner’s linear model of the TLD [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1
Sketch of the steel girder box top-site. Left: without the wooden panels;
Right: with the wooden panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Sketch of the mast structure with dimensions in [m]. From left to right:
front, side and isometric view of the mast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Left: Experimental model of the mast;
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Fixed bolted connections; Top: Pile to steel top-site connection; Bot-
tom: Pile to concrete block connection; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Starlit view of the experimental setup location including the placement
of the structure and the placement of the weather station . . . . . . .
15
5.1
FE-model created in Ansys and its position with respect to the global
coordinate system. From left to right: front, side and isometric view
of the mast
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Mode shapes, bn from FE-model.
The mode shapes are plotted in
increasing order from left to right and from top to bottom
. . . . . .
18
6.1
Plexiglas watertight TLD tank with attached 3D printed supports for
the lasers and lid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.2
Shaking table test setup for the TLD. Left: side view of the tank
emphasizing the polystyrene ﬂoating roof; Right: top view of the tank
emphasizing the placement of the lasers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3
Singular value decomposition of the SD matrix of the TLD responses.
Left: response produced by excitation in the longitudinal direction of
the tank; Right: response produced by excitation in the transverse
direction of the tank
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.4
Identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst water sloshing frequency. Left: Singular value
of the spectral matrix with IP1 depicting the initial frequency guess
and IP2 the band width; Right: Autocorrelation function with IP3
denoting the noise tail cut-oﬀ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.5
Mode shapes, bn from FE-model after the addition of the TLD and
their associated frequencies. The mode shapes are plotted in increasing
order from left to right and from top to bottom
. . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.1
Location of the four sensors on the top-site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Schematic representation of the translational DOFs of each sensor . .
29
==PAGE:57==
List of Figures
48
7.3
Geophone sensor together with the base station
. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
8.1
Free decay response of the mast in displacements, recorded by Node 0
pre- damper installation. Left: Excitation applied along the y-axis of
the mast; Right: Excitation applied along the x-axis of the mast . . .
33
8.2
Zero crossings and amplitude peaks of the FD response when excitation
in the longitudinal direction of the mast is applied (y.direction)
. . .
33
8.3
Free decay response of the mast in voltage, recorded by Node 0 post-
damper installation. Left: Excitation applied along the y-axis of the
mast; Right: Excitation applied along the x-axis of the mast . . . . .
34
8.4
Singular value of the SD matrix of the structural response of the mast
without the damper. Left: as applied in the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst
bending modes and the torsional one; Right: as applied in the identi-
ﬁcation of the second bending modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.5
Singular value of the SD matrix of the structural response of the mast
with the damper. Left: as applied in the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst bend-
ing modes and the torsional one; Right: as applied in the identiﬁcation
of the second bending modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
8.6
Identiﬁed frequencies of the ﬁrst bending modes with the TLD (red)
and without the TLD (blue), along all data sets showing, the splitting
of the bending mode along y . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8.7
Identiﬁed frequencies of the second bending modes and the torsional
modes along all data sets. Mast without the TLD (blue) and mast with
the attached TLD (red)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8.8
Modal response of the structure as a function of mean wind speed,
V600, squared, before and after the addition of the TLD. Left: Modal
response of the ﬁrst bending mode along the transverse direction of
the mast; Right: Modal response of the ﬁrst bending mode along the
longitudinal direction of the mast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.9
Torsional modal response of the structure as a function of mean wind
speed, V600, squared, before and after the addition of the TLD . . . .
40
8.10 Modal response of the structure as a function of mean wind speed,
V600, squared, before and after the addition of the TLD. Left: Modal
response of the second bending mode along the transverse direction of
the mast; Right: Modal response of the second bending mode along
the longitudinal direction of the mast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.1 Experimental setup - Free vibration test of the wooden mast . . . . .
49
B.1 Drawing of the TLD tank
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
C.1 Sketch of the mast mounting process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
==PAGE:58==
Appendix A
Free vibration tests were conducted on the wooden mast with the purpose of estab-
lishing the value of it’s modulus of elasticity (E).
A.1 Experimental setup
The wooden mast is hanged by a rope at the two ends in a horizontally position. By
using this type of supports it is safe to assume that the beam is free to vibrate in
one plan. The plan perpendicular to the direction of the supports. As a result, two
tests were conducted so that both the x −y and the z −y can be consider ass freely
vibrating. The response of the mast is recorded in three points with accelerates and
the frequencies associated with the two tests are identiﬁed by the use of OMA.
Figure A.1: Experimental setup - Free vibration test of the wooden mast
==PAGE:59==
A Appendix
50
A.2 Theoretical formulation
The natural frequencies of a beam (f) is deﬁned according to [27] as a function of it’s
geometry, material properties and eigenvalues as:
fi =
ωi
2 π =
λ2
i
2 π L2
r
E I
m
(A.1)
where i = 1 , 2 , 3 ... represents the modal index.
Furthermore, E denotes the
Young’s modulus of the material, I the area moment of inertia of the cross section
about the neutral axis, m the mass per unit length of the beam and λ the dimension-
less natural frequency parameter. The latter depends of the boundary conditions of
the beam. For a beam that is considered to be free at both ends λ1 = 4.73 according
to Table 4.2 in [27].
By isolating E in Equation A.1 and inserting the values of the other parameters the
values of the Young’s modulus about axis x and z are found.
Ex =
f1.x 2 π L2
λ1
2 m
I
=
38.52 · 2 · π · 3.62
4.73
2
4.96
8.33 · 10−6 = 11703MPa (A.2)
Ez =
f1.z 2 π L2
λ1
2 m
I
=
39.02 · 2 · π · 3.62
4.73
2
4.96
8.33 · 10−6 = 11703MPa (A.3)
==PAGE:60==
Appendix B
Figure B.1: Drawing of the TLD tank
==PAGE:61==
Appendix C
C.1 Work-ﬂow of the mounting process
The structure is mounted with the help of an overhead crane already installed at
the experimental site by Andersen P. L. for an ongoing PhD project. Besides the
overhead crane, a fork truck and an electric mobile lifting table car were utilised for
mounting the structure. The following steps outline the steps followed for mounting
the structure:
• Equip with personal protective equipment: safety shoes, helmet;
• Attach the empty TLD tank in the metallic box and ﬁx it with screw:
• Transport the metallic box and the wooden mast to the site and position them
as seen in sketch nr. 1;
• Fix the upper part of the mast to the metallic box using 2 angular proﬁles;
• Fix 2 of the 4 metallic angular proﬁles to the concrete base to establish the
position of the mast;
• Lower the cable for the automatic winch;
• Hook the top part of the metallic box in the end of winch cable (See sketch nr.
2);
• Slowly lift the mast (See an intermediate position in sketch nr. 3)
• Continue lifting until the bottom end of the mast is situated above the founda-
tion bloc (See sketch nr. 4);
• Slide the mast right/left so that it is centrally positioned above the foundation
bloc (See sketch nr. 4);
• Lower the must until the bottom part of the pile rests on the concrete pile in
the desired position;
• Fix the wooden pile in the 2 standing angular proﬁles mounted in step X by
screws;
• Attach the last 2 angular proﬁles – ﬁx them with screws to the mast ﬁrst and
then to the concrete bloc;
• Once the structure is secured and stable, unhook the winch cable from the top
of the metallic box;
==PAGE:62==
53
C.1 Work-ﬂow of the mounting process
• Preparing the work setup will involve handling of heavy metallic elements by
the use of a crane by a trained technician at DTU Laboratory;
• No direct involvement of students in the manipulation of the crane will be
involved unless directly instructed by the technicians;
Figure C.1: Sketch of the mast mounting process
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Jin Ting Wang et al. “Real-time hybrid simulation of multi-story structures in-
stalled with tuned liquid damper”. eng. In: Structural Control and Health Monitoring
23.7 (2016), pp. 1015–1031. issn: 15452263, 15452255. doi: 10.1002/stc.1822.
[2]
Jin Kyu Yu, Toshihiro Wakahara, and Dorothy A. Reed. “A non-linear numerical
model of the tuned liquid damper”. eng. In: Earthquake Engineering and Dynamics
28.6 (1999), pp. 671–686. issn: 10969845, 00988847.
[3]
Yozo Fujino et al. “Parametric studies on tuned liquid damper (TLD) using cir-
cular containers by free-oscillation experiments”. eng. In: Doboku Gakkai Rombun
398 (1988), pp. 177–187. issn: 18827187, 02897806.
[4]
K FUJII et al. “WIND-INDUCED VIBRATION OF TOWER AND PRACTI-
CAL APPLICATIONS OF TUNED SLOSHING DAMPER”. eng. In: Journal of Wind Engineering
33.1-2 (1990), pp. 263–272. issn: 18728197, 01676105. doi: 10.1016/0167-
6105(90)90042-b.
[5]
A. Kareem and W.-J. Sun. “STOCHASTIC RESPONSE OF STRUCTURES
WITH FLUID-CONTAINING APPENDAGES”. und. In: 119.3 (1987), pp. 389–
408. issn: 10958568, 0022460x. doi: 10.1016/0022-460x(87)90405-6,10.
1016/0022-460X(87)90405-6.
[6]
LM SUN et al. “THE PROPERTIES OF TUNED LIQUID DAMPERS USING
A TMD ANALOGY”. eng. In: Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics
24.7 (1995), pp. 967–976. issn: 10969845, 00988847.
[7]
Dorothy A. Reed et al. “Experimental investigation of tuned liquid dampers”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction (1996),
pp. 215–216.
[8]
D Reed et al. “Investigation of tuned liquid dampers under large amplitude ex-
citation”. eng. In: Journal of Engineering Mechanics-asce 124.4 (1998), pp. 405–
413. issn: 19437889, 07339399.
[9]
M. J. Tait, N. Isyumov, and A. A. El Damatty. “Performance of tuned liquid
dampers”. eng. In: Journal of Engineering Mechanics 134.5 (2008), pp. 417–427.
issn: 19437889, 07339399. doi: 10.1061/(asce)0733-9399(2008)134:5(417).
[10]
T. Wakahara, T. Ohyama, and K. Fujii. “Suppression of wind-induced vibration
of a tall building using tuned liquid damper”. eng. In: 43.43 (1992), pp. 1934–
1935. issn: 18728197, 01676105. doi: 10.1016/0167-6105(92)90615-H.
[11]
Rune Brincker and Carlos E. Ventura. Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis.
eng. Wiley Blackwell, 2015, pp. 1–360. isbn: 9781118535141, 9781119963158,
1118535154, 1118535162, 111996315x, 1118535146. doi: 10.1002/9781118535141.
==PAGE:64==
55
Bibliography
[12]
D.E. Newland. RANDOM VIBRATIONS AND SPECTRAL ANALYSIS. und.
1975.
[13]
R. Brincker and P. Andersen. “Method for vibration analysis”. eng. In: (August,
2004).
[14]
Leonel Jose dos Santos Teixeira Ramos. “Study and simulations of the synchro-
nized pedestrian footstep loads and passive damping solutions for footbridges”.
PhD thesis. 2018.
[15]
H. Lamb. Hydrodynamics. eng. University press, 1895, 604 s.
[16]
G. W. Housner. “Dynamic pressures on accelerated ﬂuid containers”. eng. In:
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America (1957).
[17]
Silja Tea Nielsen and Pernille Lysgaard Andersen. “OMA-based monitoring of
a wind loaded structure, OMA-baseret monitorering af vindbelastet konstruk-
tion”. und. 2019.
[18]
Steen K. Dynamics of Structures. eng. Technical University of Denmark, 2015,
pp. 140–154. isbn: 1851661549.
[19]
“Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures – Part 1-1: General rules and rules for
buildings”. eng. In: (2014).
[20]
Lasse Førde Thunbo and Niklas Carl Ørum-Nielsen. “Eﬀect of nonstationary
and oscillatory masses in operational modal analysis, Eﬀekten af instationære
og svingende masser i operationel modal analyse”. und. 2019.
[21]
B. A. Harper, J. D. Kepert, and J. D. Ginger. “Guidelines for Converting Be-
tween Various Wind Averaging Periods in Tropical Cyclone Conditions 37 World
Meteorological Organisation 27-Aug-2010 Harper B.A. 2002: Tropical cyclone
parameter estimation in the Australian region: Wind-Pressure Relationships”.
eng. In: (2016).
[22]
J. A. Larsen. “Sensenet getting started guide”. eng. In: (2017).
[23]
Swaroop K. Yalla and Ahsan Kareem. “Beat phenomenon in combined structure-
liquid damper systems”. eng. In: Engineering Structures 23.6 (2001), pp. 622–
630. issn: 01410296, 18737323. doi: 10.1016/s0141-0296(00)00085-7.
[24]
Elsa Andersen et al. Availability of high quality weather data measurements.
eng. 2017.
[25]
Lasse Førde Thunbo and Niklas Carl Ørum-Nielsen. “Eﬀect of nonstationary
and oscillatory masses in operational modal analysis, Eﬀekten af instationære
og svingende masser i operationel modal analyse”. und. 2019.
[26]
Hong-Nan Li et al. “Wind-Induced Vibration Control of Dalian International
Trade Mansion by Tuned Liquid Dampers”. eng. In: (2012).
[27]
Robert D. Blevins. Formulas for Dynamics, Acoustics and Vibration. eng. Wi-
ley Blackwell, 2015, pp. 1–448. isbn: 9781119038122, 9781119038115, 1119038138,
1119038219, 1523110198, 1119038111, 111903812x, 9781119038214, 9781119038139.
doi: 10.1002/9781119038122.
