==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management
User preferences for future electric vehicle
charging infrastructure:
A stated choice experiment
Anant Atul Visaria (s171681)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Transport Division
DTU Building 116
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.transport.man.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:3==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
User preferences for future electric vehicle
charging infrastructure:
A stated choice experiment
Anant Atul Visaria (s171681)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:4==
User preferences for future electric vehicle charging infrastructure:
A stated choice experiment
This report was prepared by
Anant Atul Visaria (s171681)
Supervisors
Anders Fjendbo Jensen
Mikkel Thorhauge
Stefan Eriksen Mabit
==PAGE:5==
e
Release date: 18th of April 2020
Category:
1 (public)
Edition:
First
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve
the Master of Science in Engineering (MSc) at
the Technical University of Denmark.
This report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
©Anant Atul Visaria, 2020
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis project was to understand and analyse the user preference
of Danish electric vehicle (EV) users with respect to the charging infrastructure, based
on their driving usage and charging needs. This was done through a qualitative and
quantitative assessment. The qualitative assessment was based on a literature review of
existing studies about EV charging behaviour. Additionally, semi-structured interviews
of Danish EV users were conducted to understand their experience and perspectives.
Based on this, for the quantitative assessment, two stated choice experiments were
designed. The ﬁrst experiment looked into long term decision making for regular charging
practices, based on preferences for pricing structures for charging. The second experiment
was designed to assess the instantaneous decision making with respect to occasional
charging needs that occur on long trips. The survey was shared with the support of E.ON
Denmark and 558 responses from Danish EV users were collected. Using the data collected
multinomial logit and mixed logit models were estimated for the two experimental setups.
The main ﬁndings show that EV adoption is still nascent in Denmark and majority EV
users are male, with high incomes, and high educations. Most users charge at home and
they show a higher preference for all inclusive/ﬂat fee pricing structures. Moreover, they
show a high preference for interoperability between charging networks, both nationally
and internationally. They also derive more utility from intercity charging locations that
require less detour time and have more chargers with higher speeds, along with additional
facilities. Lastly a distinct preference for some of the attributes among Tesla users is
also observed compared to non-Tesla users. Overall it is seen that EV users signiﬁcantly
take into account both cost and convenience in their decision making.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Management Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a
Masters Degree in Sustainable Energy - Energy Systems Analysis.
The thesis contents represent 30 ECTS points. The work in relation to the thesis has
been conducted in the period November 2019 to April 2020.
Kongens Lyngby, April 18, 2020
Anant Atul Visaria (s171681)
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
This project, like most other projects, would not be possible without the continuous
support of a lot of people. That’s why I would like to express my gratitude towards the
people who have helped me through it and supported this project.
First and foremost, my supervisors Anders, Mikkel and Stefan, without whom this
would’ve been an impossible task. Thank you for being patient and so easy to communi-
cate with, even for the smallest queries I had. I couldn’t have wished for better supervisors.
Next, I would like to thank Sonja for her help with the survey, and our colleagues at
E.ON Denmark Hanne, Troels, Nicolai and Mette Marie, for their support with the project.
I would also like to thank my friend Sara, for selﬂessly helping me with the Danish
translations for the survey, and Karla for her help with proof reading. I am also grateful
to my colleagues at DTU Transport Andreas, Mayara and Vishnu for their help with the
softwares for survey design, and Ioanna for her help with the python script.
Last but not the least, I thank my parents. Everything I have been able to achieve
and everything I go on to achieve, is because of them. None of it is possible without
their love, sacriﬁce and support.
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vi
Nomenclature
viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Qualitative Assessment
4
2.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Conclusions from qualitative assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theory
13
3.1
Stated Choice Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Discrete Choice Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Survey Design
21
4.1
SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular Charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
SC 2: Instantaneous Decisions - Charging on Long Trips
. . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Final Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Descriptive Statistics
35
5.1
Socio-demographics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:10==
Contents
v
5.2
Housing Related . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Vehicle Related . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
EV Usage Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Long trips related . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Modelling Results and Discussion
43
6.1
SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
SC1: Long term decisions - ML Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
SC2: Instantaneous decisions - MNL Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
SC2: Instantaneous decision - ML Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
59
A Appendix
63
Bibliography
72
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
Transport sector CO2 emissions by mode in the Sustainable Development
Scenario, 2000-2030 [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Global EV stock 2013-2018 [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Monthly EV sales in Denmark since 2013 [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.1
General Introduction to SC Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Introductions Slide 1 for SC1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Introductions Slide 2 for SC1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
SC1 Sample Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
SC1 Sample Scenario - without home charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.6
Introductions Slide for SC2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
SC2 Sample Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1
Frequency of general transport mode usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Frequency of diﬀerent types of trips with EV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Frequency of charging at diﬀerent locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
List of Tables
3.1
Full Factorial Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Orthogonal Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
Subscription Cost Levels for Flat Fee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
SC 1: Design setup for long term decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
SC 2: Design setup for instantaneous decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1
Socio Demographics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Statistics related to housing, parking and home charging . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
vii
5.3
Statistics related to EVs and other cars in household
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Statistics related to driving and charging usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Statistics related to long trips and relevant problems with charging
. . . . .
42
6.1
Market Share: Observed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
SC1 Base MNL Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
SC1 Final MNL Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Market Share: Observed vs Estimated by ﬁnal MNL model . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.5
SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal MNL model - Subscription Cost . . . . . . .
50
6.6
SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal MNL model - Public and Home Charging Costs 50
6.7
SC1: ML model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.8
Market Share: Observed vs Estimated by MNL and ML models . . . . . . .
52
6.9
SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal ML model - Subscription Costs
. . . . . . .
53
6.10 SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal ML model - Public and Home Charging Costs 53
6.11 SC2 Base MNL Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.12 SC2 Final MNL model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.13 SC2 ML Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
BEV Battery Electric Vehicle
DK
Denmark
EU
European Union
EV
Electric Vehicle
FF
Flat Fee
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
ICE
Internal Combustion Engine
IIA
Independence from Irrelevant Alternatives
LL
Log-likelihood
LR
Likelihood Ratio
ML
Mixed Logit
MNL Multinomial Logit
MS1
Monthly Subscription
NC
No Contract
SC
Stated Choice
SP
Stated Preference
V2G
Vehicle-to-Grid
==PAGE:14==
1 Introduction
The transport system, like most other systems, presents a complex problem to tackle in
the context of sustainable development. It consists of strong interactions between the
social, technical, economic and environmental sphere. Transportation is responsible for
24% of direct CO2 emissions from fuel combustion. At 3.6 Gt of CO2 road vehicles –
cars, trucks, buses and two- and three-wheelers – account for nearly three-quarters of
transport CO2 emissions. However, global transport emissions increased by 0.6% in 2018
(compared with 1.6% annually in the past decade) owing to eﬃciency improvements,
electriﬁcation and greater use of biofuels [1]. In Figure 1.1 it can be seen that passenger
vehicles make up the greatest share of transport emissions. Therefore greater eﬀorts are
required to achieve the sustainable development scenario demonstrated in the graph by
IEA. This points to the crucial role electric vehicles (EVs) have to play with respect to
making the transport sector more sustainable. The increase in EV share would directly
impact the passenger vehicle emissions and in turn global emissions from transport.
Figure 1.1: Transport sector CO2 emissions by mode in the Sustainable Devel-
opment Scenario, 2000-2030 [1]
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
2
While the adoption EVs is rapidly growing, the global EV stock is still less than 1% of
car ﬂeet. Most of this growth has been seen in countries like Norway, China, Netherlands,
Sweden etc. This trend is seen in Figure 1.2. The increased adoption of EVs in the
last decade has been dependent mainly on technology and policy developments. It is
expected that in coming years, with improved technology, the battery size and in turn
the EV driving range will increase. Furthermore, research and development on charging
infrastructure is expected to enable super-fast charging at 350 kW. The fact that EV
prices will reduce over time and many countries intend to set up policies to support
the purchase and use of EVs, it is expected that the EV adoption rate will continue to
increase. However, this also means that there’s a need for better planning, especially for
the charging infrastructure, to improve and support the transition to e-mobility.
Figure 1.2: Global EV stock 2013-2018 [1]
In Denmark, as of 2019 there are ∼10,000 EVs and only ∼4% of new cars purchased
are EVs [2]. As seen in Figure 1.3 this trend is deﬁnitely increasing. However, there is
a need to understand how this increase can be catalysed if Denmark is to achieve it’s
ambitious emission reduction targets. An important part of the system is the charging
infrastructure. The most dominant charging networks in Denmark are by E.ON, Clever
and Tesla. E.ON alone accounts for over 1500 public charging points in Denmark.
However, if the EV market needs to grow, the number of charging point also need to
increase signiﬁcantly to support it.
==PAGE:16==
1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.3: Monthly EV sales in Denmark since 2013 [2]
Most technological development is also dependent on the way the end user interacts
with it. Similarly with EVs, there is a strong behavioural and social aspect associated
with the use of electric vehicles. Questions like: where do people prefer to charge their
EVs, how long are they willing to wait, how much they are willing to pay; need to
be answered in order to enable better planning of the charging infrastructure. This
project tries to zoom into similar questions and develop a qualitative and quantitative
understanding of the relevant aspects. The aim here is to identify key attributes that
inﬂuence the decision making of EV users, especially when it comes to charging their
cars. To do so, a literature review was conducted to identify existing knowledge on
behavioural aspects of EV users. This was followed by interviews of eleven EV users
from across Denmark. Based on this a stated preference survey design is developed to
further investigate key areas. From the data collected through the survey, choice models
are developed to identify the signiﬁcant attributes and how they inﬂuence the utility
users derive from speciﬁc aspects of the charging infrastructure.
==PAGE:17==
2 Qualitative Assessment
2.1
Literature Review
The literature review focused on ﬁndings from various studies previously done with
the aim of getting an understanding of the general behavioural trends already studied
globally. Furthermore, key areas yet to be investigated were identiﬁed. Based on these
factors, questions were developed for the qualitative interviews and eventually the stated
preference survey. It is important to note that the focus here was mainly on battery
electric vehicles (BEV) and henceforth EVs would refer to BEVs.
2.1.1
EV adoption and charging infrastructure
Various intrinsic and extrinsic factors inﬂuence EV adoption. Some of the important
intrinsic or internal factors can be vehicle ownership costs, purchasing models, driving
range, and charging time. While, some of the extrinsic or external factors that can be
signiﬁcant are policy, ﬁnancial incentives, charging infrastructure, and social norms.
In a study conducted in Sweden it was found that the local policy instrument of
public charging infrastructure has a signiﬁcant and positive impact on the EV adoption
rate and it is also found to aﬀect the EV adoption to a higher degree in urban munic-
ipalities than in suburban and rural municipalities. This implies that by developing
public charging infrastructure, the barriers of range anxiety and limited charging pos-
sibilities decrease which, in turn, increase the utility of owning a BEV. Furthermore,
diﬀerences in the expansion of public charging infrastructure across municipalities could
explain why the diﬀusion of EVs is faster in some municipalities while others fall behind.[3]
Similarly, a recent study conducted in the Nordic region investigates the interconnected
inﬂuence of socio-demographics, behavioral, economic, and technical factors associated
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Literature Review
5
with electric vehicle (EV) adoption interest. They surveyed 4885 participants across
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. The results from this study support
the hypothesis that shorter charging time will have a positive eﬀect on EV adoption, but
reject the hypothesis that public charging station availability have a positive eﬀect on
EV adoption.[4]
Furthermore, in another study the availability of charging infrastructure is said to
be positively correlated with EV adoption but determining the exact inﬂuence on EV
adoption requires further experience with later market stages. Moreover, it states that,
while high availability of charging infrastructure does not automatically lead to high
adoption rates, low availability is an inhibitor to the adoption of EVs. However, the
inﬂuence of charging infrastructure as a variable seems to diﬀer depending on the national
context and is not the sole factor responsible for EV adoption. [5]
A study using agent-based simulation models conducted in Germany suggest some
diﬀerent results. They developed a simulation model for various scenarios up to 2030,
that considers individual EV user behavior and optimal charging infrastructure. The
model is based on techno-economic analysis and focuses on the inﬂuence of public slow
charging options (≤22 kW). The conclusion drawn is that a market diﬀusion of passen-
ger EVs is possible without public slow charging options. That is, a large numbers of
public slow charging options for opportunity charging cannot accelerate EV sales from a
techno economical point of view. However, the study also concludes that public charging
infrastructure is an important safety net for long-distance travel and for users without
home charging. Results also show that subsidies for charging options need to be in place
for a long time, since the amount of energy charged publicly is not suﬃcient to economize
for the majority of charging points in the coming years.[6]
Coﬀman et al. (2017) rightly refers to the relation between charging infrastructure and
EV adoption as a “chicken-and-egg” conundrum where limited infrastructure is a barrier
to EV adoption yet investment in charging networks depends on the number of EVs on the
road. On the one hand better charging infrastructure acts a safety net and reduces range
anxiety among users and promote EV usage, but on the other hand the installing chargers
is only ﬁnancially viable is there are more users ensuring payments for charging services.[7]
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Literature Review
6
Therefore, what can be said with some certainty is that charging infrastructure is an
important factor in increasing EV market share, but not the only factor responsible for
this. That is, better access to charging infrastructure and improved charging technology
is a necessary, but not suﬃcient, condition to increase overall EV adoption.
2.1.2
Who buys EVs?
It is observed that most people who buy and use EVs are male, with high incomes
and relatively higher education [8][9][10]. This is to be expected as EVs are still rather
expensive compared to conventional ICE cars. Moreover, a general aﬃnity for new
technology and also for green energy and sustainability is seen among EV users [11].
That is why many people end up buying EVs also consider its environmental beneﬁts as
a reason for their choice. They also support the use of sustainable energy sources such
as solar and wind for their electricity needs for charging [12].
2.1.3
Where do EV users charge their cars?
The main locations for charging are at home, at work, at public locations within cities
and at locations between cities for drivers stop during long trips. Home charging options
are most frequently used. In most studies 80% of EV users charge overnight at home
or at public chargers nearby [9][8][13]. Several questionnaire survey studies have found
that having access to charging at home is the most inﬂuential location in encouraging
consumers to purchase EVs [14]. This is followed by charging at work or a daily place of
commute [14]. While public charging spots are the least used locations of them all, they
are an important infrastructure acting as a safety net for the EV users, especially when
they travel distances are longer [15]. On longer trips EV users in Norway are willing to
make up to 3 stops for charging depending upon trip lengths. Up to 20 minutes of waiting
time was acceptable, especially when the charging stations had additional facilities like
WiFi, restrooms, restaurants or similar additional facilities were available [9].
2.1.4
When do EV users charge their cars?
On a daily basis those who can charge at home tend to charge at home overnight. While
this can be classiﬁed as a contextual trigger (i.e. charging at regular time irrespective
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Literature Review
7
of battery level), some users charge based on subjective triggers (i.e. when the battery
reaches a certain level) [13]. This possibly depends on various factors such as range
anxiety, convenience, location of chargers and awareness of battery degradation. This
aspect becomes even more prominent when people use EVs for longer trips and must take
breaks to charge their cars. Furthermore, a study done in Germany found that in the
future Most DC fast charging will occur from 4 pm to 7 pm which is during the evening
peak demand. This could cause local grid issues [16]. Therefore, time of charging will
become even more relevant in the future, especially when considering the supply side
and power quality issues.
2.1.5
What kind of trips are EVs used for?
In general trips can be divided into 2 broad categories: short and long strips. Short trips
consist of the daily commute trips that tend to be of shorter distances (approximately less
than 100 km), and long trips tend be the inter-city trips. EVs are used more for shorter
trips, whereas people tend to opt for their conventional cars for longer trips, especially
because of range anxiety. Previous research indicates that the EVs are used for more
trips, and mostly during weekdays and less during vacation and weekends. Similarly, Tal
and Turrentine (2017) show that ﬁrst generation Nissan Leaf owners use their BEV for a
large share (50%-70%) of trips up to 110 km, which is comfortably within the maximum
driving range of this vehicle. Furthermore, Nissan Leaf owners in general stay within the
one-way distance of their battery possibilities, whereas Tesla owners largely exceed this
limitation as they use fast charging possibilities to travel long-distance trips [10]. People
surveyed in Norway who had Tesla cars were satisﬁed with their car’s driving range for
long trips. Non-Tesla users said that the Tesla range is acceptable and with this higher
range they would be willing to use their EVs for longer trips [9].
2.1.6
How much are EV users willing to pay?
Research assessing the willingness to pay for EVs compared to conventional cars shows
that people have various factors that inﬂuence their car purchase choices and it’s rather
unpredictable whether they would opt for an EV or not. The higher initial cost combined
with range anxiety and lack of charging infrastructure can be a major deterrent to EV
purchases [17][18][19]. However, a common purchase motivation and beneﬁt of owning
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Literature Review
8
an EV is low operating costs compared to conventional cars [14]. In Norway it was
observed that the tax beneﬁts and no tolls for EVs, helped increase the EV adoption
[9]. Within existing EV users, there isn’t much research done to identify willingness to
pay for charging, and other charging related attribute. Additionally, with the various
charging infrastructure providers in the market, if consumers wish to access all stations,
they may be required to hold a membership card for each company. This situation can
cause diﬃculties for consumers and can be a barrier to them purchasing an EV [20].
Results indicated that consumer respond positively to interoperability [9]. Lastly, while
a lot of charging stations allow free charging as an incentive, this can potentially lead
to congestion and over usage. Therefore, it isn’t ideal to have free charging options,
especially with the number of EVs increasing [15].
2.1.7
Charging etiquette
In a study conducted in San Diego, USA, researchers interviewed 29 early EV adopters
to better understand the social norms and etiquette related to charging at locations away
from home, which mainly includes public and work charging. They deﬁne etiquette as a
set of rules that deﬁnes correct and acceptable behavior within speciﬁc social interactions.
They found that people lacked good services that would allow them to ﬁnd public charging
locations and the status of these locations in real time. Moreover, they weren’t sure how
to deal with problems like non-EVs parked in the charging sports, or car-sharing EVs
and taxis occupying spaces meant for public charging. Additionally, they weren’t sure
what the norm is around disconnecting the charger from a car that has been charged and
connecting to their own car. There was no tool or service that allowed people sharing
public or work charging spots to communicate with each other so that everyone can
beneﬁt from this infrastructure [21]. In general, these problems are bound to amplify
with increased EV adoption. Hence, there seems to be a need for deﬁned social norms
about charging practices at public locations, and tools or services to support this.
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Interviews
9
2.2
Interviews
2.2.1
Interview Setup
Based on the literature review it was seen that there are various factors that inﬂuence
the preferences of EV users. In order to get a better understanding of how signiﬁcant
these ﬁndings are in the Danish perspective and to help design a survey that matches
the thinking process of EV users, a set of interviews were conducted.
2.2.2
Methodology
In December 2019, posts were made on various Danish EV user forums on Facebook. In
response to these posts contact was made with eleven EV users from around Denmark,
and interviews were set up. Eight interviews were conducted over a phone call, and the
other three interviews were conducted in person. The average length of the interviews
was twenty-ﬁve minutes. To maintain privacy and observe GDPR rules, no recordings
were made of the interview. The interviews were conducted in a semi-structured format
[22], as informal conversations allowing for questions based on responses, a basic script
for questioning was maintained. The following were some general questions covered in
all interviews to get a common understanding of the varying user preferences. These
questions were:
• Which EV do you use generally?
• How long have you had the EV?
• Did you ﬁnd it easy to adjust to using an EV?
• What’s the approximate daily and annual driving usage?
• How do you most often charge your EV?
• Do you have a home charging unit?
• Do you have any memberships with charging infrastructure providers?
• Do you take long trips with the EV?
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Interviews
10
• Where do you choose to charge your EV on large trips?
• What problems do you usually face with parking and charging etiquette of EVs?
• Would you participate in future developments like bi-directional charging?
• Would you consider renting out your home charger as a service?
2.2.3
Interview Findings
Out of the people interviewed ten were male and only one was female. Moreover, four
were Tesla users. All except one respondent had some sort of home charging ranging
from the basic level 1 charging using an ordinary socket to a dedicated home charging
unit from Clever or E.ON (the two largest charging service providers in Denmark).
Charging at work was possible for four of the users. While most of the respondents had a
membership with a charging network provider, they generally complained about the lack
of interoperability and how complicated the payment system and pricing structure can be.
Overall the charging behavior was a mix of contextual and subjective triggers, and
hence no general daily charging pattern except overnight home charging and work charg-
ing (where applicable) could be seen among these respondents. A few of the users had
tried using charging points available at supermarkets or malls, such that they would allow
their car to charge while they complete their shopping. These users were pleased with
this service. While there was a constant trade-oﬀbeing made between convenience and
cost, the biggest driver for EV usage was lower operating cost compared to conventional
cars.
All except one respondent used their cars for daily commute. One respondent just
uses their Tesla for just long trips, which was an odd ﬁnding. On an average all users
have an annual usage of around 30,000 km, except for one user who drives 60,000 km
annually with the EV.
What was interesting to observe was that most users had taken long trips with their
EV at varying frequencies in a year. For these long trips they would plan ahead and
identify what their charging options would be on the route taken. Additionally, few of
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Conclusions from qualitative assessment
11
the users made a comment on how using EVs had in fact improved their driving behavior.
Taking breaks for charging, driving at moderate speeds to maximise battery eﬃciency,
and just the overall EV experience had made the long trips a more pleasant experience.
Key factors to look at while selecting charging locations was the charger speeds, cost
and surrounding facilities.
Overall the Tesla users were more pleased about their driving experience. This was
due to the larger driving range, free fast charging locations available across Denmark, and
the overall user experience. This is possible as Tesla has complete control over the whole
process from the car to the charging. Some non-Tesla users also mentioned that they
would consider getting a Tesla in the future. The only concern is the high purchasing cost.
Most of the respondents seemed to have adapted very well to using an EV. While
the learning curve was steeper for some, most of the respondents hadn’t faced any
major issues with using chargers or charging their cars. In fact, most of the people
seem to be very enthusiastic about their EVs and try to keep up with the recent de-
velopments. This was reﬂected in their willingness to adopt future technologies like
bi-directional charging (V2G) or be a part of services like renting out home charging space.
Lastly, one major point of criticism was the lack of socially acceptable charging
etiquette. Issues like EVs not moved from charging spots even after charging is completed
and cases of taxis/car sharing vehicles taking up public EV charging spots, are key points
of frustration among most users. Especially for those living in Copenhagen.
2.3
Conclusions from qualitative assessment
While the interviewed set is rather limited, it was still fairly heterogeneous. When
clubbed with the ﬁndings from literature review, the following points can be concluded
about the adoption of EVs and overall user preferences:
• These are still the early days of EV adoption, and due to the taxes in Denmark,
the average EV user is a relatively high-income male with high levels of education.
However, in the future, incentives from the government and simpler pricing strategies
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Conclusions from qualitative assessment
12
from charging providers will play a critical role in allowing more people to buy and
use EVs. It appears that, even though EVs present a more sustainable option, the
driving force behind EV adoption is the cost factor, especially the operating costs.
• With increased EV usage, smart charging options like time-of-use based pricing
would be a beneﬁcial approach specially to reduce peak time charging and other
issues on the power supply side.
• Free charging options can catalyse the EV usage, but in the future scenario it can
cause congestion issues and over usage. Therefore, a better strategy for pricing of
charging are needed. Additionally, this would make the business case for faster
chargers more viable.
• Factors like interoperability among charging networks need to be addressed to
improve ease of use. Additional factors like convenient and fast public charging,
specially to support longer trips will promote EV usage and improve the overall EV
experience. Overall, while cost is one of the biggest driving factors for EV usage,
convenience also plays a critical role in improving the user experience.
• Home charging will continue to be the most signiﬁcant location for charging but
charging options at work and public locations will be important to work as a safety
net. These locations will play an even more signiﬁcant role in improving the user
experience for people without private parking spaces at home or when users go on
longer trips and need to charge at intercity locations.
• With increased number of EV users, a social framework for acceptable behavior
and usage of charging points is needed, to avoid overuse, or lack of access to the
people who really need the service.
• Other competitors might have to learn from Tesla and adopt some of its practices
to improve the EV user experience. For example, the ﬁnes levied by Tesla when
users do not disconnect from chargers after charging, helps reduce the frustrations
that a driver might face, interoperability and fast charging makes it easier to take
long trips with a Tesla and most Tesla intercity charging locations are strategically
positioned to make charging convenient for their users.
==PAGE:26==
3 Theory
3.1
Stated Choice Experiments
SC experiments investigate what people would do given a set of characteristics of a
situation instead of observing what people to in real life. The purpose is to ﬁnd out what
(which variables, attributes or factors) and to which extent they inﬂuence their decisions
[23]. It also allows the ﬂexibility to choose which attributes to include, like generic, alter-
native speciﬁc, and socio-demographic. Furthermore, it gives the advantage of obtaining
multiple observations from each respondent by presenting them with diﬀerent choice
situations with changing attribute levels. SC experiments are best suited to capture trade-
oﬀs that respondents might be making in their decision making, but are not consciously
aware of them. These captured as the respondent goes through diﬀerent choice scenarios
with varying levels in the attributes [24]. The main advantage of using hypothetical
situations to analyse new modes, is also its biggest disadvantage as people might not do
in reality what they say in the experiment. There might be constraints in their everyday
life that are not covered by the SC experiment. Respondents might be biased toward
choosing an alternative for several reasons like social desirability, or wanting to inﬂuence
policy making. For example, if a respondent feels that a survey is being conducted by
a policy making authority, they might make choices so as to inﬂuence these policies
rather than based on their choice preferences. Lastly, there is also a risk of what Bates
(1988) calls "respondent fatigue" when individuals are presented with too many situations
and do not consider all choice situations distinctly, but give in to biases and prejudices.[25]
While designing an SC experiment it is important to make realistic assumptions when
deﬁning the attributes and levels [26][27] as well as keeping the number of attributes
suﬃciently small, so that respondents are not overwhelmed by the amount of information
they are supposed to process [28].There are several ways to make the situations relatable
for the respondent. Firstly, level values should be based on real values from the respon-
dents’ environment, such as real prices for public transport, fuel or parking. Secondly,
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Stated Choice Experiments
14
through customisation, e.g. by asking the respondent for a speciﬁc trip they have taken
in the past and relating the decisions to that. Thirdly, it could be an option to ask the
respondent to imagine being in a speciﬁc scenario, such as going grocery shopping.
3.1.1
Experimental design
In SP experiments, the respondents are presented with a number of choice situations
with diﬀerent attributes and levels. While the shown attributes are always the same, the
levels vary between situations. The levels are drawn from an underlying experimental
design to construct the hypothetical choice situations. Basically, an experimental design
is a matrix of values that describes, which levels are shown in which situation in an SP
experiment. The attributes are represented as columns. Rows depict the choice situation.
By not assigning the values in the matrix randomly, the statistical power of the whole
experiment is meant to increase. The remainder of this section is largely based on [23].
There are several diﬀerent design types that can be considered for an SC experiment.
A full factorial design considers all possible eﬀects (direct and interaction), generating
each possible combination of levels as shown in Table 3.1 with 3 attributes A, B and C,
with two levels each, leading to 8 choice situations.
Table 3.1: Full Factorial Design
s
A
B
C
1
-1
-1
-1
2
-1
-1
1
3
-1
1
-1
4
-1
1
1
5
1
-1
-1
6
1
-1
1
7
1
1
-1
8
1
1
1
While this is the most comprehensive way, it is mostly not feasible as the number of
choice situations becomes very large with increasing attributes and levels. Therefore, in
the more practical fractional factorial designs, each respondent is only shown a subset of
S choice situations from the total number of choice situations. One option is to randomly
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Stated Choice Experiments
15
select choice situations from the full factorial. Another option is to give the ﬁrst S choice
situations to the ﬁrst respondent, the second S choice situations to the second respondent,
and so on. Both options can lead to biased outcomes, as for example a respondent may
face only low or only high values of a certain attribute. This could be avoided by choosing
the subsets in such a way that attribute level balance is satisﬁed. Orthogonal designs
and eﬃcient designs select subsets in a more structured way. As eﬃcient designs require
prior estimates, for this project orthogonal design was considered.
Orthogonal design is the most common approach, aiming at minimising the correlation
among attributes by ensuring that the attribute levels are varied independently of one
another. An example can be seen in Table 3.2. An orthogonal design is said to be
orthogonal if it satisﬁes attribute level balance and all parameters are independently
estimable. This translates into the deﬁnition that the attribute levels for each attribute
column in the design need to be uncorrelated. Orthogonal design is mostly used due
to its simplicity to construct as well as its property of ensuring that linear regression
models will not suﬀer from multicollinearity.
Table 3.2: Orthogonal Design
s
A
B
C
1
-1
-1
-1
2
-1
1
1
3
1
-1
1
4
1
1
-1
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Discrete Choice Models
16
3.2
Discrete Choice Models
In the following section the mathematical methods used for the model estimation and
analysis are outlined. The basic models are regressed as Multinomial Logit models
whereas the advanced model is a Mixed Logit model.The theory presented here is an
amalgamation of information and text from these sources [29] [30] [31].
Behavioural choice modelling consists of two mappings. The ﬁrst is the mapping of
model attributes to choice utility and the second mapping describes the relationship
between the utility and the probability of an individual choosing an alternative associated
with a certain utility. Due to the associated randomness only the probability that a
speciﬁc alternative is chosen can be estimated. Hence, we model at an individual level
and aggregate the results. [32]
3.2.1
Random Utility Maximisation
Individual choice behaviour theory assumes that the random utility Un,i an individual n
gains from choosing alternative i can be described as the sum of the systematic utility
Vn,i and an error term ϵn,i, such that Un,i = Vn,i + ϵn,i. Systematic utility is what we can
estimate. In the simplest form, the model of the systematic utility is linear in parameter
as well as in attributes and resolves to
Vn,i =
X
k
βj,k · xn,j,k
(3.1)
with k being the set of attributes x whereas the parameters β are to be estimated
to describe the relationship between the choice alternatives and the resulting utility.
The model estimation can be done in diﬀerent ways. PandasBiogeme uses a likelihood
optimisation, such that the probability that a certain model describes the underlying
data accurately is maximised. The log-likelihood can be formulated as
LL = log(L) =
X
n
X
j
dn,j · log(Pn,j)
(3.2)
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Discrete Choice Models
17
with dn,j being a binary variable taking the value 1 if individual n chooses alternative j
and 0 otherwise. Hence, the log-likelihood (LL) is maximal for L = 1 corresponding to a
perfect ﬁt of the model. The resulting probability of choosing an alternative i from a
choice set Cn can be formulated as
Pn,i = Prob(Vn,i + ϵn,i ≥Vn,j + ϵn,j)
∀i ̸= j, (i, j) ∈Cn
(3.3)
3.2.2
Multinomial Logit Model
This relationship can under certain assumptions be resolved to the Multinomial Logit
Model (MNL), where the probability of choosing alternative i is the exponential of the
utility of this alternative divided by the sum of the exponentials of the utilities of all
alternatives:
Pn,i =
exp(Vn,i)
J
X
j=1
exp(Vn,j)
(3.4)
However, the relation between the utility, and thereby the vector of observed variables,
and the probability is not linear, but rather sigmoid or S-shaped. This suggests that
parameters cannot be interpreted directly, as in a linear regression model. Instead, ra-
tios of coeﬃcients, derivatives and elasticities need to be consulted to interpret parameters.
MNL models feature independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) meaning that the
ratio of the probabilities between two alternatives is independent from other alternatives.
3.2.3
Mixed Logit Model
The ﬁnal models estimated in this study is based on a Mixed Logit (ML) model introducing
to the estimates such that the choice probability of alternative i is formulated as
Pn,i =
Z
Ln,i(β)f(β)dβ
(3.5)
with Likelihood of Ln,i under the condition of a given β:
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Discrete Choice Models
18
Ln,i(β) =
exp(Vn,i)
J
X
j=1
exp(Vn,j)
(3.6)
meaning that the logit formula is evaluated under diﬀerent realisations of β with, in
this case, a normal distribution of the estimate. Hence, the parameters of this distribution
are to be estimated. It is written as the sum of the mean of the distribution and a
random variation following a standard normal distribution. As a number of draws of
that variable is taken, the model is the weighted average of the outcome of these draws.
The model in this study follows a panel speciﬁcation such that the likelihood Ln,i is
evaluated panel-wise with a panel referring to the T = 3 questions answered by a person
in the study sub-scripted t, so that the integrand changes to
Ln,i(β) =
Y
t=1,...T
exp(Vn,i,t)
J
X
j=1
exp(Vn,j,t)
.
(3.7)
That allows to consider individual preferences by creating correlation between the
choices made by one individual.
3.2.4
Statistical Tests
Two main statistical tests used to evaluate models are t-tests: used as measures of
signiﬁcance of estimated parameters, and likelihood ratio test: used as comparison tests
between models.
3.2.4.1
t-Test
In general, t-tests check the equality of two estimates. The test statistic is t-distributed
and converges to the normal distribution around mean zero for large populations (asymp-
totic normal distribution). Here, only the t-test against zero is used. For this case, the
test statistic can be simpliﬁed to
t =
ˆβk
ˆsk
∼a N(0, 1)
(3.8)
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Discrete Choice Models
19
with ˆβk being the estimate of βk in the set k of estimators.
ˆsk is the estimated
standard error. The null hypothesis of the estimator being zero can be rejected at a 95%
conﬁdence level if the absolute t-value is larger then 1.96.
3.2.4.2
Likelihood Ratio Test
The likelihood ratio test questions equal goodness of a model and its nested simpliﬁcation.
The test-statistic compares the log-likelihood (LL) of the two models assuming a χ2
distribution of the test-statistic at f degrees of freedom being the diﬀerence of the amount
of estimated parameters:
LR = −2 ∗(LL( ˆβ1) −LL( ˆβ2)) ∼χ2
f
(3.9)
ˆβ1 and ˆβ2 are the set of parameters for the restricted and unrestricted models
respectively.
3.2.5
Elasticities
As the estimated parameters do not have a direct impact on the choice probability but
only on the utility function, it is best to analyse their impact by using derivatives and
elasticities. The change in the choice probability given a change in an observed variable
is described by their derivative. Rather than derivatives, it is common to use elasticities
as these are normalised for the variables’ units. An elasticity describes the percentage
change in a choice probability with regard to percentage change in the observed variable.
It is calculated as follows:
Ei,xn,i = ∂Vn,i
∂xn,i
xn,i (1 −Pn,i)
(3.10)
The elasticity can also be calculated when determining the percentage change in the
probability of another alternative i when the alternative speciﬁc observed variable xnj is
increased. This is then called the cross-elasticity and is calculated as follows:
Ei,xn,j = −∂Vn,j
∂xn,j
xn,j (Pn,j)
(3.11)
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Discrete Choice Models
20
As a manifestation of the IIA property for MNL models the cross-elasticity is the same
for all alternatives i, which is also seen in the above formula. This is called proportionate
substitution.
ML models allow diﬀerent substitution patterns that are not restricted by the IIA
property. As the probabilities in ML are determined by simulation, elasticities can also
be simulated by simulating percentage changes. The relative percentage change of a
probability of an alternative respective to a percentage change in a variable can then be
determined as follows:
Ei,xn,j = % change in Pn,j
% change in xn,j
(3.12)
==PAGE:34==
4 Survey Design
Initially, the survey design began with the idea to have two stated choice (SC) exper-
iments, one related to short trips, and one related long trips. However, this idea was
rejected after the qualitative interviews were conducted. It was observed that the EV
user didn’t think this way about their decision making. Moreover, with increased battery
range and the existing charging practices, short trips that occur daily weren’t really a
problematic situation with regards to charging.
Therefore, based on the overall qualitative assessment from literature review as well
as the user interviews, it was identiﬁed that two main decision-making situations needs
to be studied further to better understand the underlying user preferences; Long term
decisions, like what kind of pricing plan or charging network membership they need
to meet their regular charging demands and Instantaneous decisions that take into
consideration various aspects like cost and convenience to decide where they would like to
charge, especially on longer trips. Therefore, the following two stated choice experiments
are developed, to test preferences of Danish EV users.
4.1
SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular
Charging
There is signiﬁcant research done on the willingness to pay for EV purchase and diﬀerent
business models around it. However, in the interviews it was found that a common
consideration that went into the decision of buying an EV was the operation and mainte-
nance. While, EVs in Denmark are still relatively more expensive than ICE cars, users
state that the comparatively low operation maintenance costs of an EV (roughly 1/3 as
that for ICE cars) is what made EVs more attractive for them. However, the literature is
rather limited on diﬀerent pricing strategies for EV charging and access to EV charging
networks, which accounts for most of the regular operation costs. Additionally, it is seen
==PAGE:35==
4.1 SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular Charging
22
that a lot of diﬀerent factors and preferences account for a long term decision such as
choice of pricing structure and membership with a charging network. Therefore, for the
ﬁrst SC experiment it was decided to present the user with diﬀerent pricing options to
get an idea of what trade-oﬀs they would make, and see which are most attractive pricing
features.
E.ON[33] and Clever[34] are the two biggest EV charging service network providers in
Denmark. They both have a network that is spread out well across Denmark, and have
similar pricing structures. Hence, it was safe to assume that most users would be familiar
with the type of pricing structures provided by them. Furthermore, as E.ON Denmark
had agreed to support this project by distributing the survey to their Danish customers,
it was decided to model the pricing structures to be somewhat similar in attributes to
those provided by E.ON. This would ensure that most respondents are familiar with the
variables presented. The other network that most users would be familiar with is the
Tesla[35] charging network. However, as this is free for Tesla users and non-Tesla users
wouldn’t have access, it was not considered for the pricing attributes. However, some key
features like operability across borders, ﬁnes and intercity locations with high number of
charging points, were kept in mind while designing the survey.
The alternatives decided upon based on the existing pricing structures and hypotheti-
cal future possibilities were No Contract (NC), Flat Fee (FF) and Monthly Subscription
1 and 2(MS1 and MS2). The relevant attributes decided upon were Subscription Cost,
Home Charging Cost, Public Charging Cost and Network Access.
The basic explanation for attributes as considered for the experiment is as follows:
Subscription Cost (kr./month): This a ﬁxed contractual cost paid by the user on
a monthly basis to the charging service provider. It is expected that subscription fees are
inversely related to the public and home charging costs, i.e., the higher the subscription
cost, the lower the cost for charging. This attribute is relevant for Flat Fee and Monthly
Subscription alternatives. As the levels for subscription cost vary between alternatives,
they are discussed in more detail with the alternative description below.
Public Charging Cost (kr./kWh): This is the cost for consuming one unit of
==PAGE:36==
4.1 SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular Charging
23
power (kWh) at a public charging location. It is relevant for the Monthly Subscription and
No Contract alternatives. As the levels for public charging cost vary between alternatives,
they are discussed in more detail with the alternative description below.
Home Charging Cost (kr./kWh): This is the cost for consuming one unit of
power (kWh) for charging the car at home. Usually, the home charging cost can be rather
complicated based on factors like whether the home charging unit is installed or not,
tax exemptions for green energy, contract with electricity provider and charging service
provider etc. Therefore, the home charging cost can vary from user to user. However, for
the purpose of this experiment it was important to provide a common point of reference
and therefore the price levels for home charging were set common for all users. Here,
the reference point was taken based on the average electricity cost per unit in Denmark
which is ∼2 kr./kWh [36]. Therefore, the levels chosen were 1.5, 2 and 2.5 kr./kWh. This
attribute is relevant for No Contract and Monthly Subscription alternatives.
Network Access: In the present conditions, users need to be registered to diﬀerent
charging network providers, in order to get access. Moreover, a contract with one network
provides them access to the charging locations of just that one network, which is further
restricted only to Denmark. This true for most countries and most charging service
providers, with the exception of Tesla. However, as the EV adoption increases, a better
framework allowing interoperability will be required[9][14]. This was also ﬁnding from
the interviews. Therefore, taking into account this hypothetical scenario for the future,
the Network Access attribute is designed to test how desirable interoperability is for the
users. The levels are:
• Only one network in Denmark (DK): This represents the current norm,
where network access under the alternative is restricted to charging locations within
Denmark that belong to the service provider with which the user has a contract.
• All networks in Denmark (DK): This is still hypothetical in DK, but has been
tested in countries like Norway and Netherlands[14] where the user has the option
to operate any charger using the same RFID chip. Here, it means that the pricing
structure allows the user to charge at all locations across Denmark at the given
pricing, irrespective of the service provider for the location.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular Charging
24
• All networks in EU: This is also hypothetical for now. However, it could be a
reality in the near future where users can charge at all locations across EU at the
given pricing, irrespective of the service provider for the location.
These attributes are put together under the following alternatives:
No Contract (NC): This alternative is aimed to replicate for EV users something
similar to the practice of fuelling for a ICE/conventional car and paying for it as you go.
As the name suggests within this alternative the user is not contracted to a charging
service provider, and therefore pays no subscription cost. However, the ﬂip-side is the
higher public charging cost with levels 4, 6 and 8 kr./kWh. The levels were adjusted
according to information provided by E.ON and adjusted for future trends. In February,
Clever decided to reduce their public charging cost to 6 kr./kWh for non-subscribers[37],
which was in line with our assumptions here. Moreover, to further simulate the similarity
with practices for conventional cars, the network access is always kept at "All Networks
in EU". It can be assumed that this hypothetical alternative allows the user to travel
anywhere in EU and pay as per consumption, with no recurring costs.
Flat Fee (FF): This is similar to the "All Inclusive" structure provided by E.ON[33]
and other providers. Here the user enters into a contract with the charging service
provider, and is required to pay a relatively high subscription cost. In return the user
doesn’t pay any additional costs for home and public charging based on units consumed,
i.e., home and public charging cost is zero. Practically there is a limit to the total number
of units that can be consumed per month. However, as this level is in the range of
EV usage of an average EV user, and also for the sake of simplicity, no such limit is
considered here. A mandatory precondition for availing this option is the installation of
a dedicated home charging unit that approximately costs 7000 kr. The network access
can vary between the same levels as discussed earlier. It was seen that charging service
provider set the subscription cost for such an option based on the battery size of the EV
and some other factors dependent on the housing of the user. Therefore, the subscription
cost levels in this option were customised based on inputs from the user, as per Table 4.1.
The user responses considered are availability of a personal/reserved parking space and
the size of the battery.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular Charging
25
Personal/Reserved Parking
Battery Size
Subscription
Yes
≤44
500
600
700
Yes
44 <
700
800
900
No
≤44
300
400
500
No
44 <
500
600
700
Table 4.1: Subscription Cost Levels for Flat Fee
Monthly Subscription 1 (MS1): This alternative is also similar to an option
currently available with E.ON and other providers. Here, there is a monthly subscription
cost which is lower compared to FF. However, there is an additional cost per unit of
power for home and public charging. The home charging cost and network access are
set as per general design speciﬁcations discussed earlier. The subscription cost levels
for this option are 50, 100 and 150 kr./month. As there is a ﬁxed cost per month, the
public charging cost here is kept lower than NC, and the levels are 2.5, 3.5 and 4.5 kr./kWh.
Monthly Subscription 2 (MS2): This is an hypothetical variant of MS1. The
attribute levels are similar to MS1, except the public charging cost. It was designed
keeping in mind the possibility of smart charging, that would allow a user to capitalise
on ﬂuctuating electricity prices. Which is why the public charging cost here would be
dependent on peak and oﬀpeak hours. Peak hours are deﬁned as Monday to Friday
6am to 9am and 4pm to 7pm. The rest are oﬀ-peak hours. The public charging cost
during peak hours has the levels 3.5, 4.5 and 5.5 kr./kWh, which is higher than in MS1.
However, the prices for oﬀpeak hours would be 2, 3 and 4 kr./kWh which are lower
than MS1. The peak and oﬀ-peak prices were taken in ﬁxed pairs, that is 3.5 for peak is
always shown with 2 for oﬀ-peak, 4.5 with 3 and 5.5 with 4. Which means that there
is always a 1.5 kr. diﬀerence between the peak and oﬀ-peak pricing. This is an option
that would incentivise charging in oﬀ-peak hours, and hence reduce the load and power
quality issues in the grid during peak hours. This is done keeping in mind the ﬁnding in
the literature review that users tend to charge at peak hours, especially in the evening.[14]
The alternatives and related attributes can be summarised as seen in Table 4.2. Note
that, for simplicity, the subscription price is shown as 500/600/700 in the table. The
levels for this were discussed earlier in Table 4.1. In general the values/levels considered
in this design for subscription and public charging were set based on a combination
==PAGE:39==
4.1 SC 1: Long term decisions - Regular Charging
26
No Contract
Flat Fee
Monthly
Subscription
1
Monthly
Subscription
2
Subscription
Cost (kr.)
0
700/600/500
150/100/50
150/100/50
Home Charging
Cost (kr./kWh)
1.5/2/2.5
0
1.5/2/2.5
1.5/2/2.5
Public Charging
Cost (kr./kWh)
8/6/4
0
2.5/3.5/4.5
Peak hours:
3.5/4.5/5.5
Oﬀ-Peak hours:
2/3/4
Network Access
All networks in EU
One network in DK/
All networks in DK/
All networks in EU
Table 4.2: SC 1: Design setup for long term decisions
of available references, discussion with members of the team at E.ON that has been
supporting the project, SC experiment design requirements and anticipated future trends.
It is important to also note that, a question was asked before the SC scenarios in the
survey, to ﬁnd out whether the respondent had the possibility to charge at home. If there
was no possibility to charge at home, the home charging cost attribute was removed from
the SC scenarios for those respondents. This was done to avoid the decision making to
be more realistic and uninﬂuenced by irrelevant factors.
In the initial version of the SC design, and additional attribute called "Fines" was
considered. The attribute was applicable to public charging, and was similar to a ﬁning
system applied for the Tesla network, where the customer is charged a time based ﬁne
(kr./min) if they do not disconnect from the charger after the charging is complete. This
would reduce the possibility of congestion and over consumption. Another aspect in
the initial version was that the network access attribute was a little more detailed, with
additional/higher costs than public charging costs, to use chargers on another network
or outside Denmark.
A pilot survey, mainly consisting of the SC scenarios, was conducted among EV users
at some departments at DTU and by sharing the survey on some Swedish EV forums
==PAGE:40==
4.2 SC 2: Instantaneous Decisions - Charging on Long Trips
27
on Facebook. This was done to get an initial data set for testing, and feedback on the
survey questions, without inﬂuencing future respondents. While the data collected wasn’t
signiﬁcant enough, some users found the survey a little complicated to understand. In
order to simplify the scenarios and make it easy to answer, the attribute for ﬁne was
removed, and the network access attribute was simpliﬁed to the form seen in Table 4.2.
4.2
SC 2: Instantaneous Decisions -
Charging on Long Trips
Continuing the narrative of cost and convenience being two important factors for EV
users, another scenario was anticipated that would that has become increasingly common
now. With the increased battery size and range of EVs, along wit the availability of fast
chargers, it is seen that more EV users have started taking their EVs for longer trips,
like vacations, or intercity travel or travel to summer houses. This was also observed
in the interviews conducted, as mentioned earlier. While still most people prefer using
their conventional ICE cars for longer trips [9], the tendency is shifting as EV adoption
increases and charging infrastructure improves. Moreover, it is noted in various studies
that public charging infrastructure was an important safety net for users, especially in
intercity locations to facilitate longer trips [14] [6].
Therefore, with this consideration, it was recognised that a second SC experiment
was necessary to investigate the charging preferences of EV users when it comes to
long trips. The idea here was to ask users to consider the scenario that they are on
a long trip and as their battery level is low (∼20%) they need to charge at a public
fast charging option nearby. Based on this the choice scenario was created with the
possibility to choose between 3 charging locations, with diﬀerent levels for the attributes
Detour, Chargers Available, Charging Speed, Cost and Additional Facilities. This was an
unlabelled experiment, so the alternatives were all similar in structure. The attributes
are explained as follows:
Detour (minutes): Putting oneself in the shoes of a EV user about to make a
decision to charge the EV, while on a long trip, detour is the ﬁrst attribute that probably
==PAGE:41==
4.2 SC 2: Instantaneous Decisions - Charging on Long Trips
28
comes to mind. Most users have a way of ﬁnding out charging locations available nearby
using maps on apps or websites by charging service providers or like Chargemap[38].
Based on this the user can estimate the detour they need to take to use these chargers.
A choice needed to be made between presenting detour in units of distance or time. It
was decided that time would be easier to interpret for respondents and based on this
levels of 0, 5 and 10 minutes were assumed. Ideally it would be expected that users
prefer minimal detour. That is why detour is an interesting factor to look at especially in
context with the attributes yet to be discussed, because people can have choice variations
and trade-oﬀs where they can choose a larger detour if it provides better utility due to
other attributes.
Chargers Available: The next consideration is the number of chargers available at
the locations. This has two inherent factors, i.e., the total number of chargers at the
location and how many out of those were available. So, this attribute is a combination of
these two factors and is similar to what one would say is the probability of ﬁnding a vacant
charger at a location. Based on interactions with EV users it was found that locations
could have from as low as 1 charger to some locations with over 10 chargers. Hence,the
levels for total number of chargers chosen are 1, 4 and 10 chargers to capture a general
range of low, medium and high. The levels for the number of chargers vacant/available
were set as 0, 1 or 2, to simulate the lower end of possible probabilities to ﬁnd a vacant
charger and test the trade-oﬀs made at this condition. That is, with the combination of
these two factors, it can be seen that the user would be making a choice between the
options 0 out of 1, 1 out of 1, 0 out of 4, 1 out of 4, 2 out of 4, 0 out of 10, 1 out of
10, and 2 out of 10 chargers available. These options cover the probability of ﬁnding a
vacant charger to be 0 in three combinations, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.5 in one combination each
and 1 in one combination. The reasoning behind this hypotheses is that, logically, if one
is to choose between options with a high probability of chargers being vacant, then their
decision making might not take into account the vacancy and would rather be based on
other factors. So, to make charger availability a competitive attribute, these levels were
taken. It could also be argued that just having the number of vacant chargers would
have been enough. However, in a realistic case, the user has access to information on
total chargers at a location. Moreover, even though there is a condition where no charger
is vacant (zero level), the total number of chargers can inﬂuence the choice. For example,
users might think that at a location with a higher number of total chargers, even though
==PAGE:42==
4.2 SC 2: Instantaneous Decisions - Charging on Long Trips
29
all spots are occupied, the chances of the charger being vacated soon were also higher. In
the survey design software there were some instances where the scenario generated the
option 2 out of 1 chargers available. As this was unrealistic, this option was manually
adjusted to 1 out of 1 available.
Charging Speed (in km per 10 minutes): This attribute represented the speed
at which the chargers would charge the EV battery. Originally, this was supposed to
represent charging time. However, in the most general case of a linear charging curve,
the equation for charging time is:
ChargingTime = Battery Size ∗%Charge Required
Charger Capacity
(4.1)
As it can be seen, charging time is dependent on many conditions like the car battery
size, the capacity of the charger and upto what battery level percentage the user wishes
to solve. This isn’t ideal for a general attribute which can be compared and understood
equally by all respondents. All users might not be aware of these calculations, whereas
some may not be able to make decisions based on values of charger capacity given in kWh.
However, most users are aware of how much distance they need to travel on long trips
and how much time they would like to wait. Moreover, on a long trip the users would
most likely prefer fast chargers as they wouldn’t want to long breaks on a journey. Based
on this it was decided that charging speed should be represented in terms of km range
added to the car after charging at a fast charger for unit of time thereby giving the user
an idea of both the factors they can easily comprehend, distance and time. This was also
inﬂuenced by data provided in [5] about kilometre range added to a battery in general
on a 10 minute charge. Furthermore, anything from 22 kW and above is considered as
a fast charger. Therefore, the corresponding range in km per 10 minutes of charge is,
approximately 60 to 100. Based on all this information, the levels selected here were 60,
85 and 110 km per 10 minute of charge.
Cost (kr./kWh): This is a rather self-explanatory attribute, as already discussed in
SC1. What’s important to note here is that the levels were set as per the public charging
cost levels of the No Contract option, i.e., 4, 6 and 8 kr./kWh. Moreover, it’s known that
diﬀerent respondent can have contracts with diﬀerent pricing structures, that is why a
more generally applicable cost attribute was needed. Hence, respondents were asked not
==PAGE:43==
4.2 SC 2: Instantaneous Decisions - Charging on Long Trips
30
to take into account their existing pricing plans or the choices they might have made in
SC1.
Additional Facilities: A lot of times the charging locations may or may not have
additional facilities like at a gas station. In the study conducted in Norway it was seen
that these additional facilities did aﬀect how attractive a charging location was for users
and they preferred locations with good facilities. These facilities allow the users to take a
break and get some rest on their trips, and are especially important for when families are
travelling with children. The activities users do during this waiting time can range from
using restrooms/toilets, watching content online, to getting some food and refreshment.
In some cases due to lack facilities they do nothing but wait or take a stroll, which is less
preferable.[9] Therefore available additional facilities were given three levels: None, Only
Restroom Available and Restroom, Supermarket and Restaurants available.
A summary of the SC2 design and levels for the attributes can be seen in Table 4.3.
In the initial iterations of the survey design, attributes for Fine and Waiting Time were
also considered. In order to simplify the survey after feedback during the pilot, the
attribute for Fine was removed. Waiting time was removed as it was argued that most
users don’t have an idea of the waiting time to get a vacant charger before they get to a
location. Also, as the decision making scenario given is related to a situation before the
user gets to the location, the waiting time attribute was removed from the design.
Attributes
Levels
Detour (minutes)
0/5/10
Chargers Available
Vacant: 0/1/2
Total: 1/4/10
Charging speed (km/10 min.)
60/85/110
Cost (kr./kWh)
4/6/8
Additional Facilities
None
Only Restroom
Restroom, Supermarket and Restaurants
Table 4.3: SC 2: Design setup for instantaneous decisions
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Final Survey
31
4.3
Final Survey
As stated earlier, the SC experiments for this project are designed using an orthogonal
design. For doing so NGENE [23] was used. For both, SC1 and SC2, 27 choice scenarios
with 9 blocks were created. This means that each respondent would answer 3 scenar-
ios of SC1 and 3 scenarios of SC2. All the choice scenarios can be seen in the Appendix A.
The ﬁnal survey presented to the respondents was prepared in Qualtrics, an online
platform capable of making dynamic surveys, which is need for SC experiments. The
survey was being supported by E.ON Denmark in order to continue the data collec-
tion similar to what was done in the previous three years under the GREAT project
(https://great-region.org/). Therefore, the ﬁnal survey had many other revealed
preference and attitudinal questions, for EV and non-EV users. However, this project
mainly focuses on the EV users and questions related to the SC experiment.
Figure 4.1: General Introduction to SC Scenarios
For the SC part, the respondents were ﬁrst shown a general introductory slide (see
Figure 4.1) explaining to them that they would be asked to choose options under two
hypothetical scenarios and each scenario would be shown three times with diﬀerent values.
This was followed by the two slides with introductory explanation of the SC1 (see
Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3). The ﬁrst slide explains the hypothetical scenario, that one of
the large charging network providers in Denmark presents them with four pricing options,
and they need to choose one of them based on their usage and preferences. The second
slide provides some supporting information that explains some aspects of the attribute
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Final Survey
32
that might be unclear to the respondent, like the network access or time based part
of MS2. Here it is also mentioned that for FF a dedicated home charging unit costing
7000DKK is mandatory.
Figure 4.2: Introductions Slide 1 for SC1
Figure 4.3: Introductions Slide 2 for SC1
Next they were shown the 3 out of 27 of the SC1 scenarios based on which of the
9 blocks they were assigned. A feature in Qualtrics allows for the respondents to be
randomly assigned a block, and evenly distribute this assignment. This ensured that
all the scenarios were equally represented. Prior to the SC, the respondents were asked
questions about their car parking, EV battery size and whether it was possible for
them to have a home charging unit installed. The type of parking and battery size
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Final Survey
33
decided the subscription cost levels of the FF option for them as per Table 4.1. If the
respondent had indicated they had the possibility for or had already installed a home
charger, then they were shown the scenario as seen in Figure 4.4. In case they indicated
that the home charger installation was not possible for them, then they saw a scenario
where home charging cost was removed, like in Figure 4.5. Also, the point about FF
requiring a dedicated home charging unit was removed from the introductory slide for
these respondents.
Figure 4.4: SC1 Sample Scenario
Figure 4.5: SC1 Sample Scenario - without home charging
After this, introductory slide for SC2 (Figure 4.6) was shown, which explained to
the respondent that scenario of being on a long trip with a battery level 20% and they
needed to choose a public fast charging location. Here it was also mentioned that this
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Final Survey
34
was a new scenario unrelated to the previous scenarios or their existing pricing plans.
Then similar to SC1, 3 scenarios, like in Figure 4.7, were shown.
Figure 4.6: Introductions Slide for SC2
Figure 4.7: SC2 Sample Scenario
The rest of the survey questions relevant to this study, that were asked to EV users,
can be seen in the Appendix A.
==PAGE:48==
5 Descriptive Statistics
The survey was was launched on 11th March, 2020. Most of the responses received were
via the survey being shared by E.ON to it’s customer base in Denmark. Additionally,
the survey was also posted on various Danish EV forums on Facebook. A total of 686
complete responses were collected. From all these responses, 558 are BEV users. For
the purpose of this thesis the focus has been on BEV users and henceforth all the analysis
presented is based on responses of these 558 users. Out of the 558 responses, 488 responses
are from users who are E.ON Denmark customers, and 70 are non-E.ON customers. The
response collection was stopped on 4th April, 2020. The following sections discuss various
basic descriptive statistics related to the respondents and their EV usage. As this survey
was voluntary and certain amount of privacy needed to be maintained as per GDPR,
there are characteristics where a few respondents choose not to share their information.
Therefore total responses for some variables may be less than 558. However, the share of
these unknown responses are very insigniﬁcant (∼1%).
5.1
Socio-demographics
Based on the statistics represented in Table 5.1, it can be said that the average respondent
in this study is similar to that in most studies previously discussed in the literature review.
Majority of the respondents (88%) are male, and the average age is 50 years. The average
age is slightly higher than the average age of a person in Denmark, which is 41.5 years [39].
While 86% of respondents are employed or self-employed, 86% earn above 30,000
DKK/month and the median income lies in the range of 50,000 to 59,000 DKK/month.
As per the general statistics by Danmarks Statistik [39], this is higher than the average
Danish income. Additionally, at least 80% of the responses come from people who
have taken some form of further education, while 12% studied in vocational schools.
With 72% respondents who have completed medium or long term further education
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Socio-demographics
36
at a University level, it is safe to say that the average respondent has a high education level.
Lastly, 91% respondents come from households with 2 or more members, at an average
of 2.8 household members, which is also higher than the Danish average of 2.1 members
per household [39]. Only 28% respondents have households with one or more children
below the age of 10 years.
Frequency
Percent
Gender
Female
66
12%
Male
486
88%
Age (years)
18 - 30
20
4%
31 - 50
265
48%
51 - 70
239
43%
71+
31
6%
Income (DKK/month)
Less than 20,000
23
5%
20,000 - 29,000
48
9%
30,000 - 39,000
70
14%
40,000 - 49,000
105
21%
50,000 - 59,000
109
21%
60,000 - 69,000
52
10%
70,000+
102
20%
Employement
Employee
384
69%
Self-employed
96
17%
Pensioner/Eearly retirement
61
11%
Other
15
3%
Education
9-10th grade
8
1%
Upper secondary
25
4%
Vocational school
67
12%
Short-term further (1½ - 2 years)
43
8%
Medium-term further (2 - 5 years)
184
33%
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Housing Related
37
Long-term further (min. 5 years)
216
39%
Other
14
3%
Household (HH)
One person HH
48
9%
HH with Children
158
28%
Table 5.1: Socio Demographics
Therefore, it can be said that the average respondent in the data collected from the
survey is a 50 year old male, with some form of higher education. He is employed and
has an above average income. These characteristics are fairly similar to those seen in
respondents of the studies discussed earlier.
5.2
Housing Related
It was important to collect information about type of housing, and speciﬁcally type of
parking and availability of home charging unit, in order to set the subscription costs for
the Flat Fee option. In Table 5.2, it can be seen that over 80% of the respondents live in
urban or sub urban locations. This is important to know, as this could be mean most
people live in close proximity to some form of public charging solution.
Additionally, it can be seen that most of the respondents have some sort of personal
or reserved parking available, while 22% have to use some form of public or shared
parking. This also explains why 67% have a home charging unit installed, and 13% have
the possibility to install it. While, 20% don’t have this possibility. This could imply that,
as seen in the previous literature, most users would want to charge their EVs at home.
Frequency
Percent
Housing Type
Urban
252
45%
Sub-urban
204
37%
Rural
98
18%
Car Parking
Public/Street parking
81
15%
Shared parking space in complex
37
7%
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Vehicle Related
38
Reserved parking space in complex
25
4%
Personal parking in driveway or garage
415
74%
Home Charging Unit
Installed
372
67%
Possible but not installed
74
13%
Not Possible
112
20%
Table 5.2: Statistics related to housing, parking and home charging
5.3
Vehicle Related
It was important to ﬁnd out the basic speciﬁcations of the EV in focus, especially as it
was seen in the qualitative assessment that Tesla users tend to have somewhat diﬀerent
preferences and expectations, based on their experience. In Table 5.3 it can be seen
that almost half (48%) respondents are Tesla users, which allows for a good comparison
between some preferences for Tesla and Non-Tesla users. In the non-Tesla EVs, it is seen
that Nissan and Renault EVs are common among respondents. This was also partially
expected, as per Danish EV sales statistics by Dansk Elbil Alliance, where Teslas are the
highest sold EVs in Denmark.[2]
For the Flat Fee option in the survey it was important to take into account the
battery sizes, and therefore battery statistics were also recorded. It can be seen that
most users have EVs with batteries bigger than 44 kWh, with the mean size being 58
kWh. This is to be expected as most respondents have Teslas which tend to have bigger
batteries. Moreover, this also points to the aﬃnity of users to cars with bigger batteries,
pointing to a need to overcome their range anxiety.
Frequency
Percent
Make
BMW
33
6%
Hyundai
42
8%
Nissan
82
15%
Renault
68
12%
Tesla
269
48%
VW
36
6%
==PAGE:52==
5.3 Vehicle Related
39
Other
28
5%
Battery Size (kWh)
Less or equal to 44 kWh
215
39%
Greater than 44 kWh
343
61%
Mean
58
Purchase Year
2018-2020
466
83.5%
2015-2017
66
11.8%
Before 2015
26
4.7%
Other Cars
More than one BEV
67
12%
Gasoline/Diesel Cars
257
46%
Table 5.3: Statistics related to EVs and other cars in household
Additionally, most respondents got their most frequent used EV, very recently. Over
80% of them have been purchased between 2018 and this year. This is very much in
line with the EV purchase statistics across the globe and speciﬁcally in Denmark [2].
This also shows how the EV market is still in it’s nascent stage. Almost half the users
also have a Gasoline/Diesel car, which is in line with previous studies. Surprisingly, 12%
respondents have more than one EV (speciﬁcally BEV).
Figure 5.1: Frequency of general transport mode usage
==PAGE:53==
5.4 EV Usage Statistics
40
5.4
EV Usage Statistics
In this section diﬀerent statistics about average usage frequency of EV, and charging
choices are discussed. First, it can be seen from Figure 5.1 that, keeping with national
statistics, the most frequently used mode of transport for the respondents is the Car [39].
82% of the respondents use the car at least 5 times a week, as a driver.
Digging in deeper into the numbers for the 558 EV users, we see in Table 5.4 that on
an average the respondents travel 561 kms per week, which is distributed over an average
of 10 trips per week. One trip is considered driving from point A to B. Furthermore, the
respondents charge on an average 5 times a week.
Min
Max
Mean
Median
Weekly Trips
1
45
10.7312
10
Weekly Distance (km)
15
20000
561.09
450
Weekly Charge Frequency
1
30
5.2276
5
Table 5.4: Statistics related to driving and charging usage
Additionally, it can be seen in Figure 5.2 that 63% of the EV users use their car to
travel to work 5 times a week. This clubbed with the average of 10 weekly trips and 5
charges seen in Table 5.4, could mean that most respondents use their EV to travel to
work from Monday to Friday and probably charge every day if possible.
The next most frequent trip purpose is dropping oﬀor picking up children, with
17% respondents stating they use their EV for this 5 times a week,. Thereafter, most
respondents take miscellaneous trips like shopping, errands and leisure with a frequency
of 1 to 4 times a week. Lastly, vacation trips are less frequent, as would be expected, at
less than 3 times a month.
Lastly, as seen in Figure 5.3 more than half the respondents charge their EVs at
home using a home charger, at least 3 - 5 times a week. This is pretty much in line
with the statistics seen in Table 5.4 where 5 charges per week are seen as the average.
Overall, the next most frequent charging location is used a few times a week by 26%
==PAGE:54==
5.4 EV Usage Statistics
41
Figure 5.2: Frequency of diﬀerent types of trips with EV
respondents. This behaviour also relates to the fact that most of the respondents have a
private/reserved parking and a home charging unit installed, as in Table 5.2, while the
users without a home charging unit or a personal parking space (over 20% in both cases)
end up using the public slow chargers a few times a week.
It’s interesting to see that 72% respondents never use work charging, probably due to
the lack of charging infrastructure at their work places. Moreover, among the Tesla users
who have access to the Tesla Super Charger network, most respondents use it only a few
times a month.
Figure 5.3: Frequency of charging at diﬀerent locations
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Long trips related
42
In summary, the average respondent to the survey is male, around the age of 50
years. He has a high level of education, and a high income of around 50,000 DKK/month.
Moreover, he lives in a household with at least 1 or 2 other people, in what’s most likely
an urban or sub-urban dwelling. He has his own car parking space and has a home
charger installed. It’s highly likely that he drives a Tesla, and mostly uses it to drive to
and back from work. Most frequently he charges his car at home, about 5 times a week,
and covers around 500 km a week.
5.5
Long trips related
For the SC2 it was important to record some information related to the experiences
of the respondents with long trips in the last 5 years. As seen in Table 5.5 more than
half the respondents have taken long trips. Furthermore, respondents who had taken
long trips were asked what problems they had faced with charging during these long
trips. The most common problem is "Too few chargers", and over 25% of these users
faced problems with availability of chargers, payments or connection to chargers. This
clearly points to a need for improvement of the public charging infrastructure especially
at intercity locations.
Frequency
Percent
Long Trips
Yes
309
55%
No
249
45%
Problems
Payment solution
80
26%
Connection to the charger
80
26%
Too few chargers
169
55%
Chargers occupied/long waiting time
91
29%
Only/mainly slow chargers
90
29%
Other problems
46
15%
Table 5.5: Statistics related to long trips and relevant problems with charging
==PAGE:56==
6 Modelling Results and
Discussion
The following sections discuss the results obtained by applying discrete choice modelling
to the the data collected from the survey. For both SC1 and SC2, the modelling begins
with a base Multinomial Logit (MNL) model, consisting of only the attributes included in
the SC scenarios, without any transformations. Following an iterative process, individual
speciﬁc parameters were added systematically, and models were tested for improvement
in goodness for ﬁt. This was mainly done by checking if the sign of estimates made sense
theoretically and practically, the parameters showed signiﬁcance based on t-test values,
and if the overall model was improved based on the log-likelihood (LL) value and LR
test. Additionally, some key attributes were also tested for non-linear transformations
by applying box-cox transformations, and based on the values obtained, a decision was
made about keeping it linear or logarithmic. Also, various combinations were tested with
alternative speciﬁc parameters, changing reference alternative and interactions between
attributes, leading to the ﬁnal MNL model. The next step was to test the speciﬁcations
with a Mixed Logit (ML) model where randomisation and panel eﬀect was taken into
account for the parameter coeﬃcients and the standard deviation of the parameters
was checked, in order to account for the random taste variation among respondents.As
the SC1 is a labelled experiment, the calculated direct and cross elasticities for key
attributes are presented based on the MNL and ML model. However, as elasticities have
no substantive meaning in unlabelled experiments [40] this step was not carried out for
SC2. The modelling was carried out using PandasBiogeme package in Python [41].
6.1
SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
As discussed in the survey design, SC1 is a labelled experiment with 4 alternatives No
Contract (NC), Flat Fee (FF), Monthly Subscription 1 and 2 (MS1 and MS2). The
==PAGE:57==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
44
observed market shares can be seen in Table 6.1.
Observed (%)
NC
23.256
FF
53.858
MS1
13.108
MS2
9.778
Table 6.1: Market Share: Observed
The MNL model has four utility functions, one for each alternative respectively. The
main attributes included under each of these alternatives can be seen in Table 4.2. As
it can be seen that in NC, the subscription cost and network access are ﬁxed value
attributes, while in FF, the home and public charging costs are ﬁxed. Therefore, these
are not taken into account in their respective utility functions. Therefore, in the base
MNL model for SC1, each utility function has an attribute for subscription cost, home
charging cost, public charging cost and network access, excluding where they are ﬁxed
values. Moreover, network access is split into 3 dummy variables for the three levels One
network in Dk, All networks in Dk and All networks in EU, with a binary variable for
each. The variable for one network in DK is taken as the reference in the estimations.
Based on this, the base model has been estimated and the results for the parameter
values are shown in Table 6.2. All the parameters here are generic and the alternatives
they are included in are indicated in brackets.
The ﬁrst check is whether the signs of the parameters make sense. All three cost
related parameters have a negative sign. As we expect respondents to make logical
decisions, cost is expected to have a negative sign, implying that users derive less utility
when costs are increased. Therefore, the estimates here are in line with theoretical and
practical understanding. Moreover, it can be seen that the parameters for subscription
and public charging cost are signiﬁcant at 99% conﬁdence level, based on the t-test value.
The network access parameters, show positive estimates, which is to be expected as in
reference to access to just one network in DK, users would derive greater utility from better
network access, as in the all networks in DK and EU levels. However, only the parame-
ter for access to all networks in EU shows statistical signiﬁcance at a 99% conﬁdence level.
==PAGE:58==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
45
Description
Value
Std. error
t-test
p-value
ASC (FF)
1.380
0.267
5.160
0.000
ASC (MS1)
0.174
0.109
1.600
0.109
ASC (NC)
1.200
0.124
9.680
0.000
Subscription Cost (FF, MS1, MS2)
-0.001
0.000
-2.020
0.044
Home Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
-0.099
0.056
-1.780
0.074
Public Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
-0.144
0.032
-4.540
0.000
All networks in DK (FF,MS1,MS2)
0.156
0.091
1.700
0.089
All networks in EU (FF,MS1,MS2)
0.298
0.090
3.310
0.001
Sample size:
1674
Initial log likelihood:
-2320.66
Final log likelihood:
-1930.48
Number of parameters:
8
Table 6.2: SC1 Base MNL Model
Overall this base model has a ﬁnal LL of -1930.48, and two parameters have a lower
signiﬁcance, showing that there is room for improvement. In order to do so various
combinations were tried and tested, leading upto the ﬁnal version of the MNL model
seen in Table 6.3. While there were a lot of diﬀerent steps that went into developing this
model, only the important variations and observations made will be discussed.
The ﬁrst step in this process was to check if the parameters for home and public
charging cost can be combined, seeing that the attributes have the same units. However,
even though the combined parameter showed signiﬁcance, the overall model ﬁt wasn’t
better. Moreover, it can be argued that despite having the same units, the two attributes
have relatively diﬀerent levels (see Table 4.2) which could have diﬀerent psychological
perceptions for the user. Also, it is seen in the literature review and descriptive statistics
that home and public charging behaviour is distinctly diﬀerent and it would be interesting
to see separate results for the two. Based on these arguments, it was decided to continue
with separate home and public charging cost parameters.
The next step was to test for non-linear transformations in the cost parameters. To do
so, a box cox transformation was applied to subscription cost, home and public charging
==PAGE:59==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
46
cost one at a time. The box-cox equation is:
x′
λ = xλ −1
λ
(6.1)
Here, if the estimated λ is closer to 0, it implies the variable should be logarithmic
and if it is closer to 1, it should be linear. When tested for subscription and public
charging cost parameters, the estimated values pointed to a log transformation. Whereas
for the home charging cost it pointed to keeping the attribute linear. Furthermore,
the LL improved with the log transformations of subscription and public charging cost
attributes. Therefore, even though log scales are somewhat diﬃcult to interpret, due the
mathematical signiﬁcance, these transformations for subscription and public charging
costs were maintained. Doing so led to a model with a LL -1919.272 while there were still
8 parameters. This highlights the improvement in the model ﬁt due to the log transform.
In the iterative process the next variation was to test if having separate parameters
for subscription cost in FF and monthly subscription (MS1 and MS2) made sense. So, a
model was tested where there was an alternative speciﬁc parameter for subscription cost
in FF, while the parameter for MS1 and MS2 was kept generic. The argument for this
was how diﬀerent the levels for subscription cost in FF (varying from 300 to 900) and MS
(varying between 50, 100 and 150). Also, seeing that FF had the biggest market share
out of the four alternatives, it is interesting to see what sets this alternative apart. This
reasoning combined with a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the estimated values and an improved
model ﬁt, meant that the separate parameters for FF and MS were kept in the model.
Next, it was hypothesised that the choice behaviour of the respondents must also
dependent upon their travel and charging behaviour. Plus, seeing the high variation
in the weekly distance covered by individuals (Table 5.4), this was the next attribute
to be tested. In doing so, the distance covered weekly was tested in multiple diﬀerent
ways: generic parameter with MS2 as reference alternative, alternative speciﬁc parameter
with MS2 as reference alternative, changing the reference alternative etc. The model
that showed the best results was one where the parameter was added only to the FF
alternative. Furthermore, based on the box-cox transformation it was seen that a log
transform would improve the speciﬁcation. Therefore, a parameter for the log transform
of distance covered weekly was kept in the FF alternative. Moreover, seeing the wide
variation in weekly distance, it makes sense to have log transform. As seen in Table 6.3
==PAGE:60==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
47
the parameter shows a positive value and high signiﬁcance. The interpretation here is
that, based on the marginal utility (0.999) individuals driving more get a greater utility
from the FF alternative compared to other alternatives. That is to say that people who
drive more would prefer the FF pricing structure. This makes sense qualitatively, as the
ﬂat fee structure allows them to pay one ﬁxed price and not worry about how many
times the car needs to be charged at home or outside. Note that, this relation needs to
be interpreted keeping in mind the logarithmic scale.
In the next few iterations, the attributes tested were the battery size of a respondents
EV, a dummy for Tesla user or not, and the frequency with which a user charged at
diﬀerent charging locations. Similar to the weekly distance, these attributes were also
tested under diﬀerent model speciﬁcations. Based on the results, the ﬁnal model includes
an attribute for the battery size, a dummy variable for Tesla users and attributes for
charging at diﬀerent charging location (home with type 1/granny charger, home with
home charging unit, public slow chargers and fast chargers). The Tesla dummy is 1 for
Tesla users and 0 for non-Tesla users. The variables for charging location usage frequency
vary from 1 to 6 (1 = never and 6 = 5 times a week). The diﬀerent levels are seen in
Figure 5.3. These attributes showed best ﬁt when included in FF alternative. Based on
the results, it can be said that if the individual has an EV with a bigger battery, then
he/she prefers the FF option. Similarly it is seen that Tesla users also have a higher
preference for FF. The frequency of charging at home with a home charging unit, or at
public slow and fast chargers, shows a positive relation with the utility of FF. This is
probably due to the zero home and public charging costs that FF oﬀers. However, what’s
interesting to see is that the estimate for the charging with type 1 charger has a negative
sign. The reason for this can be that for the Flat Fee option it was said that the user
required to get a home charging unit costing 7000 kr. and maybe people who frequently
charge with a type 1 charger prefer not to spend that much money. Another explanation
could be that these users could have some sort of beneﬁts based on their contracts with
the electricity provider, which makes charging at home cost eﬀective even if it is with a
slow charger, and they prefer not to pay a higher price for their charging needs. However,
these explanations are diﬃcult to conﬁrm based on the data alone. Charging frequency
at work was also tested, however it was found to be insigniﬁcant, and was not included
in the ﬁnal model.
==PAGE:61==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
48
The next step was to include various socio-demographic attributes. In a similar
manner to previous attributes discussed, parameters for Age, Income, Gender, Educa-
tion were tested. Models were also tested for the parameters with socio-demographic
attributes interacted on main attributes like subscription, home and public charging
costs. Based on the results Age and Income showed signiﬁcant results at 99% conﬁdence.
The gender dummy, where 1 = Female, 0 = Male, showed some signiﬁcance, and was
kept because the ﬁnal result was intriguing. Education as a standalone parameter, didn’t
show signiﬁcance, nor did all the parameters for diﬀerent interactions. Again, the best
model ﬁt was found when the parameters were added to FF. It can be seen in the results
that high income earners show a preference for FF, while females do not prefer the ﬂat fee.
Furthermore, models were tested for Age as a grouped attribute, with age groups for
below 30, between 31 and 50, between 51 and 70, and above 70. The group for above 70
was take as reference. In the results it was found that individuals under 30 and between
the age of 30 and 50 showed a preference for FF. Whereas people between 51 and 70
showed a lower preference for Flat Fee. The signiﬁcance of the parameter for age group
between 30 and 50 is at a lower conﬁdence level of ∼65%. Grouping for income groups
was also tested, but, the results were insigniﬁcant. However, the signs of the estimate
for income groups of income below 50,000 were negative, and above 50,000 income were
positive. While insigniﬁcant statistically, it hints at the tipping point for the preferences
to change with respect to income.
The results of the estimates from the ﬁnal MNL model are shown in Table 6.3.
As discussed, most parameters included show a high signiﬁcance at ∼99% and three
parameters show signiﬁcance at lower conﬁdence levels. Overall the ﬁnal model has a LL
of -1631.94 which is signiﬁcantly better than the base model.
Furthermore, the validity of the model is also checked when the observed and esti-
mated market shares for the four alternatives are computed and compared, as seen in
Table 6.4. While the estimated and observed shares are fairly close, the estimated market
share is slightly higher for NC, and lower for MS1 and MS2.
Other important indicators for the model are the direct and cross elasticities. For
the ﬁnal MNL model the direct and cross elasticities are calculated with respect to
subscription costs (Table 6.5), home and public charging costs (Table 6.6). The direct
==PAGE:62==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
49
Description
Value
Std. error
t-test
p-value
ASC (FF)
3.380
1.560
2.170
0.030
ASC (MS1)
0.102
0.113
0.899
0.368
ASC (NC)
-1.440
0.557
-2.590
0.010
log Subscription Cost (FF)
-2.470
0.360
-6.870
0.000
log Subscription Cost (MS1, MS2)
-0.621
0.123
-5.050
0.000
Home Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
-0.301
0.083
-3.630
0.000
log Public Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
-0.866
0.169
-5.130
0.000
All networks in DK (FF,MS1,MS2)
0.193
0.102
1.900
0.058
All networks in EU (FF,MS1,MS2)
0.336
0.102
3.300
0.001
Charging with Type 1/Granny (FF)
-0.317
0.058
-5.460
0.000
Charging with Home Charging Unit (FF)
0.123
0.042
2.910
0.004
Charging with Public Slow Charger (FF)
0.454
0.056
8.150
0.000
Charging with Public Fast Charger (FF)
0.145
0.064
2.260
0.024
log Distance covered weekly (FF)
0.999
0.101
9.890
0.000
Battery Size (FF)
0.012
0.004
3.510
0.000
Tesla user (FF)
0.473
0.173
2.740
0.006
Income (FF)
0.075
0.024
3.100
0.002
Female (FF)
-0.338
0.191
-1.770
0.076
Age below 30 (FF)
1.940
0.807
2.400
0.016
Age b/w 31 and 50 (FF)
1.390
0.789
1.760
0.079
Age b/w 51 and 70 (FF)
-0.692
0.122
-5.670
0.000
Sample size:
1674
Final log likelihood:
-1631.94
Number of parameters:
21
Table 6.3: SC1 Final MNL Model
Observed (%)
MNL (%)
NC
23.256
23.536
FF
53.858
53.883
MS1
13.108
13.023
MS2
9.778
9.558
Table 6.4: Market Share: Observed vs Estimated by ﬁnal MNL model
==PAGE:63==
6.1 SC1:Long term decisions - MNL model
50
SubFF
SubMS1
SubMS2
NC
1.333
0.081
0.059
FF
-1.141
0.081
0.059
MS1
1.333
-0.540
0.059
MS2
1.333
0.081
-0.562
Table 6.5: SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal MNL model - Subscription Cost
PubNC
PubMS1
PubMS2
HomeNC
HomeMS1
HomeMS2
NC
-0.662
0.113
0.083
-0.371
0.062
0.045
FF
0.204
0.113
0.083
0.111
0.062
0.045
MS1
0.204
-0.753
0.083
0.111
-0.419
0.045
MS2
0.204
0.113
-0.783
0.111
0.062
-0.435
Table 6.6: SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal MNL model - Public and Home
Charging Costs
elasticities are highlighted in red, and represent how much the utility of the given
alternative is aﬀected by an unit increase in the given attribute. The cross elasticities
represent how a unit increase in the attribute aﬀects the other alternatives. The values
represented here are an average of the elasticities over all observations. Due to the IIA
property of MNL, the same cross elasticity is seen across alternatives. It’s important
to remember that subscription and public charging cost are log transformed, and this
must be taken into account when interpreting the elasticities. The subscription cost in
FF has the highest impact on the elasticities, this can be due to two factors. Firstly,
FF has majority market share, and secondly the values of subscription cost in FF are
relatively higher than other variables. Therefore, the impact of changing FF subscription
cost is greatest. Next, the the shares are most aﬀected by changes in public charging
costs, followed by MS1 and 2 subscription costs, and then home charging cost. For MS1
and MS2, it seems like change in public charging costs would have a greater impact than
subscription and home charging costs. The cross elasticity being proportionate for all
other alternatives is a outcome of the IIA condition, however, this is rather unrealistic.
This issue is addressed in the ML model described in the next section, where due to
panel eﬀect the substitutions are disproportionate and a little more realistic.
==PAGE:64==
6.2 SC1: Long term decisions - ML Model
51
6.2
SC1: Long term decisions - ML Model
As the data collected is through an SC experiment, there are 3 observations from every
respondent. Therefore, a ML model with panel eﬀect is estimated to capture the cor-
relations between the unobserved factors for each individual. This way the ML model
accommodates the idiosyncratic aspects of decision-maker preferences.
The ﬁnal ML model presented in Table 6.7 is developed by specifying random coef-
ﬁcients for subscription cost (FF and MS), home and public charging cost (NC, MS1
and MS2). As a part of the modelling process an error component model was also
attempted, however due to an unidentiﬁable issue, the model couldn’t estimate any
results. Hence, the results presented here are based on estimates by applying random
parameter speciﬁcation. This allows the results to capture unknown heterogeneity in
the individual preference for speciﬁc attributes, which are subscription, home and public
charging cost. The estimates presented are using antithetic normal draws from Modiﬁed
Latin Hypercube Sampling (MLHS) [41] [42]. However, before this normal draws with
pseudo random and Halton sampling were also tested. The number of draws were varied
from 100 to 1000 to improve precision and check the model. The choice probablities are
integrated using Monte Carlo Integration.
In the results, the signs of the estimated parameters are the same as in the MNL
model, and are logically correct. Moreover, the standard deviation for the randomised
parameters also show signiﬁcance at high conﬁdence level, except for the standard devia-
tion for home charging cost, which is signiﬁcant at a relatively lower conﬁdence level.
Compared to the MNL model, the parameters in the ML for charging frequency on public
fast chargers, and for female respondents loses signiﬁcance. Whereas, the parameter for
Age group between 31 and 50 years becomes signiﬁcant. Overall, with a LL of -137.62,
the ML model clearly shows a much better ﬁt compared to the MNL.
Based on the estimates of the ML model, probablities were simulated keeping the same
settings of draws and integration as for the model estimation. As seen in Table 6.8 the
market share for NC, MS1 and MS2 are slightly overestimated by the ML model, probably
due to the induced randomness. The MNL model is better at replicating market shares.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 SC1: Long term decisions - ML Model
52
Description
Value
Std. error
t-test
p-value
ASC (FF)
11.000
3.690
2.970
0.003
ASC (MS1)
-0.017
0.131
-0.128
0.898
ASC (NC)
-3.400
0.749
-4.540
0.000
log Subscription Cost (FF)
-6.730
0.922
-7.300
0.000
σ Subscription Cost (FF)
0.469
0.072
6.500
0.000
log Subscription Cost (MS1, MS2)
-1.230
0.177
-6.960
0.000
σ Subscription Cost (MS1, MS2)
0.593
0.065
9.100
0.000
Home Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
-0.981
0.191
-5.140
0.000
σ Home Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
0.672
0.355
1.890
0.059
log Public Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
-1.730
0.296
-5.850
0.000
σ Public Charging Cost (NC, MS1, MS2)
1.470
0.267
5.500
0.000
All networks in DK (FF,MS1,MS2)
0.514
0.150
3.420
0.001
All networks in EU (FF,MS1,MS2)
0.541
0.153
3.540
0.000
Charging with Type 1/Granny (FF)
-0.781
0.219
-3.570
0.000
Charging with Home Charging Unit (FF)
0.293
0.144
2.040
0.041
Charging with Public Slow Charger (FF)
1.210
0.214
5.670
0.000
Charging with Public Fast Charger (FF)
0.391
0.248
1.570
0.115
log Distance covered weekly (FF)
2.340
0.344
6.810
0.000
Battery Size (FF)
0.034
0.014
2.370
0.018
Tesla user (FF)
1.470
0.685
2.150
0.032
Income (FF)
0.201
0.093
2.160
0.031
Female (FF)
-0.616
0.692
-0.890
0.374
Age below 30 (FF)
5.660
2.030
2.780
0.005
Age b/w 31 and 50 (FF)
5.240
1.910
2.740
0.006
Age b/w 51 and 70 (FF)
-2.060
0.490
-4.200
0.000
Sample size:
1674
Final log likelihood:
-1371.62
Number of parameters:
25
Table 6.7: SC1: ML model
Observed (%)
MNL(%)
ML(%)
NC
23.256
23.536
22.962
FF
53.858
53.883
53.683
MS1
13.108
13.023
13.408
MS2
9.778
9.558
9.947
Table 6.8: Market Share: Observed vs Estimated by MNL and ML models
==PAGE:66==
6.2 SC1: Long term decisions - ML Model
53
SubFF
SubMS1
SubMS2
NC
0.955
0.109
0.079
FF
-0.783
0.026
0.021
MS1
0.891
-0.417
0.120
MS2
0.822
0.173
-0.457
Table 6.9: SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal ML model - Subscription Costs
HomeNC
HomeMS1
HomeMS2
PubNC
PubMS1
PubMS2
NC
-0.453
0.120
0.088
-0.411
0.121
0.066
FF
0.085
0.050
0.033
0.085
0.065
0.039
MS1
0.232
-0.679
0.283
0.231
-0.766
0.295
MS2
0.276
0.366
-0.762
0.179
0.401
-0.760
Table 6.10: SC1: Elasticities based on ﬁnal ML model - Public and Home
Charging Costs
However, the simulated elasticities seen in Table 6.9 and Table 6.10 are more realistic
compared to those from the MNL model. These are simulated by individually increasing
the relevant attribute by 10% and computing the percentage change in probablities with
respect to the change in the attribute. Immediately it is evident that unlike with the
MNL, due to the absence of IIA, the substitution isn’t proportionate across alternatives.
Moreover, even though the eﬀect of increased subscription cost in FF is highest, it isn’t
as pronounced as was the case with the MNL estimates. What’s interesting to see here
is that for MS1 and MS2, the direct elasticities are higher for home and public charging
cost, than for subscription cost. Meaning that, there is greater sensitivity to change in
home and public charging costs compared to change in subscription costs. Moreover, the
substitutions between MS1 and MS2 are more prominent here, which should be expected
considering they have similar speciﬁcations. For example, a change in subFF or homeNC
causes a similar increase in share for MS1 and MS2, while in the case of HomeMS1, a de-
crease in share for MS1, causes a greater increase of share for MS2 than other alternatives.
In summary for SC1, the ML model is a more realistic estimate compared to MNL.
However, there is still scope for improvement with the speciﬁcations modelling. Nonethe-
less, these models give a very clear insight into some of the factors like weekly driving
range, battery size, income that drive the people to choose the ﬂat fee option compared
to other options.
==PAGE:67==
6.3 SC2: Instantaneous decisions - MNL Model
54
6.3
SC2: Instantaneous decisions - MNL
Model
Description
Value
Std. error
t-test
p-value
Detour time
-0.083
0.010
-8.710
0.000
Number of chargers vacant
0.535
0.043
12.500
0.000
Total number of chargers
0.039
0.010
3.900
0.000
Charging speed
0.019
0.002
10.800
0.000
Cost
-0.390
0.023
-17.100
0.000
Restroom available
0.129
0.078
1.640
0.100
All facilities available
0.649
0.090
7.190
0.000
Sample size:
1674
Initial log likelihood:
-1839
Final log likelihood:
-1450
Number of parameters:
7
Table 6.11: SC2 Base MNL Model
While the systematic iterative process of developing a model by adding attributes one
at a time and testing the speciﬁcations is the same here, the main diﬀerence is that
SC2 is an unlabelled experiment. Therefore, the modelling has three utility functions
(as three options were presented to respondents), but the parameters are generic across
the utilities. Moreover, all individual speciﬁc attributes other than the main attributes
present from the SC scenarios, were introduced as interactions with one of the main
parameters.
The ﬁrst model estimated is base model with parameters for just the main attributes
Detour, Chargers Available, Charging Speed, Cost and Additional Facilities available.
Chargers Available was split into Chargers Vacant and Total Chargers as originally
described in the survey design. Additional Facilities available was split into dummies for
it’s three levels: None, Only Restroom Available and All facilities available (i.e. the level
with Restroom, Restaurant and Supermarket Available). The dummy variable for ’None’
was kept as reference. The results of the base model can be seen in Table 6.11.
==PAGE:68==
6.3 SC2: Instantaneous decisions - MNL Model
55
As seen here, all parameters show estimates with the logically correct sign as would
be expected. Detour (time) and Cost parameters are negative. Whereas, there’s positive
preference for number of vacant chargers, total number of chargers, charging speed,
and facilities. The only parameter that shows somewhat less signiﬁcance is the dummy
for restroom available. Cost was tested with a log transformation. Despite a small
improvement in LL, in order to keep the model simple and easy to interpret, especially
when interactions are introduced, the transformation was taken out, keeping cost linear.
Now that the main attributes were in place, the individual speciﬁc attributes from
outside the SC experiment, were introduced as interactions with the main parameters.
Models were tested for interactions with Battery size, Total number of cars, a dummy
for Tesla users, the variable for Long Trips (1 = people who have taken long trips in last
5 years, 0 otherwise) and the frequency of using public fast chargers (1 = Never, upto
6 = 5 times a week). These attributes were selected, with the consideration that they
would be related to the choice scenario of making a long trip and using a fast charger.
However, the only attribute that was found to be signiﬁcant was the Tesla dummy when
interacted with Charging Speed and interacted with Total Chargers Available.
The next steps involved testing interactions with socio-demographic attributes. Here
the interactions tested were with Age, Gender, Education, Income, and Number of
Children in a household. The only signiﬁcant interactions were for Cost with Education
level and Cost with Females. It was surprising that the interactions with income or the
interaction of facilities with children wasn’t signiﬁcant, as would logically be expected.
Based on this the estimates for the ﬁnal MNL model are presented in Table 6.12. Overall
the ﬁnal model has a LL of -1423 which is signiﬁcantly better than the base model, as
conﬁrmed by the LR test with a 99% conﬁdence.
LR = −2 ∗((−1450) −(−1423)) = 54 > χ2(4) = 13.28, α = 0.01
(6.2)
Some points to observe are, that by introducing an interaction of total chargers
available with Tesla, the parameter with the interacted attribute is signiﬁcant at 95%
conﬁdence, but the non-interacted parameter loses signiﬁcance. Which can be interpreted
as, Tesla users having a preference for higher total number of chargers available at a
location. Moreover, Tesla users also seem to have a preference for higher charging speed.
This can be related to their experience with the Tesla charging network. Additionally,
==PAGE:69==
6.4 SC2: Instantaneous decision - ML Model
56
Description
Value
Std. error
t-test
p-value
Detour time
-0.082
0.010
-8.510
0.000
Number of chargers vacant
0.547
0.044
12.600
0.000
Total number of chargers
0.022
0.014
1.640
0.102
Charging speed
0.010
0.002
4.290
0.000
Cost
-0.267
0.081
-3.290
0.001
Restroom available
0.128
0.079
1.620
0.104
All facilities available
0.659
0.091
7.240
0.000
Cost*Education
-0.031
0.016
-1.950
0.052
Cost*Female
0.202
0.062
3.270
0.001
Charging Speed*Tesla
0.021
0.003
6.400
0.000
Total Chargers * Tesla
0.039
0.020
1.980
0.048
Sample size:
1674
Final log likelihood:
-1423
Number of parameters:
11
Table 6.12: SC2 Final MNL model
the higher the education level of an individual, the more sensitive they are to the cost of
charging, based on the cost*education parameter, at a ∼95% conﬁdence. Further, it’s
surprising that the parameter for cost*female shows a positive sign, which would mean
that women are less sensitive to the charging price. However, this doesn’t stand with
logic, and needs to be further investigated. Lastly, it’s observed that the speciﬁcation
for ’Restroom Available’ is still relatively less signiﬁcant, but ’All facilities available’ is
positive and signiﬁcant at 99% conﬁdence. This reﬂects the need for better additional
facilities at intercity charging locations.As stated earlier, elasticities have no substantive
meaning in unlabelled experiments [40] and therefore they haven’t been calculated here.
6.4
SC2: Instantaneous decision - ML
Model
Similar to SC1, a ML model was developed for SC2, by applying random parameter
speciﬁcation, allowing the results to capture unknown heterogeneity in the individual
preference for speciﬁc attributes. Random coeﬃcients were speciﬁed for detour, chargers
==PAGE:70==
6.4 SC2: Instantaneous decision - ML Model
57
Description
Value
Std. error
t-test
p-value
Detour time
-0.112
0.015
-7.390
0.000
σ Detour time
0.074
0.040
1.860
0.062
Number of chargers vacant
0.814
0.075
10.800
0.000
σ Number of chargers vacant
0.464
0.174
2.660
0.008
Total number of chargers
0.028
0.018
1.500
0.133
Charging speed
0.014
0.004
3.420
0.001
σ Charging speed
0.043
0.005
9.320
0.000
Cost
-0.403
0.144
-2.790
0.005
σ Cost
0.535
0.061
8.740
0.000
Restroom available
0.140
0.113
1.240
0.215
All facilities available
1.050
0.137
7.660
0.000
Cost*Education
-0.050
0.028
-1.770
0.077
Cost*Female
0.335
0.113
2.980
0.003
Charging Speed*Tesla
0.032
0.006
5.210
0.000
Total Chargers * Tesla
0.061
0.027
2.240
0.025
Sample size:
1674
Final log likelihood:
-1350.07
Number of parameters:
15
Table 6.13: SC2 ML Model
vacant, charging speed and cost. The ﬁnal estimates presented in Table 6.13 are also
using antithetic normal draws from MLHS sampling with 1000 draws [41] [42]. The
choice probablities are integrated using Monte Carlo Integration.
The interpretation of the parameters is still the same as that in the MNL model
here, but the ML model presents a better ﬁt. However, it’s important to note that by
introducing the randomisation, the parameters for restroom available and cost*education
become comparatively less signiﬁcant.
The standard deviation for speed, cost and chargers vacant shows signiﬁcance at
99% conﬁdence. Whereas, the σ for Detour signiﬁcant at 85% conﬁdence. However,
there seem to be some discrepancies with the ﬁnal results. The standard deviation for
speed points to a high share of individuals with the probability of a negative parameter.
Similarly for cost, there seem to be a share of individuals with positive cost parameters.
Plus, the problem with the positive estimate for cost*female still persists. In an attempt
==PAGE:71==
6.4 SC2: Instantaneous decision - ML Model
58
to solve this a log normal distribution for the general cost parameter was attempted.
That did not resolve the problem completely either. Therefore, it appears like the data
is indicating towards a distribution other than a normal or log-normal. This a ﬂaw of
the model that will be worked on in the future. However, for the purpose of the thesis
project, the parameters are interpreted based on the normal distribution based estimates.
In summary for SC2, despite the ﬂaws the ML model is a better estimate compared to
MNL as it accommodates the heterogeneity in choice among individuals with regards to
the attributes and has a much better overall ﬁt. While, there is still scope for improvement
with the speciﬁcations modelling, the models give a very clear insight into the factors
that inﬂuence preferences of EV users in Denmark with regards to intercity charging
locations.
==PAGE:72==
7 Conclusion
It is evident that the green transition of the transport sector is necessary. Electriﬁcation
and EV adoption will play a key role in this transition. However, to catalyse this
EV adoption trend, research is needed into aspects of how to improve the overall user
experience, so that more people can and want to use EVs. Moreover, there is a need
to identify what factors need to be considered while designing the supporting charging
infrastructure, allowing it to support the increasing share of EVs.
This master’s thesis aims at ﬁlling the gap about some of the questions related to user
preferences when it comes to EV charging and infrastructure, especially in the Danish
context. The conclusions drawn here are based on a mix of approaches like qualitative
assessment through literature review and interviews, statistical analysis of data collected
through a stated choice experiment and discrete choice modelling.
Based on SC1: Long term decisions related to regular EV use and charging
The SC1 experiment looked into the user preferences for long term decisions like
what kind of pricing structures are preferred, while taking into account EV driving and
charging behaviour, along with socio-demographic factors. It is seen that people deﬁnitely
have a preference for the Flat Fee (FF) structure where they pay a ﬁxed fee once a month
and don’t need to pay per unit of power consumed for home or public charging. This
was followed by a relatively equal share split between No Contract (NC) and Monthly
Subscription (MS1 and MS2 combined) options. While, the individuals were still sensitive
to the cost parameters, the higher preference for FF, shows the trade-oﬀbeing made
between convenience and cost, as the user chooses to pay a higher subscription cost per
month to avoid worrying about how often he/she charges and where the charging takes
place.
Moreover, the higher preference for FF is explained by the positive parameter esti-
mates, and hence the positive eﬀect on utility when an individual frequently uses a home
==PAGE:73==
7 Conclusion
60
charging unit or public chargers. Similarly, the higher the distance driven per week, and
the higher the battery size of the EV, the greater is the utility derived from the FF
option for the user, and therefore he/she has a higher preference for FF compared to NC
or MS options. However, it is seen that users who haven’t invested in a home charging
unit, and frequently use a basic type 1 charger at home instead, derive a lesser utility
from the FF option, and would prefer other options. This is probably because they do
not wish to invest in a home charging unit and are satisﬁed with type 1 charger.
Moreover, it is observed that, Tesla users, people with higher incomes and those
below the age of 50, show a higher preference for the FF pricing structure. Whereas,
users over the age of 50, and females, show a lower preference for FF. Lastly, users
clearly show a high preference for interoperability. In the ﬁnal ML model both access to
’All Networks in DK’ and ’All networks in EU’ shows a positive eﬀect on the derived
utility. Which clearly shows that users want options allowing them to uses chargers that
might belong to other networks and also want more convenient charging when travelling
outside Denmark. This might be a factor in explaining why, after FF, the most pre-
ferred option was NC which always showed network access available for all networks in EU.
Based on SC2: Instantaneous decisions related to occasional charging on long
trips
The SC2 results represent the preferences of individuals when taking longer trips with
their EV and using fast chargers at intercity locations. The models show that most users
derive lower utility when detour time and costs increase, i.e., they would prefer charging
locations that were probably closer to the highways and had lower costs. Whereas, they
show a higher preference for locations with more vacant chargers, higher total number
of chargers available, and greater charging speeds. However, considering the ML model
results, it is seen that a small share of the users might have the opposite preferences for
cost and charging speed. While theoretically this seems illogical, this might be a result
of trade-oﬀbeing made between cost and speed. There is a need for further investigation
with the ML model for the SC2 experiment.
Furthermore, Tesla users tend to have a comparatively higher expectations for charging
speed and the total number of chargers at a location and the charging speed. Additionally,
==PAGE:74==
7 Conclusion
61
it is seen that users clearly are more attracted to charging locations that provide addi-
tional facilities like restaurants, supermarkets and restrooms. Which points to setting up
intercity charging locations with access to such facilities which would improve the charg-
ing experience for users, as this would allow them to spend the waiting time more fruitfully.
General Conclusions
The study conﬁrms that EV adoption is still in it’s nascent stage in Denmark. As
EVs are still expensive, the users are relatively older men with high incomes and high
education levels. Most EV users choose to charge at home and most of the respondents
had personal parking with home charging units available. However, there is a signiﬁcant
group of respondents that doesn’t have these facilities and relies on public charging. Also,
a Tesla car is the most preferred EV among the respondents.
Based on the interviews, descriptive statistics and modelling results it can be con-
ﬁrmed that both cost and convenience play a crucial role in the decision making and
charging preferences of Danish EV users. While they do want lower charging costs, they
also have an aﬃnity for the convenience of interoperability, and easily accessible intercity
charging locations with good additional facilities. Moreover, it can also be seen that
there is an increasing trend for users to take longer trips with their EVs, due to increasing
battery sizes and improving charging infrastructure. However, as the EV adoption trend
continues, the charging infrastructure needs to be increased substantially, because the
users need more public chargers with faster charging speeds. It is interesting to observe
that Tesla users, that make a major share of the respondents, showed distinct preferences
in both choice setups. This might be because of their diﬀerence experience thanks to the
Tesla charging network. Which conﬁrms that other competitors (car manufacturers and
charging service providers) need to adopt some of the features from Tesla, to improve
user experience, and keep the market competitive. Lastly, it must be mentioned that
the study also shows a need for practices like time based charging, despite the low but
signiﬁcant market share seen for MS2. Clubbed with the interview results, it is seen that
there is a need and also an acceptance for smart charging and technologies like V2G.
In conclusion, the study has clear implications that can help with planning and
development of future EV charging infrastructure especially in Denmark and around the
==PAGE:75==
7 Conclusion
62
world. Hopefully, this can be used for the better decision making by public authorities
and charging service providers.
Future work
Clearly, this area of research is a hot topic and there is a necessity to support EV
adoption. While this study answers some key questions, there is scope for improvement.
As indicated earlier, within the study the ML model speciﬁcations, especially for SC2,
can be improved to better explain the data with diﬀerent types of distributions. There
could be many more interactions that could be tested.
Moreover, similar studies are needed that further investigate ﬁnes and more compli-
cated pricing structures including roaming charges, allowing for better estimates of the
users willingness to pay for charging, to develop better business models for investment
in charging infrastructure. While this study targets the problem from the customers
perspective or the demand side, the future steps require a more systemic context. There-
fore, there is a requirement to combine such behavioural studies with studies from the
perspective of the power supply side and see how the gap between power quality problems
can be better addressed while taking user behaviour into account. This sort of holistic
study would be the best way forward for planning and execution of future EV charging
infrastructure projects.
==PAGE:76==
A Appendix
The following pages contain the choice scenarios designed for SC1
and SC2. After which the screenshots from the ﬁnal survey are
presented.
==PAGE:77==
Choice Scenarios for SC1: Long term decision – with home charging cost 
  
Flat Fee 
Monthly Subscription 1 
Monthly Subscription 2 
No Contract 
  
Sit. 
Sub 
Home 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Sub 
Home 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Sub 
Home 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Sub 
Home 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Block 
4 
600 
0 
0 
0 
50 
1.5 
3.5 
2 
100 
1.5 
3.5 
2 
0 
1.5 
4 
2 
1 
5 
700 
0 
0 
1 
50 
1.5 
2.5 
1 
150 
2.5 
4.5 
1 
0 
2 
4 
2 
1 
15 
500 
0 
0 
2 
100 
2 
2.5 
2 
100 
2.5 
5.5 
1 
0 
2 
6 
2 
1 
2 
600 
0 
0 
1 
100 
2 
3.5 
0 
150 
2 
3.5 
0 
0 
1.5 
8 
2 
2 
10 
500 
0 
0 
0 
150 
2.5 
2.5 
0 
100 
2.5 
4.5 
0 
0 
2.5 
8 
2 
2 
25 
700 
0 
0 
0 
150 
2.5 
4.5 
2 
100 
1.5 
4.5 
0 
0 
2 
8 
2 
2 
14 
700 
0 
0 
1 
150 
2 
3.5 
1 
50 
1.5 
4.5 
2 
0 
1.5 
8 
2 
3 
16 
700 
0 
0 
0 
100 
2 
4.5 
1 
100 
2.5 
3.5 
2 
0 
2 
8 
2 
3 
17 
500 
0 
0 
1 
50 
2 
4.5 
0 
100 
1.5 
5.5 
1 
0 
2.5 
6 
2 
3 
9 
600 
0 
0 
2 
50 
2.5 
3.5 
2 
150 
1.5 
3.5 
0 
0 
2.5 
4 
2 
4 
13 
600 
0 
0 
0 
150 
2 
4.5 
2 
150 
1.5 
5.5 
2 
0 
2 
4 
2 
4 
24 
500 
0 
0 
2 
100 
2.5 
4.5 
1 
100 
2 
5.5 
1 
0 
2.5 
6 
2 
4 
3 
700 
0 
0 
2 
150 
1.5 
2.5 
0 
50 
2.5 
3.5 
1 
0 
2 
6 
2 
5 
11 
600 
0 
0 
1 
100 
1.5 
3.5 
0 
50 
2 
5.5 
0 
0 
2 
4 
2 
5 
12 
700 
0 
0 
2 
50 
2.5 
2.5 
1 
50 
2.5 
4.5 
2 
0 
1.5 
6 
2 
5 
1 
500 
0 
0 
0 
50 
2 
2.5 
1 
50 
1.5 
5.5 
0 
0 
2.5 
4 
2 
6 
18 
600 
0 
0 
2 
50 
2.5 
4.5 
0 
50 
2 
3.5 
1 
0 
1.5 
4 
2 
6 
26 
500 
0 
0 
1 
150 
1.5 
3.5 
1 
100 
2 
4.5 
0 
0 
1.5 
8 
2 
6 
7 
700 
0 
0 
0 
50 
1.5 
4.5 
0 
150 
2.5 
5.5 
2 
0 
2.5 
8 
2 
7 
20 
600 
0 
0 
1 
150 
2 
2.5 
0 
150 
2 
4.5 
1 
0 
1.5 
6 
2 
7 
27 
600 
0 
0 
2 
50 
2 
3.5 
2 
150 
2 
5.5 
2 
0 
2.5 
8 
2 
7 
6 
500 
0 
0 
2 
100 
1.5 
4.5 
1 
150 
1.5 
4.5 
1 
0 
1.5 
4 
2 
8 
19 
500 
0 
0 
0 
100 
1.5 
2.5 
2 
50 
2 
4.5 
2 
0 
2.5 
4 
2 
8 
23 
700 
0 
0 
1 
150 
1.5 
4.5 
2 
150 
2.5 
3.5 
0 
0 
1.5 
6 
2 
8 
8 
500 
0 
0 
1 
100 
2.5 
2.5 
2 
50 
2.5 
5.5 
0 
0 
2 
8 
2 
9 
21 
700 
0 
0 
2 
100 
2.5 
3.5 
0 
100 
2 
3.5 
2 
0 
2.5 
6 
2 
9 
22 
600 
0 
0 
0 
150 
2.5 
3.5 
1 
50 
1.5 
3.5 
1 
0 
2 
6 
2 
9 
 
==PAGE:78==
Choice Scenarios for SC1: Long term decision – without home charging cost 
 
Flate Fee 
Monthly Subscription 1 
Monthly Subscription 2 
No Contract 
 
Sit. 
Sub 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Sub 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Sub 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Sub 
Public 
Ntwrk 
Block 
11 
700 
0 
1 
100 
4.5 
1 
150 
5.5 
2 
0 
6 
0 
1 
18 
500 
0 
2 
50 
2.5 
0 
150 
4.5 
0 
0 
8 
0 
1 
25 
700 
0 
0 
150 
4.5 
2 
50 
4.5 
2 
0 
4 
0 
1 
17 
700 
0 
1 
50 
4.5 
0 
50 
3.5 
1 
0 
8 
0 
2 
19 
700 
0 
0 
50 
3.5 
0 
150 
3.5 
0 
0 
8 
0 
2 
21 
600 
0 
2 
150 
3.5 
0 
150 
3.5 
1 
0 
4 
0 
2 
7 
500 
0 
0 
100 
3.5 
2 
100 
5.5 
0 
0 
6 
0 
3 
8 
600 
0 
1 
150 
4.5 
1 
100 
4.5 
2 
0 
4 
0 
3 
9 
700 
0 
2 
50 
3.5 
2 
50 
5.5 
2 
0 
4 
0 
3 
4 
500 
0 
0 
50 
2.5 
2 
100 
3.5 
1 
0 
8 
0 
4 
12 
500 
0 
2 
150 
2.5 
2 
50 
5.5 
0 
0 
6 
0 
4 
26 
500 
0 
1 
150 
3.5 
2 
50 
4.5 
0 
0 
8 
0 
4 
2 
600 
0 
1 
100 
3.5 
1 
100 
3.5 
2 
0 
4 
0 
5 
10 
600 
0 
0 
50 
3.5 
1 
50 
5.5 
1 
0 
6 
0 
5 
20 
500 
0 
1 
150 
2.5 
1 
150 
4.5 
1 
0 
8 
0 
5 
14 
700 
0 
1 
100 
3.5 
0 
150 
5.5 
0 
0 
6 
0 
6 
23 
500 
0 
1 
100 
2.5 
0 
100 
5.5 
2 
0 
4 
0 
6 
24 
600 
0 
2 
100 
2.5 
2 
150 
4.5 
2 
0 
8 
0 
6 
1 
500 
0 
0 
150 
2.5 
0 
100 
4.5 
0 
0 
6 
0 
7 
13 
600 
0 
0 
100 
4.5 
0 
50 
3.5 
2 
0 
6 
0 
7 
15 
500 
0 
2 
150 
3.5 
1 
50 
4.5 
1 
0 
8 
0 
7 
3 
700 
0 
2 
50 
4.5 
2 
100 
4.5 
1 
0 
6 
0 
8 
6 
700 
0 
2 
50 
2.5 
1 
100 
5.5 
1 
0 
4 
0 
8 
16 
600 
0 
0 
50 
4.5 
1 
50 
3.5 
0 
0 
6 
0 
8 
5 
600 
0 
1 
100 
2.5 
1 
100 
3.5 
0 
0 
4 
0 
9 
22 
700 
0 
0 
100 
4.5 
2 
150 
5.5 
1 
0 
8 
0 
9 
27 
600 
0 
2 
150 
4.5 
0 
150 
3.5 
2 
0 
4 
0 
9 
 
==PAGE:79==
Choice Scenarios for SC2: Instantaneous decision 
 
Alternative 1 
Alternative 2 
Alternative 3 
Sit. Detour Vacant Total Speed Cost Facilities Detour Vacant Total Speed Cost Facilities Detour Vacant Total Speed Cost Facilities Block 
12 
10 
0 
10 
60 
8 
1 
0 
1 
1 
60 
6 
1 
0 
1 
1 
60 
4 
0 
1 
22 
0 
0 
4 
110 
6 
-1 
10 
1 
10 
60 
6 
0 
5 
1 
10 
110 
4 
-1 
1 
26 
0 
1 
1 
60 
4 
0 
5 
1 
1 
85 
8 
-1 
0 
0 
4 
110 
6 
-1 
1 
18 
5 
2 
4 
60 
4 
1 
10 
1 
1 
110 
4 
0 
5 
1 
1 
85 
8 
-1 
2 
24 
5 
1 
1 
85 
6 
1 
5 
2 
4 
60 
4 
1 
10 
1 
1 
110 
4 
0 
2 
25 
5 
1 
10 
110 
4 
-1 
5 
0 
10 
110 
6 
0 
10 
0 
10 
60 
8 
1 
2 
2 
10 
1 
4 
85 
8 
0 
0 
1 
4 
110 
4 
1 
5 
0 
4 
60 
8 
0 
3 
10 
5 
1 
1 
85 
8 
-1 
5 
1 
10 
110 
4 
-1 
10 
0 
1 
110 
6 
1 
3 
16 
0 
0 
10 
85 
4 
-1 
0 
0 
1 
60 
8 
-1 
5 
2 
10 
110 
8 
1 
3 
9 
0 
1 
4 
110 
4 
1 
0 
0 
10 
85 
4 
-1 
0 
2 
10 
85 
6 
0 
4 
19 
10 
1 
1 
110 
8 
-1 
10 
0 
4 
85 
4 
1 
0 
1 
1 
60 
6 
1 
4 
27 
10 
0 
4 
85 
4 
1 
10 
1 
1 
110 
8 
-1 
5 
2 
4 
60 
4 
1 
4 
5 
0 
2 
10 
85 
6 
0 
10 
1 
4 
85 
8 
0 
0 
1 
4 
110 
4 
1 
5 
14 
5 
0 
10 
110 
6 
0 
10 
2 
4 
85 
6 
-1 
0 
0 
1 
60 
8 
-1 
5 
17 
10 
1 
1 
110 
4 
0 
10 
0 
10 
60 
8 
1 
10 
2 
10 
60 
4 
-1 
5 
11 
0 
2 
4 
110 
8 
0 
5 
1 
1 
85 
6 
1 
10 
2 
4 
85 
6 
-1 
6 
13 
10 
2 
4 
85 
6 
-1 
0 
2 
10 
85 
6 
0 
0 
1 
10 
85 
8 
1 
6 
20 
5 
0 
4 
60 
8 
0 
0 
1 
10 
85 
8 
1 
10 
1 
10 
60 
6 
0 
6 
7 
10 
2 
10 
60 
4 
-1 
5 
0 
4 
60 
8 
0 
10 
1 
4 
85 
8 
0 
7 
15 
0 
1 
1 
60 
6 
1 
5 
2 
10 
110 
8 
1 
10 
1 
1 
110 
8 
-1 
7 
23 
10 
1 
10 
60 
6 
0 
0 
2 
4 
110 
8 
0 
0 
0 
10 
85 
4 
-1 
7 
1 
0 
0 
1 
60 
8 
-1 
10 
2 
10 
60 
4 
-1 
5 
0 
10 
110 
6 
0 
8 
6 
10 
0 
1 
110 
6 
1 
5 
0 
1 
85 
4 
0 
5 
1 
1 
85 
6 
1 
8 
21 
0 
1 
10 
85 
8 
1 
0 
1 
1 
60 
4 
0 
5 
1 
4 
60 
6 
-1 
8 
3 
5 
2 
10 
110 
8 
1 
10 
0 
1 
110 
6 
1 
5 
0 
1 
85 
4 
0 
9 
4 
5 
1 
4 
60 
6 
-1 
0 
0 
4 
110 
6 
-1 
0 
2 
4 
110 
8 
0 
9 
8 
5 
0 
1 
85 
4 
0 
5 
1 
4 
60 
6 
-1 
10 
0 
4 
85 
4 
1 
9 
 
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
(2019). Tracking Transport, IEA, [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/
reports/tracking-transport-2019.
[2]
(). Statistik om salget af elbiler og opladningshybridbiler, Dansk Elbil Alliance,
[Online]. Available: https://www.danskelbilalliance.dk/statistik (visited
on 04/13/2020).
[3]
F. Egner and L. Trosvik, “Electric vehicle adoption in sweden and the impact of
local policy instruments”, Energy Policy, vol. 121, pp. 584–596, 2018.
[4]
C. Chen, J. Rubens, L. Noel, J. Kester, and B. Sovacool, “Assessing the socio-
demographic, technical, economic and behavioral factors of nordic electric vehicle
adoption and the inﬂuence of vehicle-to-grid preferences”, Renewable and Sustain-
able Energy Reviews, vol. 121, 2020.
[5]
M. Spottle, K. Jorling, M. Schimmel, M. Staats, L. Grizzel, L. Jerram, and J.
Gartner, “Research for tran committee, charging infrastructure for electric road
vehicles”, 2018.
[6]
T. Gnann, P. Plotz, and M. Wietschel, “Can public slow charging accelerate plug-in
electric vehicle sales? a simulation of charging infrastructure usage and its impact
on plug-in electric vehicle sales for germany”, International Journal of Sustainable,
pp. 528–542, 2019.
[7]
M. Coﬀman, P. Bernstein, and S. Wee, “Electric vehicles revisited: A review of
factors that aﬀect adoption”, Transport Reviews, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 79–93, 2017.
[8]
Chakraborty, Bunch, Lee, and Tal, “Demand drivers for charging infrastructure-
charging behaviour of plug-in electric vehicle commuters”, Transportation Research
Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 76, pp. 255–272, 2019.
[9]
E. Figenbaum and S. Nordbakke, “Battery electric vehicle user experiences in
norway’s maturing market”, 2019.
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
73
[10]
S. Haustein and A. F. Jensen, “Factors of electric vehicle adoption: A comparison
of conventional and electric car users based on an extended theory of planned
behavior”, International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, vol. 12, no. 7,
pp. 484–496, 2018.
[11]
A. Jensen, E. Cherchi, and J. de Dios Ortuzar, “A long panel survey to elicit varia-
tion in preferences and attitudes in the choice of electric vehicles”, Transportation,
vol. 41, pp. 973–993, 2014.
[12]
S. Wolﬀand R. Madlener, “Preferences for electric vehicle charging and implications
for charging infrastructure planning”, 2019.
[13]
Franke and Krems, “Understanding charging behaviour of electric vehicle users”,
Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 21, pp. 75–
89, 2013.
[14]
S. Hardman et al, “A review of consumer preferences of and interactions with electric
vehicle charging infrastructure.”, Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, vol. 62, 2018.
[15]
M. Nicholas and G. Tal, “Charging for charging at work: Increasing the availability
of charging through pricing”, 2014.
[16]
T. Gnann, D. Goldbach, N. Jakobsson, P. Plotz, A. Bennehag, and F. Sprei, “A
model for public fast charging infrastructure needs”, World Electr. Veh. J., vol. 8(4),
pp. 943–954, 2016.
[17]
N. Ito, K. Takeuchi, and S. Managi, “Willingness-to-pay for infrastructure invest-
ments for alternative fuel vehicles”, Transportation Research Part D: Transport
and Environment, vol. 18, pp. 1–8, 2013.
[18]
A. Hackbarth and R. Madlener, “Willingness-to-pay for alternative fuel vehicle
characteristics: A stated choice study for germany”, Transportation Research Part
A: Policy and Practice, vol. 85, pp. 89–111, 2016.
[19]
Hidrue, Parsons, Kempton, and Gardner, “Willingness to pay for electric vehicles
and their attributes”, Resource and Energy Economics, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 686–705,
2011.
[20]
L. L. S. Charging, Living Lab Smart Charging. Smart Charging and Electromobility,
2017.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
74
[21]
N. Caperello, K. Kurani, and J. Hageman, “Do you mind if i plug-in my car? how
etiquette shapes pev drivers’ vehicle charging behavior”, Transportation Research
Part A, no. 54, pp. 155–163, 2013.
[22]
A. William, Handbook of Practical Program Evaluation, Ch. 9: Conducting Semi-
Structured Interviews. 2015.
[23]
C. Metrics, Ngene 1.2 User Manual Reference Guide. 2018.
[24]
Fowkes and Wardman, “The design of stated preference travel choice experiments”,
Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, no. 22(1), pp. 27–44, 1988.
[25]
V. M. Hoening, Master Thesis: Car Sharing Demand in Denmark. Technical
University of Denmark, 2018.
[26]
Ortuzar and Willumsen, “Modelling transport”, 2011.
[27]
D. Pearmain, J. Swanson, E. Kroes, and M. Bradley, Stated preference techniques:
a guide to practice. Steer Davies Gleave, Hague Consulting Group, Richmond, Den
Haag, 1991.
[28]
J. Bates, “Economic issues in stated preference analysis”, 1988.
[29]
M. Ben-Akiva and S. Lerman, Discrete Choice Analysis. MIT Press - Cambridge
Massachusetts, 1985.
[30]
J. Rich, Transport Models: From Theory to Practice. Technical University of
Denmark, 2016.
[31]
K. E. Train, Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press
UK, 2003.
[32]
A. A. Visaria and A. Schledorn, Course Assignment: Quantitative Modelling of
Behaviour (42180) - Project: Swiss Metro. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[33]
(). E.ON Denmark Website, E.ON, [Online]. Available: https://www.eon.dk/
privat.html.
[34]
(). Clever Denmark Website, Clever, [Online]. Available: https://clever.dk/.
[35]
(). Tesla Website, Tesla, [Online]. Available: https://www.tesla.com/da_DK/.
[36]
(2019). Electricity prices for households in Denmark from 2010 to 2019, semi-
annually, Statista, [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
418075/electricity-prices-for-households-in-denmark/.
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
75
[37]
M. Bregenov-Pedersen. (Feb. 2020). Stor ladeoperatør sænker prisen, FDM, [Online].
Available: https://fdm.dk/nyheder/bilist/2020-02-stor-ladeoperatoer-
saenker-prisen.
[38]
(). Chargemap Website, Chargemap, [Online]. Available: https://chargemap.
com/.
[39]
(). Gennemsnitsdanskeren, Danmarks Statistik, [Online]. Available: https://
www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/Publikationer/gennemsnitsdanskeren (visited on
04/13/2020).
[40]
S. Hess and A. Daly, Handbook of Choice Modelling. Edward Elgar Publishing,
2014.
[41]
M. Bierlaire. (2018). PandasBiogeme: a short introduction. Technical report TRANSP-
OR 181219., Transport and Mobility Laboratory, ENAC, EPFL, [Online]. Available:
https://transp-or.epfl.ch/documents/technicalReports/Bier18.pdf.
[42]
S. Hess, K. E. Train, and J. W. Polak, “On the use of a modiﬁed latin hypercube
sampling (mlhs) method in the estimation of a mixed logit model for vehicle choice”,
Transportation Research Part B, vol. 40, pp. 147–163, 2006.
