==PAGE:1==
Sandwich Disbond Damage Thresh-
olds in Aircraft Components  
Søren Bundgaard  
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Sandwich Disbond Damage Thresholds
in Aircraft Components
Søren Bundgaard
Master’s Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Lightweight Structures Group
May 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Sandwich composites with honeycomb core are often used in aerospace engi-
neering due to the high stiffness/weight ratio it provides. A common honey-
comb sandwich failure mode is face/core disbonding. It is governed by a dif-
ferential pressure that occurs between the unvented honeycomb core cells and
the reduced in-ﬂight ambient pressure, known as Ground-Air-Ground (GAG)
fatigue loading. Previous incidents involving disbonding failures have trig-
gered extensive research on this topic, including the development of a numer-
ical model by PhD A. Farshidi to accurately predict disbonding.
This thesis covers the ﬁnalization of two test setups with respect to construc-
tion, controlling and optimization. Both setups aim to experimentally simulate
disbonding of aircraft components by GAG fatigue loading. One setup utilizes
internal pressurization by a proportional pressure valve, while the other uti-
lizes vacuum to manipulate ambient pressure conditions.
Subsequently, the setups are used for extensive advanced testing of sandwich
specimens with carbon ﬁber face sheets and honeycomb core provided by Air-
bus. Corresponding to the numerical model, it was experimentally observed
that an in-plane compression load has a large inﬂuence on the disbond propa-
gation behavior. Unfortunately, the mentioned numerical model was not vali-
dated in either setup with respect to propagation rate (propagation per cycle).
The lack of validation is primarily caused by large discrepancies in the exper-
imental and numerical propagation rates, where the numerical model drasti-
cally overestimates propagation. Still, viable experimental results with respect
to propagation behavior, propagation shapes and rates are presented for two
types of Ground-Air-Ground pressure load cases.
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master’s thesis is submitted as the ﬁnal assignment of the M.Sc. Eng. de-
gree in Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
constituted by 35 ECTS credits. The project has been carried out in the pe-
riod from September 2019 to May 2020 at the Department of Mechanical En-
gineering, however with experimental work carried out at the Villum Center
for Advanced Structural and Material Testing (CASMaT), also known as DTU
Structural Lab. The project has been supervised by Associate professor, Ph.D.,
Christian Berggreen of the Lightweight Structures Group at DTU.
First, I would like to thank Christian for his guidance and for pushing me the
extra mile throughout the project. I am thankful for his trust in me with this
project and his overall enthusiasm in this ﬁeld of research. I owe a thank you to
the technicians of DTU Structural Lab for their relentless help and funny mo-
ments. Furthermore, I thank a good friend of mine, Laboratory Engineer Anil
Uzal for his many contributions to my thesis and assistance without hesitation
at DTU Structural Lab - I will miss our coffee breaks.
Finally, I would like to thank my family for all the support and my fellow
students for contributing to a great atmosphere. My greatest gratitude goes to
my life companion, best friend and girlfriend, Tine, whom has continuously
encouraged and supported me through the ups and downs of this project.
Søren Bundgaard
Copenhagen, May 2020.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Sandwich Composite Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
State at Start-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Design & Construction
7
2.1
Internal Pressurization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Converter Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Load Transfer Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Vacuum Ground-Air-Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Fixture Modiﬁcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Load Cell Adapter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Viewport Redesign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Considerations & Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Components & Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.3
Manufacturing Process & Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.4
Finite Element Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Preparation of Test Setups
23
3.1
Calibration of Channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Internal Pressurization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Load Cell Referencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Performance Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Internal Pressurization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Vacuum Ground-Air-Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Experimental Procedures
29
4.1
Specimen Preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Initial Disbond Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
Valve Mounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Additional Preparations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Test Series Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
v
==PAGE:10==
4.3
Digital Image Correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Calibration of Aramis 6M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Capture Sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Fundamentals of Pressure Differential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.1
Vacuum Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.2
Pressurization Loading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results
39
5.1
Face Sheet Load Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.1
Strain Gauge Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.2
Load Distribution Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Disbond Propagation by PPV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.1
Specimen 3B-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2.2
Specimen 3B-9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Pressurization and In-plane Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.1
Specimen 3B-10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.2
Specimen 3B-7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Vacuum GAG and In-plane Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4.1
Specimen 3B-6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4.2
Expected Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusions
55
6.1
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
References
57
Appendices
59
A
Internal Pressurization Setup Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B
Load Transfer Assembly Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
C
Vacuum GAG Setup Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
D
Load Cell Adapter Drawing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
E
Fixture Modiﬁcation Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
F
Viewport Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
G
Welding Datasheet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
H
Calibration Sheets - Korea Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
I
Valve Mounting Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
vi
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The technology of sandwich composites dates back to World War II. Back then,
the war caused a signiﬁcant shortage in the availability of aluminum in the
United Kingdom. As a result, the Mosquito aircraft, developed by de Hav-
illand, was constructed using mostly wood - a balsa core and plywood face
sheets. Not only was the aircraft as fast and lightweight as the ﬁghters, but
also hard to detect on radar. As a result, great structural efﬁciency was discov-
ered [3].
Figure 1.1: The application of sandwich composites in various industries.
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Today, sandwich composites have advanced to become one of the leading ma-
terials in stiffness to weight and strength to weight critical applications such
as aerospace, maritime, renewable energy and automotive industries, shown
in Figure 1.1. Additionally, sandwich composites share several advantageous
properties with common monolithic composites; corrosion resistance, good
thermal insulation, high capacity of energy absorption, minimization of main-
tenance and exceptional fatigue strength.
A conventional sandwich construction consists of three layers; a core material
which is bonded between two, relative to the core, thin face sheets. In a sand-
wich beam, the core of the construction carries the transverse shear loads and
prevents global buckling while the face sheets sustain the axial and bending
loads. The face sheets are made of a laminate composite material, i.e. Carbon
Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) or Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymer (GFRP).
Various types of core materials and structures for sandwich construction are
available.
Some commonly used structures are honeycomb or corrugated,
both of which exist in aramid or aluminum material. Additionally, cellular
foams in numerous densities and balsa wood are available as core material.
The core material used for a sandwich composite is highly dependent on the
application. The sandwich conﬁguration where CFRP face sheets are adhered
to an aramid honeycomb core are common in aircraft industries due to the
high strength to weight ratio. A cheaper alternative, using GFRP face sheets
adhered to a balsa or foam core is more commonly used in naval and wind
industries [7].
1.1.1
Sandwich Composite Failure
Relative to a simple laminate composite, a sandwich composite is associated
with additional failure modes due to a mismatch of elastic properties between
the face sheets and core material. In sandwich composites, some of the com-
mon failures are; face sheet tension failure, face sheet compression failure, lo-
cal wrinkling instability, face sheet delamination failure, global buckling, core
shear failure, core indentation and face/core debonding in naval and wind in-
dustries, also known as disbonding in aviation and aerospace industries [18].
The latter failure mode is, in simple terms, a lack of bonding between the core
and face in a certain area. The disbond circumference, also known as the crack
tip, is governed by fracture mechanics. Disbonds can be introduced as a re-
sult of poor resin ﬂow during manufacturing, during maintenance through
overloads/impacts or due to thermal forces, known as sun blistering. Subse-
quently, propagation of the disbond may lead to complete failure of the sand-
wich structure. As a result, the load-carrying abilities are compromised and
2
==PAGE:13==
1.2. Problem Description
buckling of the disbonded face sheet, kinking or complete separation between
face and core can occur. Therefore, the face/core disbond failure mode is crit-
ical as it may compromise the integrity of the entire structure in which the
sandwich composite is used. Such a scenario was experienced in March 2005
when the Airbus A310-300 incident occurred. The aircraft rudder was sub-
jected to disbond failure in-ﬂight, causing the entire rudder to be torn off the
remaining tail structure [17], see Figure 1.2. Similarly, the X-33 space vehicle
at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center experienced disbond failure of the liq-
uid hydrogen tank during a test ﬂight [12]. These incidents have triggered
extensive research in disbond fractures of sandwich composites.
Figure 1.2: Post-incident images of the Airbus A310-300 rudder failure [8].
1.2
Problem Description
Sandwich composites are prone to face/core disbond failure which can cause
critical damage to the structural integrity of the components. Therefore, the
aviation authorities are highly invested in this topic of research. The end goal
in disbond failure research is to develop a functional tool to accurately predict
crack initiation and growth of a disbond. This advanced tool will allow the
authorities to advance their guidelines and protocols with respect to quality
assurance, inspection plans and the overall maintenance of sandwich struc-
tures. Additionally, the tool will increase the Technology Readiness Level and
expand the usage of sandwich composite construction within applicable in-
dustries.
In this Master’s thesis, the focus is experimental disbond research and possibly
validation of an existing numerical model - the ﬁnal 3D disbond propagation
model develop by A. Farshidi [7]. The model is constructed using a building-
block technique where experimental mechanics is used in combination with
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.3: The pyramid of testing, building-block approach [7].
numerical modelling, see Figure 1.3. The full 3D numerical model is consti-
tuted by several detailed experiments: The bottom building-block is known
as the "coupon level", a small-scale test series where interface fracture tough-
ness and disbond growth rate is evaluated using static and fatigue testing, re-
spectively. Experiments are carried out in multiple predeﬁned conditions with
varying mode-mixities and ambient temperatures. The results at coupon level
are then used as inputs in the sub-structural level with more complex geom-
etry and loading. This level of testing is often used to validate the predicting
ability of numerical results. The next level of testing is known as the structural
level where the complexity of loading and geometry drastically increases. This
is the level that the 3D model aims to replicate numerically. The last tests are
at component level where full-scale complex structures are tested in advanced
loading conditions. These tests are expensive, hence a limited amount are con-
ducted at this level.
1.2.1
Objectives
An aircraft experiences what in aviation industries is known as Ground-Air-
Ground (GAG) cyclic loading. The loading occurs during ﬂight due to the
differential pressure between the ambient conditions and the internal pres-
sure within the cells of the unvented honeycomb core, seen in Figure 1.4. It
is considered a root cause of disbond propagation when combined with in-
ﬂight aerodynamic loads. Therefore, it is an objective in this thesis to generate
quality data on disbond propagation. Furthermore, it is an objective to either
validate or reject the disbond propagation model, developed by A. Farshidi
[7], based on the experimental propagation results. The validation will utilize
advanced experimental testing at the structural level. The specimens available
for testing are a sandwich composite manufactured with Nomex honeycomb
4
==PAGE:15==
1.3. State at Start-up
core and pre-impregnated CFRP face sheets, similar to the composite conﬁgu-
ration used in the rudder of an Airbus aircraft.
(a) Ground level
(b) Cruising altitude
Figure 1.4: Ground-Air-Ground (GAG) loading effect on sandwich composite
structures with honeycomb core.
To achieve the objectives of the thesis, two setups with different approaches to
Ground-Air-Ground loading will be used. Both setups simulate a GAG cycle,
but with one key difference; the simpliﬁed setup, known as the pressuriza-
tion setup, will operate an internal pressurization cycle within the honeycomb
core using a proportional pressure valve (PPV). The main setup, known as the
vacuum GAG, operates the more realistic condition of lowering the ambient
pressure using a vacuum chamber while the internal honeycomb core pres-
sure remains unchanged. In both setups, the GAG load cycle is complimented
by an in-plane compression load to simulate aerodynamic loads.
1.3
State at Start-up
In the last 30 years of research, considerable progress in numerical modelling
and experimental testing of disbonding has been made. Accordingly, several
research and student projects on this topic have been carried out prior to this
thesis, three of which are signiﬁcantly relevant to this thesis. The projects in
chronological order; a Bachelor’s thesis by S. Pedersen & T. Andersen [2] on the
development of the pressurization test setup, the authors previous work (bach-
elor’s thesis [4] and special course [5]) on the development and modiﬁcation
of the vacuum GAG test setup and lastly, a Master’s thesis by A. Mulay [11]
on the initial use and testing using the vacuum GAG setup. The mentioned
projects have covered the ground work on test setup development, however
with limited ﬁne tuning and additional constructional changes needed in order
to be fully operational.
The pressurization setup, originally developed by S. Pedersen and T. Ander-
sen, accomplished a pilot test in 2015. Subsequently, it has been stored away
for approximately ﬁve years without use. Unfortunately, the converter unit
for the power and feedback of the Festo pressure components was lost during
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
this time. As the converter unit is a vital component of the pressurization test
setup, a replacement is necessary. Additionally, the connection between the
PPV and the specimen had not been permanently established as the pilot test
simply used a temporary solution.
The vacuum Ground-Air-Ground setup originates from Airbus in Hamburg,
where it was originally designed. The setup was never completely assembled
or running before being passed on to the Lightweight Structures Group of DTU
Mechanical Engineering. The process of developing/ﬁnalizing the setup was
the main objective of the authors Bachelor’s thesis [4]. After the thesis, it was
of interest to A. Farshidi to further redesign the vacuum GAG setup to accom-
modate newer specimen dimensions - from 800 × 800 mm to 400 × 400 mm
specimens. As a result, a special course was established with the main ob-
jectives; reﬁnement of the vacuum controlling, construction and assembly of
the new specimen ﬁxture and construction and assembly of the in-plane load
system [5].
In 2019, A. Mulay conducted his Master’s thesis using the vacuum GAG test
setup [11]. The thesis covers design alterations in the in-plane load system
on multiple accounts. The specimen was ﬁtted with U-caps - a steel assem-
bly/clamp that is glued to the specimen face sheets to transfer in-plane loads.
Due to the change in specimen size with U-caps mounted, the ﬁxture received
minor changes once more. Additionally, an interference between the load cell,
used to measure the in-plane load, and the vacuum chamber was identiﬁed.
This issue was resolved by replacing the load cell with a different model with
smaller diameter. The Master’s thesis concludes the following:
• Misalignment in the in-plane load system may exist and should be further
investigated.
• The Digital Image Correlation (DIC) technique is difﬁcult to utilize sufﬁ-
ciently through the existing viewport made of Plexiglas.
• The new specimen dimensions with U-caps mounted has caused a misalign-
ment with the center of the viewport, thus obstructing the ideal DIC mea-
suring angle.
In summary, both setups need adjustments with respect to the construction
and controlling. Additionally, the possible misalignment of the in-plane load
system of the vacuum GAG setup must be investigated.
6
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Design & Construction
In experimental projects, design and construction work is common in order to
make functional changes or problem solving when issues present themselves.
As mentioned in Section 1.3, the two test setups were not fully operational
at project initiation. Therefore, this chapter cover the required modiﬁcations
by initially introducing test setups at functional state and subsequently their
respective modiﬁcations will be described.
2.1
Internal Pressurization
The internal pressurization test setup is assembled using a series of Festo com-
ponents, see Figure 2.1. The setup is designed to run on the central air supply
at the DTU Structural Lab, which is capable of providing sufﬁcient pressure
(up to 7.3 bar) and ﬂow at all times.
Figure 2.1: The pressurization component assembly from Festo.
Components left to right: Shut-off relief valve, soft-start valve, pressure regulator
with 5 µm ﬁlter, 1 µm ﬁlter and proportional pressure valve (PPV).
The air initially passes through the shut-off relief valve, which is an analog
solenoid on/off switch. It is utilized as a system interlock in case the test de-
tectors are triggered, i.e. upper and lower pressure limits. Subsequently, the
pressure is adjusted in the regulator down to 2 bar to protect the proportional
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
pressure valve. The air is thoroughly ﬁltered through two ﬁlter sizes before
reaching the proportional pressure valve (PPV). The PPV controls the pressur-
ization of the honeycomb sandwich specimens using its built-in closed-loop
controller with a feedback signal from a pressure transducer within PPV. The
target pressure can be controlled with the MTS FlexTest 100 using the Program
with Feedback feature in MTS Station Builder. A simpliﬁed schematic of the
setup is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Schematics of the full pressurization setup.
As multiple specimens will be tested using the setup, the connection between
the PPV and the specimen must be easily interchangeable. A simple solution
is implemented; the specimen and PPV output piping is ﬁtted with a Schrader
tire valve and tire valve connector, respectively. As a result, the connection is
leak proof if installed correctly.
In addition to pressurization, the setup has a second control channel capable of
applying in-plane compression loads up to 500 kN. The specimen is securely
constrained by an adjustable ﬁxture that accommodate the Airbus honeycomb
specimens with minor adjustments. To evenly distribute the load from the
actuator, a load transfer assembly is used, see Section 2.1.2. Images of the
operational setup are shown in Appendix A.
8
==PAGE:19==
2.1. Internal Pressurization
2.1.1
Converter Unit
At project initiation, it was clear that the pressurization setup was not in an
operational state caused by the misplaced converter unit. The converter is an
important component as it administers all signals exchanged with the MTS
FlexTest 100 controller. It allows for the pressurization to be controlled using
MTS software and it is also the main power supply for the active Festo compo-
nents, i.e. the shut-off valve and the PPV.
(a) Original [2]
(b) Replacement
Figure 2.3: The original and the new, improved converter unit.
The PPV linearly converts a set-point value (4..20 mA range) to an output pres-
sure which is then referenced by the pressure transducer. Additionally, pres-
sure transducer can be used as active feedback signal in the corresponding
4..20 mA range [2]. Unfortunately, the MTS FlexTest 100 operates in voltage
range 0..10 V, hence a conversion is necessary. The converter unit handles this
computation using a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC). Furthermore, the
converter is constructed such that additional sensors can be added to the pres-
surization system if need be. In [2], the best PPV performance was observed
when utilizing the build-in Proportional–Integral–Derivative (PID) controller.
The performance can be further adjusted with reaction speed settings on the
PPV. It should be set to the fastest setting (displayed as "set1" on the PPV)
for best performance. Note that using the build-in controller disables the PID
options in the Station Manager.
2.1.2
Load Transfer Assembly
The internal pressurization setup does not allow for direct in-plane loading
on the U-caps of the specimen. This is primarily because the actuator cannot
be ﬁtted with appropriate loading equipment that evenly distributes the load.
Instead, the actuator is ﬁtted with an alignment cup bearing with diameter
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
150 mm that can load directly onto a load transfer assembly. The assem-
bly will uniformly distribute the force across the U-cap and the specimen, as
shown in Figure 2.2. The main requirements for the load transfer assembly
are; no interference with the ﬁxture under load, ease of manufacturing and
full coverage of the specimen. Manufacturing drawings for the assembly as
well as modiﬁed U-caps are found in Appendix B.
The assembly is manufactured as two components and assembled with coun-
terbored socket head bolts. The assembly rests on the specimen, thus it is con-
sidered a static load of approximately 12 kg ≈0.12 kN. The actuator load that
will be applied is in the range of 40-65 kN. Therefore, the additional static
0.12 kN (+ 0.3% at 40 kN) are considered neglectable. It should be noted that
a bolted connection may not be the most accurate solution in terms of paral-
lelism, discussed in Section 6.1.
2.2
Vacuum Ground-Air-Ground
The vacuum Ground-Air-Ground (GAG) test setup is similar to the pressur-
ization setup in terms of loading, however with different methods. The vac-
uum method consists of a more complex setup in terms of construction and
functionality. This is primarily due to need of a vacuum chamber and a com-
plete system of vacuum components. The vacuum GAG setup is a two-channel
setup with one channel controlling the absolute pressure in the vacuum cham-
ber and the second controlling the in-plane load.
The setup consists of a large I-beam frame with approximate dimension 2 m ×
3 m × 3.5 m (depth × width × height). The vacuum chamber assembly is fas-
tened and sealed against a base plate on the frame. Additionally, a mounting
plate is fastened to the top of the frame, where an MTS 244.22 100 kN actuator
is anchored. Attached to the swivel head at the opposite end of the actuator
are several components; a stroke rod, a vacuum bellow (to seal the actuator
movement) and the specimen-loading assembly, which uniformly distributes
the in-plane compression load. The chamber is ﬁtted with a guide component
for the stroke rod containing linear ball bearings to ensure vertical alignment
of the in-plane load system and the specimen [4]. Additionally, a specimen
ﬁxture is mounted securely to the base plate inside the vacuum chamber.
The vacuum system is assembled using Pfeiffer Vacuum components, includ-
ing the pressure transducer and vacuum pump [15]. The piping is ISO-K and
ISO-KF standards in sizes DN63 and DN16, respectively, also supplied by Pfeif-
fer Vacuum. The primary components of the vacuum system is the chamber,
the pump and a hydraulic controlled 3-way valve, illustrated in Figure 2.4.
10
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Vacuum Ground-Air-Ground
Figure 2.4: Schematics of the vacuum Ground-Air-Ground setup.
The vacuum pressure in the chamber is controlled by the 3-way valve and a
highly sensitive control loop (PID). Within the 3-way valve, a piston stabilizes
the chamber pressure by altering between a ﬁltered ambient air inlet and vac-
uum suction (from the pump). The piston position is controlled by an LVDT
that adjusts based on the feedback from the pressure transducer ﬁtted to the
chamber. Additional images of the setup are found in Appendix C.
2.2.1
Fixture Modiﬁcations
In the previous project by A. Mulay [11], the internal load cell within the vac-
uum chamber was replaced and the specimen was ﬁtted with U-caps. These
implementations drastically changed the height of the in-plane load system,
thus forcing the bottom support of the specimen ﬁxture to be lowered. As a
result, a misalignment between the center of the disbond and the center of the
viewport is present. Correspondingly, the visible disbond propagation area is
notably decreased, see Figure 2.5. In order to return the specimen to the opti-
mal position, the ﬁxture needed modiﬁcations. Additionally, the internal load
cell had to be removed, see Section 2.2.2.
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
(a) Optimal
disbond view
(b) Modiﬁed
disbond view
Figure 2.5: The disbond (orange) visibility through the viewport as a result of
change in bottom ﬁxture support.
To increase the vertical position of the specimen, a spacing block was manu-
factured to ﬁt between the two existing components. Furthermore, to stabilize
the construction, the specimen base and lower support were supplied with
threads, thus allowing the three components to be assembled with bolts, see
Figure 2.6. The manufacturing drawings related to the ﬁxture modiﬁcations
are found in Appendix E.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the fully assembled ﬁxture.
12
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Viewport Redesign
2.2.2
Load Cell Adapter
The in-plane load system is complicated and assembled with a chain of com-
ponents making it sensitive to any changes. The internal load cell of the system
has caused issues previously in this regard. Therefore, it was removed which
allowed for the ﬁxture to be positioned correctly. The load cell is replaced by
a factory ﬁtted cell on the actuator outside the chamber. This is described in
further detail in Section 3.1.2.
Figure 2.7: The in-plane load system with the position of the load cell adapter.
Note: Illustration rotated 90°clockwise.
With the load cell removed, an adapter was to take its place. The adapter
was dimensioned such that when the specimen is unloaded, the actuator is
positioned at the center of its stroke. It is a simple cylinder with two female
threads; one end attaches to the stroke rod, the other end attaches to the load
assembly, see Figure 2.7. The manufacturing drawing for the component is in
Appendix D.
2.3
Viewport Redesign
The windowed hatch on the vacuum chamber used for measurements is known
as the viewport. The current viewport, in Figure 2.8b, was constructed in 2017
where it replaced the original Airbus design, shown in 2.8a. The purpose of the
updated window was to allow for DIC measurements with only minor mod-
iﬁcations. Since then, users of the GAG setup have advised that the viewport
is further improved to increase the quality of measurements. Therefore, this
section covers the development of a new viewport hatch for the GAG vacuum
chamber, shown in Figure 2.8c and Appendix C.
2.3.1
Considerations & Objectives
Before initiating constructional changes, it is important to consider the objec-
tives and future use of the new viewport. Furthermore, material selection and
manufacturing methods can highly impact the quality of the end result.
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
(a) Original hatch
(b) Updated window
(c) Redesigned hatch
Figure 2.8: The viewport hatch iterations through previous projects.
The viewport hatch of the vacuum chamber has a high inﬂuence on the qual-
ity of experimental measurements conducted with the setup. This is due to the
viewport being the main source of visual contact with the specimen and the
only option to extract propagation data. The disbond propagation is measured
with Digital Image Correlation (DIC), see Section 4.3, hence the best possible
image through the viewport is essential to reduce measurement noise. The pre-
vious viewport iteration was limited by the original hatch design by Airbus.
This is not the case with a new bottom-up design, which will be with respect
to the following objectives:
Window size — The previous window design was square, see Figure 2.8b.
This was mainly due to the lack of alternative options when considering the
original design of the hatch, see Figure 2.8a. The most viable solution, at the
time, was face milling of the stiffeners which allowed for a 320 mm× 320 mm×
20 mm acrylic window to be fastened. In terms of stress concentrations under
a uniformly distributed load, a square geometry is not an optimal solution.
Therefore, a main objective for the new design was to implement a circular
window. Additionally, an increase in window area was desirable to obtain
visual contact with the specimen across its full width (approx. 400 mm).
Material selection — The main load carrying parts of the new viewport should
be constructed from steel, but it was important to choose a steel type with high
stiffness, stainless properties and good weldability. Correspondingly, advised
by manufacturing technicians, stainless steel type AISI 304 was selected - the
mechanical properties are shown in Table 2.1.
A material for the window of the viewport hatch was also investigated. Based
on the research conducted in [4] and previous experience with plastic materi-
als (such as acrylic), the options were narrowed down to either soda-lime or
borosilicate glass. Borosilicate glass has excellent light transmission and is con-
14
==PAGE:25==
2.3. Viewport Redesign
Table 2.1: Material properties of AISI Type 304 stainless steel [1].
Young’s Modulus
Poisson’s Ratio
Yield Strength
E = 195 GPa
ν = 0.29
σy = 215 MPa
sidered ideal for applications in optics. Additionally, when compared to soda-
lime glass, the thermal expansion coefﬁcient is considerable lower, meaning
that it is much more thermal shock resistance in rapid changes of tempera-
ture. Borosilicate glass also has a lower density than soda-lime glass, while
having higher mechanical strength [16]. For these reasons, the additional cost
of borosilicate was neglectable and it was chosen as window material. The
mechanical properties of borosilicate glass, BOROFLOAT33 from Schott, are
shown in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Material properties of the borosilicate glass, BOROFLOAT33 [16].
Young’s Modulus
Poisson’s Ratio
Bending Strength
E = 64 GPa
ν = 0.2
σy = 25 MPa
Standardized solution — Instead of developing all needed parts from the
ground and up, a standardized solution was an objective of the design. If the
standard is respected in terms of dimensions and geometry, components such
as seal rings, ﬂanges and clamps from the ISO-K standard could be utilized.
Additionally, the assembly of the window to the hatch would be similar to the
assembly of all other vacuum components on the GAG setup.
Low proﬁle — In terms of geometry, the new viewport hatch should be low
proﬁle. This means that the distance from the outside window surface to the
specimen inside the chamber should be minimized. The purpose of this ob-
jective is to achieve the optimal angle and view for DIC measurements. The
distance between the window and specimen can highly inﬂuence the width of
the measurement volume, see Section 4.3.
Manufacturing — Important considerations with respect to manufacturing
were made. The need for welding was minimized as much as possible. This
is due to the high risks of contractions when steel is welded. Any contractions
would results in additional face milling. Correspondingly, the face milling
would drastically decrease the material thickness and accordingly the stiff-
ness of the hatch. Each manufacturing drawing was highly speciﬁc regarding
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
method, order of machining and tolerances. To account for all the details in
manufacturing, a good contact to the responsible technician was crucial.
2.3.2
Components & Manufacturing
The new viewport is assembled using mainly manufactured parts, but also
purchased vacuum components of the ISO-K standard are used. This section
will cover each component and its design in detail. Additionally, the consider-
ations regarding the chosen design for the components are presented. Manu-
facturing/assembly drawings related to the new viewport are in Appendix F.
(a) Base plate
(b) Welding ﬂange
(c) Locking ﬂange
Figure 2.9: The three main AISI 304 stainless steel components.
Base plate
The base plate of the hatch is the part which assembles to the vacuum cham-
ber. Furthermore, it is a component that is experiencing a high load due to the
pressure differential produced by the vacuum chamber. The plate covers an
area of 680 mm × 680 mm while approximately 600 mm × 600 mm is exposed
to the vacuum pressure. A 0.825 bar gauge pressure in the chamber equals a
concentrated force of 30.7 kN - above 3 tons of load. The previous hatch uti-
lized stiffeners to accommodate this load, but it was highly over-dimensioned.
To identify the optimal thickness of the base plate, basic plate theory refer-
enced against a Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was used, see Section 2.3.4. The
analysis found a thickness of 20 mm AISI 304 steel more than sufﬁcient with a
safety factor against yielding above 30.
To ensure good ﬁtment to the chamber, the original hatch was measured in de-
tail to get precise measurements. The primary measurements for the base plate
consist of multiple bolt patterns, an O-ring race and rounded corners. With a
plate thickness of 20 mm, it can be cut with laser which is known for high preci-
sion. The base plate was delivered by Gladsaxe Klip & Buk with rounded, radius
60 mm, corners and a 495 mm hole at the center for the welding ﬂange, see
Figure 2.9a.
16
==PAGE:27==
2.3. Viewport Redesign
Welding ﬂange
The welding ﬂange is essentially a 3-dimensional annulus with additional con-
tours. This component was manufactured with a clearance ﬁt tolerance to the
center hole of the base plate. Subsequently, it was welded in place on both
sides of the base plate. To ensure that the welds would not fail due to the vac-
uum loads, high strength electrodes were used. The yield strength of the welds
are greater than AISI 304 steel (weld datasheet in Appendix G). The welding
ﬂange is the component to which the vacuum seal, window and fasteners as-
semble, see Section 2.3.3. The ﬂange is illustrated in Figure 2.9b.
Locking ﬂange
The locking ﬂange is similar to the welding ﬂange as it also an annulus shape,
however it is thinner, see Figure 2.9c. The ﬂange is used to distribute the fas-
tening pressure on the borosilicate window. Thus, costly damages due to con-
centrated forces at the edge of the window can be avoided. The ﬂange has a
small lip to ensure that the ISO-K claw clamps can be sufﬁciently fastened, see
Section 2.3.3.
Viewport window
The window of the viewport is, as previously mentioned, made from borosil-
icate glass in a disc shape with diameter 442 mm. The thickness of the win-
dow is dimensioned with respect to the pressure differential introduced by the
vacuum chamber. In theory, it was found that a thickness of 15 mm would
be sufﬁcient for static loading with a high safety factor. However, since the
pressure loading within the chamber is considered cyclic, the window will ex-
perience fatigue. To account for this, the safety factor against failure was fur-
ther increased with a glass thickness of 20 mm. The 5 mm increase in thickness
has neglectable effects on light throughput and glare, according to the mate-
rial data sheet [16]. Additionally, by using 20 mm borosilicate, the maximum
deﬂection is drastically reduced so that distortion can be avoided.
Figure 2.10: The load case of the circular viewport window.
For a clamped edge circular plate with uniform load, the maximum deﬂection
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
at the center of the plate can be calculated from Kirchhoff’s plate theory [14]:
δmax = P r4
64 D
D =
E t3
12 (1 −ν2)
(2.1)
Where D is the ﬂexural rigidity, P is the uniform pressure applied (0.825 bar),
r is the pressure exposed radius (r = 200 mm), E is Young’s Modulus, ν is Pois-
son’s ratio and t is the thickness of the glass, see Figure 2.10. The borosilicate
mechanical properties are seen in Table 2.2.
Using Equation (2.1) for a window thickness of 15 mm and 20 mm, the max-
imum deﬂections are 0.11 mm and 0.046 mm, respectively at 0.825 bar gauge
pressure. For a clamped plate, the maximum stress (σmax) occurs at the edges
of the loaded area and can be found as [14]:
σmax = 3P r2
4t2
(2.2)
For window thickness 15 mm and 20 mm, the maximum stress is 11.0 MPa and
6.19 MPa, respectively. The safety factors are then S15 mm ≈2.3 and S20 mm ≈
4.0.
ISO-K components
The ISO-K components are essential for the vacuum system. To streamline the
assembly procedure of the viewport, additional components of ISO-K were
purchased. To seal the borosilicate window, a centering ring with O-ring seal
of type DN 400 ISO-K is used. Figure 2.11a illustrates the component, however
the shown is in a smaller size. This seal type is self-aligning within the welding
ﬂange inner diameter. The centering ring had a ﬂange removed by milling as
the window could not be seated against the O-ring otherwise. To secure the
window in place against the O-ring, 12 pieces ISO-K claw clamps are used,
seen in Figure 2.11b. They fasten with M12 bolts to the welding ﬂange of the
viewport in a circular pattern and grip the locking ﬂange in place.
2.3.3
Manufacturing Process & Assembly
The new viewport assembly is a large component which requires large scale
CNC machining. The size of machines needed were not available at DTU,
Kgs. Lyngby, therefore assistance outside DTU was found. Initially, the base
plate, described in Section 2.3.2, was delivered to DTU Structural Lab along
additional raw materials. The welding ﬂange was manufactured at DTU and
subsequently welded to the base plate. The viewport did not include hole
patterns or tolerances at the time. Instead, detailed manufacturing drawings
were made for DTU Risø to ﬁnalize the machining with their large scale CNC
milling machine, see Figure 2.12.
18
==PAGE:29==
2.3. Viewport Redesign
(a) O-ring seal
(b) Clamp
Figure 2.11: The two ISO-K components used for the viewport.
Upon welding the ﬂange to the base plate, contractions caused the base plate
to become highly uneven. Therefore, the manufacturing drawings included
considerations with respect to the most appropriate method of machining the
viewport. The main objective was to complete face milling while removing
as little material as possible. Removing too much material could drastically
reduce the safety factor against yielding of the viewport. For this reason, the
surface of the welding ﬂange parallel to the base plate was milled ﬁrst. Sub-
sequently, the viewport was ﬂipped and the base plate was face milled on the
backside to achieve a good seal with the vacuum chamber. A maximum of
5.5 mm were removed at the position that was subjected to most contraction.
Next, the additional contours such as O-ring race, hole pattern for fastening the
viewport and thread pattern for the claw clamps were manufactured. Finally,
the geometrical tolerances regarding the O-ring seal surface were corrected be-
fore the viewport was returned to DTU, Kgs. Lyngby.
Figure 2.12: Section of the manufacturing drawing. See full drawing in Appendix F.
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
Assembly
The viewport is constructed to make the assembly process as simple as possi-
ble, hence the replication of the ISO-K vacuum components. A sectional view
of the assembly stack is illustrated in Figure 2.13. The viewport is fully assem-
bled before being fastened to the vacuum chamber as follows:
1. The welding ﬂange on which the O-ring sits is thoroughly cleaned. Subse-
quently, the centering ring with O-ring is placed within the welding ﬂange.
Note that the centering ﬂange of this ISO-K points downwards such that the
window can be seated to the O-ring.
2. The borosilicate window is carefully positioned on top of the O-ring. It is
important to center the window as much as possible.
3. A piece of rubber gasket, matching the size of the locking ﬂange, is placed
towards the edges of the window. The purpose of the gasket is to protect
the window when the locking ﬂange is fastened.
4. The locking ﬂange is aligned with the edge of the window and positioned as
such. The 12 pieces of ISO-K claw clamps are then fastened to the welding
ﬂange and thus tightening the locking ﬂange and window to the remain-
ing assembly. Note that a cross pattern should be used when tightening to
evenly distribute the compression of the O-ring. The claw clamps must not
be over-torqued.
Figure 2.13: Section cut of the viewport assembly.
2.3.4
Finite Element Analysis
The base plate of the viewport is the component with the largest area sub-
jected to vacuum. To ﬁnd the appropriate material thickness, a Finite Element
Analysis (FEA) was conducted using ANSYS. The FEA is uncomplicated, as
it is only modelled as a square, 600 mm × 600 mm, plate with the 400 mm
hole at the center, see Figure 2.14. This is done to maintain a conservative ap-
proach where no other components provide additional stiffness. In reality, the
20
==PAGE:31==
2.3. Viewport Redesign
welding ﬂange and the borosilicate window will increase the stiffness of the
viewport considerably.
Table 2.3: The base plate Finite Element results with varying material thickness.
Note values are maximum across the plate.
Thickness
mm
10
15
20
Displacement
mm
0.126
0.038
0.016
Von Mises
MPa
27.8
12.4
6.95
Safety factor
—
7.7
17.3
30.9
The Finite Element Analysis was utilized to evaluate the stress distribution
throughout the plate. The maximum Von Mises stress, due to the clamped
boundary conditions, was expected to be at the edge of the plate. This is con-
ﬁrmed by the results in Figure 2.15a. Based on the maximum Von Mises stress,
a safety factor against yielding can be calculated for each analysed thickness.
Additionally, the FEA was used to evaluate out-of-plane displacements across
the base plate, seen in Figure 2.15b. When loaded within the elastic region,
the displacements of the base plate have to be sufﬁciently small at the circum-
ference of the center hole. This is to ensure that the torsional and/or bending
forces involved are neglectable in respect to the strength of the borosilicate
window. By increasing the material thickness, the stiffness and the rigidity
against deﬂection can be elevated.
Figure 2.14: The base plate FEA load and clamped boundary conditions.
The Finite Element Analysis obtains the results presented in Table 2.3. As seen,
the thickness of the material has a high inﬂuence on the mechanical strength
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Design & Construction
and accordingly, the maximum displacement is affected. Arguably, the base
plate is greatly over-dimensioned with a material thickness of t = 20 mm. Al-
though, it should be noted that this FEA does not take removal of material
during manufacturing into account. Therefore, a plate of 20 mm may, as a re-
sult of welding contractions and subsequent manufacturing, be milled down
to t = 12 −15 mm around the edge. This is the area subjected to most stress
due to the clamped boundary conditions. As a result, the real safety factor is
much less than SF20 mm = 30.9 and expected closer to 8 −20.
(a) V. Mises stress [Pa]
(b) Displacement [m]
Figure 2.15: Von Mises stress distribution and out-of-plane (z-direction)
displacement for the base plate at t = 20 mm and P = 0.825 bar.
Figure Figure 2.15a illustrates the Von Mises stress distribution of a 20 mm
thick base plate. It is apparent, that the assumption of maximum stress at the
edges is upheld with a magnitude of σmax = 6.95 MPa. This is equal to a safety
factor against yielding of SF20 mm = 30.9. Furthermore, in Figure 2.15b, the
out-of-plane deformation is illustrated. The maximum displacement (δmax) is
found to be at the edge of the 400 mm center hole with a magnitude of δmax =
16.2 · 10−4 mm. Even in this conservative analysis, the maximum displacement
is neglectable in regards to possible failure of the borosilicate window. Based
on these results, in conjunction with limited increase in difﬁculty/expense by
manufacturing the viewport in a thicker material, the base plate was chosen to
made from t = 20 mm AISI Type 304 stainless steel.
22
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Preparation of Test Setups
With the constructional functionality of both the pressurization and vacuum
test setup concluded, the next step in experimental work is ensuring that the
controlling is capable of handling the planned testing. For the two test setups
to be fully operational, some preparations in regard to controlling and general
functionality were necessary. This chapter will cover the remaining controlling
changes/calibrations as well as performance optimization of both setups.
3.1
Calibration of Channels
A setup works by controlling a channel, for example the in-plane load. Com-
monly, test setups use single channel controlling, but in more advanced testing,
such as the pressurization setup, a two channel control is necessary to handle
both pressurization and in-plane load. Fortunately, as previously described,
the PPV of the pressurization setup has a built-in closed-loop controller, mean-
ing that the calibration cannot be altered, leaving only the in-plane load actua-
tor calibrations.
3.1.1
Internal Pressurization
The internal pressurization setup has previously been functional when it was
originally developed, but it was never used in conjunction with in-plane load-
ing of a sandwich composite specimen. Therefore, a task of combining the
pressurization and an in-plane load setup was to be managed. The in-plane
load setup was signiﬁcantly altered (moved from Instron to MTS controller),
thus the calibration tasks are identical to that of a newly developed setup.
LVDT calibration
The most widely used inductive transducer to translate the linear motion into
electrical signals is a linear variable differential transformer (LVDT). An LVDT
reports and controls the movement of an actuator piston by supplying a volt-
age corresponding to a motion. The translation between voltage and displace-
ment is known as the calibration, which is a linear relationship between the
two parameters. For example, if 3 V translates to 10 mm then 6 V should trans-
late to 20 mm.
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Preparation of Test Setups
The LVDT used for the pressurization setup is part of the EIS assembly SHY-
010-KYUNGDO-KOCO-0140, known as the Korea machine. This actuator has
a stroke of ±60 mm and was to be calibrated as such. The calibration was
carried out using a stand-alone LVDT as reference for the measurements. Ad-
ditionally, an excel calibration sheet was used to ﬁll in the readouts from both
LVDTs. Based on the readouts, the calibration sheet supplied suggested ad-
justment to the signal gains such that the deviation between the two readouts
was minimized.
Load cell Calibration
The load cell of the Korea machine also needed calibration. Commonly, load
cells need calibration more often than LVDTs as they experience cyclic load-
ing. Therefore, they are more prone to deterioration over long time use which
affects the voltage readout [9]. The method of calibration is nearly identical to
the LVDT as it is also linear. As a reference measurement, a calibration load
cell must be positioned in-line with the actuator piston. A calibration load
cell is regularly certiﬁed, thus ensuring sufﬁcient measurement accuracy. The
calibration documentation (LVDT and load cell) for the Korea machine is pre-
sented in Appendix H.
3.1.2
Load Cell Referencing
The original Airbus design of the vacuum GAG setup dictates that a load cell
within the vacuum chamber should be used. This design conforms to the
general experimental norm that the load cell should be positioned as close
to the specimen as possible for accurate readouts. However, as described in
Section 2.2.2, the internal load cell was removed as it simply caused to many
obstacles.
Figure 3.1: The MTS 100 kN Model 244.22 actuator.
Note: When mounted, the right side points towards the vacuum chamber.
Instead of the internal load cell, the unit that is ﬁxed to the actuator assembly is
used, see Figure 3.1. Correspondingly, the load cell is then outside the chamber
with easy access, but further away from the specimen. Prior to removing the
internal load cell, it is necessary to investigate the inﬂuence of the load cell
24
==PAGE:35==
3.2. Performance Optimization
position. To do so, both load cells are connected to the controller so the readout
of both can be monitored simultaneously. This procedure is called referencing
which is similar to common load cell calibration.
The referencing is handled by recording the load readout from both trans-
ducers at load steps of approximately 5 kN. This is done in the load range
of 1 −95 kN, resulting in 20 data points which is considered sufﬁcient, see Fig-
ure 3.2a. Subsequently, the load difference, Fout −Fin, can be computed and
also the percentage increase.
(a) Load steps
(b) Difference per step
Figure 3.2: Referencing between load cell inside and outside the vacuum chamber.
The load readings increase marginally when using the load cell outside the
chamber. As illustrated in Figure 3.2a, the difference between the two readouts
across the load capability of the actuator is neglectable. The difference, illus-
trated in Figure 3.2b, is linear (R2 = 0.9988) indicating that it could be adjusted
for with use of the gain controls. The mean percentage increase is 1.04% with
little spread and the maximum increase is 1.5%. This means that the outside
load cell reads a force approximately 1% higher than the inside load cell. This
is more than sufﬁcient and within normal calibration error. Correspondingly,
the removal of the internal load cell is considered a viable solution.
3.2
Performance Optimization
With the two test setups being ﬁnished with respect to construction and cali-
bration, they are fully operational. Yet, in academic projects and commercial
testing, time is often a limiting factor. Therefore, the following sections will
cover the performance optimization, especially with respect to cycle time, of
both the pressurization and vacuum GAG setup.
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Preparation of Test Setups
3.2.1
Internal Pressurization
The internal pressurization setup is highly capable of running a cycle within
acceptable time, thus not a lot of optimization is possible. Still, it is important
to note that the stability and functionality of the setup is reliant on disbond
volume. As disbond propagates and the internal volume increases, the pres-
surization cycle time may need to be increased.
Figure 3.3: The optimized pressurization cycle.
The intended cycle for the pressurization is a ramp-dwell-ramp command.
The loading follows the fatigue testing standard of ratio R = 0.1, meaning
that Pmin/Pmax = R = 0.1. Knowing the maximum gauge pressure is Pmax =
0.825 bar, it yields a minimum gauge pressure of Pmin = 0.0825 bar. Subse-
quently, the optimal cycle time for a disbond of 100 mm was found to be
3.5 s. Note that the pressurization can be performed at a faster rate. This is not
advised as it drastically increases the overshoot, i.e. the difference between the
pressure command and actual pressure. Furthermore, the pressurized volume
has to be considered; as the disbond increases, the pressurization setup has
to ﬂow considerably more air within the same amount of seconds. This may
push the limits of the PPV which is audible. The suggested pressurization cy-
cle, which can be used safely until specimen failure, is presented in Figure 3.3.
3.2.2
Vacuum Ground-Air-Ground
The vacuum Ground-Air-Ground test setup has a signiﬁcant longer cycle time.
This is because of the chamber volume of 0.4 m3 which needs to be removed by
means of the vacuum pump for every cycle. In A. Mulays previous work, the
vacuum load cycle was deﬁned as a ramp-dwell-ramp command. The maxi-
mum gauge pressure was P = 820 mbar within a cycle time of 100 s, equal to
26
==PAGE:37==
3.2. Performance Optimization
864 cycles per 24 hours [11]. Ideally, the cycle time should be lower, but it is
limited by the capabilities of the vacuum pump.
(a) Initial performance
(b) Optimized performance
Figure 3.4: The performance optimization of the vacuum cycle. Pressure is absolute.
To increase the performance and lower the cycle time, the volume within the
vacuum system needs to be minimized. To achieve a signiﬁcant effect, the vol-
ume in the vacuum chamber can be changed. The chamber was originally de-
signed to accommodate simultaneous testing of two specimens, but since only
a single specimen is tested, a large volume of the chamber remains unused.
By placing large wooden blocks in the chamber, the volume can be lowered
by approximately 30%. Subsequently, the vacuum capabilities were tested by
running the setup in the same ramp-dwell-ramp loop as A. Mulay with an in-
creased gauge pressure of 0.825 bar, seen in Figure 3.4a. As shown, the cycle
time was optimized by 40% down to 60 s. This was achieved by increasing the
slope of the pressure drop towards vacuum to full pump capacity. Addition-
ally, the dwell time between ramps was minimized.
Subsequently, the need for identical slopes in pressure loading and unloading
was considered. The experimental tests on the GAG setup seeks to validate a
numerical model. Therefore, it is desirable to replicate the numerical loading
as accurately as possible within the limits of the vacuum pump. The model
considers the loading/unloading to be instantaneous for both vacuum and in-
plane load, however this is not feasible experimentally. Instead, the vacuum
loading must respect the limits of the vacuum pump, but the unloading can
be signiﬁcantly accelerated. Accordingly, the cycle time can be lowered by
an additional 24 s down to 36 s, illustrated in Figure 3.4b. To achieve this op-
timization, the PID control loop required detailed adjustments as the quick
unloading was prone to cause system instability.
27
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Experimental Procedures
This chapter will cover the experimental testing of the project, including im-
portant preparations, scheduling of test series and calibration of the Digital
Image Correlation equipment.
4.1
Specimen Preparations
The specimens to be tested are supplied by Airbus. They are constructed us-
ing t f = 1.4 mm thick prepreg carbon ﬁber face sheets and a tc = 40 mm
Nomex honeycomb core with density ρ = 32 kg/m3. The total thickness is
ttotal = 42.8 mm. Additionally, they are manufactured with a face/core dis-
bond of 100 mm at the center of one side. This is done using a Teﬂon ﬁlm
(PTFE) to which epoxy resin does not adhere or chemically react. The spec-
imens are delivered in an uncut state as part of a large sandwich composite
sheet with different shapes and properties. Subsequently, they are cut to the
size of 400 mm × 400 mm at DTU, hence the disbond may not be positioned
at the exact center. Two sheets of specimens were delivered, known as the
A- and B-sheet, each with eight Ground-Air-Ground specimens. Furthermore,
there are two additional specimens on a different type, C-sheet. This equals
a total of 18 GAG specimens. Previous Ground-Air-Ground projects have uti-
lized three B-sheet specimens. Leaving ﬁve B-sheet, eight A-sheet and two
C-sheet specimens available at project initiation.
After manufacturing at Airbus, the sheets were marked with the location of
the disbond. Unfortunately, it was found that the disbond is in fact positioned
on the opposite face sheet of the markings. As a consequence of this critical
ﬂaw, results presented in previous Ground-Air-Ground projects utilizing the
Airbus specimens are rendered partially unreliable as out-of-plane displace-
ments were recorded on the incorrect face sheet. This conclusion corresponds
well with the results presented by A. Mulay [11], which contain a large amount
of noise and inaccuracy.
As the testing in this project is more advanced than common material char-
acterization tests, a large experimental workload is with respect to specimen
preparations. The following will cover the preparations as well as the discov-
ery of the erroneous disbond markings
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Experimental Procedures
4.1.1
Initial Disbond Propagation
The numerical results presented by A. Farshidi [7] found that in static loading,
the initial disbond diameter has a large inﬂuence on the energy release rate at
the disbond crack tip. Additionally, with relatively thick face sheets of t f =
1.4 mm, the energy release rate would be low in most loading scenarios. To
ensure that disbond propagation occurs within the loading limits of the setups,
the numerical model suggests that the initial disbond should be 200 mm.
As previously mentioned, three specimens were rendered damaged from an
experimental standpoint in their past GAG use. These specimens were still
fully intact and suitable for use in testing methods to increase the initial dis-
bond to 200 mm. Three methods of increasing the disbond without damag-
ing the specimens were tested.
Heat application
Separation between face sheet and honeycomb core material can be achieved
with sufﬁcient heating of the desired disbond area for 10-20 minutes. Subse-
quently, the heating will cause the epoxy resin to reach glass transition temper-
ature (Tg), allowing the adhesive to elongate/release between face/core with
drastically reduced Young’s Modulus [13]. Additionally, the hot air that is
trapped in the honeycomb cells will expand and assist the disbond propaga-
tion. Ideally, it should cause a face sheet bulge at the new disbond circumfer-
ence. The expected glass transition temperature of Tg = 180°C was supplied
by Airbus based on the resin typically used. Two methods of applying heat to
the honeycomb sandwich specimen were tested. First, a 200 mm steel disc
was heated to 190°C and subsequently positioned approximately 1 mm from
the specimen, seen inFigure 4.1a. The intention was that the disc would radi-
ate sufﬁcient heat. This method was also tested with the specimen positioned
on top of the heated disc to maximize the heat transfer. After several attempts,
no bulge or visible increase in disbond was identiﬁed. The second method of
applying heat was by means of a heat gun in near proximity of the desired
disbond area, enclosed by insulation material. This method is illustrated in
Figure 4.1b. The face sheet temperature was continuously monitored using an
infrared thermometer. Again, no observable results with respect to disbond
increase. Lastly, the heat gun method was tested at a face sheet temperature of
approximately 230°C which is likely to permanently damage the carbon ﬁber
face sheets. Still, no visible disbond increase on the honeycomb sandwich spec-
imen.
Based on the lack of results, Airbus was inquired regarding the certainty of
the glass transition temperature previously provided. It was found that due to
30
==PAGE:41==
4.1. Specimen Preparations
(a) Radiant heat
(b) Heat gun
Figure 4.1: Methods of heat application to increase disbond diameter.
the unconventional method of manufacturing the specimen sheets, the glass
transition temperature of the bond material is in fact approximately 250°C.
Unfortunately, heating to this level is not an option as it will damage the resin
of the carbon ﬁber face sheets. Therefore, the heating method is demonstrated
unsuccessful which is explained by insufﬁcient heating in combination with
particularly thick face sheets counteracting a bulge.
Manual pressurization
A manual method of pressurizing specimens was also considered to propa-
gate the initial disbond from 100 mm to 200 mm. The method resembles
that of the automated internal pressurization setup, but it is performed with a
digital tire pressure gauge instead, see Figure 4.2. The three previously heated
specimens were used for these tests as they were already scrapped.
Figure 4.2: Manual pressurization using digital tire pressure gauge.
The tests found that the initial disbond can be propagated signiﬁcantly with
pressurization, but the actual increase in diameter is difﬁcult to measure. At
a static 2.5 bar, the specimen failed rapidly as the disbond propagated to the
edges of the specimen. At pressures below, the crack tip advancement is au-
dible and can be vaguely controlled, although still without knowledge of the
exact magnitude of propagation. This demonstrates that manual propagation
is infeasible as it cannot be accurately controlled. Fortunately, as a preliminary
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Experimental Procedures
test, it provides proof of concept with respect to the internal pressurization
setup. With the tests, the use of a valve for pressurization was discovered as a
simple solution with a great seal.
4.1.2
Valve Mounting
For the internal pressurization setup, the connection between the proportional
pressure valve (PPV) and the specimen is crucial. As described in Section 4.1.1,
a tire valve, also known as a Schrader valve, is a viable solution as it is inexpen-
sive (one time use) and provide very simple connection to the pressurization
system. Figure 4.3 illustrates the mounted valve and the installation process is
described in Appendix I.
(a) Full specimen view
(b) Fixed Schrader valve
Figure 4.3: The Schrader valve mounted in a specimen.
4.1.3
Additional Preparations
Prior to testing, there are additional specimen preparations to be made. As the
majority of these preparations refer to other tasks, e.g. painting a stochastic
pattern refers to Digital Image Correlation (Section 4.3), they will not be cov-
ered here in detail. This section will brieﬂy describe the order of preparations
that are needed before commencing tests:
U-cap mounting — The ability and accuracy of the in-plane loading is highly
dependent on the ﬁxation of the U-caps to the specimen. The mounting of
U-caps should be one of the ﬁrst preparations conducted. First, the specimen
should be covered with use of painters tape or plastic in areas where the U-caps
should not adhere. Next, the carbon ﬁber surfaces are prepared by thoroughly
32
==PAGE:43==
4.2. Test Series Planning
scufﬁng them using low grit sandpaper and subsequently cleaned using iso-
propyl alcohol. The same approach is used to prepare the surfaces of the steel
U-caps. The U-caps are glued with Araldite 2015, an epoxy glue constructed to
adhere metals and plastics. The glue is applied to both the U-cap and speci-
men surfaces and distributed to a thick layer with a spatula. Subsequently, the
U-caps are positioned on the specimen and ﬁxed with F-clamps during curing
(24 hours). Approximately 30 minutes after application, the excess glue can be
removed.
DIC painting — The painting of the specimens with respect to Digital Image
Correlation (DIC) measurements is conducted using matte ﬁnish paint to avoid
glare. The preferred brand is Plasti-Kote Twist which will ease the application
process. First, the disbonded face sheet should be thoroughly cleaned with
isopropyl alcohol. Next, the surface is applied with 3-4 layers of white paint
which should be allowed to cure. After curing, a stochastic pattern of black
dots can be applied with care. Refer to the Aramis user manual for more in-
formation on the pattern size. This preparation is also described in Section 4.3.
After painting, the expected center of the disbond should be re-marked.
Parallel milling — The ﬁnal step is with respect to the in-plane loading. The
U-cap surfaces should be parallel which is achieved by milling. As it is difﬁ-
cult to maintain parallel surfaces when mounting the U-caps, they will require
machining with the minimum geometric tolerance; parallelism [0.05 mm]. In
Section 5.1, the reason for this is described in further detail.
Optional preparations — Lastly, the optional preparations can be carried out.
For example, the mounting of a valve for use with the pressurization setup.
Alternatively, it may be of interest to attach strain gauges to the specimen,
allowing the relative displacements through the face sheets to be monitored.
This process is described in Section 5.1.1.
4.2
Test Series Planning
An objective of this thesis is validation of the numerical disbond model devel-
oped by A. Farshidi [7]. Thus, the testing to be conducted is with respect to the
load cases previously investigated numerically. Additionally, by repeating the
load cases in both internal pressurization and vacuum, the differences between
the two propagation methods can be investigated. The tests were scheduled
to ﬁrst be completed on the internal pressurization setup. Subsequently, they
were to be repeated on the vacuum Ground-Air-Ground setup. The numerical
results cover both static and fatigue loading, but based on Section 4.1.1 and
33
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Experimental Procedures
previous results presented by A. Mulay [11], static propagation is unlikely to
be successful. Therefore, the testing in this thesis will primarily cover fatigue
loading.
In total, six specimens combined were scheduled for testing in the two setups
with the load cases presented in Table 4.1. The cases with an in-plane load of
40 kN refer to a fatigue load case that is also presented in the numerical results.
The 65 kN in-plane load cases are not directly used to validate the numerical
model. They are tested such that more experimental data of disbonding is
available. Subsequently, these cases can also be referenced against each other
for direct pressurization/vacuum comparison.
Table 4.1: The scheduled fatigue tests with varying setup and loads. Note
’pressurization’ and ’pressure’ is both the PPV-controlled setup. ’Name’ refers to the
designation of each specimen which is found on the Airbus sheets.
Test setup
Name
Gauge pressure
In-plane load
Time
[−]
[−]
[bar]
[kN]
[days]
Pressurization
3B-8
1.2...1.5
0
8
Pressurization
3B-9
1.5
0
6
Pressure + load
3B-10
0.825
40
7
Pressure + load
3B-7
0.825
65
5
Vacuum + load
3B-6
0.825
40
25
Vacuum + load
3A-1
0.825
65
20
When conducting experimental work, it is important to maintain a schedule
for each test. To do so, it is most viable if an estimation on time consump-
tion per test is included. Additionally, the estimation must cover all neces-
sary preparations and add a buffer to account for any possible obstructions.
Table 4.1 includes time estimations for each tests. It is seen that tests with
a higher in-plane load is expected to be completed faster. Furthermore, the
noted time consumption per test include 2-3 days of specimen preparation.
From Section 3.2, it is clear that the vacuum Ground-Air-Ground setup is far
inferior in terms of speed when compared to the pressurization setup. This is
equally accounted for in the time estimations.
34
==PAGE:45==
4.3. Digital Image Correlation
4.3
Digital Image Correlation
The main data extraction technique used during the experiments of this project
is Digital Image Correlation (DIC). It is a non-contact optical method which
utilizes image registration techniques to accurately track changes in both 2D
and 3D on a surface of a specimen. This measurement tool is most often used
to measure displacements and/or strains in "simple to use" and cost effective
manor [10]. The primary reason for the use of DIC is the non-contact property
of the system which is highly favored in especially the GAG setup where the
specimen is tested inside a vacuum chamber. In disbond propagation tests,
the 3D measuring technique is used. This means that two high resolution cam-
eras are used in parallel to create a 3D volume around the specimen, see Fig-
ure 4.4. Several systems of brand GOM, known as Aramis, are available at
DTU Structural Lab with different speciﬁcations appropriate for various tests.
The newest, fastest and highest resolution systems are known as Aramis 12M.
The computational power of such system is excessive for the intended dis-
bond propagation test series and more appropriate for real-time strain track-
ing. Therefore, the inferior, less powerful and a little older system, known as
Aramis 6M, is used. This system is fully capable handling the task.
Figure 4.4: Schematics of the Digital Image Correlation (GOM Aramis) setup.
4.3.1
Calibration of Aramis 6M
To utilize the full potential of any Aramis system, it needs calibration for each
individual test setup. To do the calibration, an object designed by GOM for
this task must be used - in this case the CP20 250 × 200 calibration plate. The
plate size is chosen based on the desired measuring volume which correspond-
ingly dictates the measuring distance (from camera to specimen). The CP20
250 × 200 plate will, at the a measuring distance of 361 mm allow for a mea-
suring volume of 300 mm × 240 mm. This is considered sufﬁcient considering
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Experimental Procedures
the specimen dimensions of approximately 400 mm × 400 mm. The system is
calibrated by following an on-screen 13-step instruction manual. It essentially
captures 13 images of the calibration plate at different angles and distances.
Commonly, the 13-step calibration can be conducted at any place and subse-
quently, the system can be moved to its intended position. This was not an
option with the old, sensitive viewport. The calibration had to be conducted
through the viewport to be successful. With the new viewport, the system can
now be calibrated outside the vacuum chamber and moved to its position, as
intended, with excellent results.
As previously noted in Section 4.1.3, the specimen needs to be painted with
a stochastic pattern of black dots on a white background. The black dots are
used for the Aramis system to track and correlate changes through images,
corresponding to accurate displacements and strains on the measured surface.
After calibration, the Aramis has a build-in feature allowing the user to eval-
uate the painted pattern quality. If the pattern quality is not considered suf-
ﬁcient, it is advised to manipulate the lighting pointed towards the specimen
as it has a large inﬂuence. If the quality does not improve, it is suggested to
repaint the specimen.
4.3.2
Capture Sequence
To optimize the capture sequence of the DIC system, it is supplied with in-
puts from the station controller, MTS Flextest 100. The necessary inputs are
the gauge pressure and the in-plane load that is applied to the specimen. Both
are then recorded that the exact same time as images are taken. This ensures
that the DIC measurements can be post-processed without the need for refer-
ring to the station recordings. Furthermore, the station controller is capable of
outputting a digital trigger signal. This can be used in a fatigue loading se-
quence to trigger a DIC image at predeﬁned cycle intervals. It is useful as it
ensures that the disbond is DIC recorded at maximum load, both pressure and
in-plane load. Correspondingly, this is when the out-of-plane displacement is
of highest magnitude and the disbond crack is most expanded.
Based on previous experience, the interval between image captures must be
sufﬁcient for tracking the disbond propagation accurately. With too few cycles
per image, the size of the Aramis data ﬁles quickly become excessive and may
cause software instability during post-processing. Preferably, an individual
Aramis ﬁle should not contain above 500 images. A good compromise be-
tween sufﬁcient images and ﬁle size is 100 cycles per image. Therefore, allow-
ing 50,000 cycles per Aramis data ﬁle. This capture sequence will be adequate
for the whole fatigue test in the vacuum GAG setup. In the pressurization
36
==PAGE:47==
4.4. Fundamentals of Pressure Differential
setup, it should be considered to lower the rate to 50 cycles per image when
the disbond is signiﬁcantly increased. This is due to the theoretical differences
between the two loading methods, see Section 4.4.
4.4
Fundamentals of Pressure Differential
Prior to evaluating results from the pressurization and vacuum setup, it is im-
portant to fully comprehend the natural differences between the two loading
methods with respect to the change in volume caused by the disbond face sheet
bulge.
4.4.1
Vacuum Loading
Consider the honeycomb sandwich composite specimens with an initial cir-
cular disbond at the face/core interface on one side. The specimen core is
considered completely unvented, meaning that air ﬂow and pressure equal-
ization is prevented. Therefore, rapid equalization can only occur between
honeycomb cells within the disbonded area of the specimen. However, due
to permeability, slow pressure equalization can occur between sandwich core
and the surrounding environment over time. For this reason, the specimen can
be considered unloaded (and undeformed) when a test is not in progress [6].
At the time of aircraft ascent, the ambient pressure will decrease rapidly, thus
causing a pressure difference between the entrapped air in the honeycomb
cells and the ambient surrounding air. This will cause expansion/deformation
of the disbonded face sheet, recognized as a face sheet bulge. Here, it is im-
portant to note that the deformation results in an increased volume, V, which
in turn decreases the internal pressure, p. Accordingly, as the disbonded area
increases, the interpreted force at the face sheet center caused by the pressure
differential should remain approximately constant. Additionally, the ambient
temperature also affects the volume deﬁned by the ideal gas law:
pV = nRT
(4.1)
Where T is the temperature of the gas (in this case air), R = 8.314 J/(mol K) is
the universal gas constant and n is the number of moles (amount of gas).
4.4.2
Pressurization Loading
Consider the same specimen with identical speciﬁcations as the previously
mentioned. In internal pressurization, the objective is to simulate the Ground-
Air-Ground action using a simpliﬁed method. This method may have lower
cycle time, faster specimen swaps and additional beneﬁts. However, inter-
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Experimental Procedures
nal pressurization is not an accurate GAG representation as it does not con-
sider the natural pressure drop caused by an increase in disbond volume. This
means that the ideal gas law is effectively neglected [7]. When pressurizing
the honeycomb sandwich specimen, the PPV does not consider the change in
face sheet bulge volume. Correspondingly, the interpreted force applied to the
center face sheet will increase exponentially with increasing disbond. In the-
ory, pressurization could be an exact simulation of a GAG cycle if the Digital
Image Correlation system is used to constantly evaluate the volume within
the disbond bulge. By continuously outputting the volume (or sufﬁcient di-
mensions), the station can be programmed to consider the ideal gas law in the
pressurization cycle. This means it would lower the pressure as the volume
increases.
38
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Results
In this chapter, the results of extensive experimental work is presented. The
disbond propagation methods, designed and developed throughout this the-
sis, will be evaluated and discussed with respect to the achieved results. Fur-
thermore, a comparison between the expected results from the numerical anal-
ysis (A. Farshidi [7]) and the experimental results will be presented.
5.1
Face Sheet Load Distribution
During the previous GAG project by A. Mulay, it was discovered that the face
sheets of the honeycomb specimen were not equally loaded. This was doc-
umented with use of four strategically mounted strain gauges. The results
found differences in loads between front and back face sheet, but a load differ-
ence between left and right side of a single face sheet was also discovered. A.
Mulay suggests in the thesis that the issue should be addressed prior to com-
mencing additional tests. This is because uneven loading of the face sheets
may lead to inaccurate results that will inhibit validation of the numerical
model.
5.1.1
Strain Gauge Setup
Previously, the load distribution was measured with four vertically mounted
strain gauges; two on both face sheets close to the upper U-cap. The same
method is applied in the following tests that include in-plane loading for both
the internal pressurization and GAG setup. However, only two strain gauges
are ﬁtted to the non-disbonded face sheet, as shown in Figure 5.1b. On the dis-
bonded face sheet, the Aramis DIC system is capable of extracting strain values
using a digital extensometer within the measuring volume. This eliminates
the need for two additional gauges. To ensure the DIC strain measurement are
comparable to the analog counterparts, the digital and analog gauges must be
aligned. Therefore, the painted DIC surface is marked with gauge indicators
for post-processing purposes, see Figure 5.1a.
To maintain an air tight seal of the vacuum chamber, an appropriate method
of routing strain gauge cables to the outside was established. Previously, the
internal load cell used a standardized feedthrough with connectors [4]. As the
internal load cell was removed, the ISO-KF DN16 feedthrough from Pfeiffer
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 5. Results
(a) Schematic view
(b) Tested specimen view
Figure 5.1: Quarter bridge strain gauges mounted on non-disbond face sheet.
Vacuum was available to pass the strain gauge cables through the vacuum
chamber. The feedthrough connector has a total of 8 connection pins which
is sufﬁcient for two quarter bridge strain gauges using a total of 6 pins (3 pins
each). The additional two pins can be used later for internal lighting or similar.
5.1.2
Load Distribution Results
The ﬁrst test with in-plane load was conducted on the pressurization setup
with specimen 3B-10. Prior to the fatigue test of the specimen, several static
load cycles were conducted with in-plane load of 40 kN and an internal gauge
pressure of 0.825 bar. This was done to evaluate the load distribution along the
U-caps. The recorded strains, averaged from 10 load cycles, are presented in
Table 5.1. From the table, it is seen that a misalignment in the load distribution
is present. Though, with signiﬁcant improvement in deviation magnitudes
when compared to the previously recorded by A. Mulay. Both the analog and
Aramis strain gauges show that the strain-A position is higher than the strain-
B position. Meaning, when viewed from the non-disbonded face sheet, the
left side is experiencing the higher load. Furthermore, the results show that
the two face sheets are not evenly loaded with a difference of approximately
65 µstrain at the A-position and 56 µstrain a the B-position.
After investigation of the uneven load distribution, it was found most plausi-
ble that the misalignment is caused by the U-cap surfaces being nonparallel.
The hypothesis was tested with use of a milling machine and a dial gauge.
40
==PAGE:51==
5.1. Face Sheet Load Distribution
Table 5.1: The strain gauge measurements in µstrain suggesting that the load may
be unevenly distributed. The subsequent results after machining the specimen show
improvement. The strain values are an average from 10 load cycles.
Analog gauges
Aramis gauges
µstrain
µstrain
A
B
A
B
Before
682
625
747
681
After
711
704
716
709
When moving the dial gauge along the length and width of the U-cap differ-
ences of 0.3 mm and 0.12 mm were found, respectively. This indicates that the
manual ﬁxation of the U-caps is insufﬁcient. To rectify the issue, the specimen
is face milled to high precision parallelism. Subsequently, this procedure is
implemented as part of the specimen preparations, described in Section 4.1.3.
Figure 5.2: Analog strain gauges A and B versus time. The four illustrated cycles
show, that the strains settle over time.
After the U-caps were machined, additional load distribution tests were con-
ducted. When investigating only the analog gauges, some deviations were still
present. However, after several "run-in" cycles, the load distribution became
more even as the analog gauge A and B settled on a maximum of approxi-
mately 700 µstrain, seen in Figure 5.2. It is also seen that the analog gauges are
in agreement at minimum and maximum strain, buy they deviate during the
loading process. This may possibly occur due to the load transfer assembly. It
is likely that it does not have full contact with the specimen in unloaded state.
Subsequently, when the assembly is loaded, it deforms and full contact with
the specimen is established resulting in even load distribution.
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Results
The analog measurements were referenced against the Aramis DIC results,
shown in Figure 5.3. It is seen that after machining the U-caps, the Aramis
and analog gauges are in agreement of a maximum strain of approximately
700 µstrain. Thus, the load distribution between the two face sheets is accept-
able and within 10 µstrain from each other. Furthermore, there is no signiﬁcant
difference between position A and B measurements for both face sheets which
is also presented in Table 5.1. In conclusion, by machining the U-caps to a high
degree of parallelism, the uneven load distribution can be mitigated.
Figure 5.3: Aramis strain gauge measurements vs DIC image no. in a single load
cycle after U-cap machining.
It should be noted that for each specimen intended for in-plane load, the ini-
tial step prior to fatigue testing was the load distribution analysis. In most
instances, the distribution was not an issue after U-cap machining, but as it
will later be described in Section 5.4, one specimen (3B-6) showed interesting
results with respect to load distribution.
5.2
Disbond Propagation by PPV
To study the effect of internal pressurization alone and conduct some initial
propagation, the ﬁrst series of pressurization tests did not include in-plane
load. Additionally, to ensure propagation within reasonable fatigue running
time, the gauge pressure is set between 1.2 bar and 1.5 bar depending on the
specimen. Note that these tests cannot be used to validate the numerical model
as they do use in-plane loading.
42
==PAGE:53==
5.2. Disbond Propagation by PPV
5.2.1
Specimen 3B-8
The internal pressurization test of specimen 3B-8 was the ﬁrst experiment of
the project. Thus, the appropriate internal gauge pressure was not previously
deﬁned. It was decided to start the fatigue cycles with gauge pressure 1.2 bar
and gradually increase the the load up to 1.5 bar while continuously monitor-
ing disbond propagation. The specimen was tested with the loads presented
in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: The gauge pressures and corresponding amount of cycles for specimen
3B-8. Total number of cycles (with varying gauge pressure) is 65,531 cycles.
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
P = 1.2 bar
P = 1.35 bar
P = 1.5 bar
46,531 cycles
2,300 cycles
16,700 cycles
Initially, at Run 1 with P = 1.2 bar, the specimen was loaded with 46,531 cycles.
This initiated propagation of approximately 1.9 mm in diameter. Subsequently,
the pressure was increased to 1.35 bar, but only for 2,300 cycles before being
increased to 1.5 bar. The latter was used for 16,700 cycles. The test was stopped
at a total of 65,531 cycles due to signiﬁcant propagation.
The disbond propagation of specimen 3B-8 with internal pressurization alone
was successful. In Figure 5.4 the out-of-plane displacement is illustrated as
propagation per cycle. Note the red color is displacements above 0.1 mm. The
initial predeﬁned disbond of D = 100 mm is shown in Figure 5.4a where the
crack tip is outlined by the red area. In Figure 5.4b, it is seen that the propa-
gation caused by 1.2 bar at 46,500 cycles is insigniﬁcant. The disbond diameter
has increased of 1.9 mm. The majority of the crack tip advancement occurs
during fatigue cycles with 1.5 bar, see Figure 5.4c and 5.4d. During the to-
tal amount of cycles (64,956), the disbond has doubled in diameter across the
width while maintaining an acceptable circular outline. The disbond is seen to
move towards an oval shape which is explained by the clamping mechanism
used at the vertical edges that limits horizontal propagation. Specimen 3B-8 is
still intact, although highly disbonded, and can be used for further testing if
desired.
An important note is that varying the gauge pressure during a fatigue test
drastically increases the difﬁculty of post-processing the results. Based on this
conclusion, it was decided to maintain a gauge pressure of 1.5 bar in the test
for the next specimen to accurately track the disbond propagation until failure.
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5. Results
(a) 100 cycles, 100 mm disbond
(b) 46,500 cycles, 102 mm disbond
(c) 59,831 cycles, 132 mm disbond
(d) 64,956 cycles, 188 mm disbond
Figure 5.4: The disbond propagation as a result of fatigue cycles with 1.2 bar,
1.35 bar and 1.5 bar gauge pressures. The ﬁgures illustrate out-of-plane
displacement where magnitudes higher than 0.1 mm are shown in red.
5.2.2
Specimen 3B-9
The second test is internal pressurization at 1.5 bar of specimen 3B-9. This test
can be used to verify the results found in the previous test of specimen 3B-8.
In Figure 5.5, the disbond propagation with respect to cycle number is illus-
trated with the out-of-plane displacement. In comparison to previous results,
both pressurization tests initially propagate in a 45° angle and subsequently
advance towards the oval shape. The amount of cycles before failure at 1.5 bar
is drastically reduced to a total of 23,700 cycles (compared to approx. 65,500
with 3B-8). Interestingly, when the cycles at 1.5 bar are isolated for both pres-
surization cases, the difference is 7,000 cycles. For specimen 3B-8, this devia-
tion is presumably accounted for with the additional 1.2 bar and 1.35 bar cy-
cles. The results are considered in agreement with respect to propagation rate.
44
==PAGE:55==
5.2. Disbond Propagation by PPV
(a) 100 cycles, 100 mm disbond
(b) 13,000 cycles, 110 mm disbond
(c) 21,000 cycles, 141 mm disbond
(d) 23,500 cycles, 213 mm disbond
Figure 5.5: The disbond propagation as a result of fatigue cycles with 1.5 bar gauge
pressures. The ﬁgures illustrate out-of-plane displacement where magnitudes higher
than 0.12 mm are shown in red.
When investigating the difference between pressurization and vacuum load-
ing, as described in Section 4.4, it is advantageous to analyze the change in
out-of-plane displacement at the center of the disbond. Figure 5.6 illustrates
the displacement of the center point plotted against the DIC image index (100
cycles per image). Under the assumption that disbond size correlates to the
center point displacement, it is seen that the rate of propagation exponentially
increases. This corresponds well to the theory on pressurization. It is also seen
that the maximum out-of-plane displacement exceeds 5 mm. This is signiﬁcant
and clearly visible during testing.
Specimen 3B-9 failed during testing which means it is no longer an unvented
honeycomb core and the structural integrity of the component is damaged.
Therefore, 3B-9 was cut at the vertical center line to inspect the disbond dam-
age, see Figure 5.7. From the image, the crack tip is seen to be advancing into
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Results
Figure 5.6: The displacement in mm of the disbond center point plotted against
23,700 fatigue cycles at 1.5 bar. Index refers to DIC image (100 cycles per image).
the honeycomb core material. This is interesting as a face/core interface crack
was expected. Presumably, this may occur as a results of the high internal pres-
sure. At 1.5 bar, the honeycomb cell walls are highly strained and the fatigue
loading may cause them to fail prior to the face/core interface. Correspond-
ingly, the weakest point of a core cell wall is at the center of the specimen
thickness which appears to be the direction of crack propagation.
Figure 5.7: Specimen 3B-9 section cut at the vertical center line. The propagation
appears to advance into the honeycomb core.
5.3
Pressurization and In-plane Load
Following the pressurization tests was the addition of in-plane compression
loading. This additional load is expected to inﬂuence the disbond propagation
drastically with respect to rate of propagation and disbond shape/direction.
Furthermore, the gauge pressure is dropped to the more realistic 0.825 bar ren-
dering the load case comparable to the numerical model. The following sec-
tions present results for an in-plane load of 40 kN and 65 kN, respectively.
46
==PAGE:57==
5.3. Pressurization and In-plane Load
5.3.1
Specimen 3B-10
As previously described in Section 5.1, the fatigue load case for specimen 3B-10
is internal pressurization at 0.825 bar and an in-plane load of 40 kN. This load
case directly corresponds to what is presented in the numerical results by A.
Farshidi [7], hence with certain assumptions, the experimental results should
allow for direct comparison.
(a) 97,100 cycles
(b) 118,500 cycles
Figure 5.8: Illustration of the disbond bulge at different stages of propagation.
Generated using an out-of-plane displacement curve horizontally on the surface.
The Aramis system can generate surface curves that can used to accurately
track the crack tip change and evaluate the disbond diameter. Figure 5.8 illus-
trates surface curves at 97,000 cycles and 118,500 cycles, respectively. It is seen
that the disbond diameter at 97,000 cycles is approximately 144 mm which is a
44 mm increase from the initial disbond. Furthermore, at an additional 21,500
cycles, the disbond has increased to 244 mm - an additional 100 mm increase
in disbond diameter. The curves, if positioned correctly, also display the max-
imum out-of-plane displacement which is found to be 1.80 mm and 4.44 mm
for 97,000 and 118,500 cycles, respectively. The maximum displacement at fail-
ure is a little lower than the results from specimen 3B-9 in Figure 5.6. This is
likely explained by the higher gauge pressure of 3B-9 causing a larger bulge.
Specimen 3B-10 was fatigue loaded by 119,700 cycles at the time of the disbond
reaching the vertical edges which caused venting of the honeycomb core. The
specimen does not appear damaged, but with a coin tapping test, the lack of
adhesive between face and core is audible. This is an indication that the struc-
tural integrity of the sandwich composite is compromised. In Figure 5.9, the
Aramis propagation results are presented for different cycles. Corresponding
to previous tests, it is seen in Figure 5.9b that the majority of cycles are used
at initial propagation. Subsequently, as the disbond area increases, the rate of
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. Results
propagation increases exponentially. With an in-plane load of 40 kN, the dis-
bond shape is expected to be oval as a result of instability/buckling of the face
sheet bulge. This is veriﬁed by the results.
(a) 20 cycles, 100 mm disbond
(b) 74,600 cycles, 120 mm disbond
(c) 108,500 cycles, 173 mm disbond
(d) 119,500 cycles, 257 mm disbond
Figure 5.9: The disbond propagation as a result of fatigue cycles with 0.825 bar
gauge pressures and 40 kN in-plane load. The ﬁgures illustrate out-of-plane
displacement where magnitudes higher than 0.05 mm are shown in red.
Lastly, the propagation can be compared to the numerical results, presented in
Figure 5.10. The numerical model for FCase-0 (0.825 bar and 40 kN) indicates
that the disbond should propagate approximately 13 mm in diameter within
N = 1, 000 cycles. Additionally, zero propagation should occur in the vertical
direction. From the results of specimen 3B-10, it is clear that the numerical
and experimental methods are not in agreement. There is no measurable dis-
bond increase within 1, 000 cycles experimentally. To reach a disbond propa-
gation of 13 mm at the given loads, the results for specimen 3B-10 show that
approximately 70,000 cycles are needed. Furthermore, contrary to the numeri-
cal model, there is large vertical crack propagation in the experimental results.
48
==PAGE:59==
5.3. Pressurization and In-plane Load
Based on this, it is not advised to consider the numerical model valid.
Figure 5.10: Propagation in mm based on number of cycles from [7]. Shown for
multiple load cases, however only FCase-0 is comparable to 3B-10.
5.3.2
Specimen 3B-7
The results for the numerical model only present two fatigue load cases; the
0.825 bar and 40 kN used for specimen 3B-10 and alternative with the in-plane
load increased to 44 kN, i.e. 10% increase. Based on specimen 3B-10, a load
increase of 4 kN is unlikely to impact the results signiﬁcantly. Therefore, it was
decided to use an in-plane load of 65 kN instead. As a consequence, the fatigue
test of specimen 3B-7 at gauge pressure 0.825 bar and in-plane load of 65 kN is
not directly comparable to the numerical results, but the data will be available
and can be used for future numerical validation. The increase in compression
load is expected to drastically increase the disbond propagation rate.
The disbond propagation with respect to cycle number is presented in Fig-
ure 5.11. From 5.11a, it is seen that the disbond is affected by the high in-plane
load of 65 kN as the initial shape is more oval than for specimen 3B-10 in Fig-
ure 5.9a. The initial disbond is approximately 100 mm in diameter horizontally,
but less in the vertical direction. This is presumably due to the magnitude
of compression force applied. As depicted in Figure 5.11b, at approximately
4,000 cycles, the propagation is equal to specimen 3B-10 at 74,600 cycles. This
indicates that the in-plane load has a large inﬂuence on the propagation rate
which corresponds to the numerical results.
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Results
(a) 100 cycles, 100 mm disbond
(b) 3,000 cycles, 113 mm disbond
(c) 11,000 cycles, 165 mm disbond
(d) 14,500 cycles, 256 mm disbond
Figure 5.11: The disbond propagation as a result of fatigue cycles with 0.825 bar
gauge pressures and 65 kN in-plane load. The ﬁgures illustrate out-of-plane
displacement where magnitudes higher than 0.08 mm are shown in red.
Specimen 3B-7 fails at a total of 14,900 cycles. This is a signiﬁcant 104,800 cycles
less than the previous specimen. Furthermore, the disbond circumference is a
longer oval shape as the disbond does not propagate signiﬁcantly in the verti-
cal direction; at 14,500 cycles, the vertical disbond measures 119 mm.
The out-of-plane displacement at disbond center is plotted against the fatigue
cycles in Figure 5.12. It is seen that the propagation has an exponential ten-
dency. When compared to internal pressurization alone in Figure 5.6, the ex-
ponential increase is lower. This is due to the lower gauge pressure and the
limitation on vertical propagation of specimen 3B-7. Corresponding well to
previous results, the specimen fails at an maximum out-of-plane displacement
of 5.45 mm.
Specimen 3B-7 was damaged towards the end of the test, see Figure 5.13. The
structural integrity of the specimen failed due to complete face/core separa-
50
==PAGE:61==
5.4. Vacuum GAG and In-plane Load
Figure 5.12: The displacement in mm of the disbond center point plotted against
14,900 fatigue cycles at 0.825 bar and 65 kN.
Note that index refers to DIC image (100 cycles per image).
tion. Subsequently, the two face sheets were loaded by 65 kN alone which has
caused buckling followed by a fracture of the non-disbonded face sheet, see
5.13b. By manually expanding the crack shown in 5.13a, it is concluded that
the propagation is at the face/core interface of the sandwich composite.
(a) Core damage caused by buckling
(b) Non-disbonded face sheet fracture
Figure 5.13: The tested specimen 3B-7 viewed from the one vertical edge.
5.4
Vacuum GAG and In-plane Load
The tests planned for the vacuum Ground-Air-Ground setup are with load
cases corresponding to those conducted in the pressurization setup. The main
objective with replicating the load cases is the opportunity to directly com-
pare and evaluate the experimental differences between pressurization and
vacuum. At the time of the internal pressurization testing, the GAG setup
was still going through ﬁnal preparations and assembly. Thus, the two load
cases involving GAG testing were intended to be the last tests of the project.
51
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. Results
5.4.1
Specimen 3B-6
Specimen 3B-6 was used for the ﬁrst vacuum Ground-Air-Ground test at a fa-
tigue load of 0.825 bar gauge pressure and 40 kN in-plane compression load.
The initial study was with respect to the load distribution, as previously de-
scribed in Section 5.1. The specimen was ﬁtted with U-caps and machined
to ensure parallelism, according to the previously used procedure. However,
contrary to the previous load distribution tests, specimen 3B-6 showed signs
of misalignment.
(a) 50 cycles, 100 mm disbond
(b) 17,100 cycles, 101.5 mm disbond
Figure 5.14: The disbond propagation as a result of fatigue cycles with 0.825 bar
gauge pressures and 40 kN in-plane load. The ﬁgures illustrate out-of-plane
displacement where magnitudes higher than 0.095 mm are shown in red.
The propagation results with respect to cycles are presented in Figure 5.14.
The red areas are out-of-plane displacement exceeding 0.095 mm. The speci-
men was fatigued by a total of 17,100 recorded load cycles which may have
caused some propagation. It is, however, within the noise range and therefore
nothing conclusive. Therefore, it is certain that the numerical model cannot
be validated based on these results. Interestingly, Figure 5.14a and 5.14b show
clear signs of uneven loading as the upper part of the specimen is seen to de-
form in the out-of-plane direction. Furthermore, the deformation gets more
signiﬁcant and moves towards the upper left corner. The schematics for the
uneven loading is presented in Figure 5.15. It is seen that although the U-caps
are machined parallel, they may not be normal to the surfaces of the specimen
face sheet. To overcome this issue, a method of machining that ensures nor-
mality between face sheets and U-caps must be identiﬁed. To further solve the
issue, a suggestion with respect to the U-caps is presented in Chapter 6.
52
==PAGE:63==
5.4. Vacuum GAG and In-plane Load
Figure 5.15: Honeycomb specimen U-cap parallelism. Left is optimal for even load
distribution. Right illustrates what may be experienced with specimen 3B-6.
When analyzing the out-of-plane displacement of the center point, deviations
were found although no measurable propagation has occurred. This indicates
that the loading is not constant throughout the fatigue cycles. This is likely due
to the Pfeiffer Vacuum pressure transducer that is measuring absolute pressure
where a gauge pressure transducer is more viable. With the current transducer,
the pressure setting for the fatigue load is 0.175 bar. With this, it is assumed
that the ambient pressure is constant at 1.0 bar, thus generating a gauge pres-
sure of 0.825 bar as desired. However, the ambient pressure varies and there-
fore the specimen may experience small variations in vacuum load. This can
be resolved with a new transducer measuring the gauge pressure.
5.4.2
Expected Results
The vacuum Ground-Air-Ground tests were intended for comparison with the
pressurization tests while also being a important validation tool in future nu-
merical modelling of honeycomb sandwich disbond propagation. For speci-
men 3B-6 loaded with 40 kN, results similar to the pressurization counterpart
were expected. It was, however, expected that the vacuum test would need ad-
ditional fatigue cycles and propagate in a more linear manor. The shape of the
disbond, under the assumption of evenly distributed loading, was expected to
resemble that of specimen 3B-10. In hindsight, it would have been more viable
to initiate the 65 kN test ﬁrst as that load case would likely provide faster re-
sults. Note that the 17,100 cycles of specimen 3B-6 took approximately two and
a half weeks, hence fatigue testing with many cycles will consume months.
The vacuum Ground-Air-Ground test of 3B-6 was unfortunately interrupted
by COVID-19 lockdown at DTU. At the time of interruption, the test was run-
ning but as a result of wrongful shutdown, it is estimated that approximately
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5. Results
10,000-14,000 cycles were lost from the Aramis system. This means that 3B-6
has experienced signiﬁcantly more than the recorded 17,100 cycles, but with
no record of the remaining cycles. The lockdown has continued through the
deadline of this project with no student activities being allowed at DTU. Sadly,
this is why is has not been possible to produce additional results as originally
intended.
54
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
The initial objective of this thesis was to produce two fully operational test se-
tups to simulate Ground-Air-Ground (GAG) loading. The simple setup uses
internal pressurization by a proportional valve. The more advanced setup uses
vacuum to lower ambient pressure. Effectively, the purpose of both is to gen-
erate a pressure differential between the unvented honeycomb core of sand-
wich composites and the ambient conditions, an effect known as Ground-Air-
Ground cyclic loading. This objective was successfully achieved with mod-
iﬁcations to the functionality of the internal pressurization setup which has
previously only been pilot tested. Furthermore, a comprehensive redesign of
the vacuum chamber viewport has eliminated the limitations that previously
existed with the setup. Both setups have been calibrated and performance op-
timized. Therefore, they are now considered fully operational and ready for
commercial testing.
The in-plane compression load distribution of both test setups was thoroughly
investigated. It was found that the differences in the strain measurements be-
tween the two composite face sheets were not due to misalignment of the load
transferring system. Instead, the cause was found to be the U-caps that are
manually ﬁtted to the specimens. Therefore, an approach to prepare the U-
caps by machining is evaluated and found successful.
The initial two fatigue tests of the project were loaded with pressurization by
the proportional pressure (PPV) valve only. The results found that with pres-
surization of specimen 3B-8 at 1.2 bar, the disbond propagation rate (propa-
gation per cycle) was minimal. No deﬁnitive increase in disbond size was
observed within 46,500 cycles. Subsequently, by increasing the internal gauge
pressure to 1.5 bar, the propagation rate drastically increased. Specimen 3B-9
was tested at 1.5 bar and failed at 23,700 cycles. This test revealed that the crack
growth with pressurization is exponential which corresponds well to the pre-
sented theory. At 1.5 bar, the fatigue loading was found to cause "core digging"
propagation, i.e. not at the face/core interface.
The disbonded honeycomb sandwich specimens were successfully propagated
when fatigued with both internal pressurization and in-plane compression
load. Specimens 3B-10 and 3B-7 were loaded with 0.825 bar gauge pressure
plus 40 kN and 65 kN, respectively. They failed at 119,700 and 14,900 cycles.
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 6. Conclusions
This reveals that the in-plane load has a signiﬁcant effect on the propagation
rate. An objective in this thesis was validation of a numerical disbond propaga-
tion model. Based on the 40 kN test of specimen 3B-10, the validation was not
successful. Experimentally, 70,000 cycles are needed to achieve 13 mm propa-
gation, while the numerical model estimates 1,000 cycles.
Originally, it was planned to conduct a total of six fatigue tests. However, with
the trouble caused by COVID-19, the experimental work was interrupted dur-
ing the ﬁfth test (specimen 3B-6). Specimen 3B-6 was loaded in the vacuum
chamber with a gauge pressure of 0.825 bar and in-plane load of 40 kN. Unfor-
tunately, the test only reached 17,100 cycles before being interrupted. During
the 17,100 cycles, no deﬁnitive propagation was observed. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the numerical and experimental results are not in agreement.
Overall, the project is deemed successful as good results were obtained and
the primary objectives fulﬁlled.
6.1
Future Perspectives
To further improve the in-plane compression loading, the U-cap design should
be investigated. A bolted connection is not the most viable solution. It should
be considered to use a solid DIN 1026 U-proﬁle for the caps. This will make it
disposable and easily machined to speciﬁcations.
In some instances, comparing the analog and Aramis strain measurements
were difﬁcult. This was primarily due to noise in the DIC measurements which
is difﬁcult to eliminate. Instead, it may be more feasible to use four analog
strain gauges (two on each face sheet) to accurate evaluate load distribution.
Once an appropriate U-caps solution has been found, the load distribution
analysis may become redundant. To conduct further internal pressurization
tests, the load transfer assembly should be redesigned to eliminate the bolted
connection. This will even the load distribution further.
The vacuum chamber is now in a very functional state. Still, it should be con-
sidered to replace the current absolute pressure transducer with a gauge pres-
sure transducer. By doing so, the ﬂuctuations in ambient conditions will not
inﬂuence the load case. Note that it is important to purchase a linear trans-
ducer if possible.
Lastly, the fatigue tests intended for this project should be continued. When
they are ﬁnished, they can be used to evaluate the differences between internal
pressurization and vacuum loading. Furthermore, an in-plane load only test
series should be conducted and used as additional reference data.
56
==PAGE:67==
References
[1]
Aerospace Speciﬁcation Metals (ASM). AISI Type 304 Stainless Steel. http:
//asm.matweb.com/search/SpecificMaterial.asp?bassnum=mq304a.
Accessed: 29-04-2020.
[2]
T. B. Andersen and S. D. Pedersen. “Development of a Test Rig for the
Evaluation of Disbond Damages in Honeycomb Aircraft Sandwich Pan-
els Loaded with Ground-Air-Ground Cyclic Loading”. BSc Thesis. Tech-
nical University of Denmark, 2015.
[3]
C. Berggreen. Lecture 8 - 41517 Stiffened plates and sandwich composites.
Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[4]
S. Bundgaard. “Development of a test rig for Ground-Air-Ground testing
of disbonded aircraft honeycomb sandwich panels”. BSc Thesis. Techni-
cal University of Denmark, 2017.
[5]
S. Bundgaard. “Advanced GAG-testing of honeycomb sandwich panels
in aircraft structures”. Special Course. Technical University of Denmark,
2018.
[6]
Z. Chen, R. Krueger, and M. Rinker. Face Sheet/Core Disbond Growth In
Honeycomb Sandwich Panels Subjected to Ground-Air-Ground Pressurization
and In-plane Loading. National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), 2015.
[7]
A. Farshidi. “Disbond Damage in Aircraft Sandwich Structures”. PhD
Thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[8]
International Aviation Safety Association. A310 Rudder Attachment Fail-
ure and Separation. www.iasa.com.au/folders/Safety_Issues/others/
rudder-sep.htm. Accessed: 29-04-2020.
[9]
LCM Systems. Load Cell Calibration. www.lcmsystems.com/Calibrating-
Load-Cells. Accessed: 29-04-2020.
[10]
N. McCormick and J. Lord. “Digital Image Correlation”. In: Materials To-
day 10.1016/S1369-7021(10)70235-2 (2010).
[11]
A. Mulay. “GAG-testing of honeycomb sandwich panels in aircraft struc-
tures”. MSc Thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[12]
NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center. “Final Report of the X-33
Liquid Hydrogen Tank Test Investigation Team”. Huntsville, AL, 2000.
57
==PAGE:68==
References
[13]
Omnexus - The Material Selection Platform. Glass Transition Temperature.
https://omnexus.specialchem.com/polymer-properties/properties/
glass-transition-temperature. Accessed: 29-04-2020.
[14]
P. Kelly. Solid Mechanics Part II: Engineering Solid Mechanics, Plate Theory.
Department of Engineering Science, University of Auckland, 2020.
[15]
Pfeiffer Vacuum. Pfeiffer Vacuum Components. www.pfeiffer- vacuum.
com/en/. Accessed: 29-04-2020.
[16]
Schott. BOROFLOAT 33 Datasheet. www . schott . com / d / borofloat /
6efaa32b-9b5e-43a6-acdf-175104f246b5/20190326141309/schott-
borofloat-technical-data-sheet-english-26032019.pdf. Accessed:
29-04-2020.
[17]
Transportation Safety Board of Canada. “Aviation Investigation Report
A05F0047”. Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada,
2007.
[18]
D. Zenkert. An Introduction to Sandwich Structures. Technical University
of Denmark, 2009.
58
==PAGE:69==
Appendices
A
Internal Pressurization Setup Images
59
==PAGE:70==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student ID
Phone number
S144428
+45 71201042
57
27.4
400
LOADING_FIXTURE
Søren
11/10-19
-
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
 A3
1:2
      Scale                   Format 
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
-
 AE
ISO 13920
Loading fixture
  
mK
ITEM
NO
PART NUMBER
QTY
DESCRIPTION
1
LOADING_FIX-SIDE
2
loading_fix-side.prt
2
M8X20
18
din-7991_bolt.prt_INST
3
TOPPLATE
1
topplate.prt
Bolts DIN 7991 M8x20 in grade 10.9 or higher.
 1 
 2 
 3 
SCALE  1:4
18x
M8x20
DIN7991
B
Load Transfer Assembly Drawings
60
==PAGE:71==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student ID
Phone number
S144428
+45 71201042
9x
M8
40
20+0.5
-0.5
400 0
-0.5
42.8+0.1
-0.1
TOPPLATE
Søren
07.10.2019
EN 1.0038
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
 A3
1:2
      Scale                   Format 
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
-
 AE
ISO 13920
Loading fixture
 - top plate
mK
Deburr sharp edges!
Number of pieces to manufacture: 2
Antal emner, der skal fremstilles: 2
6.3
6.3
61
==PAGE:72==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student ID
Phone number
S144428
+45 71201042
9x 
8.5
Countersunk
for M8 bolt
40
400 0
-0.5
10
6
57
LOADING_FIX-SIDE
Søren
07.10.2019
EN 1.0038
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
 A3
1:2
      Scale                   Format 
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
-
 AE
ISO 13920
Loading fixture
 - side plate
mK
Deburr sharp edges!
Number of pieces to manufacture: 4
Antal emner, der skal fremstilles: 4
SECTION
A-A
SEE
DETAIL
A
DETAIL  A
SCALE  1:1
6.3
62
==PAGE:73==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student ID
Phone number
S144428
+45 71201042
90
125
26
395
250
COMPRESSION_ASSEMBLY
Søren
11/10-19
-
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
 A3
1:4
      Scale                   Format 
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
-
 AE
ISO 13920
Compression fixture
  
mK
ITEM
NO
PART NUMBER
QTY
DESCRIPTION
1
HEIGH_PLATE
1
heigh_plate.prt
2
HEIGHT_BLOCK
1
height_block.prt
3
M16
3
din-912_bolt.prt_INST
Please use grade 8.8 or higher M16x30 bolts.
0.1 A
 1 
 2 
 3 
A
63
==PAGE:74==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student ID
Phone number
S144428
+45 71201042
25.5
16.2
17
150
395
250
20
HEIGH_PLATE
Søren
11/10-19
EN 1.0038
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
 A3
1:4
      Scale                   Format 
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
-
 AE
ISO 13920
Compression fixture
 - top
mK
Deburr all sharp edges with small chamfer!
Pieces to be manufactured: 1
Antal emner til fremstilling: 
SECTION  A-A
3x
Counterbore
for DIN 912
M16 bolt
A
A(1:1)
64
==PAGE:75==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student ID
Phone number
S144428
+45 71201042
M16
40
150
52+0.1
-0.1
395
70
HEIGHT_BLOCK
Søren
11/10-19
EN 1.0038
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
 A3
1:2
      Scale                   Format 
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
-
 AE
ISO 13920
Compression fixture
 - block
mK
Deburr sharp edges with small chamfer.
Pieces to be manufactured: 1
Antal emner til fremstilling: 
SCALE  1:4
SECTION  A-A
65
==PAGE:76==
C
Vacuum GAG Setup Images
66
==PAGE:77==
67
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
35 1
85 1
60
(25.4)
1-14 UNF
(31.75)
1-1/4-12 UNF
LOADCELL_ADAPTER
Søren
10/12-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:1
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Loadcell adapter
  
mK
Afgrat skarpe kanter!
Mål i parantes må ikke anvendes.
SECTION  A-A
D
Load Cell Adapter Drawing
69
==PAGE:80==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
120
(35)
15
3x
M8x15
FIXTURE_FOOT
Søren
12/12-19
Steel
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:2
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Fixture - foot
mK
FIXTURE_FOOT
Søren
Steel
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:2
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
 AE
ISO 13920
SECTION  A-A
E
Fixture Modiﬁcation Drawings
70
==PAGE:81==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
370
45
70
120
120
3x
9
EXTENSION_BLOCK
Søren
12/12-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:2
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Fixture - Extension block
mK
Afgrat skarpe kanter!
SCALE  1:4
SECTION  A-A
71
==PAGE:82==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
12x
M6
thru
30
60
45
395
0.1
120
9
14.5
8.5
FIXTURE_SHELF
Søren
12/12-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:2
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Fixture - shelf
mK
Afgrat skarpe kanter!
3x M8
Undersænket frihul
SECTION  B-B
SCALE  1:4
Bearbejdet emne
SCALE  1:4
Originalt emne
72
==PAGE:83==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
10
10
15
30
10.2
6.1
30
15
10
10
10.2
6.1
FIXTURE_BC
Søren
16/12-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
2:1
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Fixture - boundaries
mK
Bemærk afrundet kant!
VENSTRE
HØJRE
VIGTIGT! Der fremstilles 2x venstre og 2x højr
SECTION  A-A
SECTION  B-B
HØJRE
SCALE  1:1
VENSTRE
SCALE  1:1
73
==PAGE:84==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
15
0
48
75
6x
60
42
18x
M6
thru
FIXTURE_TOWER
Søren
16/12-19
NONE
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:4
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Fixture - tower
mK
Kun relevante mål er påsat
74
==PAGE:85==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
470
bolt cirkel
20
315
midt spor
5
4
4x
R35
midt spor
315
midt spor
275
note B
275
note B
(339)
(339)
12x
M12x17
Note A
30
38
76
38
76
40
32x
9 thru all
315
315
4x
11
thru all
2x
R0.63
2x
R0.2
WELDING_ASM
Søren
S355
Name
Date
Material
A3
1:5
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
 AE
ISO 13920
fK
WELDING_ASM
Søren
11/12-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:5
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Viewport - CNC assembly
fK
Afgrat skarpe kanter!
Note A:
Ved modtagelse af emnet er dimensionen
22mm for at tillade efterfølgende
planfræsning. Mindste målet er 20mm.
Bolt-cirkel laves efter planfræsning!
Note B:
Dimensionerne indikerer det
mindste målet for planfræsning.
Note C:
Fladen tjekkes til sidst med måleur. Såfremt fladen har slået sig under
 svejsning eller bearbejdning, skal der planes med mindst mulig spån!
Rækkefølge for planfræsning: A, B, C.
Mål indikerer maksimal spåntagning, hvis muligt.
SCALE  1:10
bagside
SCALE  1:10
forside
SECTION
A-A
note A
A
0.1
Note C
Planfræsningsareal
note B
A(1:1)
spor til o-ring
alle flader
Ra  0.4
6.3
B
3mm
A
2mm
C
1mm
F
Viewport Drawings
75
==PAGE:86==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
42
Note A
30
3
445
400+0.1
 0
inside
17
500 0.5
outs
494 0.1
30
5.2
20
CYLINDER
Søren
05/11-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:5
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-01 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Viewport - welding flange
fK
Deburr sharp edges!
Afgrat skarpe kanter!
Note A: The nominal final dimension is 40mm. 
The indicated dimension will allow for machining
after welding.
SCALE  1:5
SECTION
 A-A
A
A(1:1)
6.3
76
==PAGE:87==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
1.5
2.5
15
400
442
Outs.
FLANGE
Søren
31/10-19
S355
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:4
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Project: 76562-19-4100-017 with C. Berggreen
 AE
ISO 13920
Viewport - flange
fK
Deburr sharp edges!
Afgrat skarpe kanter!
SCALE  1:5
SECTION 
A-A
A
A(1:1)
77
==PAGE:88==
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
B
C
D
E
F
Additional info
ISO Methode E
ISO 2768
ISO 1101
ISO 8015
Description
File-name
Institution name
Name
Søren Bundgaard
Student Email
Phone number
s144428@student.dtu.dk +45 71201042
Scale
Format
442
20
WINDOW
Søren
31/10-19
Borofloat33
Name
Date
Material
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
A3
1:4
General tolerance: ISO 2768 
Form 
&. Positiontol. ISO1101, ISO8015
Gerneral tolerances for
welded constructions: ISO 13920
Weldsymbols: DIN 1912
Surfacesymbols: ISO 1302
Institute of Mechanical Engineering
 AE
ISO 13920
Viewport - Borosilicate window
fK
Note: The window must NOT be stamped!
78
==PAGE:89==
FINCORD S
Keep dry and avoid condensation. Re-drying not generally required.
If necessary: 100-110 °C for 1 hour.
AWS
A5.1: E6013
EN
499: E 42 A RR 12
EN ISO
2560-A: E 42 A RR 12
AC; DC-
2,5
65-90
21,0
10,6
350
3,2
100-140
35,9
18,3
350
3,2
100-140
47,0
24,4
450
4,0
140-180
69,8
37,3
450
5,0
190-240
107,8
58,0
450
Packaging data
Classification
Weld metal weight
per electrode  (g)
Diameter
(mm)
Current
(A)
Electrode
average  weight  (g)
MMA Electrodes
All-weld metal Mechanical Properties
As Welded
500-640
 420
 20
 47
-
Impact Energy
ISO - V (J)
Heat Treatment
Tensile 
Strength
N/mm
2
Yield 
Strength
N/mm
2
Elongation
A5 (%)
+ 20 °C
Hardness
S(P)235 to S(P)355; GP240; GP280
Length
(mm)
Current condition and welding position
Storage and redrying
PA
PB
PC
PF
PE
Analysis of all-weld metal (Typical values in %)
C
Cu
0.08
-
0.60
0.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mn
Si
P
S
Cr
Ni
Mo
Nb
V
N
C-Mn and low-alloy steels
Materials
Rutile-coated electrode particularly suited for the welding of horizontal fillets. Fine-droplet metal transfer. Easy arc striking 
and restriking. Very smooth welds blending into the base metal without undercut. Slag in most cases self-releasing. For but-
welds Fincord or Fincord DB should be used.
DB
TÜV
Approvals
Grades
see Appendix, Classification Society Approvals, for details pag. 521
32
G
Welding Datasheet
79
==PAGE:90==
Test: Load cell Calibration
#REF!
Date:
Ref. load cell, manufacture
Interface 
Name:
Ref. load cell, model
1220-AF
Place:
Ref. load cell, S/N
7874
Ref. load cell, capacity
-222 to 222kN
4
Load cell, manufa.
Ref. load cell, calibration date
2018-01-19
2
Load cell, model
Calibration unit, model
Load cell, S/N
Calibration unit, setup
Load cell, capacity
Same polarity: mV and Force
TRUE
Load cell, remarks
Tension
Compression
3.degree polynomial  B0
0,00000
0,00000
Machine:
3.degree polynomial  B1
53,97831
-54,18675
Controller:
3.degree polynomial  B2
-0,21371
-0,06872
3.degree polynomial  B3
0,03223
-0,00842
3.degree polynomial  
mV(Xi) to N(Xa)   :   Xa  =  B0  +  B1*Xi  +  B2*Xi2   +  B3*Xi 3
Kyungdo 
f. FUTEK IHH500 nr. 54305Error [%]
‐2,980
‐2,846
‐4,71%
‐5,020
‐4,792
‐4,75%
‐10,000
‐9,612
‐4,03%
‐19,980
‐19,481
‐2,56%
‐30,000
‐29,539
‐1,56%
‐39,950
‐39,592
‐0,90%
‐49,960
‐49,703
‐0,52%
‐59,960
‐59,741
‐0,37%
‐69,960
‐69,779
‐0,26%
‐80,000
‐79,759
‐0,30%
‐89,980
‐89,693
‐0,32%
‐100,000
‐99,617
‐0,38%
‐110,050
‐109,604
‐0,41%
‐124,930
‐124,385
‐0,44%
‐150,010
‐149,155
‐0,57%
‐174,940
‐173,728
‐0,70%
‐200,040
‐198,455
‐0,80%
‐224,980
‐223,062
‐0,86%
Slope
1,0064
Offset
-0,0193
Kyungdo 
FT100-1
FUTEK IHH500 nr. 543054 
Channel 6:   4,13mV/V.
25-11-2019
Anil Uzal (DTU MEK)
DTU Structural Lab
‐6,0%
‐5,0%
‐4,0%
‐3,0%
‐2,0%
‐1,0%
0,0%
1,0%
2,0%
3,0%
‐225
‐175
‐125
‐75
‐25
Error [%]
Load [kN]
H
Calibration Sheets - Korea Machine
80
==PAGE:91==
Test: LVDT Calibration
Date:
Name:
Place:
LVDT, manufa.
LVDT, model
LVDT, S/N
LVDT, capacity
LVDT, remarks
Machine:
Controller:
Kyundgo
Reference
Error [%]
‐55,000
‐55,070
0,13%
‐50,000
‐50,140
0,28%
‐40,000
‐40,200
0,50%
‐30,000
‐30,190
0,63%
‐20,000
‐20,170
0,84%
‐10,000
‐10,140
1,38%
0,000
0,000
#DIV/0!
10,000
10,000
0,00%
20,000
19,980
‐0,10%
30,000
30,030
0,10%
40,000
40,110
0,27%
50,000
50,200
0,40%
55,000
55,240
0,43%
Slope
0,9966
Offset
0,0268
25-11-2019
Anil Uzal (DTU MEK)
DTU Structural Lab
Kyungdo KDFL-100
Kyundgo
MTS FT100-1
9051127
‐1,5%
‐1,0%
‐0,5%
0,0%
0,5%
1,0%
1,5%
‐60
‐50
‐40
‐30
‐20
‐10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Error [%]
Position [mm]
81
==PAGE:92==
I
Valve Mounting Procedure
1. The non-disbonded face sheet of the specimen is located - note from Sec-
tion 4.1 that the Airbus markings should not necessarily be trusted. Ideally,
specimens are dimensioned exactly 400 mm × 400 mm, however specimens
of larger and smaller dimensions have been observed. Therefore, on the
non-disbonded face sheet, locate and mark the center accurately.
2. Next, the valve hole can be prepared using a 6 mm hardened drill at the
marked center. With the specimen placed securely leveled, drill through the
non-disbonded carbon ﬁber face sheet while ensuring no damage is done
to the core or opposite face sheet. Note that carbon ﬁber will weaken the
cutting ability of any tool/drill, hence use a discarded drill for the task.
Additionally, hand and face protection should be worn as ﬁber dust is a
health risk.
3. The Schrader valve has a diameter of approx. 15 mm where it should be
ﬁxed, however as a tight seal is needed, the next step is to use a counter-
bore end mill of 12 mm with a 6 mm pilot (ﬁtting the existing hole). This
operation can be executed on a milling machine or by a hand drill. Note
it is important to maintain the tool straight if the hand drill option is used.
Again, the tool will be damaged by the operation, therefore both a 6 mm
drill and 12 mm counterbore end mill can be found in the pallet at the vac-
uum Ground-Air-Ground setup.
4. With a precise 12 mm hole positioned at the center of the face sheet, the
valve is ready to be ﬁtted. The valve is designed to be mounted from the
inside-out, which is not an option. Therefore it can be done using a small
ﬂat head screw driver to pry it in place - it can be tedious but it is possible.
5. The valve uses a one-way core (as it is for tires), however for pressurization
testing use, it is important that the core is removed such that airﬂow is un-
restricted both in and out of the specimen. The core removal can be done
either before or after the valve is mounted to the specimen. Theoretically, if
the core is reﬁtted to the valve, the specimen should be usable for vacuum
Ground-Air-Ground testing also, assuming that no venting of the honey-
comb core is present. Note that removal of the valve from the specimen is
not possible - do not reuse them.
82
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone: +45 4525 4250
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
May 2020
