==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
RISC-V Based Neural Network Pro-
cessor for Inference in Hearing Aids
Master Thesis
Simon T. Andersen - S154227
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Neural networks are popular for use in many engineering fields. They have proven to
outperform the accuracy of hand-crafted algorithms for many tasks. This is also true
for audio processing. This thesis has looked into making a neural network for trigger-
word detection using TensorFlow. It has then converted a network into a C++ coded
version, which can be run on bare-metal processors. For this, RISC-V was investigated
and used as a reference implementation. It was found that RISC-V is a good match
for these types of tasks, due to its extendibility. A custom instruction was added to
verify this possibility. A system-on-chip was designed to allow for accelerators, memory
and peripherals. This was all done using Chisel, which is a new hardware description
language, which was also assessed along the way. Finally, the system was tested using
an FPGA and the requirements for an ASIC implementation was discussed. Simulations
and FPGA implementations proved that the system can run.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2020
Simon T. Andersen - S154227
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Alberto Nannarelli, for his guidance and counseling
throughout the project and help with focus topics.
I would also like to thank the
employees at Widex/WSA, who have given insight into industrial considerations and
use cases when doing a design. Furthermore, I would like to thank Jens Sparsø and
Martin Schoeberl for their comments throughout the project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
ABI Application Binary Interface, defines how different binary programs may interface.
For instance, it defines whether an integer is 32 or 64 bit.
Activation Function Used in neural networks to process the output of a layer. Often
used to clamp results between 0 and 1 or to keep result non-negative.
ASIC Application Specific IC. A custom designed computer chip that performs a spe-
cific application.
Black Box When using an unknown block in a design with a given set of ports.
Bootrom ROM for containing the needed binaries for booting the processor.
Chisel Hardware description language which is made as an extension for Scala. Genereates
synthesizable Verilog code.
crt C runtime, contains the system specific setup for a processor, such setting the stack
pointer.
EVEC Exception handler address that is jumped to when an exception occurs.
FC/Dense layer A fully connected layer where all inputs to the layer have a weighted
connection to all the outputs.
FFT Fast Fourier Transform, used for converting from time domain to the frequency
domain.
Floor-planning Used when designing a circuit to choose where different modules are
placed. Useful when certain modules needs to reach certain pins.
Foundry Facility that produces ASICs.
FPGA Field Programmable Gate Array, for designing custom digital hardware without
having to produce an ASIC. Allows for re-programmability of the hardware on it.
GDB The GNU Debugger, a portable debugger for programs.
HPC High Performance Computing, cluster of servers and graphic cards that allow for
more compute power.
==PAGE:10==
viii
Glossary
Inference When a trained neural network makes a prediction based on an input.
JTAG (Joint Test Action Group) Industry standard for interface to verify and test
digital hardware after production.
Keras Open-source neural network library. Uses TensorFlow or other machine learning
libraries as backend.
Makefile File that defines how a project is built. Allows for multiple targets and certain
scripting possibilites.
Neural Network A network that models the principles of the brain with neurons fir-
ing..
NOP No Operation, a term used for an instruction that effectively does nothing. Useful
for stalling processors without affecting any registers.
PC Program Counter, the current address of a program that a processor is running.
RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture developed at Berkeley University.
It is open
source with with ability to add instructions and extensions as needed.
RISC/CISC Reduced/Complex Instruction Set Computer which uses few/many types
of instructions.
RTL Register Transfer Level, when designing digital electronics by defining hardware
between registers. This is a higher level implementation compared to transistor-
level or gate-level implementations.
SAIF file Switching Activity Interchange Format, used for annotating how much all
the signals in a design is switching, which allows for dynamic power estimation.
SiFive Company that specializes in RISC-V processors. Founded by former student at
Berkeley.
Softmax Gives a probability distribution of a set of neurons.
Spike RISC-V ISA simulator. Functional golden model of the ISA.
Tape-out After an ASIC has been designed, the hardware masks are sent to a foundry
for producing the chips.
Treadle Digital hardware simulator made for Chisel.
VCD Value Change Dump, contains a waveform representation of a simulated system.
Verilator Open source hardware simulator for Verilog.
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
ix
VLSI Very-Large-Scale Integration, design of digital chips with many (+10000) tran-
sistors.
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Acronyms
ALU Arithmetic-Logic Unit.
CISC Complex Instruction Set Computer.
CNN Convolutional Neural Network.
FC Fully Connected.
FIRRTL Flexible Internal Representation for RTL.
GRU Gated Recurrent Unit.
HDL Hardware Description Language.
ISA Instruction Set Architecture.
LSTM Long Short Term Memory.
PC Program Counter.
PT PyTorch.
RISC Reduced Instruction Set Computer.
RNN Recurrent Neural Network.
TF TensorFlow.
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
RISC-V
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Chisel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Neural Network
15
2.1
Machine Learning Library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Data Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Lite Microcontroller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Trained Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
RISC-V
27
3.1
Compiler & Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Debugging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Profiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Neural Network Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.6
Importance of Extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.7
Compiler Optimizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Hardware Implementation
43
4.1
RISC-V
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
SoC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Accelerators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.5
FFT Accelerator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Contents
4.6
Software Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.7
FPGA Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.8
ASIC Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Conclusion
77
Bibliography
79
A Code for Neural Network
81
A.1 export_word.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B Code for RISC-V Software
83
B.1 hex_float_to_fixed.py . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B.2 functionTimeExecuted.py
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.3 riscv_mini_makefile.inc
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
C Code for Hardware
91
C.1 Control.scala
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.2 Datapath.scala
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.3 FALU.scala
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
C.4 MMIO.scala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
C.5 FFT.scala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
C.6 FFTTester.scala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
C.7 TestFirmwareLogging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
C.8 Basys3FPGASoC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
C.9 MALU.scala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Neural networks have been praised for its robustness and versatility in different areas.
One of the most common examples is in image recognition, where neural networks using
deep learning can easily detect objects in an image. Neural networks also apply to other
fields such as digital signal processing. This is done in many varieties including speech
enhancement [Val17] and trigger word detection. One of the benefits of neural networks
are that they use standardized ways of training and prediction. This means that the
same toolset can be used to train networks for image detection and for noise reduction,
just by changing the inner format of the network. This also means that the computa-
tional components used are very generalized. This thesis will investigate whether this
highly generalized field can be used for highly specialized fields such as for use in hear-
ing aids with a very constrained power budget. Finally, the project will be using the
hardware description language Chisel, for describing the hardware, to assess its usability
for large projects.
1.1
Goals of the Project
This project will investigate using neural networks in a hearing aid. As neural networks
change rapidly, the project will be focusing on having post-production customizability,
such that the neural network can be changed either on the fly or reprogrammed after a
possible ASIC has been made. This is rather important when using neural networks, as
they can behave in unwanted ways in different environments. As neural networks can
only learn from their dataset, it is possible that the dataset does not cover a given envi-
ronment. One possibility here is that speech enhancement is performed, but that certain
noises could trigger feedback loops in the enhancement. Furthermore, neural networks
are progressing rapidly, so after an ASIC has been designed, it has been taped out and
the hearing aid has been produced, there could be a newly trained network that one
might want to use on the hearing aid. This allows for last minute or even post-release
updates of the product.
This project will use a RISC-V based processing system, which will use different
kinds of accelerators for running a neural network. The use of a customized instruction
set will be discussed, but will not be heavily used in the current state of the project, as
that would require either compiler optimizations or specialized C-code to execute these
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
instructions. This aspect, however, will be explored.
The final goal of the project is to have a system running in real-time on an FPGA,
which can perform trigger-word detection. It will also look at the power and area con-
sumption for an ASIC implementation for an estimate on the feasibility for being used
in a hearing aid under a strict power budget.
The thesis has been made in cooperation with Widex, which has offered use cases and
knowledge around development of very low power devices. Some other use cases for neu-
ral networks running in a hearing aid, as propositioned by Widex, is sound classification,
voice detection, feedback howl detection, bandwidth extension, quantization alleviation,
gain estimation, noise reduction and the cocktail party problem, where a person needs
to focus on a single person out of a crowd that is talking. Other use cases also exist such
as speech transcription and low delay gain calculation or audio encoding/decoding for
transfer between external devices.
Chisel3 [Chi] will be used for describing the hardware.
Chisel is a hardware de-
scription language developed at Berkeley University, where the language is more object-
oriented as it is an extension of Scala. Chisel has great support for testing and hardware
description and can be compiled to synthesizable Verilog, which can be used for FPGA
or ASIC implementation.
As this is an on-going project, not all features has yet been implemented. Focus has
been kept on getting as many aspects available as possible to de-risk the entirety of the
project.
1.2
Overview
This thesis is divided into the different elements of the final project, including chapters
for the RISC-V tools, the neural network platforms utilized, and the hardware described
using the Chisel framework.
The different chapters are very much intertwined, due to codependency of software
and hardware. The neural network has certain limitations due to the available opera-
tions and the operations available are determined by the software library used. And
which software library to use is decided by the capabilities of the processor, where some
libraries requires file IO or dynamic memory allocation. When limitations due to other
aspects are experienced, these will be mentioned and a reference to the section regarding
this will be given.
The appendix only contains sample files, as there is a lot of supporting code in all
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Neural Networks
3
the projects. The different sections reference the GitHub repositories which contains all
the source code needed.
1.2.1
GitHub Repositories
The following Chapters will have some source code examples to demonstrate the prin-
ciples. However, these are only a part of the entire system. The following is a list of
repositories available on GitHub that contains the complete source code for the different
systems. The riscv-mini repository is the main repository for everything in regards to
the processing system while the Trigger-Word repository is for the training of the net-
work. The FFT repository contains tests for the FFT unit. And finally, the TensorFlow
repository contains all the code for running the TF Lite Micro examples. An upcoming
blog will describe the use of the different repositories starting from the riscv-mini repos-
itory. Setup of the different tools will not be explained, but the blog will. It will go
through all the needed steps to have a running processor using Chisel which can execute
neural networks.
• riscv-mini and SoC code: https://github.com/nothinn/riscv-mini
• FFT unit with testers: https://github.com/nothinn/FFT
• Neural Networks: https://github.com/nothinn/Trigger-Word
• TensorFlow used for TF Lite Micro: https://github.com/nothinn/tensorflow
1.3
Neural Networks
Neural networks are in no way a new invention. Much of the theory and groundwork
was done back in the 1970’s and 80’s. However, it has gotten a revival in the last decade
due to the increased processing power. This allows for computing the huge amount of
data that needs to be performed to train a network. This thesis will not go into details
on what computations are performed when training, as this can be done using much
more capable hardware, such as large GPU’s which can perform several teraflops. The
NVIDIA RTX 2080 ”consumer” graphics card can perform as much as 11 teraflops with
dedicated tensor units for doing neural network calculations. This is also one of the
reasons why the feasibility of neural networks for low power devices need to be assessed.
A graphics card can draw hundreds of watts when running, whereas a hearing aid only
has milliwatts available.
1.3.1
Types of Neural Networks
Neural networks are generally divided into three generations, where the first generation
was made using perceptron’s or threshold gates. This can only give a binary value per
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
perceptron, as it is either active or not. However, any boolean function can be generated
from this. Second generation networks use activation functions, which allows for a con-
tinuous value. This is used in most of the neural networks nowadays. Third generation
neural networks also exist, where the computation consists of spikes. These are referred
to as spiking neural networks and mimics the spikes in the brain [BBW96]. This thesis
investigates second generation networks, as these are the most common and mature ones.
Third generation networks attempt to mimic the brain more closely and has some ways
of reducing the number of calculations needed, as it only needs to process when neurons
are firing. However, this has some other difficulties as the input needs to be represented
using a neuron stream and the training is not done by backpropagating an error but
one way is by clamping neurons to a required value. When doing neural networks, deep
leaning is often used. The principle here is to apply several neural network layers one
after the other, such that the benefits of different types of networks are used where most
applicable.
1.3.2
Fully Connected Layers
When working with neural networks, the most basic layer is a fully connected (FC) layer,
also known as a dense layer. This has an all-to-all connection between input neurons
and output neurons with a weight for each connection. This requires a lot of weights for
making a network being able to perform even simple detections. It is, however, good for
summing up any findings and variable correlations. For instance, a fully connected layer
is often used as the final layer, as this can look at the output of the layer or layers before
and then use the information needed. A network might have multiple inputs, which
could be audio, accelerometer and humidity sensor, to detect what kind of environment
you are in. These three inputs can be handled with different layers and then the final
fully connected layer intertwines them to a class output or a regression output. When
detecting classes, you will have as many neurons in the final layer as there are classes,
such that each neuron represents a class.
aj = activation
( N
∑
i=1
wijxi + bj
)
(1.1)
Figure 1.1 shows a neural network that only consists of fully connected layers. This
network has a single hidden layer and an output layer, for a total of two layers. Each
layer is calculated from Equation 1.1, where xi is the i’th neuron of the input to the layer.
bj is the bias for the j’th neuron in the layer. The bias is used to allow for non-linearities,
to change when a neuron ”fires”. wij is the weighted connection between the i’th neuron
of the input to the j’th neuron of the layer. The hidden layer functions as the input to
the output layer. activation in the function is the activation function used for this layer.
There are numerous types of activation functions, as explained in Section 1.3.5.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Neural Networks
5
Figure 1.1: Example of a fully connected network. [Fil]
1.3.3
Convolutional Neural Networks
Neural networks are often used for image recognition. For a relatively low-resolution
image, the number of weights for a given number of output neurons quickly becomes
very large, when using only fully connected layers. A 28x28 pixel black and white im-
age would need almost 8000 weights for detecting 10 classes. However, other types of
layers exist. The most used type for image recognition is convolutional layers. These
work from a principle of generalization, where an image is ”scanned” with a number of
filters, which looks for features in an image. A feature could be thought of as a wheel if
trying to recognize a car in an image. Another benefit is that the convolutional neural
network (CNN) is more generalized as to where a feature is located because it scans over
the image. Therefore, a feature is more locational invariant, where a fully connected
layer would need the features to be at the trained position. The basic operation of a
convolutional layer is a fully connected computation on a small part of the image.
Figure 1.2 shows the principle behind the convolutions. A kernel, in this case 3x3,
is scanned over the image. The resulting image is then used for the next layers. The
values of the map to the right is then an indication of where in the image the filter was
matching. In this case, the best match results in 4 which occurs 4 times.
Figure 1.2: Kernel for 3x3 convolutions. [Con]
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
What the exact filters, or kernels, are is varying from network to network and from
training to training. However, it will most likely find the easiest features to recognize.
Therefore, it is also very important to control what data the network is trained on. It
needs to have a representative dataset and there must not be any indicators in the train-
ing set that is not available in the real data. One example is if you have many pictures
of animals. If the pictures contain an annotation, such as text in the corner with the
type of animal, the network might train on recognizing this text instead, as this would
always be in the same position and easier to distinguish. And when moving to ”real”
data, there are no such annotations and the network would not work.
a CNN often contains pooling layers. Examples of these are max- or average pooling,
where a number of ”pixels” are either averaged or the maximum value is taken and then
stored. This serves to reduce the size of the inner layers in the network. When looking
at a filter that looks for a feature, the pooling layer will remove a lot of redundant infor-
mation and only store a lower density image of the locations of the features. Figure 1.3
shows a full CNN, with convolutions, pooling and classification using a fully-connected
layer at the end. RELU and Softmax is described in Section 1.3.5.
Figure 1.3: A full CNN, showing multiple different layers. [Cnn]
1.3.4
Recurrent Neural Networks
A third type of neural network layers are recurrent neural networks (RNN). The princi-
ple in RNNs is that information is used from previous calculations. This is often used
in time series data, where it is important in which order features are appearing. When
working with RNNs there are different types of units as well. Depending on the tools
used these are called by different names but Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) and Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) are two different ways of doing this. The principle here is
to do a FC layer which includes information from the last timestep. To allow for differ-
ent time ranges and easier training, the units contains different gates, where the GRU
includes an update gate and a forget gate. These gates are what is used for obtaining
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Neural Networks
7
recurrence and are also trained, such that the network finds out for how long a value
should be kept in ”memory”. The benefit of the recurrent units is that these also has a
much lower memory consumption, due to the reccurrent time-aspect used.
Figure 1.4 shows the principle of any RNN network, where the unrolled part is what
is achieved with the feedback. The internals of a unit depend on what type of layer
is used. Some of the common ones are the GRU and LSTM units, which both have
internal gates that helps when training. Figure 1.5 shows the gates of the GRU, which
contains an update gate and a reset or forget gate.
Figure 1.4: The principles of an RNN network, where the result is used for the next
iteration. [Und]
Figure 1.5: GRU with available gates.
Equation 1.2 is the update gate, Equation 1.3 is the reset gate and finally Equation
1.4 is the output of the GRU. The activation functions shown here are the sigmoid and
tanh functions, but these can be changed in the implementation.
zt = σg(Wzxt + Uzht−1 + bz)
(1.2)
rt = σg(Wrxt + Urht−1 + br)
(1.3)
==PAGE:24==
8
1 Introduction
ht = (1 −zt) ◦ht−1 + zt ◦σh(Whxt + Uh(rt ◦ht−1) + bh)
(1.4)
1.3.5
Activation Functions
A common thing about all the layers is that they often use some kind of activation
function. Activation functions are applied to the results of a layer, after adding the bias.
The activation function is used to keep a value within a certain range or to perform a
threshold on the neuron. This imitates the idea of neurons in the brain, where a cer-
tain number of neurons need to be firing in order for the next neuron to fire and adds
unlinearities. Figure 1.6 shows three common activation functions, which are the ReLu,
Sigmoid and TanH functions. The ReLu zeroes all negative values. Sigmoid keeps the
output with a range of 0 to 1 where TanH gives a range between -1 and 1.
0
2
−2
0
−1
1
x
y
Figure 1.6: Examples of activation functions in neural networks. ReLu (
), Sigmoid
(
) and TanH (
)
The Softmax function is also used as a sort of activation layer, however often in
the end of classification networks. This function gives a probability distribution of the
output neurons, which sums to 1. This both helps with training of the network but also
gives the probability for each of the classes of whether they have been detected. This
can be used for a threshold, such that an action is performed if the probability of a
certain class is larger than 80%. Figure 1.3 also includes a Softmax as the last layer.
1.4
RISC-V
Due to the nature of neural networks, which are in rapid development, it is beneficial to
have a system that can be changed after tape-out. Here, accelerators are used for specific
calculations that are common to neural networks. This, for instance, is the multiply and
accumulate functions, activation functions and different pre-processing of the signals.
The choice of using RISC-V was because of its open source nature, its possibility of
customizing the instruction set and the readily available versions written in Chisel [Ucb]
[Asa+16]. Section 4.1 will go through the hardware used and made for this processor.
==PAGE:25==
1.4 RISC-V
9
1.4.1
History
RISC-V is an instruction set architecture (ISA) which was originally developed at Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley. It is a Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC), which
means that it is made to perform only a limited set of operations. The opposite version
is a Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC), which has long instructions that can
perform highly complex operations. The idea behind RISC is that only a few operations
are needed in general and the complex operations can be performed using a number of
simple instructions. Back when X86 architecture was coming forth, the hardware scene
was quite different. Memory was fast and computational units were slow. Therefore, it
made sense for a computer to work directly on memory. Nowadays, memory is slow, and
computations are fast, which is why RISC-V uses a register-based load-store instruction
set. This means that all operands must be loaded into registers before-hand but has the
benefit that once it is in the register there is very fast access to it.
1.4.2
Instruction Format
RISC-V was developed with modern computers in mind. It was developed with help from
David Patterson, one of the authors of the book Computer Architecture: A Quantitative
Approach [Hen19]. This book takes a quantitative approach to processor design. This
explains many of the rationales behind the exact functionality of the RISC-V proces-
sor. For instance, the use of 32 registers was found as a good middle-ground for having
enough registers to map variables onto while keeping the number of bits required at a
minimum. As RISC-V uses 32 bits for each instruction in the base set (the Compressed
(C) extension allows for certain 16 bit instructions to reduce memory consumption), it
would require 3*log2(32) = 15 bits for having information about the two operand regis-
ters and the result register needed for instructions such as addition. This can be seen
in Figure 1.7, where rd is the result register and rs1 and rs2 are the operand registers.
opcode contains information about which instruction should be executed, such as what
type of instruction it is. imm is an immediate used for different operations. funct3 and
funct7 are used for instructions that needs to be specified more than what is in the
opcode. All this can be seen in the RISC-V Instruction Set Manual [Wat15], which also
specifies the functionality.
1.4.3
Extensions
The system was also designed such that all instructions keep the register addresses at
the same bit-positions for the different instructions, to ease the hardware that needs
to interact with the register file. Another quantitative approach that was taken was to
use jumps and branches with a certain size for the immediate. By analyzing a lot of
programs, a distribution of the needed jump-lengths was found. Thereby, it is possible
==PAGE:26==
10
1 Introduction
Format
Bit
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Register/register
funct7
rs2
rs1
funct3
rd
opcode
Immediate
imm[11:0]
rs1
funct3
rd
opcode
Upper immediate
imm[31:12]
rd
opcode
Store
imm[11:5]
rs2
rs1
funct3
imm[4:0]
opcode
Branch
[12]
imm[10:5]
rs2
rs1
funct3
imm[4:1]
[11]
opcode
Jump
[20]
imm[10:1]
[11]
imm[19:12]
rd
opcode
Figure 1.7: 32-bit instruction formats. Notice how the register addresses are always
located at the same bit-position. The same goes, as much as possible, for the immediate
values. [Risa]
to use the needed number of bits to represent the immediate, which leaves as many
bits as possible for customizability, which is another huge benefit. The RISC-V systems
are designed with extensions in mind. A program compiled for the base instruction set
can run on any RISC-V processor. More complex processors can be made with custom
instructions, which requires changes in the compilation of a program. There are several
standard extensions defined, which can be freely added as needed. For instance, one of
the often-added extensions is the M extension, which is the Standard Extension for In-
teger Multiplication and Division. Without this, multiplication, division and remainder
are performed using only the base instructions and will therefore take much longer. Fig-
ure 1.8 shows the current extensions that are both in the works and frozen. It is possible
to choose the extensions needed, but some extensions require other extensions, as can
also be seen in the RISC-V manuals. For instance, the D extension for Doubles-precision
floating point requires the F extension, for computing single-precision floating-point.
If an extension is not used, then it is perfectly fine to use its opcodes for custom
instructions. For instance, as explained in section 3.1.7, it is possible to implement a
fixed-point extension using the single-precision floating point instructions. The benefit
being that you can use a compiler that thinks it compiles for floating point but is exe-
cuted using fixed point instead.
1.5
Chisel
Finally, this thesis will be using and evaluating Chisel, which is a hardware description
language (HDL) that is in highly active development at University of California, Berke-
ley. As hardware synthesis tools are very conservative when it comes to new languages,
the benefit of Chisel is that it generates pure synthesizable Verilog code. Thereby, it
should be fully compatible with CAD tools for hardware implementation and simulation.
The maturity and feature set will be investigated along with how much a solution needs
to be hacked to function as if the project was done using VHDL or Verilog.
==PAGE:27==
1.5 Chisel
11
Name
Description
Version
Status[a]
Base
RV32I
Base Integer Instruction Set, 32-bit
2.1
Frozen
RV32E
Base Integer Instruction Set (embedded), 32-bit, 16 registers
1.9
Open
RV64I
Base Integer Instruction Set, 64-bit
2.0
Frozen
RV128I
Base Integer Instruction Set, 128-bit
1.7
Open
Extension
M
Standard Extension for Integer Multiplication and Division
2.0
Frozen
A
Standard Extension for Atomic Instructions
2.0
Frozen
F
Standard Extension for Single-Precision Floating-Point
2.0
Frozen
D
Standard Extension for Double-Precision Floating-Point
2.0
Frozen
G
Shorthand for the base and above extensions
N/A
N/A
Q
Standard Extension for Quad-Precision Floating-Point
2.0
Frozen
L
Standard Extension for Decimal Floating-Point
0.0
Open
C
Standard Extension for Compressed Instructions
2.0
Frozen
B
Standard Extension for Bit Manipulation
0.92
Open
J
Standard Extension for Dynamically Translated Languages
0.0
Open
T
Standard Extension for Transactional Memory
0.0
Open
P
Standard Extension for Packed-SIMD Instructions
0.1
Open
V
Standard Extension for Vector Operations
0.8
Open
N
Standard Extension for User-Level Interrupts
1.1
Open
H
Standard Extension for Hypervisor
0.4
Open
Figure 1.8: Extensions for the RISC-V processor. A processor can be made by choosing
a set of the extensions as needed. [Risa]
1.5.1
Principles
Chisel does not generate Verilog code directly. It uses an intermediate representation
called Flexible Internal Representation for RTL (FIRRTL, pronounced fertil). The ben-
efit of using FIRRTL is to have an intermediate representation in the same way as
software compilers also has an intermediate representation. This allows for conversion
to FIRRTL from different libraries as needed. FIRRTL is an abstract syntax tree (AST)
representation, for easy hardware implementation. The benefit here being that opti-
mizations can be performed, such as peephole optimization, without having to know
about the input or output. Another benefit is that it allows for open-source hardware
synthesis without having to support the entire Verilog, VHDL or Chisel standard. It
is also useful for academia that can investigate CAD tools or other types of optimizations.
Chisel is not a stand-alone language like VHDL and Verilog, but it is a library for
Scala. Scala is itself based on Java and allows for doing anything that can be done
==PAGE:28==
12
1 Introduction
in Java, with better support for functional programming. When working with Chisel,
you define a component as a class that extends the Module class. The Module contains
the information needed to actually generate hardware. When working with Chisel, it
is a good idea to remember that you are in fact working with hardware and, therefore,
everything needs to be converted to Verilog in the end.
One of the large benefits of Chisel is that it is made for hardware generation. For
instance, you can write Scala code to generate ROMs which can then easily be converted
to hardware. Listing 1.1 shows all the needed Chisel code for a Cosine lookup table with
a dynamic bit width and number of indexes.
1
val cos_array = for(k <- 0 until samples/2) yield math.round(math.cos
(2*math.Pi*k/samples)*(1<<bitwidth -1))
2
3
val cos = VecInit(cos_array.map(t => t.asSInt(bitwidth.W) ))
4
5
io.out := cos(io.address)
Listing 1.1: Chisel code for generating a hardware Cosine look-up table
More details on how to use Chisel will be showed in the hardware sections, which will
go through the needed constructs. When having a folder with the required files, all you
have to do to generate Verilog is write sbt run in a terminal, as it uses the Scala Build
Tools (SBT). You are referred to the Chisel Bootcamp [Fre] for a quick introduction
into Chisel with coding examples. Also, Digital Design with Chisel by Martin Schoeberl
[Sch19] is a great book for learning the basics of Chisel. And with the basics of Chisel it
is possible to produce hardware faster than with VHDL or Verilog. One of the reasons for
this being that you can do direct connections between component ports without defining
signals beforehand and that it is possible to generate simple or complex circuitry in-line.
For instance, a rising-edge detector could be written as in Listing 1.2. This is done using
a function, where RegNext is a register that is defined with its next value always being x.
1 def risingedge(x: Bool) = x && !RegNext(x)
Listing 1.2: Chisel code for a rising-edge detector
This leads to an important aspect of Chisel. When writing Chisel, we can define reg-
isters directly because clock and reset are implied signals. So, when defining a register,
we can set its reset value, but we will not have to handle the clock and reset signals.
These are automatically generated in the Verilog file. We can, however, freely use the
signals if this is what we want to do. It is also possible to define different clocked re-
gions in the code, which we will show an example of in Section 4.2. If we have some
specialized hardware written in Verilog or VHDL, we can also blackbox these into the
systems. Verilog code is even supported in testing when using Verilator. But more on
this in section 4.2.
==PAGE:29==
1.5 Chisel
13
1.5.2
Chisel Version
Chisel is currently on the third major revision, Chisel3. One of the drawbacks of this is
that Chisel3 is not fully backwards compatible with Chisel2. There is a compatibility
layer, but it is much the same as when working with Python 2 and 3. It is possible
to convert, but some features are removed so a direct conversion is not possible. For
Chisel3, one example of this is subword assignment, which was supported in Chisel2 but
is not supported in Chisel3. However, as Chisel is in active development, it is possible
to affect the development. It is also possible to change the functionality of Chisel by
defining new functions.
1.5.3
Testing
Chisel has built-in tools for testing modules. Depending on the testing framework used,
it has support for using different simulators. The default simulator is Treadle (which is
developed as part of Chisel), but this is relatively slow for larger circuits. It also has
support for Verilator [Int], which is a very fast open-source simulator for Verilog. Veri-
lator works by compiling a C-program mimicking the hardware that is then simulated.
The Chisel library creates all the needed files and calls the simulator itself. Depending
on the testing library used, there is also support or experimental support for the VCS
simulator. This, however, requires a license for VCS.
Chisel has a focus on easy testing and uses the Scala test-framework for testing mul-
tiple tests in parallel. To test all the circuits in a system you just have to run sbt test.
After running all the tests, it gives an overview of the tests that succeeded and failed. A
single test can also be run by running sbt ”testOnly <testName>”. The tests are written
using a principle of peeking, poking and expecting. That is, we can poke values onto
signal ports, peek the value of a port and expect values, which is the same as assertions,
which is the actual test. We can write the tests in a Scala programming language, so
testing using loops is very easy and conditional assignments are possible by peeking the
signals. Section 4.5.7 has an example of how unit- and integration tests are performed
and shows how much simpler and feature rich it is compared to a VHDL testbench.
One issue, however, is that testing is performed using these different simulators on
the generated Verilog code or directly on the FIRRTL. Therefore, there is a need for a
way of testing a circuit post-synthesis using the same tests. As of right now, you still
need to write a testbench in a supported HDL to do post-synthesis netlist tests. This
is needed to verify that timings are satisfied, functionality is the same and to perform
power consumption estimation, which requires information about the switching activity.
Therefore, you currently need to write tests in two different languages for testing the
system before and after. However, this is further discussed in section 4.8.2.
==PAGE:30==
14
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2
Neural Network
This chapter will go through the neural network and deep learning techniques applied
as well as the performance, benefits, drawbacks and limitations experienced. The goal
of the neural network we are working with is efficient speech recognition for a small set
of trigger words.
2.1
Machine Learning Library
When working with machine learning, there are multiple toolsets that can be used. The
two most popular libraries are TensorFlow [Tena] and PyTorch [Pyt]. Both of these
libraries are widely used and has tools for using GPUs for efficiently training a network.
Other, less used, libraries also exist, where Darknet [darknet13] is an open source li-
brary written in C and CUDA. TensorFlow is made by Google while PyTorch is made
by Facebook. Darknet is somewhat a niche product, as it was developed by Joseph Red-
mon for use with his YOLO network for image detection and is as such focused on doing
image classification. TensorFlow and PyTorch both supports a wide range of networks
which can be used for many different types of both classification and regression networks.
TensorFlow, from now on referred as TF, and PyTorch, referred has PT, have ap-
proximately the same functionalities when it comes to training a network. It is possible
to make specialized networks, write custom optimizers and much more. TF has been
available for a longer time as it was initially released in 2015 where PT was released in
2016. Choosing between the libraries is like a religion to some people, but the general
thought is that PT has been developing faster while TF has the best capabilities. For
non-religious people the best library is the one that gets the job done. Many networks
already exist with different capabilities, where a normal deep-learning approach is to
find a network that gets the job done and then modify this. Therefore, you will often
choose the framework that was used in the original network.
TF was chosen as the primary framework because of its examples using the TF
dataset for speech recognition of trigger words such as ”yes”, ”no”, ”up”, and ”down”
[War18]. A huge benefit of TF is its library for running on microcontrollers, which is
called TensorFlow lite for microcontrollers [Tenb]. This library allows you to convert
a network trained using regular TF to a C-only version which can be compiled by any
compiler needed. There exist other solutions for this but most of them are focused on
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Neural Network
light-weight implementations for execution on systems with an OS, where the TF mi-
crocontroller version is made for running bare-metal. Instead of running purely on TF
a library called Keras was used on top of this. This library uses TF as a backend and
enables simpler implementations where multi-GPU training is done with a minimum of
work. As a note, it is possible to port Darknet to a bare-metal version by implementing
a dynamic memory library for malloc and free and by implementing a file-reader that
can read files directly from the memory.
This is important and tells us that most of the libraries with a C-backend can be
used with some modifications. This is also a valid point for the rest of this chapter,
which is based on TF, where similar solutions are possible for PT and can be modified
if using other libraries as well.
2.2
Data Generation
As neural networks can only be as good as the dataset they are trained on, it is very
important to investigate this. Generating a dataset while training allows for a much
more diverse training and reduces the amount of stored data as variations can be made
on the fly. This also allows for easily testing new changes, such as adding noise to the
training data or adding new samples.
2.2.1
Dataset
A good dataset is crucial for a good network, as it needs to represent most possibilities.
When looking at datasets there are many aspects to consider. For one, it needs to be
precise. That is, for classification, it should have correct labels and all the data should
be labeled. The quality and diversity of the samples are also important, where a dataset
might have been recorded using different microphones or they could be recorded using
the same. If using the same, the data will have a certain ”color” made by the microphone,
where a new microphone might color the audio differently which could make the network
unable to do proper detections. The dataset might have been low pass filtered either
when being recorded or in software afterwards which can also have an effect. Therefore,
the dataset should be very diverse at first and include recordings from as many different
areas as possible. But as dataset generation is a very time-consuming process, using a
pre-recorded and labeled dataset is often the way to go in the beginning. The neural
network trained in this thesis uses the [War18] dataset.
Preliminary work was also put into using The Spoken Wikipedia Corpora dataset
[BKH19], which is a dataset that contains labeled information from the reading of many
Wikipedia articles. A Python script was written to extract the words from this dataset,
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Data Generation
17
which can be seen in Appendix A.1. The validity of the extracted words needs to be
verified, as the different recordings have different sampling frequencies and the precision
of the labeling is unknown.
2.2.2
Transformations
When training over a long time, transformations are often used on the inputs to diversify
the dataset. When working with images, this would be done by morphing the picture
using rotation, stretching, zooming, color transformations and many other transforma-
tions. For audio, we can also perform many types of transformations, which is similar
to what would be done on images. As speech is very personalized, where we can distin-
guish a person uttering a sentence, the audio has some different encodings of the speech
”data”. To morph the audio, we can slow it down or speed it up to change the duration
of a spoken word. We can also change the pitch to alter the frequencies. Adding noise is
another way of ”muddying” the audio, such that a more generalized sound is processed.
Very few transformations have been applied, as the network is a proof of concept, but
the dataloader for the training loop was made with support for it.
2.2.3
Generating the Data
When training a network, the data is divided into batches and epochs, where a batch
is a subdivision of the dataset while an epoch is every time the entire dataset has been
processed. Batch training allows for much faster training for larger datasets as it only
needs to process a batch at a time compared to having to compute an error for the entire
dataset. When transforming the input data, we will still have the same batch sizes and
the same number of data entries. However, when it is sampled it is transformed in a
set way. When training, the toolflow requests a batch of data which the data generator
generates on the fly.
To make the data generator, Keras has a preset way of doing it in order to be directly
compatible with the training loop. A Python class is made which takes some arguments
for its construction. In the construction it is possible to choose how data is loaded.
Depending on the number of threads and amount of memory it is possible to preload
the samples into memory, load them from the disk each time its needed or a combina-
tion of the two. The currently used solution preloads all the samples and stores them in
RAM, as the HPC used for training has plenty of RAM available but with slower disk IO.
The data generator implements three methods for this, __len__, __getitem__ and
on_epoch_end. The first one returns the number of batches per generation or epoch.
This is often given as number of samples divided by the batch size. The second method
is called every time the training of the network needs a new batch to work on. This is
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Neural Network
what performs the primary part of the data generation as it can generate batches on
the fly. The final method can be used to reset the batch generation or to shuffle the
data depending on how this wants to be treated. Some networks can behave differently
depending on what the last input was, which is often true for recurrent networks. Listing
2.1 shows the three functions needed. An __init__ function is also made. This pre-
loads data which drastically improve runtime compared to making many disk accesses.
1
def __len__(self):
2
'Denotes the number of batches per epoch'
3
return int(np.floor(self.num_files / self.batch_size))
4
5
def __getitem__(self, index):
6
'Generate one batch of data'
7
# Generate indexes of the batch
8
indexes = self.indexes[index*self.batch_size:(index+1)*self.
batch_size]
9
# Find list of IDs
10
list_IDs_temp = [self.loaded_audio[k] for k in indexes]
11
# Generate data
12
X, y = self.__data_generation(list_IDs_temp)
13
return X, y
14
15
def on_epoch_end(self):
16
'Updates indexes after each epoch'
17
self.indexes = np.arange(self.num_files)
18
if self.shuffle == True:
19
np.random.shuffle(self.indexes)
Listing 2.1: Functions for the Keras data generator.
To train on the same data that the hardware sees, where FFT is performed in fixed
point with only a limited number of bits, it is possible to use Chisel tests to run a sample
through a bit-accurate simulation of the hardware and obtain the result of this. This
is very useful for pre-processing of samples using techniques such as FFT. Section 4.5.7
describes how this is done.
2.2.4
Class Imbalance
Class imbalance is an issue with neural networks when there are many more samples of
one class compared to the others. This makes the training focus more on the dominant
classes and makes it ”forget” about the less seen classes. In the latest used network,
the classes were very balanced. However, if the classes were changed to, for instance,
include all other words as false samples, which should not be detected as any of the
trigger words, then this class would become much larger. There are two major ways of
alleviating this. One is to randomly select a class of which to draw the next sample
from. This gives an equal distribution of samples between classes, no matter how many
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Lite Microcontroller
19
samples are in each class. Alternatively, a set of weights can be added that tells the
optimizer how much the loss for the different classes should count. Both approaches
have been tested when training networks.
If we extended the complete dataset with our own data, we would in the beginning
see a huge imbalance, where the self-added data would be very small and therefore the
network would be focused on the original dataset. This is normally an issue with class
imbalance, where certain classes appear more often than others. The same thing can
be applied on datasets, such that the training will randomly choose a datapoint from
one of the datasets without information on how large the dataset is. Thereby, it would
use all the datasets equally. Or, if some datasets are ”less important”, a sample can be
chosen by weighted random selection.
2.3
Lite Microcontroller
The TF library includes a C++ library for microcontroller and embedded processor
implementation [Tenb]. This library is great for bare metal systems without support
for standard libraries and dynamic memory allocation. This means that everything is
contained in the library, such that no files needs to be dynamically loaded. This has
some benefits but also some very important limitations. One important aspect to note is
that the library is only made for inference. That is, it is not made for training a network
on the device but only to perform detections. This is, however, exactly what is needed
for most implementations, as the training is done on desktops or servers with plenty of
compute power.
2.3.1
Benefits & Drawbacks
One of the benefits of this library is that it has support for a wide range of microcon-
trollers and adding new targets is very easy, as explained in Section 3.5. It has support
for accelerating parts of a program dynamically, such that the same library can be used
for multiple targets at the same time, where the optimized code is added in parallel to
the reference implementation. Thereby, it is easy to get a system running as a baseline
before optimizing for the specific target.
One of the major drawbacks of the library is that it only supports a subset of the TF
operations. And this subset is quite limited compared to what TF can do. For instance,
it does not support 1D convolutions, but it does support 2D convolutions. This is not
that big of a hindrance, as the input format can be reshaped with another dimension
of size 1. This was done in Section 2.4.2. Furthermore, it does not support any type of
RNN layers. Therefore, when designing the network, these limitations must be taken
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Neural Network
into consideration. However, it is possible to extend the library with new types of op-
erations. So, if it is found that a recurrent layer greatly outperforms a convolutional or
fully connected layer, in either size or accuracy, it is still possible to implement this.
2.3.2
Converting a Network
When converting a network, there are some steps that needs to be performed. The first
task is to make sure that only the available operators are used. The network is then
converted to a quantized model to avoid the use of floating-point operations. When
converting to a quantized version, the network should be evaluated again to verify that
the accuracy is still satisfactional. The quantized version stores the parameters as 8-bit
values instead of a 32- or 64-bit floating point value. Therefore, the size becomes quite
a bit smaller. After this is done, the new network is converted to a FlatBuffer, which is
the TF Lite representation of networks. This is then converted to a C byte array, such
that it can be used in the program as read-only memory. The C arrays will then contain
all the parameters and the configuration of the network.
After this is done, a program needs to be written that utilizes the network. In order
to use the network, an input to the network needs to be available. Therefore, it should
collect the data and do any pre-processing needed before the inference is done by the
network. The result should then be used to write an output or perform some action
depending on the result. This project has converted a model to a FlatBuffer and on to
a C byte array. A custom network has not been tested running on the TF Lite Micro
framework, only pre-trained networks.
2.4
Trained Networks
After a data generator has been made, it is quite simple to test the network with differ-
ent types of networks. This section contains two neural networks. One made using RNN
layers and another that can only use the available layers for the C++ implementation,
as explained in Section 2.3. As the limitations are only due to a lack of support, it is
possible to support the other operations as well and, therefore, it is important to know
the benefit of using other types of layers.
2.4.1
Pre-processing
Neural networks are great at trying to make sense of the input data. However, the
easier the data is to make sense of, the easier it is for the network. Pre-processing is
often applied to data when it comes to audio networks. Pre-processing is not the same
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Trained Networks
21
as transforming the data, as the pre-processing converts the sample into a new format.
Domain specific knowledge is here used to simplify the data. When making a neural
network, it makes sense to see how data is normally processed using more conventional
methods. For instance, in speech recognition, the audio is often converted to the fre-
quency domain using the Fourier transforms to a spectrogram. This gives an ”image” of
the speech, which is easier to process, as this is also what happens when the ear hears
audio. Other conversions could also be applied, such as extracting the Mel-frequency
Cepstral Coefficients [On+06], which is a type of non-linear frequency representation.
This is neat due to the non-linearity of hearing, where it is easier to distinguish sounds
the lower the frequency.
For the keyword recognitions used in this thesis, the audio clips have been converted
into spectrograms using an FFT with an overlap of 120 samples and a total of 200 sam-
ples per FFT. The exact values for this are not important and would for a hardware
implementation be changed to a multiple of 2, for faster execution. Figure 2.1 shows
two such spectrograms from 0 to 4 KHz of two different people saying ”no”. The audio
clips contain some noise and, therefore, a red marking has been added around the main
feature. This shows how two different sayings of ”no” has quite a lot of similarities. The
tone depth of the saying is different, which can be seen on the ”nose” being at different
frequencies. As the similarities can be found by inspection, there is a good chance that
a neural network will also be able to do this.
Figure 2.1: Two one second spectrograms of two different people saying ”no”.
For comparison, Figure 2.2 shows a one second spectrogram of a person saying
”happy”. This shows how ”happy” consists of two syllables. When comparing to the
two spectrograms of ”no”, it is seen that they have quite different features.
Another rather normal pre-processing to do for many networks is to normalize the
input. This means that when training the input only has a certain fixed range to look
at. For instance, speech has a huge dynamic range so this would be good to normalize.
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Neural Network
Frequency [Hz]
Figure 2.2: A one second spectrogram of the word ”happy”.
Taking the logarithm on an input is another way of scaling down a large dynamic range,
where the normalization then makes sure that the output is within a certain range. In
that way, the network is not detecting how loudly a person says ”no”, but whether the
utterance is actually ”no”. Normalization can also be performed as an initial layer in
the network. The trained network uses normalizing of the input and the spectrogram is
dB scaled.
2.4.2
Configurations
The first network is a very large recurrent neural network, that functions as a benchmark.
Table 2.1 (a) shows the specifications for this network. This uses convolutions, batch
normalization, dropout, GRU and dense layers. It has a total of 424,135 parameters.
That is, you would need 424KB to store this network, if each parameter uses a single byte.
An alternative network, that uses only operations that are readily available for TF
Lite Micro, is one based on only convolutions and dense layers. This can be seen in
Table 2.1 (b), which has a total of 26,067 parameters. The reshape layer does not do
anything except add a dimension of 1. This is used because the TF Lite Micro only
supports 2-dimensional convolutions. By reshaping, this is the same as performing a
1-dimensional convolution.
2.4.3
Performance
The next important aspect of the two used networks is how well they perform after
training. Both networks were trained for 80 epochs and validated on an unknown set
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Trained Networks
23
Table 2.1: Configuration of an RNN and a CNN based network.
Type
Shape
Params
InputLayer
549
101
0
Conv1D
134
196
297136
Batch
134
196
784
Activation
134
196
0
Dropout
134
196
0
GRU
128
124800
Dropout
128
0
Batch
128
512
Dense
7
903
(a) RNN with a total of 424,135 parameters
Type
Shape
Params
InputLayer
549
101
0
Reshape
549
101
0
Conv2D
134
16
24256
Activation
134
16
0
Dropout
134
16
0
Conv2D
30
4
964
Flatten
120
0
Dense
7
847
(b) CNN with a total of 26,067 parameters
of data. Table 2.2 and 2.3 shows a confusion matrix for the RNN and CNN version.
The confusion matrix is a tool for validating the results of a classification network. The
columns are the actual classes and the rows are the predicted classes. So, for a perfect
network, it should only have non-zero values in the diagonal, which is shown in bold.
The RNN network predicted a total of 110 bed of which 105 were correct. It mistook 1
cat, 2 dog and 2 nine for bed. In the same way, we can see that bed was mispredicted
three times as bird, four times as cat, twice as dog and once as nine.
The two tables show how the RNN performs better than the CNN, but that the CNN
still performs relatively well.
RNN
bed
bird
cat
dog
happy
marvin
nine
Predictions
bed
105
0
1
2
0
0
2
110
bird
3
103
0
0
0
1
3
110
cat
4
0
107
0
1
0
0
112
dog
2
0
0
114
0
0
0
116
happy
0
0
2
0
111
1
0
114
marvin
0
0
0
0
1
113
0
114
nine
1
0
0
1
0
3
151
156
Total
115
103
110
117
113
118
156
Table 2.2: Confusion matrix for the RNN network. It has an accuracy of 96.6% on a
total of 832 samples.
The accuracy is not the only performance measure. The loss also tells how certain
the network is on its prediction. The more certain it is on a prediction, the closer the
output of this class comes to a 1. For a perfect network, the loss is expected to be as close
to 0 as possible, as this means there is no discrepancy between the data and the infer-
ence. Table 2.4 shows the loss and accuracy for training and testing after 80 epochs for
==PAGE:40==
24
2 Neural Network
CNN
bed
bird
cat
dog
happy
marvin
nine
Predictions
bed
97
2
10
2
1
0
1
113
bird
7
96
1
0
1
3
6
114
cat
7
4
93
5
1
0
1
111
dog
3
2
1
104
0
3
2
115
happy
7
0
4
0
103
0
2
116
marvin
0
9
1
2
2
96
5
115
nine
4
1
0
1
5
0
137
148
Total
125
114
110
114
113
102
154
Table 2.3: Confusion matrix for the CNN network. It has an accuracy of 87.3% on a
total of 832 samples.
the two networks. We can here see that the loss is much better for the large RNN version.
training loss
training acc
testing loss
testing acc
CNN
0.1054
0.9631
0.1042
0.9636
RNN
0.0023
0.9930
0.0485
0.9906
Table 2.4
The reason for different values for training and testing is that they use different
parts of the dataset. The training loss is always expected to decrease as much as pos-
sible whereas the testing, and validation, accuracy and loss might become worse while
the training becomes better. This is due to overfitting, which can be seen in Figure 2.3.
This shows how the test loss is improving until around epoch 7, after which it gradually
becomes worse. Therefore, the network performs best around epoch 7, if evaluating on
the testing set. To overcome this overfitting, the dataset should undergo some trans-
formations when being processed. The current training sets does nothing to transform
the data, as this is a proof of concept implementation. Overfitting is also overcome by
stopping the training early, when the test accuracy and loss starts becoming worse.
Finally, we can see the accuracy of the two networks in Figure 2.4, where we can see
that the RNN network rapidly performs very well. The CNN, on the other hand, per-
forms worse but is still climbing slowly. Therefore, the CNN network can probably be
optimized by using some different deep learning techniques for training. It is important
to note that the accuracy shown here is better than what was shown in the confusion
matrices. This is because this is data from the actual training loop, whereas the con-
fusion matrices are calculated after the training is complete, on a validation set. This
validation set is also much smaller than the training set, which leads to the possibility
of a wrong guess pulling down the result more substantially.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Trained Networks
25
0
20
40
60
80
1.5 · 10−2
3 · 10−2
5 · 10−2
7.5 · 10−2
0.1
Loss
Training
Testing
Figure 2.3: Loss for the RNN for the training set and testing set.
0
20
40
60
80
0.9
0.93
0.96
0.99
1
Epoch
Accuracy
CNN
RNN
Figure 2.4: Accuracy of CNN and RNN when trained for 80 epochs.
==PAGE:42==
26
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
RISC-V
In this chapter, we will be looking at the toolchain used for RISC-V in the project. This
has been built from the riscv-gnu-toolchain, which is available from the RISC-V GitHub
[Risb]. This toolchain contains a version of the GCC compiler and also contains the
GDB debugger, GNU C Library, and other useful tools. We will also be going over
other firmware-related aspects of the system used, such as profiling tools, testing and
debugging tools. Several of these aspects are connected with the hardware and will
be explained from a hardware perspective in chapter 4. This chapter will go over the
implementations from a software perspective.
3.1
Compiler & Setup
When working with a processor, a good set of tools is paramount for efficient imple-
mentation. It is possible to write machine code directly, but this is only useful for very
small efficient areas. When working with programs, we need to have a compiler that
can do the heavy lifting for us. Furthermore, the processor also needs to have some way
of initializing itself and the programs needs to know at what addresses this occurs. This
section details some of the different aspects of this, where all the elements have been
implemented.
3.1.1
Bootrom
The benefit of using a processor is that the system can be changed after tape-out. How-
ever, in order for this to actually be possible, the program needs to be stored in some
sort of non-volatile rewritable memory. This memory then needs to be transferred to
the RAM that the processor has available in order to be executable. To accomplish
this, there could be used a state machine that loads the memory into the RAM. This
is a rigid solution where a bootrom is often a more flexible approach. The bootrom is
a small ROM that contains a simple program for initializing the processor and load the
executable memory into the RAM. This bootrom can also contain information about
the system, such as its revision number and the available hardware.
==PAGE:44==
28
3 RISC-V
The hardware is made to initialize the program counter (PC) to address 0x200. This
is the point of entry for the processor and, therefore, the starting point of the bootrom.
The bootrom then executes a program, which can look at pins or verify the integrity of
a program while loading. Listing 3.1 shows the bootrom used for the processor. This
contains some visual tests to know that it actually boots, such as writing ”1489” on
the seven-segment display and printing ”Hello World” to the UART. After this is done
it asks a SPI peripheral to load in memory from an attached Flash chip starting from
address 0x200000 and ending at address 0x3fffff. This is stored in the block_mem RAM
which starts at address 0x20000000. It then waits until the SPI peripheral is done with
this before it writes ”ABCD” to the seven-segment display. After this, it jumps to the
new starting point of the loaded program, which is at address 0x20000000. This is done
using inline assembly as the compiler does not know this address. What happens is that
the return register is overwritten with the address and it then issues a return instruction,
which makes the processor jump to this address.
1 #define SEVEN_SEGMENT (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x80000010)
2
3 #define UART_START (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x80000004)
4 #define UART_END (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x80000008)
5
6 #define SPI_START_ADDR (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x40000000)
7 #define SPI_FLASH_START_ADDR (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x40000004)
8 #define SPI_FLASH_END_ADDR (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x40000008)
9 #define SPI_STATUS (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x4000000C)
10
11 #define BLOCK_MEM 0x20000000
12
13 int main()
14 {
15
SEVEN_SEGMENT = 0x1489;
16
17
printstr("Hello World\n",12);
18
19
SPI_START_ADDR = BLOCK_MEM;
20
SPI_FLASH_START_ADDR = 0x00200000;
21
SPI_FLASH_END_ADDR = 0x003FFFFF;
22
while(SPI_STATUS != 0); //Wait for flash to have loaded in the entire
address range
23
24
SEVEN_SEGMENT = 0xABCD;
25
26
//Jump to main program.
27
__asm volatile("nop");
28
__asm volatile("nop");
29
__asm volatile("mv ra,zero");
30
__asm volatile("lui ra,0x20000");
31
__asm volatile("ret");
32
return 0;
33 }
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Compiler & Setup
29
Listing 3.1: Bootrom for the RISCV-processor
The addresses for the peripherals and memories used here are hardcoded into the
program. However, it is possible to make this dynamic, which is explained in Section
4.2.3. It would then get all this information from a header file which is generated at
hardware synthesis time.
3.1.2
C Runtime
Now, the bootrom is a very simple program that does not really do any initialization
of the processor. This is performed by the C runtime (crt), which is an initialization
written in assembly.
What this does is define the _start function and _trap_entry
function. The _start function sets all the registers to 0 and then initializes the stack
pointer and the global pointer. It then jumps to the _init function, which is defined
in a syscalls file. This is especially useful for multi-core or threaded systems, where the
function will find the thread to run or jump to the main function if single-threaded. It
is, however, also very useful for hiding the implementation details, such that a person
writing a program, or the bootloader does not have to know about this. The syscalls
can also contain functions for system operations such as writing to UART. In this case,
however, the syscalls and these files are kept small, to reduce the needed size of the ROM.
3.1.3
Compilation
When compiling for the system, we now need to use all of the mentioned files for the
bootloader. A Makefile has been made which contains a build instruction that contains
the needed files. Listing 3.2 shows the command that is executed to obtain the needed
file for the processor. This contains several compiler flags. The -mabi is the application
binary interface (ABI) of the processor, which defines what variables are available. In
this case it is ilp32 which means that it has support for integer, long and pointers of
32 bits. When linking, the compiled programs must use the same ABI. If floating point
hardware and registers are added, then the flag would be changed to ilp32f, which means
that it has 32-bit floating-point registers available. The -march specifies the available
architecture. This is where the extensions are added, and the processor bit width is
declared. rv32i is a 32-bit RISC-V processor that only has the basic I extension, while
rv32im is the same with the multiplication extension. In our case, we will control the
hardware generated from these two commands but primarily change the architecture
flag. There are other flags that are used to reduce and optimize the compilation, such
as the -O2 optimization flag and the -nostartfiles flag, which tells the assembler not to
use the default crt0 file.
==PAGE:46==
30
3 RISC-V
1
$ $(RISCV_GCC) -I$(RISCV_TEST_DIR)/env -I$(RISCV_TEST_DIR)/common -
static -std=gnu99 -O2 -mabi=ilp32 -march=rv32i -o main.riscv main.c
$(RISCV_TEST_DIR)/common/syscalls.c $(RISCV_TEST_DIR)/common/crt.S
-static -nostdlib -nostartfiles -lm -lgcc -T $(RISCV_TEST_DIR)/
common/test.ld
Listing 3.2: Command to compile the bootloader.
3.1.4
Linker Script
Now, when all the source code has been compiled, the object files needs to be linked
together. That is, the crt.o, syscalls.o and main.o that are generated by the compiler
needs to be connected to a single executable file. A linker is used for this. It happens in
the same command as the compilation in Listing 3.2, where it has a -T flag, which takes
the path to a linker script as an argument. This linker script defines the different mem-
ory regions available and defines a symbol for the global pointer. When assembling the
file, these addresses are used for placing the _start function at address 0x200 and stores
the data region for the bootloader at address 0x10000. The reason for this is hardware
based, such that the system can have one ROM for the instructions and another ROM
for the data, which allows the processor to read from these in parallel. Listing 3.3 shows
the linker script used for the bootloader. The stack pointer could also have been defined
in this linker script but is not actually used. When using a linker script, only a single
place needs to be changed if the memory system changes, such as the start-address or
the memory sizes.
1 OUTPUT_ARCH( "riscv" )
2 ENTRY(_start)
3
4 SECTIONS
5 {
6
. = 0x0200;
7
.text.init : { *(.text.init) }
8
.text : { *(.text) }
9
10
. = 0x10000;
11
/*ROM data for bootloader*/
12
.rodata : { *(.rodata) }
13
14
.sdata : {
15
__global_pointer$ = 0x20000000 + 0x800;
16
*(.srodata.cst16) *(.srodata.cst8) *(.srodata.cst4) *(.srodata.cst2)
*(.srodata*)
17
*(.sdata .sdata.* .gnu.linkonce.s.*)
18
}
19 }
Listing 3.3: Linker script for bootloader
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Compiler & Setup
31
3.1.5
Main Program
The sections above have detailed some of the needed files for making a bootloader for
the system. However, this bootloader only has to be made once and it is then the main
program that is of importance. This program also needs to go through the same steps
as explained for the bootloader just with another setup. The crt file is much simpler, as
it only has to set up the stack and global pointer to match the new program, as can be
seen in Listing 3.4.
1
.section ".text.init"
2
.globl _start
3 _start:
4
.option push
5
.option norelax
6
la gp, __global_pointer$
7
.option pop
8
la sp, __stack_top$
9
j main
Listing 3.4: crt.S for the main program
The linker script is quite similar to the one used for the bootloader and contains
some of the same information. They cannot use the same linker script because the boot-
loader is made to load into a ROM, while the main program is not able to store data
in this ROM. The linker script used for the programs run on the processor can be seen
in Listing 3.5. This is where the available memories are defined along with their sizes
and the sections as well. This gives a new global pointer compared to the bootloader,
which is why the crt updates this. The stack pointer is also initialized, as the main pro-
gram might use the available memory in another fashion. The linker script below can
be generated at synthesis time with the different memories defined under the MEMORY
blocks. It is also possible to add symbols for the different accelerators and peripherals
in this linker script, but for convenience, this is added through a generated header file.
1 OUTPUT_ARCH( "riscv" )
2 ENTRY(_start)
3
4 MEMORY{
5
BLOCKRAM (rwx) : ORIGIN = 0x20000000 , LENGTH = 256K
6 }
7
8 SECTIONS
9 {
10
PROVIDE(__stack_top$ = ORIGIN(BLOCKRAM) + LENGTH(BLOCKRAM));
11
12
. = 0x20000000;
13
.text.init : { *(.text.init) }
14
.text : {
15
KEEP(*(.stack))
16
KEEP(*(.vectors))
17
KEEP(*(.text))
==PAGE:48==
32
3 RISC-V
18
. = ALIGN(4);
19
KEEP(*(.rodata))
20
. = ALIGN(4);
21
} >BLOCKRAM
22
23
.sdata : {
24
__global_pointer$ = . + 0x800;
25
} >BLOCKRAM
26 }
Listing 3.5: program.ld linker script for the main program
3.1.6
Custom Instructions
Custom instructions are a great way of making a processor able to perform certain op-
erations much more efficient. When adding custom instructions, there are several con-
siderations. Section 4.1.2 explains the hardware and Chisel considerations when adding
new instructions, whereas this section has a focus on the compiler and the software.
To have the compiler actually understand and use the new instructions is outside
the scope of this thesis. However, we still want to be able to manually use the new
instructions. There are different ways to do this. One way of doing it is to use a fully
defined word for the instruction:
1 __asm volatile(".word 0xaabbccdd");
This will make the compiler insert this word at that point in the code, where the
word should then be the instruction with the registers at the correct positions. In order
to know where the registers are, you would need to define a function for it, such that
the argument registers would be used, and the result register would be the return register.
For a newer toolchain than the one was used in this project, a simpler way of doing
this is supported. This is by using the .insn pseudo directive. This defines unknown
instructions based on the different RISC-V formats. For r type instructions, the follow-
ing is a general inline assembly instruction where r is the register format. opcode is the
opcode of the instruction while func3 and func7 are the function values. %0 is the result
register, which maps to a variable called res, while %1 and %2 are the input registers,
which maps to the var1 and var2 variables defined in the code.
1 __asm volatile(".insn r opcode , func3, func7, %0, %1, %2" : "=r"(res) : "r
"(var1),"r"(var2));
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Compiler & Setup
33
This allows for doing inline assembly in the C code, without having to call a function
for it.
This also allows the compiler to optimize the code more.
As an example, a
byte swap instruction was made, which is an immediate type. Its opcode is 0x2a, and
its funct3 value is 0x0. It uses the rs1 and rd field for the input and output registers
and finally it has the immediate value set to 0. The inline assembly code would look
as follows, where var is a variable that contains the input and res is the variable that
should contain the result in the code:
1 //I type:
.insn i opcode , func3, rd, rs1, simm12
2 __asm volatile(".insn i
0x2a,
0, %0,
%1,
0 ": "=r"(res) : "r"(var)
);
This can then be defined in a function that does this, where the compiler can opti-
mize the function call away. Alternatively, the function can be declared using a #define
macro. The benefit of using either a #define macro or a function, is that an alternative
implementation can be made, such that if the instruction is not available, it performs
the same operation using software.
3.1.7
Fixed-Point Instructions
The use of fixed-point numbers was investigated for a processor. Section 4.1.4 explains
the hardware implementation of a fixed point instruction set, where this section de-
scribes the software point. Implementing an entire set of instructions requires quite a
bit of compiler work, if it needs to be properly integrated. However, as we will not be
using the floating-point extension, we can reuse the instructions from this. The benefit
of this is that we do not need to change the compiler at all. We just calculate on fixed
point instead of floating point. As the floating-point extension uses a new register file,
any added instructions can use the new register file as well. This reduces the cluttering
of the original ALU, as a new ALU for fixed point calculations is needed.
From a programming point of view, this means that only a minimum of considera-
tions needs to be done. Because we are using fixed point, there is a much smaller range
of values. The hardware is designed using saturating units, such that if the number
becomes too positive or negative, it will saturate to the maximum or minimum value.
You only know that the value is at least the saturated value, but this is still possible to
work with and detect.
When the compiler emits assembly, the F extension only allows for a few immediate
values. Therefore, when declaring a float, the binary file will contain a 32-bit floating-
point number. One solution would be to make some hardware that can convert between
fixed- and floating-point, but this would take up too much hardware. Therefore, a script
was written that goes through the generated hex file and converts all the binary fixed-
point values to floating point. This script gives a message each time a value is clipped
==PAGE:50==
34
3 RISC-V
to either max or min, so the programmer can check if this is alright. The script, as seen
in Appendix B.1, takes in the generated IHEX file, the disassembly of the program and
an offset. This offset is used to match the address of the IHEX and disassembly. The
new hex file is now ready for execution on the processor.
3.2
Testing
The system uses a Chisel testbench for testing the different aspects. This is elaborated
in section 4.6.1 with a focus on the hardware and simulator aspects. When running a
program, we want to be able to test that the different elements work as expected. This
is especially important when using custom instructions compared to a software routine.
The tester works by looking for a string printed on UART that states whether the test
has succeeded or failed.
3.2.1
Writing a Test
This type of test is quite powerful, as it can be used to test many aspects and units
of the system, when we can define an expected output for a certain operation. The
simplest test, using this, only prints a string. The other tests are written as simple pro-
grams that tries an operation and if the result is the expected, then it prints the passed
string. Otherwise, it prints that it failed. Listing 3.6 shows a simple program that test
additions, multiplications and divisions. If a test fails, then it returns a non-zero value.
If it succeeds, it returns a 0, so the main function that calls the tests just has to add
the values. If you need to know which test failed, the return value can be printed. In
this case, the addTest returns 1, mulTest returns 2 and divTest returns 4 if they fail.
Therefore, you can print the test value where the bits will represent what tests failed.
1 #include "UART.h"
2 #include "defines.h"
3
4 int addTest(){
5
int a = 10;
6
int b = 20;
7
int c = a + b;
8
if(c == 30){
9
return 0;
10
}else{
11
return 1;
12
}
13 }
14 ...
15 int main(){
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Debugging
35
16
int test = 0;
17
test += addTest();
18
test += mulTest();
19
test += divTest();
20
21
if(test == 0){
22
printstr(TEST_SUCCESS_STRING ,TEST_SUCCESS_STRING_LENGTH);
23
}else{
24
printstr(TEST_FAILED_STRING ,TEST_FAILED_STRING_LENGTH);
25
}
26 }
Listing 3.6: Simple operator tests
One important thing when writing these tests is that the compiler is not allowed to
perform optimizations. Otherwise, the optimizer could see that the test should always
return a 0 and therefore optimize it away. To verify that it actually contains the func-
tions, a disassembly of the program can be verified.
3.3
Debugging
When developing a program, we often want some kind of debugging. The Rocket Chip
includes a JTAG interface that allows for using the GNU Debugger (GDB) when run-
ning on actual hardware. The riscv-mini does not have this feature, but it can be added
if needed. However, the current system does support the poor man’s debugger, as we
have a UART connection. When writing a program, it makes sense to run it on the
development machine until it works as expected. However, the development machine
does not take our accelerators into account, unless we write a program that imitates
them. That is, a normal approach is first to make a functional program, then profile it
and then, from the information gained when profiling, optimize the bottlenecks.
But when it comes to debugging, we have another way of running the GDB. The
RISC-V tools contains a simulator for the instruction set, called Spike, which can be
used with GDB to run programs as if they were run on a RISC-V processor. We can use
this to verify the expected functionality and it also supports different extensions for the
processor. However, if you want a simulator for a processor containing less extensions
than the normal simulator, all you need to do is to compile the program for the simpler
architecture. Thereby, it will still run in the same way where the extra extensions will
just not be used.
Spike has support for custom instructions. To do this, the new instruction should
be described in the same way as all the other instructions are defined. And by looking
at similar instructions, the simulator can be extended for the new instructions. This
is great for custom instructions, but it still does not support the custom accelerator
==PAGE:52==
36
3 RISC-V
units used. To test these, we need to run it in either the simulator or on actual hard-
ware. Therefore, a set of tests should be developed when implementing new accelerators.
These tests should first use a software reference model and then use the accelerator to
calculate the same thing, to verify that the result is the same.
3.4
Profiling
A very important aspect when designing programs is to know where to optimize. To
accommodate this, a profiling tool was developed when running tests, with the hardware
aspect explained in section 4.6.3. The basics from a software point of view is to compile
any program that runs as a test. That is, if a fully functional system is being profiled,
it should run a number of iterations before printing ∼∼∼ALL TESTS PASSED∼∼∼,
which will end the simulation. The current profiler only works using simulation and,
therefore, it takes a long time to perform profiling on a large program.
To run the profiler, a test program is written and compiled. You then run the tester
TestFirmwareLogging, which simulates a processor and runs a given program until it
finds either ∼∼∼ALL TESTS PASSED∼∼∼, ∼∼∼SOME TESTS FAILED∼∼∼or an
illegal operation is performed. When this happens, it dumps information on how many
cycles the program has been at each instruction address throughout the program. A
Python script, as seen in Appendix B.2, then takes this dump and the disassembly of
the program and generates an interval tree. This gives information on how much time
is spent executing every function in the program. The function names have undergone
C++ mangling, but they are still recognizable. It then prints all the functions in order
from the one spent the least time in to the one spent most time in. The profiler only
accumulates time spent executing instructions of a function and the main function is
therefore probably not the one that takes the most time, as the sub-functions does not
count towards the main functions running time.
After running the profiler, you have a readily available list of functions that takes
the most time executing. For a more in-depth analysis, the instruction address dump,
which contains cycles spent in each address sorted by the address, can be viewed. This,
together with the disassembly of the program, now allows for seeing exactly what loops
are taking long to perform. This also gives an idea of whether the processor is spending
a lot of time idling, which happens when you try to write twice through the UART.
The first string is received immediately but the second one waits for the first string to
be done sending before accepting the memory request. Therefore, the profiler will often
show that the printstr function is one of the primary time consumers. As having a UART
connection is primarily for development, the time spent in printstr can be subtracted
from the total time to get a more accurate run-time.
==PAGE:53==
3.5 Neural Network Execution
37
3.5
Neural Network Execution
As mentioned in section 2.3, TensorFlow has a C++ library for executing a subset of
neural networks. This section will be going through the needed setup and tools in order
to have the processor running this library. This includes the current limitations, such
as dynamic memory allocation.
TF is a Python library which has backends written in C or C++, for higher perfor-
mance. However, this uses a lot of OS calls, which is not available for bare metal systems,
such as the one we are using. Because of this, the TF Lite Microcontroller library was
used, which works with a minimum of dependencies. It only supports a limited subset
of the entire TF library, due to the simplicity of the implementation.
3.5.1
Support for RISCV-mini
To support the processing system that has been made in this system, there are a couple
of changes that must be made. The library is made with support for multiple targets,
such that you can duplicate files performing an operation and then store these in a folder
with the name of the target. The Makefile then looks through the folders and uses the
specialized ones if available. Otherwise, it uses the generic version.
In principle, the only source code that needs to be made to have it running, is a
debug logger. That is, some way of printing messages using UART or whatever the
system supports. This is done in a file called debug_log.cc, which must have a function
as described in the header file. Listing 3.7 shows the implementation of this, in order
for it to work with the system made. The reason why the function prints a newline
character is two-fold. The first reason being that the simulator only prints entire lines
to the console, so a newline after any string will make sure that all strings are actu-
ally printed. The other reason being that this helps when profiling the system. When
printing in this way, the program will stall at the second print and wait until the first
string is printed. Thereby, it will not exit the function before the string has been printed.
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 #include <string.h>
3
4 #define UART_START (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x80000004)
5 #define UART_END (*(volatile unsigned int *)0x80000008)
6
7 void printstr(const char* s)
8 {
9
UART_START = (int)s;
10
UART_END = (int)s + strlen(s);
11 }
12
==PAGE:54==
38
3 RISC-V
13 extern "C" void DebugLog(const char* s) {
14
printstr(s);
15
printstr("\n");
16 }
Listing 3.7: Implementation of debug_log.cc
The next point is to define the compilation flow. This is done using an include file
for the Makefile, which can be seen in Appendix B.3. This contains a rule for a target,
such that if this match, it will use this include file. The file is a modified version of
one used for the SiFive systems. This file has information on where to find the linker
script and any source code that is needed. Furthermore, it contains the flags used for
the compiler, such as the optimization level.
Because the system runs off a bootloader and the linker script need to have the start-
ing code at a certain address, we need to define a function for the starting point, which
is _start. This makes sure that _start is placed as the first function. And because the
compilation of the entire program makes use of a global pointer, this also needs to be
set up. This is done using inline assembly. All of this is accomplished by making a
new main.cc file in the riscv-mini directory, which the Makefile will then compile from.
Listing 3.8 shows the needed code to support all of this.
1 #include "tensorflow/lite/micro/examples/hello_world/main_functions.h"
2
3 extern "C"{
4
void _start()__attribute__ ((section (".text.init")));
5
extern int main(int, char* []);
6
7
void _start() {
8
__asm volatile(".option push");
9
__asm volatile(".option norelax");
10
__asm volatile("la gp, __global_pointer$");
11
__asm volatile(".option pop");
12
13
main(1, (char**)0);
14
}
15 }
Listing 3.8: main.cc file for starting the program
3.5.2
Examples with Tests
The library includes some examples with corresponding tests, which are used for verify-
ing that the systems are working as expected. The hello world example is a natural place
to start, as this loads some modules and prints to the output. This is primarily a test
of the compilation and debug logger. The test was used to make the first modifications
of the system, such as setting up the global pointer. This was not needed before, as
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Neural Network Execution
39
the other programs written for the processor did not use this. This was found through
debugging, as explained in Section 3.2, by using a Spike simulator as reference. When
using the Spike simulator, it has its own linker script and flags that should be used.
Therefore, a new target was made for the TF Lite Micro, which targets a Spike 64-bit
simulator. The reason for using the 64-bit simulator is that this is the default Spike
version. The functionality is almost identical.
The functionality of the test was also verified by running it on an FPGA with the
program loaded onto it. This resulted in the same output on UART as was seen in the
simulator.
3.5.3
Micro Speech
The next test to do is a larger test that runs a neural network. For this, the micro speech
example was used, which can detect whether an audio clip contains ”yes” or ”no”. This
is very similar to the neural networks that was trained, just a simplified version.
One issue with this example is that is uses dynamic memory allocation for performing
the FFT calculations. The FFT is calculated using the KissFFT library [Mbo]. This
requires support for malloc, calloc and free functions, which are not defined in the pro-
cessing system. An allocation library can easily be used to enable this feature, but as
the system will not be using the KissFFT library, this was not implemented. An actual
system will be using an accelerator for calculating the FFT. However, in order to test if
the rest is working, there were pre-calculated versions of the FFT available as memory
arrays. These were used instead, to test the actual neural network and not as much the
pre-processing of it.
The profiler was used on this test, which gives a good indication as to what func-
tions should be optimized. Figure 3.1 shows a graph of the 100 functions that most
time was spent in. As can be seen, the vast majority of the time is spent in a very few
functions. The most time, a total of 58,699,447 cycles, was spent in a function for depth
wise convolution, so this is the first function that should be accelerated or offloaded. For
comparison, the second and third most heavy functions used 37,984,322 and 11,51,296
cycles, which were both a part of the depthwise convolution as well.
Furthermore, the profiler can find exactly what part of a function that the function
spends time executing. Figure 3.2 shows a graph of a section of the program. It has a
total of 252 instructions from the function that the most time was spend in. This shows
how even in this function, most of the time is spent in only around 100 instructions.
==PAGE:56==
40
3 RISC-V
0
20
40
60
80
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Loss
Function execution time
Figure 3.1: Cycles spent in the 100 functions with the most cycles spent.
0
50
100
150
200
250
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Loss
PC execution time
Figure 3.2: Time spent per address in the single most used function.
3.6
Importance of Extensions
When using different extensions, the number of instructions that can be performed is
increased. This has the benefit of being able to compute faster, as there are more specific
instructions for the needed operations. For instance, a byteswap, that reverses the order
of the bytes in a word, takes several instructions using the normal instruction set. This
would require storing the intermediate value into a register while shifting and AND’ing
for each byte. A hardware instruction would not take a lot of hardware, as the internal
lines just need to be swapped, in order to do it in a single cycle. Therefore, this can
potentially reduce the number of instructions needed from ∼20 instructions to only a
single instruction, which gives much faster execution and a smaller code size.
Table 3.1 shows the memory consumption for the TF lite micro_speech test pro-
==PAGE:57==
3.7 Compiler Optimizations
41
gram, which was compiled with different RISC-V extensions. This test comes relatively
close to a real-life program, which has to execute a neural network. As can be seen,
the addition of the M extension reduces the code size by ∼2.4%. This is not a lot, but
the execution time is greatly reduced. The C extension allows for using compressed in-
structions. This adds several compressed instructions, such as add and subtract, which
only uses half a word. This adds some hardware, as instructions are no longer word
aligned. Furthermore, the processor needs to decide on whether the PC should increase
by 2 or 4, depending on the instruction. However, as can be seen here, the code-size is
reduced by ∼16%. When adding support for atomic instructions using the A extension,
the code-size compared to the simplest processor is reduced by 23%. The reduction
comes from performing atomic operations, such that data does not have to be loaded
into and out of registers as much. Further improvements can be performed, but for them
to be viable, the compiler needs to understand what they do and how to optimize for
them. Furthermore, the compiler needs to be compiled for the different permutations
of extensions that it used. A cross compiler can compile for some permutations but not
all.
Extensions
I
IM
IMC
IMAC
KB
117.6
114.8
101.0
90.5
Proportion
1
0.976
0.859
0.770
Table 3.1: Comparison of code-size when using different extensions
For an idea of the change in runtime, the micro speech program was run without
the M extension. This test took 6.5 hours to run compared to 1.5 hours when using
the M extension. Using the profiler, it was found that it ran for a total of 249,632,561
cycles compared to 99,704,151 cycles when using the M extension. That is a speedup
of 2.5 when using the M extension, which can do all the instructions in a single cycle.
Assuming a 10 MHz clock, these two tests would take 25 and 10 seconds to perform in
hardware. These tests were all run using the -Os compiler optimization flag.
3.7
Compiler Optimizations
Optimizations can be performed with different goals. One is to reduce unneeded code,
which pre-calculates results and stores these instead. Another optimization is by reduc-
ing the execution time using tools such as loop-unrolling. In loop-unrolling, a loop that
iterates a number of times is unrolled, such that the executed code is added a number
of times. This greatly improves the execution time for loops that only execute a limited
number of instructions. The more the loop is unrolled, the faster it runs but the larger
the binary also becomes. When unrolling a loop, there is a diminishing return for un-
==PAGE:58==
42
3 RISC-V
rolling, as the executed part of the loop becomes larger.
Because of the increase in code-size, other optimizations can be chosen, that reuses
more code. This has the drawback that it executes slower, but the binary size is re-
duced. The TF lite uses the -Os optimization, which goes for the smallest binary size.
For reference, when compiling without any optimization, it takes 130.6 KB for the IM
extensions, which is ∼14% more than the optimized version. When using the normally
used optimization for execution time, -O3, the program takes up 141.2 KB of space,
which is a 23% increase in code-size. The downside when using optimizations is a longer
compilation time. However, this is not really an issue for programs small enough to fit
in the processor.
The test case used is not the most representative, as it contains a lot of data in its
programs. This is because it has pre-sampled values and their results for comparison.
Therefore, it is expected that the impact of optimization and extensions is even larger for
an actual program. The current system has an issue with code using the -O3 optimizer
which must be fixed before being able to use this optimizer. The profiler can be used to
see the impact that optimizations has. A full power-estimation of a program can also
be performed, to see the most efficient implementations. This is further described in
Section 4.8.3.
A final note on optimization is that code may behave in a slightly different way than
described. For instance, the optimization may remove stores to addresses, when these
values are not used anywhere. Therefore, the functionality of the accelerators needs to
be tested, as explained in Section 3.2. This is done by using the volatile keyword in C
or C++, which tells the compiler that this variable may change at any point in time.
Therefore, no assumptions can be made of its value.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Hardware Implementation
This chapter will be going through the hardware aspect of the project, with sections for
some of the different accelerators and a major section for the RISC-V processor. This
section will also go through the needed configurations for testing on an FPGA. Finally,
there is a section on ASIC implementation for area and power estimation.
4.1
RISC-V
RISC-V was chosen as the processor architecture as this has wide support, is open source
and has different reference implementations with support for customization of the in-
struction set. The project has looked into using the Rocket Chip [Asa+16] as a baseline
for the processing system, which implements a very modular system written in Chisel.
However, a simpler implementation was desired, as Rocket Chip is more focused on a
full-fledged processor that can run an operating system. Therefore, it contains a lot of
unneeded features, such as large memory busses and, most notably, a 5-stage pipeline.
As the system is planned for using a slow clock period, of 10 MHz or slower, this is
overkill. Therefore, the baseline implementation uses the riscv-mini [Ucb] implementa-
tion, which only has a 3-stage pipeline implementation. This system is easier to run,
takes less hardware and is easier to extend as it has fewer modules in the beginning.
The three stages used are fetch, execute and write back. This system also has simple
caches for instruction and data, which can interface using the NASTI-interface, which
appears to be identical to the AXI-interface. However, this cache is not currently used,
as explained in section 4.3.1.1.
4.1.1
Processor Architecture
The riscv-mini is a 3-stage pipeline which can be seen in Figure 4.1. This is the baseline
implementation, which can be extended to include more extensions. The three stages
are Fetch, Execute and Write Back, where Fetch fetches the next instruction. Based on
the instruction, Execute reads the registers needed, calculates the branch and performs
the Arithmetic needed on the registers. It also calculates the address if the instruction is
a load or store. Write Back writes to the register file, writes or reads from the data cache
or updates the CSR register file. The CSR register file is the Control/Status Register
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Hardware Implementation
which contains information about the processor and can control certain aspects. For
instance, it contains a cycle counter which can be used for timing a system.
Figure 4.1: The riscv-mini pipeline. [Ucb]
We can see from the figure how it has support for register forwarding, such that the
same register can be saved to and then used in the next cycle. This would otherwise
need to stall a cycle, as the register file is stored synchronously. Because of this, there is
no need to stall the system. However, when a branch or jump is done, it will have read
one more instruction than what should be performed. Therefore, if a branch is taken,
a signal is given that turns the next instruction into a no operation (NOP) instruction.
This signal also decides whether the next PC is itself plus 4 or the branched address.
Another feature of the system is that it has support for handling illegal instructions.
If an illegal instruction occurs, which is any instruction that is not supported, then the
instruction is also turned into a NOP and the PC is set to an EVEC address, which
is the exception handler address. This is currently used in the simulation to end the
simulation with a failure. However, in a real system implementation, this can be used
to log the exception and restart the system into a safe state. Or for systems running an
OS, the thread running can be marked as bad while the rest of the threads continue.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 RISC-V
45
4.1.2
Custom Instruction
This section will go through the steps taken in order to add a byte-swap instruction,
which can change the endianness of a word. The first thing is to define the new instruc-
tion. This is done by extending the Instructions.scala file, so that it contains a new
line for the swap instruction. BitPat is used to recognize instructions based on the bit
pattern. The opcode is set to ”b0101010” and the func3 value is set to 0. This is all that
is needed to recognize an immediate function. The rest of the bits are for the immediate
value and the source and result registers.
1 def SWAP
= BitPat("b?????????????????000?????0101010")
The next step is to make the control circuitry understand the new instruction. This
is done in Control.scala, where a line for the instruction is added and the control flags
when the instruction is used is chosen. As this is an immediate instruction, it has the
same flags as, for instance, the xori instruction. The only flag that is different is the
flag for the ALU, that needs to know that it should perform a swap. This can be seen
in Appendix C.1.
Lastly, the instruction needs to be added to the ALU. Simple operations like this can
easily be added to the normal ALU. For more intricate instructions a new ALU may be
made, which then also requires modifying the datapath to include it. This is done for
the multiplication and fixed point extensions.
The ALU needs to add an enumeration of the swap operation, which is used by the
control circuitry to signal that it is a swap instruction. In this case, it is enumerated as
12:
1 object ALU {
2
val ALU_ADD
= 0.U(4.W)
3
val ALU_SUB
= 1.U(4.W)
4
val ALU_AND
= 2.U(4.W)
5
val ALU_OR
= 3.U(4.W)
6
val ALU_XOR
= 4.U(4.W)
7
val ALU_SLT
= 5.U(4.W)
8
val ALU_SLL
= 6.U(4.W)
9
val ALU_SLTU
= 7.U(4.W)
10
val ALU_SRL
= 8.U(4.W)
11
val ALU_SRA
= 9.U(4.W)
12
val ALU_COPY_A = 10.U(4.W)
13
val ALU_COPY_B = 11.U(4.W)
14
val ALU_SWAP
= 12.U(4.W)
15
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Hardware Implementation
16
val ALU_XXX
= 15.U(4.W)
17 }
The actual hardware is defined under the ALU module, where it checks the operation
flag and then chooses the needed operation based on that. If the instruction does not
match any of the entries, it will default to output the io.B value. A double hashtag
(##) is a concatenation operation in Chisel. This version only works for 32 bit imple-
mentations, but could have supported both versions based on the XLEN flag. Listing
4.1 shows the ALU module used.
1 class ALUSimple(implicit p: Parameters) extends ALU()(p) {
2
val shamt = io.B(4,0).asUInt
3
4
io.out := MuxLookup(io.alu_op, io.B, Seq(
5
ALU_ADD
-> (io.A + io.B),
6
ALU_SUB
-> (io.A - io.B),
7
ALU_SRA
-> (io.A.asSInt >> shamt).asUInt,
8
ALU_SRL
-> (io.A >> shamt),
9
ALU_SLL
-> (io.A << shamt),
10
ALU_SLT
-> (io.A.asSInt < io.B.asSInt),
11
ALU_SLTU -> (io.A < io.B),
12
ALU_AND
-> (io.A & io.B),
13
ALU_OR
-> (io.A | io.B),
14
ALU_XOR
-> (io.A ^ io.B),
15
ALU_COPY_A -> io.A,
16
17
//Custom instruction
18
ALU_SWAP -> io.A(7,0) ## io.A(15,8) ## io.A(23,16) ## io.A(31,24)
19
))
20
21
io.sum := io.A + Mux(io.alu_op(0), -io.B, io.B)
22 }
Listing 4.1: ALU module
4.1.3
Multiplication Extension
The multiplication extension for the RISC-V processor consists of instructions for some
permutations of integer signed/unsigned multiplication, division and remainder oper-
ations. This is very much needed for doing neural networks that primarily consists of
multiply and accumulate (MAC) operations. The current system implements all of these
operations in a single cycle operation, which is quite heavy for division and remainder.
Multiplications can also be optimized if permitting multiple cycles. This section will ex-
plain the changes that was done to implement the M extension and then the theoretical
approach for making this work in multiple cycles. An alternative is to use the -mno-div
flag in the compiler which states that no integer division instructions should be used
==PAGE:63==
4.1 RISC-V
47
and thereby allow not to have hardware for division and remainder.
The hardware behind the multiplication instructions are quite simple, as they only
need to do the same as when doing additions or other register operations. However, the
processor still needs to implement the different hardware. To have a dynamically syn-
thesizable system, riscv-mini uses a configuration-based approach. This makes it easy
to change implementation of units and what is supported. Listing 4.2 shows how the
configuration works, with XLEN being the processor bit width and FLEN is the floating-
point bit width. The ARCH is the architecture used based on the used extensions. The
Buildxxxx cases are the different units used. This allows for choosing different types of
implementations for different systems.
1 class FPGAConfig extends Config((site, here, up) => {
2
// Core rv32im
3
case ARCH => Seq('i','m')
4
case XLEN => 32
5
case FLEN => 32
6
case Trace => false
7
case BuildALU
=> (p: Parameters) => Module(new ALUArea()(p))
8
case BuildFALU
=> (p: Parameters) => Module(new FALUImpl()(p))
9
case BuildMALU
=> (p: Parameters) => Module(new MALUImplSingleCycle
()(p))
10
case BuildImmGen => (p: Parameters) => Module(new ImmGenWire()(p))
11
case BuildBrCond => (p: Parameters) => Module(new BrCondArea()(p))
12
case FREQ => 2000000
13
}
14 )
Listing 4.2: Config for riscv-mini
The Control.scala file is the one that contains information about all the available
instructions. When adding the multiplication instructions, this needs to be extended
with the new instructions. This handles all the control signals that needs to be used for
updating the PC, choosing registers, controlling the ALU, branching and more. This
also contains a flag that tells the processor whether it is a legal instruction. When hav-
ing all the multiplication instructions declared, this needs to be dependent on whether
the hardware is implemented. Furthermore, the instructions were also added to the
Instructions.scala file, which uses bitpatterns to recognize the different instructions in
the controller.
The hardware has been made by making a new ALU to keep the design modular.
The datapath first checks if multiplications should be included. It then generates the
multiplication ALU dependent on this flag. Throughout the datapath file, whenever
the multiplication ALU is used, it checks if the usingMul flag is true. Thereby, it only
connects the signals if there is an instance of the new ALU. Listing 4.3 shows all the
required code to add the ALU to the datapath. If the M extension is not chosen in the
configuration, then no hardware will be generated for the multiplications. This is one of
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Hardware Implementation
the powers of Chisel, which can dynamically add hardware as needed. The reason why
asInstanceOf is used, is that the m_alu val at line 2 is either an MALU class or a None
class if the if is false. Therefore, the compiler needs to be told that it should always
be treated like a MALU class instead of a Some class which is used when it could be
different classes.
1 val usingMul= p(ARCH).contains('m')
2 val m_alu = (if (usingMul) p(BuildMALU)(p))
3 ...
4 if(usingMul){
5
m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].io.rs1 := rs1
6
m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].io.rs2 := rs2
7
m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].io.alu_op := io.ctrl.malu_op
8 }
9 ...
10 if(!usingMul){
11
ew_alu
:= alu.io.out
12 }else{
13
ew_alu
:= Mux(io.ctrl.malu_op =/= MALU_XXX , m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].
io.out, alu.io.out)
14 }
Listing 4.3: Extracts of Datapath.scala showing the code needed for the multiplier.
The actual multiplication ALU can be seen in Appendix C.9, which is very similar
to the ALU.scala file for normal arithmetic’s. This is a very simple implementation
with single cycle operations for all the instructions. They are declared using built-in
operators so it us op to the synthesis tool to decide the implementation. However, as
division and remainder are very heavy operations, you would either exclude these and
do them in software or allow for multicycle operations. To use multicycle operations,
the entire pipeline can either be stalled until the result is computed, which is fine when
the operations are seldomly used. However, an alternative approach is to keep a flag
that tells whether a register is ready. This flag would normally be 1 for all the registers,
except when a multicycle operation was being performed. Then the result register would
be marked as not ready. The hardware would then have to stall if any of the flags of
the used registers were not ready and stall until they are both ready. This allows for
the processor to keep running while an unneeded register is computing.
4.1.4
Fixed Point Extension
To allow for decimal values, a set of fixed-point instructions were added with accompany-
ing hardware. These instructions used the same implementation as the F floating point
extension, which allows for reusing the design and compiler. The entire F extension has
not yet been implemented, but the basics have been made.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 SoC
49
The datapath has been modified like with the multiplication extension. But because
the F extension uses another 32 entry 32-bit register file, it needs some additional modifi-
cations as well. Appendix C.2 shows the file for the datapath which contains the required
modifications. The primary difference compared to the multiplication extension is that
it has a new set of control signals. It also changes some of the control signals for the old
control unit, as there are instructions for passing data back and forth when converting
a fixed-point number to an integer and vice versa. Furthermore, it also needs to be able
to perform load and store instructions, which requires some modification to the memory
connection.
The hardware for computing an instruction is defined in a new ALU, which can be
seen in Appendix C.3. This is very similar to the normal ALU, just with the fixed-point
instructions instead. One of the differences is that it needs to be able to read three
registers at a time, as there are multiply and accumulate instructions. Besides this,
the ALU is a saturating ALU, so if a value is too large or too small to be represented,
the value is set to the maximum or minimum value. As of right now, the implemented
instructions of the F extension are:
• FADD_S -> Addition
• FSUB_S -> Subtraction
• FMUL_S -> Multiplication
• FLW -> Load word
• FCVT_W_S -> Convert Fixed point to signed integer
• FCVT_WU_S -> Convert Fixed point to unsigned integer
4.2
SoC
This section will go through the definition of the system. How different modules are
chosen and added to the system. It also explains the generation of needed files for the
firmware as well as a full system test.
4.2.1
System Overview
The entire system is based on a memory arbitration system which can easily be extended.
Figure 4.2 shows one possible configuration which includes an FFT accelerator, an ADC,
several memories and a single RISC-V processor. The accelerators are units only made
for doing calculations or moving memory around. These accelerators may have one or
more memory links but should always have an MMIO-interface. These interfaces will
be explained in section 4.4. The peripherals are an extension of the accelerator modules
==PAGE:66==
50
4 Hardware Implementation
that also includes a PinIO port, for connecting to the outside world. It is seen that the
ADC and XADC modules are connected to each other. This is to simplify the processing
system, as the ADC is a wrapper for the XADC, which is an FPGA specific implemen-
tation of an ADC. The memories are also defined with a generic interface, which makes
it simple to add new either RAM or ROM components.
Processors
Accelerators
ADC
0x80002000
20B
FFT
0x80003000
12B
ICache
DCache
RISCV-Mini
MemIO
MemIO
Memory Arbitration
MMIO
MemIO
UARTIO
UART
0x80000000
12B
MemIO
MMIO
BootROM
text
0x00000000
0x000007FF
MemIO
BootROM
data
0x00010000
0x000101FF
Main Memory
0x20000000
0x2000FFFF
MemIO
Audio
Memory
0x30000000
0x300003FF
SPIIO
MMIO
MemIO
SPI
0x40000000
16B
SoC
Memories
Peripherals
XADCIO
XADC
0x80001000
16B
SevSegIO
MMIO
SevenSeg
0x80000010
2B
MMIO
MemIO
MMIO
GPIOIO
MMIO
GPIO
0x80004000
8B
Figure 4.2: Top level system overview. The hexadecimal values are the starting address
(and ending address for memories), while the bottom B is the number of bytes in the
registers in the units.
4.2.2
Adding Modules
The SoC level is where the system is designed. That is, this is where the modules and
how many are chosen. This is also where the memories of a given size are attached. The
following sections will describe how the different types of modules are declared. Listing
4.4 shows the connection of the modules as shown in figure 4.2. The PinIO of the periph-
erals are connected to the port of the SoC. The Modules is a list of the modules which is
used for connecting to the memory arbiter. The arguments of the different modules are
the addresses used and any configuration specific information. For instance, this could
be used to make a generic sized FFT accelerator, so the system could have one for 64
==PAGE:67==
4.2 SoC
51
taps and another for 128 taps.
1 //Define peripherals
2 val sevenSeg = Module(new SevenSegmentMMIO(0x80000010L , 0, "
SevenSegmentModule"))
3 io.sevenSeg := sevenSeg.pins
4 val spi = Module(new SPIMMIO(0x40000000 , 1))
5 io.spi <> spi.pins
6 val uart = Module(new UARTMMIO(32000000, 0x80000000L , 2))
7 io.uart <> uart.pins
8 val xadc = Module(new XADC(3,0x80001000L , sim))
9 io.xadc <> xadc.pins
10 val adc = Module(new ADCMMIO(4,0x80002000L))
11 xadc.mmio <> adc.xadc_mmio
12 val gpio = Module(new GPIOMMIO(0x80004000L ,6))
13 gpio.pins <> io.gpio
14
15 //Accelerators
16 val fft = Module(new FFTMMIO(0x80003000L ,5))
17
18 val modules = Seq[MMIOModule](
19 sevenSeg ,
20 spi,
21 uart,
22 adc,
23 fft,
24 gpio
25 )
Listing 4.4: Adding modules to the SoC.
The next point is the connection of the MemIO ports, which has to be done for only
some of the modules. This is done in the same way as with the modules, just with a
sequence of MemIO ports instead.
1 //Test module that makes memory requests to check robustness
2 val tester = Module(new MemTester())
3
4 val memLinks = Seq[MemIO](
5
tester.memLink ,
6
spi.memLink ,
7
uart.memLink ,
8
adc.memLink ,
9
fft.memLink
10 )
The same principle applies to the memories, but this will be explained further in the
next section. The final part of the SoC is to connect all the modules and memories to
==PAGE:68==
52
4 Hardware Implementation
the memory arbiter. This is done using three loops, which runs automatically.
1 val memArbiter = Module(new MemArbiterFPGA(modules , memLinks , memories))
2
3 for ((mmio, index) <- modules.zipWithIndex) {
4
memArbiter.io.mmios(index) <> mmio.mmio
5 }
6
7 for ((mem, index) <- memLinks.zipWithIndex) {
8
memArbiter.io.memLinks(index) <> mem
9 }
10
11 for ((mem, index) <- memories.zipWithIndex) {
12
memArbiter.io.memories(index) <> mem
13 }
4.2.3
Code Generation
Defining new accelerators, peripherals or memories is easy in the system. Due to the
centralized point of implementation, this can also create the needed files for the firmware.
For instance, the linker script should contain information about the memories available
in the system. This linker script can be written at hardware generation time, such that
it always matches the hardware. This is easily done in Chisel when Scala is available.
The different modules defined have unique names which can be used when generating a
header define file for the firmware. This would define the modules with their names to
certain addresses, such that if the addresses change, the header file will automatically
change to reflect this. This is part of what is normally referred to as the board support
package (BSP). This greatly simplifies the required knowledge of the full system and
allows for developing on multiple versions using the same software.
4.3
Memory
The current processor uses a memory arbitration system for the processor to access the
registers of the different accelerators. Furthermore, the accelerators can have their own
memory-link such that they can access the needed memory on their own. This section
will describe the memory arbitration from a hardware view while section 4.4 describes
the implementation using Chisel.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Memory
53
4.3.1
Memory Arbitration System
The memory arbiter uses a simple arbitration system such that each memory can be
reached by all units. Each of the memories has an arbiter to allow for parallel access.
The SoC has multiple memories, such as the bootrom which is used for the bootloader,
a main memory for containing the executed code and then the possibility of memories
that can be used for different data management. The current system has a one-to-all
memory arbitration, such that the processor and all the accelerators with memory links
can access each of the memories. Only one port is available for each memory so an
efficient implementation will have different elements accessing different memories. For
instance, the processor should have a memory which is only used for the instructions
and then another memory to contain the stack, heap and static memory. Otherwise,
it would take two cycles each time an instruction has to perform a load or store, as it
would need to read an instruction at the same time as it needs to save or load a register.
4.3.1.1
Main Memory Arbitration
The current solution uses a priority-based arbitration system, such that we can control
which components has the highest priority. In the case of a single processor and accel-
erators that has only few memory accesses, this version works fine when accessing the
same memory, as long as the instruction and data ports of the processor has the lowest
priority. Otherwise, these would starve anything with a lower priority, as we need to
access an instruction every single cycle. A starvation would also happen if multiple
processors were connected in this way, as one of the processors would always get its
request granted. One solution is to change to a round-robin arbitration system, which
is as simple as changing the automatically generated arbitration module.
The riscv-mini implementation has implementations for instruction- and data caches,
but these are not used as of right now. This was an active choice, to have as simple
a system as possible. However, it is possible to implement instruction caches for the
processors such that they need to do fewer requests to the main memory. This, however,
can still lead to starvation if the highest prioritized processor runs in a loop that is
too big for the cache, such that it constantly requests the main memory. A combined
solution would be to use a round robin arbiter with instruction caches for the processors.
A data cache does not seem all that beneficial, as all the units are memory mapped and
should be able to compute on the same memory. A stack cache, on the other hand,
could prove useful.
4.3.1.2
Network on Chip
Yet another solution would be to use a Network on Chip (NoC) to interface either the
entire or parts of the system. It could be beneficial for certain accelerators to have its
==PAGE:70==
54
4 Hardware Implementation
own local memory with a ”slower” access time to the main memory or other accelera-
tors memory. One such implementation could use [Pet+19], which has fast single-cycle
access to its own dedicated memory with slower reads/writes to other memories. This
solution would also spread out the possible position of the accelerators such that they
would not all need to be routed to the same memory arbiter. And as long wires on
both FPGAs and ASICs consume a lot of power and adds to the propagation delay, this
could allow for much more efficient utilization of power and area. Figure 4.3 shows a
possible implementation of this using a bi-torus NoC. For a 3x3 solution like this using
the implementation detailed in [Pet+19], read/write operations to any other node would
take at most 10/16 cycles.
Processor
FFT
GPIO
UART
SPI
ADC
SevenSeg
Bootrom
RAM
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Router
& NI
Figure 4.3: Bi-torus NoC implementation of SoC. NI is the network interface
When looking at an FFT accelerator that needs to be continuously running, this
needs to have a certain amount of data allocated for it. This could be allocated at
synthesis time as this does not change with programming. A system can then be co-
ordinated such that the audio sampling accelerator will save the samples directly to a
part of the FFT memory which can, after processing a window, store the result into
the memory of the next accelerator that needs this. Or it can just have it stored in its
memory, where the different needed accelerators can access it directly. This would be
programmable, such that a register tells the FFT accelerator the address of where to
store the result and this would then determine where the result was saved.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Memory
55
4.3.2
Simple Dual Port Memory
When working with neural networks, the primary concern is often the memory, which
is a bottleneck for the system. This is due to the large amount of weights and neurons
that needs to be processed where there is simultaneously a large amount of data moving
around. If there was enough hardware, it would be possible to do in-place computation
but as a fully connected layer would need to use all the inputs for each output, this is not
practically feasible. This also goes for the FFT unit, which needs to store intermediate
results for the next round.
For an FFT, there needs to be the same amount of writing as reading, which has to
be done at the same time. Therefore, a dual-ported memory would double the possible
bandwidth. And for an accelerator that, for instance, calculates activation functions, it
either needs to do this in-place or store it into another location. And when working with
many accelerators that needs to access memory in parallel, two ports is better than one.
However, as power is paramount for hearing aids, we need to take care. A further
analysis should be done for different memories using memory compilers for ASICs, but
as SRAM normally needs to have wiring for both writing and reading, a simple dual
port memory is probably not that much larger compared to a single port memory. And
it is definitely smaller than a true dual port memory.
When it comes to special types of memories, it is also possible to have memories
with multiple read ports and only a single write port, which is beneficial for reading out
weights which only needs to be changed rarely. However, as the system is clocked quite
slowly, the memories could also be ”overclocked”, such that they can handle multiple
requests per ”normal” clock cycle. This, however, increases the power consumption. So,
this is a question of how much area is available, what power budget and the amount of
memory needed. The SoC solution can easily change the used memory types, as this is
all done in a single memory arbiter.
4.3.3
Memory Divisions
Depending on the memory system used, a possible extension of the system is to use mul-
tiple blocks of memories. For this system, a set of rules can be applied to simplify the
connections, as the current solution requires a memory arbiter on each memory available.
A set of smaller memories, for the accelerators to use, could use the simple dual port
principle, such that at any given time one accelerator or processor may read from the
memory block while another writes to it.
One of the rules of the system could be that only a single memory-link can read at a
time and one memory-link doing a write. This greatly simplifies the memory arbitration
system, as this can be made from a set of OR-gates, where the address (and data if
==PAGE:72==
56
4 Hardware Implementation
write) lines are a large OR-gate of all the memory connections. And each of the memory
connections should then have an AND-gate such that it only shows a non-zero address
or data line if it is currently writing to that memory. The AND-gate would be controlled
by the current address and the enable signal. This removes the need of specific arbitra-
tion which allows for more individual memories and, thereby, more bandwidth. Figure
4.4 shows the principle of one such arbitration system. The demux only send non-zero
values out to the selected output. For this example, the memories have 213 entries each.
The 13th and 14th bits choose which memory is written to.
The drawbacks of this approach are that the programmer needs to have information
on when the different accelerators are running and what memories are currently being
used. This is not much harder than managing a scratchpad memory but do allow for
bugs. Another issue is that the memories would have a certain size and if a piece of
memory needs just a bit larger than a block, then it would require two blocks. This
problem can also be solved by just having these limitations known when programming.
The program can be modified to fit the memories, where neural networks can often be
tweaked, and the exact number of neurons does not really matter. Except for the num-
ber of output neurons.
A testing system can be implemented using a full arbiter for all of the memories,
where there is hardware which monitors the number of requests the arbiter gets at any
given time. If it gets more than one request in a cycle, then it raises an error flag which
allows for debugging the problem without breaking the functionality of the system (one
error could occur if having the UART write out from a buffer stored in a memory, which
can take a lot longer than expected). One of the major drawbacks is that it can be hard
ADC
FFT
UART
Addr
Addr
Addr
Data
Data
Data
Memory 0
Memory 1
Memory 2
Memory 3
[14:13]
[12:0]
[14:13]
data
addr
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
data
addr
data
addr
data
addr
(2)
(3)
(4)
4*addrB
4*dataB
4*addrN
4*dataN
addrB[0]
addrN[0]
dataB[0]
dataN[0]
addrB[1]
addrN[1]
dataB[1]
dataN[1]
addrB[2]
addrN[2]
dataB[2]
dataN[2]
addrB[3]
addrN[3]
dataB[3]
dataN[3]
Figure 4.4: Arbitration with mutually exclusive inputs
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Accelerators
57
to keep memory at 100% bandwidth, as this requires the accelerators or processors to
make a memory request every cycle. A memory-arbitration system, which accepts mul-
tiple requests at a time, will allow for a higher utilization rate for less memory-hungry
accelerators.
4.4
Accelerators
Accelerators can be dynamically added to the system using Chisel and a dynamic mem-
ory arbitration system.
This section will go over the different aspects of adding an
accelerator to the system. This starts with a basic GPIO ”accelerator” and afterwards
extends to memory-interfacing accelerators.
4.4.1
Memory Mapped Units
The accelerators in this system are all memory mapped, such that a processor can per-
form writes and reads from all the connected accelerators. An easy implementation is
to have registers in the accelerators that are read or written from the processor. Alter-
natively, the units may work directly on the request. This, for instance, could be if an
address is used as an enable signal, that will start the accelerator.
The GPIO unit will here be used to show the connection that needs to be done, as
this is an easy implementation using only registers. The definition of the class can be
seen in Listing 4.5. The argument val address is the starting address of the accelera-
tor. This does not need to be considered, as the memory arbiter only sends through
addresses from 0 to the number of bytes in the accelerator. The value is used for the
memory arbiter, that needs to map it. The argument val index is used to index multiple
units, such that they can have different numbers when having more of the same units.
The implicit value is for information about the system, which can be used to extract
information about whether it is a 32- or 64-bit system.
1 class GPIOMMIO(val address: Long, val index : Int)(implicit val p:
Parameters) extends MMIOModule with PinIO {
2 ...
3 }
Listing 4.5: Definition of GPIO MMIO module
We can see that this class extends the MMIOModule instead of the normal Module.
This is because these units need to have some values in order to be connected to the
memory arbiter. This is a trait which can be seen defined in Listing 4.6. What this
means is that anything that extends this needs to define the val as can be seen. This
comes from the object-oriented approach of Scala, such that different modules can be
==PAGE:74==
58
4 Hardware Implementation
referenced in the same way and dynamically connected.
1 trait MMIOModule extends MultiIOModule {
2
val index : Int
3
val moduleName : String
4
val address: Long
5
val mmio : MMIO
6
val numBytes : Int //Number of byte addressable registers.
7 }
Listing 4.6: Trait for MMIOModule
When looking at that trait, we can see that this extends the MultiIOModule, which
is a special type of the Module object, which allows for multiple IO ports. Normally,
the ports need to be a bundle under a val named io. In the case of the GPIO unit, it
needs two sets of ports. It needs the MMIO port for the processor to communicate, but
it also needs the PinIO port because it needs to have pins to the outside world. This
is also why the GPIOMMIO has the with PinIO in its declaration. All this trait is, is
that the module should have a port called pins. These are then used in the top level
connection, as was shown in section 4.2.2. MMIO is a bundle that contains a memory
request and memory response channel. The rest of the classes for MMIO units can be
seen in Appendix C.4.
For the actual definition, we now need to have all the definitions in order to comply
with MMIOModule and PinIO. Lines 1 through 4 of Listing 4.7 shows the needed val,
in order to comply. The moduleName, as we can see, is given a meaningful name which
then ends with the index. In that way, we can have multiple units of the same type.
After this, we have some wires defined and their connections in lines 8 through 13. Lines
15 to 27 is the needed code in order to update the registers and answer read requests
from the processor.
1
val numBytes = 8 //21 inputs and 16 outputs
2
3
val mmio = IO(new MMIO())
4
val pins = IO(new GPIOIO())
5
6
val moduleName = "GPIO" + index.toString()
7
8
val leds = Reg(Vec(16,Bool()))
9
val out = Reg(UInt(32.W))
10
11
pins.leds := leds
12
13
mmio.resp.bits.data := out
14
15
when(mmio.req.valid) {
16
switch(mmio.req.bits.addr) {
17
is(0.U) {
==PAGE:75==
4.5 FFT Accelerator
59
18
when(mmio.req.bits.mask =/= 0.U){
19
leds := mmio.req.bits.data
20
}
21
out := leds
22
}
23
is(4.U){
24
out := pins.but_l ## pins.but_r ## pins.but_u ## pins.but_d ##
pins.but_c ##
pins.switches.asUInt
25
}
26
}
27
}
Listing 4.7: Trait for MMIOModule
As we can see, the only missing class is the GPIOIO used in line 4 in Listing 4.7.
This is defined in the same file as the GPIO unit is defined and this contains information
about the pins that should go to the unit. This can be seen in Listing 4.8, which extends
Bundle, as this is how we declare groups of signals. This GPIO unit has 16 switches
(defined as Vec but could have been defined as UInt as well), 16 leds and 5 buttons,
which match up with the available GPIO on the Basys 3 FPGA development board.
This can easily be modified for other boards.
1 class GPIOIO extends Bundle{
2
val switches = Input(Vec(16,Bool()))
3
val leds
= Output(Vec(16,Bool()))
4
val but_l
= Input(Bool())
5
val but_r
= Input(Bool())
6
val but_u
= Input(Bool())
7
val but_d
= Input(Bool())
8
val but_c
= Input(Bool())
9 }
Listing 4.8: GPIOIO definition
4.5
FFT Accelerator
This Section will go over some of the aspects of pre-processing performed on the sampled
audio before being fed to a neural network. A spectrogram is the frequency response of
a signal in a set of timesteps. The frequency response of a small part can be obtained
using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), which is a highly optimized function when
working on signal lengths which are a power of 2. The accompanying Chisel code for
the accelerator, as explained in the next sections, can be seen in Appendix C.5. This
includes a version for both a single memory link and a version for two dual ported mem-
ories.
The following subsections will go through the FFT unit, starting from the absolute
basics of the FFT and then explaining the implementation of the different units needed.
==PAGE:76==
60
4 Hardware Implementation
Throughout, we will be using generic terms, but it is important to note that data values
are assumed to be in a signed fixed point format, where the input samples can obtain
values in the range [-1;1[.
As the FFT needs to be performed every time n samples has been obtained, this
is a recurring and cyclic operation. Therefore, the processor would need to do a lot of
operations to compute the entire FFT each time this happens and thus would need to
use a large amount of its time on this. Instead, the accelerator can calculate while the
processor is doing other operations and is in that way a ”free” operation when consider-
ing the time used. Given that a 128 tap FFT is needed with 50% overlap and a sampling
rate of 20 KHz, the FFT would need to be able to process one full FFT 312 times a
second. And given a 10 MHz clock frequency, this would give it 32000 cycles per FFT.
4.5.1
Basics of the FFT
The FFT is a very fast way to obtain a frequency domain representation of an audio
signal. This can be done using several levels of butterfly operations. The number of
levels needed is equal to log2(n) where n is the number of samples. And the number of
butterfly operations in each level in a radix-2 butterfly is n/2, as two inputs are used for
two outputs. Figure 4.5 shows the principle behind a decimation in time (DIT) FFT for
8 samples. When performing an FFT, there is either a decimation in time or decima-
tion in frequency, which affects the structure of the operations and the twiddle factors
used. A deeper explanation is readily available, such as in [Sla13]. Figure 4.5 shows a
decimation in time butterfly FFT unit, which is the baseline of the FFT implementation.
Figure 4.5: Decimation in Time FFT Buttterfly, [Sla13, Fig.1]
==PAGE:77==
4.5 FFT Accelerator
61
4.5.2
Butterfly Unit
As can be seen from Figure 4.5, there is a number of butterfly operations. A butterfly
operation is a complex operation following Equation 4.1, where y0 and y1 is the upper
and lower output and x0 and x1 is the upper and lower input. ωk
n is what is known as
the twiddle factor, where n is the number of samples and k is the value as seen in figure
4.5. All the values of the equations are complex numbers.
y0 = x0 + x1 × ωk
n
y1 = x0 −x1 × ωk
n
(4.1)
The hardware needed for the butterfly unit is quite simple, as it only consists of
additions and multiplications. It has three inputs (two samples and a twiddle factor)
and two outputs. The twiddle factor can either be applied to the input of a level or to
the output of a butterfly operation. But as explained in [Sla13], the easiest is to apply
it to the input of a butterfly operation, as this makes indexing the twiddle factor unit
easier. The twiddle factor unit will be explained in the next subsection.
The butterfly unit consists of a complex multiplier, a complex adder and a com-
plex subtractor. A complex adder/subtractor is a simple component, as it only requires
adding the real part with the real part and the imaginary part with the imaginary part.
The complex multiplier, on the other hand, is not just simply a multiplication between
the real parts and the imaginary parts. Equation 4.2 shows the equation given the real
and imaginary parts, where (a + bi) is a number with a being the real part and b being
the imaginary. The equation shows that we need to have four multiplications, one addi-
tion and one subtraction, which will give the result in its real and imaginary part.
(a + bi)(c + di) = ac + adi + bci + bdi2
= ac + adi + bci −bd
= (ac −bd) + (adi + bci)
(4.2)
After performing the complex multiplication, the butterfly unit simply needs to make
a complex addition and a complex subtraction to obtain the final result. As multiplica-
tions in hardware can be obtained in different ways, such as using pipelined or multi-cycle
implementations, a hardware implementation should take this into consideration. Other
than that, the butterfly unit can be a simple combinatorial unit.
Figure 4.6 shows a diagram of the butterfly unit designed. All the signal lines are
complex valued and in a fixed-point format. The specific format of the fixed point is
inconsequential to the principles shown but is important for the implementation. The
output of the adder/subtractor will be one bit larger as usual, but the output of the
complex multiplier needs to be shifted right with the number of fractional points. Fur-
thermore, to reduce the bit size, the upper bits of the result of the complex multiplier
==PAGE:78==
62
4 Hardware Implementation
is truncated. As the twiddle factor can only obtain a value in the range of ]-1;1[, the
result will be strictly smaller than the input. This is further elaborated in section 4.5.3.
Therefore, the output of the BFU unit possibly needs one more bit to represent the
results. The total bit size needed in the end occurs when all input values are 1, in which
case one more bit is needed in each level. If there is knowledge about the range of inputs,
it is possible to reduce the number of needed bits. However, the safe implementation
adds one bit per level.
BFU
a
b
Twiddle
2*n
2*n
2*n
Complex
Multiplier
Complex
Adder
Complex
Subtractor
2*(n*2)
a'
b'
2*(n+1)
2*(n+1)
Figure 4.6: Diagram showing a butterfly unit as used in the design. Notice that all lines
are complex valued, hence the 2*. Furthermore, only the lower bits (after truncating or
rounding the number of lower bits equal to number of binary points) of the output from
the complex multiplier is used for the following addition/subtraction.
4.5.3
Twiddle Factor
The next part of the FFT unit is the twiddle factor, which is different constants that
needs to be multiplied onto the values at different locations in the FFT calculation. For
the 8-point FFT, the twiddle factors can be seen as ω, ω2 and ω3. The value of the
twiddle factor is given in Equation 4.3, where i is the imaginary unit, k is dependent
on the position in the FFT calculation and n is the number of samples in the FFT. In
the case of the twiddle factors in Figure 4.5, k is 3 for ω3. When no twiddle factor is
mentioned, it is k=0, which gives e0 = 1, in which case it is just a multiplication by 1.
ωk
n = e−2πik
n
(4.3)
We need 4 complex constants for an 8-point FFT, which generalizes to the number
of samples in the FFT divided by 2. To obtain these values, we use a lookup-table with
pre-calculated values, such that we do not have to perform the heavy calculation for the
small amount of values needed. This is generated at hardware compile time. Chisel is
great for these kinds of units, as it can use Scala for calculating the array needed given
the arguments of the bit width and number of samples.
Listing 4.9 shows all the needed code to generate a twiddle factor ROM for a given
number of samples and bit width. This is a testament to the capabilities of Chisel for
==PAGE:79==
4.5 FFT Accelerator
63
generating hardware with the underlying capabilities of Scala.
1 class Twiddle(samples: Int, bitwidth: Int) extends Module{
2
val io = IO(new Bundle{
3
val addr
= Input(UInt((samples/2).W))
4
val twiddle_real = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
5
val twiddle_imag = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
6
7
})
8
9
//Here we calculate a ROM
10
val cos_array = for(k <- 0 until samples/2) yield math.round(math.cos
(2*math.Pi*k/samples)*(1<<bitwidth -1))
11
val sin_array = for(k <- 0 until samples/2) yield math.round(-math.sin
(2*math.Pi*k/samples)*(1<<bitwidth -1))
12
13
//If larger than what can be shown
14
val cos = VecInit((cos_array.map(t => (if(t == (1<<bitwidth -1)) (t-1)
else t).asSInt(bitwidth.W) )))
15
val sin = VecInit((sin_array.map(t => (if(t == (1<<bitwidth -1)) (t-1)
else t).asSInt(bitwidth.W) )))
16
17
io.twiddle_real := cos(io.addr)
18
io.twiddle_imag := sin(io.addr)
19 }
Listing 4.9: Twiddle ROM generator
4.5.4
Address Generation Unit
The controlling part of the FFT system is the address generation unit. As can be seen
in Figure 4.5, the incoming samples are not in-order. The reason for this is to simplify
the calculations and use the same type of butterfly unit throughout, as an 8-point FFT
needs to use sample 0 and 4 in the first level, which should reside at address 0 and 1.
In the second level, it would need to use address 0 and 2. And for the third level, it
needs to use address 0 and 4. The same goes for the other butterfly units in a similar
fashion. As all operations from level to level is independent of each other, it does not
matter in what order the butterfly operations are performed. Therefore, a reordering
of which butterfly operation is computed is possible, to simplify the address generation.
It is here seen that a bit left-rotation of the index and index + 1 with L bits leads to
two indexes used for indexing into the memory. L is the level of the FFT and index is
a number from 0 to 7 for an 8-point FFT which increments by two after each butterfly
operation. This is shown in equation 4.4. The reason for incrementing the index by two
is that we operate on two samples for every butterfly operation performed.
==PAGE:80==
64
4 Hardware Implementation
addrA = RotateLeft(index, L)
addrB = RotateLeft(index + 1, L)
(4.4)
When the indexing has gone through an entire level, the level is increased by one and
the receiving memory now becomes the sending memory, as we are working with the
idea of every other level being saved in one of two memory banks to allow for concurrent
reading/writing. If only a single memory is available, this can be alleviated by using the
bit that switches between the memories as a memory bit, such that if 5 bits are needed
for indexing each memory, the choosing bit would be the 6th bit.
The final part of the address generation unit is to generate the address for the twiddle
factor. The twiddle address is obtained by masking out the lower N-L-1 bits, where N
is the number of bits needed to represent the index (log2(n)) and L is the current level.
This can be seen from Figure 4.5 where N=3. At level 1, it needs to use ω2 at address
3 and 7 which corresponds to index 4 and 6, which in bits are ”b100” and ”b110”. The
lower 3-1-1=1 bit is removed, which leaves us with ”b10” and ”b11”. We then AND
with a number of leading ones equal to the current level, which is 1. This gives us the
addresses ”b10” and ”b10”.
As Figure 4.5 shows, the input has to be stored in a bit-reversed order. To overcome
this, a multiplexer has been added, such that the FFT requests the bit-reversed address
when in level 0. This adds a bit of hardware but simplifies operations for the processor
or other hardware that needs to store the initial samples.
4.5.5
Windowing function
To allow for overlap when doing the FFT, a windowing function is performed before the
FFT is done, such that the FFT component only needs to have a continuous signal as
input. However, as the solution uses a complex multiplier with a twiddle factor, it is
possible to apply this windowing function by using the multiplier and giving it another
value than the twiddle factors in the first level, as the twiddle values are all 1 in the
first level. This would require one more multiplier for the top part of the butterfly unit,
which multiplies by 1 when in all levels other than the first, where it multiplies by the
windowing function. When using a lookup table, this can be stored either in RAM or
ROM, where the benefit of the ROM is a smaller footprint, whereas storing in RAM
would allow for the processor to assign the windowing function and thus make it more
generic after tape-out.
The implementation of this is as simple as using a multiplexer, which chooses a value
from the windowing lookup-table when in level 0, where the value is chosen dependent
on the sample index, which is readily available.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 FFT Accelerator
65
4.5.6
Single Memory Link
As the FFT can compute its results much faster than needed, it is possible to use only a
single memory link to do the computations. This, however, requires that the two inputs
are obtained first and afterwards the two outputs are stored. To do this, a state machine
has been designed that reads two words, allows for calculating the result and then stores
two words. This state machine could also be extended, such that more time is allowed
for the multiplications performed, where the current solution does this in a single cycle.
Another improvement would be to use the notion of simple dual ported memory, as
explained in Section 4.3.2. In this case it would be possible to change the pipelining of
the system, such that it can perform a read and a write every cycle, when possible, and
as such double the bandwidth of the system.
4.5.7
Testing with Chisel
When working with hardware, we want to test that the system works as expected. Using
testbenches, it is possible to make modifications to the system and easily verify that it
is still working. The FFT accelerator contains both a unit test and integration tests.
Appendix C.6 contains all of the tests made for this. It implements a wrapper module
to handle the memory, but this could also have been done in software. The FFTCom-
ponentTest is the only unit test, which tests some parts of the address generation unit.
The FFTSingleTest tests the FFT accelerator with a single memory link. It takes an
input and generates a module based on the size of that input. It then prints the obtained
values of the FFT to the terminal, which can manually be verified. This could also have
been automated by calculating the FFT in Scala and then expect that the values are
the same within a certain threshold.
As Chisel has all of Scala as a backend, it is possible to make bit-accurate simula-
tions for use in other programs. For instance, the neural network training could use the
simulators to perform the FFT, so the input to the network is exactly the same as in
the hardware. This could be done using some sort of inter-process communication or
by passing the values back and forth using the terminal. And because Chisel is made
from Scala, which is made from Java, it is possible to run the simulation on any system
that contains a JVM. This is a powerful feature which greatly reduces the license and
software stack required to run tests, compared to having VCS, ModelSim or other com-
mercial simulators running the system.
==PAGE:82==
66
4 Hardware Implementation
4.5.8
Optimizations
To optimize the use of the FFT, which is an operation that needs to be performed every
n sample, it would be possible to make a flag from the ADC unit, which would flag
when the next part of the samples are ready for calculation. This is great for a real-time
system, where it is guaranteed to be able to finish the operations within time and would
free up even more processing power, as the processor would not have to keep track of
these two units, only an initial setup.
The simple solution for the FFT uses the memory which stores the samples for stor-
ing the intermediate results as well and as such would overwrite the samples. For a
system that runs automatically, this would require that the samples were either copied
over to the area when needed or to use a larger part of the memory for the calculations.
The accelerator can easily be changed such that it is possible to control this only by
writing to a register.
Another possible improvement would be to use a register file for the intermediate
results instead of the main memory. Given a 128 tap FFT, it would need to have 2
128 entry register files with a bit width of 32 bits. Depending on the size and type of
memories used, this would be more power efficient compared to constantly requesting a
large RAM. It would, however, take up some more area. A benefit would also be that
the registers are always available and thus speed up the execution time. And when done
processing, the module could be powered down for energy conservation.
4.6
Software Aspects
This section will go over some of the aspects needed when considering the software part
of the system. This includes the required tests and hardware for doing profiling, testing
and debugging of the system.
4.6.1
Testing
There are multiple tests that are performed for the different hardware units, but these
tests are only unit tests. That is, they make sure that the unit works as expected but
does not test the entire system. For this, we also need integration tests to verify that the
interaction between the different units are actually working. For this, a Chisel test has
been written that records the output of the UART. It saves the characters into a string
and when it gets a newline character, it prints this to the console when testing. The
tester then looks for the string to contain either ∼∼∼ALL TESTS PASSED∼∼∼or
∼∼∼SOME TESTS FAILED∼∼∼. If it does not contain any of them, then the tester
continues. If it gets the failed string, then an assertion is tripped which ends the test and
==PAGE:83==
4.6 Software Aspects
67
flags it as a failure. If it gets the passed string, then it finalizes the program and ends
the test without triggering a fail, which completes the test. Section 3.2 explains how
tests are written and added to the tester, while this section goes through the hardware
and Chisel aspect.
4.6.1.1
Adding Tests
the softare tests that was shown are very simple but can easily be extended to test units
such as the FFT unit. As we have an approximate idea of the error of using the fixed-
point number representation, we can test that the result of the FFT is within a certain
range to check that it works. But when we want to run many tests, we want it to be as
simple as possible to add new tests to the system. Therefore, the Chisel tester looks at
a file that contains a line per program that needs to be run. It then runs these either in
parallel or one at a time, depending on the settings. Parallel execution requires better
hardware, as it has to run a simulation of a full system per test running. An alternative
is to use Verilators multi-thread support, which allows for running a single simulation
on multiple threads. This is currently used for the very long tests.
4.6.1.2
TensorFlow Lite Micro Tests
The test strings comes from the TF Lite Micro tests, that prints either ∼∼∼ALL TESTS
PASSED∼∼∼or ∼∼∼SOME TESTS FAILED∼∼∼. This is the reason for these strings
being used. A Makefile has been made that compiles the TF tests to include them in
the test. One issue with these tests are that they are a major integration test, that tests
most functionalities of the TF library. Therefore, they take a lot longer to run. The
hello world test runs in several minutes while the micro speech test takes more than
an hour to complete. To accommodate this, the tester needs to increase the number
of steps before it times out. The timeout is a feature that stops a test from running
forever. An extension of the test would be to have an argument for how many cycles a
test is expected to run. An upper limit, so to say. When doing simple tests, there is no
reason to have these running for multiple hours each, if a small bug found its way into
the system. This is a simple addition to make but requires knowledge of the expected
runtime.
4.6.1.3
Post-Implementation Test
An important aspect about these tests is that they can also be run directly on hardware,
to verify the post-implementation functionality. This is done by flashing the test FPGA
and the FLASH to contain the processor and the program to execute. The UART in-
terface can then be monitored to check if it prints ∼∼∼ALL TESTS PASSED∼∼∼.
==PAGE:84==
68
4 Hardware Implementation
This is both a functional implementation test, but it is also a possible way of testing
larger programs faster. For instance, a program that takes multiple hours to run in a
simulation should only take a couple of seconds when running on an actual FPGA. Even
when considering the implementation time for running a full synthesis, this can be much
more efficient for the large programs. And if doing multiple tests, then the hardware
does not have to be re-implemented, only the programming file needs to be updated
with the new binaries, which is done in seconds.
The problem with the post-implementation tests is that the FPGA needs to be large
enough to accommodate the processor and the program running. The processor itself is
not particularly large but the memory might be an issue, as there is a limited amount
of block ram available. It is, however, easy to verify how large the memories may be by
synthesizing the design. Another bottleneck is the FLASH chip, that needs to store the
program. This also has to be large enough to contain the entire binary for the program.
Again, this can easily be computed, and a limit may be applied.
4.6.2
Debugging
Debugging is a major part of any hardware development. As a matter of experience,
using Chisel has removed some common bugs that occurs when writing VHDL but has
added some other. A common error with VHDL is that signals are connected wrong
when making adjustments to a system, due to multiple places that a signal needs to
be declared. As Chisel can connect directly between components, there is no need to
declare a lot of signals. VHDL also allows for a signal to have multiple drivers. This
is not allowed in Chisel so these errors will be brought forth at compilation time. One
issue that comes with this, though, is that Chisel applies a value to a signal or register
from the last assignment in the code. This is a feature which greatly reduces the number
of mutually exclusive cases that needs to be written. However, a forgotten assignment
can make the system misbehave.
When debugging, it works like in any other hardware system. A simulation is done,
and waveforms are inspected. It is arguably easier and faster to write tests in Chisel,
which should make people perform test-driven development instead of debug driven.
This is done by having tests for the different subcomponents of the system, so it is more
evident exactly where the error is. For instance, a number of tests can be performed
that adds random delays to a unit to see whether it is robust towards this.
The debugging of a processor is a bit more complicated, as this contains a lot of small
systems that could interfere with the result. For instance, if a wrong value is loaded
into a register, it could be a bug in the register loading, the memory request, memory
arbiter or even when storing the value in the memory in the first place. Or perhaps
the memory is out of range. To ease debugging a golden model can be used. This is
==PAGE:85==
4.7 FPGA Implementation
69
also referred to as co-simulation. In this project Spike has been used to compare the
steppings of a program. The PC can then be followed in both the simulation and on
Spike, which then shows when a wrong action occurs. This is still a very time-consuming
task and a proper co-simulation would be beneficial. This could compare the values of
the register file after each step, which will then show exactly when something goes wrong.
4.6.3
Profiling
Profiling is a powerful tool when optimizing a program, as it tells exactly where a pro-
gram has spent its time executing. The profiler is made using the integration test, which
runs the program with a pre-loading of the RAM. The test of the bootloader with an
attached FLASH chip is done in another test. The test is monitoring the UART to look
for the pass or fail strings, at which point it will end its execution. Alternatively, it
stops when the processor requests the EVEC address, which is a fault address. For each
cycle it runs, it notes the current PC into a hash map and then, just before it fails or
after it succeeds, it sorts the map and stores the time spent per instruction into a file.
The test that is run can be seen in Appendix C.7. After this is done, the information is
looked through in a script to generate a per function execution overview.
4.7
FPGA Implementation
When testing hardware, it is important to verify that the system actually works outside
of simulation. There are aspects that a functional simulation does not take into consid-
eration. For instance, a system needs to keep within some timing requirements and the
size of the hardware should also be within reason. In order to test the system an FPGA
wrapper has been made in Chisel, which connects the SoC level to a certain FPGA. The
Basys 3 development FPGA has been used for testing in this project, but the solution
has been kept general such that any FPGA can be swapped in with a minimum of mod-
ification.
4.7.1
Shells
Appendix C.8 shows the implementation of the wrapper, whose only purpose is to map
the connections between the IO of the SoC and on the development board. This connects
the wires for peripherals such as the seven-segment module, SPI and UART. The module
extends another module called the Basys3Shell. This module describes the development
board with its available IO. When using the shell, the top-level ports of the generated
Verilog code will have those exact names and can therefore be used to match an ac-
companying XDC file. This module also declares any board specific implementations,
==PAGE:86==
70
4 Hardware Implementation
such as clock generators. The Vivado clock generator is added to the system as a black
box implementation, which means that its port level is described. All that needs to be
done in Vivado is then to instantiate a version of this clock generator. Listing 4.10 shows
the needed code for this, where the wizard should be configured with three clock outputs.
1 class clk_wiz_0 extends BlackBox {
2
val io = IO(new Bundle {
3
val clk_in1 = Input(Clock())
4
val clk_out1 = Output(Clock())
5
val clk_out2 = Output(Clock())
6
val clk_out3 = Output(Clock())
7
val reset = Input(Bool())
8
val locked = Output(Bool())
9
})
10 }
Listing 4.10: Black boxing the device specific clock generator.
Another very hardware specific implementation is that the FLASH chip on the devel-
opment board is shared with the configuration file. Therefore, some special Verilog code,
the STARTUPE2, needs to be used to share this connection. This is also accomplished
using a BlackBox implementation. By doing this, there is no need for any external Ver-
ilog code, as this is inside the generated code. The SPI clock is then connected through
this component in the Basys 3 wrapper.
4.7.2
Clock Domains
The designed system only uses a single clock domain. However, one might want to add
other clock domains as well, for either faster or slower components. The system uses
a Mixed-Mode Clock Manager (MMCM), which takes the available 100 MHz clock and
converts it into one or more frequencies. To use this, the wrapper is wrapped with a
withClockAndReset statement, that changes the clock and reset for the part wrapped.
This would allow to have multiple clock domains or to fit more units of different frequen-
cies into the same FPGA.
1 class Basys3FPGASoC(memPath: String = "")(implicit override val p:
Parameters) extends Basys3Shell {
2
withClockAndReset(clock_32MHz , resetIn) {
3
implicit val p = (new FPGAConfig).toInstance
4
5
val soc = Module(new FPGASoC(sim=false, memPath= memPath))
6
7
...
8
9
}
10 }
==PAGE:87==
4.7 FPGA Implementation
71
4.7.3
Implementation Results
The system has been implemented on an Artix-7 FPGA where this section will go
through some of the implementation metrics. This is in regards to area and timing
for the rv32im configuration without division and remainder operators. Table 4.1 shows
the resource consumption. This shows how the datapath and the memory arbiter are the
primary consumers. As the modules are hierarchical, the > shows when a module is an
internal module of another. It is seen that the m_alu module is using 12 DSPs, which
is because it defines four 32 by 32 bit multiplications, instead of reusing the multipliers.
In comparison, the FFT unit uses only 4 multipliers. Another noticeable area hog is the
CSR module, which uses 842 LUTs and 397 registers. This can be greatly reduced, as
most of the CSR is not needed.
Name
LUTs
Registers
BRAM
DSPs
ASIC area [µm2]
Percentage
FPGASoC
5296
1726
36
16
1195024
100%
> adc
87
179
0
0
6060
0.5%
> audioSamples
168
3
4
0
423760
35%
> block
166
3
32
0
443879
37%
> bootromdata
82
28
0
0
2275
0.2%
> bootromtext
912
32
0
0
56563
4.7%
> core
2318
665
0
12
162937
14%
>> ctrl
142
0
0
0
840
0.07%
>> dpath
2168
665
0
12
162006
13.5%
>>> alu
321
0
0
0
4282
0.35%
>>> brCond
45
0
0
0
806
0.07%
>>> csr
842
397
0
0
15809
1.3%
>>> immGen
32
0
0
0
302
0.03%
>>> m_alu
205
0
0
12
73937
6.2%
>>> regFile
113
0
0
0
30249
2.5%
> fft
268
189
0
4
32803
2.7%
> gpio
22
36
0
0
957
0.08%
> memArbiter
1016
312
0
0
75873
6.3%
> sevenSeg
19
37
0
0
1263
0.1%
> spi
99
123
0
0
4024
0.33%
> uart
136
111
0
0
3961
0.33%
> xadc
4
8
0
0
595
0.05%
Table 4.1: Vivado and ASIC resource consumption for a rv32im implementation
==PAGE:88==
72
4 Hardware Implementation
This non-optimized version has a maximum frequency of 55 MHz on the FPGA, with
the execute stage being the critical path.
4.8
ASIC Implementation
As the system has been designed for hearing aids the ASIC implementation is important
as well. Chisel generates Verilog which should be readily available for ASIC synthesis.
This section will go through the experiences with this.
4.8.1
Synthesis
The system has been synthesized using Synopsys Design Tools with a 65 nm node. This
was done to verify that the synthesis tool understands the generated Verilog code. The
primary use is understanding and compiling memory, which is further elaborated in Sec-
tion 4.8.5. The critical path is identical to the one found for the FPGA implementation,
which is through the execute stage. When running a default synthesis for a clock fre-
quency of 10 MHz, the critical path was found to take 31 ns, for a max frequency of 32
MHz. This used standard voltage threshold transistors throughout. A second synthesis
was done for low power, which resulted in a critical path of 22 ns or 45 MHz. This used
high voltage threshold transistors through the entire critical path.
Figure 4.1 also contains two columns for the area consumption for the different
modules, to compare to the FPGA implementation. Notice that the large block memory
was manually reduced to the same size as the audioSamples RAM in order for the tool
to be able to elaborate it. It is seen that the two RAMs make up 73% of the area
consumption. We can also see that half of the area of the datapath is taken up by the
ALU for the multiplier.
4.8.2
Netlist Testbench
After synthesizing a netlist from the VLSI tools, they should be tested to verify func-
tionality. As the tools often only support VHDL and Verilog testbenches, this leads to
an issue with Chisel. The Chisel PeekPokeTesters needs to interact with the simulator
in order to perform the simulation. Without further investigation in the VCS support,
the Treadle and Verilator simulators does not support simulation with annotated delays.
Furthermore, Treadle works on FIRRTL code, so this cannot be used for a synthesized
netlist. Verilator works with the generated Verilog code and as such should be able to
work on the netlist instead. This, however, requires that the ports are named in the same
way. The best guess is that VCS will be able to run the simulation on the synthesized
netlist.
==PAGE:89==
4.8 ASIC Implementation
73
One possible way to reuse the tester would be to write a generic testbench in
VHDL/Verilog that can mimic the inputs to the system from a generated VCD file.
The testbench could then also test that the outputs are identical to what is seen in
the VCD file. This needs to take timing into consideration, so an exact match is not
expected but it should be identical at rising edges of clocks.
The testbench is used to both verify the functionality of the design but also to gain a
better estimate of the dynamic power consumption. In order to do this, a Switching Ac-
tivity Interchange Format (SAIF) file is used in the tools. This is obtained after running
a testbench with a full program or a set of test vectors. Alternatively, such a file can
be generated from a VCD file using the vcd2saif tool. Therefore, if a testbench can be
run on the netlist that generates a VCD file, it is possible to obtain a SAIF file from this.
A testbench written in Verilog or VHDL could always be used, but it would be a nice
feature to use the same tests as was used when testing the system in Chisel. However,
as Chisel is still an ongoing project, official support for this is still in the works. In
the case of this system, the testbench would only need to mimic a SPI based FLASH
chip which contains the program, as this is what the bootloader loads the program
for. This testbench would then use a binary file in the same way as the Chisel simula-
tor does. It should also have a UART decoder to verify that a program runs as expected.
4.8.3
Program Power Estimation
As different configurations and programs might have different power consumption, such
as when optimizing the C code for speed or size, a proper way of extracting this informa-
tion is needed. This is done using a testbench, as explained in the last section, that runs
a program on a simulation of the ASIC. This power consumption is then only measured
in the duration of the actual code running, to exclude any initialization consumption, as
this is only done when the processor boots up. These simulations are expected to take a
long time, as they have to take logical delay into consideration and a test would run for
a long time, to create a proper benchmark. However, this can be run over an extended
duration of time when certain programs needs to be tested.
The power estimation is done by generating a gate-level netlist with an accompanying
SDF file. This is then run through a simulator such as VCS, which supports simulat-
ing with delays. This generates a SAIF file which can then be applied to Synopsys
Design Vision for a more accurate power estimation. For an even more accurate figure,
post-layout power estimation can be performed in the same way. This is done by using
the Synopsys IC Compiler, which generates a post-layout netlist. The same testbench is
then used on this using VCS. After the simulation is done, a SAIF file is generated which
the IC compiler can then use to give an even more accurate power consumption estimate.
==PAGE:90==
74
4 Hardware Implementation
4.8.4
Clock Gating & Clock Domains
Clock gating is a very powerful tool when it comes to power consumption reduction.
Some synthesis tools support automatic clock gating of systems by analyzing the sys-
tems. It can then change enable signals for registers to clock gates instead. As Chisel
has an inferred clock and reset, this is not normally changed throughout the design.
However, larger designs often have multiple clock domains to help with timings or de-
pendent on the needed frequency for the different areas. Chisel does support multiple
clock domains by using the withClockAndReset or withClock where the clock can be
manually gated. This can also be used when internal clock generators are used, which
can be black boxed into the design.
4.8.5
ROM & RAM
Another important aspect when working with ASICs is that the power is highly depen-
dent on the memory used. The system uses both ROM and RAM in the design. When
the synthesis tool synthesizes a ROM, it will generate it using a gate implementation.
This is fine for small ROMs but for larger ROMs, the boolean equation becomes more
and more expensive. Therefore, for ROMs of a certain size, a compiler is used. This
ROM compiler is node specific, as it is highly optimized from the foundry’s side. When
doing a ROM, a single transistor is used to represent a bit. It then uses a via to de-
termine whether the bit is a zero or a one. Therefore, a ROM with a certain bit width
and a certain number of entries will use the same area, no matter the content. A gate
implementation is dependent on the content of the ROM. Therefore, when doing floor-
planning, it is easier to use compiled ROMs. They are also more power efficient as the
number of transistors needed are way less for moderately sized ROMs.
The same principles apply to a RAM, where it will be synthesized using multiplexers
and registers when done through RTL code. There are also node specific compilers for
RAM blocks. These are also much more efficient than a manual implementation, as the
transistor sizes used for these are smaller than what a transistor normally is allowed
to be. The RAM compilers are very node specific because the bit cells are heavily op-
timized from the foundry side. The design rules for the transistors are smaller than
conventional logic when doing this, but due to heavy analysis this can match a certain
yield for the process. Normally a 6-transistor memory cell is used for 65 nm nodes, where
higher transistor-counts are seldomly used in low power devices as the leakage power is
substantial for these designs and more transistors would increase the leakage.
The foundry often has an IP available for RAM and ROM, but these are often made
for speed. Therefore, alternative IPs should be used when doing very low power designs,
such as hearing aids, where a company such as Mobile Semiconductor makes IPs for this.
The bit cells are controlled by the foundry, to make the transistors as small as possi-
ble, so it is only the peripheral circuitry that can actually be modified for higher power
==PAGE:91==
4.8 ASIC Implementation
75
efficiency. It is possible to make custom bit cells, but these needs to follow common
design rules, which makes them around 20-30% larger compared to the bit cell from the
foundry. And this will then make it less power efficient.
Regarding one large RAM compared to multiple smaller RAMs, the number of bit
cells are the same. What changes is the peripheral controlling system of the RAM. It is
cheaper to have only a single controller for the cells, compared to multiple controllers for
more cells. That is, the leakage power increases when using more small RAMs. Where
there is a gain is that the dynamic power consumption decreases when dividing the mem-
ory, as the control circuitry that has to be driven is smaller and the internal lines of the
RAM is smaller as well. To get an actual idea of the power consumption would require
synthesizing designs with the different implementations and perform power calculations
on these. Because the memory is one of the primary power consumers in a design, it is
hard to validate the power feasibility of the system without using compiled memories.
==PAGE:92==
76
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis has found that making a neural network for trigger-word detection is possi-
ble. It was found that with the tools available it is possible to make a neural network
and convert it into a C++ implementation that can be run on bare-metal. The trained
networks showed good accuracy for inference.
It was also found that RISC-V is a good candidate for optimizing neural networks
using either custom instructions or memory mapped accelerators. To this, a lot of the
surrounding hardware was made which allows for simple modifications for further work
on the project.
Chisel was found to be a great language for describing such a system. It still has
some limitations regarding post-synthesis simulations, but as this is an on-going project,
this will be investigated later. Chisel has allowed for developing a much larger system
faster than what could have been done in VHDL in the same time span.
The resource consumption for the designed SoC has not given any indications of
being an issue. The future work is to make a complete system running an accelerated
network with power estimations for an ASIC.
==PAGE:94==
78
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[Asa+16]
Krste Asanović et al. The Rocket Chip Generator. Technical report UCB/EECS-
2016-17. EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, April 2016.
url: http://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-
2016-17.html.
[BBW96]
Peter. Bartlett, Anthony. Burkitt, and Robert C. Williamson. “Networks of
spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models”. In: Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Australian Conference on Neural Networks (acnn’96).
1996, page 261. isbn: 0731524292. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/2383202626.
[BKH19]
Timo Baumann, Arne Köhn, and Felix Hennig. “The Spoken Wikipedia Cor-
pus collection: Harvesting, alignment and an application to hyperlistening”.
In: Language Resources and Evaluation 53.2 (June 2019), pages 303–329.
issn: 15728412. doi: 10.1007/s10579-017-9410-y. url: https://nats.
gitlab.io/swc/.
[Chi]
Chisel/FIRRTL: Home. url: https://www.chisel-lang.org/.
[Cnn]
cnn.jpeg. url: https://miro.medium.com/max/2000/1*vkQ0hXDaQv57sALXAJquxA.
jpeg.
[Con]
Convolutional Neural Network Basics - Rohan Verma. url: https://rohanverma.
net/blog/2018/10/14/convolutional-neural-network-basics/.
[Fil]
File:Colored neural network.svg - Wikimedia Commons. url: https : / /
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Colored_neural_network.svg.
[Fre]
freechipsproject/chisel-bootcamp: Generator Bootcamp Material: Learn Chisel
the Right Way. url: https://github.com/freechipsproject/chisel-
bootcamp.
[Hen19]
John L. Hennessy. Computer architecture : a quantitative approach. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, an imprint of Elsevier, 2019. isbn: 9780128119051.
url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2305303279.
[Int]
Intro - Verilator - Veripool. url: https : / / www . veripool . org / wiki /
verilator.
[Mbo]
mborgerding/kissfft: a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) library that tries to
Keep it Simple, Stupid. url: https://github.com/mborgerding/kissfft.
==PAGE:96==
80
Bibliography
[On+06]
Chin Kim On et al. “Mel-frequency cepstral coefficient analysis in speech
recognition”. In: 2006 International Conference on Computing & Informatics.
IEEE, June 2006, pages 1–5. isbn: 978-1-4244-0219-9. doi: 10.1109/ICOCI.
2006.5276486. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5276486/.
[Pet+19]
Morten B. Petersen et al. “Time-predictable distributed shared on-chip mem-
ory”. In: Microprocessors and Microsystems 71 (November 2019), page 102896.
issn: 01419331. doi: 10.1016/j.micpro.2019.102896. url: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0141933118305611.
[Pyt]
PyTorch. url: https://pytorch.org/.
[Risa]
RISC-V - Wikipedia. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RISC-V.
[Risb]
riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain: GNU toolchain for RISC-V, including GCC. url:
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain.
[Sch19]
Martin Schoeberl. Digital Design with Chisel. Kindle Direct Publishing, 2019.
isbn: 9781689336031. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2473796752.
[Sla13]
George Slade. “The Fast Fourier Transform in Hardware: A Tutorial Based
on an FPGA Implementation”. In: ResearchGate (March 2013). url: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/235995761_The_Fast_Fourier_
Transform_in_Hardware_A_Tutorial_Based_on_an_FPGA_Implementation.
[Tena]
TensorFlow. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/.
[Tenb]
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/
lite/microcontrollers.
[Ucb]
ucb-bar/riscv-mini: Simple RISC-V 3-stage Pipeline in Chisel. url: https:
//github.com/ucb-bar/riscv-mini.
[Und]
Understanding RNN and LSTM - Towards Data Science. url: https://
towardsdatascience.com/understanding-rnn-and-lstm-f7cdf6dfc14e.
[Val17]
Jean-Marc Valin. “A Hybrid DSP/Deep Learning Approach to Real-Time
Full-Band Speech Enhancement”. In: (September 2017). url: https : / /
arxiv.org/abs/1709.08243.
[War18]
Pete Warden. “Speech Commands: A Dataset for Limited-Vocabulary Speech
Recognition”. In: (2018). url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
2408743806?single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%3DSpeech%2BCommands%
253A%2BA%2BDataset%2Bfor%2BLimited-Vocabulary%2BSpeech%2BRecognition%
26show_single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593.
[Wat15]
Andrew Waterman. “The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual”. In: (2015). url:
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2289582376.
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX A
Code for Neural Network
A.1
export_word.py
1 import soundfile as sf
2 import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET
3 import os
4
5 import numpy as np
6
7 from pathlib import Path
8 import librosa
9
10
11 words = dict()#Dictionary to hold the words
12 filesr = 33100 #SampleRate for output file
13
14 #Dir containing the wiki dirs
15 dirs = os.listdir("english/")
16
17 #Make the dir to contain the exported words
18 Path("words/").mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
19
20 #For each wiki entry
21 for dir in dirs:
22
print(dir)
23
path = "english/" + dir
24
try:
25
audioPath = path + "/audio.ogg"
26
tree = ET.parse(path + "/aligned.swc")
27
28
print("Adding: {}".format(audioPath))
29
#Load the audio for the entry
30
data, samplerate = librosa.load(audioPath ,filesr)
31
print(samplerate)
32
33
root = tree.getroot()
34
for n in root.findall(".//n"): #Finds all "n" elements in entire
tree
35
word = n.get('pronunciation').lower()
36
start = n.get('start')
37
end = n.get('end')
38
if start: #These must not be None
39
if end:
==PAGE:98==
82
A Code for Neural Network
40
#Make folder for the word in the entry
41
Path("words/" + word).mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=
True)
42
43
try:
44
info = open("words/" + word + "/list.txt","r")
45
lines = info.readlines()
46
index = 0
47
if(len(lines) >= 1):
48
lastLine = lines[-1]
49
index = int(lastLine.split(" ")[0]) + 1
50
info.close()
51
except FileNotFoundError:
52
index = 0
53
pass
54
55
#Extract the information needed
56
tempPath = "words/" + word + "/" + word + "_" + str(
index) +".wav"
57
with sf.SoundFile(tempPath , "w", samplerate=filesr,
channels=1) as f:
58
startSample = samplerate * (int(start) / 1000.0 +
0.1) #.1 second before and after
59
endSample = samplerate * (int(end) / 1000.0 + 0.1)
60
61
#Info about extracted words for debugging
62
info = open("words/" + word + "/list.txt","a")
63
info.write(str(index))
64
info.write(" ")
65
info.write(audioPath)
66
info.write(" ")
67
info.write(str(startSample))
68
info.write(" ")
69
info.write(str(endSample))
70
info.write("\n")
71
info.close()
72
73
#Save the audio clip
74
f.write(data[int(startSample):int(endSample)])
75
try:
76
words[word].append((audioPath , int(start),int(end)
))
77
except KeyError:
78
words[word] = [(audioPath ,int(start),int(end))]
79
except Exception as e:
80
print("{} failed".format(path))
81
print(e)
82
83
84 print("Went through all of Wikipedia")
85 print()
appendices/nn/export_word.py
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Code for RISC-V Software
B.1
hex_float_to_fixed.py
1 #Takes in a ihex file path, a dump.text path and an address offset.
2
3 import sys
4 import re
5
6 from codecs import decode
7 import struct
8
9 BPs = 16 #Number of bits for fraction
10
11 def int_to_bytes(n, length):
12
return decode('%%0%dx' % (length << 1) % n, 'hex')[-length:]
13
14
15 def bin_to_float(b):
16
""" Convert binary string to a float. """
17
bf = int_to_bytes(int(b, 16), 4)
# 8 bytes needed for IEEE 754
binary64.
18
return struct.unpack('>f', bf)[0]
19
20 def binfloat_to_binfixed(b):
21
f = bin_to_float(b)
22
23
print(f)
24
25
val = round(f*2**BPs)
26
27
print(val)
28
29
if val >= 2**31-1:
30
val = 2**31-1
31
print("Clipped to max value")
32
elif val <= -2**31:
33
val = -2**31
34
print("Clipped to min value")
35
36
hexStr = "%0.8X" % val
37
38
return hexStr
39
==PAGE:100==
84
B Code for RISC-V Software
40 #binfloat_to_binfixed("40866666")
41
42 ihex = sys.argv[1]
43 dump = sys.argv[2]
44 offs = sys.argv[3]
45
46 pattern = 'Disassembly of section (.+):'
47
48 #test = "Disassembly of section .text.startup:"
49
50
51 with open(dump) as f:
52
lines = f.readlines()
53
54 validSection = False
55
56 flws = []
57 for line in lines:
58
59
#Check if new section
60
result = re.match(pattern ,line)
61
if result:
62
if ".text" in result.group(1):
63
validSection = True
64
else:
65
validSection = False
66
else:
67
#If we are in a valid section , which is not a section name
68
if validSection:
69
#Match groups
70
#(address)(instruction)(name of instruction)
71
val = re.match("([0-9a-f]+):\t([0-9a-f]+) +\t([a-z]+)",line)
72
73
if val:
74
if "flw" in val.group(3):
75
print(line)
76
out = int(re.match(".*# ([0-9a-f]+) <.*",line).group
(1) ,16)
77
flws.append(out)
78
79
80 #Save each one as a set of byte addresses
81 flw_bytes = []
82 for flw in flws:
83
addresses = []
84
for i in range(4):
85
addresses.append(flw + i + int(offs ,16))
86
87
flw_bytes.append(addresses)
88
89 #Go through the hex file:
==PAGE:101==
B.1 hex_float_to_fixed.py
85
90 pattern = ":([0-9A-F][0-9A-F])([0-9A-F][0-9A-F][0-9A-F][0-9A-F])([0-9A-F
][0-9A-F])([0-9A-F]*)([0-9A-F][0-9A-F])"
91
92 with open(ihex) as f:
93
lines = f.readlines()
94
95
96 float_val = ""
97
98 floats = {} #address indexed
99
100 address = 0 #Base address
101 for line in lines:
102
match = re.match(pattern ,line)
103
104
if not match:
105
print("Line not matched")
106
print(line)
107
Exception("LINE DID NOT MATCH")
108
109
byteCount
= match.group(1)
110
addressLower = match.group(2)
111
record
= match.group(3)
112
data
= match.group(4)
113
checksum
= match.group(5)
114
115
if record == "00": #data
116
addr = address + int(addressLower ,16)
117
118
for byteAddr in range(int(byteCount ,16)): #For each byte in the
line
119
for flw in flw_bytes: #For each flw
120
for i in flw: #For each byte of the flw
121
if i == addr+byteAddr:
122
float_val = data[byteAddr*2:byteAddr*2+2] +
float_val
123
if len(float_val) == 8:
124
#print(float_val)
125
floats[i-3] = binfloat_to_binfixed(float_val)
126
float_val = ""
127
128
if record == "04":
129
#Extended linear address
130
address = int(data ,16) << 16
131
132
133
134
135 float_bytes = {}
136
137 for index in floats:
138
print(index, floats[index])
==PAGE:102==
86
B Code for RISC-V Software
139
for i in range(4):
140
float_bytes[index +i] = floats[index][8-i*2-2:8-i*2]
141
142
143 newlines = []
144 #Convert floats to fixed point
145 address = 0 #Base address
146 for line in lines:
147
match = re.match(pattern ,line)
148
149
if not match:
150
print("Line not matched")
151
print(line)
152
Exception("LINE DID NOT MATCH")
153
154
byteCount
= match.group(1)
155
addressLower = match.group(2)
156
record
= match.group(3)
157
data
= match.group(4)
158
checksum
= match.group(5)
159
160
if record == "00": #data
161
addr = address + int(addressLower ,16)
162
163
changed = False
164
for byteAddr in range(int(byteCount ,16)): #For each byte in the
line
165
if byteAddr+addr in float_bytes:
166
changed = True
167
line = line[:9+byteAddr*2] + float_bytes[byteAddr+addr] +
line[9+byteAddr*2+2:]
168
169
170
if changed:
171
tmp = line[1:-3] #Extract bytes
172
summed = 0
173
for i in range(int(len(tmp)/2)):
174
summed += int(tmp[i*2:i*2+2],16)
175
176
lsb = summed & 0xff #Only take the LSB
177
178
checksum = (-lsb)& 0xff
179
180
newlines.append(line[:-3] + "%0.2X\n" % checksum)
181
else:
182
newlines.append(line)
183
184
elif record == "04":
185
#Extended linear address
186
address = int(data ,16) << 16
187
newlines.append(line)
188
else:
==PAGE:103==
B.2 functionTimeExecuted.py
87
189
newlines.append(line)
190
191 with open(ihex + ".fixed", "w") as f:
192
for line in newlines:
193
f.write(line)
appendices/riscv/hex_float_to_fixed.py
B.2
functionTimeExecuted.py
1 #This python scripts takes a riscv executable file and a logging file of
PC and prints the time used to execute each function
2 #If a function calls another function , the time is spent in the other
function. So main will probably not be the one with the most execution
time.
3
4 import sys
5 from intervaltree import Interval , IntervalTree
6
7 import re
8
9 dumped = sys.argv[1]
10 logFile
= sys.argv[2]
11
12 tree = IntervalTree()
13
14 startInterval = 0
15 endInterval
= 0
16 intervalName
= ""
17
18 #Make itnervalTree for functions
19 with open(dumped) as f:
20
funcMatch = "([0-9a-f]+) <(.*)>:"
21
instMatch = "([0-9a-f]+):(.*)"
22
23
for line in f.readlines():
24
25
func = re.search(funcMatch ,line)
26
inst = re.search(instMatch ,line)
27
if func:
28
#print(func.group(1))
29
startInterval = int(func.group(1) ,16)
30
intervalName
= func.group(2)
31
elif inst:
32
endInterval = int(inst.group(1) ,16)+1
33
elif len(line) <= 1:
34
#Save into intervaltree
35
if startInterval != 0 and endInterval != 0:
36
#print(startInterval ,endInterval ,intervalName)
37
tree[startInterval:endInterval] = (intervalName ,0)
==PAGE:104==
88
B Code for RISC-V Software
38
startInterval = 0
39
endInterval = 0
40
41 #Update intervalTree with running time
42 with open(logFile) as f:
43
match = "Key: 0x([0-9a-f]+), value:([0-9]+)"
44
for line in f.readlines():
45
matched = re.match(match,line)
46
addr = int(matched.group(1) ,16)
47
number = int(matched.group(2))
48
old = sorted(tree[addr])
49
#print(old)
50
if old:
51
tree.remove(Interval(old[0].begin,old[0].end, old[0].data))
52
#print(old[0].begin,old[0].end, old[0].data)
53
tree[old[0].begin:old[0].end] = (old[0].data[0],old[0].data
[1]+number)
54
55
56 funcList = []
57 for interval in tree:
58
#print(interval)
59
funcList.append((interval.data[0],interval.data[1]))
60
61 for func in sorted(funcList , key=lambda x: x[1]):
62
print(func)
appendices/riscv/functionTimeExecuted.py
B.3
riscv_mini_makefile.inc
1 # Settings for RISCV 32-bit MCU toolchain.
2 ifeq ($(TARGET), riscv_mini)
3
RISCV_ARCH ?= rv32im
4
TARGET_ARCH := $(RISCV_ARCH)
5
TARGET_TOOLCHAIN_PREFIX := riscv64 -unknown -elf-
6
7
PLATFORM_FLAGS = \
8
-march=$(TARGET_ARCH) \
9
-mabi=ilp32 \
10
-mcmodel=medany \
11
-mexplicit -relocs \
12
-fno-builtin -printf \
13
-fno-exceptions \
14
-DTF_LITE_MCU_DEBUG_LOG \
15
-DTF_LITE_USE_GLOBAL_CMATH_FUNCTIONS \
16
-fno-unwind-tables \
17
-fno-builtin \
18
-ffunction -sections \
19
-fdata-sections \
==PAGE:105==
B.3 riscv_mini_makefile.inc
89
20
-funsigned -char \
21
-Wvla \
22
-Wall \
23
-Wextra \
24
-Wsign-compare \
25
-Wdouble -promotion \
26
-Wshadow \
27
-Wunused -variable \
28
-Wmissing -field-initializers \
29
-Wno-unused-parameter \
30
-Wno-write-strings \
31
-fno-delete-null-pointer -checks \
32
-fno-threadsafe -statics \
33
-fomit-frame-pointer \
34
-fno-use-cxa-atexit \
35
-Os \
36
-lm -lgcc \
37
-nostartfiles \
38
-specs=nosys.specs
39
40
CXXFLAGS += $(PLATFORM_FLAGS) \
41
-fpermissive \
42
-fno-rtti \
43
--std=gnu++11
44
45
CCFLAGS += $(PLATFORM_FLAGS)
46
47
BUILD_TYPE := micro
48
49
LDFLAGS += $(foreach s,$(LIBWRAP_SYMS),-Wl,--wrap=$(s))
50
LDFLAGS += $(foreach s,$(LIBWRAP_SYMS),-Wl,--wrap=_$(s))
51
LDFLAGS += -L. -Wl,--start-group -lc -Wl,--end-group
52
LDFLAGS += \
53
-T/home/simon/riscv-mini/program/common/program.ld \
54
--specs=nano.specs \
55
--specs=nosys.specs
appendices/riscv/riscv_mini_makefile.inc
==PAGE:106==
90
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Code for Hardware
C.1
Control.scala
1 // See LICENSE for license details.
2
3 package mini
4
5 import chisel3._
6 import chisel3.util.ListLookup
7 import freechips.rocketchip.config.Parameters
8
9 object Control {
10
val Y = true.B
11
val N = false.B
12
13
val M = true.B
14
15
// pc_sel
16
val PC_4
= 0.U(2.W)
17
val PC_ALU = 1.U(2.W)
18
val PC_0
= 2.U(2.W)
19
val PC_EPC = 3.U(2.W)
20
21
// A_sel
22
val A_XXX
= 0.U(1.W)
23
val A_PC
= 0.U(1.W)
24
val A_RS1
= 1.U(1.W)
25
26
// B_sel
27
val B_XXX
= 0.U(1.W)
28
val B_IMM
= 0.U(1.W)
29
val B_RS2
= 1.U(1.W)
30
31
// imm_sel
32
val IMM_X
= 0.U(3.W)
33
val IMM_I
= 1.U(3.W)
34
val IMM_S
= 2.U(3.W)
35
val IMM_U
= 3.U(3.W)
36
val IMM_J
= 4.U(3.W)
37
val IMM_B
= 5.U(3.W)
38
val IMM_Z
= 6.U(3.W)
39
40
// br_type
==PAGE:108==
92
C Code for Hardware
41
val BR_XXX = 0.U(3.W)
42
val BR_LTU = 1.U(3.W)
43
val BR_LT
= 2.U(3.W)
44
val BR_EQ
= 3.U(3.W)
45
val BR_GEU = 4.U(3.W)
46
val BR_GE
= 5.U(3.W)
47
val BR_NE
= 6.U(3.W)
48
49
// st_type
50
val ST_XXX = 0.U(2.W)
51
val ST_SW
= 1.U(2.W)
52
val ST_SH
= 2.U(2.W)
53
val ST_SB
= 3.U(2.W)
54
55
// ld_type
56
val LD_XXX = 0.U(3.W)
57
val LD_LW
= 1.U(3.W)
58
val LD_LH
= 2.U(3.W)
59
val LD_LB
= 3.U(3.W)
60
val LD_LHU = 4.U(3.W)
61
val LD_LBU = 5.U(3.W)
62
63
// wb_sel
64
val WB_ALU = 0.U(2.W)
65
val WB_MEM = 1.U(2.W)
66
val WB_PC4 = 2.U(2.W)
67
val WB_CSR = 3.U(2.W)
68
69
import ALU._
70
import MALU._
71
import Instructions._
72
73
val default =
74
//
kill
wb_en
illegal?
75
//
pc_sel
A_sel
B_sel
imm_sel
alu_op
br_type |
st_type ld_type wb_sel
| csr_cmd |
malu_op
76
//
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
77
List(PC_4,
A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, Y, MALU_XXX)
78
val map = Array(
79
LUI
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_U, ALU_COPY_B , BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
80
AUIPC -> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_U, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
81
JAL
-> List(PC_ALU, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_J, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_PC4, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
82
JALR
-> List(PC_ALU , A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_PC4, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
83
BEQ
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_B, ALU_ADD
, BR_EQ , N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
==PAGE:109==
C.1 Control.scala
93
84
BNE
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_B, ALU_ADD
, BR_NE , N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
85
BLT
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_B, ALU_ADD
, BR_LT , N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
86
BGE
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_B, ALU_ADD
, BR_GE , N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
87
BLTU
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_B, ALU_ADD
, BR_LTU, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
88
BGEU
-> List(PC_4
, A_PC,
B_IMM, IMM_B, ALU_ADD
, BR_GEU, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
89
LB
-> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX , LD_LB , WB_MEM, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
90
LH
-> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX , LD_LH , WB_MEM, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
91
LW
-> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX , LD_LW , WB_MEM, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
92
LBU
-> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX , LD_LBU, WB_MEM, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
93
LHU
-> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX , LD_LHU, WB_MEM, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
94
SB
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_S, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_SB , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
95
SH
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_S, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_SH , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
96
SW
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_S, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_SW , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
97
ADDI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
98
SLTI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_SLT
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
99
SLTIU -> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_SLTU
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
100
XORI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_XOR
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
101
ORI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_OR
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
102
ANDI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_AND
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
103
SLLI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_SLL
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
104
SRLI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_SRL
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
105
SRAI
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_SRA
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
106
ADD
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
107
SUB
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_SUB
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
108
SLL
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_SLL
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
109
SLT
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_SLT
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
==PAGE:110==
94
C Code for Hardware
110
SLTU
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_SLTU
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
111
XOR
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XOR
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
112
SRL
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_SRL
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
113
SRA
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_SRA
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
114
OR
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_OR
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
115
AND
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_AND
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
116
FENCE -> List(PC_4
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
117
FENCEI -> List(PC_0
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
118
CSRRW -> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_COPY_A , BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, Y, CSR.W, N, MALU_XXX),
119
CSRRS -> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_COPY_A , BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, Y, CSR.S, N, MALU_XXX),
120
CSRRC -> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_COPY_A , BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, Y, CSR.C, N, MALU_XXX),
121
CSRRWI -> List(PC_0
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_Z, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, Y, CSR.W, N, MALU_XXX),
122
CSRRSI -> List(PC_0
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_Z, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, Y, CSR.S, N, MALU_XXX),
123
CSRRCI -> List(PC_0
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_Z, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, Y, CSR.C, N, MALU_XXX),
124
ECALL -> List(PC_4
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, N, CSR.P, N, MALU_XXX),
125
EBREAK -> List(PC_4
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, N, CSR.P, N, MALU_XXX),
126
ERET
-> List(PC_EPC , A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_CSR, N, CSR.P, N, MALU_XXX),
127
WFI
-> List(PC_4
, A_XXX,
B_XXX, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
128
129
MUL
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_MUL),
130
MULH
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_MULH),
131
MULHSU -> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_MULHSU),
132
MULHU -> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_MULHU),
133
DIV
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_DIV),
134
DIVU
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_DIVU),
135
REM
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX, LD_XXX , WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_REM),
==PAGE:111==
C.1 Control.scala
95
136
REMU
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_RS2, IMM_X, ALU_XXX
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, M, MALU_REMU),
137
138
139
//Fixed Point load and store which needs to use the normal ALU
140
FLW
-> List(PC_0
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX, Y,
ST_XXX , LD_LW , WB_MEM, N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
141
//FSW
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_S, ALU_ADD
, BR_XXX , N,
ST_SW , LD_XXX , WB_ALU , N, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX),
142
143
//Custom instructions
144
SWAP
-> List(PC_4
, A_RS1,
B_IMM, IMM_I, ALU_SWAP
, BR_XXX, N,
ST_XXX , LD_XXX, WB_ALU, Y, CSR.N, N, MALU_XXX)
145
)
146 }
147
148 class ControlSignals(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
149
val inst
= Input(UInt(xlen.W))
150
val pc_sel
= Output(UInt(2.W))
151
val inst_kill = Output(Bool())
152
val A_sel
= Output(UInt(1.W))
153
val B_sel
= Output(UInt(1.W))
154
val imm_sel
= Output(UInt(3.W))
155
val alu_op
= Output(UInt(4.W))
156
val br_type
= Output(UInt(3.W))
157
val st_type
= Output(UInt(2.W))
158
val ld_type
= Output(UInt(3.W))
159
val wb_sel
= Output(UInt(2.W))
160
val wb_en
= Output(Bool())
161
val csr_cmd
= Output(UInt(3.W))
162
val illegal
= Output(Bool())
163
val malu_op
= Output(UInt())
164 }
165
166 class Control(implicit p: Parameters) extends Module {
167
val io = IO(new ControlSignals)
168
val ctrlSignals = ListLookup(io.inst, Control.default , Control.map)
169
170
171
// Control signals for Fetch
172
io.pc_sel
:= ctrlSignals(0)
173
io.inst_kill := ctrlSignals(6).asBool
174
175
// Control signals for Execute
176
io.A_sel
:= ctrlSignals(1)
177
io.B_sel
:= ctrlSignals(2)
178
io.imm_sel := ctrlSignals(3)
179
io.alu_op
:= ctrlSignals(4)
180
io.br_type := ctrlSignals(5)
181
io.st_type := ctrlSignals(7)
182
183
// Control signals for Write Back
==PAGE:112==
96
C Code for Hardware
184
io.ld_type := ctrlSignals(8)
185
io.wb_sel
:= ctrlSignals(9)
186
io.wb_en
:= ctrlSignals(10).asBool
187
io.csr_cmd := ctrlSignals(11)
188
io.illegal := ctrlSignals(12)
189
190
io.malu_op := ctrlSignals(13)
191 }
appendices/chisel/Control.scala
C.2
Datapath.scala
1 // See LICENSE for license details.
2
3 package mini
4
5 import chisel3._
6 import chisel3.util._
7 import freechips.rocketchip.config.Parameters
8
9 import MALU._
10
11 object Const {
12
val PC_START = 0x200
13
val PC_EVEC
= 0x100
14 }
15
16 class DatapathIO(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
17
val host = new HostIO
18
val icache = Flipped(new CacheIO)
19
val dcache = Flipped(new CacheIO)
20
val ctrl = Flipped(new ControlSignals)
21
val f_ctrl=Flipped(new FControlSignals)
22 }
23
24 class Datapath(implicit val p: Parameters) extends Module with CoreParams
{
25
val io
= IO(new DatapathIO)
26
val csr
= Module(new CSR)
27
val regFile = Module(new RegFile)
28
val alu
= p(BuildALU)(p)
29
/*
30
if(arch.contains('m')){
31
val malu
= p(BuildmALU)(p)
32
}*/
33
34
35
val usingFP = p(ARCH).contains('f')
36
val usingMul= p(ARCH).contains('m')
==PAGE:113==
C.2 Datapath.scala
97
37
38
val f_alu = (if (usingFP) p(BuildFALU)(p))
39
val f_regFile= Module(new FRegFile)
40
41
val m_alu = (if (usingMul) p(BuildMALU)(p))
42
43
44
val immGen
= p(BuildImmGen)(p)
45
val brCond
= p(BuildBrCond)(p)
46
47
import Control._
48
import FControl._
49
50
/***** Fetch / Execute Registers *****/
51
val fe_inst = RegInit(Instructions.NOP)
52
val fe_pc
= Reg(UInt())
53
54
/***** Execute / Write Back Registers *****/
55
val ew_inst = RegInit(Instructions.NOP)
56
val ew_pc
= Reg(UInt())
57
val ew_alu
= Reg(UInt())
58
val f_ew_alu= Reg(UInt(flen.W))
59
val csr_in
= Reg(UInt())
60
61
/****** Control signals *****/
62
val st_type
= Reg(io.ctrl.st_type.cloneType)
63
val ld_type
= Reg(io.ctrl.ld_type.cloneType)
64
val wb_sel
= Reg(io.ctrl.wb_sel.cloneType)
65
val f_wb_sel = Reg(io.f_ctrl.wb_sel.cloneType)
66
val wb_en
= Reg(Bool())
67
val f_wb_en
= Reg(Bool())
68
val csr_cmd
= Reg(io.ctrl.csr_cmd.cloneType)
69
val illegal
= Reg(Bool())
70
val f_illegal= Reg(Bool())
71
val pc_check = Reg(Bool())
72
73
/****** Fetch *****/
74
val started = RegNext(reset.asBool)
75
76
val regStall = WireDefault(0.B) //Stalls if a register does not have its
value yet
77
//This can happen on multicycle operations , such as div and rem.
78
79
val counter = Counter(20)
80
//regStall := counter.inc()
81
82
val stall = !io.icache.resp.valid || !io.dcache.resp.valid || regStall
83
val pc
= RegInit(Const.PC_START.U(xlen.W) - 4.U(xlen.W))
84
val npc
= Mux(stall, pc, Mux(csr.io.expt, csr.io.evec,
85
Mux(io.ctrl.pc_sel === PC_EPC,
csr.io.epc,
86
Mux(io.ctrl.pc_sel === PC_ALU || brCond.io.taken, alu.io.sum
>> 1.U << 1.U,
==PAGE:114==
98
C Code for Hardware
87
Mux(io.ctrl.pc_sel === PC_0, pc, pc + 4.U)))))
88
val inst = (if (usingFP) Mux(started || io.ctrl.inst_kill || io.f_ctrl.
inst_kill || brCond.io.taken || csr.io.expt, Instructions.NOP, io.
icache.resp.bits.data)
89
else Mux(started || io.ctrl.inst_kill || brCond.io.taken ||
csr.io.expt, Instructions.NOP, io.icache.resp.bits.data))
90
pc
:= npc
91
io.icache.req.bits.addr := npc
92
io.icache.req.bits.data := 0.U
93
io.icache.req.bits.mask := 0.U
94
io.icache.req.valid
:= !stall
95
io.icache.abort
:= false.B
96
97
// Pipelining
98
when (!stall) {
99
fe_pc
:= pc
100
fe_inst := inst
101
}
102
103
/****** Execute *****/
104
// Decode
105
io.ctrl.inst
:= fe_inst
106
107
io.f_ctrl.inst := fe_inst
108
109
// regFile read
110
val rd_addr
= fe_inst(11, 7)
111
val rs1_addr = fe_inst(19, 15)
112
val rs2_addr = fe_inst(24, 20)
113
regFile.io.raddr1 := rs1_addr
114
regFile.io.raddr2 := rs2_addr
115
116
117
// fRegFile read
118
val f_rd_addr
= fe_inst(11, 7)
119
val f_rs1_addr = fe_inst(19, 15)
120
val f_rs2_addr = fe_inst(24, 20)
121
val f_rs3_addr = fe_inst(31,27)
122
123
//if (usingFP){
124
f_regFile.asInstanceOf[FRegFile].io.raddr1 := f_rs1_addr
125
f_regFile.asInstanceOf[FRegFile].io.raddr2 := f_rs2_addr
126
f_regFile.asInstanceOf[FRegFile].io.raddr3 := f_rs3_addr
127
//}
128
129
130
131
132
// gen immdeates
133
immGen.io.inst := fe_inst
134
immGen.io.sel
:= io.ctrl.imm_sel
135
==PAGE:115==
C.2 Datapath.scala
99
136
// bypass
137
val wb_rd_addr = ew_inst(11, 7)
138
val rs1hazard = wb_en && rs1_addr.orR && (rs1_addr === wb_rd_addr)
139
val rs2hazard = wb_en && rs2_addr.orR && (rs2_addr === wb_rd_addr)
140
val rs1 = Mux(wb_sel === WB_ALU && rs1hazard , ew_alu, regFile.io.rdata1)
141
val rs2 = Mux(wb_sel === WB_ALU && rs2hazard , ew_alu, regFile.io.rdata2)
142
//TODO consider hazard for mul operation
143
144
145
// bypass RegFile
146
val f_wb_rd_addr = ew_inst(11, 7)
147
val f_rs1hazard = f_wb_en && (f_rs1_addr === f_wb_rd_addr)
148
val f_rs2hazard = f_wb_en && (f_rs2_addr === f_wb_rd_addr)
149
val f_rs3hazard = f_wb_en && (f_rs3_addr === f_wb_rd_addr)
150
val f_rs1 = Mux(f_wb_sel === F_WB_ALU && f_rs1hazard , f_ew_alu ,
f_regFile.io.rdata1)
151
val f_rs2 = Mux(f_wb_sel === F_WB_ALU && f_rs2hazard , f_ew_alu ,
f_regFile.io.rdata2)
152
val f_rs3 = Mux(f_wb_sel === F_WB_ALU && f_rs3hazard , f_ew_alu ,
f_regFile.io.rdata3)
153
154
155
// ALU operations
156
alu.io.A := Mux(io.ctrl.A_sel === A_RS1, rs1, fe_pc)
157
alu.io.B := Mux(io.ctrl.B_sel === B_RS2, rs2, immGen.io.out)
158
alu.io.alu_op := io.ctrl.alu_op
159
160
if(usingMul){
161
//M_ALU operations
162
m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].io.rs1 := rs1
163
m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].io.rs2 := rs2
164
m_alu.asInstanceOf[MALU].io.alu_op := io.ctrl.malu_op
165
}
166
167
if(usingFP){
168
// F_ALU operations
169
f_alu.asInstanceOf[FALU].io.rs1 := f_rs1 //Mux(io.f_ctrl.A_sel ===
A_RS1, rs1, fe_pc)
170
f_alu.asInstanceOf[FALU].io.rs2 := f_rs2 //Mux(io.f_ctrl.B_sel ===
B_RS2, rs2, immGen.io.out)
171
f_alu.asInstanceOf[FALU].io.rs3 := f_rs3 //Mux()
172
f_alu.asInstanceOf[FALU].io.alu_op := io.f_ctrl.alu_op
173
}
174
175
// Branch condition calc
176
brCond.io.rs1 := rs1
177
brCond.io.rs2 := rs2
178
brCond.io.br_type := io.ctrl.br_type
179
180
// D$ access
181
val daddr
= Mux(stall, ew_alu, alu.io.sum) >> 2.U << 2.U
==PAGE:116==
100
C Code for Hardware
182
val woffset = (alu.io.sum(1) << 4.U).asUInt | (alu.io.sum(0) << 3.U).
asUInt
183
184
val fp_store= WireDefault(0.B)
185
186
when(ew_inst(6,0) === "b0100111".U){ //STORE-FP
187
fp_store := 1.B
188
}
189
190
io.dcache.req.valid
:= !stall && (io.ctrl.st_type.orR || io.ctrl.
ld_type.orR)
191
io.dcache.req.bits.addr := daddr
192
io.dcache.req.bits.data := Mux(fp_store , f_rs2, rs2 << woffset)
193
io.dcache.req.bits.mask := MuxLookup(Mux(stall, st_type , io.ctrl.st_type
),
194
"b0000".U, Seq(
195
ST_SW ->
"b1111".U,
196
ST_SH -> ("b11".U << alu.io.sum(1,0)),
197
ST_SB -> ("b1".U
<< alu.io.sum(1,0))))
198
199
200
201
202
// Pipelining
203
when(reset.asBool || !stall && csr.io.expt) {
204
st_type
:= 0.U
205
ld_type
:= 0.U
206
wb_en
:= false.B
207
f_wb_en
:= false.B
208
csr_cmd
:= 0.U
209
illegal
:= false.B
210
pc_check
:= false.B
211
}.elsewhen(!stall && !csr.io.expt) {
212
ew_pc
:= fe_pc
213
ew_inst
:= fe_inst
214
if(!usingMul){
215
ew_alu
:= alu.io.out
216
}else{
217
ew_alu
:= Mux(io.ctrl.malu_op =/= MALU_XXX , m_alu.asInstanceOf[
MALU].io.out, alu.io.out)
218
}
219
if(usingFP){
220
f_ew_alu
:= f_alu.asInstanceOf[FALU].io.out
221
}
222
csr_in
:= Mux(io.ctrl.imm_sel === IMM_Z, immGen.io.out, rs1)
223
st_type
:= io.ctrl.st_type
224
ld_type
:= io.ctrl.ld_type
225
wb_sel
:= io.ctrl.wb_sel
226
f_wb_sel
:= io.f_ctrl.wb_sel
227
wb_en
:= io.ctrl.wb_en
228
f_wb_en
:= io.f_ctrl.wb_en
229
csr_cmd
:= io.ctrl.csr_cmd
==PAGE:117==
C.2 Datapath.scala
101
230
illegal
:= io.ctrl.illegal && io.f_ctrl.illegal //Both need to be
illegal. If one is legal, then there is a valid instruction
231
pc_check
:= io.ctrl.pc_sel === PC_ALU
232
}
233
234
// Load
235
val loffset = (ew_alu(1) << 4.U).asUInt | (ew_alu(0) << 3.U).asUInt
236
val lshift
= io.dcache.resp.bits.data >> loffset
237
val load
= MuxLookup(ld_type , io.dcache.resp.bits.data.zext, Seq(
238
LD_LH
-> lshift(15, 0).asSInt, LD_LB
-> lshift(7, 0).asSInt,
239
LD_LHU -> lshift(15, 0).zext,
LD_LBU -> lshift(7, 0).zext) )
240
241
// CSR access
242
csr.io.stall
:= stall
243
csr.io.in
:= csr_in
244
csr.io.cmd
:= csr_cmd
245
csr.io.inst
:= ew_inst
246
csr.io.pc
:= ew_pc
247
csr.io.addr
:= ew_alu
248
csr.io.illegal
:= illegal
249
csr.io.pc_check := pc_check
250
csr.io.ld_type
:= ld_type
251
csr.io.st_type
:= st_type
252
io.host <> csr.io.host
253
254
// Regfile Write
255
val regWrite = MuxLookup(wb_sel, ew_alu.zext, Seq(
256
WB_MEM -> load,
257
WB_PC4 -> (ew_pc + 4.U).zext,
258
WB_CSR -> csr.io.out.zext) ).asUInt
259
260
regFile.io.wen
:= (wb_en || f_wb_sel === F_WB_REG) && !stall && !csr.
io.expt
261
regFile.io.waddr := wb_rd_addr
262
regFile.io.wdata := Mux(f_wb_sel === F_WB_REG , f_ew_alu , regWrite)
263
264
265
val f_regWrite = MuxLookup(f_wb_sel ,f_ew_alu.zext, Seq(
266
F_WB_MEM -> load,
267
F_WB_REG -> ew_alu.zext
268
) )
269
270
271
272
//if(usingFP){
273
f_regFile.asInstanceOf[FRegFile].io.wen
:= f_wb_en.asInstanceOf[Bool
] && !stall && !csr.io.expt
274
f_regFile.asInstanceOf[FRegFile].io.waddr := f_wb_rd_addr
275
f_regFile.asInstanceOf[FRegFile].io.wdata := f_regWrite.asUInt
276
//}
277
278
==PAGE:118==
102
C Code for Hardware
279
280
// Abort store when there's an excpetion
281
io.dcache.abort := csr.io.expt
282
283
if (p(Trace)) {
284
printf("PC: %x, INST: %x, REG[%d] <- %x\n", ew_pc, ew_inst ,
285
Mux(regFile.io.wen, wb_rd_addr , 0.U),
286
Mux(regFile.io.wen, regFile.io.wdata, 0.U))
287
}
288 }
appendices/chisel/Datapath.scala
C.3
FALU.scala
1 // See LICENSE for license details.
2
3 package mini
4
5 import chisel3._
6 import chisel3.util._
7 import freechips.rocketchip.config.Parameters
8
9 // Fixed point ALU
10
11 object FALU {
12
val FALU_ADD
= 0.U(4.W)
13
val FALU_SUB
= 1.U(4.W)
14
val FALU_MUL
= 2.U(4.W)
15
val FALU_DIV
= 3.U(4.W)
16
val FALU_MINMAX = 4.U(4.W)
17
val FALU_SQRT
= 5.U(4.W)
18
19
val FALU_CNV_W
= 6.U(4.W)
20
val FALU_CNV_WU = 7.U(4.W)
21
22
23
val FALU_XXX
= 15.U(4.W)
24 }
25
26 class FALUIo(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
27
val rs1 = Input(UInt(flen.W))
28
val rs2 = Input(UInt(flen.W))
29
val rs3 = Input(UInt(flen.W))
30
val alu_op = Input(UInt(4.W))
31
32
val out = Output(UInt(flen.W))
33 }
34
35 import mini.FALU._
==PAGE:119==
C.3 FALU.scala
103
36
37 abstract class FALU(implicit val p: Parameters) extends Module with
CoreParams {
38
val io = IO(new FALUIo)
39
def logFALUOp(op: Int): Unit = {
40
when(io.alu_op === op.U) {
41
printf("A == %d, B == %d, opcode == %d\n", io.rs1, io.rs2, io.alu_op
)
42
}
43
}
44 }
45
46 class FALUImpl(implicit p: Parameters) extends FALU()(p) {
47
48
49
val MAX_VALUE = WireDefault(0x7fffffffL.S.asFixedPoint(16.BP))
50
val MIN_VALUE = WireDefault((-2147483648).S.asFixedPoint(16.BP))
51
52
val op1 = io.rs1.asFixedPoint(16.BP)
53
val op2 = io.rs2.asFixedPoint(16.BP)
54
val op3 = io.rs3.asFixedPoint(16.BP)
55
56
val result = WireDefault(0.F(64.W,32.BP))
57
//ToDo: Implement limiter such that too high values will get clipped to
max/min
58
result := MuxLookup(io.alu_op, op2, Seq(
59
FALU_ADD
-> (op1 + op2),
60
FALU_SUB
-> (op1 - op2),
61
FALU_MUL
-> (op1 * op2),
62
FALU_DIV
-> (op1 / op2),
63
64
65
FALU_XXX
-> (0.F(32.W,16.BP))
66
67
))
68
69
val clipped = WireDefault(0.F(32.W,16.BP))
70
71
when(result > MAX_VALUE){
72
clipped := MAX_VALUE
73
}.elsewhen(result < MIN_VALUE){
74
clipped := MIN_VALUE
75
}.otherwise{
76
clipped := result
77
}
78
79
80
when(io.alu_op === FALU_CNV_W || io.alu_op === FALU_CNV_WU){
81
io.out := (op1.asUInt) >> 16
82
}.otherwise{
83
io.out := clipped.asUInt()
84
==PAGE:120==
104
C Code for Hardware
85
}
86
87 }
appendices/chisel/FALU.scala
C.4
MMIO.scala
1 package peripherals
2
3 import chisel3._
4 import chisel3.util._
5
6 import freechips.rocketchip.config.Parameters
7
8 import mini._
9
10 class MemoryReq(val addrSize : Int = -1)(implicit p: Parameters) extends
CoreBundle()(p) {
11
private val size = (if (addrSize == -1) xlen else addrSize)
12
val addr = UInt(size.W)
13
val data = UInt(xlen.W)
14
val mask = UInt((xlen / 8).W) //If all 0, then it is a read
15 }
16
17 class MemoryResp(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
18
val data = UInt(xlen.W)
19 }
20
21 class MMIO(val addrSize : Int = -1)(implicit val p: Parameters) extends
Bundle { //Memory mapped io
22
val req = Flipped(Valid(new MemoryReq(addrSize)))
23
val resp = Valid(new MemoryResp)
24 }
25
26 trait MMIOModule extends MultiIOModule {
27
val index : Int
28
val moduleName : String
29
val address: Long
30
val mmio : MMIO
31
val numBytes : Int //Number of byte addressable registers.
32 }
33
34 trait PinIO{
35
val pins : Bundle
36 }
appendices/chisel/MMIO.scala
==PAGE:121==
C.5 FFT.scala
105
C.5
FFT.scala
1 package fft
2
3 import chisel3._
4 import chisel3.util._
5
6 import chisel3.experimental.ChiselEnum
7
8 class FFT_IO(val bitwidth: Int, val samples: Int) extends Bundle{
9
//val audio_ready = Input(Bool()) //Indicates that the audio
memory is filled
10
val running
= Output(Bool())//Indicates that the FFT is being
calculated
11
12
val start
= Input(Bool())
13
14
val stall
= Input(Bool())
15
16
//Memory containing samples
17
val mem_audioA = new MemReq()
18
val mem_audioB = new MemReq()
19
20
//Memory containing the FFT output
21
val mem_FFTA = new MemReq()
22
val mem_FFTB = new MemReq()
23
24
25 }
26
27 class MemReq extends Bundle{
28
val addr
= Output(UInt(32.W))
29
val data_out= Output(UInt(32.W))
30
val data_in = Input(UInt(32.W))
31
val write
= Output(Bool())
32
val en
= Output(Bool())
33
val valid
= Input(Bool())
34 }
35
36
37 class FFTSingle(samples: Int, bitwidth: Int, bp: Int) extends Module{ //
bitwidth is the incoming bitwidth
38
39
val io = IO(new Bundle{
40
val running = Output(Bool())
41
val start = Input(Bool())
42
43
val mem = new MemReq()
44
})
45
46
val agu = Module(new AGU(samples))
47
==PAGE:122==
106
C Code for Hardware
48
val bfu = Module(new BFU(bitwidth ,bp))
49
val twiddle = Module(new Twiddle(samples ,bp+1))
50
val stall = WireDefault(1.B)
51
52
//If even, result is in same memory as samples were stored.
53
//Else, it is in the opposite memory.
54
val finalMemory = log2Ceil(samples) % 2
55
56
agu.io.stall := stall
57
58
//two registers for input to BFU
59
val input = Reg(Vec(2,UInt((bitwidth*2).W)))
60
61
val mem_chooser = RegInit(0.U)
62
63
twiddle.io.addr := agu.io.twiddle_addr
64
65
66
bfu.io.a_real := input(0)(bitwidth -1,0).asSInt()
67
bfu.io.a_imag := input(0)(bitwidth*2-1,bitwidth).asSInt()
68
69
bfu.io.b_real := input(1)(bitwidth -1,0).asSInt()
70
bfu.io.b_imag := input(1)(bitwidth*2-1,bitwidth).asSInt()
71
72
bfu.io.twiddle_real := twiddle.io.twiddle_real
73
bfu.io.twiddle_imag := twiddle.io.twiddle_imag
74
75
76
object S extends ChiselEnum{
77
val idle, load0, load1, store0, store1, agu = Value
78
}
79
80
when(agu.io.switch & ~stall){
81
mem_chooser := ~mem_chooser
82
}
83
84
io.mem.data_out := DontCare
85
io.mem.addr := DontCare
86
io.mem.write := 0.B
87
io.mem.en := 0.B
88
89
io.running := ~agu.io.done
90
91
agu.io.start := io.start
92
93
val state = RegInit(S.idle)
94
switch(state){
95
is(S.idle){
96
when(io.start | ~agu.io.done){
97
state := S.load0
98
io.mem.en := 1.B
99
io.mem.addr := mem_chooser ## agu.io.a_addr_read
==PAGE:123==
C.5 FFT.scala
107
100
}
101
}
102
is(S.load0){
103
io.mem.en := 1.B
104
io.mem.addr := mem_chooser ## agu.io.a_addr_read
105
when(io.mem.valid){
106
state := S.load1
107
input(0) := io.mem.data_in
108
io.mem.addr := mem_chooser ## agu.io.b_addr_read
109
}
110
}
111
is(S.load1){
112
io.mem.en := 1.B
113
io.mem.addr := mem_chooser ## agu.io.b_addr_read
114
io.mem.data_out := bfu.io.a_out_imag ## bfu.io.a_out_real
115
when(io.mem.valid){
116
state := S.store0
117
input(1) := io.mem.data_in
118
io.mem.en := 0.B
119
//io.mem.addr := ~mem_chooser ##
agu.io.b_addr_write
120
//io.mem.data_out := bfu.io.b_out_imag ## bfu.io.
b_out_real
121
}
122
}
123
is(S.store0){
124
io.mem.en := 1.B
125
io.mem.write := 1.B
126
io.mem.addr := ~mem_chooser ##
agu.io.a_addr_write
127
io.mem.data_out := bfu.io.a_out_imag ## bfu.io.a_out_real
128
when(io.mem.valid & RegNext(state === S.store0)){ //Needs
minimum one cycle
129
state := S.store1
130
io.mem.addr := ~mem_chooser ##
agu.io.b_addr_write
131
io.mem.data_out := bfu.io.b_out_imag ## bfu.io.b_out_real
132
}
133
}
134
is(S.store1){
135
io.mem.en := 1.B
136
io.mem.write := 1.B
137
io.mem.addr := ~mem_chooser ## agu.io.b_addr_write
138
io.mem.data_out := bfu.io.b_out_imag ## bfu.io.b_out_real
139
when(io.mem.valid){
140
io.mem.write := 0.B
141
state := S.agu
142
stall := 0.B
143
io.mem.en := 0.B
144
}
145
}
146
is(S.agu){
147
//when(agu.io.done){
148
state := S.idle
149
//}.otherwise{
==PAGE:124==
108
C Code for Hardware
150
//
state := S.load0
151
// }
152
}
153
}
154 }
155
156 class FFT(samples: Int, bitwidth: Int, bp: Int) extends Module{ //bitwidth
is the incoming bitwidth
157
158
val io = IO(new FFT_IO(bitwidth ,samples))
159
160
val agu = Module(new AGU(samples))
161
162
//If even, result is in same memory as samples were stored.
163
//Else, it is in the opposite memory.
164
val finalMemory = log2Ceil(samples) % 2
165
166
io.running := ~agu.io.done | RegNext(~agu.io.done) //Show running for
one more cycle
167
168
169
//Hard applied
170
io.mem_audioA.en := 1.B & ~io.stall
171
io.mem_audioB.en := 1.B & ~io.stall
172
173
io.mem_FFTA.en := 1.B & ~io.stall
174
io.mem_FFTB.en := 1.B & ~io.stall
175
176
177
agu.io.stall := io.stall
178
179
agu.io.start := io.start
180
181
val mem_chooser = RegInit(0.B)
182
183
when(agu.io.switch & ~io.stall){
184
mem_chooser := ~mem_chooser
185
}
186
187
//When switch is high, mem_chooser is delayed one cycle. Hence the MUX
.
188
io.mem_audioA.addr := Mux(RegEnable(mem_chooser ,~io.stall),RegEnable(
agu.io.a_addr_write ,~io.stall),agu.io.a_addr_read)
189
io.mem_audioB.addr := Mux(RegEnable(mem_chooser ,~io.stall),RegEnable(
agu.io.b_addr_write ,~io.stall),agu.io.b_addr_read)
190
191
io.mem_FFTA.addr := Mux(RegEnable(mem_chooser ,~io.stall),agu.io.
a_addr_read ,RegEnable(agu.io.a_addr_write ,~io.stall))
192
io.mem_FFTB.addr := Mux(RegEnable(mem_chooser ,~io.stall),agu.io.
b_addr_read ,RegEnable(agu.io.b_addr_write ,~io.stall))
193
194
==PAGE:125==
C.5 FFT.scala
109
195
val twiddle = Module(new Twiddle(samples ,bp+1)) //bp+1 to include sign
196
197
twiddle.io.addr := RegEnable(agu.io.twiddle_addr ,~io.stall)
198
199
val bfu = Module(new BFU(bitwidth ,bp))
200
201
//Real part is lower bits, while imaginary part is upper bits.
202
bfu.io.a_real := Mux(RegEnable(RegEnable(~mem_chooser ,~io.stall),~io.
stall), io.mem_audioA.data_in(bitwidth -1,0).asSInt, io.mem_FFTA.
data_in(bitwidth -1,0).asSInt)
203
bfu.io.a_imag := Mux(RegEnable(RegEnable(~mem_chooser ,~io.stall),~io.
stall), io.mem_audioA.data_in(bitwidth*2-1,bitwidth).asSInt, io.
mem_FFTA.data_in(bitwidth*2-1,bitwidth).asSInt)
204
205
206
bfu.io.b_real := Mux(RegEnable(RegEnable(~mem_chooser ,~io.stall),~io.
stall), io.mem_audioB.data_in(bitwidth -1,0).asSInt, io.mem_FFTB.
data_in(bitwidth -1,0).asSInt)
207
bfu.io.b_imag := Mux(RegEnable(RegEnable(~mem_chooser ,~io.stall),~io.
stall), io.mem_audioB.data_in(bitwidth*2-1,bitwidth).asSInt, io.
mem_FFTB.data_in(bitwidth*2-1,bitwidth).asSInt)
208
209
210
bfu.io.twiddle_real := twiddle.io.twiddle_real
211
bfu.io.twiddle_imag := twiddle.io.twiddle_imag
212
213
io.mem_audioA.data_out := bfu.io.a_out_imag ## bfu.io.a_out_real
214
io.mem_audioB.data_out := bfu.io.b_out_imag ## bfu.io.b_out_real
215
216
io.mem_FFTA.data_out := bfu.io.a_out_imag ## bfu.io.a_out_real
217
io.mem_FFTB.data_out := bfu.io.b_out_imag ## bfu.io.b_out_real
218
219
220
io.mem_audioA.write := RegEnable(mem_chooser && (~agu.io.done),~io.
stall) & RegEnable(RegEnable(~agu.io.skip,~io.stall),~io.stall) & ~
io.stall
221
io.mem_audioB.write := RegEnable(mem_chooser && (~agu.io.done),~io.
stall) & RegEnable(RegEnable(~agu.io.skip,~io.stall),~io.stall) & ~
io.stall
222
223
io.mem_FFTA.write
:= RegEnable(~mem_chooser && (~agu.io.done),~io.
stall) & RegEnable(RegEnable(~agu.io.skip,~io.stall),~io.stall)& ~
io.stall
224
io.mem_FFTB.write
:= RegEnable(~mem_chooser && (~agu.io.done),~io.
stall) & RegEnable(RegEnable(~agu.io.skip,~io.stall),~io.stall)& ~
io.stall
225
226 }
227
228
229 class Twiddle(samples: Int, bitwidth: Int) extends Module{
230
val io = IO(new Bundle{
==PAGE:126==
110
C Code for Hardware
231
val addr
= Input(UInt((samples/2).W))
232
val twiddle_real = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
233
val twiddle_imag = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
234
235
})
236
237
//We can either use a lookup table or we can use a twiddle calculator.
238
239
240
//Here we calculate a ROM
241
242
val cos_array = for(k <- 0 until samples/2) yield math.round(math.cos
(2*math.Pi*k/samples)*(1<<bitwidth -1))
243
val sin_array = for(k <- 0 until samples/2) yield math.round(-math.sin
(2*math.Pi*k/samples)*(1<<bitwidth -1))
244
245
println(cos_array)
246
println(sin_array)
247
248
//If larger than what can be shown
249
val cos = VecInit((cos_array.map(t => (if(t == (1<<bitwidth -1)) (t-1)
else t).asSInt(bitwidth.W) )))
250
val sin = VecInit((sin_array.map(t => (if(t == (1<<bitwidth -1)) (t-1)
else t).asSInt(bitwidth.W) )))
251
252
253
io.twiddle_real := cos(io.addr)
254
io.twiddle_imag := sin(io.addr)
255 }
256
257 class AGU(samples: Int) extends Module{ //Address Generation Unit
258
val addr_bits = log2Ceil(samples)
259
val io = IO(new Bundle{
260
val stall = Input(Bool()) //Stalls when some inputs are not ready
yet
261
//Can be changed to include per input stalling or ready thing
262
//which would allow for calculating when ready
263
264
val start = Input(Bool()) //Treated as a pulsed signal.
265
val done = Output(Bool())
266
267
val skip = Output(Bool())
268
269
val switch = Output(Bool()) //tick that indicates that memories
needs to be swapped
270
271
val twiddle_addr = Output(UInt((addr_bits -1).W))
272
273
val a_addr_write = Output(UInt(addr_bits.W))
274
val b_addr_write = Output(UInt(addr_bits.W))
275
276
val a_addr_read = Output(UInt(addr_bits.W))
==PAGE:127==
C.5 FFT.scala
111
277
val b_addr_read = Output(UInt(addr_bits.W))
278
279
280
})
281
282
val level = RegInit(0.U(log2Ceil(log2Ceil(samples)).W)) //There are
log2 levels
283
val index = RegInit(0.U((addr_bits).W)) //Index is for each level.
284
285
286
val index0_reversed = WireDefault(Reverse(index))
287
val index1_reversed = WireDefault(Reverse(index+1.U))
288
289
290
val index0_rotated = Wire(Vec(addr_bits , Bool()))
291
val index1_rotated = Wire(Vec(addr_bits , Bool()))
292
293
val running = RegInit(0.B)
294
295
io.done := ~running
296
297
io.skip := 0.B
298
299
val skipped = RegEnable(io.skip,~io.stall)
300
301
when(io.start){
302
running := 1.B
303
}
304
305
io.switch := 0.B //Default value
306
when(running & ~io.stall){
307
when(~skipped){
308
index := index + 2.U;
309
}
310
311
when(index === (samples -2).U ){ //When counter resets , except for
the first occurence.
312
313
when(level === (log2Ceil(samples)-1).U){ //Done
314
level := 0.U
315
316
running := 0.B
317
318
319
}.otherwise{
320
level := level + 1.U
321
io.switch := 1.B
322
io.skip := 1.B
323
}
324
}
325
}
326
==PAGE:128==
112
C Code for Hardware
327
val testWire = WireDefault(0.U)
328
dontTouch(testWire)
329
//Bit rotation
330
for(i <- 0 until addr_bits){
331
index0_rotated(i) := 0.B //Default value, not used.
332
index1_rotated(i) := 0.B
333
334
for(j <- 0 until log2Ceil(samples)){
335
when(j.U === level){
336
testWire := j.U
337
338
index0_rotated(i) := (index)(((i - j + log2Ceil(samples))
% log2Ceil(samples) ))
339
index1_rotated(i) := (index+1.U)(((i - j + log2Ceil(
samples)) % log2Ceil(samples) ))
340
}
341
}
342
}
343
344
io.a_addr_read := Mux(level =/= 0.U,index0_rotated.asUInt,Reverse(
index))
345
io.b_addr_read := Mux(level =/= 0.U,index1_rotated.asUInt,Reverse(
index+1.U))
346
347
io.a_addr_write := index0_rotated.asUInt
348
io.b_addr_write := index1_rotated.asUInt
349
350
351
// For 32 samples , 5 bits, this is (0xFFF0 >> level) & (index/2)
352
val tmp0 = WireDefault((((1<<(addr_bits -1))-1) << (addr_bits -1)).U)
353
dontTouch(tmp0)
354
val tmp1 = WireDefault((tmp0 >> level))
355
val tmp2 = WireDefault(index(addr_bits -1,1))
356
val tmp3 = WireDefault(tmp1 & tmp2)
357
io.twiddle_addr := tmp3
358
359
360 }
361
362 class BFU(bitwidth: Int, bp : Int) extends Module{ //ButterFly Unit, bp =
Binary points. Number of fractional bits.
363
val io = IO(new Bundle{
364
val a_real = Input(SInt(bitwidth.W))
365
val a_imag = Input(SInt(bitwidth.W))
366
367
val b_real = Input(SInt(bitwidth.W))
368
val b_imag = Input(SInt(bitwidth.W))
369
370
val twiddle_real = Input(SInt(bitwidth.W))
371
val twiddle_imag = Input(SInt(bitwidth.W))
372
373
val a_out_real = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
==PAGE:129==
C.6 FFTTester.scala
113
374
val a_out_imag = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
375
376
val b_out_real = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
377
val b_out_imag = Output(SInt(bitwidth.W))
378
})
379
380
//Complex multiplication of B and twiddle factor
381
//(a+bi)(c+di) = ac + adi + bci + bdi^2
382
//
= ac + adi + bci - bd
383
val a = WireDefault(io.b_real)
384
val b = WireDefault(io.b_imag)
385
val c = WireDefault(io.twiddle_real)
386
val d = WireDefault(io.twiddle_imag)
387
388
val real = WireDefault((a*c - b*d).asSInt ) //Gives bitwidth*2-1 bits
389
val imag
= WireDefault((a*d + b*c).asSInt) //TODO add rounding to
minimize quantization error.
390
391
392
val high_bit = bp + bitwidth -1
393
val low_bit = bp - 1
394
395
396
io.a_out_real
:= (io.a_real + (real >> bp).asSInt).asSInt
397
io.a_out_imag
:= (io.a_imag + (imag >> bp).asSInt).asSInt
398
399
io.b_out_real
:= (io.a_real - (real >> bp).asSInt).asSInt
400
io.b_out_imag
:= (io.a_imag - (imag >> bp).asSInt).asSInt
401 }
appendices/chisel/FFT.scala
C.6
FFTTester.scala
1 package fft
2
3 import chisel3._
4 import chisel3.util._
5 import org.scalatest._
6
7 import chiseltest._
8 import chiseltest.experimental.TestOptionBuilder._
9 import chiseltest.internal.{VerilatorBackendAnnotation , WriteVcdAnnotation
}
10
11 class FFTTestSingleModule(bitwidth: Int, samples: Int, bp: Int) extends
Module{
12
val io = IO(new Bundle{
13
val running
= Output(Bool())//Indicates that the FFT is being
calculated
==PAGE:130==
114
C Code for Hardware
14
val start
= Input(Bool())
15
16
17
val testMemReq = Flipped(new MemReq())
18
})
19
20
21
val fft = Module(new FFTSingle(samples ,bitwidth ,bp))
22
23
24
val counter = Counter(2)
25
val valid = ~counter.inc()
26
fft.io.mem.valid := RegNext(valid)//Always valid. Change to test when
not always true.
27
28
io.testMemReq.valid := 1.B
29
30
io.running := fft.io.running
31
fft.io.start := io.start
32
33
34
//Memory should be able tom hold number of samples and the result , hence
*2
35
val mem = SyncReadMem(samples*2, UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
36
37
fft.io.mem.data_in := 0xffffffffL.U
38
when(fft.io.mem.en){
39
fft.io.mem.data_in := mem(fft.io.mem.addr)
40
when(fft.io.mem.write & valid){
41
mem.write(fft.io.mem.addr,fft.io.mem.data_out)
42
}
43
}
44
45
46
io.testMemReq.data_in := mem(io.testMemReq.addr)
47
when(io.testMemReq.write){
48
mem.write(io.testMemReq.addr, io.testMemReq.data_out)
49
}
50
51 }
52
53
54
55
56
57
58 class FFTSingleTest extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester with
Matchers {
59
behavior of "FFTSingleTester"
60
61
it should "Calculate an 8 point FFT" in {
62
==PAGE:131==
C.6 FFTTester.scala
115
63
val bp = 8 //Binary point, number of fractional bits.
64
val one = (1<<bp)-1
65
val input = Seq(one,one,one,0,0,0,0,0)
66
val samples = input.length
67
val bitwidth = bp + 1 + log2Ceil(samples) //Bitgrowth = number of
fractional bits + 1 for sign + number of levels
68
test(new FFTTestSingleModule(bitwidth ,samples , bp)).withAnnotations(
Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation ,VerilatorBackendAnnotation)) { c =>
69
70
c.clock.setTimeout(10000)
71
72
c.io.testMemReq.write.poke(1.B)
73
//Fill out memory
74
75
for(i <- 0 until samples){
76
77
c.io.testMemReq.addr.poke((i).U)
78
79
c.io.testMemReq.data_out.poke(input(i).U)
80
81
c.clock.step(1)
82
}
83
84
c.io.testMemReq.write.poke(0.B)
85
86
c.clock.step(10)
87
88
//Test that memory has been filled correctly
89
for(i <- 0 until samples){
90
c.io.testMemReq.addr.poke((i).U)
91
92
c.clock.step(1)
93
94
c.io.testMemReq.data_in.expect(input(i).U)
95
}
96
97
98
c.clock.step(10)
99
c.io.start.poke(1.B)
100
101
c.clock.step(4)
102
c.io.start.poke(0.B)
103
while(c.io.running.peek().litToBoolean == true){
104
c.clock.step(1)
105
}
106
c.clock.step(1)
107
108
val finalMemory = c.fft.finalMemory
109
110
for(index <- 0 until samples/2){
111
c.io.testMemReq.addr.poke(((finalMemory <<log2Ceil(samples)) +
index*2).U)
==PAGE:132==
116
C Code for Hardware
112
c.clock.step(1)
113
114
val out0 = c.io.testMemReq.data_in.peek()
115
c.io.testMemReq.addr.poke(((finalMemory <<log2Ceil(samples)) +
index*2+1).U)
116
c.clock.step(1)
117
val out1 = c.io.testMemReq.data_in.peek()
118
119
//Fixed 2 float
120
def int2float(int: BigInt, bitwidth: Int, bp: Int) = {
121
122
var real_int = int & ((1<<bitwidth)-1)
123
var imag_int = (int >> bitwidth) & ((1<<bitwidth)-1)
124
125
126
if (((real_int >>(bitwidth -1))&0x1) == 1){ //Sign bit
127
real_int = ~real_int
128
real_int += 1
129
real_int = real_int & ((1<<bitwidth)-1)
130
real_int *= -1
131
}
132
133
if (((imag_int >>(bitwidth -1))&0x1) == 1){
134
imag_int = ~imag_int //Twos complent *-1
135
imag_int += 1
136
imag_int = imag_int & ((1<<bitwidth)-1) //Only keep lower bits
137
imag_int *= -1 //Make bigint negative
138
}
139
140
val real = real_int.toDouble / ((1<<(bp)).toDouble)
141
val imag = imag_int.toDouble / ((1<<(bp)).toDouble)
142
143
(real, imag)
144
}
145
146
val (real_0 , imag_0) = int2float(out0.litValue(), bitwidth , bp)
147
val (real_1 , imag_1) = int2float(out1.litValue(), bitwidth , bp)
148
149
println("Index %d: %f; %fj".format(index*2, real_0, imag_0))
150
println("Index %d: %f; %fj".format(index*2+1, real_1, imag_1))
151
152
}
153
}
154
}
155 }
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
==PAGE:133==
C.6 FFTTester.scala
117
163
164
165 class FFTTestModule(bitwidth: Int, samples: Int, bp: Int) extends Module{
166
167
val io = IO(new Bundle{
168
169
//val audio_ready = Input(Bool()) //Indicates that the audio memory is
filled
170
val running
= Output(Bool())//Indicates that the FFT is being
calculated
171
val start
= Input(Bool())
172
173
174
val write_test
= Input(Bool())
175
val write_addr_a= Input(UInt(log2Ceil(samples).W))
176
val write_addr_b= Input(UInt(log2Ceil(samples).W))
177
178
val write_data_a= Input(UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
179
val write_data_b= Input(UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
180
181
val read_data_a = Output(UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
182
val read_data_b = Output(UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
183
184
185
val readB_addr_a = Input(UInt(log2Ceil(samples).W))
186
val readB_addr_b = Input(UInt(log2Ceil(samples).W))
187
188
val readB_data_a = Output(UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
189
val readB_data_b = Output(UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
190
})
191
192
193
val fft = Module(new FFT(samples ,bitwidth , bp))
194
195
val counter = Counter(6)
196
197
//fft.io.stall := 0.B// ~counter.inc()
198
fft.io.stall := ~counter.inc()
199
200
io.running := fft.io.running
201
//fft.io.audio_ready := io.audio_ready
202
fft.io.start := io.start
203
204
205
val memA = SyncReadMem(samples , UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
206
val memB = SyncReadMem(samples , UInt((bitwidth*2).W))
207
208
io.read_data_a := memA(io.write_addr_a)
209
io.read_data_b := memA(io.write_addr_b)
210
211
io.readB_data_a := memB(io.readB_addr_a)
212
io.readB_data_b := memB(io.readB_addr_b)
==PAGE:134==
118
C Code for Hardware
213
214
215
216
217
when(io.write_test){
218
memA.write(io.write_addr_a , io.write_data_a)
219
memA.write(io.write_addr_b , io.write_data_b)
220
}
221
222
when(fft.io.mem_audioA.en){
223
when(fft.io.mem_audioA.write){
224
memA.write(fft.io.mem_audioA.addr,fft.io.mem_audioA.data_out)
225
}
226
}
227
when(fft.io.mem_audioB.en){
228
when(fft.io.mem_audioB.write){
229
memA.write(fft.io.mem_audioB.addr,fft.io.mem_audioB.data_out)
230
}
231
}
232
233
234
when(fft.io.mem_FFTA.en){
235
when(fft.io.mem_FFTA.write){
236
memB.write(fft.io.mem_FFTA.addr,fft.io.mem_FFTA.data_out)
237
}
238
}
239
when(fft.io.mem_FFTB.en){
240
when(fft.io.mem_FFTB.write){
241
memB.write(fft.io.mem_FFTB.addr,fft.io.mem_FFTB.data_out)
242
}
243
}
244
245
when(fft.io.mem_audioA.en){
246
fft.io.mem_audioA.data_in := memA(fft.io.mem_audioA.addr)
247
fft.io.mem_audioB.data_in := memA(fft.io.mem_audioB.addr)
248
}.otherwise{
249
fft.io.mem_audioA.data_in := RegEnable(memA(fft.io.mem_audioA.addr),
fft.io.mem_audioA.en)
250
fft.io.mem_audioB.data_in := RegEnable(memA(fft.io.mem_audioB.addr),
fft.io.mem_audioB.en)
251
}
252
253
when(fft.io.mem_FFTA.en){
254
fft.io.mem_FFTA.data_in := memB(fft.io.mem_FFTA.addr)
255
fft.io.mem_FFTB.data_in := memB(fft.io.mem_FFTB.addr)
256
}.otherwise{
257
fft.io.mem_FFTA.data_in := RegEnable(memB(fft.io.mem_FFTA.addr),fft.io
.mem_FFTA.en)
258
fft.io.mem_FFTB.data_in := RegEnable(memB(fft.io.mem_FFTB.addr),fft.io
.mem_FFTB.en)
259
}
260 }
==PAGE:135==
C.6 FFTTester.scala
119
261
262 class FFTTest extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester with Matchers {
263
behavior of "FFTTester"
264
265
it should "Calculate an 8 point FFT" in {
266
267
val bp = 11 //Binary point, number of fractional bits.
268
val one = (1<<bp)-1
269
val input = Seq(one,one,one,0,0,0,0,0)
270
val samples = input.length
271
val bitwidth = bp + 1 + log2Ceil(samples) //Bitgrowth = number of
fractional bits + 1 for sign + number of levels
272
test(new FFTTestModule(bitwidth ,samples , bp)).withAnnotations(Seq(
WriteVcdAnnotation ,VerilatorBackendAnnotation)) { c =>
273
274
c.io.write_test.poke(1.B)
275
//Fill out memory
276
277
for(i <- 0 until samples/2){
278
c.io.write_addr_a.poke((i*2).U)
279
c.io.write_addr_b.poke((i*2+1).U)
280
281
c.io.write_data_a.poke(input(i*2).U)
282
c.io.write_data_b.poke(input(i*2+1).U)
283
284
c.clock.step(1)
285
}
286
287
c.io.write_test.poke(0.B)
288
289
c.clock.step(10)
290
291
//Test that memory has been filled correctly
292
for(i <- 0 until samples/2){
293
c.io.write_addr_a.poke((i*2).U)
294
c.io.write_addr_b.poke((i*2+1).U)
295
296
c.clock.step(1)
297
298
c.io.read_data_a.expect(input(i*2).U)
299
c.io.read_data_b.expect(input(i*2+1).U)
300
}
301
302
303
c.clock.step(10)
304
c.io.start.poke(1.B)
305
306
c.clock.step(4)
307
c.io.start.poke(0.B)
308
while(c.io.running.peek().litToBoolean == true){
309
c.clock.step(1)
310
}
==PAGE:136==
120
C Code for Hardware
311
c.clock.step(1)
312
313
val finalMemory = c.fft.finalMemory
314
315
for(index <- 0 until samples/2){
316
c.io.write_addr_a.poke((index*2).U)
317
c.io.write_addr_b.poke((index*2+1).U)
318
319
c.io.readB_addr_a.poke((index*2).U)
320
c.io.readB_addr_b.poke((index*2+1).U)
321
322
c.clock.step(1)
323
324
val out0 = if(c.fft.finalMemory == 0) c.io.read_data_a.peek() else
c.io.readB_data_a.peek()
325
val out1 = if(c.fft.finalMemory == 0) c.io.read_data_b.peek() else
c.io.readB_data_b.peek()
326
327
//Float 2 fixed
328
def int2float(int: BigInt, bitwidth: Int, bp: Int) = {
329
330
var real_int = int & ((1<<bitwidth)-1)
331
var imag_int = (int >> bitwidth) & ((1<<bitwidth)-1)
332
333
334
if (((real_int >>(bitwidth -1))&0x1) == 1){ //Sign bit
335
real_int = ~real_int
336
real_int += 1
337
real_int = real_int & ((1<<bitwidth)-1)
338
real_int *= -1
339
}
340
341
if (((imag_int >>(bitwidth -1))&0x1) == 1){
342
imag_int = ~imag_int //Twos complent *-1
343
imag_int += 1
344
imag_int = imag_int & ((1<<bitwidth)-1) //Only keep lower bits
345
imag_int *= -1 //Make bigint negative
346
}
347
348
val real = real_int.toDouble / ((1<<(bp)).toDouble)
349
val imag = imag_int.toDouble / ((1<<(bp)).toDouble)
350
351
(real, imag)
352
}
353
354
val (real_0 , imag_0) = int2float(out0.litValue(), bitwidth , bp)
355
val (real_1 , imag_1) = int2float(out1.litValue(), bitwidth , bp)
356
357
println("Index %d: %f; %fj".format(index*2, real_0, imag_0))
358
println("Index %d: %f; %fj".format(index*2+1, real_1, imag_1))
359
360
}
==PAGE:137==
C.6 FFTTester.scala
121
361
}
362
}
363 }
364
365
366
367 class FFTComponentTest extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester with
Matchers {
368
behavior of "AGUTester"
369
it should "Generate correct memory addressing for 8 samples" in {
370
test(new AGU(8)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)) { c =>
371
372
val bits = log2Ceil(8)
373
374
c.io.start.poke(0.B)
375
while(c.io.done.peek == 0){
376
c.clock.step()
377
}
378
379
c.io.start.poke(1.B)
380
c.clock.step()
381
c.io.start.poke(0.B)
382
383
c.io.a_addr_read.expect(0.U)
384
c.io.b_addr_read.expect(4.U)
385
c.clock.step()
386
387
c.io.a_addr_read.expect(2.U)
388
c.io.b_addr_read.expect(6.U)
389
c.clock.step()
390
391
c.io.a_addr_read.expect(1.U)
392
c.io.b_addr_read.expect(5.U)
393
c.clock.step()
394
395
c.io.a_addr_read.expect(3.U)
396
c.io.b_addr_read.expect(7.U)
397
c.clock.step()
398
}
399
}
400
401
//Float 2 fixed
402
def f2f(floatNumber: Double, bitwidth: Int, bp: Int, add: Int = 0) : Int
={
403
val multiplied = floatNumber*(1<<bp)
404
var integer = math.round(multiplied)
405
406
407
val result = (integer+add).toInt
408
409
return result
410
}
==PAGE:138==
122
C Code for Hardware
411
412
413
414
415
behavior of "BFUTester"
416
it should "Calculate some different factors" in {
417
test(new BFU(16,10)).withAnnotations(Seq(WriteVcdAnnotation)){ c =>
418
419
val a = f2f(1.0,16,10,-1)
420
val b = f2f(1.0,16,10,-1)
421
val twiddle = f2f(1.0,16,10,-1)
422
423
//ToDo implement some different tests
424
425
c.io.a_real.poke( a.S)
426
c.io.a_imag.poke( 0.S)
427
428
c.io.b_real.poke( b.S)
429
c.io.b_imag.poke( 0.S)
430
431
c.io.twiddle_real.poke(
twiddle.S)
432
c.io.twiddle_imag.poke(
0.S)
433
434
435
c.clock.step()
436
437
c.io.a_out_real.expect((((a<<10)+b*twiddle)>>10).S)
438
439
c.io.b_out_real.expect(1.S)
440
441
442
}
443
}
444
445 }
appendices/chisel/FFTTester.scala
C.7
TestFirmwareLogging
1 class TestFirmwareLogging extends FlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester with
Matchers{
2
//This test logs the value of PC every cycle, to see where the most time
is spent.
3
behavior of("FPGA SoC system")
4
5
//print("Starting test")
6
7
val path = "program/tests/tf_micro_speech_test/bin/main.hex"
8
//val path = "program/tests/tf_hello_world_test/bin/main.hex"
==PAGE:139==
C.7 TestFirmwareLogging
123
9
//val path = "program/tests/tf_micro_speech/bin/main.hex"
10
11
"tf_micro_speech" should "print ~~~ALL TESTS PASSED~~~" in {
12
13
implicit val p = (new FPGAConfig).toInstance
14
15
test(new FPGASoC(memPath = path)).withAnnotations(Seq(
VerilatorBackendAnnotation ,// WriteVcdAnnotation ,
16
VerilatorFlags(Seq("--trace-depth
1",
17
"--threads 12"
18
)))) { dut =>
19
20
val pcMap = HashMap[Long, Long]().withDefaultValue(0.toLong)
21
22
fork{
23
//print("Forked")
24
while(true){
25
26
dut.io.debugBools(1).expect(1.B)
27
pcMap(dut.io.debugUInt.peek.litValue.toLong) += 1
28
dut.clock.step(1)
29
}
30
}
31
32
val MAXSTEPS = 1000000000
33
dut.clock.setTimeout(MAXSTEPS + 4)
34
35
//UART reader. Outputs a line on a line end.
36
val baudrate = 115200
37
val frequency= 32000000
38
var string = ""
39
val stepsPerBit = (frequency / baudrate).toInt
40
41
dut.clock.step(10)
42
43
var done = false
44
45
while(true & !done){
46
47
48
49
var char = 0
50
51
//Look for start bit falling_edge
52
while(dut.io.uart.tx.peek.litValue.toInt == 1){
53
dut.clock.step(1)
54
}
55
56
//Move ahead half a bit and a half, which should be the middle
of the first bit
57
dut.clock.step(stepsPerBit/2)
==PAGE:140==
124
C Code for Hardware
58
dut.clock.step(stepsPerBit)
59
60
for(i <- 0 until 8){
61
char = (char)
+ (dut.io.uart.tx.peek.litValue.toInt << i)
62
63
//Step one bitwidth
64
dut.clock.step(stepsPerBit)
65
}
66
67
char = char & 0xff
68
string = string + char.toChar
69
70
if (char.toChar == '\n') {
71
72
if(string.contains("~~~ALL TESTS PASSED~~~")){
73
finalize()
74
done = true
75
}
76
if(string.contains("~~~SOME TESTS FAILED~~~")){
77
finalize()
78
done = true
79
dut.reset.expect(1.B) //Fails on this assertion
80
}
81
82
83
print("Got string: ")
84
print(string)
85
string = ""
86
}
87
88
//Pass the stop bit
89
}
90
91
92
//Finalize by writing pcMap to file:
93
val mapPath = path + ".log.txt"
94
95
val pw = new PrintWriter(new File(mapPath))
96
97
dut.clock.step(10)
98
99
for((key, value) <- pcMap.toSeq.sortBy(_._1)) pw.write("Key: 0x"+
key.toHexString+", value:"+value.toString()+"\n")
100
101
pw.close
102
103
dut.clock.step(10)
104
}
105
}
106 }
appendices/chisel/TestFirmwareLogging.scala
==PAGE:141==
C.8 Basys3FPGASoC
125
C.8
Basys3FPGASoC
1 class Basys3FPGASoC(memPath: String = "")(implicit override val p:
Parameters) extends Basys3Shell {
2
3
withClockAndReset(clock_32MHz , resetIn) {
4
implicit val p = (new FPGAConfig).toInstance
5
6
val soc = Module(new FPGASoC(sim=false, memPath= memPath))
7
8
//Connecting the XADC
9
soc.io.xadc.vauxn6 := vauxn6
10
soc.io.xadc.vauxn7 := vauxn7
11
soc.io.xadc.vauxn14 := vauxn14
12
soc.io.xadc.vauxn15 := vauxn15
13
soc.io.xadc.vn_in := vn_in
14
15
soc.io.xadc.vauxp6 := vauxp6
16
soc.io.xadc.vauxp7 := vauxp7
17
soc.io.xadc.vauxp14 := vauxp14
18
soc.io.xadc.vauxp15 := vauxp15
19
soc.io.xadc.vp_in := vp_in
20
21
/*
22
//LEDs for debugging purposes
23
IOBUF(LED(0), clock_32MHz.asUInt().asBool())
24
IOBUF(LED(1), resetIn.asBool())
25
IOBUF(LED(2), soc.io.debugBools(0).asBool())*/
26
27
for (i <- 0 until 16) {
28
IOBUF(LED(i), soc.io.gpio.leds(i))
29
}
30
31
for (i <- 0 until 16) {
32
soc.io.gpio.switches(i) := IOBUF(sw(i))
33
}
34
35
36
//Buttons
37
soc.io.gpio.but_l := IOBUF(btnL)
38
soc.io.gpio.but_r := IOBUF(btnR)
39
soc.io.gpio.but_d := IOBUF(btnD)
40
41
soc.io.gpio.but_c := 0.B //Used for reset
42
soc.io.gpio.but_u := 0.B //Used for MMCM reset
43
44
45
46
//Seven Segment
47
for (i <- 0 until 7) {
48
IOBUF(seg(i), soc.io.sevenSeg.seg(i))
49
}
==PAGE:142==
126
C Code for Hardware
50
51
for (i <- 0 until 4) {
52
IOBUF(an(i), soc.io.sevenSeg.an(i))
53
}
54
IOBUF(dp, soc.io.sevenSeg.dp)
55
56
soc.io.uart.rx := IOBUF(RsRx)
57
58
IOBUF(RsTx, soc.io.uart.tx)
59
60
dontTouch(soc.io.host)
61
soc.io.host <> DontCare
62
63
//Map SPI to jtag at first
64
IOBUF(JA(0), soc.io.spi.chipSelect_n)
65
IOBUF(JA(1), soc.io.spi.sck)
66
IOBUF(JA(2), soc.io.spi.sdi)
67
IOBUF(JA(3), soc.io.spi.wp_n)
68
IOBUF(JA(4), soc.io.spi.hld_n)
69
70
soc.io.spi.sdo := IOBUF(QspiSO)
71
IOBUF(QspiCSn , soc.io.spi.chipSelect_n)
72
IOBUF(QspiSI , soc.io.spi.sdi)
73
IOBUF(QspiWn , soc.io.spi.wp_n)
74
IOBUF(QspiHoldn , soc.io.spi.hld_n)
75
76
//Connect clock for qspi through STARTUPE2
77
val startupe2 = Module(new STARTUPE2())
78
//startupe2.io.CLK := false.B.asClock
79
startupe2.io.GSR := 0.U
80
startupe2.io.GTS := 0.U
81
startupe2.io.KEYCLEARB := 0.U
82
startupe2.io.PACK := 0.U
83
startupe2.io.USRCCLKO := soc.io.spi.sck
84
startupe2.io.USRCCLKTS := 0.U
85
startupe2.io.USRDONEO := 0.U
86
startupe2.io.USRDONETS := 1.U
87
88
}
89 }
appendices/chisel/Basys3FPGASoC.scala
C.9
MALU.scala
1 // See LICENSE for license details.
2 package mini
3
4 import chisel3._
5 import chisel3.util._
==PAGE:143==
C.9 MALU.scala
127
6 import freechips.rocketchip.config.Parameters
7
8 // Multiplication and division ALU
9
10 object MALU {
11
val MALU_MUL
= 0.U(4.W)
12
val MALU_MULH
= 1.U(4.W)
13
val MALU_MULHU
= 2.U(4.W)
14
val MALU_MULHSU = 3.U(4.W)
15
val MALU_DIV
= 4.U(4.W)
16
val MALU_DIVU
= 5.U(4.W)
17
val MALU_REM
= 6.U(4.W)
18
val MALU_REMU
= 7.U(4.W)
19
20
val MALU_XXX
= 15.U(4.W)
21 }
22
23 class MALUIo(implicit p: Parameters) extends CoreBundle()(p) {
24
val rs1 = Input(UInt(xlen.W))
25
val rs2 = Input(UInt(xlen.W))
26
val alu_op = Input(UInt(4.W))
27
28
val out = Output(UInt(xlen.W))
29 }
30
31 import mini.MALU._
32
33 abstract class MALU(implicit val p: Parameters) extends Module with
CoreParams {
34
val io = IO(new MALUIo)
35
def logMALUOp(op: Int): Unit = {
36
when(io.alu_op === op.U) {
37
printf("A == %d, B == %d, opcode == %d\n", io.rs1, io.rs2, io.alu_op
)
38
}
39
}
40 }
41
42 class MALUImplSingleCycle(implicit p: Parameters) extends MALU()(p) {
43
44
val op1 = io.rs1
45
val op2 = io.rs2
46
47
//ToDo: Implement limiter such that too high values will get clipped to
max/min
48
io.out := MuxLookup(io.alu_op, DontCare , Seq(
49
MALU_MUL
-> (op1 * op2)(xlen -1,0),
50
MALU_MULH
-> (op1.asSInt * op2.asSInt())(xlen*2-1, xlen).asUInt,
51
MALU_MULHU
-> (op1 * op2)(xlen*2-1, xlen),
52
MALU_MULHSU
-> (op1.asSInt * op2)(xlen*2-1, xlen).asUInt,
53
54
MALU_DIV -> (op1.asSInt / op2.asSInt()).asUInt,
==PAGE:144==
128
C Code for Hardware
55
MALU_DIVU -> (op1 / op2),
56
57
MALU_REM -> (op1.asSInt % op2.asSInt()).asUInt,
58
MALU_REMU -> (op1 % op2),
59
60
MALU_XXX
-> DontCare
61
62
))
63 }
appendices/chisel/MALU.scala
==PAGE:145==
==PAGE:146==
