==PAGE:1==
Flexibility Design for Optimization of Bridge Girders
Jari Devilee
Master Thesis
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
June 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis is part of the fulﬁllment of the requirements for the Master degree in
Civil Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark. The project accounts for
30 ECTS, and has been carried out between 02-01-2020 and 02-06-2020.
Supervisors:
Associate Professor Peter Noe Poulsen, DTU Civil Engineering
Associate Professor John Forbes Olesen, DTU Civil Engineering
Jari Devilee
s182560
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, 2 June 2020
II
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Peter Noe Poulsen and John Forbes Olesen for
their helpful advice throughout the project. Under their supervision I have been able to
learn a lot. I enjoyed discussing my work with them, both in person and through virtual
meetings.
I also want to give a special thanks to Jan Karolini from DTU Byg IT, who made
it possible for me to complete this thesis from home after DTU closed down halfway
through the project.
III
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Orthotropic bridge decks have enabled bridges to span record-breaking distances. To
build bridges that span even further, the weight of the girder has to be reduced, and
fatigue problems must be tackled. New design approaches are needed to improve the
already very optimised orthotropic deck design. This report investigates the eﬀects of
the ﬂexibility of the top plate supports on the stresses in the top plate. By creating a
more ﬂexible support system stresses can be distributed more evenly. The aim is to ﬁnd
a design that lowers stresses in the top plate without increasing the self-weight of the
girder.
The ﬁrst approach focuses on more ﬂexible diaphragms to reduce the reaction forces where
the top plate runs over the diaphragm. A second approach focuses on the introduction
of longitudinally inclined diaphragm elements, to increase shear interaction between the
top and bottom plate. Models are made in 2D ﬁrst, and successful design changes are
implemented in a detailed 3D model. Finally, the most successful design is used for a
more detailed optimisation. All the models in this project are based on the Izmit Bay
Bridge, a suspension bridge designed by COWI.
The results show that creating more ﬂexible diaphragms can reduce the stresses in the top
plate, but only when combined with a proportional reduction of the diaphragm spacing.
In 2D, reducing the stiﬀness and spacing by 50% decreased the top plate stress by 21%.
Top plate stresses are also reduced by introducing inclined diaphragm elements. The
optimisation in 3D showed that new designs can reduce both stress and self-weight. The
maximum stress reduction was 10%, the maximum weight reduction was 5%.
From all the diﬀerent models and results, two main conclusions can be drawn. First
of all, top plate stress can be reduced by making the top plate supports more ﬂexible,
if combined with a reduced diaphragm spacing. Secondly, the top plate stress can be
reduced by introducing inclined diaphragm elements. Both design changes require more
elements, but the optimisation showed that it is still possible to achieve a lower girder
self-weight.
IV
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
3
Izmit Bay Bridge Design
4
4
2D Model Setup
6
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Shear elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Section properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.5
Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.6
Stress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Testing of the 2D Model
13
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.1.1
Inﬂuence of diaphragm spacing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.1.2
Inﬂuence of shear stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.3
Inﬂuence of top plate stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.4
Inﬂuence of bottom plate stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.5
Inﬂuence of diaphragm bending stiﬀness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.6
Combination of multiple parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.7
Constant weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Increasing shear stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Inclined diaphragms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1
Only inclined elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.2
Vertical and double inclined elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3.3
Vertical and single inclined elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3.4
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6
3D Model Setup
27
6.1
Level 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.1.1
Boundary conditions and connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.2
Pre-tensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Level 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.3
Connections between Level 1 and Level 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4.1
Betti’s theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4.2
Truck load location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.5
Inclined element design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.6
Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
V
==PAGE:7==
7
Testing of the 3D Model
47
7.1
First run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Constant weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.3
Comparing 2D and 3D results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8
Optimisation
57
8.1
Diaphragm spacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Parameter study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.2.1
Top plate reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2.2
Diaphragm beam reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2.3
Diaphragm strut reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.2.4
Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9
Conclusion
69
10 Further Work
71
References
72
A Matlab Element Properties
76
B Shear Element Calculations
79
C Veriﬁcation of Shear Elements
80
D Dead Load Calculations
82
E Pretension Calculations
83
F New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
86
G Strut Stress for Constant Weight Models
91
H Top Plate Section Properties
93
I
Diaphragm Section Properties
98
VI
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The maximum span of suspension bridges has increased considerably during the 20th
century. At the start of the century the Brooklyn Bridge in New York was the record
holder, with a main span of 486 m [1]. At the end of the century the longest main span
was found in the Akashi Kaikyo Bridge in Japan, with a main span of 1991 m [1]. New
bridges are planned in Italy and across the Gibraltar Strait with main spans of more than
3 km [2, 3].
One of the important inventions that enables such long-span bridges is the orthotropic
deck. This deck consists of many thin steel plates, creating a very lightweight structure.
Low self-weight is necessary for the cables to be able to carry the bridge over large spans.
Over the years the orthotropic deck has been optimised to minimise weight, while carrying
heavier loads.
On the downside, the orthotropic deck is relatively ﬂexible, and prone to fatigue problems.
The deck has a large number of welds that are subject to endless load cycles as cars and
trucks cross the bridge. This can lead to cracks in the welds and plates, compromising
the structural integrity of the bridge. Especially the connections to the top plate suﬀer
from fatigue, as the stresses are highest right under the wheels applying loads.
In this project the ﬂexibility of the top plate supports is changed in search for a more
optimal design. The main question is: how does the ﬂexibility of the top plate supports
aﬀect the stresses in the top plate? Initially a more ﬂexible diaphragm is created, reducing
the reaction forces where the top plate runs over the diaphragm. The ﬂexible support
will allow for more displacement, so bending in the top plate will increase. To prevent
high bending stresses, other parameters increasing the stiﬀness of the girder are combined
with the reduced diaphragm stiﬀness. The goal is to ﬁnd a design that lowers the stress
in the top plate without increasing the girder self-weight.
A second approach will focus on the introduction of longitudinally inclined diaphragm
elements. Modern orthotropic decks only have transverse diaphragms. By creating el-
ements that have a longitudinal inclination, the shear interaction between the top and
bottom plate is increased, and stresses could be reduced. Again the goal is to ﬁnd a
design that lowers the stress in the top plate without increasing the girder self-weight.
A secondary goal is the reduction of self-weight without increasing the stress in the top
plate.
First models are made in 2D, since a simple setup will allow for quick design changes,
so many parameters can be tested over a wide range of values. The results of the 2D
analysis will give an indication of what design changes are eﬀective. These designs are
then modelled in more detail in a 3D model. The most eﬀective design from the 3D
models is used for a detailed optimisation in an attempt to minimise top plate stress and
girder self-weight.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
The orthotropic bridge deck was invented in 1948 [4]. The design looked very simple then,
compared to the orthotropic bridges that have been built more recently. Longitudinal
beam girders supported a top plate, which had open ﬂat plates welded on the bottom
to increase the bending stiﬀness of the top plate. The system was very eﬃcient in its
material use, making it relatively lightweight. While this design was innovative at the
time, many improvements have been made since.
After the collapse of the Tacoma Bridge in 1940, more emphasis was placed on aerody-
namics. The Severn bridge was the ﬁrst bridge to use a streamlined closed box girder,
making it less susceptible to wind loading, and stiﬀer in torsion [1]. The closed box girder
is still commonly used in the design of long span bridges.
Other improvements relate to fatigue problems, as this was initially overlooked or not
properly understood [4]. An orthotropic deck contains many welds, making it generally
more susceptible to fatigue failure than other deck types. Many bridges built in the middle
of the twentieth century have suﬀered fatigue damage, and required heavy maintenance.
[5, 6]. Since then, improvements have been made in the connection detailing to create
more resistant welds [4], which has also shaped the new Eurocode design guidance [7].
Despite the improvements, fatigue is still a major concern in the design of orthotropic
bridge decks, and research from all sorts of angles is conducted to improve orthotropic
bridge decks. This varies from optimisation of plate thicknesses [8, 9], to optimised rib
dimensions [10], to the introduction of fracture mechanics to aid the fatigue analysis [11].
Another method to reduce fatigue problems that has been investigated a lot relates to
the inﬂuence of the surfacing layer. This layer is the only layer separating traﬃc from
the steel top plate. If the surfacing layer is stiﬀand has a rigid bond with the underlying
top plate, composite action may occur [12]. In this case the stresses in the top plate are
signiﬁcantly reduced, and fatigue cracks will occur after a much longer time period, or
not at all. However, replacing a common asphalt layer with a stiﬀer concrete layer results
in a weight increase of the deck [12, 13, 14], which is undesirable for several reasons.
First of all, while avoiding structural failure is one of the main drivers in bridge design,
a client might focus more on cost. If the self-weight of the girder is increased, then the
size of all other elements will also increase. Scaling up the main cable, towers, anchors
blocks, and tower foundations would be very expensive. It is therefore important that
new design concepts do not lead to a signiﬁcant weight increase of the girder. Secondly,
feasibility might become a barrier. With the current density and strength of steel cables,
the theoretical maximum length of a suspension cable is 5 km [15], which is the length
at which the cable can only carry its own weight. With planned bridges spanning 3 to 5
km [2, 3], keeping the girder self-weight to a minimum is of critical importance.
Previous research has focused a lot on increasing the stiﬀness of the top plate and surfacing
layer [12, 13].
In this project the ﬂexibility of the top plate support system will be
2
==PAGE:10==
2 Background
decreased. By creating more ﬂexible diaphragms, the traﬃc load should be more evenly
spread between diaphragms, thus reducing the stresses in the connection between the top
plate and the diaphragm.
Introducing more ﬂexibility in the diaphragms might require the introduction of more
elements to limit deﬂection and curvature in the top plate. Increasing the number of
elements in the diaphragms will of course result in a higher self-weight, so a balance must
be found between the stiﬀness of the elements, and the number of elements. This project
aims to reduce the fatigue problems in orthotropic decks, while keeping the self-weight
of the girder to a minimum.
3
==PAGE:11==
3
Izmit Bay Bridge Design
All the models in this project are based on the Izmit Bay Bridge to make the project as
realistic and relevant as possible. The Izmit Bay Bridge is designed by COWI A/S and
Dissing+Weitling architects, and was opened in 2016. The bridge ranks in the top ten
longest spanning suspension bridges in the world. This chapter will give an outline of the
design, which will be used as a reference throughout the report.
Figure 3.1 shows the elevation of the bridge. The suspended part of the bridge is sym-
metric, since the towers are of equal height and the side spans of equal length.
Figure 3.1: Elevation drawing of the Izmit Bay Bridge (Figure by COWI)
Figure 3.2 shows a cross section of the girder. The girder is made of thin steel plates,
supported by troughs running longitudinally on the inside of the girder on all plates. Since
the troughs run longitudinally, the plates have a much higher stiﬀness in the longitudinal
direction than in the orthogonal, transverse direction. This special form of anisotropy is
called orthotropy, and the girder is called an orthotropic girder.
A diaphragm is installed at every 5 m interval. The diaphragm consists of a diaphragm
beam running transversely between the troughs, and ten diaphragm struts connecting
the top beam to the bottom beam. The diaphragms provide a stiﬀsupport to the top
plate, ensuring the girder keeps its general shape and allowing the top and bottom plate
to share loads. In this project the ﬂexibility of this top plate support will be investigated,
so most of the design changes will focus on the diaphragms.
Figure 3.2: Cross section drawing of the Izmit Bay Bridge girder (Figure by COWI)
4
==PAGE:12==
3 Izmit Bay Bridge Design
The girder supports six traﬃc lanes, three in each direction. A 60 mm thick surfacing
layer separates the wheels from the steel top plate. The troughs under the outer lanes
are slightly thicker, as heavy lorries are expected to mainly use the outer lanes.
Table 3.1 gives some important dimensions of the girder. More details of the design may
be introduced in the report when relevant.
Hanger spacing
25 m
Width between hangers
30.1 m
Total girder width
35.93 m
Maximum girder height
4.75 m
Diaphragm spacing
5 m
Top plate thickness
14 mm
Bottom plate thickness
9 mm
Diaphragm beam plate thickness
14 mm
Diaphragm strut radius
219 mm
Diaphragm strut thickness
5-8 mm
Table 3.1: Dimensions of the Izmit Bay Bridge girder
The girder is completely made of steel, with a thin surfacing layer on top. The hangers
and main cable are also made of steel, but with a much higher yielding strength to allow
for the high tensile stresses in the cables. Table 3.2 gives some material parameters of
the structural steel. No details of the towers, anchors, and foundation are given here,
since these parts of the bridge are not under investigation in this project.
Density
Young’s modulus
Poisson’s ratio
Yield strength
Material
[kg/m3]
[GPa]
[-]
[MPa]
Plate steel
7850
210
0.3
335-460
Cable steel
7850
195
0.3
1770
Table 3.2: Material parameters of the Izmit Bay Bridge
5
==PAGE:13==
4
2D Model Setup
4.1
Introduction
The girder is ﬁrst modelled in 2D using Matlab. By keeping the model simple, many small
changes can be made to a range of variables. In the initial phase of the project the design
variables to be investigated were not ﬁxed. The project mainly focuses on the ﬂexibility
of the diaphragms, but many other parameters can be investigated in combination with
the diaphragm ﬂexibility to optimise the design.
A code [16] for analysing frame structures with simple beam elements is implemented.
Using inputs like diaphragm spacing, hanger spacing, heights, thicknesses, etc., all the
nodes, elements and material properties can be neatly assembled in matrices. The code
can then set up the stiﬀness matrix, determine the deformations and section forces, and
plot the outputs. By making the model as parametric as possible, almost all inputs can
be changed independently to alter the geometry and stiﬀness of the girder. This section
will outline how the model was created, how it works, and what assumptions are made
within the model.
To convert the 3D girder to a 2D model, various simpliﬁcations had to be made. In
reality the top and bottom plate both consist of thin steel plates with troughs, creating
orthotropic plates. Both plates have an inclination. The real girder also has inclined web
plates, horizontal walkway plates, and diaphragm beams and struts, as shown in Figure
3.2. This detailed section needs to be approximated by two beams only, representing the
top and bottom plate, plus some vertical elements to connect them.
Figure 4.1 shows one span between two hangers of the Matlab model. It shows the top
and bottom plate as horizontal beams, connected by vertical beams representing the
diaphragms. Hangers are placed at 25 m intervals. There are also shear elements. The
setup and function of these elements will be explained in section 4.2.
Figure 4.1: 2D Matlab model of the bridge girder
For both the top and bottom plate, the section properties were calculated per meter
width, based on the plate thickness and geometry of the troughs (see Appendix A).
The inclined web plates were ignored, and the top and bottom plate were assumed fully
horizontal, ignoring any inclination. The width of the top plate is approximately 25.7
6
==PAGE:14==
4 2D Model Setup
4.2
Shear elements
m, which in the 2D model was reduced to 25 m. Top bottom plate is modelled with
the same width. The section properties per meter were therefore multiplied by 25. The
maximum height of the girder is 4.75 m, but an average height of 4 m is used in the
2D model. Using these dimensions, the total moment of inertia of the 2D girder is 99%
of the moment of inertia of the original girder, showing that the assumptions on height
and width are reasonable. The goal was not to make the 2D model identical to the real
bridge, but to ensure stiﬀnesses and behaviour are reasonably representative of the real
bridge.
4.2
Shear elements
The inclined web plates are ignored in the calculation of the section properties of the top
and bottom plate, but they fulﬁl an important role in transferring shear forces between
the top and bottom plate. If the top and bottom plate were modelled without being
connected through the webs, the girder would become like a Vierendeel truss, although
the diaphragms are much weaker in bending than the top and bottom plate. In reality
part of the shear force is transferred through the web, making the top and bottom work
together in bending. To model this transfer of shear forces, a set of special elements was
created that allows solely for the transfer of shear forces, so no axial forces or moments
are transferred (Figure 4.2).
The elements are made as was done by Turmo [17], where it is used to model shear inter-
action of a steel-concrete composite beam. Two inclined elements are created (element
3) starting at the top and bottom plate respectively. The other ends are connected by
a horizontal element (element 4). The inclined elements are very stiﬀcompared to the
top and bottom plate, so they do not deform locally when the girder is loaded. The
horizontal element is axially stiﬀ, but has no bending stiﬀness, thereby only resisting
horizontal motion between the nodes in the top and bottom plate. The axial stiﬀness
of the element is based on the real shear stiﬀness between the top and bottom plate of
the girder. There are also diaphragm elements (element 2) to keep the top and bottom
plate apart, transferring only the vertical loads. There are many shear elements between
diaphragms to ensure the shear interaction is continuous along the entire span.
Figure 4.2: Shear connector element design
To approximate the real shear stiﬀness of the girder, the steel plate can be unfolded
7
==PAGE:15==
4 2D Model Setup
4.2
Shear elements
(Figure 4.3). The rectangle, which has a unit width, has a shear stiﬀness G. If the top is
displaced by a unit force, the top displacement is:
∆x = F · Lplate
GAs
(1)
The axial deformation of a beam is:
∆x = F · Lelement
EA
(2)
With ∆x known from equation 1 , the axial stiﬀness EA of the element can be determined
using equation 2. This calculation is performed twice, once for a section of the top and
bottom plate at the edge of the girder, and once for a section of the top and bottom plate
in the middle of the girder (Figure 4.3). This is done since the shear stiﬀness will be
diﬀerent due to the diﬀerence in length. The average stiﬀness is applied to the elements
in the 2D model. The stiﬀness value in the model is based on the shear stiﬀener spacing,
to ensure the stiﬀness per meter span is constant even when the number of shear elements
per meter is changed. Calculations can be found in Appendix B.
Figure 4.3: Unfolded girder area responsible for the shear interaction of the top and bottom
plate at the edge and centre of girder
To verify that this element setup works, a simply supported beam is modelled much like
the girder, with an identical top and bottom plate, shear connectors, and diaphragms.
Without any shear elements the top and bottom plate bend independently, each taking
half the load. When the number of shear stiﬀeners is increased suﬃciently the top and
bottom plate should behave like a composite beam with full interaction. A convergence
model was made, where the number of shear elements is increased until full interaction is
achieved. The model was run for both a point load at midspan, and a UDL on the entire
beam. Results show that there is convergence (Figure 4.4), and the beam eventually
behaves like a composite beam.
Table 4.1 shows comparisons with analytical values
of deﬂection, demonstrating that full shear interaction is achieved. The plots showing
deﬂection and section force diagrams of the converged models are shown in Appendix C.
8
==PAGE:16==
4 2D Model Setup
4.3
Section properties
(a) Point Load
(b) Distributed load
Figure 4.4: Convergence plots of deﬂection for two standard load cases for an increasing
number of shear elements
Load case
Deﬂection analytical
Deﬂection numerical
Diﬀerence
[mm]
[mm]
[%]
Point load no shear
248
248
0.00
Point load full shear
1.97
1.96
0.51
UDL no shear
1550
1550
0.00
UDL full shear
12.30
12.31
0.08
Table 4.1: Shear interaction test results for a simply supported beam
4.3
Section properties
The girder model is set up to be as parametric as possible.
With simple changes of
numbers in the input ﬁle, it is possible to change the spacing between diaphragms, shear
elements, and hangers, but also the number of spans, the trough dimensions, and plate
thicknesses. Section properties of the top and bottom plate are then calculated based
on these inputs. The diaphragm is given an area approximately equal to the area of the
ten struts in the original design, which is 0.085 m2. A similar calculation is done for
the moment of inertia, giving a value of 0.002 m4. Calculations are shown in Appendix
A. The stiﬀconnectors in the shear elements are given an arbitrary high value to model
them as rigid elements, while the axial stiﬀness of the horizontal element is determined
as explained in section 4.2. Hangers are given twice the area of the real hangers since the
hangers on each side of the girder are merged in the 2D model. However, the hangers
at the boundaries of the model are not doubled to create a symmetric boundary. The
moment of inertia of the hangers is very low to ensure the hangers transfer no bending
moments. Section properties of the main elements are given in Table 4.2.
9
==PAGE:17==
4 2D Model Setup
4.4
Boundary conditions
Element
E
A
I
[GPa]
[m2]
[m4]
Top plate
210
0.615
0.011
Bottom plate
210
0.352
0.004
Diaphragm
210
0.085
0.002
Hanger
195
0.032
1e-21
Table 4.2: Stiﬀness and section properties of the main elements in the 2D model
4.4
Boundary conditions
The model only models a part of the deck, not the entire bridge. Appropriate boundary
conditions need to be established to keep the model realistic. The most detailed solution
would be to calculate the deformations in a global model of the full bridge, and apply the
relevant deformations to the edges of the smaller girder model, as was done Baandrup
[18]. This needs to be done for every load case, and diﬀerence in ﬂexibility between the
global and local model needs to be accounted for.
In order to simplify the boundary conditions and to allow for changing of load cases at
the early stage of the project, it was decided to increase the size of the local model, and
apply no special boundary conditions at all. By simply applying the load far away from
the boundary by modelling more spans, there will be very little eﬀect from the boundary
conditions. A small investigation showed that section forces and deformations converge
when 7 spans are modelled, taking the section forces and deformations from the centre
span (Figure 4.5). Since the model is a simple beam model, including a few extra spans is
not too computationally demanding, so this solution was implemented, and no complex
boundary conditions are included.
(a) Point load deﬂection
(b) Point load normal force
(c) Point load moment
Figure 4.5: Convergence plots of deﬂection and section forces for an increasing number of
spans
The only support conditions are then on the hangers. The hangers are supported at
the top in all three degrees of freedom. In theory they should not be supported in the
rotational degree of freedom, but since their bending stiﬀness is set to an extremely low
value, there are practically no bending moments in the hanger.
This boundary condition setup neglects the ﬂexibility of the main cable system, an impor-
tant feature of a suspension bridge. However, this simpliﬁed version is deemed detailed
10
==PAGE:18==
4 2D Model Setup
4.5
Loads
enough for the 2D model, so the main cable will only be included in the 3D model.
4.5
Loads
The model contains two load cases. The ﬁrst one is a UDL modelling the self-weight.
Taken from [18], the self-weight is set to 12.8 ton/m. The second load case is the load of
a truck. The truck load is based on Load Model 1 from Eurocode 1-2 [19], see Figure 4.6.
Since a single truck wheel would not load the entire bridge girder section, the load needs
to be scaled up to take into account the girder width of 25 m. There are six lanes on
the girder, so there can be a maximum of 12 wheels in one line. One truck wheel applies
a load of 300 kN, so the total load would be 3600 kN per axle. To simplify the load
application the spacing of the two truck axles is ignored, so both axle loads are applied at
the same place, making the total load 7200 kN. The truck load can be placed anywhere
along the length of the girder. The main points of interest are in the middle between
diaphragms when top plate sagging is high, and very close to a diaphragm, when the top
plate is locally hogging over the diaphragm.
Figure 4.6: Vehicle loads from EC1-2 FLM1 [19]
4.6
Stress
The Matlab FE code returns normal forces (N), bending moments (M), shear forces (V),
and displacements (δ). To compute the stresses, Navier’s formula is used:
σ = N
A + My
I
(3)
where A is the cross sectional area of the element and I is the moment of inertia of the
element, as given in Table 4.2. The distance to the neutral axis is given by y. Since the
top plate is the element of interest, y = 0.09 m, as shown in Figure 4.7.
11
==PAGE:19==
4 2D Model Setup
4.6
Stress
Figure 4.7: Neutral axis of top plate and trough element
To summarise, the base case model is an attempt to represent the real girder of the Izmit
Bay Bridge in a simpliﬁed 2D form. With some assumptions on the geometry, section
properties and load application, a reasonably accurate model can be made. Outputs from
this model will never perfectly match reality, but the model is a useful tool to change
parameters around to get an idea of the general behaviour, mainly focusing on seeing
if the section forces can be reduced. If section forces are reduced for certain parameter
changes, it is likely that similar behaviour will be observed in 3D, so the 3D modelling
can be more focused by only modelling changes that worked in the 2D model.
12
==PAGE:20==
5
Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
The ﬁrst approach for optimisation is the reduction of the diaphragm axial stiﬀness. In
orthotropic bridges, large stress concentrations occur in the top plate where the top plate
connects to the diaphragm. When reducing the axial stiﬀness of the diaphragms, the load
is expected to spread over several diaphragms, thereby reducing the stress concentrations.
This increased ﬂexibility is also expected to lead to larger deﬂections of the top plate,
which could cause cracks in the surfacing layer due to high curvature of the top plate,
as well as increased bending stresses.
Therefore it may be necessary to increase the
stiﬀness of other elements, or reduce the diaphragm spacing. In this section the eﬀects of
reducing the axial stiﬀness on the stresses in the top plate are studied, and combinations
with many other parameters are made to see if the combined eﬀect gives a more optimal
design.
The original axial stiﬀness value of the diaphragms is 1.79 ·1010 N. Initially values of the
stiﬀness are changed in steps from 2.1 ·1010 N to 2.1 ·105 N. This is a very large change,
but it will show the full trend of section forces and stresses when reducing the stiﬀness.
Later on, the eﬀects of much smaller stiﬀness reductions are studied.
The truck load case is applied on the top plate, very close to a diaphragm. Figure 5.1
shows that the stresses increase signiﬁcantly when the diaphragm stiﬀness is reduced. The
increase in stresses is entirely due to an increase in bending moments in the top plate,
as very little interaction with the bottom plate is achieved. It was expected that some
additional stiﬀness in other elements would be necessary to keep the bending moments
low. However, with a stress increase of almost 200% for the lowest modelled stiﬀness it
is not likely that combined with other changes the stresses will be lower than the base
case, so the diaphragm stiﬀness should probably not be reduced as much.
Figure 5.1: Diaphragm stiﬀness reduction with constant diaphragm spacing of 5 m
13
==PAGE:21==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
5.1.1
Inﬂuence of diaphragm spacing
The original spacing of the diaphragms is 5 m, resulting in ﬁve diaphragms per span
between each hanger. In the model the spacing is reduced by increasing the number of
diaphragms between two hangers from ﬁve to ten. In this way it is ensured that there
is always a diaphragm right under the hanger, which is necessary for the correct transfer
of the loads from the girder into the hangers. Figure 5.2 shows that the stresses barely
reduce when decreasing the spacing. The result is not as expected, since a reduction of
the span between two diaphragms was expected to lead to a reduction of the stresses in
the top plate.
Figure 5.2: Diaphragm spacing reduction with constant diaphragm stiﬀness
To further investigate both trends, a combination of both models is made, where both
stiﬀness and spacing are reduced. Figure 5.3 shows the stresses for each given combination
of spacing and stiﬀness in a 3D plot. The ﬁgure shows that in all cases the stresses increase
signiﬁcantly when reducing the diaphragm stiﬀness. The stress increase is less severe for a
lower diaphragm spacing, so reducing the spacing has some eﬀect. However, every model
with a reduced diaphragm stiﬀness leads to higher stresses, irrespective of the diaphragm
spacing.
An extreme case with 150 diaphragms per span was modelled to see if stresses would
eventually reduce.
Inserting this many diaphragms did indeed reduce the stresses to
values lower than the base case values, but it is of course not reasonable to insert a
vertical support every 0.17 m.
14
==PAGE:22==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
Figure 5.3: Simultaneous diaphragm spacing and stiﬀness reduction
5.1.2
Inﬂuence of shear stiﬀness
In Figure 5.2 the stresses decrease when the diaphragm spacing is reduced, but not as
much as expected. If the span of a simply supported beam with a point load is halved, the
bending moment and the related stresses would also be halved. This is not the case for
the results in Figure 5.2, where halving the span reduced the stress by approximately 8%.
However, the top plate in the girder model is more complicated than a simply supported
beam, since it is supported by diaphragms that are not as stiﬀas ground supports, and
there is shear interaction with the bottom plate. The eﬀects of the diaphragm stiﬀness
and shear stiﬀness on the peak bending moment in the top plate is further investigated.
When making the diaphragms and shear elements very stiﬀ, the top plate is almost like a
normal continuous beam. For this extreme case, halving the span should lead to halving
the moment. Figure 5.4 plots the ratio between bending moments for a girder with ﬁve
and ten diaphragms, so the span is halved from the ﬁrst model to the next. It shows that
a moment ratio of 0.5 is obtained for the case of very high stiﬀnesses. It can also be seen
that when either shear stiﬀness or diaphragm stiﬀness is reduced, the ratio is increased.
This means that for a more ﬂexible structure the eﬀect of decreasing the diaphragm
spacing becomes less important.
At the far right of the plot the ratio is decreasing again, when diaphragm stiﬀness is even
further reduced. However, it should be noted that this is only a ratio, and the absolute
moment in the top plate in both models is still increasing when the diaphragm stiﬀness
is reduced.
15
==PAGE:23==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
Figure 5.4: Ratio of moment in the top plate for designs with 5 and 10 diaphragms,
depending on shear and diaphragm stiﬀness, load close to diaphragm
The same plot is made for a slightly diﬀerent load case. Initially the truck load was
placed close to the diaphragm, but it could also be centered between the diaphragms. In
this case the ratios are closer to 0.5 (Figure 5.5).
A possible explanation for this diﬀerence is that when the load is very close to the
relatively ﬂexible diaphragm, this diaphragm will take most of the load. Moments and
stresses are caused by this local interaction between load, top plate and diaphragm, and
there is very little eﬀect of the span to the next diaphragm. When the load is exactly
between two diaphragms, this distance becomes more important, as the nearest supports
are each as far as half the diaphragm spacing away from the load.
Figure 5.5: Ratio of moment in the top plate for designs with 5 and 10 diaphragms,
depending on shear and diaphragm stiﬀness, load centered between diaphragms
16
==PAGE:24==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
When doing this analysis it also became clear that increasing the shear stiﬀness resulted
in a reduction of the moments and stresses in the top plate. Figure 5.6 shows a trend
that was observed for all load cases and diaphragm spacings, where moments decrease
signiﬁcantly when shear stiﬀness in increased. This result is analysed in more detail in
section 5.2.
Figure 5.6: Eﬀect of increasing shear stiﬀness on moment in top plate
5.1.3
Inﬂuence of top plate stiﬀness
The original approach for optimisation was to reduce the axial stiﬀness of the diaphragms.
This reduction is combined with other parameters to see if they can compensate for the
sharp increase in stress observed in Figure 5.1.
To further increase the load bearing
capacity of the top plate, the trough height can be increased. This mainly adds bending
stiﬀness to the top plate, which may reduce stress. Figure 5.7 shows the stress for diﬀerent
combinations of trough height and diaphragm stiﬀness. Similar to the spacing parameter,
increasing the trough height reduces the stress, but when diaphragm stiﬀness is reduced
the stresses still increase relative to the base case. Moreover, trough height values of up to
0.7 m are unconventionally high. It was also observed that when the bending stiﬀness of
the top plate is increased, it carries more of the moment locally, and less globally through
interaction with the bottom plate. This means bending moments are increased in the top
plate, although stresses are slightly reduced due to the increased bending stiﬀness.
17
==PAGE:25==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
Figure 5.7: Stress for diaphragm stiﬀness and trough height combinations
5.1.4
Inﬂuence of bottom plate stiﬀness
To bring more of the bending moments to the bottom plate, the bottom plate bending
stiﬀness can be increased. When increasing its stiﬀness, it will take more of the load,
so stresses in the top plate will reduce. Results show that stresses in the bottom plate
increase substantially (Figure 5.8). A lower diaphragm stiﬀness reduces stresses in the
bottom plate, because less load is transferred from top to bottom, so the top plate
will carry a much greater share of the load alone.
Again the increasing stiﬀness of
one parameter is not enough to balance out the stress increase caused by the reduced
diaphragm stiﬀness.
(a) Stresses in top plate
(b) Stresses in bottom plate
Figure 5.8: Stress for diaphragm stiﬀness and bottom plate stiﬀness combinations
18
==PAGE:26==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
5.1.5
Inﬂuence of diaphragm bending stiﬀness
Figure 5.9 shows the eﬀects of increasing the moment of inertia of the diaphragms on
the stresses. Stresses are reduced if the bending stiﬀness is increased, but not enough to
balance out the stress increase from more ﬂexible diaphragms. Moreover it is undesirable
for the diaphragms to carry moments, as they are designed for transferring axial forces
only. Finally, it may be practically diﬃcult to increase the bending stiﬀness while reducing
the cross sectional area to decrease the axial stiﬀness.
Figure 5.9: Stress for diaphragm axial stiﬀness and bending stiﬀness combinations
5.1.6
Combination of multiple parameters
A ﬁnal run of the ﬂexible diaphragms was made with a combination of parameters.
To avoid introducing too many variable combinations that cannot be plotted graphically,
some parameters were combined in a set, where for each set the stiﬀness of the parameters
is increased. Table 5.1 shows the variables used for each set. These sets were then run
together with a changing diaphragm axial stiﬀness. Figure 5.10 shows the results. From
the ﬁgure it can be seen than when combining all previously investigated parameters and
making them stiﬀer, stresses can be reduced while reducing the diaphragm stiﬀness. The
lowest observed stress value is 32 MPa, lower than the original value of 48 MPa.
This case mainly serves as an example to show that stresses can be reduced for more
ﬂexible diaphragms, but it requires a lot of other changes.
Trough heights are more
than doubled, the number of diaphragms is doubled, and the bending stiﬀness of the
diaphragms is increased signiﬁcantly. All these changes will amount to an increase in
material, which means a higher girder self-weight and a more expensive bridge. Signiﬁ-
cantly reducing the diaphragm stiﬀness is therefore not considered a good choice in the
optimisation of the bridge girder.
19
==PAGE:27==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.1
Reducing diaphragm axial stiﬀness
Set
Idb
No. of diaphragms
Top trough height
Bottom trough height
[m4]
[-]
[m]
[m]
1
0.0002
5
0.36
0.3
2
0.002
6
0.46
0.4
3
0.02
7
0.56
0.5
4
0.2
8
0.66
0.6
5
0.2
9
0.76
0.7
6
0.2
10
0.76
0.7
Table 5.1: Combinations of parameters used for model run with changing diaphragm stiﬀness
Figure 5.10: Stress for diaphragm axial stiﬀness and parameter combinations
5.1.7
Constant weight
The main conclusion that can be drawn so far is that signiﬁcantly decreasing the axial
stiﬀness of the diaphragms is not a good method for reducing the stresses in the top
plate. However, in all models analysed so far the diaphragm axial stiﬀness is reduced by
factors between 10 and 100.000, resulting in a signiﬁcantly reduced material use. Some of
the reductions might not even be practically possible unless a diﬀerent material is used,
as the section of the diaphragm elements cannot be made 100.000 times smaller. If the
material volume and thereby weight is kept constant by making smaller changes in the
design, more realistic designs will be made. For example, the girder could have twice as
many diaphragms, each with a cross sectional area and thus axial stiﬀness equal to 50%
of that of the original design.
Figure 5.11 shows that the stress in the top plate decreases when the number of di-
aphragms is increased, but the area of each diaphragm is decreased proportionally to
keep the total material volume the same. The maximum stress reduction is 21%, from 66
20
==PAGE:28==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.2
Increasing shear stiﬀness
MPa to 52 MPa, which is signiﬁcant. Contrary to what was found before, it is possible
to reduce top plate stresses while reducing the diaphragm stiﬀness without creating un-
feasible designs. On top of that, there is no weight increase of the girder. Alternatively,
the weight could be slightly reduced while keeping the stress constant, which could also
be a goal in the design optimisation. This result shows that there is an opportunity to
improve the design based on small changes in the axial stiﬀness of the diaphragms.
The 2D model allows for easy changing of the parameters, so the size of the diaphragm
can easily be halved. In the real bridge, scaling down the struts and diaphragm beam
could be limited. For example, the diaphragm beam wraps around the troughs, so it has
a minimum height that should be bigger than the trough height. The diaphragm struts
may be prone to buckling if their section is reduced signiﬁcantly. These limitations are
further investigated in the 3D model.
Figure 5.11: Stress in the top plate when changing the number of diaphragms but keeping
the total diaphragm material volume constant
5.2
Increasing shear stiﬀness
The axial stiﬀness of the diaphragms was the ﬁrst parameter that was investigated in
the 2D model. The next parameter that is investigated is shear stiﬀness. As explained
in section 4.2, special shear elements were made to model the behaviour of the girder
in 2D. This conveniently allowed for increasing the shear stiﬀness in the model, without
considering how this increased shear stiﬀness would be obtained in practice. Figure 5.6
already showed that the bending moment in the top plate can be reduced if the shear
stiﬀness is increased. Figure 5.12 shows how the stresses in the top plate decrease when
the shear stiﬀness is increased, much like Figure 5.6. This result was expected, since
the girder will carry the loads in global bending where the top plate is in compression
and the bottom plate in tension, acting like one big beam. Local bending of the top
plate is reduced, and with that the stresses are reduced. Especially the initial stiﬀness
21
==PAGE:29==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.3
Inclined diaphragms
increase has a large impact, showing there is room for improvement of the design even
when changes are small.
Figure 5.12: Stress in the top plate when increasing shear stiﬀness
The shear elements were modelled because the top and bottom plate are connected
through the inclined web, and therefore they have some shear interaction.
However,
it is not very eﬃcient to increase the shear stiﬀness by making these plates thicker, as
it would result in a large increase in self-weight. The best alternative is to look at the
diaphragms again, as these are the other elements that connect top and bottom plate. In
the current design of orthotropic decks the diaphragms are purely vertical (in 2D), and
their main functions are keeping the shape of the girder, and transferring stresses to the
hanger. For this purpose, vertical diaphragms are sensible. However, if the diaphragms
would be inclined longitudinally, they could also transfer horizontal forces from top to
bottom, thereby increasing the shear interaction between the top and bottom plate. In
section 5.3 diﬀerent designs of the girder with inclined elements are analysed.
5.3
Inclined diaphragms
5.3.1
Only inclined elements
New girder designs with inclined elements are made. First a model with only inclined
diaphragms is tested, later a combination of inclined and vertical diaphragms is made.
Figure 5.13 shows the new design of the girder. In order to keep the spacing between
diaphragm connections at the top plate constant, the number of diaphragms has to be
doubled. For each vertical, two inclined elements creating a v-shape are modelled. Sec-
ondly, no vertical element exists at the hanger. This could be problematic when the full
3D girder is modelled, but in this simpliﬁed version the hanger connects at the top plate,
and the design in Figure 5.13 will suﬃce.
22
==PAGE:30==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.3
Inclined diaphragms
Figure 5.13: 2D design of the girder with inclined diaphragms
Figure 5.14 shows a comparison of stresses when modelling with inclined and vertical
diaphragms. Note that when referring to for example ﬁve diaphragms, for the inclined
model this means ﬁve connections at the top plate, but this is achieved by ten inclined
elements. For a fair comparison with the vertical diaphragms, the inclined elements are
given an axial stiﬀness such that material use is constant for all models. Figure 5.14 shows
that in all cases lower top plate stress is achieved when the diaphragms are inclined. The
increased shear interaction shows to be beneﬁcial.
Figure 5.14: Stress in the top plate for vertical and inclined diaphragms when changing the
number of diaphragms but keeping the total diaphragm material volume constant
5.3.2
Vertical and double inclined elements
Figure 5.15 shows the design for a combination of inclined and vertical elements. In
the ﬁrst run of this model all stiﬀness is in the vertical elements. For the second run
80% of the stiﬀness is in the vertical elements and 20% in the inclined elements. This
is continued until all stiﬀness is in the inclined elements, at which point the design will
be the same as the one in Figure 5.13. Figure 5.16 shows how the stresses vary in this
case, where 1 on the axis Adb/Adb,0 means all stiﬀness is in the vertical elements, and 0
23
==PAGE:31==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.3
Inclined diaphragms
means all stiﬀness is in the inclined elements. This shows that stresses are always lower
when modelling only inclined elements, and always lower when increasing the number of
diaphragms. Material was kept constant in all cases.
The result is as expected. Since the vertical diaphragms are under two inclined elements,
they are not very eﬀective.
The best result is therefore obtained when the inclined
elements have 100% of the stiﬀness, so they are as eﬀective as possible.
Figure 5.15: 2D design of the girder with vertical and double inclined diaphragms
Figure 5.16: Top plate stress when varying stiﬀness between vertical and inclined
diaphragms
5.3.3
Vertical and single inclined elements
Figure 5.17 shows the design options when including only one inclined element per vertical
diaphragm. In this case care should be taken with the number of diaphragms per hanger,
as an odd number will result in an asymmetric design at the hangers. Again the stiﬀness
was initially put in the vertical elements, and in steps transferred to the inclined elements.
In this case the optimal design is found when the vertical elements have 40% of the
stiﬀness, and the inclined elements 60%. This shows a combination of vertical elements
and some longitudinally inclined elements could also work.
24
==PAGE:32==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.3
Inclined diaphragms
(a) Asymmetric design
(b) Symmetric design
Figure 5.17: 2D design of the girder with vertical and single inclined diaphragms
Figure 5.18: Top plate stress when varying stiﬀness between vertical and inclined
diaphragms
5.3.4
Comparison
For all tested designs with inclined elements the stress in the top plate is reduced. Table
5.2 shows the lowest maximum stress values for each design case. The designs containing
inclined elements result in much lower stresses than the base case. Interestingly there is
not so much diﬀerence between the stresses of both designs with inclined elements, despite
a considerable design diﬀerence. Further investigation in 3D will need to demonstrate if
it is better to use only inclined diaphragms, or if inclined and vertical elements should
be combined.
Design
Stress
[MPa]
Base case
66.0
Only inclined diaphragms
48.9
Vertical and inclined diaphragms
49.2
Table 5.2: Lowest maximum stress for diﬀerent diaphragm designs
25
==PAGE:33==
5 Testing of the 2D Model
5.4
Conclusion
As an additional consideration, the inclined elements could be added to the original design
without making changes to the elements of the original design. In practice this means
including inclined elements in already existing bridges to alleviate their fatigue problems.
In this case, material volume and thus self-weight will increase, unless other elements are
replaced in a scaled down version.
5.4
Conclusion
Results from the 2D model show that signiﬁcantly decreasing the diaphragm’s axial stiﬀ-
ness does not result in lower stresses in the top plate, unless a disproportionate amount
of steel is added elsewhere in the section. If only one other parameter is changed, such
as top plate stiﬀness or the diaphragm spacing, the stress increase caused by the reduced
diaphragm stiﬀness outweighs the stress decrease caused by the other parameter.
However, if the diaphragm stiﬀness is reduced by a much smaller factor, stresses can be re-
duced. When the diaphragm stiﬀness is reduced by 50% while the number of diaphragms
is doubled, thereby keeping total material volume constant, the stress in the top plate
reduces by 21%. This result shows that using more elements with a lower ﬂexibility can
result in a more eﬃcient design. This is in line with the initial expectation that stresses
in the top plate could be lower if the stiﬀness of the diaphragms is reduced. It also
matches the expectation that additional elements or additional stiﬀness elsewhere would
be necessary. The reduction of the diaphragm axial stiﬀness will be further investigated
in the 3D models.
The results also show that increasing shear stiﬀness in the girder is helpful in reducing top
plate stress. The increased interaction between top and bottom plate can be achieved by
including longitudinally inclined elements between the top and bottom plate. This could
be either in the form of full inclined diaphragms and no vertical diaphragms, or smaller
inclined elements that are combined with the existing diaphragms. All the models with
inclined elements resulted in lower stresses than the base case model, but there is no
large diﬀerence in stress between the models with inclined elements. Therefore multiple
designs of girders with inclined elements will be investigated in 3D.
The 2D model is very simpliﬁed. It could be the case that some designs that worked in
the 2D model might not be eﬃcient when turned into a 3D model. For example, the way
the diaphragms interact with the hanger will be more important in 3D. Local eﬀects will
also be more important, as the 3D model can include a single truck located somewhere
on the bridge deck, instead of a load acting on the entire transverse span of the deck.
It is therefore expected that not all results from the 2D analysis will hold in the 3D
analysis. However, it is expected that reducing the diaphragm stiﬀness while increasing
the number of diaphragm elements will have a positive eﬀect on the top plate stresses.
Similarly, the inclusion on longitudinally inclined elements is expected to lower top plate
stresses.
26
==PAGE:34==
6
3D Model Setup
Modelling in 2D allowed for easy modiﬁcation of parameters to quickly investigate a
large number of diﬀerent designs. From the 2D models it became clear that increasing
interaction between the top and bottom plate is beneﬁcial, and that this could be achieved
by including inclined elements in the girder. There are many ways in which inclined
elements can be included without deviating too much from the current girder design. A
few cases in 2D already showed that diﬀerent designs can lead to similar improvements.
To get a more detailed picture of the stresses in all the elements, the girder should be
modelled in 3D.
In this project all 3D modelling is done using Abaqus [20, 21]. The Izmit Bay Bridge is
still used as the base case design. Several other thesis projects at DTU have been based
on the Izmit Bay Bridge, where each thesis built on the models developed by previous
theses [18, 22, 23]. As a result, a very detailed Abaqus model of the Izmit Bay Bridge was
available for this project. However, for the sake of full understanding and ownership of
the model, several parts of the model were remade in this project. This section explains
all the steps that were taken in the setup of the 3D ﬁnite element model.
The Izmit Bay Bridge spans 2682 m with a main span of 1550 m, making it one of the
largest suspension bridges in the world. Modelling such a large bridge in full detail would
results in an extremely large model. To keep computational demand and running time
low, the bridge model must be simpliﬁed. The investigation is mainly looking at local
eﬀects of traﬃc load on top plate stresses, so it is not relevant to model towers or anchor
blocks in detail. In fact, even large parts of the deck can be signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed, as
the important eﬀects of a truck load are mainly local, and stresses further away from
the truck are not critical. A balance must be found between detailed modelling near the
load, and simpliﬁed modelling further away from the load.
In research by Bjærre [23] the Izmit Bay Bridge is modelled in three diﬀerent levels of
detail. Figure 6.1 shows all three levels separated, Figure 6.2 shows how they ﬁt together.
Level 1 is the least detailed, and consists of beam elements only. It includes the main
cable, towers, hangers, and a large part of the deck. Level 2 is a shell model of the bridge
girder, spanning 125 m, equivalent to ﬁve hanger spans. Level 3 is a fully detailed model
of the top plate including the troughs and diaphragm beams, also modelled as shells. In
Bjærre [23] this level of detail is only used for 25 m on a small section of the top plate,
as can be seen in Figure 6.2. Truck loads are only applied to this level, and stresses are
only studied at this level. The less detailed levels are necessary to ensure the model still
has the correct boundary conditions, so only modelling a Level 3 model of the top plate
would not be a proper representation of the bridge.
While the investigation by Bjærre [23] focuses on details in the fatigue design, this project
is looking more at top plate stresses in general, and not at stresses in for example the
corners of troughs. It is therefore unnecessary to include Level 3 in the model. Only
Level 1 and 2 are included in this project, and more detail on how these were set up is
given in the following sections.
27
==PAGE:35==
6 3D Model Setup
6.1
Level 1
Figure 6.1: Three detail levels of the ﬁnite element model of the Izmit Bay Bridge (Level 3
not included in this project)
Figure 6.2: Three detail levels of the ﬁnite element model of the Izmit Bay Bridge merged
(Level 3 not included in this project)
6.1
Level 1
A suspension bridge is very ﬂexible, so the Level 1 model is necessary to accurately model
the eﬀects of the cable system. All elements are modelled as beams with explicit section
properties. The model geometry and section properties are all taken from the model
developed in previous studies [22, 23]. Section properties are summarised in Table 6.1.
The deck and towers have varying sections, the locations of which are shown in Figure
6.3.
28
==PAGE:36==
6 3D Model Setup
6.1
Level 1
E
Radius
Area
Iy
Iz
J
[GPa]
[m]
[m2]
[m4]
[m4]
[m4]
Deck A
210
1.24
3.94
97.61
8.63
Deck B
210
1.56
5.33
129.17
11.62
Main Cable
195
0.3517
Hanger
195
0.07181
Tower Lower
210
3.01
21.93
26.63
28.53
Tower Upper
210
1.34
8.93
8.83
8.34
Table 6.1: Section properties of Level 1 elements
Figure 6.3: Sketch showing locations of diﬀerent section properties
6.1.1
Boundary conditions and connections
Figures 6.4 and 6.5 show the boundary conditions applied to Level 1. These are the only
boundary conditions in the entire model, as the Level 2 model is tied into the Level 1
model through connections. The anchor blocks are modelled by translational boundary
conditions on the main cables, allowing all rotations. The deck is also restrained from
translation in all directions, plus a rotational restraint on the longitudinal axis restricting
torsion at the end of the deck. The towers are ﬁxed in all translations and two rotational
degrees of freedom. Finally, the deck is supported in the transverse direction where it
passes through the towers, which is also the case in the real bridge.
The connections between all elements are fully ﬁxed, allowing for transfer of moments.
While this may seem incorrect for the hangers and cables, their bending stiﬀness is so
low that practically no moment is actually transferred in these elements.
29
==PAGE:37==
6 3D Model Setup
6.1
Level 1
Figure 6.4: Boundary conditions on cables and deck end
Figure 6.5: Boundary conditions on the tower bottom, and tower to deck connection
6.1.2
Pre-tensioning
The self-weight of the deck and cable system causes signiﬁcant deﬂection. This deﬂection
can be counteracted by pre-tensioning the main cables and hangers, to ensure the dead
load state of the bridge has minimal deﬂection. The available models also contain pre-
stress loads, but these were recalculated as part of this project.
To calculate the required pre-tensioning loads analytically without making it a very de-
tailed study, several assumptions have been made:
30
==PAGE:38==
6 3D Model Setup
6.1
Level 1
• The deck is assumed to be of type A along the entire span
• The deck is assumed completely horizontal
• Hanger self-weight is negligible and therefore ignored
• Main cable self-weight is assumed to be a horizontal UDL
• The main cable is assumed to have a perfect parabolic shape in the main span and
side spans.
Appendix D shows the calculations of all dead loads in the model.
First the hanger
pre-tensioning is calculated. Each pair of hangers supports 25 m of bridge deck, and the
self-weight of Deck A including surfacing is 130.2 kN/m. The hanger load is then:
25 · 130.2
2
= 1629 kN
In Abaqus the pre-tension is applied as a change in length, using a load type called bolt
load. To calculate the change in length for each hanger, the load is divided by axial
stiﬀness EA, and multiplied by the hanger length. Full calculations are in Appendix E.
The pre-tension values for the main cable are separated in two parts, the main span and
side spans. The calculation procedure is identical for both, but the sag and span of each
cable curve is diﬀerent. Calculations for the main span are shown as an example, the side
span calculations are in Appendix E. The main span length L is 1550 m, and the sag k is
171.67 m. The original cable length s0 can then be approximated using equations from
[24]:
s0 = L · (1 + 8
3
k2
L2)
(4)
This gives a cable length of 1600.7 m. When the deck and main cable self-weight is
applied, the cable will sag. The new length s1 will be approximately [24]:
s1 = L · (1 + 1
24
q2 · L2
H2
)
(5)
where q is the uniformly distributed load from the deck and main cable, and H is the
horizontal reaction force at the ends of the cable. While q is known, both s1 and H are
unknown. Two additional equations are used to solve this. First of all we can write an
equation for the change in length, ∆s1 [24]:
∆s1 = HL
EA · (1 + 1
12
q2 · L2
H2
)
(6)
We can then also write:
s0 = s1 −∆s1
(7)
Now we can solve for H in equations 5 and 6 to satisfy equation 7. This gives a horizontal
force of 162.4 MN, and a new sag of 177.59 m. Without any pre-tensioning the central
point of the bridge would be more than 6 m lower than designed.
31
==PAGE:39==
6 3D Model Setup
6.1
Level 1
The horizontal force is constant in the main cable, but the normal force changes with the
inclination of the main cable:
Ncable =
H
cos(θ)
(8)
where θ is the angle of the main cable with the horizontal (Figure 6.6). Again the change
in length must be found, so the normal force is divided by the axial stiﬀness EA, and
multiplied by the length. One pre-tensioning load is applied per piece of main cable
between two hangers, so the length used in this calculation is the length of a section
of main cable between two hangers (Figure 6.6).
This length also changes with the
inclination of the main cable. By applying these length changes, the main cable should
return to its original position with a sag of 171.67 m, but now with the self-weight applied.
Figure 6.6: Schematic of the normal force determination in the main cable
For the side span the same steps are followed, but diﬀerent sag and span values are used.
The cable curve of the side spans is approximated by a sag of 223.5 m and a span of
1768.9 m. However, the side span does not form a full parabola, as it is cut oﬀbefore the
lowest point is reached, see Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: The side span curve as a section of a parabola
32
==PAGE:40==
6 3D Model Setup
6.1
Level 1
Veriﬁcation
Figure 6.8 shows the vertical displacement of the bridge elements when dead load and
pre-stress are applied. The main span displacement is 3.8 m upwards, while the side
spans deﬂect 3.7 m down. In the initial calculations it was assumed that the ends of
the cable curve (at the tower top) stay in place, but of course the tower tops can move.
With this dead load and pre-stress applied, the towers deﬂect 0.8 m out, thereby raising
the main span and lowering the side span. This is the main reason the displacements
are still considerable. The second reason that the results are not perfect is because the
behaviour of the cable system is non-linear, but assumed linear in the calculation. The
normal force in the cable will change with the sag, so multiple iterations are needed to
get a more accurate pre-stress result. While 3.8 m sounds like a very large displacement,
it is only 0.25% of the main span length. Nonetheless a much better result was expected.
Figure 6.8: First result of displacements with dead load and pre-stress
Due to the interaction between the side span and main span it is diﬃcult to analytically
determine how to tweak the pre-stress to lower the displacements of the deck. Numerical
methods could be used, as has been done by Andersen and Hansen [22], but this requires a
completely diﬀerent approach, a diﬀerent model, and more time. It was therefore decided
to tackle the problem empirically, by changing the pre-stress values manually until a more
optimised result was found. It was not expected that this method would result in very
small displacements, but at least in an improvement of the initial results.
The goal of the empirical changes was to straighten the towers and lower the displacement
of the main span. A second goal was to make sure the ﬁnal pre-stress values are based
on the analytical pre-stress values as much as possible, and are not a random collection
of numbers. Finally a compromise was made between the analytical calculations and
observed results, by multiplying all pre-stress values by a factor 0.7.
This gave zero
displacement of the towers, and zero deﬂection at midspan. The side spans still showed
displacements of 3.2 m (Figure 6.9). However, the side span is of less importance since
the detailed Level 2 shell girder is located in the main span, and will not be aﬀected
much by the side span deﬂection. At the location of the shell girder, the deck is almost
straight, so no additional stresses from curvature are induced.
The factor 0.7 was found through some trial and error, and no explanation can be given
for the fact that this factor returns the tower and main span displacement to zero. While
the result is not optimal, is was deemed suﬃcient for the analysis of local loads on the
shell girder in the main span. This result was therefore kept for the rest of the project.
33
==PAGE:41==
6 3D Model Setup
6.2
Level 2
Figure 6.9: Final result of displacements with dead load and pre-stress
6.2
Level 2
The Level 2 model consists of shell elements for all the steel plates, combined with beam
elements for the diaphragms. In reality, the steel plates have troughs running in the
longitudinal direction, making the girder highly orthotropic. To model this with just
shell elements, the stiﬀness matrices need to be constructed manually. Determining all
the stiﬀness values of all the diﬀerent plates of the girder is a large task, subject to several
assumptions and simpliﬁcations. In one of the previous projects [23], a large part of the
thesis was dedicated to this task. Both analytical and computational values were found,
and the diﬀerences were discussed. Since this is outside the scope of this project, the
results from Bjærre [23] were used without modiﬁcation.
Figure 6.10 and 6.11 show the diﬀerent elements that make up the Level 2 model. Each
plate type in Figure 6.10 has diﬀerent section properties due to varying plate thicknesses
and trough dimensions. Similarly, the diﬀerent colours in Figure 6.11 indicate elements
with diﬀerent section properties.
Figure 6.10: Girder plate types. Green: Top plate 1; Orange: Top plate 2; Pink: Top plate
3; Red: Inclined web plate; Blue: Walkway Plate; Yellow: Bottom plate
34
==PAGE:42==
6 3D Model Setup
6.3
Connections between Level 1 and Level 2
Figure 6.11: Diaphragm element types. Green: Top beam; Red: Inclined web beam; Blue:
Walkway beam; Yellow: Bottom beam; Black: Diaphragm struts 1-5
The coloured beams in Figure 6.11 have a T-section with cut-outs for the troughs, as
shown in Figure 6.12. In the level 2 model they are modelled as beams with explicit
section properties, as determined by Bjærre [23]. The struts labelled S1-S5 in Figure 6.11
are modelled as beam elements with a simple circular hollow proﬁle, closely representing
the real design.
Figure 6.12: 3D design of diaphragm beams [23]
The shell and beam elements made by Bjærre [23] only have a stiﬀness matrix, but no
actual section. Therefore Abaqus cannot output any stresses in these elements. To still
be able to measure stresses in the top plate, a thin normal shell layer is added on top of
the top plate. This shell layer has a negligible thickness, so it does not contribute to the
stiﬀness of the girder. It only acts as a gauge, recording the stresses of the top plate.
6.3
Connections between Level 1 and Level 2
To properly tie the shell girder into the beam model, two connection types are used. First
the hangers are connected to the shells. This is done through simple beam connectors.
Again, moment can be transferred into the hanger, but due to its low bending stiﬀness
this practically does not happen. Figure 6.13 shows the connection of the hangers to the
deck. The second connection is between the beam deck and the shell deck. To ensure
the entire section of the shell deck is interacting with the center-line beam, a coupling
35
==PAGE:43==
6 3D Model Setup
6.4
Live load
constraint is made from the end node of the beam connecting to the entire surface of the
shell deck. Figure 6.14 shows this connection.
Figure 6.13: Hanger to deck connection
Figure 6.14: Beam deck to shell deck connection
6.4
Live load
Fatigue failure is caused by repeated loading and unloading. For the bridge deck this
stress variation is the result of passing cars and trucks. Eurocode 1991-2 [19] describes
how to determine the traﬃc load on bridges. There are several methods, varying between
simpliﬁed distributed loads and point loads to the use of actual traﬃc data. In the original
design of the Izmit Bay Bridge Fatigue Load Model 4 was used, which is a combination of
trucks of diﬀerent shapes and sizes. During the design it was found that the most damage
in several fatigue details was caused by truck 5A-H [25], which then became the load case
that was used in the design, as well as the main load case for some of the theses using
this bridge as an example [18, 23, 25]. In this project there is no emphasis on speciﬁc
fatigue details, but it still makes sense to use the same or a similar load case. Since the
36
==PAGE:44==
6 3D Model Setup
6.4
Live load
5A-H truck load is not directly from the newest version of EC1-2, a similar truck from
EC1-2 [19] was chosen to be the main load case in this project.
EC1-2 deﬁnes the number of axles, the load per axle, and the size of the contact surface
between the wheels and the deck. It also stipulates that the load distributes into the
deck at a 45 degree angle through the road surface, so a larger part of the top plate is
mobilised by the wheel load. Figure 6.15 shows this principle. Because the surface layer
is not modelled in Abaqus, the area of the wheel contact surface is increased to take this
load spread into account. The ﬁnal conﬁguration of the load is shown in Figure 6.16
Figure 6.15: Load spreading from a truck wheel through the road surface (from EC1-2 [19])
Figure 6.16: Truck load conﬁguration after EC1-2 FLM4 [19]
6.4.1
Betti’s theorem
In reality the truck can be driving anywhere on the bridge. Trucks would predominantly
use the outer lanes, but could also be on the other lanes. To ﬁnd the location of the truck
that causes the highest stress, Betti’s theorem is used. This theorem states that for a
linear elastic body, the work done through the displacements of Q for a force P is equal
to the work done through the displacements of P for a force Q [26]. A short derivation
of the theorem is shown here, referencing [27].
Consider a structure with coordinates i = 1, 2, ..., n, n + 1, ..., N. The structure is subject
37
==PAGE:45==
6 3D Model Setup
6.4
Live load
to forces Pi (i = 1, 2..., n) and Qi (i = n + 1, ..., N). If the P-system loads the structure
alone, for internal and external work to be in equilibrium:
1
2
Z
V
{σP}T {ϵP} dV = 1
2
n
X
i=1
PiDPi
(9)
A similar equation can be written for Q:
1
2
Z
V
{σQ}T {ϵQ} dV = 1
2
N
X
i=n+1
QiDQi
(10)
Now suppose Q is applied when P is already acting. Again the internal work from Q
must equal the external work:
1
2
Z
V
{σQ}T {ϵQ} dV +
Z
V
{σP}T {ϵQ} dV = 1
2
N
X
i=n+1
QiDQi +
n
X
i=1
PiDQi
(11)
Substituting eq. 10 in eq. 11 gives:
Z
V
{σP}T {ϵQ} dV =
n
X
i=1
PiDQ
(12)
If P is applied when Q is already acting, this gives:
Z
V
{σQ}T {ϵP} dV =
N
X
i=n+1
QiDPi
(13)
Since the structure is linear elastic, stress and strain are proportional:
Z
V
{σQ}T {ϵP} dV =
Z
V
{σP}T {ϵQ} dV
(14)
Therefore, eq. 12 and 13 are equal, so:
n
X
i=1
PiDQi =
N
X
i=n+1
QiDPi
(15)
In practice this means a high stress can be applied at a point of interest, and the dis-
placements of the structure recorded. Then placing a load on the location that deﬂected
most, will result in the highest strain and stress at the point of interest.
6.4.2
Truck load location
First a point of interest needs to be determined. In previous studies [18, 23] the critical
fatigue details were the weld between the trough and the top plate, and the corner of the
cut-out in the diaphragm beam. This level of detail is not modelled in this project, the
only remaining connection between elements is where the top plate runs over a diaphragm
beam, which is where high stresses will occur. A random positioning of the truck showed
38
==PAGE:46==
6 3D Model Setup
6.4
Live load
that the highest stresses occur where the diaphragm struts connect to the diaphragm
beam and top plate, see Figure 6.17.
Figure 6.17: Chosen point of interest for maximum stress
On the top plate an opposing pair of forces is applied at this location, creating a high local
stress. Figure 6.18 and 6.19 show the displacement contour when this load pair is applied.
Only a small area has a high inﬂuence on the stress. The area extends from the point
of interest to the next diaphragm. Figure 6.20 plots only the downward displacement,
since the truck load is vertically down, and should therefore be located on the area with
maximum vertical downward deﬂection. It shows that the negative displacement only
occurs on one side of the point of interest, so for maximum stress the load should only
be on one side of the diaphragm, and not centered over it.
Figure 6.18: Displacement contour overview for two opposing loads applied at the point of
interest
39
==PAGE:47==
6 3D Model Setup
6.4
Live load
Figure 6.19: Displacement contour for two opposing loads applied at the point of interest
Figure 6.20: Negative displacement contour for two opposing loads applied at the point of
interest
In Figure 6.19 a very small area with very high displacement can be seen right next to
the diaphragm. Figure 6.21 shows a close-up of this area. Displacements are ten times
higher here than further away, so theoretically the highest stress would be caused by
loads applied right here. However, one truck wheel is already much larger than this area,
let alone a combination of axles. This area is therefore ignored, and the truck is aligned
using the larger red/orange area from Figure 6.20.
Figure 6.21: Close-up of displacement contour around point of interest for maximum stress
40
==PAGE:48==
6 3D Model Setup
6.4
Live load
The initial position of the truck is shown in Figure 6.22. The idea here is that the average
load of the three rear axles is centered over the area of worst displacement, and will thus
cause the highest stress. However, even higher stresses were found when only one set of
wheels was aligned perfectly on the area of worst displacement. While a lower load is
used by not aligning the full axle, a higher stress is found due to the perfect alignment
of load and displacement area. The alignment in Figure 6.23 is used as the load case in
the rest of this project.
Figure 6.22: Initial truck alignment centering rear axles around the downward displacement
area
Figure 6.23: Final truck alignment centering one line of wheels of the rear axle on the
downward displacement area
The load is applied using shell plates that have the size and spacing as shown in Figure
6.16. The shells have a negligible thickness, and are connected to the top plate of the
bridge through a surface-to-surface tie constraint. To ensure the load is vertical while
41
==PAGE:49==
6 3D Model Setup
6.5
Inclined element design
applied on the inclined top plate, the load is applied as a surface traction load. Figure
6.24 shows the location of the truck on the whole girder. The truck load is next to the
central diaphragm of the Level 2 model.
Figure 6.24: Final truck location on the bridge girder
6.5
Inclined element design
So far the setup of the girder is very close to the actual design. Following the results from
the 2D model, new girder designs are made in 3D, incorporating longitudinally inclined
elements. These designs are made at the Level 2 model, and incorporated into the Level
1 model in the same manner as the original girder.
There are many ways in which inclined elements can be included without deviating too
much from the current girder design. In this project four new designs are made and
investigated. To understand the diﬀerences between the designs, ﬁrst the original design
is shown, see Figure 6.25. This ﬁgure shows a plan view, front and side elevation, and
a bird’s eye view. Figure 6.11 already showed the section with the diﬀerent elements.
The main thing to point out here is the fact that the diaphragms are purely transverse,
with no longitudinal elements at all. This means the diaphragm can carry loads sideways
towards the hangers, but loads applied longitudinally between hangers must be carried
through the top and bottom plates. In this section, elements that run longitudinally
are referred to as inclined elements, as opposed to the original elements that run purely
transversely and are called vertical elements, even though they have an inclination in the
transverse plane. In a side view this description would match. Besides transferring the
live loads, the diaphragm also keeps the shape of the girder constant. The outer shape
of the diaphragms is therefore kept in all new designs.
42
==PAGE:50==
6 3D Model Setup
6.5
Inclined element design
Figure 6.25: Plan view, bird’s eye, front view and elevation of the basic girder design
Figure 6.26 shows the four designs where inclined elements are added to the diaphragm.
All designs are described in more detail to highlight the diﬀerences.
Inclined diaphragm 1
In the ﬁrst design, the six centre struts of the original diaphragm design are removed.
Instead, six inclined struts are used. They connect at the top of the original diaphragm,
and then at the bottom between the diaphragms. This means the vertical elements are
replaced by a Λ-shaped diaphragm, if seen from the side. The inclined elements have a
transverse inclination equal to the inclination of the original struts, so from a front view
no diﬀerence can be observed. The outer two struts in the original design are not inclined
since they are very short, so making them inclined would lead to very shallow, ineﬀective
struts. This design is closest to the design shown in Figure 5.13.
Inclined diaphragm 2
In the second design the original diaphragms are kept, and inclined elements are added.
For each strut in the original diaphragm another two inclined struts are added. Again
the inclined elements have the same transverse position as the original struts, hence no
changes are seen in the front view drawing of the diaphragm. The inclined elements start
at the bottom of the original diaphragms, and connect to the top plate between two
diaphragms. Thereby the longitudinal span between top plate supports is halved. An
additional diaphragm beam at the top is necessary to connect the inclined elements to
the top plate. This design is similar to the one in Figure 5.15.
Inclined diaphragm 3
In the third design the original diaphragm is also kept, and additional inclined elements
are added. These elements only have a longitudinal inclination, so from a front view they
will look vertical. The elements connect at the bottom of the original diaphragm, and
then to the top plate between the original diaphragms. Here an additional diaphragm
beam will connect the inclined elements to the top plate. This design is very similar to
design 2, except now the elements run purely longitudinal. This design is also similar to
43
==PAGE:51==
6 3D Model Setup
6.5
Inclined element design
the one in Figure 5.15.
Inclined diaphragm 4
The fourth design is similar to design 3. The original diaphragm is kept, and purely
longitudinal elements are added. However, instead of two inclined elements between the
diaphragms, only 1 inclined element is used. This means the inclined element will connect
at the top of one diaphragm, and at the bottom of the next. No additional top plate
support points are created. To ensure the design is symmetric, six diaphragms per hanger
span are needed instead of ﬁve. This design is closest to the design shown in Figure 5.17.
Figure 6.26: Plan view, bird’s eye, front view and elevation of the all inclined diaphragm
girder design
These four designs are the starting point of the investigation in 3D. Initially, the section
properties of the inclined elements are identical to those of the struts in the original
diaphragm. This means all new designs are heavier than the original design. Fatigue
problems are caused by a stress variation, which is caused by live load only, so the
additional weight has no impact on the fatigue problems of the girder. However, having
a heavier girder would result in the need for larger hangers, cables, anchors, etc., which
should be avoided. If one or more of the new designs are eﬃcient, the section properties
of individual elements of the design could be optimised to reduce the weight of the
diaphragm.
44
==PAGE:52==
6 3D Model Setup
6.6
Mesh
6.6
Mesh
To keep the model size to a minimum, a relatively coarse mesh is used almost everywhere
in the model, except in the area around the diaphragm where stress will be measured.
Initially the mesh was reﬁned with a focus on the point where the diaphragm struts
connect to the top plate as also shown in Figure 6.17. However, at this connection point
a shell with no real thickness connects to two beam elements with no real section, thus
creating a point of inﬁnite stress. Figure 6.27 shows how very high stresses are recorded
in a very small area. The ﬁner the mesh, the higher the stress.
Figure 6.27: A very high stress value at the connection point between the top plate and the
diaphragm struts
This small area with unrealistically high stress is of course not relevant in the analysis, so
stress must be recorded a certain distance away from this point. Following St Venant’s
Principle [28], a small distance away from the load application point one cannot observe
how this load was applied. In other words, despite having an almost inﬁnite stress at one
location, this will not aﬀect the results a small distance away from this point.
In the model the top plate has no thickness, but in reality the top plate including troughs
is 360 mm in height. As a rule of thumb the distance away from the point is chosen
equal to the section depth, so stresses are measured 360 mm away from the connection
point, approximately halfway between the diaphragm and the truck axle closest to the
diaphragm. The ﬁnest part of the mesh is in this location, with the mesh slowly becoming
coarser as the distance to the measuring point increases. Figure 6.28 shows the ﬁnal mesh
design. The smallest elements are approximately 5 x 5 mm.
45
==PAGE:53==
6 3D Model Setup
6.6
Mesh
Figure 6.28: Final mesh design
To summarise, the 3D model consists of two levels. The ﬁrst is a beam model of the
towers, cables, and part of the deck, and the second a more detailed shell model of a
small section of the deck. One truck load will be applied at a ﬁxed location, and stresses
will be measured at a ﬁxed location. Four additional girder models are made with inclined
diaphragm elements. The stresses in the new models will be compared to the stresses
in the base case model to see how eﬀective the new designs are. The model does not
include any details of the troughs and diaphragm beam. However, it can be assumed
that if stresses are lowered in the simpliﬁed top plate, then the stresses are also lower in
the fatigue details. The 3D model is a much more accurate representation of the bridge
than the 2D model, so results from the 3D model should be closer to reality. However,
the 2D model was already a good representation, and the results from the 3D model are
generally expected to match the results from the 2D model.
46
==PAGE:54==
7
Testing of the 3D Model
In section 6 the setup of the 3D model is explained. This setup is used for making the
model of the original bridge, as well as the base models for the girders with inclined
diaphragms. In this section the new designs are tested to see if stresses are lowered by
the introduction of inclined elements.
7.1
First run
Figures 7.1-7.5 show the stress contours of the top plate with the truck load applied. For
all plots the contour range has been set to 1-24 MPa, so all plots are directly comparable.
The grey areas in each model are where stresses are incorrectly very high, as explained in
section 6.6. Figure 7.1 also shows where the stresses are measured for comparison of the
maximum stress. Table 7.1 shows the stress values for each model measured at this point.
Note that while the measured stresses are not high enough to cause fatigue problems,
stresses are expected to be higher in the details of the trough and diaphragm, which are
not modelled in detail here. Any reduction in the stress at the probe location is assumed
to apply to the troughs and diaphragm as well.
Figure 7.1 shows the stresses in the original design. The high stresses at the diaphragms
are clearly visible on the left and right side of the rear axles, as well as on the left of the
second front axle. The areas of high stress are small. Under the rear axles, stresses are
relatively low. The contour gives a good indication of how local the truck load is, as the
high stresses are only seen where a truck wheel is right next to a diaphragm.
The ﬁrst design with inclined diaphragms is not very eﬀective, as stresses are 9% higher
than in the original design. The contour in Figure 7.2 shows higher stresses everywhere,
with less blue and more red and yellow visible in the contour plot. It seems that the
removal of the six centre struts in the original diaphragm is not compensated for by the
introduction of six inclined struts.
The contours in Figure 7.3 and 7.4 are very diﬀerent from the original, mainly due to the
fact that there is very little blue to see. This indicates stresses are higher in some areas
of the girder compared to the original design, but as can be seen in Table 7.1, the stress
at the probing location is much lower for both designs. Design 2 and 3 have inclined
elements that connect to the top plate between the original diaphragms, so the top plate
span in longitudinal direction is much shorter. This results in a more even spread of the
truck load, which is why stresses are higher in some locations, but the overall maximum
stress is lower. This means design 2 and 3 are successful in reducing the top plate stress.
The fourth design also sees a stress reduction, albeit very small. This stress reduction can
be attributed to the fact that the diaphragms are closer together, as this model contains
six diaphragms between a set of hangers instead of ﬁve. The inclined elements in this
design are probably not very eﬀective.
47
==PAGE:55==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.1
First run
Figure 7.1: Stress contour of the original girder design
Figure 7.2: Stress contour of the ﬁrst inclined diaphragm girder design
Figure 7.3: Stress contour of the second inclined diaphragm girder design
Figure 7.4: Stress contour of the third inclined diaphragm girder design
48
==PAGE:56==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.1
First run
Figure 7.5: Stress contour of the fourth inclined diaphragm girder design
Model
Stress
Of basic model
[MPa]
[%]
Basic model
21.22
100
New design 1
23.20
109
New design 2
19.22
90
New design 3
19.45
92
New design 4
20.78
98
Table 7.1: Stress at the probing location for all girder designs
The next set of ﬁgures (Figures 7.6-7.10) shows the stresses in the diaphragm struts.
Again the contour limits are the same in all ﬁgures for direct comparison.
In the original design (Figure 7.6), stresses are fairly evenly distributed throughout the
struts in each diaphragm, with the highest stresses in struts near the truck wheels.
Stress contours in the ﬁrst, second, and third new design look much alike. The stresses
in the vertical elements are lower than in the original design, and the stresses are also
relatively low in the inclined elements. This indicates that these designs distribute the
stresses well.
In the fourth design (Figure 7.10) the stress in the vertical elements is high, while the
inclined elements carry almost no stress.
This supports the notion that the inclined
elements in this design are not eﬀective.
49
==PAGE:57==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.1
First run
Figure 7.6: Stress contour on the diaphragm of the original girder design
Figure 7.7: Stress contour on the diaphragm of the ﬁrst inclined diaphragm girder design
Figure 7.8: Stress contour on the diaphragm of the second inclined diaphragm girder design
50
==PAGE:58==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.1
First run
Figure 7.9: Stress contour on the diaphragm of the third inclined diaphragm girder design
Figure 7.10: Stress contour on the diaphragm of the fourth inclined diaphragm girder design
From this ﬁrst run of the models it would seem logical to conclude that design 2 and 3
are eﬃcient, while design 1 and 4 are not good. However, stress is not the only important
parameter. The self-weight is also very important, since an increase in girder self-weight
will result in larger hangers, cables, towers, anchor blocks, and foundations. Design 2
and 3 both have a lot of elements, so the additional weight from these designs is much
higher than for design 1 and 4. Table 7.2 shows how much the diaphragm systems weigh
per meter span. Full calculations of the self-weight are in Appendix F.
Design 2 and 3 increase the self-weight of the girder by 13% and 15% respectively, a
substantial amount. The designs can be beneﬁcial for fatigue resistance, but the downside
51
==PAGE:59==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.2
Constant weight
of their added weight is more signiﬁcant, so the designs as they are presented here would
not be implemented in reality. Design 1 and 4 have a lower self-weight than design 2 and
3, but they are still heavier than the original girder.
Model
Weight of diaphragm
Of basic model
Total self-weight increase
[kg/m]
[%]
[%]
Basic model
1527
100
0
New design 1
2212
145
5
New design 2
3492
229
13
New design 3
3822
250
15
New design 4
2732
179
8
Table 7.2: Self-weight of all diaphragm systems
7.2
Constant weight
A second version of the models is made, this time with reduced section properties to ensure
each girder has the same self-weight as the original girder. This is done by decreasing the
radius of the diaphragm struts. The diaphragm beam, which runs transversely between
the troughs, is not reduced in size, since a large part of its size depends on the depth of
the trough, so a large reduction is not possible. Figures 7.11-7.14 show the contour plots,
with the stress range equal to those in Figures 7.1-7.5. Table 7.3 shows the stress probe
results from these models, where the stresses are recorded in the same location as before.
Figure 7.11: Stress contour of the ﬁrst inclined diaphragm girder design with reduced
element size
52
==PAGE:60==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.2
Constant weight
Figure 7.12: Stress contour of the second inclined diaphragm girder design with reduced
element size
Figure 7.13: Stress contour of the third inclined diaphragm girder design with reduced
element size
Figure 7.14: Stress contour of the fourth inclined diaphragm girder design with reduced
element size
53
==PAGE:61==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.2
Constant weight
Constant weight model
Original model
Model
Stress
Of basic model
Stress
Of basic model
[MPa]
[%]
[MPa]
[%]
Basic model
21.22
100
21.22
100
New design 1
22.92
108
23.20
109
New design 2
17.45
82
19.22
90
New design 3
16.90
80
19.45
92
New design 4
20.02
94
20.78
98
Table 7.3: Stress at the probing location for all girder designs, keeping self-weight constant
and from the initial new designs
The most important result is that the stresses in the top plate are lower for all new
designs when the section properties are reduced, compared to the new designs with stiﬀer
sections. This is a theoretical win-win, as both self-weight and stress are reduced. This
seems counter-intuitive, but it should be noted that the section of the diaphragm struts
is reduced, while the stress reduction is observed in the top plate. Of course the stresses
are higher in the diaphragm struts when their section is reduced. Nonetheless, the top
plate stress was expected to increase with a decreasing diaphragm stiﬀness.
This result is diﬀerent from the 2D results, where a decrease in the diaphragm stiﬀness
always led to an increase in top plate stress, and only by introducing more elements could
the stresses be lowered. Here the opposite happens, a reduction of the diaphragm stiﬀness
leads to a reduction of top plate stress, while the number of elements is constant.
One of the reasons for the diﬀerence could be the inﬂuence of the diaphragm beam. This
element runs transversely under the top plate, and carries the load from the centre of the
girder to the hangers. In the 2D model there is no diaphragm beam, since there is no
transverse direction. Reducing the strut stiﬀness in 2D thus reduces the stiﬀness of the
entire diaphragm, while in the 3D model the diaphragm beam stays the same. The truck
load is very close to the diaphragm and also close to the hanger, so the diaphragm beam
will play a big role in transferring the loads from the centre to the edges of the girder.
The diﬀerent load path could result in an overall lower von Mises stress.
Table 7.4 shows the stress in the bridge’s longitudinal direction (σ11), the stress in the
transverse direction (σ22), and the shear stress (σ12) for two cases of design 2. The ﬁrst
case has a stiﬀdiaphragm, the second case a more ﬂexible diaphragm. It shows that the
stress in the transverse direction is doubled when the diaphragms are more ﬂexible. This
supports the idea that the diaphragm beam is carrying more of the load.
54
==PAGE:62==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.3
Comparing 2D and 3D results
Strut radius
σ11
σ22
σ12
[mm]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
219
-20.18
-2.07
0.46
25
-19.39
-4.90
0.44
Table 7.4: Shell stresses at probing location for a stiﬀand ﬂexible diaphragm system in
design 2
Reducing the strut stiﬀness now reduces girder self-weight and top plate stress, but it has
two downsides. First of all, additional functions of the diaphragm, such as keeping the
girder shape, might be compromised, possibly resulting in cracking of the surface layer.
Secondly, the elements have to be incredibly slender in order to achieve zero weight
increase. The original radius of all struts is 219 mm, with thicknesses varying between 5
and 8 mm. For design 1 the radius of the struts is reduced to 100 mm, for design 2 to
25 mm, and for design 3 to 10 mm, while design 4 has struts of 60 mm. Radii of 10 and
25 mm are unrealistically small, and the slenderness of these elements makes them prone
to buckling. The Abaqus model does not compute buckling or failure in any way, so this
has to be evaluated separately.
As an example, the Euler buckling load of a strut with a radius of 25 mm and thickness
of 5 mm is calculated. First the second moment of area is determined:
I = π
4 · (r4
1 −r4
2)
(16)
where r1 is the outer radius, and r2 is the inner radius. This gives a value of 1.81 · 10−7
m4. Given a Young’s modulus (E) of 210 GPa, and a length (L) of 6.14 m assumed to be
simply supported, the Euler buckling load is:
Pcr = π2EI
L2
= 9951 N
(17)
The area of the strut is 707 mm2, giving a critical stress of 14 MPa. The stress in the
struts with the reduced radius varies between 0 and 40 MPa, so there is deﬁnitely a risk
of buckling failure. Appendix G shows the stress contours on the diaphragm struts when
their section size is reduced to keep the girder weight constant.
The models with constant weight have shown that reducing stress and keeping a constant
self-weight of the girder is possible. Especially design 2 and 3 show large reductions of
top plate stress. However, the designs are not feasible as presented here, since the struts
are too slender, and buckling would occur.
7.3
Comparing 2D and 3D results
At this stage it is interesting to make a comparison between the results from the 2D and
3D model, since the designs in the 3D model are largely based on results from the 2D
model. One of the main conclusions from the 2D model was that increasing the shear
stiﬀness of the girder reduces stresses in the top plate, as load sharing between the top and
55
==PAGE:63==
7 Testing of the 3D Model
7.3
Comparing 2D and 3D results
bottom plate is increased. Based on this result four diﬀerent designs with longitudinally
inclined elements were made for the 3D model.
Results from the ﬁrst designs show that not all models are successful in decreasing top
plate stress (Table 7.1). The ﬁrst design, which has very few vertical elements, results in
higher stresses than the base case. However, all other designs do reduce the stress in the
top plate. A second set of designs was made where the material use was kept constant
by decreasing the size of the struts. This was also done in the 2D model, so it allows for
a better comparison. In this case, the ﬁrst new design still results in higher stresses than
the base case, but all other designs are successful in reducing top plate stress.
One of the reasons that the vertical elements are more important in the 3D model could
be their direct load path to the hangers. In the 2D model there is no transverse direction,
so loads can go directly into the hanger. In 3D, the truck is located towards the centre of
the girder, so the loads need to be carried to the outer edges through the diaphragms. The
original diaphragms can bring the load directly to the hangers in a transverse direction,
while the inclined elements would need a more complex path (Figure 7.15). Secondly, the
vertical elements are probably more eﬀective in carrying the vertical traﬃc loads due to
their steeper inclination, so most of the load is axial, and less of the load is transferred
as shear force. The inclined elements would be more helpful in transferring horizontal
traﬃc loads, for example from breaking.
Figure 7.15: Load path comparison for a diaphragm with and without elements in the
transverse plane, plan view
The second conclusion from the 2D results was that introducing more diaphragm elements
with smaller sections could lead to reduced stress in the top plate. This was also observed
in the 3D models (Table 7.1). However, in the 3D model the stress in the top plate was
also reduced when the section properties were reduced but no extra elements were created
(Table 7.3). Simply making the diaphragm struts smaller led to a reduction of top plate
stress. This is an important result, as it means self-weight and top plate stress can be
reduced simultaneously. This result serves as the basis for further eﬀorts to optimise the
design.
56
==PAGE:64==
8
Optimisation
So far the analysis has been very crude, with section properties being either oversized,
leading to a very heavy girder, or undersized, leading to buckling. However, these initial
designs already show which designs are most eﬀective. The results in Table 7.1 show
that only design 2 and 3 result in considerable stress reductions. While they are also the
heaviest, it would not make sense to optimise a design that does not reduce stresses from
the start, as is the case for design 1. When comparing design 2 and 3, design 2 is slightly
better in reducing the stress, while also slightly lighter. Design 2 is therefore used for a
more thorough optimisation, with the goal to ﬁnd a design that weighs less, and reduces
the top plate stress. These requirements may not go fully hand in hand, so a design that
is optimised for low weight might have higher stresses than a design that is optimised for
low stress. However, both parameters are used in the optimisation as no design should
lead to either higher top plate stress or higher self-weight.
The most thorough method that could be applied to ﬁnd the best combination of section
properties and other parameters is an optimisation tool. However, setting up such an
optimisation model is very time consuming, so in this project a parameter study is con-
ducted. In a parameter study several parameters are changed one at a time, to see the
inﬂuence of individual input parameters on some set output parameters. Some eﬀects
might be so signiﬁcant that the individual parameter can be chosen independent of other
parameters, while some other parameters might aﬀect each other to such an extend that
an optimal combination has to be found. It is expected that the diaphragm spacing is
such an independent parameter, and it is therefore studied ﬁrst, before other parameters
are combined.
8.1
Diaphragm spacing
The ﬁrst and possibly more inﬂuential parameter that is investigated is the diaphragm
spacing. Design 2 includes an additional top beam, reducing top plate span from 5 m to
2.5 m. This is one of the main reasons that this design results in much lower top plate
stresses, but also in a signiﬁcantly increased self-weight. By including only three or four
diaphragms per hanger span of 25 m instead of ﬁve, the top plate spacing can still be
lower than 5 m, while the self-weight would be reduced.
Figure 8.1 shows the stress in the top plate for diﬀerent diaphragm spacings. The stresses
are lower for spacing of 2.5 m and 3.125 m, but higher when the spacing is 4.167 m.
Despite a span reduction from 5 m to 4.167 m, stresses are higher. This shows that
unless the spacing is reduced, the inclined diaphragm design is less eﬀective than the
original design with vertical diaphragms.
Two additional models were made where the diaphragm struts were reduced in size to
obtain a girder self-weight equal to the self-weight of the original design. For these designs
the stresses were reduced, but for a spacing of 4.167 m the stress was still higher than in
the original design.
57
==PAGE:65==
8 Optimisation
8.1
Diaphragm spacing
Figure 8.2 shows the girder self-weight of the diﬀerent designs. If the section properties are
not altered, but only the spacing reduced, self-weight is higher for all designs. However,
since the span is reduced and more elements are introduced, it is likely that stresses in the
struts are lower, so their section properties can be reduced. The radius of the diaphragm
struts is reduced until the weight of the new designs is equal to the weight of the original
design. As mentioned before, Figure 8.1 shows that for a spacing of 3.125 m the stress
is still lower than in the original design, but for a spacing of 4.167 m it is not. From
these results it can be concluded that using ﬁve diaphragms per hanger span results in
too much self-weight, while using three diaphragms results in higher stresses. The ﬁrst
decision in the optimisation is therefore to use four diaphragms per hanger span, giving
a spacing between top plate supports of 3.125 m.
Figure 8.1: Stress in the top plate for diﬀerent spacings of the diaphragms. In the
constant-weight designs, the diaphragm struts have been reduced in size
Figure 8.2: Girder self-weight for diﬀerent spacings of the diaphragms. In the
constant-weight designs, the diaphragm struts have been reduced in size
58
==PAGE:66==
8 Optimisation
8.2
Parameter study
8.2
Parameter study
In the detailed parameter study three diﬀerent input parameters are used. These are
the top plate section, the diaphragm beam section, and the diaphragm strut section. To
check if a design is good, four output parameters are selected. These are weight, stress,
buckling capacity, and top plate stiﬀness. All parameters are further explained below.
Input: Top plate section
The top plate consist of a 14 mm thick steel plate, connected to troughs with a height of
360 mm. This whole element is modelled in Abaqus as one shell element with an explicit
stiﬀness matrix and no thickness. Therefore scaling of the section has to be done by hand
outside the model. To limit the number of parameters, the section is scaled altogether,
instead of redesigning parameters like trough height, trough spacing, and plate thicknesses
individually. The stiﬀness values are recalculated based on the scaling, and used in the
Abaqus model. Calculations of the stiﬀness values are shown in Appendix H, and are
based on [23, 29].
Input: Diaphragm beam section
The diaphragm beam runs under the top plate, spanning almost 26 m. While there are
not as many diaphragm beams as there are diaphragm struts, its size and length still
make it an interesting element to reduce in size in an attempt to achieve a lower self-
weight. The diaphragm strut is a T-beam with cutouts for the troughs. This element is
modelled with explicit section properties, similar to the top plate. The diaphragm beam
is therefore also scaled altogether. Calculations of the section properties are shown in
Appendix I.
Input: Diaphragm strut section
The diaphragm strut is a hollow cylinder section. The geometry is determined by the
radius and thickness only. The thickness in the original design varies between 5 and 8
mm, which is very low. Therefore the radius is chosen as the only parameter that is scaled
to change the size of the diaphragm struts. An example calculation of the properties of
the struts is shown in Appendix I.
Output: Weight
The new design should not be heavier than the original design, as it would increase the
demand on all other elements of the bridge. This would result in larger cables, towers, and
anchors, so even a small weight increase would result in a large increase in material use.
The weight output is measured as a ratio of the original weight, making 1 the maximum
allowable value.
Output: Stress
The new design should not increase the stresses in the top plate, as this will aggravate
fatigue problems and thus shorten the lifetime of the bridge. The stress in the top plate
is still recorded in the same location as before, and is given as a ratio of the stress in the
original bridge, making 1 the maximum allowable value.
59
==PAGE:67==
8 Optimisation
8.2
Parameter study
Output: Buckling
The new design has a large number of struts, all sharing the traﬃc load. It is therefore
likely that the size of the struts can be reduced signiﬁcantly. To limit size reduction, the
maximum stress in the struts is measured, and compared to the Euler buckling capacity,
as also shown in equation 17. The calculation of the capacity is also shown in Appendix I.
The output is recorded as a ratio of load over capacity, making 1 the maximum allowable
value.
Output: Top plate stiﬀness
To prevent the road surface from cracking, curvature of the top plate must be limited.
The Eurocode prescribes a stiﬀness requirement of the top plate and troughs, as shown
in Figure 8.3. The spacing of the cross girders is 3.125 m, leading to a minimum stiﬀness
of 2000 cm4. The output is recorded as a ratio of the actual stiﬀness over this minimum
stiﬀness, making 1 the maximum allowable value.
Figure 8.3: Stiﬀness requirement of the longitudinal stiﬀness from EC3-2 [30]
60
==PAGE:68==
8 Optimisation
8.2
Parameter study
8.2.1
Top plate reduction
The ﬁrst parameter that is investigated is the top plate. To get an idea of the inﬂuence
of the top plate on the output parameters, a large range of scale factors is used. The
top plate is scaled by 0.9, 0.8, 0.7, and 0.6. Results of these models are shown in Figure
8.4. The stresses increase signiﬁcantly and are far above the limit before the weight ratio
drops below 1. The stiﬀness requirement is fulﬁlled for all scaling factors. These results
show that a small reduction might beneﬁt the weight, but larger reductions will lead to
unacceptably high stress in the top plate. Scaling of the top plate should therefore be
limited.
Figure 8.4: Parameter study output for diﬀerent scaling factors of the top plate
8.2.2
Diaphragm beam reduction
The diaphragm beam runs under the top plate, connecting to the troughs. The minimum
height of the beam is therefore limited by the height of the troughs. This makes the
limiting scaling factor 0.7, as the beam would otherwise be shallower than the troughs,
unless the top plate is reduced signiﬁcantly. Figure 8.5 shows that reducing the diaphragm
beam has a very small negative eﬀect on the stress, but a slightly larger positive eﬀect
on the weight. None of the combinations brought all output parameters below 1, but it
is still worthwhile to reduce the diaphragm beams in size, as it lowers the weight without
increasing the stress too much.
61
==PAGE:69==
8 Optimisation
8.2
Parameter study
Figure 8.5: Parameter study output for diﬀerent scaling factors of the diaphragm beam
8.2.3
Diaphragm strut reduction
Since there are many diaphragm struts, reducing these in size will have a large eﬀect on
the girder self-weight. On top of that, results in section 7.2 showed that reducing the
size of these elements lowers the stress in the top plate as a more ﬂexible support system
is created. Figure 8.6 shows that this is still true, with weight and stress decreasing
simultaneously.
Buckling is the limiting factor for the strut size. The buckling capacity is proportional to
the strut’s second moment of area, which includes the strut radius to the fourth power.
Lowering the radius therefore drastically reduces the buckling capacity. On top of that,
the stress in the elements increases as the cross sectional area gets smaller. One extreme
reduction is tested, where the radius is reduced from 219 mm to 50 mm. Figure 8.6 shows
that the buckling capacity is exceeded in this case. However, the diaphragm strut has a
lot of potential to reduce the weight and the stress. With a slightly larger radius buckling
can also be prevented.
62
==PAGE:70==
8 Optimisation
8.2
Parameter study
Figure 8.6: Parameter study output for diﬀerent scaling factors of the diaphragm strut
8.2.4
Combinations
Following the three separate parameter studies, several combinations of the three input
parameters can be made to obtain a more optimal design. Figure 8.4 showed that the
stress increases a lot when the top plate is scaled down, so in the combinations the
scale factors are changed to 1, 0.95, 0.9, and 0.85. Figure 8.5 showed that scaling the
diaphragm beam has a positive eﬀect on the weight and little impact on the stress. Since
the size is limited by the trough height, the smallest possible scaling factor is used in
all combinations, which is 0.7. Figure 8.6 showed that reducing the struts has a positive
impact on both the girder self-weight and the stress in the top plate, while buckling must
be controlled. In the combinations the diaphragm strut radius values used are 219, 180,
150, 120, 100, 80, 50, 40, and 30 mm. The large range and small steps should lead to
some models that satisfy all requirements, until buckling will occur. Combining the nine
strut radii with four diﬀerent top plate scale factors gives 36 combinations.
Figure 8.7 shows the results of all combinations. The behaviour of all trends is similar to
those seen in Figure 8.6, since this is the most inﬂuential parameter. Contrary to the indi-
vidual parameter studies, some combinations are found that bring all output parameters
below 1. Table 8.1 shows the input and output values of all successful combinations.
Using a top plate scale of 1, two combinations satisﬁed all requirements. This is the case
where the diaphragm strut radius is 100 mm and 80 mm. Using a top plate scale of 0.95,
four combinations satisﬁes all requirements, this time for diaphragm struts with a radius
of 120, 100, 80, and 50 mm.
When the top plate is scaled to 0.9 or 0.85, the stress is the limiting parameter, until
63
==PAGE:71==
8 Optimisation
8.2
Parameter study
buckling takes over. None of the results with these top plate scaling factors satisﬁed all
requirements.
Figure 8.7: Output of all 36 combinations of the ﬁnal parameter study, combining top plate
scale, diaphragm strut scale, and a constant diaphragm beam scale of 0.7
64
==PAGE:72==
8 Optimisation
8.3
Discussion
Top plate
Diaph. beam
Diaph. strut
Weight
Stress
Buckling
Stiﬀness
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
1
0.7
0.46
0.998
0.906
0.149
0.078
1
0.7
0.37
0.986
0.896
0.274
0.078
0.95
0.7
0.55
0.987
0.944
0.083
0.096
0.95
0.7
0.46
0.976
0.938
0.139
0.096
0.95
0.7
0.37
0.965
0.930
0.253
0.096
0.95
0.7
0.23
0.948
0.914
0.999
0.096
Table 8.1: Input and output ratios of all successful combinations relative to the original
design
The lowest weight is found when the top plate is scaled by a factor 0.95, and the struts
are scaled by a factor 0.23, giving a radius of 50 mm. The girder weight in this case is
reduced by 5%, equal to 773 kg/m. Note however that the buckling ratio in this case
is practically equal to 1, so a more detailed analysis may show that this combination
actually leads to buckling.
The lowest stress is found when the top plate is not scaled down, and the diaphragm
strut is scaled by a factor 0.37, giving a radius of 80 mm. The stress is reduced by 10%,
from 21.22 MPa to 19.01 MPa.
The results show that when optimising for stress, a self-weight higher than the possible
minimum is found, and vice versa. If the stress requirement was ignored altogether, the
weight could be reduced by up to 7%. In this case it might even be interesting to look at
design 1 instead of design 2, since this design was originally lightest. Further optimisation
of design 1 could have led to an even lighter design, but it may not have satisﬁed the
stress criterion.
8.3
Discussion
As can be seen in all the plots in Figure 8.7, the buckling output shoots up when the
scale of the diaphragm is reduced from 0.37 to 0.23. This corresponds to a radius of 80
mm and 50 mm respectively. The buckling capacity of the struts drops from 151 MPa
to 57 MPa. Since buckling capacity is proportional to the radius to the fourth power,
buckling capacity reduces signiﬁcantly when the diaphragm strut radius is reduced. On
the other hand, weight only reduces at a much slower rate. This leaves a small window
where both buckling and weight are below the limit. Since the jump between 151 and 57
MPa is so large, some intermediate radius values could be tested for further optimisation.
The other signiﬁcant trend in the plots is the simultaneous reduction of stress and weight.
When the diaphragm strut is made more ﬂexible, the stress in the top plate is reduced.
As was discussed in section 7.2, the increased inﬂuence of the diaphragm beam could
change the stress path, resulting in lower von Mises stress in the top plate. However, it
is still counter-intuitive that stresses reduce in the top plate when the support stiﬀness
is decreased.
65
==PAGE:73==
8 Optimisation
8.3
Discussion
To investigate this trend, one model was made without any diaphragm struts. Figure 8.8
shows the top plate stress contour for this design case. The stress contour is fairly similar
to the contour of the base case (Figure 7.1), although higher stresses are seen away from
the truck load. The stress at the probing location is 20.65 MPa, slightly lower than the
base case stress, which is 21.22 MPa. This is very diﬀerent from what was expected.
Having no struts means the top plate has no support at all, besides the diaphragm
beam. This means the plate spans 25.7 m transversely, while the plate has very little
bending stiﬀness in this direction. In the longitudinal direction there is support from the
diaphragm beams and the hangers, and the troughs increase the bending stiﬀness, but
this is by far not as stiﬀas having the diaphragm struts at 5 m intervals. The struts
can carry the load to the bottom plate and make the girder act as a beam with the top
plate in compression and the bottom plate in tension, but any load sharing now has to go
through the webs, which is less eﬃcient. Stresses in the top plate should be much higher
in this case.
Figure 8.8: Stress contour for design 2 without diaphragm struts
The results from Figure 8.8 are so unexpected that it casts some doubt on the accuracy
of the model. If the stresses decrease when the struts are removed, maybe the stresses are
not measured accurately. There could be a mistake in the way the top plate is modelled,
or in the way the thin layer is added on top to measure the stresses.
There are also arguments to believe the results are correct. First of all, having no struts
is very diﬀerent from having small struts, so comparing these models may not be fair.
Since Abaqus does not compute buckling or other failure, the small struts can carry very
high stresses, and therefore play an important role in the transfer of stresses between
top and bottom plate regardless of their size. Secondly, the new designs have more strut
elements than the original design, and the spacing between diaphragms is reduced. This
could allow for more ﬂexible elements in order to reach the same overall stiﬀness of the
diaphragms. Lastly, the inclined struts change the behaviour of the top plate due to the
increased shear stiﬀness. A more detailed model of the top plate could help in determining
whether the results are correct.
Assuming the results are accurate, improved designs for both weight and stress were
found. Several combinations satisﬁed all criteria, with a maximum weight reduction of
5%. A 5% reduction of girder self-weight would have a similar impact on the dimensions of
66
==PAGE:74==
8 Optimisation
8.3
Discussion
all other main components of the bridge, decreasing the bridge’s cost and environmental
impact.
However, the design is only optimised for one load case, and may not be satisfactory for
other load cases. For example, a traﬃc jam will occur less frequently than the simple
passing of a truck, and is therefore less important in the fatigue analysis. But if many
trucks are all closely spaced together on the bridge the stresses in the struts will be much
higher than for one passing truck, and buckling could occur. The design would have to be
tested and optimised for many other load cases before it could be implemented in reality.
In the original design the struts have a radius of 219 mm, but they are not close to
the buckling capacity when loaded by the truck load that was used in this analysis. This
indicates that these struts were also optimised for other load cases. The successful models
in this parameter study had radii of 50-120 mm, which is between two and four times
smaller than the original radius. Although the spacing between diaphragms is reduced
and more strut elements are introduced, it is unlikely that the struts can be four times
smaller without running into problems when other loads are applied.
The design is not only optimised for one load case, but also for one hanger spacing.
This spacing was set at 25 m in the original design, and this was kept throughout the
optimisation. The inclined elements may function better at a diﬀerent spacing, since
the spacing aﬀects the angle of inclination. In the designs used in this optimisation the
inclination of the elements is between 45° and 50°, considering both the angle in the
transverse and longitudinal direction. This is probably a good angle, as it it not too
shallow nor too steep.
Changing the spacing would also aﬀect the stiﬀness requirement. The stiﬀness parameter
as prescribed by EC1-2 in Figure 8.3 is based on the distance between cross girders, so
increasing the spacing would increase the stiﬀness demand of the top plate. However, the
plots in Figure 8.7 show that there is still a lot of room for change in the stiﬀness, with
the highest output ratio at 0.15.
However, the stiﬀness requirement in EC1-2 [19] assumes a standard orthotropic bridge
deck with purely transverse cross girders. The new design has a slightly diﬀerent system,
since the additional top beam with inclined elements does not function as a full cross
girder. Moreover, the stiﬀness of the struts is reduced, so the girders are no longer as
stiﬀ, which will aﬀect the vertical displacement of the top plate. It is therefore important
to further investigate if the stiﬀness on the top plate is adequate to prevent cracking of
the surface layer.
The optimisation of the top plate is done by scaling factors to limit the number of
parameters. In a more detailed optimisation the parameters making up these elements
could be optimised separately. For example, keeping the trough height constant might be
good to ensure the top plate has a high bending stiﬀness. On the other hand, reducing
the top plate thickness will be very eﬀective in reducing the girder self-weight. A more
detailed optimisation could lead to an even higher reduction of the self-weight. A similar
67
==PAGE:75==
8 Optimisation
8.3
Discussion
thing can be said for the diaphragm beam, which was also scaled by a factor.
The new design has a lot of extra struts, which leads to a lot of connections. Since these
struts connect to the diaphragm beam in the same place as the original struts do, up to
six struts will come together in the same place. This connection will be complicated and
must be modelled in more detail to see how the stresses can be spread most eﬀectively.
The connection might also be expensive to fabricate.
Besides some simpliﬁcations in the optimisation, overall the results of the optimisation
are satisfactory. Since the orthotropic bridge deck is already close to fully optimised,
removing even the slightest bit of self-weight would be a relevant improvement. This
optimisation has found a possible reduction of 5%, although more investigation is needed
to determine suitability of the design for other load cases. On top of that, a more detailed
model of the top plate should be made to further study the eﬀects of a reduced diaphragm
stiﬀness on the top plate stress.
68
==PAGE:76==
9
Conclusion
In this project the ﬂexibility of the top plate supports is changed in search for a more
optimal design of orthotropic bridge decks. The design of the diaphragms is changed in
an attempt to lower the stresses in the top plate, and to lower the self-weight of the girder.
Various designs were made in both 2D and 3D. The conclusions that can be drawn from
these models are given in this section.
In the ﬁrst part of the project, the diaphragm stiﬀness was reduced signiﬁcantly to
see how the stresses in the top plate would change. Results show a large increase in
the bending moment, and thereby a large increase in the stress.
To compensate for
this stress increase, other parts of the girder were made stiﬀer. However, none of the
additional measures could prevent a stress increase when the diaphragm stiﬀness was
reduced, except very extreme measures. It can therefore be concluded that signiﬁcantly
reducing the diaphragm stiﬀness is not a viable option for improving the orthotropic
girder design.
Better results were obtained by making smaller changes in the diaphragm stiﬀness. If
the diaphragm stiﬀness is halved while the diaphragm spacing is also halved, stresses in
the top plate are reduced by 21%. In this case, the weight of the girder does not change.
This shows that creating more ﬂexible diaphragms can lead to a reduction of top plate
stress, but only if the spacing between diaphragms is also reduced. The smaller changes
in the diaphragm stiﬀness and spacing result in more realistic designs.
The 2D models also showed that increasing the shear stiﬀness reduces stresses in the
top plate. By creating longitudinally inclined elements, the shear interaction between
the top and bottom plate is increased. All the models with inclined diaphragms showed
reduced stresses when compared to similar models without any inclined diaphragms. The
maximum stress reduction achieved with inclined elements is 26%.
The main conclusion that can be drawn from the 2D models is that introducing more
diaphragm elements with a lower stiﬀness results in lower stresses in the top plate, while
keeping the girder self-weight constant.
Inclined diaphragms are more eﬀective than
purely vertical diaphragms, as they create more shear interaction between the top plate
and bottom plate.
Based on the conclusions from the 2D model, four girder designs with inclined diaphragms
were modelled in 3D. Two of these new designs included an additional top plate support,
and these designs were most eﬀective in reducing the stress in the top plate. The new
designs reduced stresses by up to 10%. This conﬁrmed the conclusions from the 2D model
that including inclined elements reduces the top plate stress.
However, all new designs led to a signiﬁcant increase in self-weight, the heaviest design
adding 15% to the original girder self-weight. A second set of designs was made, where
the sections of the diaphragm struts were reduced. Unexpectedly, this resulted in even
lower stresses in the top plate. In the 2D model a reduction of diaphragm stiﬀness always
69
==PAGE:77==
9 Conclusion
led to higher stresses, but in the 3D models the opposite happened. It is possible that
the diaphragm beam plays a more important role in the stress path when the diaphragm
stiﬀness is changed, but a more detailed investigation is necessary to fully explain the
unexpected top plate behaviour.
The most promising of the four new designs was used for further optimisation. This re-
sulted in a diﬀerent diaphragm spacing, a diﬀerent diaphragm beam section, and diﬀerent
diaphragm strut sections. When optimising for stress, a maximum reduction of 10% was
achieved, while weight was reduced by 2%. When optimising for weight, a maximum
reduction of 5% was achieved, while stress was reduced by 9%. Both would be a great
improvement to the already very optimised orthotropic girder design. From these results
it can be concluded that both stress and weight can be reduced when using inclined
diaphragm elements.
From all the diﬀerent models and results, two main conclusions can be drawn. First of
all, top plate stress can be reduced by making the top plate supports more ﬂexible, if
combined with a reduced diaphragm spacing. When the top plate supports are closer
together, traﬃc load is spread more evenly, and stresses in the top plate will be lower.
Secondly, introducing inclined diaphragm elements lowers the top plate stress. The in-
clined elements increase shear interaction between the top and bottom plate. This results
in more global bending of the girder, and less local bending of the top plate. Since the
designs with inclined elements contain more diaphragm struts, care should be taken not
to increase the self-weight of the girder.
Both conclusions reveal possible improvements of the orthotropic girder design.
The
weight of the girder could be reduced, allowing bridges to span even longer distances.
The lower material use will result in lower cost, and less environmental impact. The
fatigue problems of the girder can also be reduced.
This would save inspection and
maintenance cost, and increase the lifespan of the bridge.
70
==PAGE:78==
10
Further Work
The results in this project have shown that it is possible to further optimise the or-
thotropic girder by including inclined diaphragm elements, and by creating more ﬂexible
diaphragm elements.
This section outlines the work that should be done for a more
complete analysis of these design changes.
First of all, the girder design with inclined elements should be optimised for more load
cases. In this project only one truck load is used, since it is the most critical load for
many fatigue details in the bridge. However, other loads that are not critical in a fatigue
analysis due to their rare occurrence could impose higher stresses on the girder elements.
This could for example lead to buckling of the diaphragm struts. When analysing the
design for more load cases, it is likely that the size of the diaphragm struts will be
increased, which will lower the maximum possible weight reduction.
Secondly, the optimisation could include more parameters. In this project the top plate
and diaphragm beam sections were scaled. It might be better to only scale parts of these
elements, for example the plate thickness, and not the element height. More insight can
be gained when the top plate, troughs, and diaphragm beam are modelled in full 3D.
The 3D models showed that top plate stress is reduced when the diaphragm stiﬀness
is reduced. This result was not expected, and does not match the 2D results. A more
detailed investigation is necessary to fully explain the top plate behaviour. Modelling the
top plate and diaphragm beam in 3D will help with this as well.
The top plate bending stiﬀness must meet a requirement from EC1-2. The minimum
bending stiﬀness is based on the span between diaphragms. The new inclined designs
have a much shorter span, so the stiﬀness requirement is easily satisﬁed. However, the
new diaphragms are more ﬂexible, and full diaphragms are only included every 6.25 m,
which is more than the original 5 m. The curvature of the top plate should therefore be
studied, as the more ﬂexible design may lead to cracks in the surface layer.
Lastly, including more elements means the girder will have more connections. In the
optimised design, there are places where six diaphragm struts come together from various
angles. These connections should be modelled in detail to assess the load paths and
optimise the connection.
The optimisation should not only focus on stress, but also
ensure that the connection is not too complicated and not too expensive.
71
==PAGE:79==
References
[1] Niels J Gimsing and Christos T Georgakis. Cable Supported Bridges. John Wiley
and Sons Ltd, third edition, 2012.
[2] Flint and Neill. Messina Strait Bridge, Italy, 2010.
[3] COWI.
Exploring the optimal form for very long-span bridges, 2018.
avail-
able from:
https://www.cowi.com/about/news-and-press/exploring-the-optimal-
form-for-very-long-span-bridges.
[4] Henrik Polk and Chris Walker. Advances and development needs in the structural
design of steel box girders for major bridges. In Eurosteel, pages 153–164, Copen-
hagen, 2017. Ernst & Sohn.
[5] F.B.P. de Jong. Overview fatigue phenomenon in orthotropic bridge decks in the
netherlands. In Orthotropic Bridge Conference, pages 1–24, United States, 2004.
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).
[6] Wardenier J Kolstein, M.H. A new type of fatigue failures in steel orthotropic bridge
decks. In Proceedings of Fifth Paciﬁc Structural Steel Conference, pages 483–488.
Techno Press, Korea, 1998.
[7] M.H Kolstein and J Wardenier. Fatigue strength of welded joints in orthotropic steel
bridge decks. Welding in the world, 38:175–194, 1996.
[8] Chang-Kook Oh, Kee-Jeung Hong, Doobyong Bae, Heungsub Do, and Taejin Han.
Analytical and Experimental Studies on Optimal Details of Orthotropic Steel Decks
for Long Span Bridges. International Journal of Steel Structures, 11(2):227–234,
2011.
[9] Jun Murakoshi, Naoki Yanadori, Toshiki Ishizawa, Naoki Toyama, and Takumi Ko-
suge. Study on eﬀect of deck thickness of orthotropic steel deck on fatigue durability.
Kou kouzou rombunshuu, 19(75):55–65, 2012.
[10] Abdullah Fettahoglu. Optimizing rib width to height and rib spacing to deck plate
thickness ratios in orthotropic decks. Cogent Engineering, 3(1), 2016.
[11] W. de Corte and P. Van Bogaert. An evaluation of the use of fracture mechanics
techniques for the design of orthotropic decks.
Key Engineering Materials, 348-
349:285–288, 2007.
[12] Rasmus Walter. Cement-Based Overlay for Orthotropic Steel Bridge Decks: A Multi-
Scale Modeling Approach. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical
University of Denmark, 2006.
[13] Soﬁa Teixeira de Freitas, Henk Kolstein, and Frans Bijlaard. Fatigue Assessment
of Full-Scale Retroﬁtted Orthotropic Bridge Decks. Journal of Bridge Engineering,
22(11), 2017.
72
==PAGE:80==
[14] Can Chen, Wolfgang O Eisenhut, Kreisler Lau, Alex Ingram, and John Bors. Stiﬀen-
ing Thin Orthotropic Deck Structures with Thermoset Epoxy Asphalt for Improved
Fatigue Resistance. Testing and Characterization of Asphalt Materials and Pavement
Structures, pages 32–43, 2018.
[15] Wanda Lewis. A mathematical model for assessment of material requirements for
cable supported bridges: Implications for conceptual design. Engineering Structures,
42:266–277, 09 2012.
[16] DTU Byg. BygFEM-ramme, n.d. MATLAB function.
[17] J. Turmo, J. A. Lozano-Galant, E. Mirambell, and D. Xu.
Modeling composite
beams with partial interaction. Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 114:380–
393, 2015.
[18] Mads Baandrup. Innovative Design of Steel Girders in Cable-Supported Bridges.
PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark,
2019.
[19] Dansk Standard.
Eurocode 1: Actions on structures - Part 2: Traﬃc loads on
bridges, 2003.
[20] Dassault Syst`emes. Abaqus 6.14, 2014.
[21] Gautam Puri. Python Scripts for Abaqus, Learn by Example. Gautam Puri, ﬁrst
edition, 2011.
[22] Sebastian Andersen and Ulrik M Hansen. Static and Dynamic Analysis of Izmit Bay
Bridge. Master’s thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of
Denmark, 2012.
[23] Simon Bjærre. Improvements to Present Design Philosophy of Orthotropic Steel
Decks with Focus on Fatigue. Master’s thesis, Department of Civil Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[24] Linh Cao Hoang. Cables, 2019. Bridge Structures, Department of Civil Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark.
[25] Tim Skov Jacobsen.
Analysis of orthotropic steel bridge decks.
Master’s thesis,
Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
[26] Lars Damkilde. Inﬂuenslinier. Technical report, Institut for Kemi og Anvendt In-
geniørvidenskab, Aalborg Universitet Esbjerg, 2002.
[27] Henri P Gavin. The Theorems of Betti, Maxwell, and Castigliano. Technical report,
Duke University, 2012.
[28] R.A. Toupin. Saint-Venant’s Principle. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis,
18:83–96, 1965.
[29] Leif Otto Nielsen. Elements of plate bending statics, 2008. Department of Civil
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
73
==PAGE:81==
[30] Dansk Standard. Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures - Part 2: Steel Bridges, Oct
2006.
74
==PAGE:82==
Appendices
75
==PAGE:83==
Top plate
Independent geometry parameters
Top plate thickness
≔
td
14 mm
Rib thickness
≔
tr
7 mm
Rib height
≔
hr
360 mm
Rib width top
≔
wrt
300 mm
Rib width bottom
≔
wrb
180 mm
Rib spacing
≔
dr
600 mm
Dependent geometry parameters
Rib web width
≔
wri
=
―――
-
wrt
wrb
2
60 mm
Rib length
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
365 mm
Area
≔
A
=
――――――――
+
+
⋅
td dr
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⋅
wrb tr
dr
0.0246 ――
m2
m
First moment of area
≔
S
=
――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr ―
hr
2
⋅
⋅
wrb tr hr
dr
0.002 ――
m3
m
Elastic centre
≔
e
=
―
S
A
92.98 mm
Second moment of area
≔
Iy
―――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――
+
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
dr td
3
⋅
⋅
dr td e2
⋅
2
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
drw tr hr
2
⋅
⋅
drw tr
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
―
hr
2
e
⎞
⎟
⎠
2 ⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
wrb tr
3
⋅
⋅
wrb tr ⎛⎝
-
hr
e⎞⎠
2
dr
=
Iy
⎛⎝
⋅
4.275 10-4⎞⎠――
m4
m
A Matlab Element Properties
A
Matlab Element Properties
76
==PAGE:84==
Bottom plate
Independent geometry parameters
Top plate thickness
≔
td
9 mm
Rib thickness
≔
tr
6 mm
Rib height
≔
hr
300 mm
Rib width top
≔
wrt
450 mm
Rib width bottom
≔
wrb
180 mm
Rib spacing
≔
dr
990 mm
Dependent geometry parameters
Rib web width
≔
wri
=
―――
-
wrt
wrb
2
135 mm
Rib length
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
329 mm
Area
≔
A
=
――――――――
+
+
⋅
td dr
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⋅
wrb tr
dr
0.0141 ――
m2
m
First moment of area
≔
S
=
――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr ―
hr
2
⋅
⋅
wrb tr hr
dr
⎛⎝
⋅
9.254 10-4⎞⎠――
m3
m
Elastic centre
≔
e
=
―
S
A
65.73 mm
Second moment of area
≔
Iy
―――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――
+
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
dr td
3
⋅
⋅
dr td e2
⋅
2
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
drw tr hr
2
⋅
⋅
drw tr
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
―
hr
2
e
⎞
⎟
⎠
2 ⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
wrb tr
3
⋅
⋅
wrb tr ⎛⎝
-
hr
e⎞⎠
2
dr
=
Iy
⎛⎝
⋅
1.57 10-4⎞⎠――
m4
m
A Matlab Element Properties
77
==PAGE:85==
Diaphragm element
Independent geometry parameters
Radius of strut
≔
r
219 mm
Thickness of strut (average)
≔
t
6.3 mm
Dependent geometry parameters
Inner radius of strut
≔
ri
=
-
r
t
212.7 mm
Area of 1 strut
≔
A
=
⋅
π ⎛⎝
-
r2
ri
2 ⎞⎠
0.009 m2
Moment of inertia of 1 strut
≔
I
=
⋅
―
π
4
⎛⎝
-
r4
ri
4 ⎞⎠
0.0002 m4
Number of struts
≔
n
10
Total area
≔
A
=
⋅
A n
0.085 m2
Total moment of inertia
≔
I
=
⋅
I n
0.002 m4
A Matlab Element Properties
78
==PAGE:86==
Material parameters
Young's modulus
≔
E
210 GPa
Poisson's ratio
≔
ν
0.3
Shear modulus
≔
G
=
―――
E
2 (( +
1
ν))
81 GPa
Geometric parameters
Plate thickness
≔
t
14 mm
Length between edges 
of top and bottom plate
≔
L1
6.104 m
Length between centres 
of top and bottom plate
≔
L2
30.724 m
Width
≔
b
1 m
(unit width)
Shear area
≔
A
=
⋅
b t
0.014 m2
Shear load calculations
Load
≔
F
1 N
(unit load)
Shear displacement edges
≔
Δx1
=
――
⋅
F L1
⋅
G A
⎛⎝
⋅
5.398 10-9⎞⎠m
Shear displacement centres
≔
Δx2
=
――
⋅
F L2
⋅
G A
⎛⎝
⋅
2.717 10-8⎞⎠m
Length of shear element
≔
Ls
0.2 m
Displacement of shear 
element
≔
Δx
――
⋅
F Ls
⋅
E A
Stiffness for edges
≔
EA1
=
――
⋅
F Ls
Δx1
⎛⎝
⋅
3.705 107 ⎞⎠N
Stiffness for centres
≔
EA2
=
――
⋅
F Ls
Δx2
⎛⎝
⋅
7.361 106 ⎞⎠N
Average stiffness
≔
EA
=
――――
+
EA1
EA2
2
⎛⎝
⋅
2.221 107 ⎞⎠N
Shear elements must have a stiffness of 22.2 MN per meter span. For 
example, if there are x elements per meter in the model, each element will be 
given a stiffness of 22.2/x MN. 
B Shear Element Calculations
B
Shear Element Calculations
79
==PAGE:87==
C Veriﬁcation of Shear Elements
C
Veriﬁcation of Shear Elements
(a) Point Load
(b) Distributed load
Figure C.1: Deﬂection plot of the converged 2D model verifying the correct behaviour of the
shear elements
(a) Point Load
(b) Distributed load
Figure C.2: Normal force plot of the converged 2D model verifying the correct behaviour of
the shear elements
80
==PAGE:88==
C Veriﬁcation of Shear Elements
(a) Point Load
(b) Distributed load
Figure C.3: Shear force plot of the converged 2D model verifying the correct behaviour of
the shear elements
(a) Point Load
(b) Distributed load
Figure C.4: Bending moment diagram of the converged 2D model verifying the correct
behaviour of the shear elements
81
==PAGE:89==
Deck selfweight
After Bjærre [23]
Level 1
Deck cross sectional area:
≔
Adeck
1.24 m2
Surface thickness
≔
hsurf
0.06 m
Surface width
≔
Wsurf
25.7 m
Steel unit weight
≔
ρsteel
7850 ――
kg
m3
Surfacing unit weight
≔
ρsurf
2300 ――
kg
m3
Deck load
≔
gdeck
=
⋅
⋅
Adeck ρsteel g
95458 ―
N
m
Surface load
≔
gsurf
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
Wsurf hsurf ρsurf g
34780 ―
N
m
Total selfweight load
≔
gtotal
=
+
gdeck
gsurf
130238 ―
N
m
Level 2
Deck plate circumference
≔
Odeck
68.104 m
Girder plates density
≔
mdeck
=
―――
gdeck
⋅
Odeck g
142.928 ――
kg
m2
Surface density to add 
to top plate
≔
msurf
=
―――
gsurf
⋅
Wsurf g
138 ――
kg
m2
Top plate density 
including surfacing
≔
mtp
=
+
mdeck
msurf
280.928 ――
kg
m2
Top plate thickness when 
modelled as homogenous 
shell
≔
htp
0.014 m
Top plate density when 
modelled as homogenous 
shell
≔
mtp3
=
――
mtp
htp
20066 ――
kg
m3
D Dead Load Calculations
D
Dead Load Calculations
82
==PAGE:90==
Pre-tension calculations
Initial variables
Young's modulus
≔
E
195 GPa
Span length
≔
Lmain
1550 m
≔
Lside
566 m
≔
Ltotal
=
+
Lmain
⋅
2 Lside
2682 m
Hanger span
≔
Lhanger
25 m
Main cable sag
≔
kmain
171.67 m
≔
kside
223.5 m
Deck self-weight
≔
qdeck
130238 ―
N
m
Cable self-weight
≔
qcable
29948 ―
N
m
Cable length main span
≔
s0
1600.7 m
Average cable self-
weight
≔
qcable
=
⋅
――
qcable
Lmain
s0
30928 ―
N
m
Average self-weight 
UDL per cable
≔
q
=
+
――
qdeck
2
qcable
96047 ―
N
m
Hangers
Load per hanger
≔
Nhanger
=
――――
⋅
qdeck Lhanger
2
1628 kN
Hanger radius
≔
rhanger
0.07181 m
Hanger area
≔
Ahanger
=
⋅
rhanger
2 π
0.016 m2
Hanger stress
≔
σhanger
=
―――
Nhanger
Ahanger
100 MPa
Hanger strain
≔
εhanger
=
―――
σhanger
E
⋅
5.153 10-4
Change in hanger length
≔
ΔLhanger
⋅
εhanger L
where L is the individual 
hanger length
E Pretension Calculations
E
Pretension Calculations
83
==PAGE:91==
Main cable
Main span
Main cable radius
≔
rcable
0.3517 m
Main cable area
≔
Acable
=
⋅
rcable
2 π
0.389 m2
Horizontal force in cable
≔
H
162.422339 MN
Set H such that s0=s1-Ds1
≔
s0
=
⋅
Lmain
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
1
⋅
―
8
3 ―――
kmain
2
Lmain
2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
1600.7 m
Cable length with load
≔
s1
=
⋅
Lmain
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
1
⋅
―
1
24 ――――
⋅
q2 Lmain
2
H2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
1604.3 m
Change in cable length
≔
Δs1
=
⋅
―――
⋅
Lmain H
⋅
E Acable
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
1
⋅
―
1
12 ――――
⋅
q2 Lmain
2
H2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
3.555 m
=
-
s1
Δs1
1600.7 m
<-- s0=s1-Ds1
New sag
≔
k1
=
―――
⋅
q Lmain
2
⋅
8 H
177.59 m
Example of length change calculation
Start point of first cable section
≔
x1
0 m
≔
y1
0 m
End point of first cable section
≔
x2
25 m
≔
y2
11.3 m
Original position of end point
≔
y0
10.9 m
Angle of element
≔
θ
=
atan
⎛
⎜
⎝
―――
-
y2
y1
-
x2
x1
⎞
⎟
⎠
0.425
Normal force in element
≔
N1
=
―――
H
cos((θ))
178.244 MN
Length of element
≔
L1
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
⎛⎝
-
x2
x1⎞⎠
2
⎛⎝
-
y0
y1⎞⎠
2
27.273 m
Strain of element
≔
ε1
=
―――
N1
⋅
E Acable
0.0024
Length change
≔
ΔL1
=
⋅
ε1 L1
0.064 m
E Pretension Calculations
84
==PAGE:92==
Side span
Length of parabola side span
≔
Lside
1768.94 m
Horizontal force in cable
≔
H
163.627782 MN
Set H such that s0=s1-Ds1
≔
s0
=
⋅
Lside
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
1
⋅
―
8
3 ――
kside
2
Lside
2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
1844.2 m
Cable length with load
≔
s1
=
⋅
Lside
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
1
⋅
―
1
24 ――――
⋅
q2 Lside
2
H2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
1848.4 m
Change in cable length
≔
Δs1
=
⋅
―――
⋅
Lside H
⋅
E Acable
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
1
⋅
―
1
12 ――――
⋅
q2 Lside
2
H2
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
4.163 m
=
-
s1
Δs1
1844.2 m
<-- s0=s1-Ds1
New sag
≔
k1
=
―――
⋅
q Lside
2
⋅
8 H
229.59 m
E Pretension Calculations
85
==PAGE:93==
Original Diaphragm
Diaphragm struts
Length
Radius
Thickness
≔
l1
5.61 m
≔
r1
0.219 m
≔
t1
0.005 m
≔
l2
5.44 m
≔
r2
0.219 m
≔
t2
0.008 m
≔
l3
5.18 m
≔
r3
0.219 m
≔
t3
0.008 m
≔
l4
3.93 m
≔
r4
0.219 m
≔
t4
0.0063 m
≔
l5
3.48 m
≔
r5
0.219 m
≔
t5
0.005 m
Area
Volume
≔
A1
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r1
2
⎛⎝
-
r1
t1⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V1
=
⋅
l1 A1
0.038 m3
≔
A2
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r2
2
⎛⎝
-
r2
t2⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V2
=
⋅
l2 A2
0.059 m3
≔
A3
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r3
2
⎛⎝
-
r3
t3⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V3
=
⋅
l3 A3
0.056 m3
≔
A4
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r4
2
⎛⎝
-
r4
t4⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.009 m2
≔
V4
=
⋅
l4 A4
0.034 m3
≔
A5
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r5
2
⎛⎝
-
r5
t5⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V5
=
⋅
l5 A5
0.024 m3
Total volume
≔
Vt1
=
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
+
+
+
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5⎞⎠
0.42 m3
Diaphragm beams
Area
Length
Bottom beam
≔
Abb
0.0056 m2
≔
lbb
=
⋅
2 ((
+
9.36 m
6 m))
30.72 m
Top beam
≔
Atb
0.0117 m2
≔
ltb
=
⋅
2 12.86 m
25.72 m
Inclined web beam
≔
Aiwb
0.0092 m2
≔
liwb
=
⋅
2 2.92 m
5.84 m
Walkway beam
≔
Awwb
0.0044 m2
≔
lwwb
=
⋅
2 2.92 m
5.84 m
Volume
≔
Vbb
=
⋅
Abb lbb
0.172 m3
≔
Vtb
=
⋅
Atb ltb
0.301 m3
≔
Viwb
=
⋅
Aiwb liwb
0.054 m3
≔
Vwwb
=
⋅
Awwb lwwb
0.026 m3
Total volume
≔
Vt2
=
+
+
+
Vbb
Vtb
Viwb
Vwwb
0.552 m3
F New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
F
New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
86
==PAGE:94==
Total volume of diaphragm
≔
Vt
=
+
Vt1
Vt2
0.973 m3
Spacing of diaphragms
≔
s
5 m
Area averaged per 
meter span
≔
As
=
―
Vt
s
0.195 m2
Unit weight of steel
≔
ρ
7850 ――
kg
m3
Total weight per 
meter span
≔
Wd
=
⋅
As ρ
1527 ―
kg
m
Weight of girder plates
≔
W0
=
――――
130238 ―
N
m
g
13281 ―
kg
m
Total girder weight
≔
W
=
+
W0
Wd
14808 ―
kg
m
Diaphragm weight as % 
of total girder weight
=
⋅
――
Wd
W
100
10.3
New Diaphragm Design 1
Length
Radius
Thickness
≔
l1
6.14 m
≔
r1
0.219 m
≔
t1
0.005 m
≔
l2
5.99 m
≔
r2
0.219 m
≔
t2
0.008 m
≔
l3
5.75 m
≔
r3
0.219 m
≔
t3
0.008 m
≔
l4
3.93 m
≔
r4
0.219 m
≔
t4
0.0063 m
≔
l5
3.48 m
≔
r5
0.219 m
≔
t5
0.005 m
≔
lbbx
12 m
Area
Volume
≔
A1
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r1
2
⎛⎝
-
r1
t1⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V1
=
⋅
l1 A1
0.042 m3
≔
A2
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r2
2
⎛⎝
-
r2
t2⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V2
=
⋅
l2 A2
0.065 m3
≔
A3
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r3
2
⎛⎝
-
r3
t3⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V3
=
⋅
l3 A3
0.062 m3
≔
A4
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r4
2
⎛⎝
-
r4
t4⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.009 m2
≔
V4
=
⋅
l4 A4
0.034 m3
≔
A5
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r5
2
⎛⎝
-
r5
t5⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V5
=
⋅
l5 A5
0.024 m3
≔
Abbx
=
Abb
0.006 m2
≔
Vbbx
=
⋅
lbbx Abbx
0.067 m3
F New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
87
==PAGE:95==
Total volume
≔
Vt1
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
⋅
4 ⎛⎝
+
+
V1
V2
V3⎞⎠
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
V4
V5⎞⎠
Vtb
Vwwb
Viwb
Vbb
Vbbx
1.409 m3
Area averaged per 
meter span
≔
As
=
――
Vt1
s
0.282 m2
Total weight per 
meter span
≔
Wd
=
⋅
As ρ
2212 ―
kg
m
New Diaphragm Design 2
Length
Radius
≔
l1
6.14 m
≔
r1
0.219 m
≔
l2
5.99 m
≔
r2
0.219 m
≔
l3
5.75 m
≔
r3
0.219 m
≔
l4
4.66 m
≔
r4
0.219 m
≔
l5
4.29 m
≔
r5
0.219 m
≔
ltbx
25.72 m
Area
Volume
≔
A1
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r1
2
⎛⎝
-
r1
t1⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V1
=
⋅
l1 A1
0.042 m3
≔
A2
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r2
2
⎛⎝
-
r2
t2⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V2
=
⋅
l2 A2
0.065 m3
≔
A3
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r3
2
⎛⎝
-
r3
t3⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V3
=
⋅
l3 A3
0.062 m3
≔
A4
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r4
2
⎛⎝
-
r4
t4⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.009 m2
≔
V4
=
⋅
l4 A4
0.04 m3
≔
A5
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r5
2
⎛⎝
-
r5
t5⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V5
=
⋅
l5 A5
0.029 m3
≔
Atbx
=
Atb
0.012 m2
≔
Vtbx
=
⋅
ltbx Atbx
0.301 m3
Total volume
≔
Vt2
=
+
+
⋅
4 ⎛⎝
+
+
+
+
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5⎞⎠
Vtbx
Vt
2.224 m3
Area averaged per 
meter span
≔
As
=
――
Vt2
s
0.445 m2
Total weight per 
meter span
≔
Wd
=
⋅
As ρ
3492 ―
kg
m
F New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
88
==PAGE:96==
New Diaphragm Design 3
Length
Radius
≔
l1
5.19 m
≔
r1
0.219 m
≔
l2
5.09 m
≔
r2
0.219 m
≔
l3
5.00 m
≔
r3
0.219 m
≔
l4
4.32 m
≔
r4
0.219 m
≔
l5
3.70 m
≔
r5
0.219 m
≔
ltbx
25.72 m
Area
Volume
≔
A1
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r1
2
⎛⎝
-
r1
t1⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V1
=
⋅
l1 A1
0.035 m3
≔
A2
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r2
2
⎛⎝
-
r2
t2⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V2
=
⋅
l2 A2
0.055 m3
≔
A3
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r3
2
⎛⎝
-
r3
t3⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V3
=
⋅
l3 A3
0.054 m3
≔
A4
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r4
2
⎛⎝
-
r4
t4⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.009 m2
≔
V4
=
⋅
l4 A4
0.037 m3
≔
A5
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r5
2
⎛⎝
-
r5
t5⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V5
=
⋅
l5 A5
0.025 m3
≔
Atbx
=
Atb
0.012 m2
≔
Vtbx
=
⋅
ltbx Atbx
0.301 m3
New spacing
≔
s3
=
――
25 m
6
4.167 m
Total volume
≔
Vt3
=
+
+
+
⋅
2 V1
⋅
4 ⎛⎝
+
+
+
V2
V3
V4
V5⎞⎠
Vtbx
Vt
2.029 m3
Area averaged per 
meter span
≔
As
=
――
Vt3
s3
0.487 m2
Total weight per 
meter span
≔
Wd
=
⋅
As ρ
3822 ―
kg
m
New Diaphragm Design 4
Length
Radius
≔
l1
6.32 m
≔
r1
0.219 m
≔
l2
6.24 m
≔
r2
0.219 m
≔
l3
6.17 m
≔
r3
0.219 m
≔
l4
5.63 m
≔
r4
0.219 m
≔
l5
5.15 m
≔
r5
0.219 m
F New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
89
==PAGE:97==
Area
Volume
≔
A1
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r1
2
⎛⎝
-
r1
t1⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V1
=
⋅
l1 A1
0.043 m3
≔
A2
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r2
2
⎛⎝
-
r2
t2⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V2
=
⋅
l2 A2
0.067 m3
≔
A3
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r3
2
⎛⎝
-
r3
t3⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.011 m2
≔
V3
=
⋅
l3 A3
0.067 m3
≔
A4
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r4
2
⎛⎝
-
r4
t4⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.009 m2
≔
V4
=
⋅
l4 A4
0.048 m3
≔
A5
=
⋅
π ⎛
⎝
-
r5
2
⎛⎝
-
r5
t5⎞⎠
2 ⎞
⎠
0.007 m2
≔
V5
=
⋅
l5 A5
0.035 m3
New spacing
≔
s4
=
――
25 m
6
4.167 m
Total volume
≔
Vt4
=
+
+
V1
⋅
2 ⎛⎝
+
+
+
V2
V3
V4
V5⎞⎠
Vt
1.45 m3
Area averaged per 
meter span
≔
As
=
――
Vt4
s4
0.348 m2
Total weight per 
meter span
≔
Wd
=
⋅
As ρ
2732 ―
kg
m
F New Diaphragm Design Self-Weight
90
==PAGE:98==
G Strut Stress for Constant Weight Models
G
Strut Stress for Constant Weight Models
Figure G.1: Stress contour on diaphragm of ﬁrst inclined diaphragm girder design with
reduced element size
Figure G.2: Stress contour on diaphragm of second inclined diaphragm girder design with
reduced element size
91
==PAGE:99==
G Strut Stress for Constant Weight Models
Figure G.3: Stress contour on diaphragm of third inclined diaphragm girder design with
reduced element size
Figure G.4: Stress contour on diaphragm of fourth inclined diaphragm girder design with
reduced element size
92
==PAGE:100==
Material parameters
Young's modulus
≔
E
210 GPa
Poisson's ratio
≔
ν
0.3
Shear modulus
≔
G
=
―――
E
2 (( +
1
ν))
81 GPa
Reduction factor
≔
χ
1
Top plate 1
Independent geometry parameters
Top plate thickness
≔
td
=
⋅
14 mm χ
14 mm
Rib thickness
≔
tr
=
⋅
7 mm χ
7 mm
Rib height
≔
hr
=
⋅
360 mm χ
360 mm
Rib width top
≔
wrt
=
⋅
295 mm χ
295 mm
Rib width bottom
≔
wrb
=
⋅
180 mm χ
180 mm
Rib spacing
≔
dr
=
⋅
600 mm χ
600 mm
Dependent geometry parameters
Rib web width
≔
wri
=
―――
-
wrt
wrb
2
57.5 mm
Rib length
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
364.563 mm
Deck plate stiffness
≔
D
=
――――
⋅
E td
3
⋅
12 ⎛⎝-
1
ν2 ⎞⎠
⎛⎝
⋅
5.277 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Strong axis properties
Area
≔
A
=
――――――――
+
+
⋅
td dr
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⋅
wrb tr
dr
0.025 ――
m2
m
Axial stiffness
≔
D11
=
⋅
A E
⎛⎝
⋅
5.167 109 ⎞⎠―
N
m
First moment of area
≔
S
=
――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr ―
hr
2
⋅
⋅
wrb tr hr
dr
0.002 ――
m3
m
H Top Plate Section Properties
H
Top Plate Section Properties
93
==PAGE:101==
Elastic centre
≔
e
=
―
S
A
92.95 mm
Second moment of area
≔
Iy
―――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――
+
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
dr td
3
⋅
⋅
dr td e2
⋅
2
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
drw tr hr
2
⋅
⋅
drw tr
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
―
hr
2
e
⎞
⎟
⎠
2 ⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
wrb tr
3
⋅
⋅
wrb tr ⎛⎝
-
hr
e⎞⎠
2
dr
=
Iy
⎛⎝
⋅
4.273 10-4⎞⎠――
m4
m
Bending stiffness
≔
D44
=
⋅
E Iy
⎛⎝
⋅
8.973 107 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Enclosed area of 1 rib
≔
AE
=
⋅
―――
+
wrt
wrb
2
hr
0.086 m2
Circumference
≔
Or
=
+
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb
wrt
1.204 m
Rib stiffness parameter
≔
K
=
―――
⋅
4 AE
2
―
Or
tr
⎛⎝
⋅
1.7 10-4⎞⎠m4
Torsional stiffness
≔
GK1
=
+
⋅
(( -
1
ν)) D
――
⋅
G K
dr
⎛⎝
⋅
2.292 107 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Weak axis properties
Ribs are ignored in the calculations of weak axis properties, as well as the coupling terms.
Axial stiffness
≔
D22
=
⋅
td E
⎛⎝
⋅
2.94 109 ⎞⎠―
N
m
Bending stiffness
≔
D55
=
D
⎛⎝
⋅
5.277 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Torsional stiffness
≔
GK2
=
⋅
(( -
1
ν)) D
⎛⎝
⋅
3.694 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Coupling terms
≔
D12
=
⋅
⋅
td ν E
⎛⎝
⋅
8.82 108 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
D21
D12
H Top Plate Section Properties
94
==PAGE:102==
≔
D45
=
⋅
D ν
⎛⎝
⋅
1.583 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
≔
D54
D45
Shear stiffness
≔
D33
=
⋅
td G
⎛⎝
⋅
1.131 109 ⎞⎠―
N
m
Twist stiffness
≔
D66
=
――――
+
GK1
GK2
2
⎛⎝
⋅
1.148 107 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Transverse shear stiffness
≔
K11
=
⋅
―――
⋅
⋅
2 hr tr
dr
G
⎛⎝
⋅
6.785 108 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
K22
=
⋅
⋅
―
5
6
G td
⎛⎝
⋅
9.423 108 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
K12
0
Top plate 2
Independent geometry parameters
Top plate thickness
≔
td
=
⋅
14 mm χ
14 mm
Rib thickness
≔
tr
=
⋅
8 mm χ
8 mm
Rib height
≔
hr
=
⋅
360 mm χ
360 mm
Rib width top
≔
wrt
=
⋅
295 mm χ
295 mm
Rib width bottom
≔
wrb
=
⋅
180 mm χ
180 mm
Rib spacing
≔
dr
=
⋅
600 mm χ
600 mm
Dependent geometry parameters
Rib web width
≔
wri
=
―――
-
wrt
wrb
2
57.5 mm
Rib length
≔
drw
=
‾‾‾‾‾‾‾‾
+
wri
2
hr
2
364.563 mm
Deck plate stiffness
≔
D
=
――――
⋅
E td
3
⋅
12 ⎛⎝-
1
ν2 ⎞⎠
⎛⎝
⋅
5.277 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
H Top Plate Section Properties
95
==PAGE:103==
Strong axis properties
Area
≔
A
=
――――――――
+
+
⋅
td dr
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr
⋅
wrb tr
dr
0.026 ――
m2
m
Axial stiffness
≔
D11
=
⋅
A E
⎛⎝
⋅
5.486 109 ⎞⎠―
N
m
First moment of area
≔
S
=
――――――――
+
⋅
⋅
2 drw tr ―
hr
2
⋅
⋅
wrb tr hr
dr
0.003 ――
m3
m
Elastic centre
≔
e
=
―
S
A
100.066 mm
Second moment of area
≔
Iy
―――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――
+
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
dr td
3
⋅
⋅
dr td e2
⋅
2
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
+
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
drw tr hr
2
⋅
⋅
drw tr
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
―
hr
2
e
⎞
⎟
⎠
2 ⎞
⎟
⎟⎠
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
wrb tr
3
⋅
⋅
wrb tr ⎛⎝
-
hr
e⎞⎠
2
dr
=
Iy
⎛⎝
⋅
4.697 10-4⎞⎠――
m4
m
Bending stiffness
≔
D44
=
⋅
E Iy
⎛⎝
⋅
9.864 107 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Enclosed area of 1 rib
≔
AE
=
⋅
―――
+
wrt
wrb
2
hr
0.086 m2
Circumference
≔
Or
=
+
+
⋅
2 drw
wrb
wrt
1.204 m
Rib stiffness parameter
≔
K
=
―――
⋅
4 AE
2
―
Or
tr
⎛⎝
⋅
1.943 10-4⎞⎠m4
Torsional stiffness
≔
GK1
=
+
⋅
(( -
1
ν)) D
――
⋅
G K
dr
⎛⎝
⋅
2.619 107 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Weak axis properties
Ribs are ignored in the calculations of weak axis properties, as well as the coupling terms.
Axial stiffness
≔
D22
=
⋅
td E
⎛⎝
⋅
2.94 109 ⎞⎠―
N
m
H Top Plate Section Properties
96
==PAGE:104==
Bending stiffness
≔
D55
=
D
⎛⎝
⋅
5.277 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Torsional stiffness
≔
GK2
=
⋅
(( -
1
ν)) D
⎛⎝
⋅
3.694 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Coupling terms
≔
D12
=
⋅
⋅
td ν E
⎛⎝
⋅
8.82 108 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
D21
D12
≔
D45
=
⋅
D ν
⎛⎝
⋅
1.583 104 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
≔
D54
D45
Shear stiffness
≔
D33
=
⋅
td G
⎛⎝
⋅
1.131 109 ⎞⎠―
N
m
Twist stiffness
≔
D66
=
――――
+
GK1
GK2
2
⎛⎝
⋅
1.311 107 ⎞⎠―――
⋅
N m2
m
Transverse shear stiffness
≔
K11
=
⋅
―――
⋅
⋅
2 hr tr
dr
G
⎛⎝
⋅
7.754 108 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
K22
=
⋅
⋅
―
5
6
G td
⎛⎝
⋅
9.423 108 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
K12
0
H Top Plate Section Properties
97
==PAGE:105==
Material parameters
Young's modulus
≔
E
210 GPa
Poisson's ratio
≔
ν
0.3
Shear modulus
≔
G
=
―――
E
2 (( +
1
ν))
81 GPa
Diaphragm struts
Radius
≔
r
0.219 m
Thickness
≔
t
0.005 m
Area
≔
A
=
⋅
π ⎛⎝
-
r2
(( -
r
t))
2 ⎞⎠
0.007 m2
Second moment of area
≔
I
=
⋅
―
π
4
⎛⎝
-
r4
(( -
r
t))
4 ⎞⎠
⎛⎝
⋅
1.594 10-4⎞⎠m4
Length of centre strut
≔
L
6.42 m
Euler critical buckling stress
≔
σ
=
―――
⋅
⋅
π2 E I
⋅
L2 A
1179 MPa
Diaphragm beams
Reduction factor
≔
χ
1
Web thickness
≔
tw
=
⋅
14 mm χ
14 mm
Flange thickness
≔
tf
=
⋅
12 mm χ
12 mm
Web height
≔
hw
=
⋅
602 mm χ
602 mm
Flange width
≔
wf
=
⋅
250 mm χ
250 mm
Area
≔
A
=
+
⋅
tw hw
⋅
tf wf
0.011 m2
First moment of area
≔
S
=
⋅
⋅
tw hw
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
―
hw
2
―
tf
2
⎞
⎟
⎠
⎛⎝
⋅
2.587 106 ⎞⎠mm3
Elastic centre
≔
e
=
―
S
A
226.408 mm
I Diaphragm Section Properties
I
Diaphragm Section Properties
98
==PAGE:106==
Second moment of area 
(weak axis)
≔
Iz
=
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
hw tw
3
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
tf wf
3
⎛⎝
⋅
1.576 10-5⎞⎠m4
Second moment of area 
(strong axis)
≔
Iy
=
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
tw hw
3
⋅
⋅
tw hw
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
+
―
hw
2
―
tf
2
e
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
⋅
⋅
―
1
12
wf tf
3
⋅
⋅
tf wf e2
⎛⎝
⋅
4.631 10-4⎞⎠m4
Torsional stiffness
≔
J
=
+
⋅
⋅
―
1
3
hw tw
3
⋅
⋅
―
1
3
wf tf
3
⎛⎝
⋅
6.946 10-7⎞⎠m4
Shear stiffness
≔
Ky
=
⋅
⋅
tw hw G
⎛⎝
⋅
6.807 108 ⎞⎠N
≔
Kz
=
⋅
⋅
tf wf G
⎛⎝
⋅
2.423 108 ⎞⎠N
I Diaphragm Section Properties
99
