==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Development and comparison of control
strategies for a novel industrial distillation
column configuration focused on Grade
AA methanol at high recovery rates
B.Sc.Eng.
Niels Sæderup Halager
(s153357)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Chemial Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Kemiteknik
Søltofts Plads 228A
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 2800
kt@kt.dtu.dk
http://www.kt.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
S153357 Niels Sæderup Halager 
 
DTU CHEMICAL ENGINEERING  
Master student 
 Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering 
 
 
 
Project description: 
 
Project title: 
Development and comparison of control strategies for a novel industrial distillation 
column configuration focused on Grade AA methanol at high recovery rates.  
ECTS Points: 
 
30 
Student: 
 
Niels Sæderup Halager   
 
 
     (s153357@student.dtu.dk) 
Project advisors: 
Isuru Sampath Bandara Abeykoon Udugama 
 
(isud@kt.dtu.dk) 
 
Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom  
 
 
 
(jkh@kt.dtu.dk) 
 
Project background: 
Distillation is one of the most widely used separation methods in the chemical industry 
and is therefore of high interest. In order to satisfy a given target purity or productivity, 
the distillation column must be operated carefully. If an automated control system can 
be applied to the system, many benefits may follow such as the ability to increase 
productivity  or decrease operation cost all while satisfying the purity targets.  
 
Project content: 
The ability to use automated control systems for managing industrial distillation 
columns has been established in recent years. In this project, a control system will be 
developed for an industrial distillation column for purification of a methanol and water 
mixture with ethanol impurities to Grade AA methanol using a new column design.  
                             This involves the following specific tasks: 
1) Transition the current steady state model to a dynamic process model. 
2) Develop a regulatory control structure based on standard PID control blocks to ensure 
steady solutions. 
3) In parallel, develop an advanced regulatory and model predictive control (MPC) control 
strategies on Aspen HYSYS to ensure on specification production during routine 
process operations. 
4) Exploration of the connection and barrier between Aspen HYSYS and the 
MATLAB/Simulink environment allowing for advanced MPC applications to be 
implemented.  
5) Exploration of the ability and barrier to integrate the proposed advanced and 
regulatory control layers in a real plant to demonstrate industrial strength controller 
capabilities. 
i
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc.Eng. thesis was prepared at the department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a Masters degree in Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 11, 2020
B.Sc.Eng. Niels Sæderup Halager (s153357)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
High grade methanol is widely used in the chemical and pharmaceutical industry. It is
produced industrially by catalytic conversion of natural gas and the product is typically
a mixture of methanol, water and unwanted impurities such as ethanol and acetone.
Distillation is an energy intensive operation, but remains the only method of industrial
methanol purification.
Grade AA methanol has strict purity requirements and many designs have been devel-
oped for Grade AA methanol production. A novel industrial distillation column design
uses mass integration to reduce the overall energy consumption and increase recovery
rates.
This thesis continues the development of the novel industrial distillation column by
developing an advanced control strategy that can satisfy the strict purity requirements
for Grade AA methanol, while maintaining a high recovery rate and reduced energy
consumption in an industrial environment.
The advanced control structure development is divided into three parts. The first
part explains how the novel distillation column configuration is different from previous
designs. The second part transforms the existing steady state simulation of the novel
distillation column configuration to a dynamic simulation. This includes setting up a
stabilising control layer that maintains process variables such as liquid levels, pressures
and mass flows. The third part uses the dynamic simulation to develop a linear process
model that serves as background for two advanced supervisory controllers.
The advanced control structure successfully enabled the novel distillation column
configuration to be operated closer to the Grade AA specifications at constant high
recovery rates which resulted in an energy reduction of 700.5 kW heating utility.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Resumé (Danish)
Kemisk rent metanol er meget anvendt i den kemiske industri. Det produceres industrielt
af naturgas der ved hjælp af katalytisk reaktion giver en blanding af: metanol, vand og
små mængder urenheder så som ætanol og acetone. Industriel fremstilling af kemisk
rent metanol kan kun gøres ved destillation hvilket er en meget energiintensiv metode.
Der er strenge renhedskrav til Grade AA metanol og der er udviklet specialiserede
industrielle destillationsmetoder til dette. En ny industriel destillationsmetode til frem-
stilling af Grade AA metanol benytter sig af masse-integration til at reducere det samlede
energiforbrug samt at øge udbytteprocenten.
Denne afhandling fortsætter udviklingen af den nye industrielle destillationsmetode
ved at opstille et avanceret kontrolsystem der kan overholde de strenge renhedskrav,
fastholde en høj udbytteprocent og reducere energiforbruget.
Videreudviklingen af det avancerede kontrolsystem, er inddelt i 3 faser. Første fase
indeholder en forklaring af hvordan den nye destillationsmetode er forskellig fra tidligere
metoder.
Anden fase, omdanner den eksisterende stady-state simulering af den nye
destillationsmetode til en dynamisk simulering. Desuden vil der blive opstillet en sta-
biliseringskontrolstruktur som opretholder procesvariabler, herunder væskestand, tryk,
og masse flow. Den tredje fase bruger den dynamiske simulering til at udvikle en lineær
procesmodel som er baggrund for to avancerede administrerende kontrolstrukturer.
De avancerede kontrolstukturer muliggjorde at den nye destillationsmetode kunne
holdes tættere på specifikationerne for Grade AA metanol ved konstante høje udbyt-
teprocenter, hvilket resulterede i en 700.5kW varmereduktion.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
iii
Abstract
v
Resumé (Danish)
vii
Contents
ix
Abbreviations
1
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Methanol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Methanol applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Crude methanol production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Project scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Processing of crude methanol
11
2.1
Separation principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Industrial distillation columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Distillation operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Novel industrial distillation column configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Novel industrial distillation column configuration
29
3.1
Simulation software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Steady-state simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Dynamic simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Comparison between steady-state and dynamic simulation
. . . . . . . .
46
4
Advanced control
49
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.1
Disturbance phenomena
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Connection with MATLAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Plantwide control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4
Supervisory control layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.5
Supervisory control final remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5
Conclusion
85
A MATLAB Programs
87
A.1 dynstartstop.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.2 Fit.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.3 tfsolver.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
B Transfer functions
95
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:13==
Abbreviations
FOPTD first order plus time delay. 61–63, 66–68, 70, 83, 85
HFO heavy fuel oil. 5
HP high pressure. 16, 18
LP low pressure. 16, 17
MIMO multiple input multiple output. 21, 22, 24
MMSA Methanol Market Services Asia. 5
MMT million metric tons. 4, 5, 15
MPC model predictive control. 22, 24, 25, 57, 59, 68, 70, 79–81, 85, 86
MTO Methanol-to-Olefins. 5
MTPD metric tons per day. 16
PID proportional, integral and differential. 21, 23–25, 39, 41, 43, 85
PM Particulate Matter. 5
PNEC predicted no effect concentration. 9
RGA relative gain array. 39, 40
RWGS reverse water gas shift. 7
SISO single input single output. 21, 22, 39
VLE vapour liquid equilibrium. 46
==PAGE:14==
2
Abbreviations
Nomenclature
AC
Active constraints
B1
Bottoms 1 stream out of the reboiler in the refining column
B1 MeOH
Bottoms 1 methanol composition
B2
Bottoms 2 stream out of the reboiler in the recovery column
B2 MeOH
Bottoms 2 methanol composition
β
Product recovery rate
C1
Condenser in the refining column
C2
Condenser in the recovery column
CV
Controlled variable
CV1
Controlled variables in the supervisory control layer
CV2
Controlled variables in the regulatory control layer
D1
Distillate 1 stream out of the condenser in the refining column
D1 EtOH
Distillate 1 ethanol composition
D2
Distillate 2 stream out of the condenser in the recovery column
D2 EtOH
Distillate 2 ethanol composition
D1D2
Distillate composition controller 1
D1R2
Distillate composition controller 2
D1D2R1R2
Distillate composition controller with optimising reboiler control
F1
Feed stream into the refining column
F2
Feed stream into the recovery column
FC
Flow controller
FI
Flow indicator
Grade AA
Methanol purification specification see table 1.2
λij
Energy interaction in Wilson equation
LC
Level controller
LI
Level indicator
N
Number of stages
PC
Pressure controller
PI
Pressure indicator
PID
Proportional intergral and differential controller
PI
PID controller without the differential part
PPM
Parts per million, unit of concentration
PV
Process variable
R1
Reboiler in the refining column
R2
Reboiler in the recovery column
S1
Side draw stream out of the refining column
S2
Side draw stream out of the recovery column
SP
Setpoint
t
h
Metric tonnes per hour, unit of mass flow rate
w/w
Weight per weight, unit of concentration
v/v
Volume per volume, unit of concentration
xD
Product ethanol specification (PPM weight)
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Distillation is a widely used separation method in the chemical production industry and
is therefore of great interest for chemical engineers. They are typically in charge of the
process design and commissioning of the chemical plant.
Currently, with climate change and increasing population density, an increasing interest
in sustainability and energy saving has developed. Since distillation is a very energy
intensive unit operation which in 1992 consisted of about 3% of the world energy con-
sumption[1] the need for optimisation and development of new separation systems is
huge.
Methanol is a chemical that is purified using distillation columns. In the following
section methanol is introduced as a chemical as well as its applications.
1.1
Methanol
Methanol is one of the most important chemicals today. It is the simplest alcohol that
exists, and it has the chemical formula CH3OH and 3D structure as seen in figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Methanol structure showing the 3D configuration of the molecule[2].
Methanol was discovered several hundred years ago and up until 1923, destructive
distillation of wood was the only important source of methanol.
Between 1923 and
1960s methanol was produced at high pressure and temperature using a sulphur-resistant
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Table 1.1: Methanol physical properties.
Methanol (CAS 77-56-1)
Value
Molecular weight
32.042 u
Density
786.68 kg/m3
Boiling point
64.1 ◦C at ambient conditions
Flash point
15.6 ◦C
Ignition temperature
470 ◦C
Explosion limits
6.72-36.50 % v/v
ZnO–Cr2O3 catalyst. In the later 1960s the process was improved by using a copper ox-
ide catalyst and a synthesis gas rich in carbon dioxide under mild reaction conditions[3].
The methanol production details are reviewed in section 1.3.2.
Special safety precautions must be observed when handling and using methanol. Due
to the low flash temperature, vapour will be present at ambient conditions and if the
concentration is within the explosion limit it may burn in the presence of an ignition
source. The substance is toxic if swallowed or inhaled, if it touches the skin and it causes
damage to organs[4].
1.2
Methanol applications
Methanol has a wide range of applications. They can be divided into energy conversion,
feedstock for production of other chemicals[5] and other uses.
Energy conversion can be from chemical energy to mechanical or thermal energy in a
combustion engine or in a fuel cell. As an automotive fuel it can be used in specialised
engines.
Methanol has several advantages over conventional fuel.
It burns at lower
temperature than gasoline and the lower volatility reduces the explosion or fire risks.
Approximately 70% of all methanol is used for chemical synthesis of dimethyl terephta-
late, methyl tertiary butyl ether, methyl methacrylate, formaldehyde and acetic acid[6].
Methanol also has other uses: It is widely used as a solvent and inhibitor and it may also
be used as an anti-frost agent in several different consumer and industrial products[6].
All the above applications give a huge world demand. Methanol production is a mas-
sive industry with over 90 methanol plants worldwide. They have a combined capacity
of around 110 million metric tons (MMT) per year. The methanol supply and demand
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Methanol applications
5
balance from 2014 to 2019 (estimate) seen in figure 1.2 shows that the supply and de-
mand has been increasing for at least the last 5 years according to Methanol Market
Services Asia (MMSA). It also shows different uses of methanol and their magnitude,
where the largest sectors are formaldehyde and methanol-to-olefins[7].
Figure 1.2: MMSA Global methanol supply and demand balance from 2014 to 2019
(estimate).
Methanol demand is predicted to increase by 5.42% in the forecast years 2019-2027[8]
due to the increased use of Methanol-to-Olefins (MTO) technology, increased demand for
petrochemicals and promotion of methanol as a transportation fuel by governments[9].
The use of methanol as a marine fuel would also contribute to a substantial increased
demand (a potential of 80 MMT) since the emission from methanol combustion as op-
posed to heavy fuel oil (HFO) contains no SOx and has a reduced NOx and Particulate
Matter (PM) concentration[10].
The large methanol supply and demand is well established but considering the increas-
ing energy price and increasing demand for methanol, new or more efficient production
methods will be needed. In the following sections, a typical industrial methanol produc-
tion procedure will be presented.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.3
Crude methanol production
Methanol is produced on an industrial scale by catalytic conversion of synthesis gas
(syngas)[3]. The process consists of the following three parts: Production of syngas,
methanol synthesis and product purification.
1.3.1
Production of synthesis gas (syngas)
Syngas consists of hydrogen (H2), carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2). It
can be produced from all carbonaceous materials but in large scale methanol plants it
is most commonly produced from natural gas by steam reforming where steam reacts
with methane (CH4)[11].
Biomass can also be used to produce a more sustainable methanol product, i.e. bio-
methanol[5].
1.3.1.1
Bio-methanol production
Most biomass for fuel production goes to the bio-ethanol production by fermentation
or catalytic conversion of foodstuff[12]. Bio-methanol production does not have this
limitation and since the use of foodstuff for fuel generation is controversial, bio-methanol
may be a more acceptable solution to the global warming problem.
Bio-methanol has obvious environmental advantages over fossil fuel generated methanol.
Biomass can be produced sustainable and the biomass used in bio-methanol production
may be waste from other bio-products. Compared to fossil methanol, it reduces the
amount of greenhouse gas emissions due to biomass being considered CO2 neutral when
emissions from transportation and processing are neglected[13].
1.3.2
Catalytic synthesis of methanol
The actual methanol synthesis follows the equilibrium reactions[3]:
CO + 2 H2 −−⇀
↽−−CH3OH
(1.1)
CO2 + 3 H2 −−⇀
↽−−CH3OH + H2O
(1.2)
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Crude methanol production
7
These reactions are exothermic and gives a decrease in volume and the highest conversion
rate is at high pressure and low temperature. A side reaction also occurs which is the
reverse water gas shift (RWGS) reaction:
CO2 + H2 −−⇀
↽−−CO + H2O
(1.3)
This reaction is endothermic and may assist maintaining the lower reaction temperature.
Figure 1.3: The methanol synthesis process as outlined in [3].
In figure 1.3, the methanol synthesis process can be seen. The syngas enters at the
bottom of the diagram and enters a compressor to mix it with the recycle stream of
unreacted synthesis gas. This mixture enters another compressor and is heated to the
optimal reaction pressure and temperature before it enters the methanol reactor. Indus-
trial methanol reactors uses CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 and other metal oxides catalyst material
and operates at around 300 ◦C[14]. The three reactions result in a carbon conversion
between 50% to 80%[3] which means that multiple passes through the reactor is re-
quired. This is the reason for the unreacted syngas recycle stream. The products from
the methanol reactor is cooled by the heat exchangers and then separated in a syngas
rich recycle stream and a raw methanol liquid stream. A purge stream is included to
prevent build-up of material in the recirculating loop. The synthesis stage design and
optimisation will not be further discussed in this thesis.
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
In the methanol reactor, several by-products are formed. They mostly consist of
higher alcohols, ethers, esters, hydrocarbons and ketones and stem from impurities in
the reactants or in the catalyst material. These impurities have a large influence on
the purity of the product and the amount of resources used on purification of crude
methanol.
1.3.3
Crude methanol processing
A medium industrial scale methanol plant produces around 3000 t
d (115.7 kg
h ) methanol[15,
16] and uses distillation to separate the water and impurities from the crude methanol.
Such a high productivity requires massive distillation columns and typically two or more
columns to reach the desired product specification[15, 17].
1.3.3.1
Product specifications
The product specification should be set to give the highest possible return on investment
when considering the plant operation cost and market value. When a plant maintains a
high grade methanol production, it has the best chance of a high return on the invest-
ment since a higher purity grants a premium. Grade AA is the most commonly traded
high purity methanol[18, 19] and corresponds to the grade used in most laboratories and
for production of other chemicals. This grade should therefore be the specification goal
and the requirements for federal grade A and AA methanol, according to Ullmann’s En-
cyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry (2012)[3], is listed in table 1.2. The most important
specifications are that AA methanol should contain more than 99.85% w/w methanol
with less than 0.10 % w/w water and have an ethanol impurity of less than 10 PPM
w/w ethanol.
Table 1.2: Grade AA specification as listed in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial
Chemistry (2012) [3].
Property
Grade A
Grade AA
Ethanol content
PPM w/w
N/A
<10
Acetone content
PPM w/w
<30
<20
Non-volatile matter
mg/100 mL
<10
<10
Methanol content
% w/w
>99.85
>99.85
Water content
% w/w
<0.15
<0.10
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Project scope
9
Another design goal is that the wastewater should be so pure that it can be disposed
of or reused as pure water instead of having to use costly biological treatment to remove
any organics[20]. A methanol content of 5 PPM mass has been previously achieved in
methanol plants[21] and the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health agrees with this
value in a report describing methanol exposure scenarios[22]. The European Chemicals
agency list predicted no effect concentration (PNEC) for freshwater 20.8 PPM-mass and
2.08 PPM-mass for marine water. A concentration of 5 PPM-mass methanol should
therefore be safe to dispose of into nearby freshwater. Mass integration could also be
applied, and the wastewater stream could be used to produce steam for the reformer
and the strict methanol limit might not be necessary.
1.4
Project scope
The product purity and waste requirements presented above are not easy to achieve
in industrial distillation. The discipline of industrial high purity distillation has been
developed in recent years, but remains a demanding unit operation for the process
design engineer. The state of the art methanol purification schemes will be presented
in chapter 2 and will explain the design background of the novel industrial distillation
column configuration focused on grade AA methanol at high recovery rates.
Process simulation is one of the chemical process engineer’s favourite tools and will
be used to tackle the challenge of operating the novel distillation column configuration
by means of dynamic simulations. In chapter 3 a dynamic simulation will help develop
stabilising regulatory control, where necessary, and a valid dynamic model will give the
process increased credibility and industrial applicability.
Industrial strength will be added to the novel distillation column configuration by
developing advanced supervisory control that can automate and optimise the system.
Two different controllers will be developed in chapter 4 on the basis of a linear process
model.
They will be subjected to industrial variations in the process that normally
would bring the system out of balance and their performance will be graded.
It is this author’s hope that the proposed control structures for a novel industrial
distillation column configuration can reduce energy consumption and improve methanol
yield. If so, this project has succeeded and will enable new methanol plants to increase
their productivity and profit by implementing the proposed design.
==PAGE:22==
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Processing of crude
methanol
This chapter will serve as a guide and reference for reviewing the novel purification
configuration. Comparing a novel system to existing systems makes it possible to eval-
uate the improvements in energy consumption and methanol yield. These metrics are
extremely important in the increasing world methanol demand, and increasing energy
prices since the production cost is directly linked to the market profit.
Methanol distillation can have many different designs, and in this report 8 designs
will be presented. They are all based on the same principle but uses different heat or
mass integration and number of distillation columns. In the end of the chapter, the case
study will be introduced.
2.1
Separation principle
Two distinct types of distillation columns are used in series to separate the raw methanol
into the desired purity[3, 20].
2.1.1
Distillation unit operation
At this point, the nomenclature describing energy and material streams in distillation
will be introduced, and a list can be found in the nomenclature on page 2. For each
letter used, the subscript number denotes the stage in the distillation starting from the
bottom and to the top at stage N.
The principle of distillation is: a feed stream F containing a mixture of chemical species
with distinctive boiling points can be split into a bottoms B and an overhead product
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Processing of crude methanol
or distillate D. B is the higher temperature boiling liquid while D is the lower
temperature boiling liquid. The driving force of the separation is the difference in
boiling point of the compounds and in general the higher the difference, the easier
separation.
Figure 2.1: Distillation unit configuration where a feed F enters at the feed stage M +1
and is split into an overhead product D and a bottoms B using a reboiler
and a condenser[23].
A diagram of a distillation unit can be seen in figure 2.1 and consist of a column,
reboiler and condenser. The reboiler is the lowest stage in the unit and provides the
necessary vapour stream (V1) by reboiling the liquid stream (L2). A heat exchanger us-
ing hot utility steam (qr), where the hot side is a high pressure steam or a hot material
stream from elsewhere in the plant. The condenser is used to condense the overhead
vapour (VN) into a liquid used as either reflux (LN+1) or overhead product (D) by means
of a cold utility stream such as cooling water.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Separation principle
13
The column consists of individual stages where the vapour and liquid interact and de-
pendent on the tray efficiency, they achieve a certain degree of equilibrium. This vapour-
liquid equilibrium can be estimated for a mixture using suiting activity coefficient models
and binary interaction coefficients. For each stage, the vapour and liquid compositions
are different and the lower boiling compounds (light-ends) will concentrate in the vapour
and be driven up in the column while the higher boiling compounds (heavy-ends) will
be forced down when concentrated in the liquid[23].
In the reboiler, a large amount of heat is used to increase the boil-up. In the condenser,
a similar large amount of heat is removed. When cooling water is used in the condenser,
heat recovery is difficult since it is a low-quality energy. When the heat cannot be re-
covered, the column has a high energy input and low thermodynamic efficiency which
is one of the reasons that distillation columns are energy-expensive unit operations.
The total number of stages in the distillation column has a large influence on the prod-
uct compositions. A typical design algorithm for a distillation unit is to determine the
number of theoretical equilibrium stages needed for a specific separation. In binary sep-
aration, this has been done using the McCabe–Thiele method for many years[23]. This
simple method indicates, that many theoretical stages are needed for high purity binary
distillation due to the decreasing distance between the equilibrium curve and operating
line. And for a smaller distance, the concentration gradient becomes very small.
2.1.2
Crude methanol refining
Processing of crude methanol involves two column types and is seen in figure 2.2. The
first column is called a topping column where dissolved gasses (see table 2.1) and low
boiling compounds are removed as vapour and returned to the methanol process syn-
thesis loop[17].
In the top of the topping column, raw methanol from the synthesis loop enters and
interacts with the methanol vapour stream generated in the reboiler. This strips the
dissolved gasses and light-ends from the raw methanol liquid[24]. The bottoms product
which contains mostly methanol and heavy boiling compounds, enter the next distillation
column called the refining column.
Pure methanol is produced as distillate in the refining column and pure water in the
bottoms product. Somewhere in the middle of the column depending on the composition,
impurities accumulate and can be removed by drawing material from this stage. It is
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Processing of crude methanol
Figure 2.2: Methanol processing using two distillation columns: Topping column and
Refining column. .
Table 2.1: Chemical species found in the top and bottom products of the two distilla-
tion columns used in processing of raw methanol[3, 20, 24, 25].
Topping column
Top
Dissolved gasses: H2, CH4, COx, N2,
dimethyl ether, esters, methyl formate and acetone
Bottoms
Methanol and lower boiling compounds
Refining column
Top
Methanol
Bottoms
Water
Fusel
Higher alcohols, long-chain hydrocarbons,
higher ketones, and esters of lower alcohols with
formic, acetic, and propionic acids.
Higher waxy hydrocarbons in small amounts
typically below the feed stage and the stream is called fusel oil. The contents in the top,
side and bottom streams are summarised in table 2.1.
The size and design parameters of these columns are very dependent on the compo-
sition of the raw methanol, product specifications and energy budget[20].
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Industrial distillation columns
15
2.2
Industrial distillation columns
2.2.1
Plant data
Koch-Glitsch[25] is a structured packings and tray manufacturer for the chemical and
pharmaceutical industry and provides information of typical methanol purification pro-
cesses. The topping column typically consist of 35-40 trays are the refining column 70-90
trays to reach the grade AA methanol purity. This high number of trays is expected
since an increasing amount of equilibrium steps are required for a higher purity product.
The manufacturer indicates that in the refining column, many side draw locations should
be present to handle fusel oil composition changes when the catalyst in the methanol
synthesis becomes less selective to methanol[25]. A different explanation may be that
the additional side draw locations is to take deviation between simulation and the real
plant into account.
Methanex is the world’s largest methanol producer and supplier of methanol to inter-
national markets in North America, Asia Pacific, Europe and South America[26]. The
Canadian based company has 6 plants distributed across the world. It has 3 methanol
plants in New Zeeland which produces 2.5 million metric tons (MMT) methanol per year
and supplies 95% to the Asia Pacific[27]. One of their plants uses a two-column distilla-
tion scheme as indicated by Koch-Glitsch. The first column processes crude methanol,
by using 48 trays and gives a height of 31 m. The next column produces pure methanol
using 88 trays, and a total height of 50.8 m[28]. Another Methanex plant situated in
Australia (Burrup Peninsula, Western Australia) indicates that a three-column distilla-
tion scheme is used for methanol purification[29].
The topping column only account for approximately 20% of the total heat used in purifi-
cation of crude methanol when it only contains water, methanol and ethanol[24]. This
is also indicated from the large size difference between the two columns.
2.2.2
Methanol purification using more columns
A. P. Douglas and A.F.A. Hoadley[24] investigated three different three-column separa-
tion schemes where heat integration could be utilised. The schemes all have a topping
column followed by two refining type columns of various designs. From different design
overviews it was found that operating pressure and sizes of the different columns are
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Processing of crude methanol
very dependent on the capacity and product specifications.
The first design is called the standard enrichment cascade. It uses a topping column
as with the two-column design, then a high pressure refining column and a recovery
column. The refining column and recovery column is heat integrated, so the condenser
of the refining column reboils the bottoms of the recovery column. The two streams
exiting the refining column is the top methanol product and the water rich bottoms
which is the feed stream for the recovery column. This column produces pure methanol
in the overhead product, fusel oil side draw and bottoms product consisting of water.
The refining and recovery column both produce pure methanol and these streams are
mixed before they exit the plant. The purpose of this design is to feed a pre-rectified
stream to the recovery column and thereby be able to save utility on the refining column
condenser and the recovery column reboiler.
The second design is called the double-coupled enrichment cascade. It is like the first
design, except the top product of the high pressure refining column is used as reboiler
in both the topping and recovery columns. Product streams are the same as the first
design. This design offers additional utility savings compared to the first design.
The third design is a three-column separation scheme called the double effect. It was
invented by Lurgi GmbH (now Air Liquide Global E&C Solutions Germany GmbH) and
is the most used design in the methanol production industry[30]. It consists of a topping
column, a high pressure (HP) column and an atmospheric/low pressure (LP) column.
After the topping column (as in the two-column design) a HP column is in parallel with
a LP column such that the bottoms product of the topping column is split into two
feed streams for the HP and LP columns. The HP column is heat integrated with the
LP column such that the top product of the HP column is used as reboiler in the LP
column. This is possible since the boiling temperature of the liquid in the LP reboiler
is lower than the temperature of the vapour in the HP overhead product. Both the HP
and LP columns produce high purity methanol in the top and pure water in the bottom
as well as having fusel oil side draws that contains the impurities and some methanol.
The study concludes that an inter-reboiler should be placed at the fusel oil stage which
supplies 70-90% of the total column heat duty. This is done to utilize surplus heat from
the methanol synthesis. The study continues to conclude that a methanol plant using
any of the three-column designs outlined above, can generate surplus capital from heat
production.
In a study by T. Blumberg et al.[15] of a simulated commercial 2700 metric tons
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Industrial distillation columns
17
per day (MTPD) (112.5 t
h) methanol plant is analysed for energy optimisation.
Its
design is derived from plant data from manufacturers and other studies and some of
the data is listed in table 2.2. This plant uses a three-column methanol refining scheme
consisting of a topping column, high pressure column and low pressure column which
produces grade AA methanol from raw methanol. The scheme is similar to the double
effect configuration seen above but no heat integration is utilised. The crude methanol
contains 77 mol-% methanol, then mostly water and some impurities. Much like the
above separation procedure, the first column is a topping column which separates light-
ends and dissolved gasses. The top product is recycled back into the methanol synthesis
step and reused. The bottoms product is further refined in two additional columns in
series: the pressure column and atmospheric column.
They found that two refining
columns were needed to produce grade AA methanol. The plant design is consistent
with the tray manufacturer’s information apart from an additional refining column.
Table 2.2: Design data for the simulated plant in [15].
Design variable
Topping column
Pressure column
Atmospheric column
Condenser pressure
124 kPa
186 kPa
100 kPa
Reboiler pressure
164 kPa
280 kPa
100 kPa
Number of stages
42
81
56
Feed stage
27
26
23
Reflux ratio
0.6
0.75
0.9
Designs involving the double-effect three-column scheme were further developed by
adding additional recovery columns after the LP column in a report by J. Zhang et al.[30].
As a guideline, multicolumn systems of three or more columns can only be justified when
energy cost is very high, or energy reduction is of high importance[20]. The additional
recovery column ensures a low methanol content in the wastewater and fusel oil side
draw and a reduced energy intensity of the overall process, but at an increased capital
cost and increased process complexity.
The authors compare two multi-effect distillation designs: a four-column scheme and
five-column scheme.
The four-column design seen in figure 2.3 consists of a topping column (C1’) operated
near atmospheric pressure where the raw methanol enters near the top of the column
at a flow rate of 92.36 t
h. C1’ uses a two step condenser with air and cooling water
while it uses saturated steam in the reboiler.
The overhead product is returned to
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Processing of crude methanol
Figure 2.3: Methanol processing using the double effect four-column scheme[30]. C1’
topping column, C2’ high pressure column, C4’ atmospheric column, C5’
recovery column, C6’ water wash column. AC: air condenser, SW: satu-
rated steam, CW: cooling water, F’: feed, D’: overhead product, B’: bottom
product, S’: side-draw, V’: light ends.
the methanol synthesis loop, and the bottom product is fed into the following column,
C2’. This is a HP column operating at 500-800 kPaG and uses the bottoms stream
of the following atmospheric column (C4’) as condenser and saturated steam utility in
the reboiler. About 40-50% of the methanol is removed in the overhead product and
the rest is fed to C4’ as the bottoms product along with water and impurities. C4’ is
operated near atmospheric pressure and the pure methanol overhead product uses air in
the condenser before it is mixed with the other overhead streams. A fusel oil side draw
containing most of the impurities and water rich bottoms stream from C4’ are fed to the
next column, C5’, at two different stages where the fusel oil enters above the bottoms
feed. C5’ is a recovery column that has two purposes. It ensures the bottoms wastewater
is free of methanol and that methanol is recovered in the overhead product and not as
waste in the fusel oil. C5’ produces wastewater at the bottoms using saturated steam
in the reboiler and air in the condenser before the overhead product is mixed with the
other product streams. The fusel oil contains mostly ethanol and other higher alcohols
and is collected to further processing or disposal.
The authors reports a 30% energy reduction between this design and the standard two-
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Industrial distillation columns
19
column scheme seen above, but additional energy could be saved by adding an additional
column to the scheme.
The five-column scheme seen in figure 2.4 is very similar to the four-column scheme,
but an additional medium-pressure column, C3, has been added between C2 and C4.
C5 becomes a refining column since most methanol is removed in the overhead product
in C2, C3 and C4. No fusel oil is drawn from C4 which lowers the temperature in the
bottom making it possible to use the overhead vapour of C2 and C3 as reboiler in C3
and C4 respectively. An additional heat integration is possible between C5 and C1 since
more methanol enters as feed from C4. The pressure in C5 can be increased so much
that the overhead vapour can be used as reboiler in C1 giving significant additional
energy savings. The authors used a commercial software called Pro/II using the NRTL
Figure 2.4: Methanol processing using the double-effect five-column scheme[30]. C1
topping column, C2 high pressure column, C3 medium pressure column, C4
atmospheric column, C5 recovery column, C6 water wash column. AC: air
condenser, SW: saturated steam, CW: cooling water, F: feed, D: overhead
product, B: bottom product, S: side-draw, V: light ends .
equation for the activity coefficients in the liquid phase for most of the column to make
steady-state simulations of the two schemes. They used saturated steam at 500 kPaG as
hot utility and 30 ◦C water as cooling utility. Their purity goal for methanol was 99.99%
w/w and slightly better than grade AA. They also used a contraint of <50 PPM w/w
methanol in the bottoms wastewater. The bottoms product of the atmospheric column
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Processing of crude methanol
(C4’ or C4) was controlled at 0.01% w/w methanol.
The simulations of the four and five column schemes were conducted using process
capacity, process configuration and operating conditions taken from an existing methanol
plant where a four-column purification scheme is used. The crude methanol from the
synthesis loop has the composition and conditions seen in table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Crude methanol taken from the methanol plant mentioned in [30].
Both the four and five-column schemes produced grade AA methanol with 5 PPM
w/w acetone, 1 PPM w/w water and 7-8 PPM w/w ethanol in the product and 50
PPM w/w ethanol in the wastewater. It is noted that this concentration is 10 times
higher than the design goal presented in section 1.3.3.1. The four-column scheme used
49.688 MW of heat and gave a recovery rate of 99.79% methanol while the five-column
used 32.982 MW and had a recovery rate of 99.80% methanol. This means that the
five column scheme saves 33.6% energy compared to the four-column scheme but when
compared to the 71 MW used by the two-column scheme[30] it uses 53.5% less energy.
The four-column scheme only saves 30% energy compared to the two-column scheme.
As previously mentioned, the method of energy saving by adding additional columns
comes at the price of increased capital cost and increased process complexity. It would
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Distillation operation
21
require more operators and more automation in order to work reliably and safe and this
increased expense may outweigh the saved reboiler duty. What can be learned from the
study is that distributing the separation on more columns decreases the overall energy
consumption.
There may be different designs or process optimisations where additional columns are
avoided but energy is still saved. A possible route is process control and will be intro-
duced in the following sections.
2.3
Distillation operation
The ability to run a distillation column continuously at high capacity can in most cases
be done with competent operators being able to handle large disturbances without com-
promising the product specifications. This is mainly done by over-purification[31] which
means that the distillation column is operated such that it always produces a product
that is better than the given specifications. This may be done with a higher reflux ratio
and a high reboiler boil-up ratio than is really needed. In the event of a disturbance in
the feed or process, the product specifications may be drifting out of specifications but
due to the way the column is operated, the specifications are usually never broken, and
the operators have time to counteract the disturbance. This practice comes at the cost
of increased reboiler duty or decreased column capacity. A solution to this problem is
to operate the column at the product specification, but this requires expert operators
which are only focused on running the column. Operators are usually very busy at an
industrial plant, so this is a lot to expect from an operator and hiring more operators is
usually not economic.
The only true solution is to use automated control which can handle many different dis-
turbances while maintaining product or plant specifications automatically. The ability
to control the process also has other advantages than disturbance mitigation. Human
errors can be reduced since the operation requires less human interaction and the process
can be run more efficient and closer to the specifications which has a huge effect on the
energy use of the process.
Process control can be applied to many dynamic systems and is a huge research topic.
The controllers encountered in this report are single input single output (SISO) and mul-
tiple input multiple output (MIMO) controllers where SISO control uses proportional,
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Processing of crude methanol
integral and differential (PID) controllers and MIMO uses model predictive control
(MPC) or multiple SISO controllers regulated by a higher level controller[32].
Distillation control is a rigorously studied field and below it is applied to the two-column
system presented above.
2.3.1
Optimised two-column distillation operation
As mentioned in section 2.3, operating a distillation column is not always optimal due to
strict product and wastewater constraints. However, control of a high purity distillation
column is very difficult due to non-linear behaviour and disturbances in the feed or in
the process[33].
In 2013, a project involving the two-column methanol processing scheme was started
by I.A. Udugama et al.[34]. The purpose of the project was to explore energy efficient
distillation schemes of high purity methanol at high recovery rates. The first publication
[34] presented a steady-state model of the two-column scheme and was used to develop
optimal designs for three different operating points. The software used for this simulation
was Aspen HYSYS using Wilson-Virial/Poy property package and the model was verified
using industrial process data. The simulation only consisted of the refining column since
this column is the most interesting due to the massive amount of energy is uses. The
column had 88 trays and the feed flow rate of 141.9 t
h consisted of 80% w/w methanol,
150PPM w/w ethanol, 95 PPM w/w butanol and 20 weight-% water.
The refining
column separates the crude methanol to grade AA methanol with 7 PPM w/w ethanol
using 87.7 MW of heat utility in the reboiler.
In a further development of this column scheme by M. A. Kraller et al.[35], the feed
composition was changed to 4:1 ratio: 83% w/w methanol and 17 weight-% water at the
same trace amount of ethanol and butanol. Simulations of the 87 tray refining column
were conducted in Aspen HYSYS as in [34] and the results are listed in table 2.4.
In all designs, the overhead product satisfied the grade AA methanol requirements and
the bottoms contained <7.2 PPM w/w methanol or ethanol. The base case at 97.7%
recovery serves as a reference point for the three optimisations performed. The first was
a 76.5% reduction of the side draw mass flow which reduces the amount of methanol
lost in this stream by 77.8%. This operating point gave a 99.5% recovery rate since the
distillate flow increased accordingly while the reboiler used 2.5% more heating utility.
A different way to achieve 99.5% recovery rate was to lower the side draw by 2 stages.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Distillation operation
23
This increases the number of stages for the primary separation section of the column
(methanol/water) but decreases for the secondary separation (methanol/ethanol) and in
order to compensate, the reboiler duty was increased by 2.3% compared to the reference.
The final optimisation was to increase the number of stages in the column. This comes
at a huge capital investment increase but raises the recovery rate to 99.5% without
additional energy consumption in the reboiler which may only be feasible when the cost
of energy exceeds a given threshold. The 3 different two-column optimisations gave good
Table 2.4: Results of optimisation in [35].
Recovery
97.7%
99.5%
99.5%
99.5%
Design
# of
trays 87
Reduction of
side draw
Lowering side
side draw stage
Increase # of
trays to 115
Mass flow
Product
114.6 t
h
116.7 t
h
116.7 t
h
116.7 t
h
Side draw
3.1 t
h
0.7 t
h
3.1 t
h
3.1 t
h
Bottoms
24.3 t
h
24.6 t
h
22.2 t
h
22.2 t
h
Reboiler duty
86.3 MW
88.5 MW
88.2 MW
86.3 MW
indications of what to expect when the recovery rate is increased towards 100%. If a new
plant is to be commissioned, the most energy favourable solution is to add additional
stages. This may be a very expensive solution. Increasing the number of stages will also
increase the amount of material that is held in the column and increase the total weight
of the column resulting in additional support needed. For existing systems, reducing the
side draw rate is the most energy favourable solution closely followed by lowering the
side draw stage. The two solutions do however use ∼2 MW more reboiler duty which
is a lot of energy.
In the above two-column optimisation, only the steady-state operation was consid-
ered. Dynamic simulations are extremely useful for simulating transient responses to
disturbances. In dynamic mode there are more degrees of freedom and controllers are
needed to maintain a stable and steady operating point. This was the case in the report
by I. A. Udugama et al.[36] about a new method of determining the methanol product
recovery in the two-column scheme investigated above by the same authors. In this case,
simple PID control was used to stabilise the side draw flow rate and liquid level in the
reboiler as well as the pressure in the condenser. Since the distillate composition always
needs to be on specification, a composition controller was implemented on the distillate
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Processing of crude methanol
which manipulated the flow rate and had a direct influence on the recovery rate. The
control structure can be seen in figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Control structure stabilising the recovery rate simulations in [36].
In a more recent report by the same authors[21] a more elaborate control struc-
ture was developed with the purpose of disturbance rejection in a large scale industrial
methanol plant and energy savings in reboiler duty. The control structure is based on an
overwrite control framework that calculates setpoint values for PID controllers through-
out the plant. The structure can be seen in figure 2.6. The large RCC is the recovery
constraint controller. It is a supervisory controller that measures the current recovery
rate and ethanol content in the product. These are used to calculate setpoint values
for the distillate composition and side draw flow controllers. The DRC is the dynamic
reboiler controller which is a feedforward and feedback trim controller that calculated
the reboiler duty controller setpoint.
In addition to this control strategy, an MPC was also developed with the same design
goals and served as a controller candidate for the system. The MPC was a two-by-
two MIMO controller which calculated setpoints for the reboiler duty controller and
the distillate composition controller. The advantage of MPC is that it can predict the
response of the system from a given disturbance and counteract it using different con-
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Distillation operation
25
trollers throughout the system. MPC is also good at managing plant scheduling where
disturbances are known.
Figure 2.6: Control structure used on the two-column scheme in [21].
The two control strategies were tested for setpoint tracking and disturbance rejection
with good results. It was found that the MPC was able to keep the system closer to
the product specifications which resulted in about 500 kW reduced energy consumption
which was a higher amount compared to the PID based control strategy. The authors
conclude that the MPC is the best candidate for energy reductions but may require a
higher amount of maintenance than the simple controller. This is due to the model being
constant while the process drifts over time resulting in an inaccurate model.
When the recovery rate was increased from 97.7% to 99.5% in the two-column scheme,
it was found to be very sensitive to some disturbances namely feed mass flow rate, ethanol
and methanol feed concentration[35]. This has a huge influence on the ability to control
the system since an inherently stable system is easier to control. The simple PID based
control schemes were functional and reduced the total energy consumption, but a more
stable and energy efficient system is still needed in the growing industry.
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Processing of crude methanol
2.4
Novel industrial distillation column
configuration
In the studies of three to five-column systems, it was found that a significant amount of
energy can be saved by splitting the purification process in more steps (more columns).
The newest study on high purity distillation by I. A. Udugama et al. [16] investigates
different purification procedures and a promising solution is to use a three-column scheme
unlike the three-column scheme seen above and is seen in figure 2.7. The idea was that
a recovery column after the refining column with mass integration may ease the high
recovery rate strain and should increase stability as well as reduce energy consumption.
The refining column is specified as in the two-column scheme seen is section 2.3.1 and
produces grade AA methanol in the overhead product (D1) and water with <3 PPM w/w
methanol and ethanol in the bottoms (B1). A fusel oil side draw (S1) is extracted from
tray 9 and removes most of the ethanol and other impurities from the refining column.
This column configuration will only have a high recovery rate when operated/sized as
in table 2.4 which results in a high reboiler duty. This problem should be solved by
recovering the lost methanol in S1 using a recovery column that returns a methanol rich
stream to the refining column. The column can be very small in diameter compared to
the refining column since it only process 1/16 of the total feed F1. The side draw (S2)
will be rich in ethanol and other impurities and should contain minimal methanol while
the bottoms (B2) should contain <3 PPM w/w methanol and ethanol.
The design process of this novel industrial distillation column configuration is a chal-
lenging process with many different parameters that can be optimised such as number of
stages, feed/side draw stage and flow rate, reboiler/condenser duty, distillate flow rate,
column/reboiler/condenser size for both columns and recirculation steam feed stage in
the refining column.
The paper investigates many of these parameters using a steady-state model in Aspen
HYSYS. The number of stages were determined to be 89 in the refining column since this
was the maximum available. It was found that a high amount of trays gives a reduced
reboiler duty in the recovery column from easier separation, however, a large amount of
trays gives a large capital investment and therefore 60 is a reasonable amount. The feed
stage in the first column was selected as 32 due to this being the optimum for reduced
reboiler duty and the feed stage in the recovery column as 20 since this was the lowest
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
27
Figure 2.7: Diagram of the three-column separation scheme as presented in [16]. De-
sign parameters can be read from the columns. The topping column is not
pictured but its bottoms product is F1.
stage where the composition matched what was inside the column and a lower stage
number gave a reduced reboiler duty. The side draw location at the first column was 9
due to this stage giving the lowest reboiler duty without effecting the methanol bottoms
concentration. In the recovery column, the side draw was selected to be at 8’th stage
for the same reasons as the first column. The last specification is the re-entry stage of
the recycle stream in the main column and is set to 85.
The side draw mass flow rate from the refining column was investigated between 6.5 t
h
and 10 t
h in [16]. The effect on the recovery column was investigated and a linear relation
between the side draw mass flow and reboiler duty of the recovery column was found
where a high flow rate resulted in a high reboiler duty. In the recovery column, ethanol
concentration in the feed stage area also increases significantly with a high side draw
flow rate from the refining column. This flow rate may be optimised in the following
but for the moment it will be set to 9 t
h since the higher the flow rate is, the higher the
recovery rate can be at the price of column size and reboiler duty.
In the recovery column, the side draw flow rate was set to 4 t
h and the distillate to 2 t
h.
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Processing of crude methanol
The diameter of the two distillation column is determined from the internal rate
of mass flow. The refining column has a fixed feed flow rate of 142.5 t
h and gives a
high internal mass rate and therefore a large diameter of about 7m is needed[37]. The
recovery column has a much lower internal rate of mass flow than the refining column
and can be substantially smaller in diameter. The diameter should be around 1m but
it may be larger if the side draw rate from the refining column is increased. This may
be subject to further optimisation.
This leaves the following design parameters open: side draw flow rate, reboiler duty,
condenser duty, distillate flow rate, column size, reboiler and condenser size.
In the next chapter, the steady-state simulation of the novel 3 column methanol
distillation configuration developed by I. A. Udugama et al. will be examined and further
developed in order to set a benchmark that can be transformed to a dynamic system
where many new possibilities such as advanced control and plantwide optimisation are
available.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Novel industrial distillation
column configuration
In order to examine and develop the novel industrial distillation column configuration,
a virtual process plant must be built where experiments can be conducted in silico. It
should be able to simulate the dynamic behaviour of the process accurately. This will
require that it is validated against a real plant or at least against another validated
model.
This chapter includes an introduction of simulation software followed by steady-state
and dynamic simulation of the distillation column configuration.
3.1
Simulation software
Aspen HYSYS V11 (HYSYS) was selected to carry out the simulations. This choice was
motivated by the extensive previous work that had been done with the novel column
configuration using this software in steady-state simulations.
HYSYS is an industrial process simulator used in the petrochemical industry[38]. It
is capable of steady-state flowsheet simulations like other software as Aspen Plus, SimSci
or PRO/II. They all use sequential-modular approach for solving the unit operations in
the flowsheet one by one[39]. This is an advantage since material and energy streams
and units operations don’t have to be initialised, but many iterations are often needed
for the model to converge.
HYSYS can simulate an industrial process in dynamic mode, which means that transient
behaviour can be observed. This can be start-up and responses to disturbances when a
controller has been implemented. A huge effort has been made to make the transition
from a steady-state model to a dynamic one in HYSYS easier. This is one of the reasons
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
that this project uses HYSYS as simulation software since a steady-state model of the
novel three-column purification scheme is already available in HYSYS.
3.2
Steady-state simulation
3.2.1
Previous work
The novel three-column configuration was presented in section 2.4 along with the op-
timised design parameters. These were found by extensive steady-state process sim-
ulations in HYSYS for many different designs and optimised with respect to energy
consumption and design limitations. The optimal design with all the mass and energy
streams as well as the unit operations were stored in a HYSYS file supplied to the author
of this report as initial starting point.
3.2.2
HYSYS flowsheet
The process flowsheet is seen in figure 3.1. Material streams are labelled as in figure
2.7. Reboiler and condenser duty energy streams are labelled R and C for the refining
column (R1 and C1) and rectifying column (R2 and C2).
The process of forming a process flowsheet that can simulate the novel three-column
scheme involves a few steps. Four chemical species are selected under Properties →
Component Lists. These are: iso-butanol, methanol, ethanol and water. The system is
designed to handle a trace amount of ethanol in the feed, but might be necessary to test
the system for a higher alcohols such as iso-butanol or other trace compounds.
The Wilson fluid package is selected with the Virial vapour model. The Wilson coeffi-
cients and binary interaction coefficients are used in order to correlate with plant data
as in[21]. This model is suitable due to its ability to describe the non-ideal behaviour of
the alcohol-water mixture.
The next step is to draw the process flowsheet in the Simulation section using mass and
energy streams and the two distillation column unit operations.
Adding a distillation column initialises a guided design procedure where all the design
parameters can be entered. The number of trays and flow stages are entered as described
in section 2.4.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Steady-state simulation
31
Figure 3.1: Steady-state flowsheet used in the Aspen HYSYS simulations.
The condenser pressure is set at 134.2 kPa in the refining column and 139 kPa in the
recovery column. Consequently, when recycling material, a pump may not be needed
due to the pressure difference. No pressure drop in the condenser or the reboiler are
specified. A pressure drop through the columns gives reboiler pressures of 184.1 kPa
and 165.1 kPa for the refining and recovery columns respectively. The column pressures
are slightly different from seen in [16] and will give slightly different results.
As a simplification, the energy input and output in the reboiler and condensers are set to
be energy streams. They represent hot and cold utility, and therefore operational cost.
They can be estimated from the energy requirements if needed, but when comparing
different purification schemes, heat and cooling duty is sufficient. The model describing
heat transfer is selected as Direct Q since it neglects heat-transfer area or temperature
differentials and it has more possibilities if real utility streams are used instead of pure
duty[40].
The column specifications needed for solving the mass and energy balances were a dis-
tillate and side draw mass flow rate and are solved using a weighted tolerance of 0.01
and an absolute tolerance of 1 × 10−3 t
h.
Additionally, the tray internals are kept standard according to table 3.1 since they are
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
reasonable for an industrial distillation column. As a final note on the columns, the
internal tray efficiency is set to 80% in both columns to match industrial column limi-
tations.
Table 3.1: Column internals settings in HYSYS simulations.
Variable
Specification
Tray Spacing
609.6 mm
Tray Thickness
3.175 mm
Tray Foaming Factor
1.000
Max Tray Flooding
85.00%
Weir Height
50.80 mm
Max Weir Loading
89.42 m3/h/m
D/C Type
Vertical
D/C Clearance
38.10 mm
Max DC Backup
50.00%
There are two adjustment blocks ADJ-1 and ADJ-2 which adjusts the reboiler duty
in the two columns. These blocks ensure that the specifications are met by adjusting
the energy stream. The solver settings can be seen in table 3.2 and are tuned to give 8
PPM w/w ethanol in D1 and 25 PPM in the recycle stream from the recovery column.
The tolerance is selected to give accurate results without too many iterations needed for
the simulation to converge.
Table 3.2: Solver settings for the ADJ blocks.
Setting
ADJ-1
ADJ-2
Method
Secant
Tolerance
1 × 10−7
Step size
100 kW
Maximum iterations
1 × 103
1 × 102
Target variable:
Object
D1
D2
Variable
Master Comp
Mass Frac (Ethanol)
Specified Target Value
8 × 10−6
25 × 10−6
The recycling block RCY-1 is a mathematical unit operation which is needed when
a recirculation stream is present in the flowsheet. It makes sure that the connected unit
operations can converge one by one and updates the stream if the input is different from
the output.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Steady-state simulation
33
At this point, the flowsheet is only missing its input: A feed stream of crude methanol.
3.2.3
Crude methanol input for simulation
The feed stock for the refining column is as outlined in the case study in [16] and is
based on actual plant operating conditions. The feed stock is slightly different than seen
in table 2.3 above but this is expected since the crude methanol from catalytic synthesis
is dependent on reactant purity, catalyst material and synthesis design and in this case,
the topping column not included in the simulation has removed the dissolved gasses.
The feed specifications for the following simulations are as seen in table 3.3. Iso-butanol
composition is set to 0 because simulation of higher alcohols is not required now.
Table 3.3: Feed flow specifications[16].
Variable
Specification
Flow rate
142 500 kg
h
Methanol
0.822250 mass fraction
Ethanol
0.000150 mass fraction
Water
0.1776 mass fraction
Iso-butanol
0
Vapor fraction
Saturated liquid
Pressure
174.40 kPa
Temperature
83.51 ◦C
The feed temperature and pressure are estimated from the requirement of saturated
liquid, composition and mass flow rate and is slightly different than seen in [16]. The
next step is to set the last design parameters and begin steady-state simulation.
3.2.4
Operating point selection
In section 2.4, the open design parameters were side draw flow rates, reboiler and con-
denser duties and distillate flow rate. These determines the column size.
The operating point selected in the following sets the benchmark performance of the
system. As discussed in the introduction, the world methanol demand is increasing, and
energy prices are increasing. Therefore, a high methanol yield or recovery rate is needed.
Recovery rate for this system is determined by a mass balance of ethanol over the system.
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
It is defined as:
Recovery rate = β = D1 · xD1,MeOH
F1 · xF1,MeOH
· 100
(3.1)
where xi,j is the mass fraction of j in the i’th stream. It can also be defined by the
amount of methanol that is not present in the distillate:
β = F1 · xF1,MeOH −B1 · xB1,MeOH −B2 · xB2,MeOH −S2 · xS2,MeOH
F1 · xF1,MeOH
· 100
β ≈F1 · xF1,MeOH −S2 · xS2,MeOH
F1 · xF1,MeOH
· 100
(3.2)
In steady-state, the two definitions are equal but operating the system unsteady or with
disturbances, it is necessary to use equation (3.2) because it is more sensitive to small
changes. In [16], D1 was selected as 115.7 t
h and would give a recovery rate, β of 98.74%.
99.5% recovery rate is desirable and can be obtained by adjusting the distillate D1
mass flow rate and increasing the reboiler duty. From the ADJ-1 block, 8 PPM w/w
ethanol is expected in D1 which gives a mass fraction of 99.9992% w/w when water
content is neglected. Since the input mass flow rate of methanol is fixed, the required
D1 flow rate can be estimated from equation (3.1) as:
99.5% =
D1 · 0.999992
142.5 t
h · 0.822255 · 100 ⇒D1 = 99.5%142.5 t
h · 0.822255
0.999992 · 100
= 116.586 t
h
(3.3)
From equation (3.3) the distillate mass flow rate should be selected as 116.586 t
h. This
now enables sizing of the columns, since the internal traffic can be estimated. This is
done using the column sizing tool available in HYSYS and gives a diameter of 7.163 m
and 1.372 m in the refining and recovery columns respectively. The refining column a
very large distillation column but the size is typical for the industry[37].
An overview of the design parameters, flow and mass fraction specifications can be
found in table 3.4 and is implemented in the steady-state simulations.
3.2.5
Steady-state simulation setup and results
A flowsheet as with a recycle stream and multiple solvers can be hard to converge
in HYSYS without piecewise implementing each unit operation and checking for er-
rors. Therefore, the original HYSYS flowsheet by I. A. Udugama[16] was used since
it contained a converged process flowsheet of the novel three column scheme and this
simulation file was validated against a real industrial methanol plant.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Steady-state simulation
35
Table 3.4: Plant design parameters and operating point.
Component
Value
Stream
Value
Refining column
F1
142.5
t
h
Condenser pressure
134.20 kPa
Methanol
82.2255
% w/w
Reboiler pressure
201.10 kPa
Ethanol
150
PPM w/w
Number of stages
89
Water
17.7600
% w/w
Raw feed stage
32
D1
116.585
t
h
Recycle feed stage
85
Ethanol
8
PPM w/w
Side draw stage
9
S1
9
t
h
Reflux ratio
1.493
D2
2
t
h
Boil-up ratio
7.635
Ethanol
25
PPM w/w
Recovery column
S2
4
t
h
Condenser pressure
139.00 kPa
Reboiler pressure
175.63 kPa
Number of stages
60
Feed stage
20
Side draw stage
15
Reflux ratio
3.229
Boil-up ratio
1.395
The new operating point and other setting were entered, and the solver was turned
on. In order to make the solvers converge, the two ADJ blocks needed to be solved
multiple times along with the column solvers.
A stream property table from the steady-state simulation is summarised in table 3.5 and
the reboiler and condenser duties are seen in table 3.6. A quick way to determine the
quality of the converged solution is to do a mass and energy balance on the system. This
yielded a difference of 0.164 kg
h and 0.428 MW energy flow between inputs and outputs
which is an insignificant amount and the results should be usable.
Table 3.5: Results from the steady-state simulation with the adjusted operating point.
Mass flow
Methanol
Ethanol
Water
Press.
Temp.
t/h
% w/w
PPM
% w/w
kPa
°C
F1
142.50
82.2250
150
17.7600
175.11
83.50
D1
116.59
99.9992
8.00
1.787 21 × 10−5
134.20
71.80
S1
8.9999
28.7259
2277
71.0464
195.02
101.5
B1
18.914
2.508 07 × 10−5
0.00
100.000
201.10
120.4
D2
2.0000
99.9975
25.0
4.714 49 × 10−6
139.00
72.74
S2
4.0000
14.6342
5111
84.8548
166.94
103.2
B2
2.9999
1.848 75 × 10−7
0.00
100.000
175.63
116.2
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
Table 3.6: Reboiler and condenser duty.
Condenser duty
Reboiler duty
Refining column
87.214 MW
86.791 MW
Recovery column
2.5685 MW
2.5639 MW
Combined
89.782 MW
89.355 MW
Steady-state simulation of the distillation column configuration is seen to follow the
specifications above using the new design parameters. The refining column produces
grade AA methanol with the specified 8 PPM ethanol where a tiny amount of water is
present, so the recovery rate is at the specified 99.5%. It uses 86.791 MW in the reboiler
to do so, which is a huge amount of energy but is of the expected magnitude and similar
to the other design seen in chapter 2.
The side draw entering the recovery column contains mostly water and methanol but
also has a large amount of ethanol which is highly desired. If most of the ethanol is
removed in the side draw, then it is easier to obtain grade AA methanol in the distillate.
The recovery column recycles a high methanol concentration in D2 and the side draw S2
contains approximately 10-20% w/w methanol and water and about 1% w/w ethanol.
The reboiler in the recovery column uses 2.5639 MW heating duty which is a very small
amount compared to the refining column as expected when considering its lower capacity.
The performance of the novel three-column purification scheme can be evaluated using
the two metrics defined in chapter 2: energy consumption and methanol yield. The
recovery rate was set to 99.5% which was also achieved in the two-column scheme in
section 2.3.1 where the results are listed in table 2.4. In the two-column scheme, the
high recovery rate was achieved with a reboiling duty of between 88.2 MW and 88.5
MW when lowering the side draw stage or reducing the side draw flow rate. They both
use less reboiler duty than the combined duty in the novel three-column scheme which is
unexpected. There must be process parameters that can be optimised for reboiler duty.
A brief experiment in optimising the recycle ethanol content was conducted and
gave the results drawn on figure 3.2. Each concentration setpoint was solved using an
increased tolerance of 1 × 10−8 in the ADJ solvers. It was found a change in concentra-
tion of 1 PPM, would not always trigger the solvers, and the columns would converge
to a different reboiler duty.
Instead, the points were solved <5 PPM from each other and as the figure clearly shows,
an optimal concentration exists between 25 and 31 PPM.
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Steady-state simulation
37
A linear relation between the reboiler duty and the ethanol concentration was seen in
both columns and combined they show a minimum reboiler duty.
An increased ethanol recycle concentration resulted in a reduction in the recovery col-
umn reboiler duty as well as a small increase in the refining column reboiler duty. This
corresponds to an easier separation in the recovery column since the distillate purity
is decreased while in the refining column the separation becomes harder since a larger
impurity is added to the top of the column.
The total reboiler duty does not correspond to the one listed in table 3.6 which indicates
that the solver can reach different steady-states. Therefore, additional optimisation was
stopped and the recycle concentration was kept at 25 PPM.
Figure 3.2: Combined reboiler duty of the refining and recovery columns plotted
against recycle ethanol content.
If no significant reduction in reboiler duty can be achieved in the novel three-column
scheme at 99.5% recovery rate, the benefits of this scheme must be found in the control-
lability and stability, so it can be operated closer to the specifications without a high
increase in reboiler duty. Additionally, it may be possible to run the columns closer
to full recovery since 0.5% is still almost 600 kg methanol lost per hour. This must be
investigated in a dynamic model and the steady-state simulation above serves as a jump
start for the following work.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
3.3
Dynamic simulation
A dynamic process such as a continuous distillation column can be difficult to converge
in a steady-state simulation as seen above. It might require less effort to simulate the
same process as dynamic since, you will be able to get an understanding of how the
system works if you can analyse it while it is running and you will be able to interact
with it and see its response.
3.3.1
Transition from steady-state to dynamic model
Dynamic mode has certain requirements that are different from steady-state mode. Mass
flow specifications should be set by control valves with a pressure specifications at the
exit stream. This is to maintain the number of degrees of freedom, while enabling the
flow to be manipulated. Additionally, the dynamic solver i.e. the integrator should be
set up with sufficiently small time steps to let it converge without errors or crashes.
It is possible to set up the process flowsheet entirely in dynamic mode, but this was
not ideal when a converged steady-state model was available.
The first steps in transitioning the steady-state to a dynamic model, is to make sure
the material streams are controlled by valves. These are the bottoms of both columns
B1 and B2, the side draw S1 and distillate D1 and D2. S2 was manipulated directly
without a valve as a simplification. The pressures were specified as in table 3.7 and all
the valves were set to 50% open and sized using the sizing tool in HYSYS.
Table 3.7: Pressure specifications after control valves used in the dynamic simulations.
D1
S1
B1
B2
Pressure
99.73 kPa
159 kPa
149.6 kPa
130.6 kPa
From previous experience with simulation software, it was decided to decouple S1
from the recovery column. This was done in order to help the solver converge and prevent
crashes. The decoupling was done by adding a mix unit where pure component methanol,
ethanol and water enters and forms the stream F2. By reading the component mass
fraction of methanol, ethanol and water in S1 and writing them to form 3 new streams
of pure components, a clone of S1 was formed. This was done in a spreadsheet block in
HYSYS. The two streams S1 and F2 had some temperature and pressure differences, but
such differences are also encountered over a valve, so the solution would still be valid.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Dynamic simulation
39
3.3.2
Dynamic solver or Integrator setup
The integrator settings used in the following simulations were set up in order to converge
at high pace, so longer simulations were possible. The integration steps were set to 0.05
seconds for stability and an acceleration of 8 to gave a real time factor of 30 meaning.
This means that in the following simulations, 1 hour in real time is 30 hours in the
simulated plant. The acceleration was found to have an influence on the results and
should be selected carefully.
Starting the dynamic solver with all control valves 50% open, did not result in a
steady-state and the simulation quickly crashed. Therefore, the side draw valve was
reduced and the recycle stream was shut off. This did stabilise the system, but the
results were not useful.
It was found that when running the dynamic solver, the system was very unstable
even to small valve position changes and would drift to a non-physical situation where the
vapour liquid equilibrium or mass balances would not converge, and the solver needed
to be reset.
Therefore, it was decided to use proportional, integral and differential
(PID) controllers to stabilise the system and to reach the same operating point as the
steady-state simulation just as seen in the report by I. A. Udugama et al.[36].
3.3.3
Simple PID controllers for stabilisation
The system was stabilised using PID flow-, pressure- and level-controllers. These were
implemented in HYSYS and can be seen in figure 3.3 which is the process flowsheet used
in the dynamic simulations. It contains a lot of new valves named VLV and its stream
name. The green circles are PID controllers which have a process variable (PV) as
input and a manipulated variable (MV) as output where the green lines are connected
accordingly. A more detailed piping and instrumentation diagram can also be seen in
figure 3.4 where the controllers are named as in HYSYS.
A relative gain array (RGA) gives a good indication of which process variables can
be paired with manipulated variables in a control structure containing multiple single
input single output (SISO) controllers. A high gain indicates that a small manipulation
has a large influence on the process.
An experienced process operator will know exactly which handles to turn to keep the
process stable or to implement a process change and which handles not to touch. Just
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
Figure 3.3: Dynamic flowsheet from Aspen HYSYS simulations.
like the operator, a process engineer can run experiments on a virtual plant in a dynamic
simulation and get an understanding of the magnitude of each RGA element a so called
system identification.
This was the basis of the following control pairings where the pair, with the highest or
appropriate influence on the process or gain, was selected. They may not be the best
pair, but they will stabilise the process and that is the goal of this control layer.
An example is the valve VLV-D1.
This valve has an influence on many process
variables such as the mass flow of D1, the pressure in the condenser and the liquid level
in the condenser. Any of these pairs may be valid but, in this case, it should be paired
with the mass flow D1 since they are directly linked, and it will reduce time delay. Any
time delay is unwanted due to the inherently slow system dynamics when two distillation
columns are mass integrated. VLV-D1 may also be a good handle to control recovery
rate as seen in equation (3.1) and may be used in a more advanced control strategy.
These controllers are only to stabilise the system in order to reach an operating point
Therefore, in the refining column, mass flow D1 was controlled using the valve VLV-
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Dynamic simulation
41
D1. Similar for S1, the valve VLV-S1 was used. The liquid level in the reboiler should be
kept constant at 50% to avoid a too high liquid level if a disturbance occurs or to leave
room for oscillations. The valve on B1 VLV-B1 has a large influence on the reboiler liquid
level since B1 flows in the order of 20 t
h. The two other mass streams out of the refining
column are already used and therefore B1 mass flow was used to control the liquid level.
For the same reason as the reboiler, the condenser level should also be controlled. The
reflux stream is used with this controller since reflux has a large influence on the liquid
level in the condenser. This control valve is only seen in figure 3.4 and in HYSYS it is
manipulated directly without a valve in the column subflowsheet (column environment
in HYSYS). This is done to simplify the model and should not have a huge influence on
the results.
The last control loop in the refining column is the condenser pressure. The condenser
duty has a strong influence on the condenser pressure where an increase in duty lowers
the pressure when more vapour is condensed. The pressure is therefore controlled by
directly manipulating the condenser duty energy stream. This is a simplification because
in the real plant, it should control the amount of cooling utility supplied to the condenser.
The controllers in the recovery column are paired exactly as the refining column.
The simple PID control structure can be seen in table 3.8 along with their setpoints
needed to match the steady-state simulation.
Table 3.8: Simple PID control pairing.
Controller
Manipulated variable
Controlled variable
Setpoint
PC-C1
Condenser duty
Condenser pressure
134.2 kPa
LC-C1
Reflux flow rate
Condenser liquid level
50%
LC-R1
VLV-B1 actuator position
Reboiler liquid level
50%
FC-D1
VLV-D1 actuator position
D1 flow rate
116.6 t
h
FC-S1
VLV-S1 actuator position
S1 flow rate
9 t
h
PC-C2
Condenser duty
Condenser pressure
139.0 kPa
LC-C2
Reflux flow rate
Condenser liquid level
50%
LC-R2
VLV-B2 actuator position
Reboiler liquid level
50%
FC-D2
VLV-D2 actuator position
D2 flow rate
2 t
h
FC-S2
S2 flow rate
S2 flow rate
4 t
h
Controller tuning is an important step in implementing an efficient and robust control
structure. Many different strategies exist for tuning a PID controller such as IMC tuning
relations or step test method[32]. In this multiloop control structure, 10 PID loops are
used which makes the closed-loop tuning extra difficult.
As seen with the VLV-D1
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
Figure 3.4: Piping and instrumentation diagram showing the process with indicators and controllers where information is
passed in dotted lines and material in full lines.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Dynamic simulation
43
example above, manipulating this variable has an influence on many process variables
and if they are controlled properly, a cascade of control movements will follow. It may
ultimately destabilise the system.
Multiloop PID tuning can be performed using the sequential loop tuning method[32],
which involves closing and tuning one PID loop at a time since the process dynamics
will be different for each loop closed.
This turned out to be impractical for the dynamic simulation of the novel three-column
methanol purification scheme. Instead, controller gains (Kc) and integral time constant
(τI) were selected to give the most stable system with respect to experimenting with
process variables and therefore without considering disturbance rejection or setpoint
tracking. Additional fine-tuning may be necessary but can be carried out independently.
This enabled a dynamic simulation of the system to reach a steady-state.
3.3.4
Dynamic simulation setup and results
The outcome for the control structure seen above involved many steps. The first step
was to get the integrator to run without crashing the software. A timestep of 0.05 s and
an acceleration of 4 was used and control valves were set so the system would not crash.
Then, one by one the controllers were implemented, and the process was slowly steered
towards the same operating point as in the steady-state simulations.
A peculiar system behaviour revealed itself when operating the columns. Sometimes
negative mass flows, i.e. mass flow opposite to the normal direction, occurred different
places in the plant. Since there are no pipes or pumps in the flowsheet, fluid flows in the
direction of the lowest pressure. In a real plant, fluid can be pumped against the pressure
gradient with appropriate equipment and therefore it does not reflect real behaviour. In
simulation, a valve was used to stop the negative flow and restore the negative pressure
gradient.
At one point, it was decided to remove the decoupling between the two columns as
seen in the flowsheet. This resulted in a more linear flowsheet and no visible instabilities
were recorded. The decoupling served as a safety net when operating far from steady
and may be reimplemented if needed.
Each simulation was run for a long time and the dynamic steady-state was maintained
for >30h before results were exported to excel.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
The results from this simulation is listed in table 3.9 and an integrator with 0.05s
timestep and acceleration 8 was used. There are some streams that are very similar but
included to illustrate the pressure and temperature differences seen over control valves.
Just as in the steady-state simulation, the process reaches the desired operating point
according to the setpoints in table 3.8 and the reboiler duties as in the steady-state
simulation.
Table 3.9: Results from the dynamic simulation using the HYSYS flowsheet sheen in
figure 3.3.
Mass flow
Methanol
Ethanol
Water
P
T
t/h
% w/w
PPM
% w/w
kPa
°C
F1
142.50
82.2250
150
17.7600
174.7
83.50
D1
116.59
99.9994
6.18
4.354 63 × 10−4
134.2
71.80
D1-out
116.59
99.9994
6.18
4.354 63 × 10−4
99.73
64.08
S1
9.0000
28.7257
2300
71.0445
194.7
101.3
B1
18.914
1.260 49 × 10−5
0.00
100.000
201.1
120.4
B1-out
18.914
1.260 49 × 10−5
0.00
100.000
149.6
111.3
F2
9.0000
28.7257
2300
71.0445
162.3
96.07
D2
2.0000
99.9987
12.5
9.844 09 × 10−7
139.0
72.74
D2-out
2.0000
99.9987
12.5
9.844 09 × 10−7
137.1
72.36
Recycle
2.0000
99.9987
12.5
9.844 09 × 10−7
137.1
72.36
S2
4.0000
14.6334
5170
84.8500
166.2
103.0
B2
3.0000
7.875 84 × 10−8
0.00
100.000
175.6
116.2
B2-out
3.0000
7.875 84 × 10−8
0.00
100.000
130.6
107.3
A comparison between the steady-state and dynamic simulations can give an indica-
tion of the credibility to the dynamic model since the steady-state model was validated.
It was noted that the integrator settings had a large influence on the ethanol PPM
concentrations in the distillate D1 and in the recycle stream. Therefore, an experiment
with the same process and two different integrators was conducted for a normal integrator
and a slow integrator. The normal used 0.05s time steps and acceleration 8 while the
slow had a time step of 0.005s and acceleration 2. The error between the two simulations
are listed in table 3.10 for stream properties and 3.11 for stream composition. A positive
difference means that the value obtained with the normal integrator is larger than with
the slow integrator.
All errors in the stream property table are seen to be very small. The largest difference
was in mass flow B1 with an error of 0.567 kg
h which is neglectable since it has the same
size of the error in mass balance of each simulation which were 0.053 kg
h and 0.485 kg
h for
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Dynamic simulation
45
the normal and slow solver respectively.
The condenser duties are set by pressure controllers and may be different with the two
integrators.
An error in the refining column of 7.60 × 10−5MW and in the recovery
column of 5.42 × 10−6MW was found, but such a small error compared to the 86MW
duty is neglectable.
Table 3.10: Comparison between a normal and slow integrator. Largest difference in
pressure is S1.
Vapour fraction
Temperature
Pressure
Mass flow
Unit
◦C
kPa
kg
h
D1
0
3.18 × 10−5
7.11 × 10−6
−2.61 × 10−2
D1-out
−1.04 × 10−9
2.25 × 10−5
Manual
−2.61 × 10−2
S1
0
−5.03 × 10−3
−1.65 × 10−2
−6.41 × 10−2
B1
0
−2.66 × 10−3
−1.66 × 10−2
5.67 × 10−1
B1-out
−5.07 × 10−6
−3.18 × 10−6
Manual
5.67 × 10−1
F2
−4.95 × 10−6
−2.84 × 10−3
1.38 × 10−3
−6.41 × 10−2
D2
0
Manual
1.21 × 10−4
3.38 × 10−2
D2-out
6.72 × 10−8
5.55 × 10−5
−9.27 × 10−6
3.38 × 10−2
Recycle
7.71 × 10−8
5.55 × 10−5
−9.27 × 10−6
3.38 × 10−2
S2
0
−7.02 × 10−3
1.98 × 10−3
0
B2
0
2.13 × 10−4
1.33 × 10−3
−3.86 × 10−3
B2-out
4.15 × 10−7
1.04 × 10−6
Manual
−3.86 × 10−3
In table 3.11, significant differences are seen in almost all material streams where
some raise more concern than others. The error of 32.3 PPM ethanol in S1 may propagate
to the rectifying column which is seen in the 8.20 PPM difference in D2 and 96.8 PPM
in S2. The bottoms streams are seen to have 0.00 PPM error and both models can be
trusted. A large difference is seen in S2, but this stream is not critical since it is classified
as waste. A 228 PPM methanol concentration S2 only means that the recovery rate may
have a small inaccuracy.
A stream which should be trusted is D1 since it determines the methanol purity and
ultimately the product value.
It is 1.48 PPM higher (+18.9%) in ethanol with the
normal solver than the slow solver. This should not be a problem since, if we trust
the normal solver and set the ethanol concentration at 10 PPM, the real concentration
would be approximately 8 PPM and is still below the grade AA specification. There
might be an energy loss when the process is not operated closer to the specification but
for simulation purposes it is sufficient and can be used for the following simulations.
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
Table 3.11: Comparison between a normal and slow integrator. Units are PPM w/w.
Ethanol
Water
Methanol
D1
1.48
0.05
-1.53
S1
-32.3
-59.7
92.0
B1
0.00
-0.06
0.06
D2
8.20
0.01
-8.21
S2
-96.8
-131
228
B2
0.00
0.00
0.00
With added confidence in the integrator, a comparison between the dynamic and
steady-state simulation is in order and should validate the model.
3.4
Comparison between steady-state and
dynamic simulation
Just as when the two dynamic integrators were compared, the simulation results from
the steady-state and dynamic models are compared to find differences or weaknesses.
The stream property differences are seen in table 3.12 and the composition in 3.13.
Table 3.12: Comparison between dynamic and steady-state simulation.
Vapour fraction
Temperature
Pressure
Mass flow
Unit
◦C
kPa
kg
h
F1
Manual
Manual
0.451
Manual
D1
0
1.38 × 10−5
2.18 × 10−5
3.90 × 10−4
S1
6.47 × 10−4
0.182
0.323
−3.04 × 10−5
B1
0
−2.05 × 10−4
−1.28 × 10−3
−1.47 × 10−4
D2
0
1.04 × 10−4
2.16 × 10−5
−1.06 × 10−5
Recycle
−1.32 × 10−3
0.376
1.936
1.54 × 10−4
S2
1.80 × 10−4
0.237
0.692
9.65 × 10−6
B2
0
−3.78 × 10−6
−2.17 × 10−4
−8.14 × 10−5
The vapour fraction differences are very low which makes sense since they use the
same vapour liquid equilibrium (VLE) model. In the steady-state simulation, no control
valve for the recycle stream is present and this results in a temperature and pressure
difference.
Therefore, a small inaccuracy may be introduced to the refining column
and propagate further to other streams. S1 also has small temperature and pressure
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Comparison between steady-state and dynamic simulation
47
Table 3.13: Comparison between dynamic and steady-state simulation. All units are
PPM w/w.
Ethanol
Water
Methanol
D1
1.82
0.135
-1.95
S1
-21.1
19.0
2.11
B1
0.00
-0.130
0.130
D2
12.5
0.04
-12.5
S2
-54.8
47.5
7.30
B2
0.00
-0.00
0.00
differences, and may be why S2 also shows slight differences in temperature and pressure.
It may also be the result of fluid calculations in dynamic mode being different than in
steady-state. In any case, the differences are small <0.5 ◦C and <2 kPa.
There is a 0.5 kPa difference in the feed stream which has to do with how F1 is defined.
In the steady-state simulation vapour fraction, temperature and mass flow are defined
by the user while in dynamic mode, temperature is calculated by HYSYS. The two
simulations agree completely on the mass flows which is an important find and indicates
how well the simulations agree.
There are some significant differences in the compositions seen in table 3.13. The
most significant stream is D1 since it is very important to keep under 10 PPM w/w
ethanol. There is a difference of 1.82 PPM in ethanol which means that the dynamic
simulation underestimates by 23%. It may be a result of the small temperature and
pressure differences seen between the two models, but it may also be a limitation to
the HYSYS software. When calculating an ethanol mass balance of the system it was
found that 7.09 PPM is lost in the system and may accumulate somewhere. Reducing
the reboiler duty will enable a better match between the models since this will increase
the ethanol content in the distillate.
Other composition differences are seen in the side draw S1 and S2 which is in streams with
higher concentrations so the relative difference is smaller. In S2 the ethanol concentration
is 54.8 PPM less than in the steady-state simulation which corresponds to -1.1% and
can in most cases be neglected.
As an experiment, the amount of reboiler reduction necessary to reach the desired 8
PPM w/w ethanol in D1 and 25 PPM w/w ethanol in the recycle was estimated using
two composition controllers measuring the mass fraction of ethanol while controlling
the reboiler duty.
The controllers acted just as the ADJ blocks in the steady-state
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Novel industrial distillation column configuration
simulations and solved an optimisation problem where the solution was defined by the
setpoints. It was necessary to solve both optimisation problems at once since the reboil-
ers are cross interacting and have an effect on all other process variables. The controllers
were tuned so they would move the system slowly towards the new setpoints, while all
other controllers adjusted to the new operating point. This resulted in a steady-state
satisfying the two setpoints while the reboilers used 85.911 MW and 2.4024 MW of
heating utility which combines to 88.313 MW which is 1.042 MW less than the required
duty of 89.355 MW in the steady-state simulations (0.880 MW and 0.162 MW in the
refining and recovery columns respectively). As a simplification, 1 MW reboiler duty
can be added to the system in order to compensate for this difference. It was noted that
when decreasing the reboiler duty to reach the setpoints in D1 and the recycle stream,
almost all other composition differences were reduced as well as the stream property
differences which further validates this simplification.
It is difficult for most models to get PPM level accuracy and HYSYS is no exception.
In dynamic mode, all concentrations are a few PPM off compared to the steady-state
solution, but the most important ones are D1 which is underestimated. With that in
mind, the dynamic simulator can still be used to full extend since in almost all other
parts, the two simulators strongly agree. In [21], the steady-state model was validated
against a real plant and when the dynamic model agrees with this steady-state model,
it too is valid for simulating a real plant.
This chapter served as a justification for dynamic mode simulation in HYSYS and proved
that the novel three column purification scheme by I. A. Udugama et al.[16] can be
operated and controlled in HYSYS.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4
Advanced control
In this section, an advanced control strategy will be applied to the methanol purification
section. This is done in order to improve the performance and efficiency of the system
when it is operated in an industrial setting with dynamic effects.
4.1
Disturbance phenomena
In a chemical plant, nothing is truly constant and complex process disturbances will
occur as a natural part of operation. They can appear in process variables or they can
change the process in unforeseen events.
In chapter 1, the methanol synthesis was outlined in figure 1.3 while the purification
section was rigorously investigated in chapter 2. The purification section in a methanol
plant is subject to disturbances from previous unit operations (upstream) and to other
process disturbances in several ways.
4.1.1
Upstream disturbances
A process disturbance can occur in the methanol reactor which is the last step before
the purification section. The methanol reactor has an operating point that is optimised
for a high selectivity to methanol and at this operating point it produces a well-known
output stream. When the methanol reactor is operated under less than ideal conditions,
some uncertainties are introduced.
The amount of impurities in the crude methanol is most sensitive to the catalyst material
and feed composition where some disturbances may increase the formation of higher
alcohols while others the formation of ketones or esters[41].
The way a disturbance
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Advanced control
present itself may be graduate with a slow composition drift as suggested by Koch-
Glitsch[25] or it may be fast due to variations in the methanol synthesis feed composition.
Other disturbances as reactor temperature or pressure deviations will have an influ-
ence on the output stream that is transferred to the purification section. These kinds
of disturbances can be simulated by including variations in the purification section feed
composition, flow rate, temperature and pressure. The variations should be fluctuating
and drifting at the same time and in a combination of variables.
Steam is used as heating utility in the reboilers and are produced by the methanol
synthesis, upstream. If there is a failure in the synthesis and it produces less heat, it
may result in a shortage of heating utility. This will limit the amount of heat duty
that can be supplied to the reboilers and reduce the boilup ratio. A similar disturbance
can occur in the condensers if the cooling utility (typically water) temperature changes
due to weather conditions or seasons changing. This will affect the reflux ratio and the
distillate flow rate. In both cases, the controllers need to readjust to never break product
specifications. In the HYSYS flowsheet, the energy streams are pure energy (direct Q)
and can be manipulated as desired to simulate such disturbances.
4.1.2
Synthetic disturbance
Variations are unpredictable and random. They may present as noise or drifting in one
variable or in many at the same time.
A way of synthesising disturbances is to use multiple sine wave generators that has their
own frequency and combined they create a random, but periodic pattern. This was done
in HYSYS using 4 transfer function blocks that generates sine waves with a specified
amplitude according to equation (4.1).
OP = PV + A · sin
(2π t
T
)
(4.1)
where OP is output, PV is process variable, A is the amplitude t is time and T is the
period. The 4 amplitudes were selected to give a 10% peak to peak amplitude of the
142.5 t
h if all 4 waves collided and 4 different T were selected in seconds as: 3600, 7200,
14400 and 28800. The periods were selected deliberately as multiples since this would
create a recurring pattern in the disturbance that enables easy comparison between
simulations.
In one of the transfer functions, a 2% random noise was included to simulate smaller
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Disturbance phenomena
51
oscillations.
The resulting disturbance in F1 over a 36 hour period is plotted in figure 4.1.
The
simulated noise appears to be random but with recurring patterns as desired. In the
same way, noise in other process variables such as composition temperature and pressure
can be synthesised and an example of this is plotted in figure 4.2. The same sine waves,
but with a higher amplitude is used which effectively couples the disturbances. There
may be cases where it is relevant to not couple the disturbances, so they follow distinct
patterns or out of phase depending on the desired disturbance scenario.
Figure 4.1: Feed flow rate as a function of time simulating an industrial plant where
disturbance is included by implementing 4 sine waves to give a variation
from the nominal feed flow (red line).
In figure 4.3, the variation in selected variables are seen when subjected to the feed
mass flow and composition disturbances presented above.
The variation is 0.01322
√
PPM in D1 and 0.4660
√
PPM in D2. It is less than expected for such large dis-
turbances, but operating closer to the <10 PPM w/w ethanol limit in D1 without con-
trolling the composition is not safe. The composition is drifting over the course of weeks
and the composition may drift even further if the simulation had continued. The smaller
variance in D2 EtOH may be caused by the variance in the CV2s.
It is necessary to evaluate how the stabilising control layer CV2 performs under
constant feed disturbance. There are 10 CVs and 10 MVs and to give a overview of these
variables, they are plotted in one figure. Each control pair has its CV on top and PV
on the bottom in figure 4.4. The rows are: level controllers, flow controllers and finally
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.2: Feed ethanol composition as a function of time simulating an industrial
plant where disturbance is included by implementing 4 sine waves to give
a variation in the feed composition (red line) expected to be around 150
PPM.
Figure 4.3: D1 ethanol and D2 ethanol compositions when subjected to a feed com-
position and flowrate disturbance that is switched on after 10 hours. The
variation is 0.01322
√
PPM in D1 and 0.4660
√
PPM in D2.
pressure controllers. At the 10 hour mark, the feed composition and flow disturbance is
turned on and a significant amount of variance is introduced. The variance is calculated
for each variable over 1000 hours, 40 hours after the disturbance was started. These are
listed in table 4.1.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Disturbance phenomena
53
Figure 4.4: Stabilising control layer and manipulated variables when subjected to dis-
turbance at 10 hour mark. Each control pair is on top of each other.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Advanced control
Table 4.1: Variance in each controller PV and MV.
LC-C1
LC-R1
LC-C2
LC-R2
PV
4.631 × 10−6
0.01793
8.339 × 10−4
1.456 × 10−3
MV
3.034 × 10−3
4.127
1.738 × 10−4
2.615 × 10−4
FC-D1
FC-S1
FC-D2
FC-S2
PV
6.682 × 10−5
1.303 × 10−5
4.140 × 10−5
1.439 × 10−4
MV
7.427 × 10−5
0.015 97
8.305 × 10−4
9.625 × 10−3
PC-C1
PC-C2
PV
1.966 × 10−4
4.713 × 10−5
MV
2.432 × 10−4
1.413 × 10−5
The variances in CV2 in table 4.1 indicates where the disturbances affects the most.
Of all the controllers, LC-R1 has the highest variances as is evident by B1 flowing
between 16 and 22 t/h. This is mainly due to the feed flow rate disturbances. The rest
of the controllers are performing well without a high variance in either the PVs or MVs.
The figure shows perfectly how much noise PID controllers can introduce to a system.
The transfer function block used for the disturbances in HYSYS did not have the
ability for the sine waves to be reset and start at a specified point. Identical patterns
are therefore impossible to obtain without using the same HYSYS file. This is also
applicable to the random noise generator which could not be seeded and produce identical
pseudorandom noise in each simulation. For the following work, a HYSYS template file
was used to test the proposed control strategies and therefore there is no problem with
generating the same disturbance pattern, except for the random noise.
A different
solution may be to import noise from an external software as MATLAB and therefore a
connection between these software was investigated.
4.2
Connection with MATLAB
It is possible to run a simulation across multiple software when a data connection has
been established. Above, the implementation of process disturbances revealed limita-
tions in HYSYS that can be circumvented by setting up the disturbance in MATLAB
and sending it to HYSYS. Additionally, MATLAB can be used to build advanced con-
trollers and then send commands such as setpoint changes or changes in manipulated
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Connection with MATLAB
55
variables directly to HYSYS. This interaction also appears more as a real industrial
environment where the HYSYS simulation acts as the plant where measurements can
be collected by the controllers that are set up in MATLAB. The procedure will be to
run simulation in HYSYS in discrete time, meaning that the simulation runs for a time
period and stops. Then the controller in MATLAB computes new setpoints and actuator
movements which is send to the process and simulation runs again. This procedure can
be run in a loop in MATLAB for any desired amount of time and the control structure
performance can be evaluated.
The first step in implementing such a system is to establish the data link between the
two software. In MATLAB, a COM server can be set up to interact with multiple soft-
ware using the actxserver('Hysys.Application.V11.0') command.
It was anticipated that interrupting the dynamic solver influences the HYSYS model.
Therefore, a series of experiments investigating this issue was conducted using a MATLAB
program that send start and stop commands to the HYSYS dynamic solver. For this
purpose, a dynamic HYSYS flowsheet of the process at steady-state was used. The
program can be found in appendix A.1 and was used to generate the data plotted in
figures 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7 below. All the plotted variables are deviation variables, that is
the deviation from its steady-state. The red dashed lines indicate interruptions of three
different sizes: 400 minutes, 800 minutes and 1600 minutes.
In figure 4.5 and 4.6 a large amount of noise is visible in all controlled variables and
some process variables. The largest noise is in B1 and is about 1 kg/h in magnitude.
The PI controllers introduce noise when they maintain a controlled variable on its set-
point, and is something that cannot be removed completely without having a filter on
the controllers. The PI controllers may be tuned less aggressively to reduce noise, but
the observed noise is tolerable.
In B1 and B2 (figure 4.5) significant spikes are present each time the solver is inter-
rupted, and in largest magnitude in B1. These spikes upset the PI controllers which
creates some oscillation seen as noise in other variables.
The oscillations decrease when the interval increases indicating that the PI controller is
settling off. The other flows show a higher amount of noise but at a lower magnitude
where the spikes almost disappear in noise.
The effects of the spikes can be seen in the distillate and bottoms compositions (figure
4.6). D1 ethanol composition is of very high interest due to the strict composition re-
quirements in grade AA methanol. Instead of a random noise, the concentration drifts
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.5: Mass flow rates of controlled variables where the HYSYS dynamic solver
was started and stopped indicated by the red dashed lines with three in-
tervals: 400 minutes, 800 minutes and 1600 minutes.
randomly. The variation decreases when the interruption intervals are increased indi-
cating that the interruption is the cause of the disturbance. The same amount of PPM
variation is seen in D2 ethanol content but appears as noise.
The methanol content in the bottoms also suffer from interrupting the solver. In B1 the
spikes have extremely small magnitude and can be neglected while in B2 they are seen
to upset the composition in a long time after the solver has restarted. This is clearest in
the last three 1600 minute intervals where the spikes both occur in positive and negative
direction at random.
The interruptions influence the simulation when operated at steady-state, but whether
it is significant is still not evident. To put this to the test, an interruption interval
of 10 minutes was tried for 100 intervals and compared with 1000 min uninterrupted
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Connection with MATLAB
57
Figure 4.6: Compositions of ethanol in the distillates D1 EtOH and D2 EtOH (top) and
methanol bottoms B1 MeOH and B2 MeOH (bottom) where the HYSYS
dynamic solver was started and stopped indicated by the red dashed lines
with three intervals: 400 minutes, 800 minutes and 1600 minutes.
operation. The 10 minutes was selected since it is a valid interval an model predictive
control (MPC) can be run without updating it, in such a slow system. The results are
plotted in figure 4.7 where the red dashed lines indicate when the interruptions have
stopped.
The higher frequency interruptions have a peculiar effect on the model. Compared to
the lower frequency interruptions, the mass flow rates are seen to have the same amount
of noise. The composition in D1 and B2 are seen to drift more with the higher frequency
and when the interruptions stop, they return to steady-state. This indicates that the
model stability has weakened and therefore, interrupting the dynamic solver should be
avoided. Saving the HYSYS flowsheet was found to have no influence on the simulation
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.7: Mass flow and compositions interrupted in 100 intervals of 10 minutes
followed by 1000 minutes uninterrupted simulation.
results.
The interaction between MATLAB and HYSYS should be in continuous time, mean-
ing that both software is running at the same time and information is passed in both
directions.
While the software is running, it is only possible to interact with HYSYS because MAT-
LAB is busy, which limits the practical aspect of this approach.
Additional simulation of unsteady-state involving a step change also gave less accu-
rate results when the solver was interrupted which further supports that this approach
is unfit.
The investigation proved, however, that a link between the two software is possible
and may be useful in other ways.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Plantwide control
59
4.3
Plantwide control
The drifting of product composition seen in figure 4.3 makes it unsafe to operate closer
to the specifications. A controller should be developed that can stabilise the product
composition so the process can be optimised.
A plantwide control design algorithm is presented by V. Minasidis et.al[42] and will
serve as guide for the following work.
The dynamic simulation in chapter 3 involved setting up a series of PI controllers that
stabilised the system. This is regarded as the regulatory or stabilising control layer,
CV2, which is the lowest layer in the control hierarchy. It can control the system at
steady-state for a constant feed input, and will maintain CV2 when disturbances are
introduced.
When the product composition starts to drift out of specification, the plant operator
will need to take the necessary countermeasures the product purity to a safe distance.
This control assignment should be handled by a supervisory control layer to run the
plant fully automatic.
4.3.1
Developing advanced controllers
A supervisory controller can consist of a model based multivariable controller such as an
MPC or a mixture of decentralised PID controllers, selectors or others[32]. The purpose
of the supervisory control layer is first to maintain the product specifications. Secondly
it needs to be economic according to a cost function J[42].
A methanol purification section is rarely a plant by itself and the cost function should
cover all parts of the methanol plant. As a simplification, no price is set on the crude
methanol feed since it is beyond the scope of this work. The cost function can be given
by:
J = pQQ + pWW −pPP
(4.2)
It consists of expenses such as reboiler and condenser utilities Q and price pQ, waste
W and price pW and selling price pP of the product P. The utility price may not be
high since most of the heating duty is produced by the methanol synthesis, however,
any heat that is saved may be used for other purposes such as district heating or power
generation. W can be minimised by keeping the bottoms compositions <3 PPM w/w
and having a high recovery rate, β. Most importantly is pP, because if the product
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Advanced control
specifications are broken, the product is basically worthless. From the cost function, the
following CVs are identified:
CV1 = {D1(specs), β, B1 MeOH, B2 MeOH}
These CVs are entirely valid, but when developing the stabilising control layer, some
of the process dynamics were revealed and it was found that the bottoms compositions
would only exceed the specifications when the process was very upset. Therefore, they
can be regarded as constraints:
AC = {B1 MeOH, B2 MeOH}
(4.3)
One of dynamics that were discovered was the sensitivity of D1 EtOH to disturbances
in the recycle ethanol composition, D2 EtOH. This is due to the stage where the recycle
enters in the refining column: if D2 EtOH is too high, the last amount of EtOH cannot
be removed and D1 EtOH breaks specification. If D2 EtOH is too low, it will reduce
D1 EtOH which is a waste of energy since higher purity is unnecessary. Therefore, D2
EtOH is selected as the second CV to give:
CV1 = {D1 EtOH, D2 EtOH, β}
(4.4)
Even though 10 PI controllers were used for the stabilising control layer, a number
of degrees of freedom (equation (4.5)) still exists: two reboiler duties and all the flow
controller setpoints.
u = {R1, R2, D1,sp, D2,sp, F2,sp, S2,sp}
(4.5)
The next step is to identify the best possible control strategy by understanding of how
the inputs affect the process and how they can be manipulated to maintain CV1. A
systematic approach is to derive transfer functions linking a step in an input to a response
in the outputs. The transfer functions can be used as a process model and is very useful
when developing the supervisory control layer.
4.3.2
Transfer function model
The procedure for deriving transfer functions from step experiment data is straight
forward and involves making a change in an input and measuring the dynamic response
in process variables.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Plantwide control
61
A HYSYS flowsheet of the process at steady-state was used to do 36 step experi-
ments, 6 steps for each 6 inputs.
The dynamic solver was activated, and the process continued for at least 200 minutes
to minimise the effect of starting the solver, as seen in above. A step in the selected
variable, for example 1% increase in reboiler duty, was entered and the response was col-
lected for selected process variables in a .csv file. Many of the variables quickly settled
at a new steady-state, but the compositions in the distillate and bottoms took extremely
long time to settle (sometimes ∼12 hours computation time) as will be evident by the
time constants in the following response figures.
At the time the step experiments were conducted, the available computation hard-
ware was less than ideal due to the COVID-19 pandemic quarantine. Access to a stable
VPN server required for the HYSYS software to run at home were not always possible
and subsequently many step experiments had to be repeated when HYSYS lost con-
nection to its license server. In general each simulated hour took 2 min comutation
time.
MATLAB was selected as calculator for the procedure of estimating an appropriate
transfer function and a program that derives a first order plus time delay (FOPTD)
transfer function from response data was written. The FOPTD transfer function has
the form[32]:
G(s) = K e−θs
τs + 1
(4.6)
which is in the Laplace domain where K is the gain, θ is the time delay, τ is the time
constant and s is the Laplace variable. In the time domain, it has the form:
y(t < θ) = y(0)
(4.7)
y(t > θ) = k K




1 −e
(
−t −θ
τ
)




(4.8)
where y is the output and k is the step size constant used for comparing different step
sizes to each other. The FOPTD transfer function is a linear model that is characteristic
for simple processes and is best suited for linear or near linear responses. It is a model
with only three parameters to fit, so it is quick and easy to derive, but it will not describe
all dynamic responses accurately.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Advanced control
The MATLAB program consist of a script and a least squares problem function. The
script is used to load the plant data and calculate the three parameters for each transfer
function using fminsearch and the least squares problem function. In appendix A.2 and
A.3 the script and solver are included and was used find the transfer functions relating a
setpoint change in FC-F2 controller to different outputs. Any time delay below 1 minute
was set to zero as a simplification.
The step size should reflect the expected control interval and selected steps were ±5.0%,
±10% and ±15%. The procedure for deriving a transfer function is shown using F2 mass
flow since the FC-F2 setpoint and F2 mass flow are as closely related as possible. The
deviation variable step response is plotted in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: ±5.0%, ±10% and ±15% steps in FC-F2 setpoint and the response in F2
mass flow rate in deviation variable.
The response in F2 flow rate has no time delay as expected with a normal PI controller
and settles within 1 hour due to the way it is tuned.
A sufficiently slow actuator
movement is desirable in this system to avoid upsetting the process.
The next step is to normalise the responses, in this case to the 10% positive step, and
to fit a FOPTD transfer function to the responses. This will give 6 transfer functions
and if the responses are linear, they will lie on top of each other and a mean value can
be used. This was the case for F2 and the normalised step responses as well as the fitted
transfer function are plotted in figure 4.9. The fit is very good with a small deviation in
the sloped section.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Plantwide control
63
Figure 4.9: Step responses in F2 mass flow rate in deviation variable compared to the
transfer function.
The transfer function linking FC-F2 setpoint to F2 is described by:
GF2(SP)F2(s) =
0.9916
439.5s + 1
(4.9)
This was a very straightforward and linear example which proves the method. The
important variables exhibit a more non-linear response. In figure 4.10, the normalised
response in distillate ethanol composition and bottoms methanol composition for the
two columns are plotted. In all cases, the new steady-state settles at different heights
which indicates that the steady-state response is non-linear. In the distillate ethanol
composition, a higher order dynamic is seen in the first 25 hours and will have to be
approximated by a time delay where the function value is 0.
The B2 MeOH has a
behaviour that is poorly described by a FOPTD transfer function since it has a large
spike before it settles.
The non-linearities are a problem for setting up a reliable control structure. The
non-linearities are common in high purity distillation and a way to increase linearity
and controllability was found by S. Skogestad and M. Morari[43]. They investigated a
high purity distillation column and found that using the logarithmic composition rather
than the actual composition, a greater linearity was achieved. This is tried on the four
compositions plotted in figure 4.10 and the result is plotted in figure 4.11.
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.10: Step responses in distillate and bottoms composition deviation variable
for steps in FC-F2 setpoint.
Figure 4.11: Logarithmic step responses in distillate and bottoms deviation variable
composition for steps in FC-F2 setpoint as well as their transfer functions.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Plantwide control
65
The effect is clearly seen in D2 and B2 where the non-linear steady-state gain is
dramatically reduced, but in D1 and B1 the effect is less visible. The transfer functions
(red dashed lines) follow the responses nicely except for B2 MeOH as predicted. This
transfer function was fitted so it would match the initial slope and the steady-state
response but would not describe the initial top point. The transfer functions describing
these responses are given in equations (4.10) to (4.13).
GF2−ln(D1EtOH)(s) = 1.948 × 10−2 e−1.333 × 105s
1.968 × 105s + 1
(4.10)
GF2−ln(B1MeOH)(s) =
−0.2338
2.696 × 104s + 1
(4.11)
GF2−ln(D2EtOH)(s) = 0.4371 e−1.019 × 105s
1.329 × 105s + 1
(4.12)
GF2−ln(B2MeOH)(s) = 2.202 e−979.1s
626.3s + 1
(4.13)
The time delays are very large in D1 and D2 while they are 0 in B1 and B2 as
witnessed by the response. The time constants indicate how long time it takes for the
system to settle at a new steady-state and they are very long for the distillates and B1
as was already revealed when working and setting up the stabilising control layer. In
B2, the time constant is very small as required to match the non-linear higher order
response.
The procedure for deriving transfer functions for each output was repeated for all 6
inputs and non-linear results will be reviewed one by one below.
Steps in R1 had an interesting effect on the distillate composition since a higher reboiler
duty will ease the separation and a purer product is expected. In figure 4.12 (left) the
normalised (to +1.0%) non-linear step responses in D1 ethanol composition can be seen.
Spikes in composition are seen for steps > +2.0% which are due to a cascade of events.
The cause is a spike in ethanol composition, in the recycle stream D2, which stems from
an ethanol composition spike in S1 also called F2. In figure 4.12 (right) some of the
non-linear behaviour disappears as seen previously when using the natural logarithm of
the composition. The spikes from steps > +2.0% are still seen but are caused by the
cascading effects and will not be used to derive the transfer function.
The other outputs affected by a step in R1 is plotted in figure 4.13 with the fitted
transfer functions listed in equations (4.14) to (4.17). The behaviour observed in the
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.12: Responses in D1 ethanol deviation variable composition for steps in R1
including the best fitting FOPTD transfer function. Left: composition
vs time; Right: the deviation variable natural logarithm of composition
vs. time.
bottoms cannot be described by a FOPTD transfer function and will be assigned a 0 as
response. This is not an optimal solution since large impulses are seen in both bottoms
logarithmic compositions and will give an inaccurate model. The response in D2 EtOH
is also problematic since it behaves mostly as an impulse with a very low steady-state
gain. The model (equation (4.16)) reflects this with a very low time constant and gain.
GR1−ln(D1EtOH)(s) =
−0.2361
2.178 × 105s + 1
(4.14)
GR1−ln(B1MeOH)(s) = 0
(4.15)
GR1−ln(D2EtOH)(s) =
1.754 × 10−2
1.762 × 10−5s + 1
(4.16)
GR1−ln(B2MeOH)(s) = 0
(4.17)
The process was very sensitive to steps in D1 flow rate and only very small steps of
±0.10%, ±0.25% and ±0.50% was applicable. The response in D1 and D2 EtOH as
well as B2 MeOH had non-linear steady-state gains while B1 MeOH was linear. D1
EtOH in figure 4.14 showed linear behaviour for negative steps in D1 mass flow while it
was highly non-linear in the positive direction. It was necessary to remove the largest
==PAGE:79==
4.3 Plantwide control
67
Figure 4.13: Logarithmic deviation variable normalised to +1% responses in distillate
ethanol and bottoms methanol composition for steps in R1 including the
best fitting FOPTD transfer function.
positive step and use the +0.10% step as mean response. The model quality for this
output is therefore not perfect and results should be used carefully. Inputs other than D1
has an affect on the recovery rate β (equation (3.2)), but only D1 will give a steady-state
response in β. This repose was also highly non-linear and gives a poor model quality.
The resulting transfer functions are listed in table 4.2. All of the following transfer
functions are listed in appendix B and the essentials in table 4.2.
A problem was revealed when doing step experiments with D2 flow rate. D2 EtOH
and the two MeOH bottoms responses show linear and non-linear behaviour as seen
previously and can be used to fit a FOPTD transfer function. This is not the case
with D1 EtOH and in figure 4.15 the non-normalised responses in D1 and D2 ethanol
composition are plotted. The responses are problematic because D1 EtOH has both
positive and negative gain depending on the step direction since all steps results in a
positive step in D1 EtOH. This behaviour was double checked with smaller steps in D2
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.14: Logarithmic deviation variable responses in D1 ethanol composition for
steps in FC-D1 setpoint including the best fitting FOPTD transfer func-
tion.
mass flowrate and the same behaviour was observed.
For positive steps in D2 mass flow, a positive change is seen in D2 EtOH which results
in a positive change in D1 EtOH when more ethanol is added to the top of the refining
column.
For a negative steps in D2 mass flow the effect is different. A negative step gives a
negative change in D2 EtOH and a positive change in D1 EtOH. The change does
not come from D2 EtOH but rather from the mass change in D2. To understand this
behaviour, it is necessary to follow the chain of events: When less material enters the
top of the refining column, a lower amount of material enters the condenser and the
liquid level drops. The level controller counteracts this by reducing the reflux stream
and this causes an increase in D1 EtOH. Such behaviour cannot be described by a simple
FOPTD transfer function and therefore the response will not be modelled. This affects
the MPC since it cannot predict the change in D1 EtOH when no model is available.
Using this variable without a model may create an offset in CV1 or the controller will
destabilise the process.
Step experiments in R2 revealed very linear responses and no response in B2 MeOH.
The transfer functions are listed in table 4.2.
The last input is the side draw of the recovery column, S2. This showed linear and
==PAGE:81==
4.3 Plantwide control
69
D1
D2
F2
R1
R2
ln(D1 EtOH)
0.5781
3.604 × 105s + 1
N/A
1.948 × 10−2 e−1.333 × 105s
1.968 × 105s + 1
−0.2361
2.178 × 105s + 1
−0.2856 e−1591s
1.204 × 105s + 1
ln(B1 MeOH)
−0.6793 e−1.106 × 104s
3.902 × 104s + 1
0.6779 e−3642s
5.898 × 104s + 1
−0.2338
2.696 × 104s + 1
0
0
ln(D2 EtOH)
5.576 e−5.877 × 104s
1.896 × 105s + 1
6.366 e−7344s
3.337 × 104s + 1
0.4371 e−1.019 × 105s
1.329 × 105s + 1
1.754 × 10−2
1.762 × 10−5s + 1
−5.970
6.090 × 104s + 1
ln(B2 MeOH)
−2.379 e−1.616 × 104s
3.957 × 104s + 1
−2.189 e−2859s
3218s + 1
2.202 e−979.1s
626.3s + 1
0
2.450 e−2275s
7296s + 1
β
0.7034 e−1.588 × 104s
3.1431 × 104s + 1
N/A
N/A
0
0
Table 4.2: Transfer functions derived from step experiments using the same initial HYSYS flowsheet at steady-state and
using the MATLAB program that calculates the FOPTD parameters by solving a least squares problem.
==PAGE:82==
70
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.15: Non normalised deviation variable logarithmic step responses in distillate
ethanol composition for steps in FC-D2 setpoint.
non-linear responses as seen previously but the outputs were less sensitive to this input
and are not listed in table 4.2. The only transfer function with a reasonably high gain
is B2 MeOH and is given in equation (4.18).
GB2 ln(MeOH)(s) = −2.467 e−447.2s
7.916 × 103s + 1
(4.18)
4.4
Supervisory control layer
The amount of variable cross interactions and time delays seen in the dynamic behaviour
of the process, strongly favours an MPC because it is able to anticipate the delayed
system response and cross interactions. The problem with an MPC is that it needs a
reasonably accurate model.
In the transfer function model in table 4.2, there were fundamental issues where
some of the variables were simplified as a zero response while others were not possible to
model using the linear FOPTD model. Therefore, an MPC may not be the best solution
and a different multivariable controller should be developed in parallel.
4.4.1
Traditional supervisory control
A simple cascading supervisory control layer can be used to control an advanced process
such as the methanol purification section and will be presented below. The control loops
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
71
will be closed one at a time.
It was defined that the most important CV1 was D1 EtOH and therefore this CV
is paired with the input that has minimal effective delay and minimal loop interaction.
It is known as the ”pair close” rule[42]. Time delays rules out F2 and R2. D2 cannot
be used since no transfer function was derived for this input. The choice is between D1
and R1, but the closest pair is D1 and R1 should be saved for a higher layer optimising
controller.
Therefore, the control pair D1,sp and D1 EtOH is selected, D1,sp →D1 EtOH, and a PI
controller is tuned using the IMC tuning approach[32] which takes the transfer function
model derived above into account. The control time constant, τC, is selected as half of
the time constant, τ, since there is no time delay. The integral time constant, τI, is
selected as τ:
GD1,sp→ln(D1EtOH) =
0.5781
3.604 × 105s + 1
τI = 3.604 × 105,
τc = 3.604 × 105
2
= 1.802 × 105,
Kc =
τ
τc · K =
3.604 × 105
1.802 × 105 · 0.5781 = 3.460
(4.19)
The next control pair should be determined by a closed loop step response test as per the
sequential loop tuning method using IMC tuning. This procedure gave very poor results
because of the heavy cross interactions and long time delays. The loops were instead
closed according to the open loop system model and hand tuned using the dynamic
responses seen above and trial-and-error.
The next loop to close is D2 EtOH and there are two MV candidates: R2 and D2.
R2 has no time delay but a larger time constant and would give a smooth control while
D2 has a higher gain and less actuator movement may be required. The best solution is
to make both pairs and compare them for the same disturbance test. The control pair
R2 →D2 EtOH, called D1R2, is seen in figure 4.16 and D2,sp →D2 EtOH, called D1D2,
in figure 4.17.
When comparing different control strategies it is very important to keep in mind
that controller tuning plays a large role in performance. The IMC tuning method does
not always make a good controller tuning as was found with the failed sequential loop
tuning method. Almost any reasonable control pair can be used with proper tuning and
may give a low variance in the PV but not always in the MV. The better control pair
will have a low variance in both PV and MV.
==PAGE:84==
72
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.16: Supervisory control using D1,sp and R2 to control D1 EtOH and D2 EtOH.
In table 4.3 the variances in PV and MV of the two controllers are listed. The
controllers are performing equally well with respect to D1 which is expected since this
loop was closed and tuned using the transfer function model. D1D2 is much better at
maintaining the CV but also has more noise in the MV indicating that D1R2 is tuned
less aggressively.
Both control pairs are good choices, and the D1R2 can be tuned to perform as well as
D1D2 but will have more noise in the MV. The control pair should be based on other
considerations.
Table 4.3: D1D2 and D1R2 controller variance in PV and MV as seen in figures 4.17
and 4.16.
D1
R2
D1
D2
PV
1.166 × 10−6
0.1395
1.136 × 10−6
7.835 × 10−3
MV
3.427 × 10−3
8.081 × 10−4
4.459 × 10−3
1.941 × 10−3
The economic part of the controller still needs to be implemented. It involves min-
imising the cost function by reducing utility cost and waste. Therefore, D1D2 seems like
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
73
Figure 4.17: Supervisory control using D1,sp and D2,sp to control D1 EtOH and D2
EtOH.
the better option because it leaves R2 open.
It was anticipated that the amount of noise from the feed disturbance may be reduced
by allowing additional or less material to flow into the recovery column according to the
magnitude of the F1 feed flowrate disturbance. The setpoint of S1 should then be set
according to a fraction of the disturbance as well as the recovery column side stream S2
should be set to keep the mass balance over the recovery column constant. It turned
out that changing the side stream flow rates introduced more noise to the system, but
from the experience it was found that S2 should be linked with D2 so the sum of the
two streams would always be 6 t
h.
Since the D1 EtOH is stabilised very well using the D1D2 controller, it would be
ideal to move the setpoint closer to the limit of 10 PPM w/w in order to increase the
recovery rate β. This is done using D1D2 and the response on the stabilising control
layer can be seen in figure 4.18 and the supervisory control layer in figure 4.19.
==PAGE:86==
74
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.18: Stabilising control layer for a setpoint change in D1 EtOH.
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
75
Figure 4.19: D1D2 controller with a setpoint closer to the limit.
The setpoint increase revealed a lot of useful information for developing an optimising
control layer. The D1D2 has excellent setpoint tracking, but a very large spike in D1
was seen. The spike was caused by the aggressive D1D2 controller, but only a 5% drop
in the condenser liquid level was seen. The cascading setpoints was followed closely
by the stabilising control layer, but almost all other variables in CV2 were upset by
the setpoint change. They settled at a new operating point after about 24 hours. A
graduate setpoint change should have been implemented in order to reduce the effect on
the stabilising control layer.
The setpoint change revealed that D1 EtOH can be stepped even closer to the <10 PPM
w/w ethanol limit. From the step response model, the increased D1 mass flow will give
a substantial increase in D2 EtOH after a time delay. This is handled by manipulating
D2 aggressively to reduce the movement in D2 EtOH.
The new D1 mass flow level increased the recovery rate to 100.0% which should be
reduced to 99.5%. From the open loop transfer function model, only D1 can manipulate
β and to reduce D1, the reboiler duty R1 needs to be reduced. Therefore, the optimising
==PAGE:88==
76
4 Advanced control
control pair R1 →β should be implemented.
The setpoint increase resulted in a lower recycle stream, D2. In order to maintain a
high recovery rate, this flow needs to be controlled. It is possible to use the reboiler duty
R2 to control D2 when taking advantage of the D1D2 controller, R2 →D1. When R2
is increased, D2 EtOH decreases and D1D2 will increase D2 to keep the concentration
constant. The resulting control strategy is a supervisory D1D2 control layer with an
optimising R1R2 control layer on top and the flowsheet can be seen in figure 4.20.
Figure 4.20: D1D2 controller as well as the economic controller R1R2.
Operating the system at a product composition of 9.9 PPM w/w ethanol and keeping
the recovery rate constant at 99.5% gave the dynamic simulation plotted in figure 4.21.
The optimising layer was deliberately tuned extremely slow since this layer should only
guide the system towards the most energy optimal operating point and avoid disturbing
the steady operation. The process is seen to reach the desired setpoints of β after a long
==PAGE:89==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
77
time and D2 has some minor variations over time. This is fine because tight control is
not needed for this layer.
Figure 4.21: D1D2 controller as well as the economic controller R1R2 with a setpoint
closer to the limit.
The total reboiler duty for the last 100 hours was 87.613 MW which is a saving of
700.5 kW or 0.7932% when compared to the process with just the stabilising control
layer.
4.4.1.1
Practical considerations
The proposed supervisory control is simple and only consist of 4 PI controllers that
ensures on-specification product at a high recovery rate - at all times. It manages to
control the process even though the process is heavily dominated by long time-delays.
It is simple in they way that it is relatively easy for a person without expert control
knowledge to identify the control loops and their function. The only setpoints that is
up to the operator is the recovery rate and product composition, D1 EtOH. The D2 and
D2 EtOH setpoints should be selected from process optimisation.
The controller does not need computational power and can be implemented as decen-
==PAGE:90==
78
4 Advanced control
tralised PID controllers that receives a setpoint from a control room that monitors the
process.
The D1D2R1R2 controller may benefit from a fine-tuning that reflects the desired
plant operating philosophy, for example if the plant needs to handle more disturbances
or have better setpoint tracking. Currently, a setpoint change in recovery rate will take
hundreds of hours.
The low noise in compositions D1 EtOH and D2 EtOH indicate that the composition
controller is aggressive. It was deliberately tuned relatively aggressively due to the strict
grade AA methanol requirements. It might be possible to tune it less aggressive, but
this depends on the composition stability is in the real plant, and how close to the
composition specifications the setpoint is selected.
The tuning also has an affect on how often measurements should be transmitted
to the controllers and how often the controllers should interact with the process. In
dynamic simulation, the PID controllers were operated continuously, but it may be more
convenient to only update the controllers periodically since the process is very slow. The
stabilising control layer should, however, remain continuous or at least update within
seconds.
In order to control CV1 using the D1D2R1R2 controller, a number of measurements
must be collected from the process. The compositions D1 EtOH and D2 EtOH needs
to be measured frequently as well as their mass flow rates.
These are used by the
composition part of the D1D2R1R2 controller.
The economic controller part needs
a few measurements to calculate the recovery rate defined in equation (3.2): the feed
composition and mass flow as well as the side draw S2 from the recovery column methanol
composition and mass flowrate. The measurements does not need to be as frequent since
this controller was tuned slow.
There was a case that revealed a flaw in the supervisory control layer and is caused by
the stabilising control layer. Increasing the D2 flowrate may destabilise the liquid level in
the recovery column condenser. The level controller uses the reflux flowrate to maintain
its 50% level setpoint. When the liquid level reaches a low value, the controller may shut
off the reflux stream completely and the distillate composition increases rapidly. This is
responded by D1D2R1R2 by shutting of D2 flow which disables the D2 controller since
it cannot measure a composition where there is no flow.
A possible solution is to restrict the actuator movements of the composition controller
in D1D2R1R2 but this may reduce its effectiveness for larger dynamic disturbances.
==PAGE:91==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
79
A different approach is to find a variable that has high sensitivity to the distillate
composition. Such a variable may be a temperature or composition profile in the column
and was used in a different distillation design[44]. A high sensitivity to D2 EtOH was
found in the composition difference between the top tray (60) and tray 25 from step
experiments and this variable may be used for a more stable control strategy.
Even though the bottoms specification of <3 PPM methanol was maintained at all
times without control, some process disturbance may cause the compositions to break
the specification. A way to control the bottoms composition was developed but never
implemented due to the very low methanol composition observed in the bottoms water
streams. Step experiments revealed that the side draw mass flow had a large influence
on the bottoms composition which means that it can be used as MV if it is necesssary
to control the bottoms methanol compositions.
The D1D2R1R2 controller performed well but does not fully utilise the model that
was developed from step experiments. Therefore, a different supervisory control strategy
is developed.
4.4.2
Model predictive control
MPC is a multivariable control strategy that uses predicted behaviour to control a
process. The MPC operates in a finite time-horizon called the prediction horizon. It
solves an optimisation problem, in the prediction horizon, to find the optimal value for
each output a few steps ahead, called the control horizon. The MPC is then updated
each control interval and the interval size determines how far ahead the MPC can predict.
After each interval, the MPC is updated and re-optimised according to the new measured
inputs. A linear MPC consist of a linear process model such as the transfer function
model in table 4.2.
MPC the advantage over PID control that it can predict and therefore reach setpoints
according to a schedule.
There are some limitations to the MPC: the performance is directly affected by the
model quality. The model gives no information about disturbances which means that
the model becomes inaccurate. Disturbances must be estimated and implemented to
the Kalman filter. A different disadvantage to the PID controller is that it adds a new
level of complexity to the system.
==PAGE:92==
80
4 Advanced control
Setting up an MPC program in for example MATLAB is a time consuming assign-
ment but is rewarded by free creativity to how advanced the MPC can be and how
many settings that can be changed to tune the controller. The assignment was found
to be beyond the scope of this report, but remain an open pathway for future and more
specialised research.
HYSYS has a built-in MPC that can be used to control dynamic processes and
implementation is straightforward with a limited number of user inputs required. The
HYSYS MPC is a linear unconstrained MPC meaning that the outputs can take any
value to satisfy the optimisation problem. Additionally, it only has one weight function,
ΓU, for the input and one for the output, ΓY , so the MPC will not be ideal for economic
optimisation because it is impossible to value one variable over the other.
The number of desired inputs and outputs are selected in HYSYS and the appropriate
first order model is entered as they were derived from step experiments according to the
transfer function matrix model in table 4.4.
Table 4.4: 3x3 transfer function matrix model representation.
u1
u2
u3
y1
G11
G12
G13
y2
G21
G22
G23
y3
G31
G32
G33
The choice of CV1 remains the same, but the MVs should be carefully selected. D2
cannot be used as MV in a HYSYS MPC because a reliable first order model for this
MV is not available. That leaves [D1, F2, R1, R2]. F2 only has a weak influence on D2
EtOH and is not included in the MPC for simplicity. The result is a 3x3 MPC as seen
in table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Transfer function matrix model used in the MPC in HYSYS.
D1
R2
R1
ln(D1 EtOH)
0.5781
3.604 × 105s + 1
−0.2856 e−1591s
1.204 × 105s + 1
0.2361
2.178 × 105s + 1
ln(D2 EtOH)
5.576 e−5.877 × 104s
1.896 × 105s + 1
−5.970
6.090 × 104s + 1
1.754 × 10−2
1.762 × 10−5s + 1
β
0.7034 e−1.588 × 104s
3.1431 × 104s + 1
0
0
==PAGE:93==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
81
Next, the MPC settings were selected carefully. The control interval determines how
far the MPC can predict in each step and in combination with the prediction horizon it
should reflect the time constants or time delays from the model. A prediction interval
of 15 minutes and a prediction horizon of 350 steps was sufficient for the model to see
step responses is all outputs.
The control horizon is the number of steps, the actuator movements are calculated and is
usually only one to two intervals but 5 was selected since it didn’t affect the computation
time to have a large control horizon and would only increase the MPC performance.
The performance of the MPC was very poor initially, because proper settings were
difficult to obtain. It was determined that since the HYSYS MPC was unconstrained
it took too large steps in the reboiler duties and would crash the system. The actuator
movements needed to be constrained, but no such standard setting were available. This
problem was solved by adding PI controllers between the MPC and the process. This
gave a transfer functions behaviour that in the order of 20 minutes changed the variable
according to the MPC output. With this workaround, the MPC started to work with
reasonable performance.
The weight functions were selected as ΓU = 0.7 and ΓY = 0.1. A value higher than
0.1 in the output weight was impossible since the MPC would become unstable from
large actuator movements.
With these settings, it was time to evaluate the controller performance. This was
done by subjecting it to the same disturbance in the feed as previously. The results
shown in figure 4.22 is for a 0.5 PPM w/w increased set point. It shows that D1 EtOH
is kept very close to the set new point, but a lot of variance or oscillating behaviour is
seen in all other variables. The variance in table 4.6 shows a higher variance than in the
cascading PI supervisory controller and shows a weakness in the MPC design. It reflects
the weight functions that values the MV higher than the PV.
Table 4.6: Variances in PV ans MV in the D1R2R1 MPC.
D1 EtOH
D2 EtOH
β
σ2
5.037 × 10−5
0.1637
0.0226
D1
R2
R1
σ2
6.657 × 10−5
2.394 × 10−4
8.616 × 10−4
With no control movements, a lot of noise in β was found which was caused by the
==PAGE:94==
82
4 Advanced control
Figure 4.22: MPC using D1, R2 and R1 to control D1 EtOH, D2 EtOH and recovery
rate β.
varying feed flowrate. Trying to control β as it fluctuate is not possible and only the
mean value should be controlled. This can be achieved by reducing the
Since the weight function for only β cannot be lowered, the only option to reduce
noise is to remove β from CV1. This is fine but then an additional supervisory controller
is needed since β is an important performance metric that needs to be high in order to
be competitive. Further work The weight function must be specified lower for β in order
to get rid of the variance but this is not possible in the HYSYS MPC.
4.4.2.1
Practical considerations
The considerations like operation philosophy and measurement updates discussed in the
D1D2R1R2 controller can be applied to the MPC, but there are some issues with this
controller that severely reduces its practical applicability.
==PAGE:95==
4.4 Supervisory control layer
83
The workaround with PID controllers between the MPC and the process seems like
an unnecessary step if the MPC was properly developed with constraints and other
optimised settings such as the ability to prioritise some inputs or outputs higher than
others. In that way, D1 EtOH can be prioritised and a penalty can be added to the
reboiler duties and make the MPC comparable to the D1D2R1R2 controller.
Some of the problems experienced when developing and tuning the MPC may come
from the model quality. In a customised MPC, the model is not limited to first order
and may even be non-linear. A more accurate model will improve the MPC performance
substantially because in some of the inputs there were no steady state response. In
these cases the response was set to zero and the MPC would not predict the process
behaviour. In the D1D2R1R2 controller above, the effectiveness of D2 as MV was seen
and it would be optimal if an MPC had access to this variable, but this was impossible
with the FOPTD model.
Implementation of the MPC in MATLAB was considered, but the effects of starting and
stopping the dynamic solver discouraged this. The accuracy and simulation pace was
severely affected by the interruptions, but when MATLAB and HYSYS was operated
continuously, MATLAB was unresponsive which means that only one simulation can be
run at a time.
Practical implementation of an MPC is more complicated than the PID based D1D2R1R2
controller. With the mixture of no time delays and very long ones, a long prediction
horizon is needed and possibly twice as long as the HYSYS MPC can handle. This
will require a lot of computational power and specialised software. Typically, a spe-
cialised MPC program is developed for a process and has a user interface with a limited
amount of settings available for the process operator and it would be operated as a black
box. The added complexity reduces the operator’s ability to identify problematic control
behaviour.
Any linear MPC needs service regularly in order to maintain model accuracy due to
worn control valves, reboiler scaling or other slow process changes. If the plant needs to
be offline during service it will be a considerably large expense.
==PAGE:96==
84
4 Advanced control
4.5
Supervisory control final remarks
With the less than ideal MPC implementations, it will not be fair to compare the
two supervisory controllers. The simple PID based D1D2R1R2 controller has a lot of
advantages compared to the current MPC, but this is mainly due to the limitations
found in the HYSYS MPC.
A case was discovered when experimenting with the supervisory control tuning. The
process can be disturbed when the product D1 flowrate is reduced to a point of no
return. A large reduction upsets the overall mass balance of the process and gave a
severe pressure increase that the stabilising control layer could not recover from and
manual actions were taken.
Such a case may also happen in a real plant for large
process disturbances and that is why operators are still required in the control room.
Implementation of any conceptual control strategy on a real system requires re-tuning
and re-evaluation. The test conditions set up in this report may not have revealed any
serious flaws, but they will quickly present themselves in the real world. For example,
the only impurity that was considered was ethanol and from the literature review in
chapter 2, a lot of other impurities are expected in crude methanol. Including impurities
like higher alcohols, acetone or other hydrocarbons in the process simulation will not
change the stabilising or supervising control layers but will require the process to be
re-optimised and the controllers re-tuned. The transition from academic project to an
industrial controller may be accomplished by testing the system using real dynamic plant
data from an industrial partner.
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
It was found that a steady-state model could be used as a starting point for setting
up dynamic simulations of the novel industrial distillation column configuration. This
was done in Aspen HYSYS which was found to be a suiting simulation software with
dynamic capabilities. Implementing a simple stabilising control layer consisting of level-
, pressure- and flow-controllers made it possible to operate the columns at a desired
operating point. The operating point was selected to match that of an existing validated
steady state simulation of the same process. Minor differences between the two models
were observed, and it was necessary to increase the combined reboiler duty by 1 MW to
validate the dynamic model.
The procedure of developing advanced supervisory controllers involved a systematic
system analysis of the distillation column configuration that revealed useful dynamic
behaviour. Step tests were carried out for each manipulated variable candidate and the
response was modelled by a first order plus time delay (FOPTD) transfer function. Most
of the measured concentrations exhibited non-linear behaviour and the linear FOPTD
transfer functions only had limited model accuracy. The linear model then served as
guide for developing two different supervisory control structure candidates.
The first supervisory control layer, D1D2R1R2, was based on simple proportional,
integral and differential (PID) control loops. Two composition controllers maintained
the product ethanol composition by adjusting the flow-controller setpoints while two
economic controllers maintained the recovery rate by adjusting the reboiler duties. The
performance was excellent for the synthetic disturbance that was implemented and by
operating the distillation columns closer to the product specifications a total of 700.5
kW reboiler duty was saved compared to the original operating point. The performance
of the controller cannot be guaranteed to work in a real industrial plant because it was
not tested and tuned using real dynamic industrial disturbance data.
The second supervisory control layer was the model predictive control (MPC). In
principle, the MPC should perform excellent on a slow and coupled system like the
==PAGE:98==
86
5 Conclusion
novel methanol distillation column configuration but implementation in HYSYS was
found to be sub-optimal. This was in-part due to the limited features of the HYSYS
MPC but also due to the model accuracy where only a linear model was available. The
MPC supervisory control approach cannot be ruled out as a viable control candidate,
but will require at least the ability to weigh each controlled variable individually and
constraining the manipulated variables.
This thesis has proven that advanced control strategies can successfully stabilise and
optimise the novel industrial distillation column configuration with the ability to operate
at high purity and high recovery rates.
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX A
MATLAB Programs
A.1
dynstartstop.m
This MATLAB program interacts with Aspen HYSYS to start and stop process simu-
lations.
1 %% Program for starting and stopping a HYSYS simulation
2 % Niels Sæderup Halager
3 % Master Student
4 % DTU 2020
5 clc
6 clear
7 % MATLAB -HYSYS CONNECTION
8 Hysys=actxserver('Hysys.Application.V11.0'); %COM Technology
9 [stat,mess]=fileattrib; %getting actual folder name
10 simcase = Hysys.SimulationCases.Open([mess.Name '\HFstartstop.hsc']); %
Opening HYSYS Simulation (Distill_Example.hsc)
11 simcase.invoke('Activate'); %Opening HYSYS Simulation (Distill_Example.hsc
)
12 %
13 fs=simcase.get('flowsheet'); %accessing to flowsheet
14 op=fs.get('Operations'); %accessing to simulated operations (e.g
Distillation column)
15 ms=fs.get('MaterialStreams'); %accessing to simulated material streams
16 ns=fs.get('EnergyStreams'); % Energy streams
17 sheet = op.Item('Controllers'); %Spreadsheets (e.g "Sheet_1")
18 HySolver = simcase.Solver; %Hysys can solve? De/Activating the solver
19 % Get values
20 % Get all streams stored in a vector
21 % Mass flow t/h
22 kgs2th=60*60/1000;
23 m=zeros(ms.Count ,7);
24 for i=1:ms.Count
==PAGE:100==
88
A MATLAB Programs
25
m(i,1)=get(ms,'Item',ms.Names{i}).MassFlowValue*kgs2th; % mass flow t/
h
26
m(i,1)=ms.Item(ms.Names{i}).MassFlowValue*kgs2th; % mass flow t/h
27
m(i,2)=get(ms,'Item',ms.Names{i}).TemperatureValue;
28
m(i,3)=get(ms,'Item',ms.Names{i}).PressureValue;
29
m(i,4:7)=get(ms,'Item',ms.Names{i}).ComponentMassFractionValue; %
composition w/w
30 end
31
32 % c = [OP, PV, SP]
33 controllers=[10,12,14,15,16,18,19,20,21,22];
34 sel=ones(length(controllers),1);
35 sel([1,2,9,10])=kgs2th;
36 c=zeros(length(controllers),3);
37 for i=1:length(controllers)
38
c(i,1)=get(op,'Item',op.Names{controllers(i)}).OPValue;
39
c(i,2)=get(op,'Item',op.Names{controllers(i)}).PVValue*sel(i);
40
c(i,3)=get(op,'Item',op.Names{controllers(i)}).SPValue*sel(i);
41 end
42 % e = [C1 R1 R2 C2]
43 % show available commands get(get(ns,'Item',ns.Names{1}))
44 e=zeros(ns.Count ,1);
45 for i=1:ns.Count
46
e(i)=get(ns,'Item',ns.Names{i}).HeatFlowValue;
47 end
48 % Combined energy
49 e(2)+e(3);
50
51 % Integrator
52 % Set stop time empty
53 tic
54 time=0;
55 for i=1%1:100
56
SetStopTime(HySolver.Integrator ,time+i*10*60*100);
57
Continue(HySolver.Integrator);
58
while GetTime(HySolver.Integrator)<time+i*10*60*100
59
end
60 end
61 toc
appendices/dynstartstop.m.
==PAGE:101==
A.2 Fit.m
89
A.2
Fit.m
This MATLAB program fits transfer functions from step response data.
1 %% Load
2 clc
3 clear
4 close all
5 T1 = readtable('C:\Users\2\Dropbox\DTU\9 Semester\Kandidat\MK2\Steps\F2\
redo\p05.csv', 'HeaderLines',11);%+5%
6 T2 = readtable('C:\Users\2\Dropbox\DTU\9 Semester\Kandidat\MK2\Steps\F2\
redo\p10.csv', 'HeaderLines',11); %+10%
7 T3 = readtable('C:\Users\2\Dropbox\DTU\9 Semester\Kandidat\MK2\Steps\F2\
redo\p15.csv', 'HeaderLines',11); %+15%
8 T4 = readtable('C:\Users\2\Dropbox\DTU\9 Semester\Kandidat\MK2\Steps\F2\
redo\m05.csv', 'HeaderLines',11);%-5%
9 T5 = readtable('C:\Users\2\Dropbox\DTU\9 Semester\Kandidat\MK2\Steps\F2\
redo\m10.csv', 'HeaderLines',11);%-10%
10 T6 = readtable('C:\Users\2\Dropbox\DTU\9 Semester\Kandidat\MK2\Steps\F2\
redo\m15.csv', 'HeaderLines',11);%-15%
11 A = table2array(T1(:,1:13));B = table2array(T2(:,1:13));
12 C = table2array(T3(:,1:13));D = table2array(T4(:,1:13));
13 E = table2array(T5(:,1:13));F = table2array(T6(:,1:13));
14 clear T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6
15 %% Allignment
16 initialv=A(1,13);
17 initial=A(1,:);
18 nms(1)=A(end,13)/A(1,13)*10-10;nms(2)=B(end,13)/A(1,13)*10-10;
19 nms(3)=C(end,13)/A(1,13)*10-10;nms(4)=D(end,13)/A(1,13)*10-10;
20 nms(5)=E(end,13)/A(1,13)*10-10;nms(6)=F(end,13)/A(1,13)*10-10;
21 %Plus one at 1
22 A = A(round(A(:,13),2)~=initialv ,1:12);
23 B = B(round(B(:,13),2)~=initialv ,1:12);
24 C = C(round(C(:,13),2)~=initialv ,1:12);
25 D = D(round(D(:,13),2)~=initialv ,1:12);
26 E = E(round(E(:,13),2)~=initialv ,1:12);
27 F = F(round(F(:,13),2)~=initialv ,1:12);
28 A = [[A(1,1)-60,initial(2:12)]' A']';
29 B = [[B(1,1)-60,initial(2:12)]' B']';
30 C = [[C(1,1)-60,initial(2:12)]' C']';
31 D = [[D(1,1)-60,initial(2:12)]' D']';
==PAGE:102==
90
A MATLAB Programs
32 E = [[E(1,1)-60,initial(2:12)]' E']';
33 F = [[F(1,1)-60,initial(2:12)]' F']';
34 %% Cut to length
35 cut = min([size(A,1) size(B,1) size(C,1) size(D,1) size(E,1) size(F,1)]);
36 a(:,:,1) = A(1:cut,:);a(:,:,2) = B(1:cut,:);
37 a(:,:,3) = C(1:cut,:);a(:,:,4) = D(1:cut,:);
38 a(:,:,5) = E(1:cut,:);a(:,:,6) = F(1:cut,:);
39 clear A B C D E F cut
40 t = a(:,1,1)-a(1,1,1);
41 %% Fitting time visual of F2
42 tits={'','B2','S2','D2','D1','F1','B1','F2','D1 EtOH','B1 MeOH','B2 MeOH',
'D2 EtOH'};
43 legs={'+5%','+10%','+15%','-5%','-10%','-15%'};
44 ylabs([2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12])={'Mass flow (t/h)','Mass flow (t/h)',...
45
'Mass flow (t/h)','Mass flow (t/h)','Mass flow (t/h)',...
46
'Composition (PPM w/w)','Composition (PPM w/w)',...
47
'Composition (PPM w/w)','Composition (PPM w/w)'};
48
49 %Time slot
50 times{12} = 0;
51 for i=1:12
52
times{i}=size(a,1)-3;
53 end
54 ppm=[1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 10^6 10^6 10^6 10^6];
55 for sel=2:12
56 figure(sel)
57 for i=1:size(a,3)
58
plot(t(times{sel})/60/60,ppm(sel)*((a(times{sel},sel,i))-(a(1,sel,i)))
,'Linewidth',2)
59
hold on
60 end
61 hold off
62 legend(legs,'FontSize',12,'location','best')
63 xlabel('Time (h)','FontSize',16)
64 ylabel(ylabs{sel},'FontSize',16)
65 title(tits{sel},'FontSize',20)
66 set(gca,'FontSize',12)
67 hold off
68 end
69 % Normalised
==PAGE:103==
A.2 Fit.m
91
70 for sel=2:12
71 figure(sel)
72 for i=1:size(a,3)
73
plot(t(times{sel})/60/60,ppm(sel)*((a(times{sel},sel,i))-(a(1,sel,i)))
/(nms(i)),'Linewidth',2)
74
hold on
75 end
76 hold off
77 legend(legs,'FontSize',12,'location','best')
78 xlabel('Time (h)','FontSize',16)
79 ylabel(ylabs{sel},'FontSize',16)
80 title(tits{sel},'FontSize',20)
81 set(gca,'FontSize',12)
82 hold off
83 end
84
85 for sel=[9,10,11,12]
86 figure(sel)
87 for i=1:size(a,3)
88
plot(t(times{sel})/60/60,(log(a(times{sel},sel,i))-log(a(1,sel,i)))/(
nms(i)),'Linewidth',2)
89
hold on
90 end
91 hold off
92 legend(legs,'FontSize',12,'location','best')
93 xlabel('Time (h)','FontSize',16)
94 ylabel('Normalised','FontSize',16)
95 title(tits{sel},'FontSize',20)
96 set(gca,'FontSize',12)
97 hold off
98 end
99
100 % Further investigation Selected responses
101 steps{12}=0;
102 for i=1:12
103
steps{i}=1:6;
104 end
105 %% TF solver
106 clc
107 options = optimset('Display','off','MaxIter',5000,'MaxFunEvals',5000);
==PAGE:104==
92
A MATLAB Programs
108 % time
109 TF=zeros(12,3);
110
111 % F2 Example
112 TFsel=8;
113 index=1;
114 for L=steps{TFsel}
115
par.Time=t(times{TFsel});%select time
116
par.EXP=((a(times{TFsel},TFsel,L))-a(1,TFsel,L))/(nms(L));
117
%par.kH=1+0*nms(L)/100*a(1,TFsel,L); %Step normalisation
118
par.kH=nms(2)/10*a(1,8,L); %Step normalisation
119
ini=[1,1,750];%guess
120
% [k theta tau]
121
[zSol,fval]=fminsearch(@(x)tfsolver(x,par),ini,options);
122
tfs(:,index)=zSol;
123
index=index+1;
124 end
125 TF(TFsel ,:) = tfs(:,5);
126 clear tfs
127 %% Test site
128 figure(TFsel)
129 switch TFsel
130
case {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8}
131
for i=steps{TFsel}
132
plot(t(times{TFsel})/60/60,((a(times{TFsel},TFsel,i)-a(1,TFsel
,i))/nms(i)),'Linewidth',2)
133
hold on
134
end
135
tfp=nms(2)/10*a(1,8,L)*TF(TFsel ,1)*(1-exp(-(t(times{TFsel})-TF(
TFsel ,2))/TF(TFsel ,3)));
136
if TF(TFsel ,1)<0
137
tfp(tfp>0)=0;
138
else
139
tfp(tfp<0)=0;
140
end
141
plot(t(times{TFsel})/60/60,tfp,'r--','Linewidth',2)
142
case {9,10,11,12}
143
for i=steps{TFsel}
144
plot(t(times{TFsel})/60/60,((log(a(times{TFsel},TFsel,i))-log(
a(1,TFsel,i)))/nms(i)),'Linewidth',2)
==PAGE:105==
A.3 tfsolver.m
93
145
hold on
146
end
147
tfp=nms(2)/10*a(1,8,L)*TF(TFsel ,1)*(1-exp(-(t(times{TFsel})-TF(
TFsel ,2))/TF(TFsel ,3)));
148
if TF(TFsel ,1)<0
149
tfp(tfp>0)=0;
150
else
151
tfp(tfp<0)=0;
152
end
153
plot(t(times{TFsel})/60/60,tfp,'r--','Linewidth',2)
154 end
155 leggd=legs(steps{TFsel});
156 leggd{(length(leggd)+1)}='TRF';
157 legend(leggd,'location','best','FontSize',12)
158 title(tits{TFsel},'FontSize',20)
159 xlabel('Time (h)','FontSize',16)
160 ylabel(ylabs(TFsel),'FontSize',16)
161 set(gca,'FontSize',12)
162 hold off
appendices/Fit.m.
A.3
tfsolver.m
This MATLAB program is the least squres problem used when fitting transfer functions
from step response data.
1 function j=tfsolver(x,par)
2 % x = [k theta tau]
3 k =
x(1);
4 theta= x(2);
5 tau=x(3);
6 tf=par.kH*k*(1-exp(-(par.Time-theta)/tau));
7 if k<0
8
tf(tf>0)=0;
9 else
10
tf(tf<0)=0;
11 end
12 j=(tf-par.EXP).^2;
==PAGE:106==
94
A MATLAB Programs
13 if theta <0
14
j=j*10^10;
15 end
16 j=sum(j+j.^2)*10^3;
appendices/tfsolver.m.
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX B
Transfer functions
This appendix contains all the FOPTD transfer functions found from step experiments.
F2
GB2(s) = 1.004 e−683.4s
593.4s + 1
(B.1)
GB1(s) = −1.002 e−1065s
851.4s + 1
(B.2)
GF2(s) =
1.000
444.6s + 1
(B.3)
GD1EtOH(s) = 1.948 × 10−2 e−1.333 × 105s
1.968 × 105s + 1
(B.4)
GB1MeOH(s) =
−0.2338
2.696 × 104s + 1
(B.5)
GB2MeOH(s) = 2.202 e−979.1s
626.3s + 1
(B.6)
GD2EtOH(s) = 0.4371 e−1.019 × 105s
1.329 × 105s + 1
(B.7)
GS1EtOH(s) = −0.1155 e−688.7s
1.0728 × 104s + 1
(B.8)
GS1MeOH(s) =
−0.1104
3.470 × 104s + 1
(B.9)
R1
GD1EtOH(s) =
−0.2361
2.178 × 105s + 1
(B.10)
GD2EtOH(s) =
1.754 × 10−2
1.762 × 10−5s + 1
(B.11)
R2
GD1EtOH(s) = −0.2856 e−1591s
1.204 × 105s + 1
(B.12)
gB2MeOH(s) = 2.450 e−2275s
7296s + 1
(B.13)
GD2EtOH(s) =
−5.970
6.090 × 104s + 1
(B.14)
==PAGE:108==
96
B Transfer functions
S2
GB2(s) =
−0.9961
7.220 × 103s + 1
(B.15)
GS2(s) =
0.9952
6.850 × 103s + 1
(B.16)
GD1ln(EtOH)(s) = 3.141 × 10−3 e−7.495 × 104s
1.462 × 105s + 1
(B.17)
GB2ln(MeOH)(s) = −2.467 e−447.2s
7.916 × 103s + 1
(B.18)
GD2ln(EtOH)(s) = 7.086 × 10−2 e−5.981 × 104s
9.984 × 104s + 1
(B.19)
GS2ln(EtOH)(s) = −0.2599 e−1111s
5.090 × 103s + 1
(B.20)
GS2H2O(s) = 3.859 × 10−2 e−413.2s
8.289 × 103s + 1
(B.21)
GS2MeOH(s) = −3.713 × 10−2 e−453.0s
8.307 × 103s + 1
(B.22)
D1
GD1(s) =
0.9983
464.9s + 1
(B.23)
GB1(s) = −0.9839 e−1.2166 × 104s
1620s + 1
(B.24)
GD1EtOH(s) =
0.5781
3.604 × 105s + 1
(B.25)
GB1MeOH(s) = −0.6793 e−1.106 × 104s
3.902 × 104s + 1
(B.26)
GD2EtOH(s) = 5.576 e−5.877 × 104s
1.896 × 105s + 1
(B.27)
GB2MeOH(s) = −2.379 e−1.616 × 104s
3.957 × 104s + 1
(B.28)
D2
GB2(s) =
−0.9996
1.200 × 104s + 1
(B.29)
GD2(s) =
0.9998
1.082 × 104s + 1
(B.30)
GB1(s) =
1.000 e−7538s
1.674 × 104s + 1
(B.31)
GB1MeOH(s) =
0.6779 e−3642s
5.898 × 104s + 1
(B.32)
==PAGE:109==
B Transfer functions
97
GB2MeOH(s) = −2.189 e−2859s
3218s + 1
(B.33)
GD2EtOH(s) =
6.366 e−7344s
3.337 × 104s + 1
(B.34)
==PAGE:110==
98
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
JL HUMPHREY and AF SEIBERT. “SEPARATION TECHNOLOGIES - AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR ENERGY SAVINGS”. In: Chemical Engineering Progress
88.3 (1992), pages 32–41. issn: 19450710, 03607275.
[2]
American Chemical Society. Molecule of the Week Archive Methanol March 11,
2013. Accessed 24-02-2020. url: https://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/
molecule-of-the-week/archive/m/methanol.html.
[3]
Jörg Ott et al. “Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry”. In: Methanol.
2012, pages 15–17. doi: 10.1002/14356007.a16_465.pub3.
[4]
European chemicals agency. Substance information - Methanol. Accessed 24-02-
2020. url: https://www.echa.europa.eu/web/guest/substance-information/-
/substanceinfo/100.000.599.
[5]
N.S. Shamsul, S.K. Kamarudin, N.A. Rahman, and N.T. Kofli. “An overview
on the production of bio-methanol as potential renewable energy”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 33 (2014), pages 578–588. issn: 1364-0321. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.02.024.
[6]
K.J. Ptasinski, C. Hamelinck, and P.J.A.M. Kerkhof. “Exergy analysis of methanol
from the sewage sludge process”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 43.9
(2002), pages 1445–1457. issn: 0196-8904. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0196-8904(02)00027-4.
[7]
Methanol Institute. Methanol Price and Supply/Demand. Visited 05-02-2020. url:
https://www.methanol.org/methanol-price-supply-demand/.
[8]
Research and Markets. Global Methanol Market 2019-2027. Visited 05-02-2020.
url: https : / / www . researchandmarkets . com / reports / 4791833 / global -
methanol-market-2019-2027.
==PAGE:112==
100
Bibliography
[9]
“The worldwide methanol market to 2027: The increasing application of methanol
as a marine fuel spurs lucrative opportunities”. In: Focus on Catalysts 2019.9
(2019), page 3. issn: 1351-4180. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.focat.
2019.08.011.
[10]
Ming Liu, Chen Li, Eng Kiong Koh, Zhiqian Ang, and Jasmine Siu Lee Lam. “Is
methanol a future marine fuel for shipping?” In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 1357 (2019), page 012014. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1357/1/012014.
[11]
Jianguo Xu and Gilbert F Froment. “Methane steam reforming, methanation and
water‐gas shift: I. Intrinsic kinetics”. In: AIChE Journal 35.1 (1989), pages 88–96.
issn: 1547-5905. doi: 10.1002/aic.690350109.
[12]
Mustafa Vohra, Jagdish Manwar, Rahul Manmode, Satish Padgilwar, and Sanjay
Patil. “Bioethanol production: Feedstock and current technologies”. In: Journal of
Environmental Chemical Engineering 2.1 (2014), pages 573–584. issn: 2213-3437.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2013.10.013.
[13]
Sjaak van Loo and Jaap Koppejan. The Handbook of Biomasss Combustion &
Co-firing. Earthscan, 2008. isbn: 978-1-84407-249-1.
[14]
H Purnama, T Ressler, R.E Jentoft, H Soerijanto, R Schlögl, and R Schomäcker.
“CO formation/selectivity for steam reforming of methanol with a commercial
CuO/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst”. In: Applied Catalysis A: General 259.1 (2004), pages 83–
94. issn: 0926-860X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apcata.2003.09.013.
[15]
Timo Blumberg, Tatiana Morosuk, and George Tsatsaronis. “Exergy-based evalu-
ation of methanol production from natural gas with CO2 utilization”. In: Energy
141 (2017), pages 2528–2539. issn: 0360-5442. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.energy.2017.06.140.
[16]
”Isuru A. Udugama, Cristoph Bayer, Robert Kirkpatrick, Wei Yu, Krist V. Ger-
naey, and Brent R. Young”. “Separation of middle boiling trace compounds by
distillation: An investigation of practical implications of complex column arrange-
ments on an industrial distillation case study”. In: (2020).
[17]
MA ROSEN and DS SCOTT. “ENERGY AND EXERGY ANALYSES OF A
PRODUCTION PROCESS FOR METHANOL FROM NATURAL-GAS”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Hydrogen Energy 13.10 (1988), pages 617–623. issn: 18793487,
03603199. doi: 10.1016/0360-3199(88)90010-9.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
101
[18]
D. Seddon. “12 - Methanol and dimethyl ether (DME) production from synthe-
sis gas”. In: Advances in Clean Hydrocarbon Fuel Processing. Edited by M. Rashid
Khan. Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy. Woodhead Publishing, 2011, pages 363–
386. isbn: 978-1-84569-727-3. doi: https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857093783.
4.363.
[19]
Zauba Technologies Private. India’s largest research platform for international
trade. Grade AA searched 11-02-2020 and showed 242 Import Shipment Records.
url: https://www.zauba.com/import-methanol-aa-hs-code.html.
[20]
Wh-Hsun Cheng and Harold H. Kung. METHANOL PRODUCTION AND USE.
1st edition. CRC Press, 1994. isbn: 0824792238.
[21]
Isuru A. Udugama, Florian Wolfensetter, Robert Kirkpatrick, Wei Yu, and Brent
R. Young. “A comparison of a novel robust decentralised control stradegy and
MPC for industrial high purity, high recovery, mulitcomponent distillation.” In:
ISA Transactions 69 (2017), pages 222–233. doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2017.04.
008.
[22]
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health. Development of initial REACH exposure
scenarios for methanol. Helsinki 2008. Translated 2009. Funded by the Finnish
Work Environment Fund.
[23]
I. Perry, Robert H., Don W. Green, and James O. Maloney. Perry’s Chemical
Engineers’ Handbook. 7th edition. McGraw-Hill, 1997. isbn: 0-07-049841-5.
[24]
A.P. Douglas and A.F.A. Hoadley. “A process integration approach to the design
of the two- and three-column methanol distillation schemes”. In: Applied Thermal
Engineering 26.4 (2006), pages 338–349. issn: 1359-4311. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2005.07.001.
[25]
Koch-Glitsch. Applications - Methanol. Accessed 25-02-2020. url: https://koch-
glitsch.com/Applications/Methanol?application=Methanoll.
[26]
Methanex. About us. Accessed 27-03-2020. url: https://www.methanex.com/
about-us.
[27]
Methanex. New Zealand. Accessed 27-03-2020. url: https://www.methanex.
com/location/new-zealand/about-methanex-new-zealand.
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography
[28]
Zaza Sapiee. FUNCTIONS & DESIGN OF DISTILLATION TOWERS. Accessed
27-03-2020. url: https://prezi.com/ozhi8j_fadxt/methanex-distillation-
column/.
[29]
Methanex Australia Pty Ltd. Public Environmental Review. Accessed 27-03-2020.
2002. url: http : / / www . epa . wa . gov . au / sites / default / files / PER _
documentation/A1405_R1077_PER%20main%20document%20-%20Part%201.pdf.
[30]
Juntao Zhang, Shengrong Liang, and Xiao Feng. “A novel multi-effect methanol
distillation process”. In: Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensifi-
cation 49.10 (2010), pages 1031–1037. issn: 0255-2701. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cep.2010.07.003.
[31]
Emerson Automation Experts. Optimizing Distillation for Increased Methanol Ca-
pacity. Accessed 28-02-2020. url: https://www.emersonautomationexperts.
com/2016/industry/chemical/increase- methanol- plant- capacity- by-
changing-how-distillation-is-operated/.
[32]
Dale E. Seborg, Thomas F. Edgar, Duncan A. Mellichamp, and Francis J. Doyle
III. Process Dynamics and Control. 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2008.
isbn: 9780470128671.
[33]
Isuru A. Udugama, Tajammal M. Munir, Rob Kirkpatrick, Brent R. Young, and
Wei Yu. “Advanced Dual Composition Control for High-purity Multi-component
Distillation Column”. In: ADCONIP 2014: 5th International Symposium on Ad-
vanced Control of Industrial Processes, Hiroshima, Japan (2014), pages 345–350.
url: https://researchspace.auckland.ac.nz/handle/2292/36470.
[34]
Isuru A. Udugama, Robert L. Kirkpatrick, Wei Yu, and Brent R. Young. “High
purity distillation column: Simulation and optimization”. In: 2013. url: https:
//researchspace.auckland.ac.nz/handle/2292/36468.
[35]
Michael A Kraller, Isuru A Udugama, Robert Kirkpatrick, Wei Yu, and Brent
R Young. “Side draw optimisation of a high‐purity, multi‐component distillation
column”. In: Asia‐Pacific Journal of Chemical Engineering 11.6 (2016), pages 958–
972. issn: 1932-2143. doi: 10.1002/apj.2030.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
103
[36]
Isuru A. Udugama, Seyed Soheil Mansouri, Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom, Michael A.
Taube, Alexander Maidl, and Brent Young. “Cost competitive “soft sensor” for
determining product recovery in industrial methanol”. In: Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers (2017). doi: 10.1109/MERCon.2017.7980450.
[37]
NPCS Board of Consultants & Engineers. Plantwide Dynamic Simulators in Chem-
ical Processing and Control. 1st edition. Asia Pacific Business Press Inc., 2010.
isbn: 9788178331430.
[38]
AspenTech. Aspen HYSYS. Accessed 04-04-2020. url: https://www.aspentech.
com/en/products/engineering/aspen-hysys.
[39]
Julian Straus and Sigurd Skogestad. “Minimizing the complexity of surrogate mod-
els for optimization”. In: 26th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process
Engineering. Volume 38. Computer Aided Chemical Engineering. Elsevier, 2016,
pages 289–294. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63428-3.50053-9.
[40]
William Luyben. Plantwide Dynamic Simulators in Chemical Processing and Con-
trol. 1st edition. CRC Press, 2002. isbn: 9780824708016.
[41]
Zhiyi Wu, Jesse Cole, Howard Fang, Meifang Qin, and Zhong He. “Revisiting
Catalyst Structure and Mechanism in Methanol Synthesis”. In: Journal of Advances
in Nanomaterials (March 2017). doi: 10.22606/jan.2017.21001.
[42]
Vladimiros Minasidis, Sigurd Skogestad, and Nitin Kaistha. “Simple Rules for Eco-
nomic Plantwide Control”. In: 12th International Symposium on Process Systems
Engineering and 25th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engi-
neering. Edited by Krist V. Gernaey, Jakob K. Huusom, and Rafiqul Gani. Vol-
ume 37. Computer Aided Chemical Engineering. Elsevier, 2015, pages 101–108.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63578-5.50013-X.
[43]
S. Skogestad and M. Morari. “LV-control of a High-purity Distillation Column”. In:
IFAC Proceedings Volumes 20.5, Part 8 (1987). 10th Triennial IFAC Congress on
Automatic Control - 1987 Volume VIII, Munich, Germany, 27-31 July, pages 387–
396. issn: 1474-6670. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-6670(17)55115-0.
[44]
Thomas Bisgaard, Sigurd Skogestad, Jakob Kjøbsted Huusom, and Jens Abildskov.
“Optimal Operation and Stabilising Control of the Concentric Heat-Integrated
Distillation Column”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 49.7 (2016). 11th IFAC Sympo-
sium on Dynamics and Control of Process SystemsIncluding Biosystems DYCOPS-
==PAGE:116==
104
Bibliography
CAB 2016, pages 747–752. issn: 2405-8963. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ifacol.2016.07.275. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2405896316304827.
