==PAGE:1==
Radiant ceiling combined with
diffuse ventilation
Thermal performance of reduced-scale
experiment
Julie Rostgaard Andersen, s123790
Kgs. Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Radiant ceiling combined with diffuse ventilation
- thermal performance of reduced-scale experiment
Danish title:
Køleloft med diffus ventilation
- termisk performance fra eksperimentelt skalaforsøg
Project type:
Master thesis
Field of study:
Architectural engineering - Energy and indoor climate
Credits:
35 ECTS
Language:
English
Author:
Julie Rostgaard Andersen
Ryparken 16, 1. Tv
2100 København Ø, Denmark
julierandersen91@gmail.com
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Academic supervisor:
Christian Anker Hviid
Associate professor
Department of Civil Engineering
cah@byg.dtu.dk
Co-supervisor:
Marie Rugholm Krusaa
Industrial PhD
Department of Civil Engineering
Saint Gobain Nordic
marrug@byg.dtu.dk
Keywords:
Reduced scale model experiment, hydronic radiant ceiling,
diffuse ventilation, similitude, heat transfer
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The
project is credited to 35 ECTS points. Experimental investigations was carried out in
test facilities in building 119 at DTU Byg.
The project is carried out with assistance from supervisor Christian Anker Hviid who
has assisted with several discussions on experimental set up, how to improve and anal-
yses of the output. Marie Rugholm Krusaa, writing her PhD in cooperation with Saint
Gobain, investigating the same ceiling has been a great support and sparring partner
in the last month of the thesis. Their knowledge and engagement to this project has
helped and supported the process and I have learned a lot from them during this project.
A great thanks to all the very service minded, helpful and welcoming employees
in the laboratory of building 119. The technical issues and challenges I couldn’t have
overcome without their expertise and willingness to help.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study presents experimental investigation of a ventilation proposal to improve en-
ergy use and thermal indoor quality while keeping indoor air quality, acoustics and
build ability in mind. The investigation is of a hydronic radiant ceiling combined with
diffuse ventilation executed experimentally in a reduced scale model. The prototype
tested is an 60cm x 60cm ceiling plate made of gypsum, aluminium fin and PEX-pipes.
Experiments are performed with the purpose of investigating the thermal performance
of the prototype for both cooling and heating scenarios. The tested parameters were
ventilation rate, water supply temperature and internal generated heat. The resulting
heat transfer coefficients have been compared to coefficients from literature. The main
outputs analyzed are heat transfer coefficients and heat flux from ventilation and water
flow.
Results show a great potential of exploiting both sides of the radiant ceiling to condition
the space. Compared to a scenario with no combination of ventilation the cases with
ventilation increase the thermal performance of the system significantly and proves the
expectations of the ceiling system.
Results of this study show great potential for further studies of the system.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Dette studie viser en eksperimental undersøgelse et muligt ventilations system tiltænkt
at forbedre energy udnyttelse og termisk indeklima, samtidig med at imødekomme krav
til indeklima, akustik og let installering. Undersøgelsen er af et vandbaseret strålingsloft
kombineret med diffus ventilation eksperimentalt udført i en reduceret skala model.
Prototypen, der er testet, er en 60 cm x 60 cm loftplade består af en gipsplade, alu-
miniumplade og PEX-rør. Forsøgene er lavet med det formål at undersøge prototypens
termiske ydeevne ved både afkølings- og opvarmnings scenarier. De testede parametre
har været ventilationsraten, vandtemperatur og den interne varmelast. Resultatet af
varmeoverførsels koefficienterne er sammenlignet med koefficienter angivet i litteraturen.
De hovedsagelige resultater analyseret er varmeoverførsels koefficienterne og varmeover-
førsel fra ventilationen og vandgennemstrømningen.
Resultaterne viser et stort potentiale ved at udnytte begge sider af det strålingsloftet
til at konditionere rummet. Sammenlignet med et scenarie uden ventilation, så viser
forsøgene med tilsat ventilation en betydelig forøgelse af den termiske ydeevne systemet
og indfrier forventningerne til loftsystemet.
Resultaterne af dette studie viser at der er potentiale for yderligere undersøgelser af
loftspanelet.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Desccription
Unit
Lc
Characteristic length
m
ta
Air temperature
◦C
top
Operative temperature
◦C
tmrt
Mean radiant temperature
◦C
tvent
Temperature of ventilation air at inlet or outlet
◦C
∆Tvent
Temperature difference between supply and return ventilation
◦C
twater
Temperature of water at inlet or outlet
◦C
∆Twater
Temperature difference between supply and return water
◦C
ts
Surface temperature
◦C
te
Air temperature of surroundings
◦C
troom
Air temperature in the room below ceiling panel
◦C
tplenum
Air temperature in the plenum above ceiling panel
◦C
ACH
Air change per hour
h−1
qv
Ventilaion rate
l/s
qw
Water flow rate
kg/s
Qvent
Effect from ventilation
W or W/m2
Qwater
Effect from water
W or W/m2
Qtransfer
Effect from transmission of envelope
W or W/m2
Qheater
Effect from heating cable (internal generated heat)
W or W/m2
Qtot/Qdev
Total energy balance, when not 0W then it represents the heat transfer deviation
W or W/m2
HTCtot
Total heat transfer coefficient including radiant and convective heat transfer
W/m2K
Abreviaton
Description
TES
Thermal energy storage
TABS
Thermally activated building systems
PCM
Phase change material
HCVA
Heating, cooling, ventilation and acoustic system
HTC
Heat transfer coefficient
ACH
Air change per hour
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Resumé
iii
Nomenclature
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
State of the art
3
2.1
Thermal energy storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Thermal ceiling systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Ventilation principles in combination with thermal ceiling . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Hypotheses
8
4
Theory
9
4.1
Thermal environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Heat transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Similitude of reduced scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Experimental design
21
5.1
Reference office . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Box design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Considerations and improvements
37
6.1
Airflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Heat loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Water temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Result analysis and discussion
42
7.1
Cooling scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
7.2
Heating scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.3
Sources of errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8
Conclusion
55
8.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Bibliography
57
A Classifications for ventilation
60
B Test scenarios
61
C Temperature distribution
62
C.1 Cooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
C.2 Heating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
C.3 Cooling tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
D Accuracy of all measurements
68
E Output from test of pitotpipe measurements
71
F Outputs of experiments
72
F.1
Cooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
F.2
Heating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
G Deviation of ventilation rate measures
107
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Buildings sector and building construction sector have a 36% share of the global energy
consumption and a 40% share of the total CO2 emissions [1]. The demand for energy in
buildings will only increase over time. Due to the awareness of climate change european
commission has made a set of binding legislation to cut 20% in greenhouse gasses, base
20% of EU energy on renewables and to improve the energy efficiency by 20% [2]. This
legislation leads to strict demands for the energy use in new buildings and gives directions
to develop new innovative solutions for how to build and how to enable an integration
of installation systems in the buildings.
It has by numerous studies shown that indoor environment affects the health of
occupants in a building and thereby requirements for the indoor requirements has become
more strict. Others of what is desired to achieve are sustainable solutions that meet the
green transition in Denmark and the rest of the world and economically advantageous
solutions. An advantage for both the economy and sustainability is to use prefabricated
units.
Buildings today have strict requirements concerning energy consumption and sus-
tainability and it has therefore been a necessity to innovate how we construct a house
and how we integrate and design installations to meet these requirements. Furthermore,
the demands for indoor climate have also increased, making the challenge of the green
transition greater. Many solutions are therefore being experimented with on how it is
possible to meet both indoor climate, energy consumption and economy requirements.
There is a high focus of the energy consumption but the exergy destruction should be
concerned to the same extend, as exergy are the irreversable energy and therefore lost
energy in the system.
One proposal on how the requirements can be met is to produce module ceilings
using water-borne cooling and heating and diffuse ventilation. Green energy sources
and acoustic ceiling panels can minimize the need for high energy consumption and
increase the indoor comfort. The concepts has potentials for low temperature heating
and high temperature cooling, which decreases the exergy in the system. Radiant ceiling
as described is the proposal investigated in this paper.
1.1
Report structure
This report have 6 parts:
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Report structure
2
1. State of art, introducing relevant solutions for cooling, heating and energy use,
chapter 2
2. Relevant theory, chapter 3
3. Method, chapter 4
4. Thoughts and improvements of the experimental design, chapter 5
5. Results, analysis and discussion, chapter 6
6. Conclusion with recommendations for further investigation, chapter 7
1.1.1
Impacts from lockdown due to Corona virus
Due to corona DTU and all facilities was locked down. It caused also a lock down of
laboratories in which experiments for this paper was executed. All experiments testing
the prototype was executed before lockdown, but reference cases was not yet tested.
Some information, photos and tests of equipment was not yet done neither. What could
be found in a previous report by Ida Mikkelsen [3], is added and referred to as her result
and work.
In experimental design, it is still described how the experiments was planned to be
executed.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
State of the art
Heating and cooling of a building can be executed in lots of different ways with different
technologies and with different energy resources. Choosing a solution depends on the use
of the building, whether it is a new or an old building, the local climate and the economy.
There are pros and cons for all solutions but some definitely have more suitable qualities
than others. The following is a research on which existing technologies for ventilation,
heating and cooling and energy use is relevant in the research for improvements of all
above.
2.1
Thermal energy storage
Thermal Energy Storage, typically referred to as TES, are systems in which there have
been taken advantages of different materials and techniques capability to store energy
for later use. It is possible to use the techniques for both long term and short term,
heating and cooling of water and for air conditioning [4]. The TES systems are highly
relevant for the future as we have legislations leading us to a much greater use of renew-
able energy. Renewable energy though often causes peaks of energy supply when it is
not needed and decrease of energy supply when the energy is most needed and mostly
it is not a steady resource. Solar energy only occurs during the day, whereas the need
for heating often is at night and evening time and also much more solar energy can be
obtained during summertime, but it is more needed during winter. To use renewable
energy in a sustainable, economical, effecient and environment friendly way it is neces-
sary to make use of thermal energy storage [4]. TES systems have a huge potential in
the worldwide challenge to become more sustainable.
Several system has shown to have huge potential including Thermo Active Building Sys-
tems (TABS), hotwater storage tank, underground thermal energy storage and Phase
Change Materials (PCM). TABS and PCM are systems integrated.
TABS
TABS are materials used to heat and cool by taken advantages of the thermal capacity
of the material. The material can be part of ceilings, floors or walls.
PCM
The most simple and common system for energy storage is using sensible heat, but using
a latent system will require much less storage capacity and smaller temperature differ-
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Thermal ceiling systems
4
ences between the stored temperature and the supply temperature [5]. PCM systems
uses the latent heat system and have attracted great interest because of its benefits. The
systems can be based on either organic compounds or inorganic compounds, each has
the opposite pros and cons, and both still need adjustments to the system to prove real
competitive properties [5].
2.2
Thermal ceiling systems
Thermal ceiling systems are systems in which a building heat and cool the indoor en-
vironment exclusively or partially through the ceiling. An investigation from Japan [6]
showed very positive response to radiant ceiling. The results revealed less stratification
and prove to perform with low vertical temperature differences when heating compared
to common systems and obtain more comfort. Results were partly based on question-
naires. The results reveal that due to the radiant ceilings influence on the sensible heat,
the ventilation rate can be decreased. A decrease of 10% energy consumption has shown
for one example of the investigation. Because the air change can be decreased, the risk of
draught can be reduced as well. This specific investigation was done with hydronic ceil-
ings combined with forced convection, but there are different ways of designing thermal
ceilings.
Figure 2.1: Typical radiant cooling ceiling [7]
Heating and cooling surfaces may have a positive effect on the indoor air quality by
several perspectives. When heating and cooling by use of surfaces, the need for ventila-
tion might be less and therefore less dust will be transported to the room. If the heated
surface is in the floors, carpets can be unnecessary and it can prevent cold corners. Due
to higher surface temperatures mold can be avoided in many cases and the mean radiant
temperature causes a lower need for air temperature in the room which increases the
relative humidity and have a positive effect on the indoor air quality [8]. When using
thermal ceiling systems, it is possible to both emit and absorb heat from the same sur-
face. Attention must be paid to the dew point when cooling and for heating there must
be paid attention to radiant asymmetry, as people are sensitive to asymmetry by warm
ceilings and cold walls [8].
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Thermal ceiling systems
5
Thermal ceilings allow low temperature heating and high temperature cooling and en-
ables low exergy system.
2.2.1
TABS
TABS have shown to have a huge potential in the development of sustainable buildings.
It is a method that allows low use of energy without compromising the human comfort.
The system takes advantage of the thermal capacity in a material and uses this to store
energy.
In this way the building mass is a part of the heating and cooling system
and thereby the building itself has an active role in the heating and cooling system.
TABS have an embedded pipe system which allow water to run through to influence the
temperature [9].
Figure 2.2: typical TABS design [9]
Thermal energy storage can be used for both walls, floors and ceilings and TABS
is meant to be used for floors or ceilings. The concept of TABS is basically like the
hydronic radiant ceilings, but with energy storage included. Using TABS for ceilings
challenges the possibility for suspended ceilings and demands visible slabs which can
cause acoustical and architectural issues. Experimental investigation have shown that
TABS can improve the heat transfer coefficient from ceiling surface to room up to 16%
by increasing the ventilation rate, when mixing ventilation is used [10].
==PAGE:14==
2.3 Ventilation principles in combination with thermal ceiling
6
2.2.2
Hydronic radiant ceilings
Hydronic radiant ceilings are ceiling plates with integrated pipes of flowing water tem-
pering the ceiling plate to either emit or absorb heat from the room. Typically it is
installed in a suspended ceiling or with insulation above to avoid upward heat losses [8].
Figure 2.3: An example of a suspended hydronic radiant ceiling from Lindnder [11]
Hydronic radiant ceiling plate can be made of gypsum or metal and typically have
a fin to conduct the heat. Alternatively to this solution a capillary thermal ceiling have
smaller pipes installed and therefore a greater area of surface to impact with the same
water flow as for the typical hydronic radiant ceiling.
2.3
Ventilation principles in combination with
thermal ceiling
Often hydronic radiant ceilings are combined with some ventilation system due to the
requirements for indoor air quality, removal of latent heat and to avoid condensation at
the surface[8]
2.3.1
Mixing ventilation
Mixing ventilation is characterised by a high air velocity delivered outside of the occupied
zone and create fully mixed air in the occupied zone.
Mixing ventilation results in great thermal comfort in combination with cooled ceiling
[12]. Jeong and Mumma found that mixing ventilation can increase the cooling capacity
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Ventilation principles in combination with thermal ceiling
7
of a radiant cooling ceiling by 5-35%, however it require air velocities higher than 2m/s
for the mechanical cooling to have a great effect[13]. The thermal conditions depends
properly designed ventilation to ensure full mixing with no draft, the cooling panels
cover the entire ceiling and cooling load of the ceiling staying below 100 W/m2[12].
2.3.2
Displacement ventilation
Opposite of mixing ventilation, displacement ventilation deliver ventilation at low veloc-
ity directly the the occupied space at floor height. The concept is that fresh air forces
the older air in the room away, without mixing it.
Behne have made an investigation to compare displacement ventilation and mixing ven-
tilation in combination with radiant cooling ceilings. The founding of this survey was
that displacement ventilation and radiant cooling ceilings perform very good for low
cooling loads from ceilings and when the air quality is prioritised higher than thermal
comfort. If the cooling load from the ceiling becomes to high compared to the load
from the ventilation, it will create mixing ventilation and thereby the stratification and
purpose of the displacement ventilation will loose its effect[12].
2.3.3
Diffuse ventilation
Diffuse ventilation is the principle of a high air pressure room above a perforated ceiling,
allowing the ventilation to enter the room with low air velocities and high air changes.
When combining diffuse ventilation with radiant ceilings the high pressure room is cre-
ated by suspended ceilings and the radiant ceiling panels is the ceiling panels hanging.
This combination is what is refered to as HCVA - Heating, Cooling, Ventilation and
Acoustic system.
Recently researches have tested the effect of the space above the ceiling and opportuni-
ties to regain energy lost to the plenum. A study by Krusaa et al. showed promising
results of increased heat transfer to the plenum by 30-45% when ventilation is added to
the radiant ceiling.
Outputs from Onsberg and Eriksens investigation of full scale radiant ceiling substan-
tiate the above results. They found an improvement from only radiant ceiling to the
apply of diffuse ventilation to result in better performance by both cooling and heating.
Radiant ceiling alone showed heat exchange potential of 8.0 W/m2K for cooling and
6.7 W/m2K for heating. The apply of diffuse ventilation showed exchange potential of
9.3 W/m2K for cooling and 12.3 W/m2K for heating. Further a doubling of air change
from 1.2 h−1 to 2.4 h−1 results in 17% increased heat exchange and doubling again to
4.8 h−1 increases the heat exchange by 22%.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
Hypotheses
Heat transfers and heat transfer coefficients (HTC) provides knowledge of how well a
cooling and heating system performs. The thermal performance of diffuse ventilation
combined with a hydronic radiant ceiling is investigated by answering following hypothe-
ses.
1
Can an experimental reduced-scale model(test bed) represent a full-scale room in
terms of heat transfer?
2.a
Is it possible to experimentally verify that upward and downward HTC is increased
when combining radiant ceiling with diffuse ventilation?
2.b
Is it possible to experimentally quantify increasing HTC for both heating and cooling
scenarios?
2.c
Is it possible to map the dependency of HTC for temperature differences and airflow
rates?
8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
Theory found relevant for this paper are introduced. All of the introduced theory are
used either by direct use of equations or as a baseline for the choices made.
4.1
Thermal environment
The thermal environment includes among other factors temperatures, humidity, airspeed
and radiation. The thermal environment has an impact on both comfort for occupants
and the energy of a building. Relevant factors are introduced and those of them most
relevant for heat exchange are to be found in section 4.2.
4.1.1
Air temperature
The air temperature ta is the temperature of air in the occupied zone affected only by
convection.
4.1.2
Operative temperature
The operative temperature is the most frequently used parameter for temperature to
describe the thermal indoor climate. It is an expression of how the human body per-
ceive the temperatures. It covers the average temperature of air and the mean radiant
temperature. The operative temperature is calculated by eq. 4.1.
to = α · ta + (1 −α) · tmrt
(4.1)
to: Operative temperature
ta: Average air temperature
tmrt: Mean radiant temperature
Values for α are air velocity depended and can be found in table 4.1.
9
==PAGE:18==
4.1 Thermal environment
10
Table 4.1: α can be found as a function of air velocity.
If the average air speed is <0.2m/s and the temperature difference between the ta
and tmrt is <7◦C, the operative temperature is calculated as follows:
to = ta + tmrt
2
(4.2)
4.1.3
Ventilation rate
The ventilation rate has a high impact on the indoor air quality. Ventilation cleans the
air for emissions and can keep temperatures within acceptable ranges. Ventilation rates
can be calculated by limits of emissions and heat from equipment, occupants, materials
and outdoor weather, depending on the scenarie calculated.
The total ventilation rate, including emissions from the building and from occupants,
is calculated by following equation, [14].
qtot = n · qP + A · qB
(4.3)
qtot: total ventilation rate of the room [l/s]
n: Design value for the number of the persons in the room [-]
qP: ventilation rate for occupancy per person [l/s/pers.]
A: Room floor area [m2]
qB: Ventilation rate for emissions from building [l/s/m2]
Values for qP and qB is to be found in classification for ventilations rates from DS
15251[14].
Table 4.2: Basic required ventilation rates for diluting emissions from
people for different categories.
==PAGE:19==
4.2 Heat transfer
11
Table 4.3: The ventilation rates for the building emissions.
4.2
Heat transfer
Overall heat can be transferred in three different ways, by conduction, convection and
radiation. All three are described in the following including some more specific situations
of heat transfer due to their relevance for this study.
4.2.1
Conduction
Conduction is the heat exchange between materials without a transport of substance.
For one material in a closed system conduction can be described as the temperature
difference in the substance becoming zero as the temperature will find a balance. If
more layers of material are the case, for example as in a wall, conduction is the heat
transfer from warm to cold between the layers.
The heat transfer through the wall
can be calculated when the properties of each layer are known. The heatflow from a
material can be described very simple as a function of area, A[m2], and heat flow density,
qm[W/m2], eq. 4.4.
Φconduction = qm · A
(4.4)
The thermal conductivity, λ, of each material along with the thickness of the material
can desribe qm by following equations that builds on eq. 4.4.
Φconduction = qm · A = U · A · (Ti −Te)
(4.5)
Φconduction: The total heat transfer through materials [W]
qm: Heat transfer density [W/m2]
A: Area of the material [m2]
U: Heat transfer coefficient [W/m2 · K]
Ti: Indoor air temperature [◦C]
Te: Outdoor air temperature [◦C]
where,
U =
1
Rsi + ∑Rm + Rse
(4.6)
Rsi and Rse are the internal and external resistances measured in [m2 ˙K/W] and can
be found by table 4.4.
==PAGE:20==
4.2 Heat transfer
12
Table 4.4: Standard values for internal and external resistances.
Rm must be calculated as
Rm = d
λ
(4.7)
Rm: Thermal resistance of the homogeneous layer m2K/W
d: Thickness of the layer [m]
λ: Thermal conductivity of the layer [W/mK]
4.2.2
Convection
Heat transfer by convection occurs when energy is transferred by a fluids movement along
a material where there is a temperature difference between the fluid and the material.
In buildings convection occurs in water pipes and along all surfaces.
Two types of convection exists, forced convection and natural convection. Forced
convection happens when for example the wind or a pump forces movements of the air,
whereas natural convection is the movement that occurs by difference in temperatures.
Temperature differences in the fluid will cause density differences as well, which are the
reason for movement.
Whether it is natural or forced convection, it can be either laminar or turbulent
airflow. Laminar flow is when the molecules of the fluid flow parallel to the surface as
seen from figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Flow profile and boundary layer for laminar flow.
The fluid will have no flow where it is in contact with the surface and the further the
distance is from the surface the higher the velocity of the fluid becomes. At a point the
fluid reaches free flow and this distance is the boundary layer. When the velocity of the
==PAGE:21==
4.2 Heat transfer
13
fluid increase fluctuations slowly appears. The higher a velocity, the more fluctuations
appear and the laminar flow becomes turbulent. Turbulent flow still has a laminar sub
layer along the surface, see figure 4.2.
The heat transfer are generally higher for turbulent airflow due to a better mixed
fluid within the boundary layer.
Figure 4.2: Flow profile and boundary layer for turbulent flow.
Convectional heat transfer can be calculated by
Φ = A · hC · (θs −θe)
(4.8)
A: Area of the surface [m2]
hC: Heat transfer coefficient [W/m2K]
θs: Surface temperature [◦C]
θe: Temperature of the fluid in the free flow [◦C]
4.2.3
Radiation
Radiation is electromagnetic waves, but radiation in this study refers to thermal radia-
tion which is defined by wavelengths between 0.01 µm and 100 µm. Radiation transfers
energy between surfaces without a direct contact between the surfaces. It does not heat
up the air but it heats up the surfaces receiving the radiation in which the material of
that surface will heat up the air by convection. All material radiate heat and the effect
depends on its surface properties and temperature.
Radiation will by the receiving surface partly be arbsorbed, reflected and transmitted,
see figure 4.3.
==PAGE:22==
4.2 Heat transfer
14
Figure 4.3: Radiation reaching a surface.
When the temperatures of the surfaces and the room temperature ranges between
15◦C and 35◦C, the heat transfer coefficient is defined by several studies and standards
to be 5.5 W/m2K. By that assumption the simple equation ?? can be used to calculate
the total radiation from a surface.
Qtotalradiation = 5.5 · (top −ts)
(4.9)
Qtotalradiation: The total radiation from a surface [W/m2]
top: Operative temperature [◦C]
ts: Average surface temperature [◦C]
4.2.4
Heat transfer by mass flow
Heat transfer by mass flow occurs in both ventilation ducts and water pipes. The flow of
the fluids in both is forced by pumps and ventilators and creates heat transfer by both
convection and conduction. When the temperature of fluid is known from the point of
supply to the point of return the heat transfer can be calculated by the equation below.
Φmassflow = ρ · cp · qv · ∆T
(4.10)
Φmassflow: Heat transfer from mass flow [W]
ρ: Density of the fluid [kg/m3]
cp: The specific heat capacity of the fluid [J/kg K]
qv: Mass flow of the fluid [m3/s]
∆T: Temperature difference between supply and return [K]
4.2.5
Heat transfer from ceiling surface
Due to difference in convective behavior the heat exchange is different for cooling and
heating scenarios. From [15] the equations for heat transfer from a heated or cooled
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Heat transfer
15
ceiling is as follows:
Qceiling−cooling = 8.92 · (top −ts)1.1
(4.11)
Qceiling−heating = 6.0 · (top −ts)
(4.12)
Qceiling: Heat transfer from ceiling [W/m2]
top: Operative temperature [◦C]
ts: Average temperature of the surface [◦C]
Comparing with equation 4.9 it is striking how the convective contribution counts
for 38% for cooling scenarios and 8% for heating scenarios.
4.2.6
Heat exchange coefficient
The heat exchange coefficient is the transferred energy per square meter surface per
kelvin. It is used to calculate the heat flow from a surface and describes the influence
from a surface to the surroundings. It has a great impact on the indoor environment
and energy use. The coefficient is to be found for different systems in several standards
and guidelines as well as scientific literature. However, the value varies so much that it
is decisive which value you choose to use to describe a heat flow.
A review[16] of existing literature, guidelines and standards, critically compares the dif-
ferent investigations and the given coefficient in each paper to determine how a heat
exchange coefficient value should be understood and used. The review focuses on the
heat exchange coefficient for radiant heating and cooling systems. The total heat ex-
change coefficient describes the addition of the coefficient for radiant and convective
heat exchange.
Qtot = Qradiant + Qconvective
(4.13)
The radiant heat exchange coefficient is a description of heat transfer from one surface to
another and the convective heat exchange coefficient describes the heat transfer from a
surface to the air. In all cases the transfer surface is the radiant surface used for heating
or cooling. Convective heat transfer can be driven either by natural convection, forced
convection or both.
Generally the literature agrees with standards and guidelines for the assumption of 5.5
W/m2 · K for radiant heat transfer coefficient, though the literature found a slightly
lower value when tested for walls. In the literature most reviewed experiments used the
area-weighted average unheated or uncooled surface temperature as the reference tem-
perature, except one using the the air temperature and the temperature of the heated
or cooled surfaces as an adjustment variable. It is to conclude that the convective heat
transfer coefficient is not as simple to define, as it had a quite wide range of outcomes.
When calculating the total heat transfer coefficient, reference temperature is either used
as the air temperature or the operative temperature.
==PAGE:24==
4.2 Heat transfer
16
For ceiling cooling, the radiant temperature results from literature agrees greatly with
the guidelines and standards and those few test results that differ from the rest are those
of an experiments with aluminium foil on the cooled surface. The total heat transfer was
for all but one case lower than the 11 W/m2 · K suggested by Revha. The calculations
for convective heat transfer coefficient have a tendency to deviate more from what is
suggested by ASHRAE when the measurements used lower values for ∆T.
Ceiling heating shows the same similar results to standards as ceiling cooling, for
the radiant coefficient. Unlike the ceiling cooling, the radiant heat transfer coefficient
is very dominant and only little effect from the convective heat transfer. From both
measurements from literature and ASHRAE the convective heat transfer coefficient will
for most cases stay in the range of 0-1W/m2 · K for ∆T up to 20◦C.
Overall the errors for radiant heat transfer are ± 20%. The results for convective heat
transfer from the literature tend to be higher than given in standards, which is positive.
Further review has been given for heating and cooling for both floors and walls. Com-
paring these the ceiling heating and floor cooling had much larger errors for total and
convective heat transfer coefficient, than the opposite cases. This is most likely due to
how much the surfaces, their position and operation, affect the bouyancy effect. The
bouyancy effect only provides small benefit to ceiling heating and floor cooling, which
causes low values and therefore higher errors.
It is essential to account for which reference temperature that is used. The reference
temperature has quite a great impact on the heat transfer coefficient, whether it is for
the radiant- or convective heat transfer. Typically the reference temperature for radi-
ant heat transfer is area-weighted average unheated or uncooled surface temperatures
whereas it is the average air temperature for convective heat transfer. The importance
of the reference temperature can be affected by the ventilation. It seems that when high
ventilation rates causes forced convection to be dominant, the reference temperature is
of less importance compared to low ventilation rates resulting in mixed convection. Di-
mensions of a test chamber have an impact and by this review it can only be concluded
that it seems to be important to keep the Rayleigh number above the turbulent ranges
and larger test chambers might show better results. The dimensions needs to be studied
further though, as there are no investigations that imply these conclusions are correct.
Furthermore the position of the heated or cooled surface in relation to the position and
type of heat source impact the heat transfer coefficient, and the heat source must there-
for be chosen carefully.
Due to differencies in the literature studies and lack of information, the review are not
a complete guide or source of knowledge to the heat transfer coefficient, though it gives
some important knowledge on how to comprehend this very complex value. It can be
derived that the radiant heat transfer coefficient is reliable, when all studies have only
small bands of error compared to the standards. However, the main conclusion of the
review is to clearify the use and purpose of the heat transfer coefficient to be able to
select correct values and parameters. It is argued to use heatflux sensors instead of
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Heat transfer
17
basing the calculation on inlet-outlet water temperature.
4.2.7
Energy balance
The principle of energy conservation states that energy can neither be created nor de-
stroyed only change form, in an isolated system. For an isolated system the energy
remains constant. This is described by equation 4.14.
∆Esystem = Ein −Eout
(4.14)
∆Esystem: Change of energy in the system [W]
Ein: Energy entering the system [W]
Eout: Energy leaving the system [W]
If the closed system is in steady state and there are no energy generated in the
system, the energy entering will be in equilibrium with the energy leaving the system.
Ein = Eout
(4.15)
If further the system generates energy and it still is in steady state, the energy
balance can be described as [17].
Ein + Egenerated = Eout
(4.16)
Egenerated: Energy generated in the system [W]
For a closed system with water flow and air flow the energy balance will be as follows:
Qtot = Qgenerated + Qwater + Qvent + Qtransfer = 0
(4.17)
Qgenerated: generated heat in the system
The other contributions can be calculated as below:
Qwater = m · cP · ∆Twater
(4.18)
Qwater: the effect from water to the closed system [W]
m: water flowrate [kg/s]
cP: the specific heat capacity [J/kgK] = 4185 J/kgK for water
δT: temperature difference of water entering and water leaving the system [◦C]
==PAGE:26==
4.3 Similitude of reduced scale
18
Qvent = v · ρ · cP · ∆Tvent
(4.19)
Qvent: the effect from water to the closed system [W]
v: airflow [m3/s]
ρ: density of air [kg/m3], 1.2 kg/m3 for air at 20◦C
cP: specific heat capacity [J/kgK], 1006 J/kgK for air at 20◦C
∆Tvent: temperature difference of ventilation air entering and leaving the system [◦C]
Qtransfer = U · A · ∆Tinternal−external
(4.20)
Qtransfer: the effect from surroundings of the system [W]
U: thermal transmittance of the material [W/m2K]
A: surface area of the material [m2]
∆Tinternal−external: temperature difference between internal and external air [◦C]
4.3
Similitude of reduced scale
Similitude is an experimental setup with parameters that ensure similarity in dynamics
between the experiment and the actual case intended to be studied. Similitude experi-
ments can be performed in a variety of ways, often used are the numerical experiments
or a reduced-scale prototype using either water or air as the fluid. By use of reduced-
scale building model the building will be recreated as close to reality as possible in a
much smaller scale in which it is easier to control the environment. To gain a credible
result from the reduced-scale model, there are some similarities that must be achieved
between the model and the investigated full size room or building, which include velocity
distribution, airflow pattern and temperature distribution[33]. The better the geometric,
kinematic and thermal similarities are performed, the more accurate the results will be
for the three criteria[33].
4.3.1
Geometric
The most basic criteria to be met is the geometry and it is relatively easy to meet
as it requires proportionally down-scaling of all linear dimensions in both X, Z and Y
direction. It is of high importance to keep the same scaling ratio between the prototype
and scale model in every linear dimension. If there is a different ratio in some dimensions
it can affect the airflow and the temperature distribution. A change in these dynamics
can cost a reduced ability to mix the air in the occupied zone and the air velocities which
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Similitude of reduced scale
19
may mean that the experimental results are no longer reliable. The ratio of height and
depth must be maintained to keep similarity and is represented by eq. 4.21.
(X
H
)
M =
(X
H
)
P
(4.21)
4.3.2
Kinematic
To ensure kinematic similarity the streamlines and flow patterns must be similar. This
can be kept if the ration of fluid velocities and accelerations are equal. From several
cases of similitude experiments and theory, it is known that the kinematic similarity is
respected if the Prandtl-, Reynolds- and Archimedes number is equal for the prototype
and the scaled model.
The Reynolds number is a dimensionless ratio describing whether laminar or turbu-
lent flow occurs in a fluid stream. The ratio is of the inertial forces and the viscous
forces. Inertial forces are the resistance to change in velocity and viscosity forces are the
resistance to deformation. The Reynolds number can be specified as follows
Re = inertialforces
viscousforces = ρ · υ · Lc
µ
(4.22)
To obtain similarity eq. 4.23 followed by eq. 4.24 must be respected.
ReM = ReP
(4.23)
(ρ · υ · Lc
µ
)
M
=
(ρ · υ · Lc
µ
)
P
(4.24)
When the fluid of the scaled modelled is air and the temperature is assumed to be
the same, the equation for similarity of Reynolds number can be expressed by eq. ??.
(υ · Lc)M = (υ · Lc)P
(4.25)
This equation makes it simple to see the consequence of the scale ratio. If the scaled
model is 1:10, LP will be 10 times LM and the consequence is a velocity in the scaled
model that is 10 times the velocity of the prototype to fulfill the similarity criteria by
Reynolds number.
From previous studies it has been proven that for scaled models
similarity improves when Reynolds number exceeds 20,000 and values lower than 2.000
for Reynolds number will make any dissimilarity noticeable.
The Prandtl number differs from Reynolds number and Archimedes number only
depending on the fluid. Though it will in some extend depend on the prototype or
model due to the temperature of the fluid be one of the defining parameters of Prandtl
number. If the temperature of the fluid is similar in the prototype and in the scaled
model and air is used as the fluid, then similarity is obtained.
==PAGE:28==
4.3 Similitude of reduced scale
20
Pr = µ · cP
κ
(4.26)
Archimedes number is the ratio of bouyancy forces and velocity of a fluid and de-
scribes the relation between bouyancy driven and wind driven flows.
Ar =
√
gβLc∆T
υ2
(4.27)
g, β and ∆T are constants and the characteristic length will depend on the scaling
factor of the reduced scaled model. From Reynold’s number above it is known that the
velocity υ will increase with a factor of 10 in the case of the scale model being 1:10 and
this will result in a decrease of Archimedes number with a factor of 100.
So the dimensionless numbers will clash when experimenting with scaled model and it
is impossible to meet them all but previous investigations state that with fully turbulent
flow the focus of similarity must be on Archimedes number.
4.3.3
Thermal
Thermal similarity is achieved when the thermal distribution and dynamics are similar.
This can be achieved if eq. 4.28 for the thermal balance between the prototype and
scaled model is respected.
[T −T∞
∆Tref
]
M
=
[T −T∞
∆Tref
]
P
(4.28)
∆Tref can be described by eq. 4.29
∆Tref =
[
Q
A
ρcP
√gβH
] 2
3
(4.29)
4.3.4
Characteristic length
There is not a specific definition of the characteristic length due to its dependence on
what is investigated. If it is the bouyancy effect that is investigated the height difference
between inlet and outlet will be the value of the characteristic length, for investigated
natural ventilation it often is the window opening and when using wind tunnels it usually
is the height of the building[18]. The characteristic length will effect Reynold’s number
and therefore it might have a huge impact which characteristic length that is chosen.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental design
An investigation of previous projects analysing the same and similar hydronic radiant
ceiling and litterature on similitude and hydronic radiant ceilings has been done. This
helps to clarify the existing knowledge and to navigate through opportunities on how
to improve the experiment. Lots of tests were executed to investigate previous findings
and current errors of the setup. These test runs led to several improvements before the
reduced-scale simulations resulted in outputs that was concluded to be trustworthy.
Figure 5.1: Working process
The reduced scale model is designed to simulate the dynamics of a full scale office.
Performing reduced scale experiments requires an extra attention to similitude. Reduc-
ing the scale will cause a change of air movements and temperature behavior. To counter
this, dimensions of the reduced scale model must have a fixed scale ratio and dimension-
less parameters must be equal for both the reduced scale model and the full scale office.
The full scale office is referred to as the reference office and the reduced scale model
is referred to as the box. Both are explained in the following sections as well as simili-
tude for the experimental setup.
The purpose is to investigate HTC behavior and the dependency of temperature dif-
ferencies within the box and ventilation rates. The varying parameters are therefore
water temperature, internal heating and ventilation rate.
Ventilation rates used to perform the simulations are based on ventilation rates meeting
class I, II and III in accordance with DS/EN 15251[14] for the reference office.
21
==PAGE:30==
5.1 Reference office
22
5.1
Reference office
The reference room is an 21.6 m2 office with an airspace above a suspended ceiling
referred to as plenum. The plenum and the officeroom is only seperated by the prototype.
All dimensions of the office can be seen by figure 5.2. The ventilation inlet is placed in
the plenum distributing the air evenly in the plenum, while the outlet is placed in the
room.
Figure 5.2: Reference office with dimensions, with plenum dimensions included.
Offices are typically occupied by 7 m2/pers corresponding to 3 occupants for this
office[19]. It is assumed that the office is not to be fully occupied all of the time, due
to that the system is dimensioned for 2.5 person. To ensure that the investigation cover
all relevant categories, ventilation rates are calculated for category I - III in accordance
to DS/EN 15251 (2007) see appendix ??. Because it is the air change per hour (ACH)
that is used to ensure similtude the ventilation rate is converted to ACH. This is done
for both the plenum and the room, but it is only the ACH for the plenum that is used
for further calculations. The ventilationrate for the office is calculated by equation 4.3.
The reference office is assumed to be a low polluting building.
Categori I:
qvent,I = 2.5pers · 10l/s/pers + 21.6m2 · 1l/s/m2 = 46.6l/s = 168m3/h
(5.1)
This ventilation rate corresponds to following air changes per hour (ACH)
ACHplenum,I =
qtot,I
Vplenum
=
168m3/h
0.6m · 6m · 3.6m = 12.9h−1
(5.2)
ACHroom,I = qtot,I
Vroom
=
335m3/h
2.85m · 6m · 3.6m = 2.7h−1
(5.3)
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Box design
23
Categori II:
qvent,II = 2.5pers · 7l/s/pers + 21.6m2 · 0.7l/s/m2 = 32.6l/s = 117m3/h
(5.4)
ACHplenum,II =
117m3/h
0.6m · 6m · 3.6m = 9.1h−1
(5.5)
ACHroom,II =
117m3/h
2.85m · 6m · 3.6m = 1.9h−1
(5.6)
Categori III:
qvent,III = 2.5pers · 4l/s/pers + 21.6m2 · 0.4l/s/m2 = 18.6l/s = 67.1m3/h
(5.7)
ACHplenum,III =
67.1m3/h
0.6m · 6m · 3.6m = 5.2h−1
(5.8)
ACHroom,III =
67.1m3/h
2.85m · 6m · 3.6m = 1.1h−1
(5.9)
The internal heat gain is calculated with the assumption of equipment for each occupant
being used all of the time and the occupants being calculated for 2.5 person as above
and with an activity level 1.2 met.
Table 5.1: Heat gain for the reference office
5.2
Box design
The box is a 0.6m x 0.6m x 0.7m box of plywood, designed to simulate the reference
office and test the diffuse ventilation and radiant ceiling panels in a small scale. 10 cm
==PAGE:32==
5.2 Box design
24
of exterior insulation is added. The box has been used by other students to test radiant
ceiling panels and the design of both the ceiling panel and the box has changed through
the different projects. The prototype used now is build by Voss og Sørensen [20]. Some
of the design changes made in this project will be introduced in chapter 6.
The box is designed with two experimental setups, the first is with the supply ventila-
tion coming in from the top of the box to use the diffuse ventilation and test the ceiling.
In the second setup the supply ventilation is moved to the side of the box so it is placed
to supply in the room underneath the prototype. This is to run cases that simulates
the typical mixing ventilation in combination with radiant ceiling, so the use of diffuse
ventilation is excluded. These two setups can be seen by figure 5.3 with dimensions and
material use.
(a) Top ventilation supply, for diffuse
ventilation simulations.
(b) Side ventilation supply, for mixing
ventilation simulations.
Figure 5.3: The box design for the to types of ventilation to be simulated showing dimen-
sions and materials used.
The specifications of the materials can be seen by table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Specifications of box materials
5.2.1
Ceiling panel
The prototype was first designed, built and tested by Eriksen and Christiansen[21] in
2017 and in 2019 a new prototype was designed and built by Voss and Sørensen [20] in
accordance with the knowledge gained from Jonathan Magnes numerical investigations
[22].
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Box design
25
Figure 5.4: Detail drawing and photo of the prototype
The prototype is a full size ceiling panel of 0.6m x 0.6m and a height of 19mm which
fits exactly to the inside dimensions of the box. The pipespace from center to center is
300mm, designed based on results from both Eriksen [4] and Magnes [22]. The pipe for
this one ceiling panel has a single loop, in which the water is led out of the box and back
in again. It is built by a 6mm perforated gypsum plate with an aluminium plate added
to the top, with PEX-pipes installed between these two layers. On top of the aluminium
plate an extra layer of 12mm gypsum is placed. Se figure 5.4.
Figure 5.5: Detail of the perforations in the prototype [23]
Specifications of Ceiling panel material can be seen in table 5.3.
==PAGE:34==
5.2 Box design
26
Table 5.3: Specifications of box materials
5.2.2
Measurement points
26 measurement points in the set up provide data relevant for investigating the energy
balance, heat exchange and the indoor environment of the box. Thermocouples are used
to measure surface and air temperatures, thermopiles to measure temperature differences
and heat flow sensor are used to measure heat fluxes. All of the measurement points and
their locations can be seen in table 5.4. Figure 5.6 illustrates where each measurement
point is located.
Table 5.4: An overview of all measurement points
Thermocouples used to measure surface temperatures are covered with an aluminium
tape to reflect radiance from other surfaces and for the same reason an aluminium tube
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Box design
27
covers all thermocouples used for air temperatures. The only exception are sensors mea-
suring water temperatures.
They are placed in a thermowell of aluminium which is
described in chapter 6. Both thermopiles and thermocouples produce electrical current
which is converted to temperatures in the data logger. The thermopiles are made of type
TT thermocouples, consisting of copper and constantan. These thermopiles are used to
measure temperature differences because of their increase of accuracy in comparison
with the thermocouples used for absolute temperatures.
The heat flux sensors, MF-10S from EKO measures the heat flux through the material
it is attached to. All four sensor are attached to the surfaces with a thermal conductive
silicone grease to ensure high thermal conductivity from the material to the sensors.
The sensors are made of thermopiles used to measure the temperature difference by an
electrical signal. Multiple thermocouples connected in series, are placed evenly over the
area of the sensor. The sensor limits the measurement to a 10cm x 10cm area leaving
the assumption of the heat flux of that area of the material to be representive of the
rest of the object it is attached to.
By instructions from DTU section of indoor climate and bulding, former students have
made the operative temperature sensors. They are created by a PT-100 sensor, covered
by a black ping pong ball and then painted grey. Both operative temperature sensors
in the box are placed in the center of the measured volumes.
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Box design
28
Figure 5.6: Measurement locations in and outside of the box. See table 5.4 for number
speicifications.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Box design
29
5.2.3
Mass Flow
The mass flow must be calculated according to the rules of similitude. The pipe length
for the reference office is 6m and 0,6m for the prototype. Calculated mass flow must
therefore be 6m/0.6m = 10 times lower for the box compared to the reference office.
The cooling demand for the radiant ceiling panel in the reference office is assumed
to be designed for 55 W/m2 with a cooling of 2K. To calculate the mass flow for the
reference office equation 4.10 is used.
55 W
m2 · 21.6m2 = mref · 4160
J
kg · K · 2K
(5.10)
mref = 0.14kg/s
(5.11)
This mass flow is then dimensioned for the prototype used in the box with a pipe-
length of scale 1:10.
mbox = 0.14kg/s
10
= 0.014kg/s = 50.4kg/h
(5.12)
5.2.4
Airflow
The airflow is calculated based on the knowledge of similitude, as for the massflow. By
equation 4.25 the airflows simulating the three calculated airflows for the reference office
can be calculated for the box.
From the later considerations in chapter 6 it is assumed that the air in the plenum is
fully mixed and therefore an average airspeed is expected to describe the airspeed at any
point in the plenum. By this assumption qv can be exchanged with ACH in equation
4.25. For the three calculated ACH in the reference office the corresponding ACH for
the box plenum are calculated and converted to ventilation rate.
ACHbox · Lbox = ACHreference · Lreference
(5.13)
ACHbox = ACHreference · Lreference
Lbox
= ACHreference · 6m
0.6m
(5.14)
To cover at larger solution area the demand for category I is doubled and halfed for
category III.
Categori I:
ACH3,plenum = 12.9h−1 · 6m
0.6m
= 129.4h−1
(5.15)
qvcatI = qv3 = 4.83l/s
(5.16)
qv3,doubled = 4.83l/s · 2 = 9.7 l/s
(5.17)
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Box design
30
Categori II:
ACH2,plenum = 9.06h−1 · 6m
0.6m
= 90.6h−1
(5.18)
qvcatII = qv2 = 3.4 l/s
(5.19)
Categori III:
ACH1,plenum = 5.18h−1 · 6m
0.6m
= 51.8h−1
(5.20)
qvcatIII = qv1 = 1.9l/s
(5.21)
qv1,halfed = 1.9l/s
2
= 0.97 l/s
(5.22)
The target airflows for experiments will be the three ones of 9.7l/s, 3.4l/s and 0.97l/s.
5.2.5
Heat Load
In the bottom of the room a 25W heating cable (originally a terrarium heating cable) is
installed to control the temperature difference ∆Troom−water between the room and the
water supply by increase the temperature of the room. The heating cable was only used
for cooling scenarios. Due to the limit of lowering the water temperature to no less than
around 17◦C, water was kept at constant temperature and the heating cable was used
to increase the temperature difference.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Box design
31
Figure 5.7: Photo of heater
The watt released from the heater was increased by 4 steps from 5.1 W to 24W. The
heating cable is evenly distributed, see figure 5.7, and the watt released is controlled by
a converter. The converter controls the watt by a knob which only makes it possible to
read an approxiate value and when testing with a volt meter it tends to deviate with 6
watt from the accurate watt. To ensure a correct measure of the watt, two volt meters is
added to read the exact volt and ampere going through to the heating cable, see figure
5.8.
Figure 5.8: The setup with voltmeters connected to the converter to read volt and ampere
going through to the heating cable
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Box design
32
5.2.6
Measurement equipment
An overview of measurement equipment used can be seen by table 5.5 along with the
related accuracy. Data sheets were accessible for most of the equipment. For the equip-
ment where data sheets weren’t accessible, tests was made to indicate a probable accu-
racy. It is marked which one are based on tests.
Table 5.5: Overview of measurement instruments and their accuracy [24] [25] [26] [27]
[28]
An overview of standard deviation, thereby accuracy, for each measurement point in
each experiment can be found in appendix D.
Thermocouples
All thermocouples used in the experimental setup have been calibrated before any experi-
ment was executed. The calibration is made by use of Reference Temperature calibrator,
RTC, from Ametek with an accuracy of ±0.04. See figure 5.9 showing that each ther-
mocouple measures between 0.3 and 0.9◦C lower than the reference temperature in the
calibrator.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Box design
33
Figure 5.9: Output of calibration of thermocouples.
This deviation does not cause invalid results from measurements as long as the devi-
ation is added or subtracted from the corresponding measured data.
Water mass flow measurement
The water flow is measured by MASSFLO flowmeter and the output is sent to MASS-
FLO signal converter from where a computer program receives and log the data. The
flowmeter measures this at the cabinet from where water temperature is tempered. At
the pipes just before the water enters the box, a Kamstrup flowmeter is installed to
measure the water flow aswell. Output of the two ways of measuring are compared in
figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Output from MASSFLO flowmeter and Kamstrup flowmeter and the devi-
ation between those two.
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Box design
34
For water flow qw2, qw3 and qw4 the deviation is within ±3% but for the lowest water
flow qw1 of ∼30 l/h the deviation between the two flow meters is 6-8%. The experiment
is designed for 0.14kg/s = 50.4l/h the same as qw2.
Airflow measurement
The airflow measured by the micromanometer, does not give stable outputs but vary
both for the Ø2.5mm and Ø50mm pitotpipe. To test the variation of outputs, a log of
data was made over a 3min. period, where all output was noted for ACH1, ACH2 and
ACH3 by both pitotpipes. The results of this test can be seen by table 5.6.
Table 5.6: Results of airflow test including the average, maximum and minimum
value for the output and the corresponding difference in %.
The test shows the percentage deviation of the maximum and minimum value in
relation to the average value of the output. The deviation keeps within 1% in all other
cases than for the return pipe Ø50mm when the ventilation rate is lowest.
Multimeter and transformer
The transformer used to control the volt going to the heating cable is controlled by two
multimeters, UNI-T UT33D, added in a parallel to measure the voltage and the ampere.
Their accuracy is 0.5%. By the use of these a deviation of ∼6W from the transformer
is seen.
Figure 5.11: The setup of multimeters connected to the transformer.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Scenarios
35
5.3
Scenarios
Experiments are executed with the purpose of investigating the thermal performance
of the prototype.
The varying factors are ventilation rate, generated heat from the
heating cable and water supply temperature. The aim is to investigate a high range
in the temperature difference between water supply and room air, but there are some
limitations.
The water temperature can not become lower than 17◦C due to water freezing in the
pipes placed in the cabinet that temper the water before it enters the box. For cooling
scenarios the temperature of the room is only increased by the heating cable and it has
a maximum of 25W. To avoid overload the heating cable did not come above 24W. The
system could not heat up the water temperature to more than 33◦C at full capacity and
it must be above the air temperature of the room for heating scenarios. When there is
no effect to impact the air temperature of the room it will be equal to air temperature
of the surrounding: approximately 22◦C. These are the reasons for the water set points
in heating scenarios.
From the test of airflow measurement it was found that the target of 9.7l/s for qv1 was
not possible to reach and the maximum limit was around 5.6 l/s. Therefore the aim
for maximum ventilation is set at a value possible to reach and stabilise but still above
ventilation class A, to still cover a larger solution area.
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Scenarios
36
Figure 5.12: Scenarios and settings aimed for during experiments.
The test of mixing ventilation is based in giving a reference to a typical scenario of
radiant heating and cooling ceiling.
Figure 5.12 is an overview of the planned cases to run and the corresponding target
values. Mixing ventilation scenarios was not executed due to corona lock down.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Considerations and
improvements
Improvements have been made since the previous project[3] to decrease uncertainties
and deviations and thereby hopefully get more truthful results.
6.1
Airflow
To improve air tightness all possible leaks have been thoroughly sealed with a suitable
duct tape. This has been done along all connections in the wooden box frame, both
inside and outside of the box additional insulation and tape along every openings for
ventilation and water pipes and also in every connection for the ventilation ducts.
The pitot tubes were a Ø50mm tube for the inlet duct and a Ø100mm tube for the
outlet tube. To get more accurate measurings of the ventilation rate, these were changed
to a Ø25mm tube for inlet and Ø50mm for outlet. By the change of pitot tubes and the
extra effort to seal the box in every possible leak, significant improvements have been
achieved. By table 6.1 the airloss after improvements can be seen. The airloss is 0% for
the lowest ventilation rate and the loss increases as the ventilation rate increase. For
the largest ventilation rate at an average of 5.25 l/s the airloss is at 10%.
Table 6.1: Loss of air through the setup
Compared to Ida Mikkelsens thesis, the improvements are significant, see figure 6.1.
Though her ventilations rates didn’t differ as much it is very clear that a great decrease
is achieved. For ventilation rates just below and above qv,2 the improvements is 78%.
37
==PAGE:46==
6.1 Airflow
38
Figure 6.1: Airloss through the box compared with results from Ida’s measurements
The ventilation rate through the pitot pipes is not steady and deviate with a percent-
age of 1-5% from the value aimed for, see figure 5.6. The equipment used to measure
the pressure difference in the pitot pipe shows an output every 5 sec. The distribution
of outputs over a 3 min. period for the two pitot pipes and the three ventilation rates
can be seen in appendix E. The ventilation rate used for calculation is the median of
the measured output.
6.1.1
Similitude of air
The previous project had an extra perforated gypsum ceiling covered by aluminum and
had only a few openings on one side of it. This is made in an attempt to create fully
mixed air in the plenum, but it is not known whether this solution actually does as
intended or if a large amount of the air still jets right through the plenum and the
diffuse radiant ceiling plate, not allowing the plenum to mix up the air and distribute
the airflow over the entire ceiling panel. See figure 6.2 for the thoughts of the previuos
project and figure 6.3(a) for what air movement the extra ceiling might result in.
Figure 6.2: The concept idea of the extra perforated ceiling. [3]
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Heat loss
39
Figure 6.3: Thoughts and ideas to the solution of air distribution in the plenum.
Figure 6.3,D illustrates how the previous solution possibly end up distributing the
air, 6.3,E illustrates a possibly solution to avoid the directly vertical airflow and create
a better mix of the plenum air and 6.3,F illustrates removal of the extra ceiling and
installation of a diffuser at opening of the supply air.
To avoid situation D, a solution with a shelf installed was considered. This was assumed
to prevent the direct vertical airflow and mix up the air even better in the plenum.
Though it was decided to go with the solution of an air diffuser. The diffuser is a circu-
lar plastic plate attached by four legs to the wooden box frame.
For mixing ventilation, the supply duct and air diffuser is moved to the room below
the ceiling panel and in the opposite side of which the exhaust duct is installed.
6.2
Heat loss
Ida Mikkelsen [3] had a quite large heat loss from where the ventilation ducts was
attached to the box. This heat loss have been tried to make up for by covering 1m of
the ventilation duct with rockwool insulation and the connection to the box has been
thoroughly covered with rockwool as well.
==PAGE:48==
6.3 Water temperature
40
(a) Result from Ida’s experiments
(b) Insulation around supply and exhaust
ventilationduct.
Figure 6.4: Heat loss from ventilation ducts and improvements.
6.3
Water temperature
The accuracy of the water temperature measurement is increased by adding two extra
sensors to the thermopile. So instead of having two sensors by the water supply and two
sensors by the water return, there are now three sensors at each. This will increase the
accuracy by a factor of 10.
Furthermore one thermowell by both supply and return water has been installed. They
are made of aluminium and the aluminium is in direct contact with the waterflow. The
previous project had the sensors attached outside of the PEX-pipes, which is a much
more poorer material to conduct the heat compared to the aluminium. The installed
thermowells only have room for 3 sensors in each, so the thermocouples that measure the
temperature at water supply and water return are attached on top of the thermowells, as
seen by figure 6.6, which is assumed to still deliver more accurate results than attaching
to the PEX-pipes. More accurate measurement of water temperatures will increase the
accuracy for the calculated heat transfer from water.
Figure 6.5: The attachment of thermopile sensors to measure temperature difference for
water before improvements.
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Water temperature
41
Figure 6.6: Thermowell installed by both supply pipe and return pipe for water.
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 7
Result analysis and
discussion
All results are an average value of the last 50 measurements, representing approximately
the last 8.5 minute of the experiment. After each experiment has reached steady state,
it is left to stay in steady state for at least half an hour before data was saved.
Cooling, heating and test scenario outputs are presented and discussed. Mixing ventila-
tion are only illustrated for cooling scenarios.
The way to create a temperature difference between roomair and watersupply was by
use of a heating cable to heat the room air. Water was kept as the lowest temperature
possible.
For more detailed outputs of all scenarios, see appendix F. Some test scenarios are
used to determine the impact of errors and to set up a scenario with no ventilation. An
overview of these scenarios is to be found in appendix B.
7.1
Cooling scenarios
Table 7.1 shows the results from cooling scenarios with qv0, qv1, qv2 and qv3, in which qv0
is results from some of the test runs where the ventilation rate was 0 l/s.
Table 7.1: Results from cooling scenarios.
Because qv0 cases have no ventilation there is no extra effect from the prototype and
is therefore the best executed scenario of a typical radiant ceiling with mixing ventila-
tion.
42
==PAGE:51==
7.1 Cooling scenarios
43
The total heat transfer coefficients to both the plenum and the room is illustrated
in figure 7.2. The positive or negative value of HTC describes whether the ceiling plate
emits or absorbs heat as illustrated in figure 7.1.
(a) The ceiling plate absorbs heat.
HTC will be negative in plenum
and room.
(b) The ceiling plate emits heat.
HTC will be positive in plenum and
room
Figure 7.1: HTC outputs and direction.
Total HTC coefficients must be based on operative room temperatures. Because it
was found that the PT-100 sensors didn’t measure correct, the total HTC coefficients
are based on air temperature. This will of course not provide correct values, but is
the best approximation of the total HTC. Figure 7.2 illustrates that HTC to the room
is influenced by the ventilation rates, but stays quite steady for each ventilation rate.
When looking at the heat transfer coefficients to plenum the behavior is much different.
It was expected that the ventilation would increase the effect from the water and the
water to cool in all scenarios. That is not the case. HTC is positive for qv0 and C12.
The heating of the plenum, despite of the water temperature still being colder than air
temperature, is possibly due to buoyancy effect. Warm air from the room rises and
despite the HF sensors is placed above each other, the warm air probably warm the air
between them and therefore the air below the HF sensor placed towards the plenum
measures the ceiling plate to be much warmer than it is.
The behavior of HTC to
plenum supports this assumption by the increased positive HTC for lower ventilation
rates and increased generated heat in the room.
No ventilation allow the buoyancy
effect to heat up the plenum air and this phenomena also seems to occur for higher
temperature differences between the water and plenum air even with a low ventilation
rate. For qv0 the ventilation is not enough to fight the bouyancy effect for a temperature
difference higher than ∼4◦C.
If so the bouyancy effect is the explanation for the heating of plenum, CT6, CT7, C10,
C11 and C12 can be neglected, as those cases have the highest internal generated heat
for qv0 and qv1.
Comparing CT5 and C9 with qv0 and qv1 HTC’s to the plenum are very steady and to
the room they slightly increase for increased ventilation rate.
==PAGE:52==
7.1 Cooling scenarios
44
CT5, C10, C6 and C2 all have a generated heat of 30 W/m2, near to the expected
internal heat gain of 24.9 W/m2.
Figure 7.2: Heat Transfer Coefficient to both plenum and the room.
Comparing the measured heat fluxes to the calculated ones from equation 4.11, it
is clear that the measured values are much more effective than the calculated ones for
HTC to the room. qv0 cases are the only exception. To the plenum the HTC is similar to
the standards. This diagram indicates an improvement of the radiant ceiling compared
to conventional radiant ceilings.
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Cooling scenarios
45
Figure 7.3: Heat flux to room and plenum compared to the calculated by standard equation
4.11
The cooling effect is a combination of the effect from ventilation and water temper-
ature. Cooling effect from ventilation will by theory cool more by increased ventilation
rates, but what needs to be discovered is whether the cooling from water increases by
increased ventilation effect. This effect is illustrated in figure 7.4a and 7.4b.
The water effect related to ventilation effect as seen in 7.4a pictures some dependency
between Qwater and Qvent. From qv1, qv2 and qv3 the slope indicates increased effect
from the water by increased effect from ventilation. Though the result is doubtful when
seeing the results from qv0. By figure 7.4b the answer to the doubtful output from qv0
seems to be the temperature difference between water supply and air. So the reason why
Qwater improves despite lack of ventilation is due to an increase of temperature difference
between roomair and water supply. Figure 7.4b pictures a very clear improvement of
cooling effect from water by adding ventilation.
==PAGE:54==
7.1 Cooling scenarios
46
(a) The total cooling effect from water
related to ventilation effect.
(b) Total cooling effect from water related to
∆T of roomair and water supply.
Figure 7.4: Cooling effect from water.
Though there tend to be an effectiveness by use of diffuse ventilation the output
from the three ventilation rates internally behaves slightly different. qv1 does not seem
to follow the same pattern as qv2 and qv3. The reason behind this behavior is possibly
due to the observed influence of bouyancy from figure 7.2 and therefore the cases marked
with a cross are the ones argued above to neglect.
Anyhow it requires a larger dataset to define a more precise behavior and for this data
set they all show a cooling increase from water by increased cooling from ventilation and
increased temperature difference between roomair and watersupply.
Focusing on the temperature difference between ventilation supply and water supply, a
dependency shows for the cooling effect. However, the dominant dependencies of these
three are still at the ventilation rate and temperature difference ∆Troomair−watersupply.
The effectiveness of the prototype seems to be great and even low ventilation rates
improve much. Assuming that qv0 represents mixing ventilation as mentioned earlier,
diffuse ventilation proves to improve radiant ceiling for cooling scenarios.
All energy contributions are listed in table 7.1. The greatest contribution is from the
water and an overview of water and ventilation contribution to the system is shown by
figure 7.5.
==PAGE:55==
7.1 Cooling scenarios
47
Figure 7.5: Energy contribution from water and ventilation.
The water temperature cools the system in all scenarios whereas the ventilation have
the opposite effect in C1, C2 and C9. Those are the scenarios with low internal gener-
ated heat. This is only for qv1 and qv3, so there is no clear pattern of this behavior other
than it only occurs for low internal generated heat.
The cooling contribution of water is within the range of ∼45 to 55 W/m2 for qv1 to
qv3, whereas it has a span from ∼25 to 50 for qv0. This suggests some uncertainties for
qv0 and again CT6 and CT7 can be neglected by the argument above of them being to
influenced by bouyancy.
The total energy balance deviation is to be seen from table 7.6. Except for qv0 there
is a pattern that the deviation decreases as the internal generated heat increases.
Figure 7.6: Energy deviation.
The energy balance deviation range is from ±0.6 W to ±16.5 W. This shows a
clear pattern of deviation and is a great improvement compared to Ida Mikkelsens[3]
experiments which had deviations from -10.4 W to -25.6 W, with most of them in the
==PAGE:56==
7.2 Heating scenarios
48
range of 21.6 ±4 W. So there is a great improvement of the experiment set up and
different from Ida’s there is a clear pattern of the deviation. Looking at the energy
balance from table 7.1, the heat transfers from Qvent and Qtransfer increase relatively
much as Qheater increases. Qwater, on the other hand, have a very narrow range despite
the relatively high difference of generated heat. All scenarios of 5.1W from the heating
cable result in more cooling from the water than scenarios with 11W generated heat.
Seemingly there is a lack of regulation from the water.
7.2
Heating scenarios
As for the cooling scenarios, all heating scenarios are listed in table 7.2 with correspond-
ing results. For heating scenarios the heating cable was not in use, therefore no watt is
generated in the room. To create a temperature difference between room air and water,
water temperature is increased.
Table 7.2: Results from heating scenarios.
There is no significant improvement of HTC to the plenum as the ventilation rate
increases, which makes it difficult to conclude any behavior without a reference scenario.
HTC to the room rises by an increase of ventilation rate. There is a quite clear picture
of a much higher dependency on ventilation rate than temperature differences between
air and water supply. The bouyancy might have an effect to HTC to plenum as well as
it had for cooling scenarios, which would change the behavior to increases of HTC by
increase of ventilation rate.
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Heating scenarios
49
Figure 7.7: Heat Transfer Coefficient to both plenum and the room.
Comparison of the heat flux measured to heat flux calculated by equation 4.12 is
seen by figure 7.8. Despite the heat flux to the room for qv1 the measured values are
more effective than the calculated. This system therefore seems to have en improved
performance compared to conventional systems.
Figure 7.8: Heat flux to room and plenum compared to the calculated by standard equation
4.12
Figure 7.9 pictures the heating effect Qwater related to the ventilation effect Qvent and
the temperature difference between room air and water supply. Figure 7.9a pictures a
tendency that the water will heat more the more the ventilation cools and that ventilation
==PAGE:58==
7.2 Heating scenarios
50
rates seems to decrease the heating effect from water. Figure 7.9b presents a picture
of dependency of temperature difference between room air and water supply in higher
degree than dependency of the ventilation rate.
(a) The total heating effect from water
related to ventilation effect.
(b) Total heating effect from water related to
∆T of roomair and water supply.
Figure 7.9: Heating effect from water.
Both from figure 7.9 and figure 7.10 it can be seen that there is a heating contribu-
tion from the water, but the ventilation counteracts and contribute with cooling for all
scenarios.
Heat transfer from water to the room is positive, meaning that the water heats the
room as expected. Figure 7.10 illustrates clearly how ventilation cools and water heats
as the water temperature increases. For all cases the cooling contribution from ventila-
tion is smaller than the heating contribution from water and both energy contributions
decreases by higher ventilation rates.
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Heating scenarios
51
Figure 7.10: Energy contribution from water and ventilation.
Due to temperature of ventilation supply being lower than air temperatures it does
not contribute with heating, though it seems that due to having a plenum the inlet air
is heated by the water in the plenum and it therefore cools the room air less than if it
was supplied directly in to the room.
When looking at the total energy balance deviation seen by figure 7.11, the deviation
gets higher by increase of the water temperature. The deviation is positive in all heating
scenarios, meaning that more energy is generated than removed. This means that some
energy is lost in the system and not accounted for. The deviation is within the range of
4.2 W and 13.3 W, similar to the deviation of energy balance for cooling scenarios.
Figure 7.11: Energy balance deviation.
==PAGE:60==
7.3 Sources of errors
52
7.3
Sources of errors
7.3.1
Box design
To ensure similitude dimensions of the scaled model everything must be scaled with
the same factor. The room of the scaled model is correct in depth but differs in width
and height. According to some literature width deviation causes no issues for similitude
in reduced scale modeling. The plenum though has only the depth to be in correct
dimension, both the height and the width is incorrect. If just the height of the plenum
could be corrected, the width might not cause any errors as for the room. Reynolds
number is the same for the plenum in both reference office and the box and therefore it
was assumed that experiments could be trustworthy despite the dimension deviation.
Similitude is partly met when all dimensions have the same scale ratio for the reduced
scale. The height and depth ratio of the room must be obtained as in equation 4.21.
(X
H
)
Box =
(X
H
)
Ref
(7.1)
But when comparing the dimensions of the reference room and the box the equation
is as follows:
( 0.6m
0.309m
)
Box =
( 6m
2.85m
)
Ref ⇒1.9 = 2.1
(7.2)
The box is built by plates of plywood, but the bottom plate does not fill out the
entire footprint of the box. The plate that opens up when needed creates a small gap
directed to the bottom insulation layer. To cover this crack the box must be tilted
which can influence the wind shields of the pipes and maybe some set up in the box. It
is difficult to seal these bottom cracks. The plate that opens up is the plate where the
waterpipes goes through. Every time the box needs to be opened, the pipes must be
split apart and emptied and all sealed areas around the pipes will be disturbed and the
sensor wires are disturbed as well. This can cause errors in the setup each time the box
needs to be opened.
It is not known which degree of error the box design might cause, but some of the
energy balance deviation can quite possibly be explained by transfer through thermal
bridges. This could be tested with a thermal camera.
7.3.2
Ventilation accuracy
The ventilation rate deviate with up to 10% from inlet measuring point to outlet mea-
suring point. Further the value of the ventilation rate read from the equipment is a
mean value and the output deviate from 2% and up to 9% from the mean value. These
deviations have been accumulated and the maximum impacts on energy contribution
from water is illustrated in figure 7.12.
Ventilation contribution to the energy balance deviates with maximum 9% for qv0 and
the deviation for total energy balance is maximum 26% for C12. Deviation for total
==PAGE:61==
7.3 Sources of errors
53
energy balance is 15% or lower for the rest of the cases.
Though the percentage deviation is high the actual deviation in watt for total energy
balance is within ±0.55 W due to ventilation insecurities.
Figure 7.12: Maximum deviation from ventilation.
7.3.3
Energy transfer
The energy transfer is calculated based on the U-value of the box envelope and measured
temperatures, which will account for energy lost through the walls. The energy transfer
does not account for thermal bridges and even though all connections and gaps are
carefully sealed by insulation and tape, it might contribute with a great enough heat
loss to influence the energy balance significantly as it is not accounted. It might be a
relatively huge unknown factor.
7.3.4
Water flow rate
The valve used to control the water flow is very sensitive and it is difficult to hit the
exact target value. The impact of the water flow is tested with two different flows for
qv0. A 30% increase of flow from 0.0098 kg/s to 0.014 kg/s and their energy contribution
can be seen in figure 7.13.
==PAGE:62==
7.3 Sources of errors
54
Figure 7.13: Energy contribution from water at two different flowrates.
The energy contribution increases by 38% for flow rate increase of 30%. This will
impact the seen improvements of the ventilation rates if the waterflow deviates from
experiment to experiment. Deviations of the water flow is not this high for cooling and
heating scenarios, so the deviation of impact will not be as significant. Though there is
a deviation of just above 11% in the heating scenarios and that might cause the graphs
to tilt more or less.
Higher water flows contribute more to the cooling and the test scenarios used to illustrate
a mixing ventilation scenario with qv0 all have a water flow rate of 0.0095 kg/s to 0.0098
kg/s.
Comparing the cooling scenarios showed a significant improvement of cooling
from qv0 to qv1, but including the knowledge of increased impact of 38% for the same
water flow increase, the improvement will not be as significant as seen in section 7.1. At
least the improvement is quite better than 40% and therefore there will still be a great
improvement from no ventilation to low ventilation rate.
7.3.5
Heat Flow sensor
The heat flow sensor might not give correct outputs due to bouyancy effect heating up
the sensor from the room and thereby it measures the temperature of the ceiling plate
to be much warmer than it truly is. This is shown by the ventilation rate being too low
to fight the bouyancy effect as temperature rises in the room. The prototype should be
without perforations where the heat sensors are placed, to avoid this error.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The study pictures some great advantages by diffuse ventilation combinated with hy-
dronic radiant ceilings. The behavior of the heat transfers are as expected and the rules
of similitude from literature is met. A dependency of both airflow rates and temperature
differences are illustrated and pictures a great dependency for both when mapping the
heat transfers. HTC dependencies of ventilation rates and temperature differences be-
tween surface temperatures and air temperatures differs whether it is for plenum, room,
cooling or heating. Because the behaviors are as expected, reduced scale models there-
fore prove to represent the behaviors of HTC coefficients of a full scale room, though it
is not verified if the values is as for the full scale room.
Though the experiments have some peculiar results for some of the cases it generally
have a very clear indication that the ventilation system improves the effect from the
prototype. The greatest effect comes from the plenum, which has the function of condi-
tioning the air before entering the room. This conditioning effect of the plenum ensure
a better utilization of the water temperature and argue against a upward loss of energy.
Being able to use the energy of the water even better by the plenum shows good oppor-
tunities for the concept of low temperature heating and high temperature cooling. This
will further improve the energy consumption and descrease the exergy of the system.
The accuracy of the measurements are very high and the energy deviation is greatly
improved compared to earlier investigations.
The ventilation in the heating scenarios does not prove to improve the effect from the
prototype much but due to lack of a baseline scenario it is not to say if there is a
significant improvement from conventional ventilation systems.
8.1
Further work
• Documentation of thermal bridges
To exclude the errors from thermal bridges, the heat loss of all gaps and connec-
tions should be documented better. By a thermal camera it would be possible
to document if there is a great heat loss from thermal bridges and it would be
possible to determine the extent hereof.
• Baseline scenarios
To be able to have a stronger argumentation that this system is an improvement
to conventional systems a better comparable baseline must be investigated.
A
baseline scenario must be executed for both heating and cooling, so it is possible
55
==PAGE:64==
8.1 Further work
56
to conclude whether there is an improvement from mixing ventilation to diffuse
ventilation combined with hydronic radiant ceilings.
The baseline would be a better comparison if it was executed as a real mixing
ventilation scenario as planned. This experimental scenario is recommended to
investigate further to truthfully conclude an improvement of the system.
The
mixing ventilation should also be tested to gain most realistic scenarios. In this
project it was considered to use some fabric attached to the ventilation inlet for
mixing ventilation, to ensure fully mixing of the air and avoid the air to just flow
directly from the inlet to the outlet as they would be placed in opposite walls with
very big inlet and outlet areas compared to the room size.
Due to the effect of bouyancy seen in the output, it might also be of importance
to cover and insulate the prototype from above.
• Full scale
Running the experiments in full scale would exclude any possible errors due to
reduced scale modelling. Though the tendency of behavior proves to be good the
exact improvement is not necessary as seen from the reduced scale. Running a full
scale experiment will provide more realistic outputs and more realistic improve-
ments, even though it is expected that the tendencies will be the same.
• Indoor environment vs. lth htc (exergy)
These experiments have been executed with the purpose to find improvement by
ventilation systems. Further investigations with targets more truth to reality would
make it possible to conclude if the system is able to meet demands of indoor
environment and energy consumption. The recommendation is to run experiments
with internal heat gains being as expected for an office this size and temper the inlet
air to real cases of heating and cooling. So for heating scenarios the temperature
of ventilation supply would be as expected for the heating season and for cooling
scenarios the supply air temperature should be as expected for the cooling season.
The ventilation rates for this project are calculated based on classifications and
diffuse ventilation has already proved to be effective to obtain good indoor air
quality. A case with tracergas could prove that with a ventilation rate providing
good thermal indoor environment, good indoor air quality is also obtained.
If these real scenarios could be set up, it is possible to test if low water temperatures
for heating and high temperatures for cooling would prove to perform within the
demands of indoor environments. If demands are met by LTH-HTC it is known
that energy consumption is limited and the exergy destruction decreases.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
I. E. Agency, Energy efficiency: Buildings, Online, Last visited on 2019-08-09,
International Energy Agency, [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/topics/
energyefficiency/buildings/.
[2]
E. Commission, 2020 climate
energy package, Online, Last visited on 2019-08-
09, European Commission, [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/
policies/strategies/2020_en.
[3]
I. S. Mikkelsen, “Thermal performance of radiant ceilings in combination with dif-
fuse ventilation - experimental investigations and energy analysis, termisk ydeevne
af varme- og kølelofter i kombination med diffus ventilation - eksperimenter og en-
ergianalyse,” und, 2019.
[4]
I. Dincer and M. A. Ezan, “Thermal energy storage methods,” eng, Green Energy
and Technology, pages 57–84, 2018, issn: 18653537, 18653529. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-91893-8_3.
[5]
M. M. Farid, A. M. Khudhair, S. A. K. Razack, and S. Al-Hallaj, “A review on
phase change energy storage: Materials and applications,” eng, Energy Conversion
and Management, volume 45, number 9-10, pages 1597–1615, 2004, issn: 01968904,
18792227. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2003.09.015.
[6]
T. Imanari, T. Omori, and K. Bogaki, “Thermal comfort and energy consumption
of the radiant ceiling panel system. comparison with the conventional all-air sys-
tem,” eng, Energy and Buildings, volume 30, number 2, pages 167–175, 1999, issn:
18726178, 03787788. doi: 10.1016/s0378-7788(98)00084-x.
[7]
Wikipedia, Radiant heating and cooling, Available at https://en.m.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Radiant_heating_and_cooling#Heating (28/03/20).
[8]
J. Babiak, B. Olesen, and D. Petras, Low temperature heating and high temperature
cooling: REHVA GUIDEBOOK No 7, English. REHVA, 2007.
[9]
R. C. .-.-. UPONOR, Thermally active building systems explained, Available at
https://web.uponor.hk/radiant-cooling-blog/thermally-active-building-
systems-explained/ (20/04/20).
[10]
M. A. Alvarez, C. A. Hviid, and P. Weitzmann, “Experimental investigations of
heat transfer in thermo active building systems in combination with suspended
ceilings,” eng, Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Symposium on Building Physics,
pages 735–741, 2014.
57
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
58
[11]
Lindner, Plafotherm® gk hekda heated and chilled plasterboard ceilings, heat con-
ducting profile as secondary grid, Available at https://www.lindner-group.com/
en/fit-out-products/heated-and-chilled-ceilings/heated-and-chilled-
plasterboard-ceilings/plafothermr-gk-hekda/ (2005/06/12).
[12]
M. Behne, “Indoor air quality in rooms with cooled ceilings. mixing ventilation or
rather displacement ventilation?” eng, Energy and Buildings, volume 30, number 2,
pages 155–166, 1999, issn: 18726178, 03787788. doi: 10.1016/s0378-7788(98)
00083-8.
[13]
J. W. Jeong and S. A. Mumma, “Ceiling radiant cooling panel capacity enhanced
by mixed convection in mechanically ventilated spaces,” eng, Applied Thermal En-
gineering, volume 23, number 18, pages 2293–2306, 2003, issn: 18735606, 13594311.
doi: 10.1016/s1359-4311(03)00211-4.
[14]
“Indoor environment input parameters for design and assessment of energy per-
formance of buildings adressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting
and acoustics, ds/en 15251,” eng, 2007.
[15]
“Building environment design - design, dimensioning, installation and control of
embedded radiant heating and cooling systems - part 2: Determination of the
design heating and cooling capacity, iso 11855-2:2012,” eng, 2012.
[16]
J. Shinoda, O. B. Kazanci, S.-i. Tanabe, and B. W. Olesen, “A review of the surface
heat transfer coefficients of radiant heating and cooling systems,” eng, Building
and Environment, volume 159, page 106 156, 2019, issn: 1873684x, 03601323. doi:
10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.05.034.
[17]
Y. A. Cengel, A. J. Ghajar, and M. Kanoğlu, Heat and mass transfer : fundamen-
tals and applications, eng. McGraw Hill Education, 2015, xxiii, 944 s. : ill. isbn:
9814595276, 9789814595278.
[18]
C. E. Walker, “Methodology for the evaluation of natural ventilation in buildings
using a reduced-scale air model,” eng, 2006.
[19]
Byggestyrelsen, “Standard arbejdspladskoncept,” dan, 2017.
[20]
D. V. Voss and R. V. Sørensen, “Experiments with prototypes of radiant ceilings
with diffuse ventilation, eksperimenter med prototyper af varme-kølelofter med
diffuse ventilation,” und, 2019.
[21]
F. V. Eriksen and N. B. Christiansen, “Hydronic heating and cooling ceiling sys-
tems with integrated diffuse ventilation,” und, 2017.
[22]
J. Magnes, “Product development and simulations of hydronic radiant ceilings
with diffuse ventilation, produktudvikling og simuleringer af vandbaseret varme-
/køleloft og køling med diffus ventilation,” und, 2019.
[23]
C. A. Hviid and S. Svendsen, “Experimental study of perforated suspended ceilings
as diffuse ventilation air inlets,” eng, Energy and Buildings, volume 56, pages 160–
168, 2013, issn: 18726178, 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2012.09.010.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
59
[24]
Instruction manual, heat flow sensor - mf-180, mf-180m, hf-30s, hf-10s, 7, EKO
instruments co., May 2018.
[25]
Measuring tube, Veab Elmicro AB,
[26]
Technical overview - 34970a data acquisition/ switch unit family, Keysight Tech-
nologies,
[27]
Massflo - masse flowmåler type mass 1000/1100, ts.28.c2.01, Danfoss,
[28]
Furness fco 510 micromanometer0, 800.553.5511, CleanAir - instrumental rental,
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX A
Classifications for
ventilation
Table A.1: Ventilation rate per person for each category [14].
Table A.2: Ventilation rate based on pollution for each category [14].
60
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX B
Test scenarios
Table B.1: Results from test scenarios and what was tested.
61
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX C
Temperature distribution
C.1
Cooling
62
==PAGE:71==
C.1 Cooling
63
==PAGE:72==
C.2 Heating
64
C.2
Heating
==PAGE:73==
C.2 Heating
65
==PAGE:74==
C.3 Cooling tests
66
C.3
Cooling tests
==PAGE:75==
C.3 Cooling tests
67
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX D
Accuracy of all
measurements
68
==PAGE:77==
D Accuracy of all measurements
69
==PAGE:78==
D Accuracy of all measurements
70
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX E
Output from test of
pitotpipe measurements
71
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX F
Outputs of experiments
F.1
Cooling
72
==PAGE:81==
F.1 Cooling
73
==PAGE:82==
F.1 Cooling
74
==PAGE:83==
F.1 Cooling
75
==PAGE:84==
F.1 Cooling
76
==PAGE:85==
F.1 Cooling
77
==PAGE:86==
F.1 Cooling
78
==PAGE:87==
F.1 Cooling
79
==PAGE:88==
F.1 Cooling
80
==PAGE:89==
F.1 Cooling
81
==PAGE:90==
F.1 Cooling
82
==PAGE:91==
F.1 Cooling
83
==PAGE:92==
F.1 Cooling
84
==PAGE:93==
F.1 Cooling
85
==PAGE:94==
F.1 Cooling
86
==PAGE:95==
F.1 Cooling
87
==PAGE:96==
F.1 Cooling
88
==PAGE:97==
F.1 Cooling
89
==PAGE:98==
F.1 Cooling
90
==PAGE:99==
F.1 Cooling
91
==PAGE:100==
F.1 Cooling
92
==PAGE:101==
F.1 Cooling
93
==PAGE:102==
F.1 Cooling
94
==PAGE:103==
F.2 Heating
95
F.2
Heating
==PAGE:104==
F.2 Heating
96
==PAGE:105==
F.2 Heating
97
==PAGE:106==
F.2 Heating
98
==PAGE:107==
F.2 Heating
99
==PAGE:108==
F.2 Heating
100
==PAGE:109==
F.2 Heating
101
==PAGE:110==
F.2 Heating
102
==PAGE:111==
F.2 Heating
103
==PAGE:112==
F.2 Heating
104
==PAGE:113==
F.2 Heating
105
==PAGE:114==
F.2 Heating
106
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX G
Deviation of ventilation rate
measures
107
