==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’’’’ 
 
 
Master Thesis 
Road safety for vulnerable road users in signal-controlled intersections 
Elwan, Ebtihal 
 DTU 11.05.2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
1 
 
 
 
Title: 
Road safety for vulnerable road users in signal-controlled intersections 
 
 
 
Project type: 
Master Thesis (15 ECTS) 
 
 
 
Project period: 
January 20th ,2020– May 11th,2020 
 
 
 
Author: 
Ebtihal B. Elwan 
 
 
 
Supervisor:  
Mette Møller  
 
 
Number of pages: 48 
 
 
Finished: May 11th2020 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
2 
 
Foreword 
This is a Master thesis written as a final part of the flexible master's course in DTU Management. The 
project is 15 ECTS and has been prepared in the period from January 20th, 2020 – May 11th,2020.  
The project examines the safety of vulnerable road users (cyclists and pedestrians) in a signal-controlled 
intersection in Copenhagen with the most cyclist and pedestrian accidents.  The purpose of the project is to 
achieve greater knowledge about the safety of the vulnerable road users at signal-controlled intersections, 
not only based on accident data from the police, but on the basis of the “near accidents” or conflicts that 
happen every day without being registered anywhere. The Swedish conflict technique study developed by 
Lund University is used to analyze the conflicts that may develop into an accident, in order to prevent 
possible accidents that may occur.
The project has been prepared with guidance from Mette Møller DTU Management. A big thank to Mette 
Møller for good guidance and good cooperation. A thank should also go to Bo Mikkelsen from the 
Copenhagen municipality, for helping with the observations and Søren Troels Berg from the municipality of 
Copenhagen for knowledge sharing and providing accident data and geometric drawings of the 
intersection. I would also thank my husband for support and for taking care of my kids in the project period. 
Reading guide 
This project includes a report and appendix. The attached Appendixes as well as their content can be seen 
in the appendix report. This report contains of figures and tables numbered by the chapter in which the 
figure or table appears. For example, the first figure or table presented in Chapter 1 will have the reference 
figure 1.1 or Table 1.1.  
 
The report consists of the following parts:  
 
1. Introduction to the problem. 
2. Background including the extent of accidents involving cyclists and pedestrians at intersections. 
3. Method description of the data collection, data processing, accident analysis and conflict study.   
4. Results presentation of the conflict study, the statistical analysis and the accident data.   
5.  Comparison of results from the conflicts study and the accident data.  
6. Discussion of the results in this study. 
7. Solution proposals on how to solve the safety problems according to the conflicts and 
accidents recorded at the intersection. 
8. Conclusion concludes what overall can be inferred from the study. 
 
 
Good reading! 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
3 
 
Summary  
Conflict studies have become a more frequent tool of analyzing traffic. This is particularly the case in road 
safety work, where traffic conflicts / near-accidents occur more frequently than accidents. This method 
makes it possible to identify the conflicts at a given location and analyze the behavior of the road users in 
order to carry out a safety assessment in a short time, not only based on accident data. For the 
identification of conflicts, the relationship between the speed and the distance in a conflict is calculated 
and based on the TA value (time to accident) which is the time for a possible conflict, the severity of the 
conflict is assessed. 
Interactions between road users leading to conflicts depend on the observer's assessment and thus may 
vary from person to person, making it doubtful whether conflict studies can represent the road safety 
problems that occurs in a given locality. This analysis will examine the validity of the use of manual conflict 
study to assess the road safety of the vulnerable road users at signal-controlled intersections.  
The purpose of this project is to validate the use of the conflict study as a supplement to the traditional 
accident analysis in the work with road safety analyzes. This is done by conducting a conflict study at the 
signal-controlled intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej in Copenhagen, which is one of the signal-controlled 
intersections with the most pedestrians and cyclist accidents. The police registered accidents are used as a 
basis for comparison to investigate the effect of the method.  
Despite the uncertainties associated with the method, comparisons between the conflicts and the police 
registered accidents have found that there is some connection between the types of conflict and the types 
of accidents, since the types of conflicts recorded are also evident in the personal injury accidents reported 
by the police. However, the uncertainty in the results makes it doubtful whether the manual conflict 
records can correctly identify conflicts and the significance of the uncertainty in the method.  
It is concluded that Conflict studies in many cases can give municipalities and regions an alternative, 
nuanced view of road safety in their area, which is not only based on accident data reported by the police. 
On the other hand, it is also concluded that it is recommended that conflict studies be performed using 
semi-automatic programs developed for this purpose or traffic simulation programs that also can be used 
to identify conflicts to achieve a more valid result. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
4 
 
Contents 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.1. 
Project description ............................................................................................................................ 7 
2. 
Background .............................................................................................................................................. 12 
3. 
Method .................................................................................................................................................... 14 
3.1. 
Data ................................................................................................................................................. 14 
3.2. 
Data processing ............................................................................................................................... 21 
3.3. 
Accident analysis ............................................................................................................................. 24 
3.4. 
Statistical analysis ............................................................................................................................ 25 
4. 
Results ..................................................................................................................................................... 27 
4.1. 
Conflicts ........................................................................................................................................... 27 
4.2. 
Statistical analysis ............................................................................................................................ 34 
5. 
Accidents ................................................................................................................................................. 35 
6. 
Comparison of results .............................................................................................................................. 38 
7. 
Discussion ................................................................................................................................................ 40 
8. 
Suggestions for solutions ......................................................................................................................... 43 
9. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................... 48 
10. 
References ........................................................................................................................................... 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
5 
 
1. 
Introduction  
 
The traffic safety work at a given location is traditionally based on an analysis of the occurrence’s accidents. 
However, this method presents several limitations. In the accident analysis, accidents are considered over a 
longer period of typically five years [Danish Road Directorate, 2015]. For this, the database will often be 
limited as accidents rarely occur [Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 2018].  
 
In addition, the fact that accidents are typically considered over a five-year period also means that different 
conditions may change, such as the development of vehicle safety or specific factors at the location, that 
effects the traffic safety situation. Other than that, the reported accidents are made up of after-reports, 
which may be based on the parties' subjective reports on the accident. [Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 2018]. 
 
Accidents also happen with a degree of randomness that can be explained by several accident factors at the 
time of the accident. The accident can therefore be due to many factors that can be attributed the location, 
the road user or the road. Several of these factors may occur at the same time but the accident is a unique 
incident that will not occur again [Lund University, 1992].  
 
Another limitation of basing the traffic safety work on accidents is that there are “dark numbers”. Not all 
accidents are registered by the police and thus the accidents do not necessarily give a representative 
picture of the traffic safety [Lahrmann, 2015]. The comparisons between the police and the hospital 
registration of traffic accidents involving personal injury shows that it is especially accident with cyclists 
that are under-represented in the police registered accidents data [Olesen, 2018]. The registrations of the 
hospitals are not currently included in the official accident statistics, but work is underway to change this 
[Statistics Denmark, 2020]. Data in this analysis provide only personal injuries from the polices database.  
 
Other areas such as air transport, general work processes, and the automotive industry looked at “nearby- 
accidents” when examining safety. Considerations were therefore made to investigate whether this 
concept could be transferred to the road traffic safety work [Hydén, 1987]. The first road traffic safety 
studies, based on traffic conflicts, were conducted in the 1950s-1960s. The studies were successful and led 
to more countries was developing their own traffic conflict observation techniques in the 1970s, 
[Laureshyn, 2016]. 
 
A major project in the United States, undertaken in 1985 by the Federal Highway Administration's traffic 
division, investigated the relationship between traffic conflicts and accidents. The conclusion of the project 
was that conflicts assess the accident picture as accurately as an assessment based on accident data 
[Gettman, 2008]. 
Evaluations that are based on data from accident reports and conflicts are assessed to give a more accurate 
picture of the safety situation than studies of accidents and conflicts separately. [D.J. Migletz and Bauer, 
1985]. Similarly, in a technical report by Laureshyn and Varhelyi [2018], it is recommended that conflict 
studies should be supplemented with other studies in the form of traffic counts, speed measurements, 
behavioral observation and accident data, as it will give a better picture of the safety in a given location 
[Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 2018]. 
Using conflicts in road traffic safety work has a number of advantages compared with accident data. For 
every accident involving personal injury, many more conflicts will occur, which will give a larger data base 
and insight into road traffic safety in a shorter time [Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 2018]. According to Lund 
University [1992], up to 40,000 conflicts will occur for each accident [Lund University, 1992], and according 
to Gettman et al. [2008], there will be 20,000 conflicts per accident [Gettman, 2008]. 
==PAGE:7==
 
6 
 
Traffic conflicts can be observed manually, thereby conflicts can be viewed and the behavior can also be 
observed which is information than is not normally available in accident reports. [Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 
2018]. In addition, based on a conflict study, improvements in road traffic safety can be done before 
accidents occur, which allows the conflict study to be used as a preventive study. [Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 
2018] 
There are also several different software tools that have been developed for semi-automatic detection of 
conflicts from video. That can in some cases help to make the work of identifying potential conflicts easier. 
an example for semi-automatic programs are RUBA (Road User Behavior Analysis) [Olesen,2016], 
developed by Aalborg University, and T-Analyst [Lund University, 2019], developed by Lund University.  
 
The advantage of these tools is that, based on predefined criteria, such as speed and distance to a potential 
point of conflict, video sequences with potential conflicts can be identified. All potential conflicts should 
subsequently be reviewed to ensure that there is a real conflict. The disadvantage of this semi-automatic 
detection is that it is difficult to form an overall assessment of the general traffic flow at the intersection 
and the road user behavior.  
 
In the recent years, it has been investigated whether methods such as tracking and microscopic traffic 
simulation can be used for conflict studies. Tracking is a fully automated program. This method can 
determine the position, speed, acceleration and heading of vehicles. This removes a large part of the 
manual work associated with semi-automatic conflict studies, which streamline the process. [Laureshyn, 
2010].  
 
However, these tools cannot fully replace the manual work, which will also largely be based on experience 
in conducting behavioral studies both in the field and from video recordings. Since it has not been possible 
to use software tools in this analysis, the registered information from the observations and video 
recordings have been analyzed manually according to the conflict technique method.  
 
Most studies in Denmark which in the conflict technique has been used have mainly been before and after 
studies focusing on concrete actions in the road design to get a quicker evaluation of the measure rather 
than waiting 3-5 years for enough accident data to become available [Trafitec,2009]. It will therefore be 
interesting to investigate the behavior and safety of the vulnerable road users at a signal-controlled 
intersection and from this to assess which road safety measures must be established at the intersection to 
avoid accidents by using the conflict technique.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
7 
 
1.1. 
Project description 
The project aims to investigate the safety of the vulnerable road users using/in? the signal-controlled 
intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej as a case. The investigation must be carried out by conducting manual 
observations, according to the Swedish conflict technique method [Hydén, 1987]. 
The project has the following problem definition: 
Can conflict technique study be used as a supplement for a traditional accident analysis to improve road 
safety? 
The above problem statement is divided into two issues: 
➢ How the results of the conflict study are consistent with the accident analysis? 
➢ What is characteristic of serious conflicts and accidents with pedestrians and cyclists in the signal-
controlled intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej? 
The project location was chosen based on the number of police-registered accidents involving cyclists and 
pedestrians in order to investigate a location where it is assumed on the basis of the traffic volumes and 
the accident data that many conflicts with the vulnerable road users can arise (see Appendix 1.1). The 
signal-controlled four-legged intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej, which can be seen on figure 1.1, was chosen 
as it is the intersection where most accidents occurred during the past five years (2014-2018). 
 
Figure 1.1: Project location, which consists of the signal-controlled four-legged intersection with the roads Tagensvej and Jagtvej in 
Copenhagen. Source: www.krak.dk.  
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
8 
 
The intersection is located in the northeastern part of Copenhagen (see the red dot in figure 1.2) 
 
Figure 1.2: Overview map of Copenhagen with the location of the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej, Source: 
www.københavnerkortet.dk    
From the collected data based on manual observations of the intersection and video recordings, the 
conflicts are analyzed,  to investigate what impact the road user behavior can have on road safety, with 
focus on the vulnerable road users and whether there is a correlation with the type of accidents that have 
occurred and the serious conflicts to improve road safety before accidents occur. The report describes the 
methods used and results. 
The intersection is a four-legged signal-controlled intersection and consists of two roads; Tagensvej and 
Jagtvej. Both roads are a part of the overall road network in the city of Copenhagen, and are in the urban 
zone, with a speed limit of 50 km/h. 
The intersection is marked with blue bicycle lanes and pedestrian zebra crossings in all directions. The bike 
paths continue all the way up to the intersection, with combined right and left turn lanes in all directions 
beside the northeastern direction which has a “bicycle-box” in front of the right turn lane (see figure 1.3).  
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
9 
 
 
Figure 1.3: Road geometry and traffic solutions the intersection is characterized by. Pictures taken by Ebtihal Elwan and from google 
maps. 
Traffic volumes  
 
The municipality of Copenhagen has collected traffic data on the roads at the intersection 
Tagensvej/Jagtvej. The bicycle and car traffic on these roads are counted in 2016 and 2018. The number of 
road users on a road is measured in annual traffic (ÅDT). ÅDT is the number of vehicles passing an average 
place on the road per day, seen over a whole year 1.  
 
The traffic counts give an overall picture of the traffic situation in specific areas or to determine the traffic 
on the individual roads. In the field of road safety, the traffic counts are used, among other things, for 
accident analyzes and accident prevention. The safety is assessed based on the number of accidents in 
relation to the amount of traffic on the road. This data can then be used to suggest solutions for 
improvements [Danish Road Directorate website, 2020].  
 
Both Tagensvej and Jagtvej are very loaded with traffic. Tagensvej has an annual traffic of 19.700 
vehicles/day and 14.600 bicycles/day. Jagtvej has an annual traffic of 18500 vehicles/day and 11.700 
bicycles/day. The traffic volumes per day is shown in figure 1.4 below. 
 
 
1 The annual traffic is traffic per day calculated as the averaged over the whole year (Danish Road Directorate, 2006). 
==PAGE:11==
 
10 
 
 
Figure 1.4: The annual traffic (ÅDT) at the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej. Red arrows indicate bicycle traffic and blue arrow indicate 
car traffic.   
Based on the traffic volumes the intersection is characterized as a medium sized intersection with different 
road user groups using the intersection. The central location of the intersection and the different functions 
around the intersection attract many road users [Municipality of Copenhagen, 2020].   
With the amount of traffic and the functions around the intersection, it is expected that many conflicts will 
arise especially with the vulnerable road users. Figure 1.5 shows the functions near the intersection. 
Northeast of the intersection there is a college "Kollegiegården" which is intended for approx. 300 residents 
and there is also another college in the southeast side of the intersection "Rigshospitalets Kollegium”, with 
approx. 400 apartments, which is a destination for many cyclists from the Panum Institute. The intersection 
is surrounded by residential properties with different occupations on the ground floor. Furthermore, bus 
stops are marked with yellow boxes with bus icon. 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
11 
 
 
Figure 1.5: Overview of the functions around the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej. Pictures are taken from google maps.  
Appendix 1.2 shows a geometric drawing of the intersection with the names of roads and Appendix 1.3 
contains, photos from the intersection. Road geometry drawings obtained from the signal and road 
department of the Copenhagen Municipality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
12 
 
2. 
Background  
 
A study of the Danish Road Accident Investigation Board showed that road user factors occurred in virtually 
all 291 accidents included in the study, which indicates that the accident could have been avoided by more 
appropriate traffic behavior. In almost half of all the analyzed accidents, it was estimated that insufficient 
attention or Inappropriate behavior on at least one of the road users involved in the accidents was the 
reason to the accidents happened [HVU, 2014]. The accident statistics in Denmark over the past 5 years 
period (2014-2018) show that during this period the accident development of killed and seriously injured 
pedestrians and cyclists is higher than the number of killed and seriously injured motorists (see figure 2.1).2 
 
 
Figure 2.1: The development of killed and seriously injured by road user at national level in urban areas, source: www.statistibanken 
.dk   
DTU Transport has shown in 2012 that both improvements in active and passive safety have significantly 
reduced the number of injuries in traffic. This is supported by the increasing prevalence of, among other 
things, airbags and anti-skid technology (ESC), which are among the technologies that certainly reduce the 
risk of injury. The roads have generally become safer as the work of removing black spots (accident-laden 
intersections or accident-laden sections of the road network) and raising the road's standard in general 
probably has a big impact also.  
Accidents at intersections  
Intersections are one of the most dangerous places in the road network and accidents at intersections 
make up a large proportion of accidents, and they are serious [Chen, Cao, & Logan, 2012]. Accidents at 
intersections occur typically when vehicles are leaving the intersection, i.e. either straight ahead or turn 
left.  Intersections are especially risky for vulnerable road users in the meeting with motorists.  
 
 
2 Final accident data for 2019 have not been definitively calculated during the project period and are therefor not included.  
==PAGE:14==
 
13 
 
The number of accidents that have happened in signal-controlled intersections in Copenhagen over the 
past 5 years period (2014-2018) with injuries involving cyclists and pedestrians shows that in 2015, there 
was a markedly decrease in the number of accidents compared to the previous year (2014). If the lowest 
accident number in 2015 (52 accidents) is compared with the accident number in 2018 (96 accidents), an 
increase in the number of accidents corresponding to 46% is seen in this period (see figure 2.2).  
 
 
Figure 2.2: Number of injury accidents involving cyclists and pedestrians in signal-controlled intersections in Copenhagen. 
The City of Copenhagen's bicycle accounts show the same trend in cycling accidents in general compared to 
the number of kilometers cycled. Despite the large increase in cycled kilometers, accident numbers have 
been at their lowest in 2015 [The Bicycle Account, 2018]. Figure 2.3 shows that there are 3 killed, 138 are 
easily injured and 198 are seriously injured in the 400 signal-controlled intersections in Copenhagen. 
 
Figure 2.3: Severity of injured cyclist and pedestrians in signal-controlled intersections in Copenhagen. 
Of all the accidents recorded in the Copenhagen signal-controlled intersections with cyclists and 
pedestrians involved, is 64.6% of the injured cyclists and 35,4% are pedestrians (see figure 2.4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The number of severely injuries clearly points to the fact that there can be done more to ensure the 
vulnerable road user conditions in signal-controlled intersections in Copenhagen. In view of this, the road 
traffic safety of cyclists and pedestrians in a signal-controlled intersection will be investigated in more detail 
in this analysis. 
71
52
60
59
96
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
138
198
3
0
50
100
150
200
250
Easily injured
Seriously injured
Killed
Cyclist
Pedestrian
Figure 2.4: Injured cyclists and pedestrians. 
==PAGE:15==
 
14 
 
3. 
Method 
The method section explains the methodological choices that underlie this study.  
3.1. 
Data 
The conflict study method is based on that road traffic safety work can be assessed on the basis of conflict 
analyzes. Assessment of road traffic safety takes place by considering the behavior that is related to the 
conflicts. This method can help understanding the process that leads to accidents [Laureshyn and Varhelyi, 
2018]. The theory behind the conflict technique study is based on the fact that there is a connection 
between accidents and conflicts. In a conflict, an evasion is made, such as braking, acceleration, turning 
maneuver to avoid the accident. The definition of a conflict is: 
 
"A traﬃc conﬂict is deﬁned as an observable situation of two or more road users where one or 
both of them take evasive action to avoid an impending collision."[Amundsen, Norges teknisk- 
naturvitenskapelige forskningsråd og Tekniska högskolan i Lund, 1977]. 
 
A serious conflict almost always has the same event sequence as an accident, with the important difference 
that accidents rarely occur and that no one is injured in the conflict [Hydén, 1987]. The connection between 
conflicts in traffic and the severity of these, can be described using a road safety pyramid. The top of the 
pyramid represents accidents while the lower part of the pyramid represents the severity of the conflict. 
The pyramid thus illustrates that the number of conflicts can be used as a 'compensation' for accidents, the 
difference is simply the number of conflicts is significantly greater than the number of accidents (see figure 
3.1).
 
 
Figure 3.1: Road safety pyramid by Laureshyn and Varehelyi [Laureshyn og Varhelyi,2018]. 
At the bottom of the pyramid is the normal safe interaction and meeting between the road users 
(encounters). Here, the road users have unobstructed and undisturbed passage. For this type of traffic the 
severity is low and these situations are most frequently found in the traffic. Next, the severity of potential 
conflicts, minor conflicts and serious conflicts increases. Here, conflicts are avoided, and these will occur less 
frequently. The top of the pyramid is the highest degree of accidents, which occur at least frequently.  
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
15 
 
Accidents can be divided into material damage, injury and fatal accidents. [Hydén, 1987] and [Laureshyn and 
Varhelyi, 2018]. The severity of the conflicts is estimated from:
➢ The distance to a thought point of collection. 
➢ The speed at the moment the conflict occurs. 
 
Data collection 
The conflict study in this analysis was conducted by manual observations, supplemented with video 
recordings. The advantages of this are that it requires a minimal form of equipment such as an observer, 
registration notes, pencil, and a watch. The camera is also an important part of the equipment to see the 
listed conflict situations through afterwards. In addition, the study has a high degree of flexibility regarding 
where and when it is performed. The disadvantages of the manual data collection, however, are that the 
observer has a high responsibility for the assessment of conflicts, time registration, listing and attention. 
Weather conditions have a major impact on the performance of the study, which can be more difficult in 
bad weather.
 
In preparation for the actual conflict studies, the selected intersection was inspected. The purpose of the 
inspection was to ensure that the intersection was suitable for the purposes of the project. The inspection 
was also a preparatory work, which included: 
 
➢ Delimitation of the observation area 
➢ Assess the need for the number of observers 
➢ Find the most suitable observations and camera positions  
➢ Try recording for a few minutes   
➢ Measuring the intersection 
 
Subsequently, the sampling video recording was reviewed to ensure that the camera location was correct 
relative to the area of observation. The optimum is to have the camera positioned high so that the conflict 
situations can be viewed from above with a perspective near to a bird’s eye view. The Municipality of 
Copenhagen does not allow private camera equipment on their signal stands, and it has also been 
investigated whether the camera could be placed in one of the apartments with a view to the intersection, 
but this has not been possible either. Two attempts were made to locate the Go Pro camera which was 
used during the registrations (see figure 3.2).  
 
Figure 3.2: Go pro camera.  
==PAGE:17==
 
16 
 
 
 
The first attempt involved placing the camera on the bench in the north eastern leg of the intersection. It 
turned out that this was not very optimal, and it was not possible to set the camera, so that the whole 
intersection was included in the picture (see figure 3.3 and 3.4). 
 
 
Figure 3.3: Placement of camera on bench (northeast corner) 
The second attempt was to attach the camera to the bike handlebars, which allowed it to get a little closer 
to the intersection. This had a very good effect as few people noticed the camera. It was therefore chosen 
to make the recordings with the camera attached to the bicycle handlebar.  
 
 
Figure 3.4: Camera attached to the bicycle handlebar.  
It was also tested where it is best for the observer to stand during the registrations of conflicts. As the 
observer must be able to assess the distance between the two parties involved in a conflict and the speed, 
it is important not to stand too far away from the observation area and thereby be more visible (see figure 
3.5). However, it is still important to insure, that the camera and observer do not affect the behavior of the 
road users. According to The Municipilaty of Copenhagens experience with road inspections it is seen that 
people in Copenhagen are in general used to see workers in yellow jackets on the roads and do not connect 
a person with a paper and pencil in his hand as a traffic controller or anything in that direction 
[Copenhagen Municipality,Road department,2020]. No special reactions have been experienced by the 
road users that are expected to have an impact on their behavior. Therefore, it is not considered that the 
observer’s or the cameras visibility at the intersection has affected the behavior of the road users and thus 
the validity of data.  
 
==PAGE:18==
 
17 
 
 
Figure 3.5: The observers position at the northeastern side of the intersection. 
It was also investigated whether it was possible to film the whole intersection at once. Unfortunately, the 
resolution of the camera did not allow this. Instead, it was chosen to film at the height of a bicycle. It is 
therefore chosen to place the observer in the corner where the pedestrian and cyclist currents are greatest 
depending on the time of day. The selected observation points and camera location are shown in figure 3.6. 
 
Figure 3.6: Observation areas and camera position.  
The Conflict Technique study was conducted from three different observation areas as shown in figure 3.6.  
Site A for three days, one day from site B and one day from site area C. Based on the best view of the entire 
intersection and the space available in the four corners of the intersection is was chosen to conduct the 
observations from area A most days, since the location of the camera and observer is not to the detriment 
of the pedestrians on the sidewalk.  For that reason, the southwest corner of the intersection has been 
deselected, as there was not enough space to the camera setup without bothering the pedestrians. Figure 
3.7, 3.8 and 3.9 shows the camera position and view from the three direction. 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
18 
 
 
 
A (Northeast corner of the intersection) 
 
 
Figure 3.7: Camera position and view from the northeast.            
B (Northwestern corner of the intersection) 
 
 
Figure 3.8: Camera position and view from north west.  
C (Southeast corner of the intersection)  
 
 
 
Figure 3.9: Camera position and view from the south east.  
In this case, it was me who conducted the observations with help of a former colleague who works with 
road traffic safety and is trained in conflicts observations. However, we did not observe the intersection at 
the same time.  
==PAGE:20==
 
19 
 
Conflict studies have been conducted for a total period of 15 ½ hours at the following weekdays and time 
of day (see table 1): 
Day  
Time 
Observation time 
Friday 07.02.2020 
12:15pm – 03:45pm 
3.5 hours 
Wednesday 19.02.2020 
2:30pm – 05:30pm 
3 hours  
Tuesday 25.02.2020 
07.30am – 10.30am 
3 hours 
Thursday 27.02.2020 
07.30am – 10.30am 
3 hours 
Wednesday 04.03.2020 
07:00am – 10:00am 
3 hours  
Table 1:Time of conducting conflict studies. The observations have been mad between 3 to 3,5 hours/day.   
The observations and data collection are conducted on weekdays except holidays. The observations were 
made during morning rush hour between 7-9.30 am and in afternoon rush hour between 15.17.30 pm to 
ensure most potential conflicts. 5 days of conflict technique studies have been conducted at the 
intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej. A total of 15,5 hours of observations were made and the observations have 
been made between 3-3,5 hours per day. The amount of registration was based on what has been assessed 
could be completed within the specified project period and available resources. 
It was daily checked whether there were planned demonstrations, or other major events in Copenhagen 
that would cause abnormal traffic conditions in the city. If this was the case, no conflict technique studies 
were conducted those days. 
Registration of conflicts 
A conflict is registered if at least one of the parties involved shows clear evidence that he or she has found 
the incident dangerous and responds to the situation immediately around the point of collision by, for 
example, accelerating, braking or changing direction [Tanja K.O.,2014]  
Conflicts are registered if:  
➢ There is a short time distance from the first road user leaving a point to the next road user arriving 
at the same point.  
➢ There seems to be a lack of interaction between road users, which is why one or both road users 
are slowing down at the last minute or make an avoiding maneuver (accelerating, braking, changing 
direction). 
➢ The incident does not feel ok or feel dangerous. These include, for example, incidents where it 
seems that a collision can easily occur if something unexpected happens. 
The following categories have been filled out in connection with the registration of a conflict: 
 
➢ Age is estimated based on appearance like hair color, aids, walking speed, height etc. 
➢ Gender is assessed based on hair length, the way people go, clothing, facial features. A 
distinction is made between women and men 
➢ Road user type is assessed by vehicle (cyclist, motorist, or pedestrian) 
➢ Conflict type is assessed based on the parties involved in the conflict.  
➢ Speed is estimated from the observer's assessment and video studies. 
==PAGE:21==
 
20 
 
➢ Distance to collusion point is estimated from the observer’s assessment and video 
material. Practically by use of knowledge of distance and widths of road marking such as 
(pedestrian field, bicycle field etc. 
➢ Time, there is difference between conflicts registered in the morning and in the afternoon 
➢ The severity of the conflict is calculated based on the relationship between the distance 
to the “possible collision point” and the speed at the time of the conflict. 
The date, the intersection and the weather conditions should be pre-filled to save time. Then all observed 
conflicts are immediately noted in a registration protocol seen in figure 3.10 (see Appendix 1.4 for a large 
format). During the observations the focus has been on cyclists and pedestrians in all crossing direction. 
The two most important parameters that have to be as precise as possible are the distance and the speed 
of the involved parts during the conflict. These two parameters should be estimated by the observer. 
Next, information on gender and age can be filled in if it is possible to determine during the inspection. It’s 
not always possible to determine the age and sex of the people involved in the conflicts. Often it is not 
possible to look into the vehicles, cyclist wearing helmets/scarfs etc. But by using video recordings more 
detailed information can be obtained. When a conflict is observed it is most important, to record the 
following first: 
 
➢ Time  
 
 
➢ Road users involved in the conflict 
 
 
➢ Speed  
 
 
➢ Distance to the point of collision 
 
➢ Conflict situation 
 
 
Figure 3.10: Conflict registration protocol. Source Lund 
Technical University.  
 
==PAGE:22==
 
21 
 
 
Quality assurance 
In this study video recordings are done to subsequently verify the registered conflicts and for quality 
assurance and supplementation if there is missing information. Quality assurance has been done by 
repeating the conflicts several times on the video recordings if there has been doubt, for example, distance 
and speed to be as accurate as possible. Is was not possible to video record during the entire observation 
period as the battery lasts for 2.5 hours at a time. 
All video recordings have been reviewed and all conflicts recorded in the field are, as far as possible, 
checked to ensure that the conflict information recorded by the observers in the field such as distances and 
speeds, is correct. If necessary, values are revised, and missing information added. The combination of field 
observations and video recordings provide higher quality of data. 
3.2. 
Data processing  
The data material contains 97 conflicts and data for each conflict is entered in excel. The severity of each 
conflict is calculated using the method and formulas below If there was any doubt about the distance and 
speed, the video material was reviewed several times to categorize the conflict as accurately as possible.  
All conflicts from the registration protocol are reviewed by entering data from all the criteria that are used 
to identify conflicts in excel using a simple coding method. 
To make it easier to find the conflicts in the registration protocol, it is chosen to enter the data for each 
registration day in excel. There is no particular way to process data, so it is up to the individual to find the 
most transparent way to do it, depending on the amount of data. The following is an example of how the 
age and gender criteria are coded and counted in Excel (see figure 3.11).  
 
Figure 3.11: Example of encoding data in Excel. See Appendix sheet 1 and sheet 2.   
==PAGE:23==
 
22 
 
 
Here it is chosen to insert the conflicts after the registration with the different categories, as it will make it 
easier to find the conflict again in the registration protocol if needed.  
 
The registered conflicts are divided into two categories, serious or less serious. Whether a conflict is serious 
or less serious is determined by the TA-value, which depends on the distance to the intended point of 
collision as well as the speed level: 
 
Where: 
 
➢ TA = Time to Accident  
➢ d = The distance to a thought point of collision 
➢ v = Speed in the dodge moment 
Time to Accident (TA) is the time that is measured from a maneuver initiated to the collision would have 
occurred if both parts had continued at unchanged speed and direction. The TA-value is calculated using 
the distance, d, between the parts involved in the conflict and the speed, v, see figure 3.12. The faster the 
parties involved in a conflict are or the later they react, the more serious the conflict becomes.  
 
All registered conflicts are entered with data from the two parameters the distance d, and the speed V to 
calculate the TA-value according to the formula above (see table 2).   
Conflict number 
d 
V (km/t) 
TA 
V (m/s) 
TA 
Severity class 
1 
0 
10 
0,0 
2,8 
0,0 B 
2 
1 
5 
0,2 
1,4 
0,7   
3 
0,5 
5 
0,1 
1,4 
0,4 A 
4 
3 
35 
0,1 
9,7 
0,3 C 
5 
0 
2 
0 
0,6 
0,0 B 
Table 2: Example of calculating the TA-value with the first 10 conflicts from the registration day 1 (07.02.2020). see Appendix 2 with 
calculation of TA-value for all conflicts. 
 
Figure 3.12: Distance d, and speed VII, for the 
road user doing an evasion maneuver – in this 
case, the left-turning car (part II). The red line 
marks the position where the avoidance starts. 
maneuver begins 
TA-value = TA = 
𝑑
𝑣 
==PAGE:24==
 
23 
 
As a control, the TA value can also be read in the following table based on distance and speed (see figure 
3.13)
 
Figure 3.13: TA value as a function of speed and distance. The bolded TA values correspond to serious conflicts. The TA values that 
are not marked with bold correspond to less serious conflicts (Source: Lund Technical University).   
A serious conflict is characterized by being brought into a dangerous traffic situation. The conflict is in the 
same way as a traffic accident as a result of the interaction between the vehicle, the environment and the 
road user not working. The avert maneuver required to avoid the accident is most often a slowdown but 
can also be an evasion maneuver, signaling or acceleration. The similarity between accidents and serious 
conflicts is clear, and therefore, according to the Swedish conflict technique theory - accidents can be 
prevented if conflicts are prevented [Olesen,2018].  
A serious conflict is defined as a situation where: 
 
 
 
That means, that a situation where there would have been less than 10 seconds (t) for an accident occurred 
if one of the parts had not reacted. The graph in Figure 3.14 defines the boundary between serious and less 
serious conflicts. It shows that it is the speed, v, and distance, d, that determine the TA-value defines a 
serious or a less serious conflict. 
TU-value= TU = 
𝑑
𝑣< 𝑡 
==PAGE:25==
 
24 
 
 
Figure 3.14: The graph defines the boundary between serious conflicts and less serious conflicts. The farther from the TA graph the 
conflict is located, the more serious it is. Source: Lund Technical University.  
At speeds of 50 km/h, is the TA-value for a serious conflict TU≤ 2 sec., corresponding to a distance up to 
approx. 27 meters. For a speed of 100 km/h is the TA-value for a serious conflict approx. 4 sec. or less, 
corresponding to a distance up to about 100 meters.  
 
3.3. 
Accident analysis  
In order to compare the observed conflict types with the actual accidents that happened at the intersection 
of Tagensvej/Jagtvej the study also includes an analysis of police registered accidents.  
Accident data is extracted from vejman.dk (see Appendix 2.1), which contains data on all police registered 
accidents in Denmark. The database contains several parameters related to each accident as well as each 
element and person (excluding uninjured passengers) involved in an accident. The accident data is from the 
years 2014-2018 (both years included) as the final accident data from 2019 have not been published during 
the project period. It is especially personal injury accidents that is interesting in this case. 
 
The accident analysis is focused on accidents with vulnerable road users - pedestrians and cyclists at signal-
controlled intersections in Copenhagen. Thus, only accidents at all the 400 signal-controlled intersections in 
Copenhagen where two or more vulnerable road users are involved and analyzed.  
Accident data is compared with the number of serious conflicts recorded, and the characteristics observed 
at the intersection of Tagensvej/Jagtvej during the conflict study. To investigate the consequences of a 
serious conflict develops into an accident the serious conflicts are converted into accidents by calculating 
the accident density of the near accidents or serious conflicts, in order to establish the necessary measures 
to prevent accidents. 
==PAGE:26==
 
25 
 
3.4. 
Statistical analysis   
Statistical tests have been performed to determine if there is a significant difference in the number of 
conflicts in relation to gender and age distribution, as well as a number of other variables in relation to the 
physical design of the intersection and conflict situations. 
A difference between two measurements is considered significant if it can be concluded by relevant 
statistical methods that the difference is so large that it is due to something else than the random variation 
that will always occur when measuring something. If the conflict technique study were made at the same 
intersection on three different days, then there could be three different results. This is due to the natural 
variance. The same road user does not necessarily behave the same every time he / she passes the same 
intersection because it’s a new situation each time. But since these are random variance measurements, 
there is always a risk that something has happened that is unusual [Bendsen, 2018]. 
Therefore, when making tests for significance, first the willingness to accept the risk of error is decided. 
This is what is called significance level. In this analysis (which is the usual in analyzes of that kind) a 
significance level of 95% is used. This means that a 5% risk of concluding something wrong can be accepted 
in this case. The collected data is the basis of the statistical validity analysis 
Example 
In a specific situation it can be whether the distribution of young men in the age group 16-25 involved in 
serious conflicts is different from the distribution of young women in the age group 16-25 who get involved 
in serious conflicts. For this purpose, the Chi square test is used. The Chi square test tests whether the 
distribution is similar between two groups [Bendsen, 2018]. 
Data 
Men 
Women 
Age Group 16-25 
61 (55,5%) 
49 (58%) 
All Other Groups  
110 
84 
Table 3: Observed data for men and women. The data includes both parties involved in a conflict. see Appendix 2 sheet 3  
For the age group 16-25, 55.5% of men get involved in conflicts while 58% of women get involved in 
conflicts. The homogeneity test tests whether the 55.5% men and 58% women can be assumed to be a 
random fluctuation or whether the percentage is different for men and women in the agegroup16-25.  
Statistical tests have been performed for the following: 
 
➢ If the distribution of young men involved in conflicts is different from the distribution of young 
women. 
➢ If the proportion of men involved in conflicts is different than the proportion of women involved in 
conflicts.   
➢ If the distribution of road users involved in conflicts different from the severity of the conflict. 
➢ If the distribution of the avoidance maneuver of part II is different from the severity of the conflict.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
26 
 
Chi square-test  
The significance is tested by use of the homogeneity tests. This test is also called a χ2 test (chi square) for 
independence. The test tests whether different samples can be concluded to derive from the same 
distribution. The Chi square test is used to compare the collected data, with the expected values which is 
what is expected under the 0 hypothesis.  
First, a hypothesis test is set up. The hypothesis test is established by setting the zero hypothesis 𝐻0 and 
the alternative hypothesis 𝐻1 for each of the categories. 
If 𝐻0 is rejected, it can be concluded that there is a significant difference between the expected and 
observed data. if 𝐻0 is not rejected/accepted, that means, there is no significant difference between 
expected and observed data. 
 
The way to calculate this is to compare observed data with expected data by using the Chi square formula: 
 
The rule for p-value approach:  
➢ Reject 𝐻0 if p-value is ≤ 0,05 
➢ Do not reject the 𝐻0  if the p-value is > than 0,05 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
27 
 
4. 
Results  
 
This section provides a description of the results of the conflict technique study, and accident analysis will 
also be presented followed by an overall conclusion of the results. 
4.1. 
Conflicts  
Among the recorded serious conflicts at the intersection of Tagensvej/Jagtvej, it has been investigated 
which conflict situations are the most frequent. This part describes the most frequent conflict situations 
and compares the proportion with the other conflict situations. 
Car conflicts are defined as conflicts where there has been at least one bicycle or at least one pedestrian 
involved in the conflict. The circumstances of these pedestrian and bicycle conflicts have been further 
investigated, and the corresponding personal injury accidents at the intersection have also been selected as 
a basis for comparison. 
 
In the conflict studies, all conflicts, both serious and less serious, according to the method, have been 
recorded. As the uncertainty of the determination of the less serious conflicts is considered to be greater 
than the uncertainty of the determination of the serious conflicts, in this analysis it is chosen to evaluate 
and compare the observed serious conflicts. Including only serious conflicts in the analysis reduces the 
overall amount of analysis data. On the other hand, it is estimated that the results of the analysis will be 
stronger. 
Table 4 lists the total number of serious and less serious conflicts observed at the intersection by conflicts 
type. The table shows that there are 50 serious conflicts out of 97 registered conflicts at the intersection. 
This corresponds to that 52% of the conflicts are serious.  
Road user 
Cyclist/Cyclist 
Cyclist/Pedestrian 
Cyclist/Car 
Car/Pedestrian 
Serious conflicts 
 16 (32%) 
11 (22%) 
 19 (38%) 
 
 
  4 (8%) 
 
Less serious conflicts 
12 (25,5%) 
4 (8,5%) 
31 (66%) 
0 (0%) 
Table 4: Number of serious and less serious conflicts by conflict type. 
It is seen that conflicts between two vulnerable road users represents 54% of the conflicts. Table 3 also 
shows that cars are involved in 46% of the serious conflicts with a vulnerable road user.  
The Danish Road Directorate uses accident diagrams in accident analyzes to illustrate accidents on a 
locality. In this case, these diagrams are used, however, converted to "Conflict diagram". The conflict 
diagrams show all serious conflicts according to where they occurred at the intersection (see figure 4.1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
28 
 
It should be noted that the colors indicated in the figures are: 
➢ Car (passenger car, van, trucks/lorries, taxi): Blue 
➢ Pedestrians and cyclists: Red  
 
Figure 4.1: Conflict diagram of the seruois conflicts at the intersection Tagenvej/Jagtvej. 
The number of serious conflicts by severity is illustrated in Figure 4.2 and gives an account of how many 
conflicts are registered in each individual severity classes, A-D. Class A is the less severe conflicts and class D 
is the most serious conflicts. The severity of the conflict increases in the direction of the arrow. 
 
Figure 4.2: TA graph. Assessed speed in the conflict moment and time of accident (TA) for all serious conflicts. The severity increases 
in the direction of the arrow. Source: Lund Technical University. 
==PAGE:30==
 
29 
 
Conflict diagrams as well as TA graphs shown in this chapter are also available in a larger format in 
Appendices 3.1, 3.2.  
It can be seen from the table 4 that there are no conflicts in the category D – the most seriously conflicts. 
This is probably because the conflicts are registered at an intersection where the speed is lower than at 
roadway. Many road users start from speed 0km/h after the signal change and as the severity is expressed 
by the speed this may be the reason why no registered conflicts are in the D category. Table 4 also shows 
that most serious conflicts are in severity classes A and B. 
 
Severity class 
A 
 
 
B 
C 
D 
Number of conflicts  
28 
 
17 
5 
0 
Table 5: Number of conflicts by severity. The severity of the conflicts increases in alphabetical order. 
As the conflict study is based on the theory that conflicts and accidents are comparable, he conflicts will be 
processed and presented based on accident situations [Danish Road Directorate, 2015], which in the 
project is referred to as conflict situations. Conflict will thus be described based on the accident situation, 
as the conflict would have ended if the involved road users had not made an avoidants maneuver. Conflict 
situations are defined based on the situations that can be seen in table 6. 
 
Conflict situation  
 
Accident number and description 
Number of conflicts  
 
 
 
 
312-Right turn accidents in front of 
oncoming.  
 
17 
 
 
 
 
510- Accidents between intersecting vehicles 
without turning and with element 2 from the 
right. 
 
20 
 
 
 
410- Left turn accidents in front of oncoming  
 
6 
 
 
 
520 – Accidents between intersecting vehicles 
without turning and with element 2 from the 
left. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
140 – Rear end collisions.  
1 
Table 6: Conflict situations in the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej 
Most of the conflicts occur in the northeastern and southeastern part of the intersection, and the most 
frequent conflict situation are accidents between two parties from different driving directions (conflict type 
510 and 520). In a signal-controlled intersection, the parties in this situation will always have different 
signal light color, as it is parties that come from different directions. These situations count for 52% of all 
serious conflicts recorded. At 23 out of 26 of this type of conflicts, both involved parties are a vulnerable 
road user and 2 out of 26 with a vulnerable road user and a car. 
The second most frequent conflict situation is “312 Right turn conflicts in front of oncoming” with 34% of 
the serious conflicts. Conflict situation 312 is a situation where both elements often will have the same 
signal at the intersection. Only 2 out of 17 of this conflict types are with too vulnerable road users involved.  
 
The third most frequent conflict situation is where one of the parties makes a left turn in front of an 
oncoming part. 12% of the serious conflicts are registered as situation 410. In all the registered serious 
conflicts of this type, the combination is with a car and a vulnerable road user.  
 
In addition, only 1 rear end collision conflict with (140) has been registered where both involved parties are 
vulnerable road users.   The conclusion is that 54% of the serious conflicts are where both involved parties 
are vulnerable road users and 46% of the serious conflicts are with a vulnerable road user and a car.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
31 
 
Limitations  
Registration of conflicts has some limitations that can affect the quality of the observations and should be 
carefully investigated and planned and accommodated before conducting a conflict technique study. 
If two conflicts occur at different points at the same time at the intersection, the observer does not have 
the opportunity to see and record these accidents due to only one observer at the intersection at the time. 
Therefore, there will be some lost information that may affect the results. Also, it is not always possible for 
the observer to see and record everything even when one conflict occurs.  This can be due many things, 
such as how fast things happen or the view of the conflict from the observer’s position. In this case, it is 
important for the observer to note the time of the conflict so that to able to find the conflict on the video 
material afterwards. However, it is not possible to find a conflict on the video material if it occurs outside 
the camera angle.  
There are some factors that may be easier to see on video such as gender and age, as there is the 
opportunity to browse multiple times and zoom in on face and clothes. It is therefore possible that the 
information in the registration protocol will be corrected if any errors are detected by repeating the 
conflicts on video. 
Many hours of observations can be affected by the weather and loss of concentration. In this case, weather 
has been dry and cold appr. 2-7 degrees celsius all days and the observers had to make sure to have warm 
clothes, gloves and umbrella. The weather can also affect the behavior of the road users and the amount of 
traffic at the intersection. Since the weather has been fairly similar on all registration days, the conditions 
cannot be compared to, for example, a sunny day or a day of heavy rain on the roads to find out if the 
weather has an impact on the number of conflicts.  
Unexpected situations may also occur during the 
observations which may affect the observer`s 
attention and view. An example might be that the 
observer is interrupted by a passerby wondering 
why he/she is standing there and 
recording/filming the traffic, or people who 
choose to stand right in front of the camera for a 
long time and covering for the camera view. That 
makes it difficult to find the conflicts in the video 
material afterwards (see figure 4.3 and 4.4). The 
camera was not moved or adjusted when these 
and similar situations occurred.  
The conflict study shows that there is a 
concentration of conflicts in the northeast and 
south east part of the intersection(see figure 4.1, 
conflict digram). This may be because most 
registrations have been made in the north-
eastern side of the intersection, which makes it 
easier for the observer to capture the conflicts 
that occur in that side of the intersection.  
 
 
Figure 4.3: Two girls are talking in front of the camera for 
about 10 min. Picture is taken from the video recordings.  
 
Figure 4.4: A man with a baby carriage eating a sandwich for 
3 min. Picture is taken from the video recordings.         
==PAGE:33==
 
32 
 
 
Road user behavior  
Behavioral registrations often require a more manual approach and cannot be substituted the traditional 
accident analysis, but it can be used as a supplement [Trafitec,2019]. There are many different ways of 
detecting behavior, which is why it is important to make clear what exactly should be examined to identify 
the behaviors contribution to the conflicts.  The road user behavior is often something that can be analyzed 
by observing the traffic over a continuous period of ½ to a full day [Trafitec, 2019]. By observing the 
intersection for 15 ½ hours it is therefore possible to form a picture of the traffic and how the road users 
act in the different traffic situations in order to reduce the inappropriate behavior. If the situations with 
inappropriate behavior can be reduces, it will eventually mean that the risk of conflicts decreases [Trafitec, 
2019]. 
In this case the type of conflicts is based on the observer's registration of the road user’s behavior where a 
distinction is made between legal and illegal behavior. The manual review often provides a good basis for 
an overall assessment of the road user’s behavior. It is also to ensure that relevant behavioral trends that 
cannot necessarily be characterized as conflicts is included in the overall assessment of the road safety at 
the intersection. The observations have given an indication of how the traffic is generally conducted at the 
intersection as well as, which and where, there are conflicts between the road users and the general 
behavior. The following behavior is observed during the conflict study inspections: 
Cyclists from Jagtvej do not use the blue bicycle 
box 
Only a few cyclists use the blue bicycle box, 
usually only in situations where many cyclists are 
waiting for the signal to change (especially 
applies to left-turning cyclists). Instead, they 
place themselves right up to the intersection. This 
behavior can cause conflicts with pedestrians and 
cyclists from the south who must cross the 
pedestrian path. It is also seen that the cyclists 
place themselves in the bike lane two and two 
next to each other in a long line when the signal 
is red, and only a few uses the blue bicycle box. In 
addition, some motorists have been registered 
holding partially in the bicycle box while waiting 
for the signal to change (see figure 4.5 and 4.6). 
 
The position of the cyclists at the intersection can 
affect the visibility of the right turning cars and 
thus result in conflicts between the right turning 
cars and the bicycles. This behavior contributes to 
312 conflicts which constitutes 34% of the serious 
conflicts at the intersection.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.5: Cyclists block the pedestrian field while waiting 
for green signal. 
 
Figure 4.6: Cycle path up to the intersection as well as a blue 
bicycle box from the sidewalk pavement to the end of the 
right turn lane.  
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
33 
 
 
 
Many cyclists cycle on the pedestrian area 
across Tagensvej. 
There are many cyclists from Tagensvej south 
who drive on the pedestrian area while there is 
green for pedestrians, to avoid waiting for the   
signal to change. This behavior can cause conflicts 
between cyclists and pedestrians especially 
because many of the cyclists come at high speed 
and the number of pedestrians crossing the road 
is also large (see figure 4.7).  
During the conflict study, conflicts are recorded 
between the cyclists from south on the 
pedestrian area and the cyclists who hold in the 
corner of the intersection. This type of conflicts is 
due to lack of space in this corner of the 
intersection and high speed from the cyclist on 
the pedestrian area. Conflicts with pedestrians 
also arise for same reasons.  
Cyclists from Tagensvej south do not stop at the 
stop line when the signal is red. 
Most cyclists from Tagensvej south do not stand 
behind the stop line at the intersection, but they 
continue to the pedestrian area and some drive 
all the way to the blue bicycle lane waiting for the 
signal to change. This behavior is a nuisance for 
pedestrians who want to cross the road and 
causes conflicts with the cyclists from west on the 
blue bicycle lane (see figure 4.8). It is also noticed 
that many cyclists cycle across the pedestrian 
area in both directions (see figure 4.9).           
 
During the conflict study the conflict types 510 
and 520 have been recorded, which may be due 
to this behavior.   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.7: Cyclists crosses Tagensvej by cycling on the 
pedestrian area. 
 
Figure 4.8: Cyclists from Tagensvej south  position at the 
intersection while waiting for signal to change 
 
Figure 4.9: Cyclist from Tagensvej south crossing on the 
pedestrian area.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
34 
 
 
4.2. 
Statistical analysis  
 
The dataset consists of 97 conflicts and each conflict consists of at least two or three parties (part I, part II 
and part III). For simplicity it is reduced to 2 parts (part I and part II). For example, one cyclist can get into a 
conflict with more than one other or to pedestrians can get into a conflict with a cyclist. There have been 6 
conflicts of this kind and these are included in the data set with only two parties. 
The dataset includes a total of 194 road users involved, of whom 110 in the age group 16-25 years, 42 in 
the age group 26-36 and 42 in the age group 37-50. 
The road user  
The distribution of young men and women in traffic accidents show that it is especially young people in the 
age group 18-24 that is highest in the statistics for killed and injured in traffic [Danish Road directorates 
accident statistics]. Most registered conflicts (both serious and less serious) in the three age groups are 
men. In the age group 16-25 years, men make up 55%, and 57% in the age group 26-36 are men and the 
age group 37-50 years is the highest with 60%. 
 
On the other hand, the statistical analysis shows that the proportion of men involved in conflicts is not 
significantly different from the proportion of women involved in conflicts. It also shows that there is no 
difference in the proportion of men involved in conflicts and the proportion of women involved in conflicts. 
From the conflict study is the cyclist the road user who is most involved in conflicts (both serious and less 
serious) in the age group 16-25 years (66%) and in the age group 26-36 years (71%) whereas in the age 
group 37-50 years the car drivers become involved in conflicts to a greater extent than cyclists (50%). 
The statistical analysis shows, that there is no difference in the proportion of road users involved in serious 
conflicts and the severity of the conflict. An overview of road user types and gender for the 3 age groups 
are shown in Appendix 4.1. 
The conflict  
On the basis of their TA values, the conflicts are categorized as severe conflicts (N = 50) and less severe 
conflicts (N = 47). An overview of conflict types by severe and less severe conflicts are shown in Appendix 
4.2. 
52% of the registered conflict types are cyclist/cars conflicts. The numbers of serious conflicts are also 
greatest in this category (38%) and then comes the cyclist/cyclist conflicts (32%). Likewise, cyclist/car 
conflicts are the most common type of conflict in the less serious conflicts 66%, which indicates that most 
cyclist/car conflicts that are registered are not categorized as severe conflicts. The conflict type pedestrian / 
car, accounts for 8% of serious conflicts and 0% of less serious conflicts.  
The proportion of the conflict types could not be tested in the same way due to few observations in this 
category. Instead, it has been tested if the distribution of the avoidance maneuver of part II is different 
from the severity of the conflict. An overview of severe and less severe conflicts by speed, distance and 
avoidance maneuver are shown in Appendix 4.3. The statistical analysis shows that part II avoidance 
maneuver is significantly different from the severity of the conflict (see Appendix 2 and Appendix 5).  
 
==PAGE:36==
 
35 
 
5. 
Accidents  
In the four-legged signal-regulated intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej, 9 accidents have been registered with 
vulnerable road user involved over the last five years in the period 2014-2018 in the accident database 
vejman.dk. Vulnerable road users are defined as pedestrian and bicycle. There are also pedestrians on 
wheels, roller skates, a stroller, etc. Bicyclists include both two- and three-wheeled bicycles as well as 
electric bicycles. As mentioned before this accident analysis will concentrate on accidents with personal 
injury, as it is in these accidents that causes the greatest damage, both human and socio-economic. A 
personal injury accident can be divided into the following 3 categories:  
➢ Killed: Person who, as a result of a traffic accident, loses life within 30 days of the accident.  
➢ Serious injury: Person who, as a result of a traffic accident, sustains a bone fracture, lesion or 
concussion. 
➢ Easily injury: Person who, as a result of a traffic accident, incurs other injuries 
There have been 9 accidents at the intersection of Tagensvej/Jagtvej which is the intersection with the 
most accidents involving pedestrians and cyclists. The accident situations can be seen illustrated in table 7, 
and the related description from the accident report can be seen in Appendix 3.5. 
 
Accident situation 
 
Discerption 
Number of accidents  
 
 
 
312 – Right turn in front of a vehicle. 
1 
 
 
 
872 – Crossing Pedestrians from the left in 
an intersection before 
Vehicle. 
1 
 
 
 
 
011 - Accident with no other road user 
involved in straight roads or at intersections 
in straight direction, on the right.  
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
410 - Left turn in front of oncoming. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:37==
 
36 
 
 
 
 
876 - Pedestrians from right after right turn. 
2 
 
 
 
877 – Pedestrians from the left after left 
turn. 
1 
 
 
 
520 - Straight-ahead, crossing vehicles with 
element 2 from the left 
 
1 
Table 7: Accident situations in the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej 
The following characteristics are from the police registered accident data: 
➢ In all accidents, there was a vulnerable road user involved (pedestrians or cyclist). 
➢ No accidents with two vulnerable road users involved.  
➢ 4 of the accidents are cyclist/car accidents. 
➢ 5 of the accidents are car/pedestrian accidents.  
The total number of personal injury accidents at the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej by road user type is 
shown in table 8 below. 
Road user 
Cyclist/Cyclist 
Cyclist/Pedestrian 
Cyclist/Car 
Car/Pedestrian 
Personal injury accidents 
0 
0 
4 
5 
Table 8:  Number of accidents by accident type. 
In the collision diagram below all the accidents that happened at the intersection are plotted. The blue 
arrows indicate the cars and the red arrow indicate the soft road user (see figure 5.1). 
It should be noted that the colors indicated in the figures are: 
➢ Car (passenger car, van, taxi): Blue 
➢ Pedestrians and cyclists: Red  
==PAGE:38==
 
37 
 
 
Figure 5.1: Accident diagram of accidents in the period 2014-2018 at the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej.  
From the police registered accidents, it is not immediately possible to deduce accidents hypothesis, which 
can be attributed to the behavior of the road users or the geometric design of the intersection. But It can 
be seen from the accident situations that most accidents that happened at the intersection are in 
connection with the right or left turn maneuver. The accident diagram is also available in a larger format in 
Appendix 3.4.  
Accident and conflict density calculations 
The accident density expresses the number of accidents per year or the number of injured per year at the 
intersection. A high accident density means that the intersection is accident-prone, and the traffic safety 
conditions should therefore be improved. For intersections, the accident density is defined as the number 
of accidents per years at the intersection. Accident density can be calculated by use of this formula [manual 
in road safety calculations, 2001]. 
UHT= 
𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 
The accident density (UHT) is used for roads or intersections and expresses the number of accidents per 
year or possibly number of injured per year. UHT is calculated at the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej with 9 
accidents over a 5 years period from 2014-2018:   
UHT=
9
5 = 1,8 which means that there have been 1,8 accidents with personal injury per year over the past 5 
years period (2014-2018).  
Assuming that the serious conflicts are turned into accidents over the same time period (2014-2018), the 
accident density will be as follows: 
UHT=
50
5 = 10 which means that 10 potential accidents at the junction can occur per year if the serious 
conflicts had ended in a personal injury accident. This is significantly more than what is registered in the 
police data, and enough to identify the intersection as accidentally loaded.  
==PAGE:39==
 
38 
 
6. 
Comparison of results 
In this chapter, data from the conflict technique studies is compared with accident data. Similarities and 
differences examined from the two different data sources are compared and described. 
A comparison is made between: 
➢ The conflict situation and the accident situation. 
➢ The number of serious conflicts and the number of accidents. 
➢ The location of the serious conflicts and the accidents at the intersections. 
➢ The involved parties of age and gender in conflicts and accidents. 
 
The conflict study shows that a large part of the conflicts occurs in connection with the right turn 
maneuver, which could be due to either lack of orientation, high speed or the overview due to the amount 
of the road users at the intersection in the rush hours. To examine the similarities between conflicts and 
accidents, the types of conflicts are compared to the types of accidents. The following is an overview of the 
number of registered conflicts and accidents by accident/conflict situations (see table 9).  
Accident/Conflict situation 
Conflicts 
Accidents 
312 – Right turn in front of a 
vehicle. 
17 
1 
872 – Crossing Pedestrians 
from the left in an intersection 
before 
Vehicle. 
0 
1 
011 - Accident with no other 
road user involved in straight 
roads or at intersections in 
straight direction, on the right.  
0 
1 
410 - Left turn in front of 
oncoming. 
6 
2 
876 - Pedestrians from right 
after right turn. 
0 
2 
877 – Pedestrians from the left 
after left turn. 
0 
1 
520 - Straight-ahead, crossing 
vehicles with element 2 from 
the left.  
6 
1 
510- Accidents between 
intersecting vehicles without 
turning and with element 2 
from the right. 
20 
0 
140 – Rear end collisions 
1 
0 
Table 9:  Overview of conflicts and accidents by accident/conflict situation.   
==PAGE:40==
 
39 
 
The conflict study shows that more than half of the conflicts occur between two vulnerable road users and 
less than half of the conflicts is with a car involved whereas there have been no accidents involving two 
vulnerable road users within the last 5 years.  
The following is an overview of the number of registered conflicts and accidents by accident/conflict type 
(see table 10).  
Accident/Conflict stype 
Conflicts 
Accidents 
Cyclist/Cyclist 
16 
0 
Cyclist/Car 
19 
4 
Cyclist/Pedestrian 
11 
0 
Pedestrian/ Car 
4 
5 
Table 10: Overview of accidents and conflicts by accident/conflict type.  
It can be seen from table 9 that the situations 312, 410 and 520 appear in both conflicts and accidents. on 
the other hand, there is not registered conflicts of the type 872, 011 and 877, but accidents of these types 
have occurred. It can be concluded from the above comparison that the types of conflicts that are also 
registered as accidents are the ones that need to be focused on in order to improve road safety at the 
intersection of Tagensvej/Jagtvej. 
The conflict study shows that there is a concentration of conflicts in the northeast and south east part of 
the intersection(see figure 4.1, conflict digram), whereas the distribution of accidents at the intersection do 
not indicate that there are parts of the intersection who are more accidentally loaded that the other parts 
(see figure 5.1, accident diagram).  
This may be due to under-reporting of this type of accident since the number of injured cyclists and 
pedestrians are approx. 10 times bigger than the official accident data from the police show [Olesen, 2018]. 
The police are mostly called for serious accidents involving killed and seriously injured, but accidents 
involving, for example, two vulnerable road users with minor injuries, do not get the police attention but 
only hospital registered. This is what the experts call "dark numbers" because they do not include in the 
statistics and therefore do not influence the work of the road authorities to reduce the number of 
accidents. 
The result of this comparison shows that there may be a big amount of "dark numbers" of accidents with 
vulnerable road users which means that the information about road safety at the intersection based on 
accident data is not enough when we need to take preventative initiatives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
40 
 
7. 
Discussion  
 
Uncertainty in the method 
The manual recordings of conflicts are associated with some uncertainties. The conflicts are recorded based 
on what the observer sees and the video material. Due to the location of the observer and camera angle, 
there are uncertainties associated with the estimation of speed and distance of the conflict. The 
registrations are made by the observer manually estimating the speed of the road users and distance to a 
possible collision point, which is based on the observer's assessment. The result may therefore be different 
if the recording was performed by another observer. As many of the conflicts take place at the intersection, 
with some distance from the camera's location, the estimated values of distance and speed may be  
affected by uncertainties. Therefore, there is a risk that incidents that are not actually conflicts are 
registered as conflicts or conflicts that should have been excluded are included as conflicts. The video 
material was used, as a supplement if it was not possible to record everything during the observations, and 
to verify the observer’s observations. There are some uncertainties associated with the estimates made 
from the video material, which may influence the number of conflicts. The farther away the road users are 
from the camera and the observer, the more uncertain the data becomes. 
 
It is also relevant to look more closely at whether the observer and the location of the camera have 
affected the road user’s behavior. The camera position on the bike is more visible to pedestrians that 
cyclists or cars A small number of pedestrians were influenced by the camera. They walked behind the bike 
with the camera to see if they could see anything from behind. There have been no situations where the 
camera has caught the attention of cyclists and motorists as they do not get that close and pass at a higher 
speed than pedestrians. A few passing pedestrians came in and asked what was going on. In general, the 
road users' focus has not been on the observer or the camera. If the observer and the camera has affected 
the behavior of the road users. Also, it is relevant to consider possible sources of error for data processing 
in Excel. At the same time, manual data processing also allows human error as the process is made by a 
human. For example, it may be that data are entered in the wrong cell with the wrong conflict. This has 
been avoided by check in case of doubt and by taking regular breaks from the heavy work requiring high 
concentration. 
It is also important to keep in mind that accidents are only based on the records the police have made. In 
addition, an unregistered number of accidents also referred to as dark numbers. The dark numbers are high 
for the soft road users, where the accidents are reported to a lesser extent. The unregistered accidents 
have a bearing on road safety work. If the accidents are not detected, it is not known that there is a traffic 
safety problem at that location. The unregistered accidents are not included in the accident analyzes. Thus, 
the accidents contain only a subset of the real accidents (Lahrmann, 2015). 
Changes in the method 
The data used in the project comes from the conducted conflict study and the available accident data. As 
stated earlier in the discussion, there have been some uncertainties associated with the conflict study 
method. Based on this knowledge of the uncertainties, an assessment has been made on what changes 
could be made to the data collection process.   
 
Drone recordings can be used to make accurate measurements for data collection for speeds, distance and 
driving behavior. Drones provide a good view of the entire location. It is necessary that the resolution of 
the camera is high as drones often film from high distance. However, drones have the challenge of not 
being able to record for extended periods at a time due to the drone's battery life. This method will 
probably not provide a large enough data basis unless multiple recordings are made over several days.  
==PAGE:42==
 
41 
 
Another method of data collection is the use of two cameras positioned opposite each other relative to the 
intersection. Using two cameras, the location is viewed from two angles that can be compared to validate 
the data. This will eliminate sources of error caused by the conflict not being clearly seen in the video 
material. In addition, cameras (go pro camera) have longer battery life to film for longer periods, thus the 
data base becomes larger and more continuous than with drone recordings. 
In addition, it is relevant to note that questionnaires could have supported the study. The advantage of a 
survey based on observations and manual records of conflicts is that it is seen what the road users do to 
end up in a conflict situation. The study is thus based on real actions rather than supposed actions. The 
disadvantage is that it is not known why the road users act as they do. The reasons and motives behind the 
behavior of the road user can be identified by a short questionnaire survey with the road users who get 
involved in conflict or conduct conflicting behavior. For example, the observer could approach the soft road 
users involved in a conflict and interview them briefly and anonymously about the reasons behind.  
Use of a conflict study to improve road safety 
It has been investigated what conflict studies are used for in Denmark. Several studies have been successful 
in the use of conflict studies in signal-controlled intersections in connection with specific road safety 
measures or before and after analysis of existing road safety measures [Trafitec,2019]. 
From the discussion of the data and the results, it is seen that there are some uncertainties associated with 
the use of the manual conflict studies to investigate road safety. 
Speed and distance have a decisive effect on whether the conflict is defined as serious or less severe. It is 
therefore important that these parameters are recorded as accurately as possible. distance and speed 
assessment can vary from observer to observer and thus have a decisive effect on the result. Overall, the 
use of manual conflict studies can be discussed because of the sources of error in this method. 
Generalizability of the study  
By generalizability it is meant that the results of the analysis can be generalized to a larger population and 
that the study goes beyond what has been studied.  
In the case study of Bent Flyvbjerg [Flyvbjerg,1991], a number of strategic case choices are presented which 
can extend the generalization possibilities of a study. An example could be “the critical case” where “if it 
applies here, it applies everywhere”. If the problems that the study aims to solve are not solved, then it 
could be a sign that it cannot succeed anywhere. Qualitative studies can have very high generalizability only 
if the case is selected correctly.  
The qualitative approach of one case study, as is the case with this study, has no generalizability in the 
traditional sense ( it is not possible to generalize the results of this study to a larger population), but the 
knowledge that has been created can easily be used and is not wasted [Yin, case study research, 2002] 
This study examines an alternative method for identifying traffic safety issues in a signal-controlled 
intersection that can be performed easily and inexpensively. This case approach means that the traffic 
safety problems found at the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej do not apply anywhere else but exactly at that 
intersection [Flyvbjerg,1991], 
Ideas for further study 
Technological developments make the process of a conflict study easier. This is seen in the development of 
semi-automatic detection programs that can analyze conflicts based on video material. For example, semi-
automatic programs RUBA [Aalborg University, n.d.], developed by Aalborg University, and T-Analyst [Lund 
University, 2019], developed by Lund University.  
==PAGE:43==
 
42 
 
In recent years, it has been investigated whether methods such as tracking and microscopic traffic 
simulation can be used for conflict studies.Tracking is a fully automated program. This method can 
determine the position, speed, acceleration and heading of vehicles. This removes much of the manual 
work associated with manuel and semi-automatic conflict studies, which makes the process more effective 
[Laureshyn, 2010].  
It is also possible to conduct a conflict study based on traffic simulation, as programs have been developed 
that can analyze traffic safety based on data from the traffic simulation files, which include the road users 
in the road network. The advantage of using traffic simulation to analyze traffic safety is that there is no 
need for the same amount of data from the location or recordings to be analyzed. In addition, the traffic 
simulation model can conduct a traffic safety analysis in a much shorter time compared to a traditional 
conflict study. Thus, many resources can be saved by this method. In addition, traffic simulation as a 
method may have an advantageous application in the planning work of new road systems or in the 
conversion of existing road systems. Road systems will thus not only be constructed based on capacity but 
will also be able to be assessed and improved in terms of traffic safety prior to construction [Huang, 2012]. 
This makes it possible to avoid possible future accidents.  
It should be noted that, as a result of this study, a comparative study might have been relevant. A 
comparative study comparing the results of this study with another signal-controlled intersection without 
or with very few accidents where manual conflict studies are also conducted. This analysis helps to 
elucidate the differences and similarities in examining two locations with different road safety levels by 
systematically comparing data that can explain the context of the conflicts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
43 
 
8. 
Suggestions for solutions  
This section will review the observations that were made as well as the solution suggestions that is based 
on this.  
 
Based on the conducted conflict study the focus will be on finding solutions to reduce the risk of getting 
involved in 510/ 520, 312 and 410 conflicts as it is the type of serious conflict that occurs most of at the 
intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej. 510/520 conflicts occur in signal-controlled intersections when either the 
cyclist or motorist is driving in red signal, or one of the parties has not been able to reach the intersection 
before the signal is changed. 312 conflicts typically happen by right-turning car and bicycles in a straight 
direction on bike lanes. 410 conflicts happen between the left turning road user and bicycles in a straight 
direction.   
There are registered 26 conflicts of the type 510/520, 16 conflicts of the type 312 and 6 conflicts of the type 
410 during the conflict study inspections. The comparison with the accident data also shows that it is these 
types of conflict that need to be focused on. 
In general, the intersection marking should be refreshed – the blue bicycle lanes and the turn line marking 
in the middle of the intersection to clarify the left and right-turners position to avoid conflicts should also 
be refreshed.  
Problem 
During the conflict study inspections, it is noted that very few cyclists use the blue bicycle box in the 
eastern leg of the intersection. As bicycle boxes have not been widely used in Denmark, the Danish Road 
Directorate conducted a large-scale study in 2016 to evaluate their impact on road safety. This study shows 
that it is not possible to conclude whether the bicycle boxes have a safety effect [Danish Road Directorate, 
2016]. This may be because cyclists have not become accustomed to use the box as a waiting area [Trafitec, 
2009]. 
 
 
Figure 8.1: The eastern leg of the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej (seen from east to west). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
44 
 
Solutions  
 
➢ It is recommended that the present solution with bicycle box be changed to a right-turn lane with a 
carried-out bicycle lane instead. A high level of safety, good accessibility and good comfort can be 
achieved for cyclists when the bicycle lane is led all the way to the intersection, with a separate 
right-turn lane for car traffic. This solution promotes the turning cars and the cyclist’s attention to 
each other. However, this solution is not recommended without a separate right-turn lane for car 
traffic. The stop line for the cars should always be 5 m from the cyclist's stop line, and this is usually 
placed immediately before the pedestrian area [Danish Road Directorate, 2019]. When establishing 
a retracted stop line for cars, the safety times for the signal should be checked, if necessary, the 
intermediate times should be adjusted [Trafitec, 2012]. See figure 8.2 below of the solution.  
 
 
Figure 8.2: Principle sketch for a solution with carried out bicycle lane. Source: Danish Road Directorate 
➢ Another alternative solution is to stop the cycle path or lane 15-25 m before the stop line and allow 
the cyclists to continue in a right turn lane along with the right turn car traffic. This reduces the risk 
of conflict with cyclists and right-turning drivers as they are allowed to merge before the 
intersection, and the cyclists can position themselves on the left side of the right turning cars. See 
figure 8.3 below of the solution.  
 
 
Figure 8.3:Principle sketch for a solution with shortened bicycle lane. Source: Danish Road Directorate 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
45 
 
Problem 
During the inspection, it is registered that the cyclists from Tagensvej have the tendency to place 
themselves on the pedestrian area or close to the blue cycle lane at the intersection when they become 
impatient, which may be due to the cyclists experiencing long waiting times. This behavior conflicts 
between the waiting cyclists and the intersecting cyclists, since the waiting cyclists may have the tendency 
to fill much, as can be seen in Figure xx below. 
 
 
Figure 8.4: The southern leg of the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej (seen from south to north) 
Solutions 
 
➢ A separate signal can be established for cyclists. This allows the cyclists to get their own signal 
phase in whole or in part. with separate cyclist signals, cyclists must always adhere to this signal. 
Cyclist signals can be used to give cyclists pre-green, where cyclists get a green signal a few seconds 
before the cars. In this way, cyclists who start off after being held too red get a head start over the 
cars and thus become more visible. the purpose is to reduce the waiting time for cyclist and avoid 
waiting cyclists for longer periods at the intersection. The cyclist signals can also be supplemented 
with a countdown function. The waiting time feels significantly shorter and a countdown signal may 
be able to counter the cyclists' red light driving, as is the case for pedestrian countdown.  
 
➢ Traffic management at the intersection to detect bicycle traffic. In traffic-controlled solutions, it is 
the traffic from the different directions that controls the length of the green time in the signal. 
Bikes can be detected via radar, video or manually by pressing a button. In some places, cyclists and 
pedestrians are detected at the same push button, others at each separate stand. However, it can 
be difficult to dedicate the traffic to the cyclists in the combined lanes. New detection methods are 
being worked on, where an app on the cyclist's smartphone activates the signal some distance from 
the intersection.  
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
46 
 
Solutions that generally improve road safety at the intersection Tagensvej/Jagtvej 
➢ The blue bicycle lane visually separates cyclists and motorists from each other, which makes cyclists 
feel safer. it is recommended that only one blue bicycle lane be established in the east-western 
direction of the intersection, based on traffic volumes and conflicts. In the other directions, white 
dotted 0.3 m wide borders can be established which are provided with bicycle symbols.  
An accident study of bicycle lanes in signal- controlled intersections has shown that marking bicycle 
lanes has resulted in a 36% reduction in the number of bicycle accidents and 57% in the number of 
seriously injured cyclists. The study also showed that special accidents between left-turning cars 
and straight-line cyclists were reduced in large intersections. [Trafitec,2006]. The study also 
indicates that one blue lane per signal-controlled intersections provide a safety profit, while two 
blue lanes should only exceptionally be established at signal-controlled T-intersections. Three and 
four blue lanes increase the accident rate.  
 
 
Figure 8.5: Sketch of the solution with one blue bicycle lane at the intersection. 
➢ Copenhagen police have recently begun to tighten cross-lighting requirements in order to improve 
road safety [The Municipality of Copenhagen]. It is recommended, based on intensifying lighting, by 
light masts or spots, focusing on the corners where the cyclists are staying. this approach will make 
cyclists more visible at the intersection. 
Road safety campaigns  
In order to prevent the number of conflicts at intersections, it is recommended to work with intersections-
conflicts/accidents campaigns.  
There is already an ongoing campaign encouraging drivers and cyclists to spend 2 sec. more on orienting 
themselves at the intersection, "2. extra seconds” [Rådet for sikker trafik]. However, it is recommended to 
intensify these types of campaigns and make them more frequent to maintain their effect.  
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
47 
 
in the case of new campaigns, it is recommended that campaigns may consist of initiatives that the 
municipality of Copenhagen stands for in collaboration with the Danish Cyclist Association and other local 
partners. The local partners can, for example. set up posters and banners, hand out leaflets etc. To get 
good advice and draw on the experiences of others, a group can be set up to follow the campaign. The 
group may consist of representatives from the Ministry of Transport, an engineering company, the Council 
for Safe Traffic (Rådet for sikker trafik) and the municipality of Copenhagen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
48 
 
9. 
Conclusion 
 
The project aims to investigate whether conflict studies can be used as a substitute for a traditional 
accident analysis and to investigating whether road safety in intersections can be assessed on the basis of 
conflict studies independent of accident data, which can be used by road authorities in connection with 
their road safety work.  
This has been investigated by conducting a manual conflict study in the signal-controlled intersection 
Tagensvej/ Jagtvej in Copenhagen to assess the behavior of road users and the traffic safety problems at 
the intersection. Conflicts are recorded based on manual observations and analyzed according to the 
conflict technique method. In addition, accident data from a 5 years period (2014-2018) is used for 
validation and comparison. 
By using the conflict study as a supplement to the police registered accident data at the intersection 
Tagensvej/Jagtvej it can be concluded that the intersection should be reviewed by the municipality of 
Copenhagen to see if the physical conditions can be changed to improve road safety such as the overview 
conditions in the turn lanes, and the waiting positions and improved signal programs. 
 
From the results, it can be concluded that manual conflict studies can be usefully used to assess the 
behavior of road users and where traffic safety conflicts arise, but this method cannot be used as a 
substitute for a traditional accident analysis, as the method used to identify conflicts is too uncertain. 
Therefore, it is recommended that a critical approach be adopted for the use of manual conflict studies and 
instead make use of the semi-automated programs developed for conflict detection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
49 
 
10. References 
 
The following was used as the basis for this behavioral study: 
Amundsen, Finn Harald, Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige forskningsråd og Tekniska högskolan i Lund, 
1977, Proceedings from the First Workshop on Traﬃc Conﬂicts, Oslo, September 1977.Tekniska Högskolan i 
Lund. 
Bendsen, T. (07. 12 2018). Statnoter.  
Chen, H., Cao, L., & Logan, D. (27. 12 2012). Analysis of risk factors affectiong the severity of intersection 
crashes by logistic regression. Traffic injury prevention. 
D.J. Migletz, W. D. Glauz og K. M. Bauer, 1985, Relationships between traﬃc conﬂicts and accidents. 
Technical report. 
Flyvbjerg B ,1991, Rationality and power 
Gettman, Douglas m.ﬂ., 2008, Surrogate Safety Assessment Model and Validation: Final Report. Technical 
report. U.S. Department of Transportation - Federal Highway Adminstartion. 
Hydén, Christer, 1987, The development of a method for traﬃc safety evaluation: The Swedish Traﬃc 
Conﬂicts Technique. Technical report. Lund University. 
HVU 2014, Havarikommissionen for vejtrafik ulykker – Hvorfor sker trafikulykkerne? 
Huang, Fei m.ﬂ., 2012, Identifying if VISSIM simulation model and SSAM provide reasonable estimates for 
ﬁeld measured traﬃc conﬂicts at signalized intersections. Technical report. School of Transportation, 
Southeast University. 
Laureshyn, Aliaksei og Andras Varhelyi, 2018, The Swedish Traﬃc Conﬂict Technique observer’s manual. 
Technical report. Lund University. 
Lund University, 1992, The Swedish Traﬃc Conﬂict Technique. technical report. Lund University. 
Laureshyn, Aliakseim.ﬂ.,2016, Review of current study methods for VRU safety - Appendix 6 – Scoping 
review: surrogate measures of safety in site-based road traﬃc observations. Technical report. 
Laureshyn, Aliaksei, 2010, Application of automated video analysis to road user behaviour. Technical 
report. Lund University.  
Olesen, A. V., Madsen, T. K. O., & Lahrmann, H. S. (2018). Underrapportering som præmis - hvordan man 
kan bruge Landspatientregistret i det lokale trafiksikkerhedsarbejde. Artikler fra Trafikdage på Aalborg 
Universitet, 2018. 
Lahrmann, Harry, 2015, Forsker: Stigende mørketal om traﬁkulykker.  
Lahrmann, Harry og Leleur, Steen (1994): Vejtrafik – Trafikteknik & Trafikplanlægning, Polyteknisk Forlag. 
Olesen, A. V., Madsen, & Lahrmann, H. S. (2016). RUBA – Videoanalyseprogram til trafikanalyser. Artikler 
fra Trafik og Veje, 2018. 
Statistics Denmark (2020). Injuries in traffic accidents reported by the police. 
==PAGE:51==
 
50 
 
 
Trafitec, 2009, Før- og efter evaluering af to Københavnske bykryds 
 
Trafitec, 2019, Metoder til registrering af konflikterende adfærd.  
Trafitec, 2006 - Effekter af overkørsler og blå cykelfelter. 
Trafitec, 2009 -Cykellommer – Spørgeundersøgelse om tryghed, tilfredshed, mv. 
Trafitec, 2012- Sikkerhedseffekter af tilbagetrukne stopstreger. 
==PAGE:52==
 
51 
 
 
