==PAGE:1==
Behavior changes in diabetics’ lifestyle
leveraging a user-centered design solution
Monika Ścibor (s180019)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tel (+45) 45 25 30 31
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Diabetes type 2 is a condition that affects the way of metabolizing sugar (glucose)
in the human body. A patient could either become resistant to insulin - a hormone
that allows them to assimilate glucose - or produce an insufficient amount of insulin
to function properly [30]. The research shows that there around 60 million of people
with diabetes in Europe. Moreover, the number of people suffering from this illness
is estimated to increase up to 71.1 million by 2040 [29], from which 90% of cases are
type 2 diabetics [71]. Although it is not possible to directly address the risk factors for
diabetes type 2 (such as age, race, family history, etc.), there are aspects of lifestyle
that can be modified [56]. In order to prevent further development of the illness, it
is recommended to: lose weight, eat healthily, exercise regularly, stop smoking and
drinking. On the grounds of problems with changing the lifestyle, the project is car-
ried out to help diabetics with managing these habits and improving their everyday
life.
This project consists of various steps allowing one to reach the final goal. The
extensive literature study examines the possibility of changing the behaviors of people
with diabetes. The analysis of the existing solutions is made. The design process is
supported by the usage of design tools like workshops and other co-creation methods.
For a more holistic approach towards user research, the collection of qualitative and
quantitative data is conducted. All these methods help to define diabetics’ goals,
needs, and motivations for using the proposed system. Lastly, usability testing is
carried out to bring final ideas to life and make the solution useful and relevant for
the stakeholders.
The project is undertaken by DTU student of Design and Innovation, Monika
Ścibor, with the supervision of Per Bækgaard. The goal of the project is to apply
participatory design thinking in order to build a Minimum Viable Product (MVP).
The outcome is a design framework for a tool helping diabetes patients with self-
reflection on their condition and drawing conclusions from that.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark, the Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science in fulfillment of the requirements for
obtaining a Master’s degree in Design and Innovation.
Kongens Lyngby, May 29, 2020
Monika Ścibor (s180019)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
To begin with, I wanted to thank my family for their support and love, as well as
curiosity about the world they instilled in me. Having them makes reaching goals
thousand times easier.
A special thanks goes to my partner, Jakub Brzosko who patiently supports me
both in everyday struggles and good times. I am aware that the journey which is
ahead of us will be both beautiful and challenging and I just cannot wait to spend
this time in his company.
I will be forever grateful for having an opportunity to study at the Technical
University of Denmark. The last 2.5 years have been a constant learning experience
during which I kept improving. I am more than thankful to all the professors and
students with whom I shared this time.
I would like to thank Per Bækgaard for his supervision. One can only hope for
such supportive and encouraging supervisor.
I would not be the same person without friends. I am so lucky to have wonderful
women around me, in particular Oliwia Łubiarz, Anna Krasnpoloska, and Katarzyna
Charuza. Thanks for always being by my side and I hope to see you all soon.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Data Collection and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature study
7
2.1
Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Type 2 Diabetes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Behavior changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Lifestyle intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Self-management and monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Digital Health Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Existing Solutions
17
3.1
Digital Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Problem Statement
21
4.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Design Process
22
5.1
Target group analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Initial Framing and Ideation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Additional Framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Definition of app features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Defining User’s Needs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Specifying Solution Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.7
Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.8
App logo and the name
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Minimum Viable Product
58
7
Discussion
61
7.1
Future development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
68
A Articles analysis - keywords
75
B Existing Solutions
77
C General Survey
80
C.1 Survey creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.2 Survey responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
D Workshops
91
D.1 Physical workshops plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
D.2 Online workshops plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
D.3 Online workshops results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
E Interviews
102
E.1
Interview with Eddie, Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
E.2
Interview with Kazimierza, Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
E.3
Interview with Małgorzata, Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
F Iterations
107
F.1
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
F.2
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
F.3
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
F.4
Iteration 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
G MVP
116
G.1 Annotated Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The project is conducted by DTU student of Design and Innovation, Monika Ścibor,
with the supervision of Per Bækgaar. The goal of the study is to improve the quality
of diabetics’ life by changing one’s behaviors. The aim of this is to motivate diabetes
patients to change their lifestyle, by designing the user-centered solution.
The results of the extensive literature study will be presented in this report. The
analysis of the existing solutions will be made. The design process will be based on a
co-creation method, for which workshops, surveys and interviews will be conducted.
After reaching the point of defining user pains, needs and motivations, the Minimum
Viable Product (MVP) will be designed. To bring final ideas to life and create a
useful solution for the stakeholders, usability testing will be carried out.
1.1
Problem definition
415 million people are suffering from diabetes worldwide [15], of which around 60
million cases were reported in Europe [58]. Moreover, it is estimated that almost 193
million people globally have undiagnosed diabetes. The study shows that approxi-
mately 90% of patients have diabetes type 2 [71]. There are many consequences of
diabetes including different diseases, which eventually lead to an early death. Al-
though the number of people with this disease is significant and its complications are
dangerous, a solution that would fulfill all the patients’ needs is still missing. It is not
easy to properly maintain diabetes, however, the study shows that early detection
and application of relevant therapies might delay or even prevent complications of
the disease [32]. Unfortunately, patients do not act reasonably after being diagnosed
and they do not apply any lifestyle change. This might be due to a lack of motivation,
no family support or not taking the condition seriously. Therefore, in this project,
a possible solution for the lifestyle intervention for type 2 diabetics will be analyzed
and discussed.
1.2
Methodology
During this project, the Double Diamond was applied as the main design method.
This tool provides guidance to structure the process and ensure not investigating the
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
solution before having a proper definition of the problem [55]. In this method, the
exploration of the issue is performed as a first step (the first part of Double Diamond
presented in Figure 1.1). Then, the problem definition is clarified. The second dia-
mond is reserved for investigating the solution. In the first half one explores varieties
and options within the chosen approach. The last step is converging them into one,
well-defined concept.
This method was introduced in 2005 by Design Council and it represents a pro-
cess of investigating an issue in depth and taking well-thought, focused action (using
respectively divergent and convergent thinking)[55]. Certainly, the process in real
life is not as linear as in the picture presented below, however, it makes planning,
involving stakeholders and development process much clearer [2].
A couple of well-known techniques were used to make the design thinking process
more efficient. In the picture below the main steps are listed and linked to a specific
phase of the Double Diamond model. It is important to mention that some of them
have already started during earlier phases and have been developed since then. It is
hard to associate one activity to a particular Double Diamond step because adapt-
ability is highly important in the user-centered design process.
Project
vision
Problem deﬁnition
Finding a solution
Problem
deﬁnition
IDEATION
Developed
solution
Generate and 
prioritise solution 
ideas
Choose speciﬁc 
problem to solve
Research 
audience pains
Development of 
speciﬁc solution
CREATION
INSIGHT
RESEARCH
• Literature study
• Existing solutions research
• Target group analysis - 
survey
• Ideation - ﬁrst part of ﬁrst 
online workshop (problem 
expansion)
• Framing - second part of 
the ﬁrst online workshop 
(problem analysis)
• Problem statement
• Ideation - ﬁrst part of the 
second online workshop 
(solutions development)
• Additional framing and 
ideation - interviews
• Iteriations - 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 
4th, 5th testing
• Framing - second part of 
the second online workshop 
(solution deﬁnition)
• Specyﬁng solution details 
- Lean Canvas & User Story 
Map
• Deﬁnition of the app 
features
• Iterations - prototyping
• MVP creation with anno-
tated wireframes
Figure 1.1: Double Diamond model with the annotated steps of the process [55].
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Methodology
3
To fully describe how the Double Diamond model was applied for this case, each
step will be shortly presented.
• Problem definition
The main focus of the first diamond was to define a clear problem statement.
This included two main parts: exploration and definition of the problem.
– Research
The main focus of the ”Research” diamond phase was to ideate on the
problem. In the first half-section, the literature study and the market re-
search of existing solutions were made. The general survey was shared to
get valuable insights about type 2 diabetics. In the end, the first online
workshop was conducted and its first half studied the biggest pains of par-
ticipants.
– Insight
The second half of the first workshop focused on determining the problem
which disturbs patients the most - this part is placed in the second half
of the Double Diamond presented in Figure 1.1. Here, the Lean Canvas
started to develop as well. The definition of the target group, pains, and
gains began evolving. This part has changed during the process as new
knowledge was acquired.
• Finding a solution
The next diamond was focused on creating proof of concept. In other words,
the solution to the problem needed to be built.
– Ideation
Ideation on solutions was performed here. A couple of interesting ideas
were developed during the first phase of the second online workshop, which
later expanded to the last, well-defined solution. Due to the fact, that par-
ticipants of workshops were diabetics type 1, additional knowledge about
type 2 diabetics needed to be collected. Therefore, a couple of interviews
took place. This activity could be listed in a few phases of Double Diamond
since the interviewers provided a lot of useful insights for each process’s
step. Additionally, the solution sharpening and usability testing happened
- five testing rounds of the prototypes were conducted. All of them were
performed with the target group.
– Creation
As it could be seen in the picture above, the second half of the ”Finding
a solution” diamond was focused on the definition of the final solution.
Here, all the ideas from participants of the second half of the second on-
line workshop were collected, creating a strong base for the first draft of
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
the prototype. During this part of the process the solution details were
specified - User Story Map and Lean Canvas were sharpened. Moreover,
the iterative process of prototyping has started and after each iteration
the testing was performed. After designing the Minimum Viable Products,
the annotation of wireframes was created.
Ideate
Prototype
Observe
Test
Figure 1.2: Human-Centered Design model [55].
Moreover, on top of the previously mentioned model, the Human-Centred Design
(HCD) method was applied. HCD can be described as a component of the Double
Diamond process [55]. In order not to limit the project and always take user input as
valuable, it is important to perceive the ongoing process as editable and incremental
[24]. Building with the user requires flexibility and on the go improvements, therefore
waterfall methodology would not work in this case.
The steps (observation, ideation, prototyping, testing) of the Human-Centered
Design model can be seen in the picture above (see Figure 1.2). The actions are
continuously repeated and every series provides new observations and allows to get
closer to a solution [55]. Therefore, the HCD method was used for each stage of the
Double Diamond model.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Data Collection and Analysis
5
1.3
Data Collection and Analysis
In the beginning of the project, the researcher needs to have a “pre-understanding”
of the topic, which in this case was gained by articles examination. It has a huge sig-
nificance both in the planning process and the analysis process, to minimize any bias
of the investigator [63]. In addition to the extensive literature study, data gathering
needed to be performed.
Data collection is a process of gathering and measuring information on variables
of interest [44]. It is done in an established systematic form, enabling one to answer
stated research questions, test hypotheses, and analyze outcomes.
There are plenty of reasons for data collection, however, the most crucial are listed
below [41]:
• it helps with gaining more knowledge about the customer,
• it enables to discover a tendency on how people change their opinions and
behaviors,
• it helps with the audience segmentation,
• it facilitates decision making and improves its quality,
• it helps with the issues solving and improvement of the product/service quality.
Data collection can be divided into two main types - qualitative and quantitative.
For a more holistic approach towards user research, in this study an analysis of
both types was used. The mixed-method research approach is a dynamic option for
expanding the scope and improving the analytic power of studies [67].
1.3.1
Quantitative
Quantitative data is numerical and can be mathematically computed, therefore it
deals with measurable information which can be presented in numbers or figures [44].
This type of data usually deals with bigger number of test cases and leads to a specific
conclusion.
Comparing this method to qualitative techniques, quantitative approach is usu-
ally cheaper and takes less time to gather information. Furthermore, because of its
high level of standardization, it is easier to compare and evaluate the output obtained
using the quantitative approach [41].
In this project, for the knowledge acquisition about the targeted audience, an
online survey was prepared and distributed to receive number of answers. Afterward,
the received quantitative data was analyzed and described in Chapter 5.1.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
1.3.2
Qualitative
Qualitative data is usually descriptive, nominal and mostly non-numerical. Collected
information is in the form of words and sentences. It observes the direct output of the
user, integrating users’ feelings, emotions and subjective perception [44]. Due to its
complexity, the audience for this data collection is normally a small group of people.
Speaking of methods for obtaining qualitative data used in this study, the co-
creation online workshops were conducted. The interviews with users were performed
and the user testing for the MVP was made. Moreover, the general survey contained
open-ended questions. All these steps are described in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature study
During the extensive literature study performed within the first phase of the project,
a total of 68 relevant articles were identified. After further review of all papers, 21
were excluded primarily due to their specific focus on the studied solution or lack
of useful insights. Therefore, in the end, 47 valuable articles were analyzed. The
research of articles started with a keyword search. Thereafter, some inspirations were
found in the references of previously reviewed papers. These positions were evaluated
as well. In addition to that, articles that had an interesting title in its reference were
googled. Overall, the research aimed to not miss any of the helpful sources.
Once articles were collected and analyzed, the division based on keywords was
made (see Appendix A). This step was beneficial for finding relevant information and
detecting a correlation between different papers. Another advantage was that such
step uncovered topics that needed to be described in this chapter.
2.1
Diabetes
Diabetes is a chronic disease that impairs the body’s ability to process blood sugar
(body glucose) [53]. It is estimated that 6.3% of the population has diabetes [62], yet
the statistics are likely inaccurate because almost 50% of diabetics are not conscious
about their illness [29].
Life with a chronic disease can be described as a constantly shifting process where
individuals undergo a complex interaction between disease and their life context [12].
Among all chronic diseases, diabetes is expected to be one of the most psychologically,
emotionally and physically challenging diseases [66]. The most common psychological
illnesses among the diabetics are depression, anxiety, and eating disorders [66].
Levels of blood glucose can be affected by many factors, for example, eating habits,
stress level, physical activity, fatigue, hormonal changes, and infections. Hence, to
manage the glucose level one needs to apply diet, exercise, stress management, insulin
injections and other drugs [62]. Nevertheless, around 70% of patients with chronic
diseases do not adhere to doctor’s orders about the treatment [66]. It is a fact that
every third diabetes patient does not follow the medical prescriptions for medication
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Literature study
intake, half of diabetics eat unhealthily and two-thirds of them do not have enough
physical activity [22]. Previously mentioned behavior and the chronic nature of the
disease generate both direct and indirect costs for the healthcare system [31].
2.2
Type 2 Diabetes
There are three major types of diabetes (type 1, type 2 and gestational diabetes) [53],
however, the most common is type 2 [48]. Approximately 90% of all diabetics have
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) [71], which can be described as endocrine system disorder,
defined by abnormal fluctuations of blood glucose levels [59]. This disease is related
to a proportional deficiency of insulin and/or resistance to it, rather than a total
deficit [16].
The study lists some factors associated with type 2 diabetes, which are obesity,
previously gestational diabetes, family history of the disease, hypertension, dyslipi-
demia, ethical factor and many more [48]. Moreover, T2DM is frequently present in
people that are lower in the occupational structure and measuring difficult context
to life (stressors, work factors, the effort-reward imbalance for men) [83]. It is worth
mentioning that, an increased risk for the development of this disease can be noticed
for first-degree relatives of T2DM patients [13]. Also, people with severe mental ill-
ness have a two to three times increased risk for diabetes [81].
If the disease is not treated properly, many complications can occur and present
danger to human life. Blindness, kidney damage and failure, nerve damage, cardiovas-
cular disease, and lower limb amputation might be the results of the above mentioned
[83]. On top of that, people with T2DM die on average 8 years earlier than people
without diabetes, which can be connected to cardiovascular disease [40].
One could be terrified after seeing all these consequences, however, the research
shows that some of the risk factors of diabetes like overweight, sedentary lifestyle,
and glucose contractions are potentially reversible [32].
If the disease is early de-
tected and properly treated in the first years after diagnosis, type 2 diabetes would
likely be delayed or even prevented [15][77]. Applying a low-fat diet and increasing
physical activity show the protective effect against the development of the illness [72].
According to other studies, smoking elimination and the reduction of alcohol con-
sumption are important factors during a treatment [13]. Moreover, to a lower extent,
pharmacological therapy can be applied [15].
There are many barriers that patients are struggling with while trying to man-
age diabetes. Currently, the guidelines for T2DM treatment are too conservative and
lack personalized support in aspects of diet, exercising, scheduled rhythm, medication,
and knowledge. Common low health literacy for the disease (up to 40%) could be
associated with not knowing about the condition and lower efficiency for the manage-
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Behavior changes
9
ment of important risk factors [4]. In addition, lack of family support, food expense,
family pressure and lack of taste can be placed among the list of T2DM management
barriers [37].
Since the number of patients with type 2 diabetes and the costs of the treatment is
rapidly increasing, it is needed to develop more cost-effective and efficient treatment
strategies [71].
2.3
Behavior changes
Behavior is a product of individual or collective action which can be determined as
a key factor of people’s health [26]. As previously mentioned, some chronic diseases
are strongly linked to a lifestyle [1]. Changing the behaviors that cause these diseases
might equal to changing long-standing habits [26]. Therefore, it is crucial to identify
effective approaches and strategies that prompt a change and maintain newly-adopted
healthy behaviors [34]. Behavior change is considered to be a process and not a one-
time event [82].
Several models were designed to support a behavior change.
The stage-based
model (see Figure 2.1) is one of them. It is composed of a series of five stages [46],
and these stages are similar to the transtheoretical model (TTM) developed in the
1980s by James O. Prochaska and Carlo C. DiClemente [61]. These stages are widely
perceived as steps of change. The stage-based model structures the design by showing
how to help people with learning and adapting to a change [46]. For every stage one
can outline barriers that may prevent the user from succeeding. These stages are:
• Preparation - occurs before the information is collected. It is mostly about
picking the right tools to use, however, sometimes they need to be changed or
adjusted while proceeding. Determination of what information to collect and
what tools to use is a barrier in this step [46].
• Collection - during this step, information is collected. The barriers here are
the lack of time, motivation, and lack of continuity in collecting information
[46].
• Integration - the stage between the Collection and Reflection phases, where
the collected facts are formed, integrated, and transformed for the reflection.
Here ideas for the solution are developed. Stopping the user from the transition
between the collection and reflection of data might be a barrier here [46].
• Reflection - reflecting on the collected information and expanding a solution.
This step could occur immediately after gaining the information (short-term) or
after some time involving extensive reflection (long-term). Barriers - that can
be defined as difficulties retrieving, exploring, and understanding information -
prevent exploration and information understanding [46].
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Literature study
• Action - choosing the right direction for execution by taking care of a new-
found understanding of the situation. Possible issues might occur with the lack
of suggestions on what to do next [46].
PREPARATION
COLLECTION
INTEGRATION
REFLECTION
ACTION
ITERATIVE
BARRIERS CASCADE
Figure 2.1: Stage-based model[46].
The limitation of maintaining positive behavior changes is a loss of individuals’ mo-
tivation [45]. The management of behaviors of diabetes requires changes in long-term
behavior, thus patients have difficulties with it [59]. For that reason, the motivation
for change must be created before the change occurs [57]. Additionally, it is impor-
tant to recognize how the patient sees his own health condition [57]. In other words,
to succeed in a cognitive-behavioral intervention it is crucial to self-identify a prob-
lem or a need for self-care behavior [18]. Lyubomirsky et al. (2005b) suggested that
to succeed in increasing well-being, new activities should fit the values and interests
of the person [64]. When starting treatment, explicit goals should be given to the
patient to show the importance of completing tasks. It prompts patients to track
their results and follow the treatment [45].
Some therapies incorporate incentives to help to motivate individuals to change
their dietary and physical activity habits to encourage and maintain the barriers they
may face [45]. Others believe that punishment is effective in behavioral changes when
combined with a reward system [28].
Moreover, many pieces of evidence suggest that social support plays an important
role in successful lifestyle change [5]. It might enhance a change because it increases
general well being and it may protect against the strain caused by high-stress life
events [17]. Additionally, social support contributes to self-efficacy [20].
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Lifestyle intervention
11
Summing up, the Health Belief Model states that people are likely to change their
health-related behaviors if they have the motive and certain beliefs to do so [36]:
• They are liable to the disease or condition.
• The impact of the disease on their lives could be dangerous.
• The prescription would reduce the risk of the disease or condition.
• Benefits of the treatment outweigh the costs.
2.4
Lifestyle intervention
Lifestyle therapy is an important factor for the management of T2D and has un-
dergone an evolution over the past years [6]. To perform optimal patient-centered
management, not only needs but the preferences and capabilities of patients should
be taken into consideration [13]. Several components can be listed in the traditional
approach to lifestyle therapy: diabetes self-management education and support, med-
ical nutrition therapy and physical activity [6].
Many studies show the general recommendations about alcohol intake, smoking
habits, physical activity, and diet. In Denmark, these guidelines for a healthy lifestyle
are known under the KRAMS factors name, which refers to Kost, Rygning, Alkohol,
Motion (translated to Diet, Smoking, Alcohol, Exercise, and Stress) [33]. These ad-
vices are especially important for diabetics.
Some sources instruct people on what a healthy lifestyle should look like. While
applying any kind of treatment the consultation with a specialist and adjustment
to an individual need to be considered. Nevertheless, after an analysis of numerous
articles, the following approach should be considered:
• Physical activity: 30 minutes of exercise at least 5 times a week [25].
• Diet: fruits and vegetables (600 grams daily), fish (min 200-300 g weekly), bread
potatoes rice and pasta (whole grains), save on sugar, save on fat, drink water
(1-1½l of water daily). Avoidance of trans fats, liquid mono- and disaccharides
[74].
• Smoking does nothing good for health, so it should be eliminated. Moreover,
smokers live on average 7 years shorter than non-smokers [74].
• The intake of alcohol should be reduced [74]. Some studies believe that the
moderative way of intake is healthy for diabetes (one drink per day or less for
adult women and two drinks per day or less for adult men, where one drink =
12-ounce beer, 5-ounce wine or 1.5-ounce distilled spirits)[6].
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Literature study
• The stress level should be reduced [33].
The aim of lifestyle therapy is to [6]:
• control glycemia to prevent microvascular complications,
• prevention of acute complications and hypoglycemia,
• improve functionality and quality of life.
2.5
Self-management and monitoring
Programs for self-management are essential fundamentals for the empowerment ap-
proach and important for human beings to manage their behaviors and chronic illness
[59]. This technique can be defined as the active participation of patients in their
treatment [76][42]. Three main areas of activities for self-management were defined
by Corbin and Strauss [39]:
• medical management (following guidelines for taking medication, applying the
dietary advice and periodic appointments),
• behavioral management (new behaviors and lifestyle adaptation),
• emotional management (dealing with frustration and other feelings associated
with chronic disease).
It is noteworthy, that there are some factors that can affect self-management and
these are [68]:
• Demographic factors: socioeconomic status and culture.
• Clinical factors: comorbidities and complexity of treatment.
• System factors: communication and relationship with providers.
Moreover, numerous barriers and facilitators for self-management were identified
and subsequently categorized as internal or external factors presented in the picture
below [23].
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Self-management and monitoring
13
Facilitators to self-management
Barriers to self-management
Self-management
Self-management
Internal factors
External factors
Influenced by Internal and External factors
Outcome
Family
support
Assistance
Cues to
Action
Routine
Knowledge
Self
Reinforcement
Healthcare
Provider
Peer
Support
Lack of
self-control
Lack of
control
Memory
failure
Fear
Pain
Disease is time
consuming
Figure 2.2: Barriers and facilitators for self-management [23].
The analysis of Lorig and Holman, who were inspired by the work of Corbin and
Strauss, defined six skills required for the human to properly conduct self-management
treatment [42]:
• problem-solving,
• decision making,
• resource utilization,
• the formation of a patient-provider partnership,
• action planning and behavior change,
• patients tailoring management plans to suit their needs.
Chronic Care Model, being a well-known guide for improvements in the man-
agement of chronic conditions, lists self-management support as one of the essential
components [75]. Nowadays, it is common that patients are mostly responsible for
the daily management of diabetes, including self-monitoring and management [73].
The shifting of the management of diabetes from doctors to patients was connected
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Literature study
to the invention of home blood glucose monitoring in the late 1970s.
Sometimes,
patients who apply this technique are led to discomfort, frustration, burnout if the
self-care treatment has no effects and it can debase further therapy [50]. Still though
treatments that combines knowledge acquisition and self-care management, have been
proven to be more effective in increasing knowledge, self-efficacy and self-care behav-
iors than educational programs [18].
There are some crucial aspects to consider while prescribing the self-management
program to patients. The participants who do not have periodic in-person consul-
tations with a nurse or a doctor would be more willing to drop the study of self-
management. Therefore to sustain their progress it is necessary to have an ongoing
diabetes self-management support [47]. The feedback to records from self-monitoring
should be given to participants to motivate them [45]. Additionally, for higher per-
formance achievement, it is recommended to set some goals for the treatment [47].
Diabetes self-management education is a crucial aspect of care for all diabetics and
it is important for the improvement of the patient’s outcomes [60]. Learning about
the disease and mental health issues including depression might be a game-changer
for the success of therapy [14].
Furthermore, the study suggests that therapy based on problem-solving may be
effective for temper and picked out diabetes outcomes [69]. American Association of
Diabetes Educators made a definition of problem-solving being a learned behavior
combined by a generation of multiple strategies for resolution of the problem, selec-
tion of the most promising strategy, its application, and evaluation. Moreover, AADE
identified problem-solving as one of the seven core diabetes self-management behav-
iors [43]. By consequence, numerous general counseling and psychotherapy treatments
incorporate this behavior for managing life problems and emotional disorders [69].
2.6
Digital Health Solution
The use of health apps is expanding, currently having over 318k of apps available
on the market [49]. New technologies are relatively cheap, can be easily accessed by
patients at multiple locations and convenient time. They suggest many interventions
based on the patient’s needs and offer continuing support (automatic reminders and
attractive presentable information) with the format tailored to the user. Digital health
solutions including remote monitoring, engagement of the patients and televisits are
extremely relevant to lifestyle interventions. These solutions can be based on a variety
of means of communication such as phone or video conferencing, texts, mobile apps
or online platforms. This approach has shown the effectiveness and time efficiency
of providing ongoing support to patients, however, it has some limitations as well [27].
==PAGE:23==
2.7 Outcomes
15
Diabetes is the most commonly targeted condition of all health conditions by app
producers [10]. Diabetics use mobile solutions for self-management, sharing informa-
tion and collaboration with doctors, which is trusted to have a positive impact on
health literacy [9]. The study shows that although management apps for diabetes
might have high scoring functionality and design, most of them do not integrate the
most crucial diabetes management tasks [35].
While creating a solution for helping patients with the management of diabetes,
it is necessary to consider the timing of notifications to act with respect to personal
needs, life constraints, and disease trajectory [47]. Moreover, research indicates that
patients are more likely to respond positively to self-management when the health
risk information is presented visually [51].
2.7
Outcomes
Previous sections described in depth different aspects of the disease. In this section,
the general outcomes of the literature study will be summarised.
There are three major types of diabetes, where type 2 is the most common one
[48]. Diabetes type 2 (T2DM) is a chronic disease related to a proportional deficiency
and/or resistance to insulin [16][53]. Study shows that some of the consequences of
T2DM can be postponed or even reversed when the disease is detected early and
the proper treatment is applied [32]. On the other hand, if the patients do not act
reasonably, there is a high risk of complications.
There are several habits that need to be addressed after being diagnosed with
diabetes. One needs to think about a diet and starting to be physically active [72].
It is important to stay hydrated, as it is a general rule for a healthy lifestyle [74].
Additionally, constant analysis of blood glucose levels is required. Moreover, due to
the well-known low literacy about this condition, it is extremely important to acquire
information about the day to day life, possible complications, side effects, etc. Smok-
ing, drinking, and being stressed do not have a positive impact on the disease, and
for that reason it is recommended to eliminate them [33]. While applying a lifestyle
change, diabetics must take care of setting reasonable goals. One might stop the
treatment immediately if the pressure is too high.
In many cases changing behaviors equals to a change of long-standing habits,
therefore it might be difficult [26]. It is important to define approaches that encour-
age a change and maintain newly-adopted behaviors. Five steps of change are defined
in the stage-based model shown in Picture 2.1 and they are significant for behavior
change. Following those steps help people to adapt to a change: preparation, col-
lection, integration, reflection, and action [46]. On top of that, setting goals seems
to play a crucial role to prompt participants to track their results and help them to
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Literature study
understand the importance of completing a task [45]. Social support increases general
well-being and might show beneficial outcomes [5].
Diabetes is the most common condition among all health-related issues targeted by
app producers [10]. Though, the majority of the apps do not integrate the most crucial
diabetes management tasks [35]. Multiple aspects need to be considered while creating
a solution for the self-management of diabetes. Among those, there is a timing of
notifications that need to correspond to personal preference [47]. Moreover, a visual
representation of health-related risk information is influential for self-management,
since the patients are more likely to respond to those [51].
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Existing Solutions
One of the first steps for this project was market research. Among other existing
solutions for diabetes management, one can find regular basic therapy in hospitals.
These traditional healthcare solutions for diabetics involve periodic consultations with
a doctor which are normally conducted every 3rd month (see Chapter 5.3). However,
the articles’ research shows that the total time patients spend in the clinic is 2 hours
and 26 minutes on average [21]. It does not sound that bad, nevertheless, almost half
of this visit is a waiting time, around 25 minutes are spent with the resident and 12
minutes with medical assistants and nurses [21]. This causes an extremely short time
devoted to diabetes management [21]. After the visit diabetics are left on their own.
It is not hard to notice, that the solution for self-management needed to be intro-
duced. An attempt to address the issue was undertaken utilizing the digital solutions.
3.1
Digital Solutions
Already existing digital health solutions were found and analysed. There are three
main groups of the apps that are currently on the market: mobile, desktop and web
applications. Mobile solutions are invented to run on mobile devices such as phone,
tablet or watch. Desktop applications could be described as any software that can be
installed on a computer. Last but not least, web apps are stored on a remote server
and displayed in a browser interface over the Internet.
3.1.1
Mobile Applications
Mobile solutions are easily accessible on distribution platforms (Google Play Store or
App Store), therefore 15 apps were downloaded and tested in order to be described
in this chapter. The full evaluation of previously mentioned can be seen in Appendix
B, where the pros and cons of each solution are listed.
The existing apps can be divided into three categories:
• Food trackers - apps that do not target diabetics primarily. These solutions
have some features that help with life management, however, they have a more
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Existing Solutions
general approach (My Net Diary Calorie Counter PRO).
• All types of diabetes management apps - consist of functionalities to track
meals, glucose level, blood pressure, etc. Normally data can be displayed as a
graph, so it is easy for the user to see a progression. In various apps this data
can be exported to PDF. This group of apps is normally designed for all types
of diabetes, where the user needs to specify it while logging in (My sugr, BG
Monitor, One drop, etc.).
• Diabetes educational apps - apps filled with articles about diabetes (Type
2 Diabetes, Beat Diabetes, etc.).
One of the first findings after this analysis was that all of the mobile apps have
a very vibrant palette of colors. Some solutions are more simple and intuitive to use
compared to others. Not that many apps are made in a user-friendly way. Numer-
ous lack description on how to input data, have too many options and too specific
information to input. Many apps consist out of too much text. Plenty of apps look
like they were made a long time ago (being old fashioned). There are many apps for
helping out with managing diabetes, however, almost none of these could motivate
people to do so. Study shows that setting goals and sending reminders help to manage
any kind of disease, however only a few of the solutions contains those functionalities.
Usually, apps provide some basic options free of charge, nevertheless if the user wants
to use the full spectrum of the features the fee needs to be paid.
Additionally, there are plenty of bespoke products companies that emerged in
phone applications within the system (Glucose Buddy, Diabetes Diary, Diamedic,
and BeatO).
Furthermore, in table 3.1 all features of the existing apps were gathered. The
functionalities list is composed of significant factors for treatment that one need to
consider after being diagnosed with diabetes. These aspects were found during the
extensive literature study outcomes of which are described in Chapter 2.7. In the
table, app names and crucial features are listed.
There are few apps that implemented the majority of functionalities listed in table
3.1. OneDrop and forDiabetes apps cover a lot of features, however at the same time
those are not that intuitive and visually pleasing. Study shows that 38% of people
will stop engaging with the solution if the content/layout is unattractive or too long
[3].
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Digital Solutions
19
My Net Diary Calorie 
Counte PRO
My sugr
BG Monitor
One drop
Diabetes connect
Diabetes Diary
Hedia
My Sugar Diary
forDiabetes
Type 2 Diabetes
e-SMBG
Beat Diabetes
BeatO
Habits Diabetes 
Coach
Glucose Buddy
Exercises
tracker
Hydration
tracker
Setting
goals
Setting
reminders
Knowledge
acquisition
Social 
support
Data 
export
Meals
tracker
Blood 
glucose
tracker
Medication 
intake
tracker
Graphical
illustration
of risk
App name
Features
Table 3.1: Existing apps features addressing issues found during literature study.
App name
Stages
My Net Diary Calorie 
Counte PRO
My sugr
BG Monitor
One drop
Diabetes connect
Diabetes Diary
Hedia
My Sugar Diary
forDiabetes
Type 2 Diabetes
e-SMBG
Beat Diabetes
BeatO
Habits Diabetes 
Coach
Glucose Buddy
PREPARATION
(selecting an app)
COLLECTION
(gathering data)
REFLECTION
(on goals)
ACTION
(set reminders, 
motivation)
Comments
INTEGRATION
(displaying 
info/graphs)
ACTION
(set reminders, 
motivation)
All info exept medication intake 
is tracked
All info exept hydration is 
tracked
All info exept hydration is 
tracked
All info exept hydration is 
tracked
All info exept hydration is 
tracked
All info exept hydration is 
tracked
All info exept hydration is 
tracked
Only meals and blood glucose 
level is tracked
Only blood glucose level is 
tracked
All info exept hydration and 
medication is tracked
All info exept hydration and 
medication is tracked
All info exept hydration and 
medication is tracked
All info exept hydration and 
medication is tracked
-
-
Table 3.2: Stage-based model for behavior change versus existing mobile solutions.
As a part of the study of the existing solutions, 15 mobile apps were analyzed with
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Existing Solutions
respect to a stage-based model presented in Figure 2.1. In Table 3.2 one can see each
application analysis in terms of fulfilling the 5 steps of behavior change. Moreover,
in the comments column functionalities that are covered in the collection stage are
mentioned.
3.1.2
Desktop Applications
As for the mobile apps, there exist diabetes management software for PC or Mac.
Their main function is to manage diabetes and track health-related data. In this cat-
egory, the following can be listed: Health Tracker, GNU Gluco Control, DietPower,
Diabetes Pilot Desktop for Windows, Fitness Assistant.
Already mentioned apps can be used without having any additional device. How-
ever, plenty of blood glucose equipment companies provide diabetes management
desktop softwares in addition to their devices. These are often available for free if the
accessory is bought [80]. This includes SLdiary by Sinovo, Compass by Accu-Chek,
OneTouch from Lifescan, Smarpix and Glucofacts Deluxe Diabetes Management Soft-
ware.
3.1.3
Web Applications
On top of the mobile and desktop applications, there are various online tools for the
management of diabetes. Their main feature is to keep track of the data inserted
by the user, however, the connection with the external devices like insulin pumps or
glucometers is possible for some of the applications. Examples of the online systems
are: Diasend, Lifebringer, SugarStats.com, DiabetEASE, On-Line Diabetes LogBook
by Dia-Log, SiDiary, NuMedics, Fitness Assistant.
As before, some of the web-based solutions provide the materials from which the
patient can learn a lot about the disease. Online courses supplying with a knowledge
on how to live with diabetes and where to get support from are available and accessible
for diabetics [8]. The online tool developed by the National Diabetes Services Scheme
(NDSS) is one of many solutions available on the market [54]. Another good example
is Living with Diabetes Guide made by American College of Physicians Foundation
which educates and promote shared decision making and goal setting in diabetes care
[7].
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Problem Statement
As written in Section 2.1, it is a fact that half of the patients eat unhealthily, two-
third of all are not active enough and every third diabetic does not follow the doc-
tor’s instructions regarding medication intake.
A short time focused on diabetes
management during periodic consultations with a doctor certainly does not improve
previously mentioned aspects. If patients do not treat diabetes properly, different
complications might occur. Therefore, diabetics need to improve their lifestyle.
The problem statement for this study might be formulated in the following man-
ner:
Type 2 diabetics do not apply any change to their lifestyle after being diagnosed.
Lack of motivation for lifestyle adjustments causes the aggravation of the disease and
a must for medication intake. Moreover, not being physically active and not applying
any diet might cause complications occurrence.
4.1
Research Question
One main research question was defined and it is composed of three sub-questions:
How an app for facilitating diabetics’ lifestyle change can be designed
to lead to an improvement in patients condition?
• What elements should the user-centered design solution be made of to encourage
type 2 diabetics for lifestyle improvement?
• How would the app be used by diabetics?
• What would motivate users to use this solution?
By answering this questions, the study aims to evaluate pains and gains of diabet-
ics, and prepare the solution that would be used by patients. The researcher’s goal
is to design with a user by applying a Human-Centered Design method.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 5
Design Process
As mentioned in the Chapter 1.2, the main design method used in this study is
a Double Diamond.
The Design Process is depicted in the Figure 1.1, where all
activities are listed. In this chapter, each step of the Design Process will be presented
and described.
5.1
Target group analysis
After the extensive literature study, the researcher gained knowledge about the dis-
ease and general information about the target group. Since the solution needed to
be adjusted to its end-users, collection of data about type 2 diabetics needed to be
performed. For this, an online survey was prepared.
The survey containing 21 questions (see Appendix C.1) was distributed online.
To receive number of responses, it was posted on the three different Facebook groups
and two web forums for diabetics. The groups and forums are not limited to one
nationality, however, almost half of the answers came after posting the survey on one
specific Danish group called ”Diabetes 2 - Danmark”. A total of 24 completed forms
were collected.
The questions of the survey could be divided into different categories: demo-
graphic, current lifestyle, overall situation, app usage, and additional comments.
Some questions were inspired by the article ”Impact of Presentation of Risks In-
formation on Diabetics’ Self Management Response” [51], read in the literature study
phase of the project.
Following graphs describe the age, gender, educational status of participants and
how long do they know about the disease.
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Target group analysis
23
Figure 5.1: Gender and age graphs.
Out of all respondents, 58.5% were women. Answers were gathered among people
from different age groups, nevertheless, it can be noticed that more than 50% of
respondents are 36 years old or older.
Figure 5.2: Educational status and disease awareness graphs.
The majority of respondents (78.3%) have a higher education. Moreover, almost
half of all know about the disease for more than 8 years. The weight of respondents
varied between 55-206 kg, and the height was between 150-186 cm.
The answers to lifestyle questions show that respondents care about their condi-
tion. Only 8.3% smoke cigarettes. An alcohol consumption is somewhat more popular,
with 35% of responders using it. 70.8% of people are physically active and 75% apply
any kind of diet. Surprisingly large number of diabetics take medication - 78.3%.
The next set of questions investigated their self-awareness and motivation to im-
prove their lifestyle. Around 50% of participants think that their situation is very
serious or critical (see Section C.2.3 in Appendix C.2). 41.7% of people show very high
interest and willingness to put an effort into improvement of their situation. 90.5%
of participants in the past 2 years tried 1-5 different diabetes programs on their own
that lasted for 3 months or less. In an open-ended question, where participants were
asked about the type of diet and why they lose motivation, plenty of them mentioned
keto diet (low carb). Giving up programs usually happened due to lack of motivation,
==PAGE:32==
24
5 Design Process
going for holidays, etc. The final question in this section of the survey asked whether
the participant would be willing to change their lifestyle to reverse or delay the effects
of the disease. 75% agreed, 16.7% said maybe, if there would be a danger of life and
the rest answered no. The second open-ended question in this section asked about
current motivators for managing the disease. Among all answers, these three were
most common responses: life, kids/family and other diseases.
Lastly, the possibility of integrating the app into lifestyle change was studied. Only
29.2% of all respondents currently use an app as a motivator for the management of
diabetes. This outcome was unexpectedly low because there are plenty of existing
solutions on the market (see Chapter 3). The question about the functionalities of the
app has shown that most of the people want to have a possibility of tracking glucose
level (11 answers). Respondents would be interested in having meals tracker and goal
setter features (10 votes per each). It looks like tracking exercises are significant for
participants as well (9 people). Sending reminders and having a reward system is
optional, but some people would be keen on having it.
Three people added an option saying that they hate or would not be interested
in using an app. Nevertheless, almost 75% of all answers marked yes or maybe for
willingness to use the app have all the features that they listed in the previous ques-
tion. Moreover, 4 out of 6 people who would not like to implement it in their lives
are more than 56 years old. Significance and adaptation of technology is lower for
elderly people, what naturally renders them less interested in using smartphone app.
Survey ended with an open question, allowing participants to state any relevant
comments. Here are some of the answers:
• ”The most important things for managing diabetes is food and exercise, so that
should be your focus areas.”
• ”Tracking of meals in a practical way. Counting carbs not Calories”
• ”Sleep monitoring could be an interesting factor in additional studies, I´ve found
in my case that irregular sleep or trouble with sleep can have terrible effects on
diabetes control.”
• ”New invention in diabetes medicine, content of each medicine or commonly
used content details, benefits and side effects of contents on other parts of body
like eyes, kidney and liver and heart.. Natural remedies for diabetes etc”
All answers from the survey study are gathered in Appendix C.2.
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Initial Framing and Ideation
25
5.1.1
Outcomes
It is crucial to get to know the target group, therefore on top of the literature study
which provided a lot of general outcomes, this survey was conducted. 24 participants
have answered this questionnaire and these answers will be used through the next
steps of the process. In these sections, a summary of the outcomes will be presented.
More than half of respondents are 36 years or older, which needs to be considered
when designing a solution. Around 50% people know about the disease for more than
8 years. Most of the participants care about their condition, as around 3/4 people
apply diets and are physically active. Some diabetics have begun 1-5 programs and
dropped them within 3 months from the start. Their reasoned it with ”Not enough
motivation”, ”Stopped at holidays” and ”It did not work”. Still, 75% of people would
be willing to change their lifestyle.
A surprisingly low number of people use an app for motivation and everyday
management (29.2%). However, participants were asked to mark the features that
they would like to have in an app. More than half claimed that they would be willing
to use it if those features would be incorporated. Here is a list of functionalities people
were interested in having (written in order from the most demanded):
• tracking glucose level,
• tracking meals,
• setting goals,
• tracking exercises,
• sending reminders,
• having a reward system.
5.2
Initial Framing and Ideation
This study is based on the co-creation process, therefore in an initial plan, four
workshops to frame the problem and ideate on solutions have been scheduled. Each
of them should focus on a different part of the project.
The first two workshops
were planned to take place in a “Research” phase of the Double Diamond 1.1, where
the main problems of the target group are defined. The aim of the 3rd and the 4th
workshops was to create solutions for previously determined issues. To be able to
conduct these activities the audience needed to be defined first. From the beginning,
the main focus was to find relevant people who could join the process.
==PAGE:34==
26
5 Design Process
5.2.1
Workshop audience
In the ideal world, the audience for the workshops should have been found in mid-
February. Multiple approaches were tested in this step. Starting from contacting
centers for diabetes (STENO, Diabetesforeningen, Center of Diabetes, etc.), talking
with bigger companies in a field (Novo Nordisk), and finally posting a request on DTU
Inside and several Facebook groups. Unfortunately, it is not easy to get in contact
with patients of the health industry, because of the data protection. Some people
from Danish Facebook Groups for Diabetes type 2 were willing to help by filling out
the survey, however, none of them were interested in joining the workshop process.
As the study proceeded and the time was running, decisions needed to be made.
Finally, four people with diabetes type 1 answered the survey posted on DTU Inside
and were willing to help. Unfortunately, diabetes type 1 and type 2 cannot be de-
scribed as the same conditions, therefore there are some possible non-conformities in
the outcome. The main dissimilarity is that diabetes type 2 can be reversed whilst
diabetes type 1 cannot be cured and it is always insulin-dependent. At that point,
the decision of proceeding with type 1 patients was made, since it is better to have
a group that has some similarities to a target group than not having any human
contribution at all.
Only three out of four diabetics type 1 responded to scheduling a workshop, there-
fore the final test group for the workshops was:
• Josep - Spanish, 24 y/o. Diagnosed while being 10 y/o, visiting a doctor every
6 months. He is studying his Master in BioTechnology at DTU.
• Mustafa - Jordanian, 25 y/o. Diagnosed with diabetes type 1 while being 9
y/o. StudyPetroleum Engineering at DTU.
• David - danish, 28 y/o. Diagnosed while being 5 y/o. Study Mathematical
Modeling and Computation at DTU.
5.2.2
Physical workshops
The four different plans for each workshop were prepared at first (see Appendix D.1).
However, in real life the test group has been asked to meet up twice, where during
the first meeting the whole focus should be on defining main problems (workshop no
1. and 2.) and the second should focus only on the solutions (workshop no 3. and 4.).
During the process of planning workshops, an extremely serious and unforeseen
event took place. The whole world froze up due to the CORONA/COVID-19 pan-
demic.
The Danish authorities asked people to stay at home and all universities
(including the Technical University of Denmark) were locked down. From the project
perspective, another rethinking of the actions and finding the best possible solution to
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Initial Framing and Ideation
27
address the previously mentioned problem needed to take place. The only reasonable
action was to conduct online workshops with a previously defined test group.
5.2.3
Online workshops
The unusual situation required the shift in the process as well as adjustments of
workshop plans to non-conventional online workshops. Specific plans were prepared
for two online workshops (see Appendix D.2).
The plans included a definition of
the desired output, time for each exercise, information about any needed materials
to prepare before the workshop and what the facilitator needs to remember on the go.
Finally, two workshops took place. The first meeting on the 25th of March was
focused on definition of a problem. The second one which took place on the 27th of
March, and addressed the solution development.
During the first session, only two participants showed up (one forgot about the
workshop despite 3 reminders sent before) and this workshop lasted 1h. The second
meeting took 1.5h with 3 participants.
Each workshop included:
• introduction with desired output definition,
• agenda description,
• get to know,
• six exercises,
• controlled break (warm-up) in the middle of the meeting,
• ending,
• feedback session.
Additionally, the second workshop contained a brief sum-up of the last workshop
with a presentation of the outcomes.
5.2.3.1
The first Online Workshop
The first online workshop is an immense part of the first diamond from the main
design method applied in this study (see Figure 1.1). For that, 2 participants showed
up - Josep and Mustafa (previously presented in Chapter 5.2.1).
This workshop followed the general structure listed in a previous chapter. After
an introduction, agenda presentation and get to know the tasks, problems research
==PAGE:36==
28
5 Design Process
started. All answers are shown in Appendix D.3.0.1 with a plan presented in Table
D.6.
The first task from all six planned was focused on creating a comfort zone by
asking participants about a situation that they have recently experienced.
David
mentioned the current, unusual coronavirus circumstances where ”it is challenging
that you have to be at home a lot of hours, which causes that you tend to eat more.
It is harder to control diabetes in the present situation”. The next two exercises were
linked to the first one - participants were asked to think about the category of their
experience and then ideate on more issues in the previously found categories. That
gave us a lot of insights and problems which could be focused on in the second part
straight after a controlled break. The second part started with a simple task and gave
each participant a possibility to tune into the creative mood again, after the break.
The impact/probability curve exercise which was the fifth exercise of the first
workshop helped with revealing the most important issues of type 2 diabetics. Each
participant filled its graph, and surprisingly after a short presentation, it was clear
that for both of them the three most impactful and probable issues are (see Figure
5.3):
• not following doctor’s prescriptions,
• difficulty with sticking to a diet,
• not doing exercises.
Figure 5.3: Impact/probability curve for diabetics issues.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Initial Framing and Ideation
29
The last exercise was based on a well-known five whys technique. This analysis
helps to establish the primary and not an approximate reason for an accident/issue
[55]. It allows to investigate a cause, and even if the researcher finds it, the question
”why it was a cause?” is being asked again. The technique does not demand necessarily
5 questions, however, the name indicates that the investigator should keep asking even
if one cause was found [55]. As an example, Mustafa said that is is difficult to stick
to a diet, because ”it is like missing something from a normal people’s life”. The last
exercise results can be seen in Figure D.4.
5.2.3.2
The second Online Workshop
The second online workshop focused on Finding a solution part of the Double Dia-
mond (see Figure 1.1). The workshop was divided into solution expansion (the first 3
exercises) and solution definition (tasks 4-6). This meeting was conducted with three
participants - David, Mustafa, and Josep. The third participant, who did not join
for the 1st stage of this process, has been provided with the extensive notes and was
asked to read them before the session. However, the second workshop started with a
longer than planned introduction and get to know.
The first task focused on warming up the participants’ imagination - they needed
to think about impractical, extreme and unrealistic solutions for the three problems
presented at the end of the previous section. Afterward, workshop members were
asked to consider solutions that could be applied in an app (see Figure D.6). During
this ideation, a lot of proposals for the solution were discovered. Then, each par-
ticipant needed to pick the top 2 solutions that he came up with. Thereafter they
started to draw how they would imagine it to look. These drawings were of very low
accuracy as the task was focused on expanding their ability of getting new ideas, not
precision of drawings. Again, the selection needed to be done, however this time each
participant had 3 votes and they could pick from every category, not only their ideas.
Subsequently, each of them got one solution idea and needed to list the features that
it includes. Furthermore, the pros and cons of each idea were demonstrated. All
exercise results are presented appealingly in Appendix D.2.
During this workshop, after each task, the facilitator kept assigning participants
to different ideas. Such a cross-linking between participants and outcomes was used
to enhance participants’ involvement and do not allow them to get used to their own
solution.
It forced them to listen carefully to others’ thoughts and ask questions.
Even if they worked mostly alone, they felt like building the concept in a group. At
the end during the feedback sessions, participants said that they really enjoyed how
dynamically they needed to adjust their brains to think about the different problems
and how well it worked for their imagination.
On top of the outcomes from the workshop, it was observed that diabetics are
concerned that their condition makes them ”not normal”, and thus, not belonging.
==PAGE:38==
30
5 Design Process
They would like to have a community of people who feels the same as they do. Patients
are ashamed of their disease while living next to healthy people.
5.2.4
Outcomes
Online workshops played a huge role as it involved ideation on the problem and solu-
tion framing.
The first workshop’s outcomes are the main issues of diabetics’ everyday life,
which confirmed the information gathered during the extensive literature study and
analysis of the target group. Three main diabetics issues are: not following doctor’s
prescriptions, difficulty with sticking to a diet, and not doing exercises. All of these
aspects involve a huge shift in the diagnosed person’s life schedule and therefore might
be problematic. Five whys exercise released the causes of these issues, and the main
motives of those might be:
• there are too many variables while changing your lifestyle,
• people are too lazy to keep constant track on undertaken activities,
• it is hard to control self while surrounded by the ”normal people”.
Among many interesting solution ideas, three happened to be the most realistic
and desired by the workshop’s participants.
The union work within the diabetes
community would normalize diabetes as a disease. On the other hand, it might put
pressure on diabetics not living up to other’s expectations and they could start com-
paring themselves to other people. A system that proposes diets which diabetics can
follow was another good idea. One participant’s concern was that ”some diets are
not for everybody”. Last but not least there was a gamification solution with the goal
settings, where diabetics could compare their results with the community. It would
involve incremental goals, starting at a low level to not demotivate people.
5.2.5
Online Workshop Guidelines
Lack of possibility to personally meet for the workshop could be treated as a limita-
tion of the project. However, the researcher needed to continue with a study and by
conducting online workshops for the first time, another finding has been obtained.
Performing online workshops is not as easy as it sounds. During the preparation
process already, some additional steps needed to be undertaken. The facilitator can-
not assume having all materials to encourage participants’ creativity (like plasticine,
color pens, printed sheets of paper, etc.), because he relies on what participants have
at their homes. Therefore another tool needs to be used to not lose participants’
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Initial Framing and Ideation
31
engagement - using Google docs with colorful tables or asking participants to draw
something in a notebook prepared before the workshop work alright. However, there
are some other tools that participants can prepare beforehand and use them during
meetings. It is the facilitator’s job to think about all these aspects and ask partici-
pants to prepare it beforehand. Moreover, if the facilitator decides on proceeding with
a drawing on paper, one needs to assure that such a drawing can be easily shared
with all participants. Technology might fail, especially in the atmosphere of urgency
and stress - considering additional time for each step is a good thing for an online
setup.
Another disadvantage is that people are not taking online gatherings as seriously
as a real meeting. It was visible especially during a lockdown of Denmark, where
people do not have a strict schedule for each day. For that reason, one participant
(David) forgot about the 1st workshop - days seem to be the same if you are staying
at home. People have many distractions at home and it is harder to control the time.
Speaking about distractions, it is normal that people cannot force their flatmates
to stay quiet during the whole workshop. It happened that one participant’s flatmate
was talking aloud which was really annoying for others and members of the workshop
could not focus. As a consequence, online meetings are prolonged if the facilitator
wants to get the same outcome. All these factors need to be consider by the organizer.
It is a good idea to send reminders and politely ask participants to follow certain rules
such as staying in a quiet place to not disturb other members, or respecting others
by showing up on time. Naturally, the facilitator can not force anyone but his role is
to make others feel comfortable as well.
There are some more boundaries that originate from being geographically sepa-
rated. People do not know each other and this cause lack of willingness to collaborate
with others. In addition, it is hard for a facilitator to motivate participants because
snacks cannot be brought to an online meeting. It is recommended to spent more
time on creating a comfort zone and prepare some unconventional get to know games
which could be performed online. Spending more time on understanding each other
will surely improve participants’ engagement. If not, people will tend to not want to
lose their time on thinking about the answers and they will have answers to every-
thing in one second. Such a behavior does not exactly support thinking outside of
the box.
On the other hand, online workshops had some advantages. In those specific times
of COVID19 when people could not interact with others, participants were more will-
ing to join a process. They were curious and a bit more active than usually, since not
that much of human interactions happen during these days. Moreover, people had a
little bit more time, due to the cancelation of all plans, so it was fairly easy to fit the
workshop in their schedules. Online workshops give a possibility to meet up without
leaving homes, which is really convenient for everyone.
==PAGE:40==
32
5 Design Process
Due to coronavirus pandemic, this was one of few solutions that could be used and
it worked well. Additional beneficial outcome that was not planned in the original
flow of the project is the guideline on conducting online workshops.
5.3
Additional Framing
Interviews conduction was not included in an initial plan for this project. Nevertheless,
building with users is an incremental process and it needs on the go improvements.
Since the desired workshop audience could not be found, some extra steps had to be
implemented to get to know the end-users more.
5.3.1
Audience
The core part of this section of the project was to interview the right people - type
2 diabetics. As previously described, finding them was not easy. On top of already
mentioned actions, the search within the friends and family circles were undertaken.
In the end, one person was found on the Facebook group for type 2 diabetics and two
were found by relatives’ connections. One interviewee is Danish and two of them are
Polish:
• Eddie - from Denmark, type 2 diabetic, 45-50 years old.
• Kazimiera - from Poland, type 2 diabetic, more than 65 tears old.
• Małgorzata - from Poland, not a diabetic (close participant of type 2 diabetics
- mum and grandma. Her husband and daughter are type 1 diabetics), 50 years
old.
Each member was contacted by phone or video call. Interviews were collected
gradually while the process performed. A talk with Eddie took place on the 9th of
February (when the struggle with finding a workshop audience begun). The second
interview with Kazimiera was on the 25th of March. Last but not least was with
Małgorzata after two online workshops - the 2nd of April. All interviews were recorded
and the transcripts can be found in Appendix E.
5.3.2
Outcomes
As the perception of the disease and medical history varies significantly between in-
terviewees, so are the responses that they provided. Nevertheless, one shared opinion
expressed by all of them is that discipline becomes crucial in everyday life once diag-
nosed with diabetes. It is especially important for people who perform blood sugar
measurements manually, as they have to regularly do them - data needs to be shown
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Definition of app features
33
to the doctor on periodic appointments (every 3rd month).
Eddie worries about his condition a lot. He was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes 3
years ago and at the beginning, the stress and the disease resulted in losing control
of his blood sugar for a long time. That is why, he decided to do some research on it.
He has been investigating diabetics’ behaviors and trying to find the main issues that
diabetics are struggling with. Among his main findings, there are: lack of motivation
for doing sports or healthy eating and avoiding sugar.
Kazimiera can be described as a typical elderly person with a lack of motivation
for a change. Even if the doctor recommends her to be physically active and stick to
the diet, she does not show any willingness to do it. Due to Kazimiera’s age and a
place of residence, she can be perceived as a part of digitally excluded people. She
utilizes her phone rarely and only for calls. This information corresponds to the sur-
vey output, that for elderly people using a mobile app might be problematic. An
interesting outcome from this interview is the fact that when diabetics get to the
point when insulin injections or any other medication is needed, a diet and workout
are still required.
Małgorzata has lived in close relation with both diabetics’ types, therefore she
could provide a lot of valuable insights. From her personal experience, there is not
that much of a difference between type 1 and type 2 diabetes. The main distinction
is an age group - type 2 diabetics are mostly older than type 1. Children are more
often diagnosed with type 1. Małgorzata said that sometimes diabetics feel socially
excluded, therefore she proposed to create a community for them. Interestingly, par-
ticipants at the workshops claimed that sometimes they feel ”not-normal” because
they are usually surrounded by healthy people. Moreover, Małgorzata pointed out
that for diabetics, it is particularly important to track carbohydrates. She commented
on an app creation process saying that in her opinion a user-testing of the final so-
lution with type 1 diabetics is not a bad idea and she is more than convinced that
the outcomes will be similar as if they were from type 2. The transcript from the
interview with her provides more interesting facts and it can be found in Appendix
E.3.
5.4
Definition of app features
Gathering all findings, the decision about the app functionality needed to be made.
The process involved several steps which helped the researcher to make a reasonable
decision:
• a literature analysis with the section division,
• general survey, where diabetics type 2 decided on top 6 features (see Appendix
C.2.4),
==PAGE:42==
34
5 Design Process
• an analyze of the diabetics’ behaviors on multiple Facebook groups,
• online workshops conduction, where co-creation methods were applied,
• interviews providing additional knowledge.
All those phases together were crucial for defining app features. Several excellent
ideas were put on the table during the study. Evaluation of each functionality took
place and showed that the implementation of everything would not be possible, there-
fore chosen features are listed below.
Following functionalities were implemented:
• Diabetes community - this feature was mentioned a couple of times during
the process. Moreover, after several diabetics Facebook groups observation it is
clear that patients motivate themselves by sharing posts of their every day scores
with people struggling with the same disease. The research showed that social
engagement has a positive impact on motivation. The feature itself would give
the user possibility of sharing their scores, pictures and react to other’s posts.
It would normalize them as people with the disease.
• Carbohydrates tracker - it was outlined during the workshop that sticking to
a diet is a problem, that needs to be addressed. Workshop’s participants claimed
that it would be nice to have different diets to pick from, however based on the
observations and the interview with Małgorzata it turned out that the carbohy-
drates play the most important role in diabetics’ life. It is crucial to keep the
intake low, therefore the carbohydrates tracker will be implemented in the app.
One can add a new entry by setting an amount of carbohydrates or choosing a
product what will automatically calculate the carbohydrates consumed. Data
will be presented on graphs.
• Exercise tracker - that is one of the most crucial aspects that needs to be
implemented in one’s life after being diagnosed with diabetes. The app would
provide the functionality to track everyday exercises. The user will have the
possibility to log a new entry with duration and level of exercises. Moreover,
one can connect the app with the step counter, so data from both exercises and
steps will be displayed on the graphs.
• Sugar level tracker - diabetics need to be up to date with their sugar level.
Adding an entry with the level of the blood glucose will be one of the features
in the app.
• Setting up reminders - the reminder for exercises, meal, or even medication
intake can be set and there would not be a need to worry about forgetting it.
Moreover, the user decides when he should be notified.
==PAGE:43==
5.5 Defining User’s Needs
35
• Goal setting - this feature would help participants with understanding the
importance of completing a task. It is worth mentioning that the user has a
choice on what is the goal of each activity. Therefore, goals might be incremental
and will be always realistic.
• Exporting data - this feature will be discussed with the target group while
testing the app, and eventually implemented while iterating. It is important
for people with different diseases to be able to export collected data and send
it to the doctor.
Functionalities that were not considered for the first prototyping and the reasons
of rejection are presented below:
• Providing articles to improve diabetics’ knowledge level about the
disease - the issue was found during the extensive literature study and did not
appear during other steps of the process. It is doubtful that people search for
that kind of information in apps, they would rather find a different source for
it, such as asking their doctor or searching on the internet.
• Eliminating smoking and drinking habits - more than half of respondents
in the survey stated that they do not smoke nor drink.
It is recommended
to eradicate these habits after being diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, however,
some other aspects of behavior change seem to be more relevant.
• Having a reward system - although some therapies use incentives to prompt
individuals’ lifestyle change, in this case, other motivators were used. Adding
one more functionality on top of the planned ones might make the app too
complex.
• Sleep monitoring - one survey’s participant said ”I´ve found in my case that
irregular sleep or trouble with sleep can have terrible effects on diabetes control”
and proposed to include it in the solution. That would be an interesting topic
for another study, as only one respondent mentioned it and no literature was
found mentioning such a correlation, this feature was not included.
• The database of diets - that idea was developed during second online work-
shop. It would really help with tracking meals, however the concern that ”diets
are not for everybody” caused the feature not to be included in the primary
design. This feature could be applied in the future development of the app.
5.5
Defining User’s Needs
The persona creation method has terrific potential, as it can leverage data collected
during the process to allow an even better understanding of users’ and customers’
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Design Process
needs [46].
During this study, the persona creation method was applied together
with the customer’s journeys to determine the key points where a change could be
implemented. Moreover, it helped with finding the main motivations for app usage.
Customer journey maps method was applied as both - a user journey before using a
solution (revealing pains) and the app’s context of use. To define personas’ goals as
a short sentence a well known, ubiquitous user story format was used [79]:
As a <type of user> I want to <some goal> so that <some reason>.
In the picture below (Figure 5.4), three personas are presented. Their archetype,
names, age, diagnosis time, nationality, occupation, and hobby were listed. More-
over, four factors of their characters (technical skills, social aspect, hardworking, and
easy-going) were defined. As it can be noticed, all these people are from different age
groups and nationalities. Each of them has different pains and gains, and since the
targeted audience is quite broad, all factors need to be taken into consideration.
Figure 5.4: Personas.
In addition to personas, customer journeys with personas’ needs and context of
use within the app for each character were created. Several aspects of personas’ were
==PAGE:45==
5.5 Defining User’s Needs
37
considered and the main issues were defined. It is shown what these people expect
from the solution. Moreover, emotions, thoughts, and touchpoints of using an app
were identified for each persona.
Mateo has an extrovert personality, his life is full of friends and he does not have
a fixed daily routine. Therefore, a solution that is not adjusting to his needs is useless
for him. From the journey presented in Figure 5.5 it is clear that he wants to have
a system where he could set goals by himself. He would probably start from the
small changes and increase them week by week. Reminders could also help him with
adjusting activities to his changing routines. The main interaction steps for Mateo
are shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.5: Mateo’s needs.
Mateo’s use case could be defined with following two sentences:
As an expressive personality like Mateo
• I want to set my own goals so that I can adjust my lifestyle improve-
ment to my changing routine.
• I want to remind myself about the activity so that I never forget to do
exercises.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Design Process
ACTIONS
EMOTIONS
TOUCHPOINTS
QUESTIONS
/THOUGHTS
Try another app for a lifestyle change
Start setting goals
See that it works well and can 
be always adjusted to your routine
Forget about one activity
Keep using setting reminders 
and goals
Set reminders
Track your routines 
activities
I don’t believe it 
would be 
useful but lets 
try
Wow, that 
is nice, I’ve 
never seen 
it before
I feel so 
demotivat-
ed that I 
forgot
Cool option, 
with it I can 
always be 
reminded
I never thought 
I will ﬁnd a 
solution that 
suits me
Goals 
settings
Open the 
app
Activities 
tracker
Reminders 
setting
Figure 5.6: Mateo’s journey map.
Katarzyna strives to socialize with other people, especially because she does not
have any relatives that are close to her. Even though she lacks motivation, if her
friends with diabetes would start to use the app, she would immediately do the
same. Especially if the app would provide a solution where she could communicate
with others. That might prompt her for a lifestyle change. It is a fact that social
engagement is good for general well-being. Katarzyna’s customer journey is presented
in 5.7. The context of an app use for Katarzyna is presented in Figure 5.8.
==PAGE:47==
5.5 Defining User’s Needs
39
Figure 5.7: Katarzynas’s needs.
Katarzyna’s app use case could be defined as:
As a demotivated by own condition person like Katarzyna I want to so-
cialize with others so that I am not lonely.
ACTIONS
EMOTIONS
TOUCHPOINTS
QUESTIONS
/THOUGHTS
Download the app recommended
by friends
See all options for a lifestyle change
Discover community section
Be inspired by others for a change
Start posting and receiving 
good feedback
Start your own lifestyle change
Set your goals
Is it really 
worth trying?
Another 
solution 
that won’t 
be useful 
Okay, this 
is inter-
esting
They really 
enjoy their 
change
Am I doing 
that good?
This is 
boring, but 
I know I 
need it
I am sure I 
can 
manage to 
reach 
higher goal!
Glucose, 
Exercise,
 Meals 
tracker
Open the 
app
Preview 
others 
activities
Collect data to track
your change
Community 
section
Goal 
setting
My posts
Track all 
activities
Figure 5.8: Katarzyna’s journey map.
Kasper is much younger than two other people and he is quite new to diabetes. He
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Design Process
finds the situation overwhelming and struggles with understanding all aspects that
needs to be changed. Therefore, as presented in his journey in Figure 5.9 he would
like to have a solution that presents data on the graphs. Moreover, due to differences
in his everyday schedules, reminders would be extremely helpful. The context of an
app use for Kasper is presented in Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.9: Kasper’s needs.
Kasper use case could be defined as:
As person that is new to the disease like Kasper
• I want to have a clear overview of all data so that I am not too over-
whelmed with aspects I need to remember to change.
• I want to set reminders for activities so that I don’t need to remember
it all.
==PAGE:49==
5.6 Specifying Solution Details
41
ACTIONS
EMOTIONS
TOUCHPOINTS
QUESTIONS
/THOUGHTS
Feeling overwhelement with information
Download the app
Start tracking data
Graphs with nicely displayed data 
Set reminders for the upcoming week
Forget about routine
Adjust reminders for the 
next week
Set automatic
 increment 
of exercises goal
It is just too 
many things 
to remember 
about
Lets try to 
structure it
Nice, it is 
so easy to 
add new 
entries
This is 
exactly 
what I 
needed!
Adjusting to 
a new 
schedule 
has never 
been so easy
Open the 
app
Activities 
tracker
Setting 
reminders
Amazing to 
have this 
option!
Goal 
increment
Yay, I can set 
all reminders 
for upcoming 
week
Setting 
reminders
Overview 
sections
Figure 5.10: Kasper’s journey map.
It is worth mentioning how users would interact with the app on a weekly and
daily basis. Users would be setting up notifications and goals periodically (some of
them would not need it, therefore this feature is optional). For daily use, customers
would be logging new entries such as meals, blood sugar and exercise tabs.
5.6
Specifying Solution Details
To present an overview and the functionality of the system to a reader, in the following
chapter Lean Canvas and User Story Map are shown. As mentioned in Chapter 1.2,
Lean Canvas, and User Story Map creation was one of the few activities by which the
development started in earlier phases and has been continued since.
5.6.1
Lean Canvas Creation
The final version of the Lean Canvas presented in Figure 5.11 was defined after the
framing and ideation process. Additional corrections were applied after the definition
of Minimum Viable Product.
The lean canvas is a one-page board with a number of blocks used to evaluate busi-
ness ideas [52]. It is perceived as a more action-driven and entrepreneurial business
plan focused on finding solutions for more immediate opportunities and problems [52].
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Design Process
The lean canvas for the DiaBetter app is shown in the picture below. Problem
and solutions are defined and presented in the picture below. Moreover, a Unique
Value Proposition is phrased and included.
These three, together with Customer
segmentation, unfair advantage, and key metrics were the most crucial parts to start
on designing a solution. In the picture below, the key metrics, cost structure, and
revenue streams of the solution are explained.
Figure 5.11: Lean Canvas for the DiaBetter app.
5.6.2
User Story Mapping
Usability can be defined as an extent to which a product or a service can be used
by a particular user to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, satisfaction, and
efficiency in a specified context of use [38]. To determine actions that one needs to
perform and the results that one wants to achieve, the User Story Map was drafted.
It is crucial to have a clear idea in mind before jumping into a initial prototype design.
A User Story Map was invented by Jeff Patton and it represents an approximately
linear view of the steps a user follows while interacting with a product [70]. The User
Story Map for DiaBetter app is shown in Figure 5.12. In the picture below users’
desired outcome (goals), high-level sequence (activities), and operations devoid of
concrete UI (tasks) are determined.
==PAGE:51==
5.6 Specifying Solution Details
43
GOAL
ACTIVITY
TASK
Cover the 
basics
Explore the app 
capabilities
Preview intro 
slides
Check today’s 
overview
Choose an 
activity
Preview a chart 
with a goal and 
current state
Preview today’s 
log
Check graphs
Pick an activity
Preview weekly 
statistics
Preview month-
ly statistics
Preview period-
ic overview
Pick data type
Specify a day/
period of time
Pick activities
Display logs
Keep
motivation
Participate in a 
community’s 
life
Pick activities 
to share
Answer on 
comments to 
your posts
Pick a picture 
type
Add desctiption
Share a post
Comment on 
other’s scores
Like other’s 
posts
Set daily goals
Set a goal for 
average 
glucose level
Set water
consumption 
goal
Set a goal for 
physical
exercises
Set steps goal
Turn on the 
daily increment 
of exercises 
goal
Improve your 
daily routine
Export data to 
PDF
Pick activity 
reminder
Turn on
reminder
Specify time
Specify
repeatability
Set reminders
Specify data
type
Pick the
activities
Display logs
Set a day/
period
Send PDF 
report to your 
email
Specify dura-
tion increment
Set up your 
medication 
intake info
Specify
medications
Set an amount
Change your 
proﬁle info
Type your email
Type name
Set up a nick
Specify your 
country
Sign up for a 
newsletter
Connect the 
app with 
myHealth
Track a lifestyle 
change
Log in a new 
entry
Pick what 
needs to be 
recorded
Set-up exercise 
duration
Pick the level of 
exercise
Insert an 
amount of
carbohydrates
Select a 
product from 
food library
Set amount 
of water 
consumed
Enter a date
Enter a time
Add a note
Save the entry
Figure 5.12: User Story Map for the DiaBetter app.
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Design Process
5.7
Iterations
Having predefined features of the app, the process of iterative design has started.
For each iteration, the Human-Centered Design model described in Section 1.2 was
applied. The analysis of provided feedback and ideation parts was crucial for the
prototyping step. All prototypes, besides the concept definition, were made in Adobe
XD. The low-fidelity concept definition prototype was made on paper (see Figure
5.13), used as a base for the first medium-fidelity prototype.
Figure 5.13: Concept definition made on paper.
The aim was to quickly iterate and refine ideas. Each prototype was shared with
the end-users on Facebook groups, the survey for gathering feedback regarding the
testing was distributed together with links.
To understand user’s preferences and behaviors two methods of testing were ap-
plied - A/B and Usability tests respectively [55]. Both of them were carried remotely,
due to the pandemic and not having a possibility to meet up offline. Moreover, the
testing was unmoderated meaning that participants made all tests in their environ-
ment without a facilitator present [19].
==PAGE:53==
5.7 Iterations
45
As previously mentioned, testing was made within the target group for the app.
Don Norman in his book ”The Design of Everyday Things” wrote that five people per
testing give enough knowledge about the target group preferences and behaviors [55].
This requirement has been fulfilled, therefore one can assume that obtained results
are valid.
There were 5 iterations in total. More information about each prototyping and
testing phase can be found further in this Chapter.
5.7.1
Iteration 1
5.7.1.1
Prototyping
For the first iteration, all the assumptions listed in Section 5.4 were considered. The
low-fidelity concept depicted in Figure 5.13 was prepared. Having the idea for the
initial prototype, the first draft was created. The initial version was fairly simple,
aiming only to show the main functionality of the app and see how users behave. In
order not to spend time on features that might become obsolete in the following iter-
ations, initial design was simple (see Figure 5.14). An XD link of the first prototype
can be found in Appendix F.1.
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Design Process
Figure 5.14: Artboards from the first iteration.
5.7.1.2
Testing
For the first iteration, eight responses from type 2 diabetics were collected. This test
included some usability and A/B questions. During this testing, participants were
asked to perform specific tasks such as ”In the app, there is a possibility of logging
exercises that you have done. Try to log in 50 min of MEDIUM exercises.”. The goal
was to find out the answers to the following questions:
• Are people able to log a new entry? (for example 50 min of medium exercises)
• Do people know where to search for setting reminders?
• Is usage of community part intuitive? How do people like this feature?
• Preference of positioning ”logging a new entry” button and argumentation for
it.
• Preference regarding the active icon format.
• Additional comments.
For many participants the task with logging in a new entry was easy, it took from
2 to 20 seconds. There were some useful comments about the rotatable circle - some
users commented that it should blink or have a gradient to be more visible.
Enabling on reminders turned out to be more tricky, several people had trouble
to find it. One said that ”was trying to add some carbs and then I expected to have an
ability to set a reminder, but there was no such a way”. Participants did not expect
it under a profile button. They were looking for settings or tried to set reminders on
==PAGE:55==
5.7 Iterations
47
the specific page (e.g. meals or exercises).
The community part was trivial to find. Participants vastly claimed that possibil-
ity of sharing their results/pictures would keep them motivated, however, some were
in doubt if they would use it instead of other SoMe channels (like Facebook groups
for diabetics).
Half of the people voted for the ”add” button in the middle and the other 50%
preferred to have it on the right. The main argument for the middle position was
that people found it very intuitive and symmetric. Positioning the button on the
right side of the screen makes it easier to reach it with the thumb though.
62,5% of participants like the highlighted icon whereas the rest vote for the filled
ones. People found the highlighted icon more visible and standing out. Moreover,
one commented a filled icon as ”I could mistake filled icon, as just the way it has been
designed, not the indication of the current view”.
In general, people liked the initial app. Its features were clear and intuitive for
most of the participants. A more descriptive summary and actual users’ answers for
the first survey are presented in Appendix F.1.1.
5.7.2
Iteration 2
5.7.2.1
Prototyping
For the second iteration, the user testing of the 1st version had been taken into
consideration. Therefore, the following aspects of the app have changed:
• The community part and the overview of the day were split into two different
artboards.
• Participants had some trouble with adding a new log as the clock-like part of
the UI did not indicate its purpose enough. To highlight the purpose, a blinking
circle was added to each log page.
• An ”add” button on the home page, where one can track activities/meals/blood
glucose was incorporated.
• The icon on the top right corner has changed from a profile to a settings icon.
• Community and overview needed to be separated, therefore in the second iter-
ation one can find them in two different places.
• People have chosen the highlighted icon for an active tab, therefore it has not
changed to a filled one.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Design Process
• An ”add” button was moved from the right side to the middle on each page.
In general, the app gained some colors to motivate users. The second iteration
design contains more illustrations to give users an immediate idea of what they are
currently dealing with. The design can be seen on the Figure 5.15. A link to a second
prototype is included in Appendix F.2.
Figure 5.15: App improvement after the first testing.
5.7.2.2
Testing
The second testing involved nine respondents gathered among different Facebook
groups for diabetes type 2. Same as before, the survey was constructed of A/B and
==PAGE:57==
5.7 Iterations
49
a number of usability questions. Several tasks were assigned to respondents to check
how do they interact with the app and to reveal parts that they do not find intuitive.
The goal of this testing was to investigate different aspects of the app usage:
• How easy it is to find today’s exercise logs?
• Do people know where they can find an overview of the day?
• Diabetics’ preference for presenting data (bar chart vs. pie chart).
• Is it intuitive what does the ”Add” button on the Community page do?
• Which design motivates users more?
• Pros and cons of logging in a new entry.
• Whether or not people like to have intro slides where the app features would
be explained.
• Additional comments.
For some participants checking today’s exercise logs was quite intuitive, however,
number of people encountered issues while doing it. Few users said that text is too
small and it is not visible. The time to accomplish this task was estimated to be
under 1 minute.
The positioning of the overview of the day button seems to be intuitive for users,
despite the icon shape - ”The only thing that I don’t find intuitive is the look of the
button, more intuitive could be a ”home” shape. Everyone will know that after press-
ing that, you will go back to the first, main site” said one participant. Some people
clicked on the Diabetter logo to go to the home page.
66,67% of participants voted for the bar chart, whereas the rest found the pie
chart more intuitive. People listed some advantages of the bar chart, for example: a
coherent look with the design, less space is taken and visual appearance. Moreover,
progression is better understood. On the pie chart people liked big, well-presented
numbers.
People found the idea of the community section and the possibility of sharing
today’s results or pictures useful. They see it as a motivation - ”Some people will
use it daily to keep themselves motivated and validated by their community”. Some
think they could be inspired by other’s recipes. Engaging in the community part is
different from person to person, therefore several users said they would use it daily
while other are not social-media types, therefore they would not be posting.
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Design Process
In the process of logging carbs intake, people have some concerns about function-
ality of the slider while trying to choose a smaller amount of carbs. Some suggested a
solution where one can type carbs using the numeric keyboard as well. Nevertheless,
users find a slider easy to use and they think the process is intuitive.
Almost all users (eight out of nine) voted for the colorful design. They perceive
it to be more playful and motivating. Moreover, people would be happy to have app
introduction slides. One of the respondents said that it should not be more than 4
artboards.
All in all users prefer the new design over the previous iteration and have a really
positive attitude towards the app. There were some comments, that the app should
tone down a little - making illustrations smaller or changing them to not look too
messy. All participants’ answers from the testing 2 are gathered and presented in the
Appendix F.2.1.
5.7.3
Iteration 3
5.7.3.1
Prototyping
The third prototype was improved by incorporating the feedback from the second
testing round. The design is briefly presented in the Figure 5.16 while the working
prototype can be found in the Appendix F.3.
After the second testing, changes
introduced are:
• The icon on the top left corner has changed from a notes icon into a house icon.
• Participants liked the colorful version, however, some stated that it should tone
down a bit. Therefore, the top logo in a colorful sections was replaced with a
monochromatic one. Moreover, illustrations for each section are a bit smaller
and some details were erased to simplify the illustrations.
• The second way of inserting carbohydrates amount was added in order to allow
adding a precise amount of carbs.
• Four intro slides were added.
• Further development of the app by adding new features that will be tested in
the next round: setting reminders, posting daily score or pictures, my posts
artboard.
==PAGE:59==
5.7 Iterations
51
Figure 5.16: Artboards from the third iteration.
5.7.3.2
Testing
For the third testing, eight respondents filled a survey. The survey combined usability
and A/B questions to see how do users perform when they need to accomplish some
tasks and what is their preference. Following features were investigated:
• Are 4 intro slides clear for the audience?
• Is setting up reminders easy enough?
• Preference of overview page design.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Design Process
• How easy it is to share a daily score with the community?
• Preference of positioning of ”All today’s logs”. During the last test, users had
some issues with locating it.
• Whether or not users know how to set a number of carbs in two different ways.
• Would the feature of exporting logs to PDF be valuable for users?
• Additional comments.
The 4 intro slides seem to provide a clear and valuable message on the app fea-
tures. Participants claim that they like them and after seeing those, they were curious
about the app - ”It explains well the main features and makes me curious about the
app”. Some suggested to change the order of the slides and add information about
tracking water intake.
Three out of eight people did not manage to set up reminders. The procedure was
rather clear for the five people that succeeded, still they wrote some comments on
possible improvements. Two people were concerned about whether the settings were
saved. Some participants wanted to set the reminder from the exercise page.
75% of people voted for the overview design with the white boxes. They perceive
it to be more clear and coherent to the rest of the app. Moreover, the colorful version
is too noisy for them. The users who voted for the second option think that the
design is more playful.
Sharing today’s score has not caused any problems. The task was easy, however,
participants commented on one unclear header. They were asked to pick the activities
to share, while the needed action was the opposite - excluding elements. One user
proposed to ads a ”tick” make this step more informative.
75% of respondents prefer to have ”All today’s logs” button below the overview of
the day. They perceive it as a sum-up of before mentioned, therefore the placement
is more clear and visible while being after graphs.
Setting a number of carbs in two different ways (by keyboard and on the wheel)
was easy for participants. They find this functionality instinctive since many apps
use similar solutions. Although the feature-wise this is clear, there were some issues
with the other aspect - ”The concept is pretty clear and intuitive, but the “clickability”
of both options doesn’t work well so far”.
Almost all respondents would like to have a PDF export feature. They think the
collected data could be useful for their doctor. Some people were not certain if this
==PAGE:61==
5.7 Iterations
53
functionality is needed. One stated that it would be better to have the possibility to
send a PDF report to an email.
Moreover, one participant suggested that the color of the ”add” button should
change respectively to the activity page layout, because of the button’s different
functionality on each page. This comment is especially significant because in previous
testings it was mentioned as well. Users’ answers for the third testing are shown in
Appendix F.3.1.
5.7.4
Iteration 4
5.7.4.1
Prototyping
The feedback collected during the third testing was implemented within the 4th iter-
ation. For this iteration the following aspects of the app have been changed:
• The order of introduction slides has changed, and short information about a
water intake tracker was added.
• Setting reminders functionality was improved.
• The font size has changed. The smallest fonts were enlarged.
• Sharing today’s score feature was redesigned. The tick icon was added, therefore
the layout is more communicatory.
Moreover, in a new version, the header
corresponds to the action required from the users.
• The ”add” button’s color is now changing, in relation to the section that is
opened.
• A short explanation was added to logging new activity on the main page.
• Monthly overview graphs were added.
• Exporting entries to PDF feature was added. A user can select activities that
will be exported.
Few artboards are presented in the 5.17 and a link to a working prototype can be
found in Appendix F.4.
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Design Process
Figure 5.17: App improvement after the third testing.
5.7.4.2
Testing
Seven users took part in the testing of the fourth iteration. The survey was dominated
by usability questions, asking participants to execute various tasks.
This testing
included only one A/B question. Answers to the following questions were explored:
• Is checking specific date logs easy enough?
• Whether or not the target group knows how to send a PDF report by email.
• Is the sharing a daily score with the community easier after feedback implemen-
tation?
==PAGE:63==
5.7 Iterations
55
• Preference of ”add” buttons color.
• Do people know the meaning of colors in the glucose section?
• Are people able to find monthly graphs for activities?
• Users’ additional comments.
Most of the participants find checking specific date logs easy and its location in
the app intuitive - ”In logs overview. It was very intuitive, quite hard not to notice it”.
One participant claims that it would be nice to filter carbs and exercises at specific
tabs respectively. Other one thought the button is only for exporting data to PDF
and did not expect to find the overview there.
The task with exporting periodic data to PDF turned out to be clear to the
users. Most of them managed to accomplish the goal quickly - ”It took me less than
a minute”, ”It took me few seconds” or ”Once knowing where the module is it was
immediate”.
Sharing today’s score testing was repeated as it caused some problems during the
third iteration. After slight redesign the feedback regarding this task turned out to
be more positive. They claim that this feature works well and they managed to ac-
complish the task in approximately 10 seconds. One person proposed to implement
this option in the date/period overview to share periodic data.
42,83% of people prefer to have the same color for an ”add” button on each
category. Users associate this button with one activity across the screens - adding
progress. However, two out of four people who picked ”Each category different color”
option think that the color is secondary while the consistency in the positioning is
more important. The other two think that by having different colors, the design is
more aesthetic and coherent.
It seems like participants get the meaning of colors in the glucose logs section.
Three colors are corresponding to the glucose levels - green, yellow, and red. One
person was not convinced if the red color should be used at all, because it might
demotivate users.
All users think that the placement of a monthly graph for carbohydrates is intu-
itive and no one has had any trouble finding it. Participants immediately located the
graph under the meals tab.
One person commented, that ”The only issue that I see is the text size, cause in
some cases it looks too small”. This opinion will be taken into account and the text
size will be enlarged for the final prototype. The results from this testing showed that
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Design Process
the users do not struggle with the app anymore. At first, some of the functionalities
were problematic, and throughout the iterative design, they were revealed and fixed.
Few comments from the last testing will be implemented in order to get to the final
prototype - MVP
5.8
App logo and the name
The aim of the app is to improve the lifestyle of diabetics type 2, therefore the need
for a name that clearly reflects it arose.
Figure 5.18: Name brainstorming.
The brainstorm session to find a proper name was undertaken, and from several op-
tions depicted in Figure 5.18 one was chosen. The final name for the app is DiaBetter.
The blue color can be associated with support and trust. Numerous health-related
apps use blue as the main color. Keeping that in mind, the logo for the app was
designed using a blue palette. A couple of ideas for the logo have been designed (see
Picture 5.19) and the final version was selected.
Figure 5.19: Logo propositions.
==PAGE:65==
5.8 App logo and the name
57
The logo is a combination of a heart shape and a tick sign, which represents
well-being and health improvement.
Figure 5.20: DiaBetter logo.
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 6
Minimum Viable
Product
As discussed in the previous sections and as stated in the research question, the
outcome of this project was to design a MVP (Minimum Viable Product) that suc-
cessfully facilitates a lifestyle change. During this study a total of 5 iterations took
place, where the final one can be defined as MVP prototyping.
The fourth testing demonstrated that users understand the app and it is intuitive
for them, since close to none issues were pointed out. Following aspect has changed
after the last usability test:
• The font size has been increased again since one person commented on it.
• Arguments about an ”Add” button color were examined. A small dominance
of ”Different color for each section” answer was compared with the comments
and it turned out that the arguments for one color of the button were stronger.
Thus, different colors have been changed to one blue color for all sections.
The app features were already described in Chapter 5.4, however, just for the
record the MVP features are: diabetes community, carbohydrates tracker, exercise
tracker, sugar level tracker, setting up reminders, goal settings and exporting data.
By comparing the app to existing solutions collected in Table 3.1 it is visible that
the app provides an additional benefit to diabetics. DiaBetter app covers almost all
aspects presented there, except knowledge acquisition and medication intake tracker.
However, one can argue that medications intake are covered in the app since it would
be possible to set up a type and interval of medication intake.
While iterating on the product, a lot of effort was put to design a solution that
would be understandable by the user. As the target group has been involved in the
design process the whole time, solution is certain to be a good fit to the users needs.
==PAGE:67==
6 Minimum Viable Product
59
During the process Gestalt Principles were followed. The Gestalt Principles is a
set of rules showing how humans normally perceive objects [84]. These rules explain
how people are prompted to make a group from similar elements, simplify compli-
cated pictures, and recognize patterns [84]. This concept was invented by German
psychologist Wertheimer in 1923 and its further development was made by Kohler,
Koffka, and Mertzger [78]. The similarity principle has been implemented by having
corresponding colors or design of buttons. Implementation of proximity primed users
to perceive different objects as being one group. By applying already known patterns,
the design process is more efficient and not too time-consuming as i allows users to
have an instant understanding of the product.
A link to a working MVP prototype is shown in Appendix G. Some wireframes of
the Minimum Viable Product are presented in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: MVP wireframes.
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Minimum Viable Product
Moreover, this solution addresses the users’ needs analyzed throughout this study.
The goals that were discovered for each created persona are met. As show by Mateo
example, as a first persona, in the DiaBetter solution, it is possible to set goals that
can be adjusted to personal needs. Additionally, one can set reminders to not forget
about activities. Katarzyna can engage within the diabetics’ community, therefore
her goal to socialize with others can be achieved while using the solution. Kasper
wants to have a clear overview of his data and sometimes set reminders for the ac-
tivities. These two goals are addressed by user-friendly graphs and setting reminders
feature. As for more complex User Story Map (see figure 5.12) which addresses the
app features users’ desired outcomes are met. These goals were created from pre-
viously mentioned personas’ goals and several other steps from the study process.
Within the app’s framework, the user can track a lifestyle change, keep own motiva-
tion, improve a daily routine, and cover the app basics.
The annotated wireframes for the solution were prepared and are presented in Ap-
pendix G.1. On the annotated wireframes, micro-interactions have been determined.
Micro-interactions are activities that have a single purpose and can be found all over
various devices and apps [65]. In Appendix G.1, for each micro-interactions triggers,
rules, feedback, and loops were identified:
• Trigger - initiates the action (user or system driven) [11].
• Rule - answers question what happens after microinteraction is triggered [11].
• Feedback - informs people what is happening [11].
• Loop - determines the mate-rules of microinteraction [65].
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
Among other existing solutions for diabetes management available on the market one
can find regular basic therapies in hospitals and digital approaches. Periodic consul-
tations with a health center are crucial for the management of the disease, however,
the study shows that from the average 2 hours and 26 minutes spent in the clinic,
more than a half is a waiting time [21]. This gives a very little amount of time for a
general consultation with a doctor, which normally takes place every 3rd month. On
top of that, only a fraction of the meeting time is spent discussing the disease man-
agement. Therefore, plenty of digital solutions attempt to solve the issue of diabetes
self-management. Diabetes is the most common condition among all health-related
problems targeted by app producers [10].
The existing digital solutions’ features were analyzed with respect to the per-
formed literature study. Although there are plenty of mobile solutions, numerous of
them do not integrate the most important management tasks needed to properly treat
diabetes (see features listed in Table 3.1). In the Minimum Viable Product designed
for this study, almost all functionalities mentioned in Table 3.1 are implemented. The
app misses the knowledge acquisition part, which is a functionality that seems to not
fit in a mobile solution framework. Some apps are filled with articles that provide
additional knowledge about a disease, but they are not often used by diabetics. It is
normal that people would search for information on the internet or by asking their
doctor, rather than spend time downloading the app to acquire new knowledge. One
can argue that the DiaBetter app fulfills this condition, because of the community
section. Users can share their knowledge with others in an extremely easy way, which
encourages learning about the disease. One can also argue that the medication intake
tracker is not implemented in DiaBetter, however in settings of the Minimum Viable
Product medication doses can be determined, and the possibility of setting reminders
for medication is also implemented. In contradiction to the existing apps, DiaBetter
provides the graphical illustration of risk by color representation on the blood glucose
graph. During the fourth testing an interpretation of colors’ meaning was checked.
Despite one person’s doubts that red color may demotivate users, it has been decided
to preserve it as it is significant to emphasize on the possible risks. Following features
from the Table 3.1 were integrated in DiaBetter app: exercise tracker, meals tracker,
hydration tracker, setting goals, setting reminders, graphical illustration of risk, social
support and exporting data.
==PAGE:70==
62
7 Discussion
Moreover, a Stage-Based model described in Chapter 2.3 was followed during the
design of Minimum Viable Product. The model assumes that there are five stages
of change: preparation, collection, integration, reflection, and action [46]. Behavior
change sometimes consists of a change of long-term habits, thus it might be immensely
hard to overcome. Implementation of these five stages was analyzed for all existing
mobile solutions (see Table 3.2) and it turned out that only two out of fifteen follow
a Stage-Based model structure: One Drop and forDiabetes apps. By looking at their
features one can notice that both solutions lack hydration tracker. What is more,
forDiabetes does not include a medication tracker. In comparision not only the Dia-
Better app fulfills all stages of a Stage-Based model but it also consists of previously
mentioned features. Although these two solutions can be seen as strong competitors
to DiaBetter, they are not designed in a user-friendly way. It is a fact that approxi-
mately 38% of users will stop engaging with a solution due to an unattractive design
or too long content [3]. After analysis of 15 existing mobile solutions, some disadvan-
tages and advantages of each were pointed and are presented in B.1. Among many
drawbacks of OneDrop and forDiabetes solutions, one can list a lack of continuity,
hidden features, unnecessary text, and confusion while navigating throughout the app.
Every study has some limitations and so does this one. Some barriers were de-
termined during the design process. Finding an audience for the workshops turned
out to be problematic - after many tries none of the end-users showed a willingness
for participation. Several attempts of reaching type 2 diabetics have been made by
contacting centers for diabetes, bigger companies in the field, posting a couple of re-
quests on DTU Inside, and asking on several Facebook groups. This issue significantly
delayed the process and disturbed following the initial project schedule. When the
decision on conducting workshops with type 1 diabetics has been made, an extremely
serious incident occurred. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic a lockdown of the whole
country took place. The project had to have another shift in the process, because of
the already planned physical workshop that could not be conducted. Instead of phys-
ical workshops, the online workshops were integrated into the study. This solution
was not ideal, however, it was manageable. A couple of drawbacks resulting from a
change to online workshops were determined:
• preparation for the online workshop takes much longer and does not correspond
to better results,
• people do not take online gatherings as seriously as physical ones,
• there are more distractions, therefore sometimes people are late or have a noisy
surrounding which bothers other participants leading to trouble with focus,
• it is harder to motivate participants, because of not knowing them in person.
This might lower the engagement and cause less creative thinking.
==PAGE:71==
7.1 Future development
63
The change in form of the workshop had some advantages as well, which were shown
in Chapter 5.2.5 together with the guidelines on how to improve the online workshop
performance. One last limitation which is worth mentioning is the way that testings
were performed. As the pandemic continued, it was not possible to conduct physi-
cal testing during which the end-user behaviors could be observed in person. The
users were asked to join the testing during an online call or record their screen while
testing, nevertheless no one agreed to do so. Therefore the survey-based testing was
conducted. Testing surveys consisted of open-ended questions that were distributed
online, with the responses of a minimum of 7 participants for each testing round. Al-
though participants elaborated on different aspects, it would be beneficial to perform
testing in person when the facilitator could ask complementary questions on the go.
7.1
Future development
For the future development of this solution, it would be suggested to perform a physi-
cal testing with the end-users. During a moderated in-person testing a lot of insights
can be gained, which would probably take the solution on a higher level. Maybe there
are some aspects that have been omitted for the Minimum Viable Product.
Moreover, the solution could be expanded by adding a specific diet feature. This
functionality would let the users follow and adjust their meals to a diet that they
picked. It would involve a huge database of recipes. If not implemented, this feature
should be at least considered, because that was one of the outcomes of the workshops.
During the whole study participants came up with other interesting aspects like sleep
monitoring, reward system, etc. (all these are presented in Chapter 5.4). Considera-
tion and further development of these might be valuable.
Although the final solution for this study target diabetics types 2, for further
steps it might be a good idea to diversify it to support different types of diabetes -
for example type 1. One of the interviewees - Małgorzata - mentioned that these two
conditions do not differentiate that much. On top of that, the workshops conducted
with type 1 diabetics brought similar results as the literature study revealed for type 2
diabetics. Some of the already existing solutions are targeting both types, and before
the user creates a new account the type needs to be picked. It might be interesting to
study a contrast between diabetes type 1 and type 2 and see if the DiaBetter might
target both.
A possibility of connecting the app to an insulin monitor would probably make
the tracking of blood glucose level easier. This would mean that the user does not
need to think about recording entries manually. Expansion to this solution might be
problematic since almost all devices that monitor blood glucose of patients have their
app which is by default connected to an insulin monitor device.
==PAGE:72==
64
7 Discussion
Last but not least, before DiaBetter implementation an interface for a log in and
sign up as a new user needs to be designed. Currently, the Minimum Viable Product
shows the main functionalities and the steps presented in the User Story Map shown
in Figure 5.12.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Estimation shows that 6.3% of the population has diabetes [62], which is a chronic
disease impairing the body’s ability to process blood sugar [53]. Approximately 90%
of all these cases are type 2 diabetes (T2DM) [71]. T2DM is related to a proportional
deficiency of insulin and/or resistance to it [16]. In case of disease an application of
treatment is crucial. If the condition is not treated properly, many complications can
occur which eventually lead to life-threatening. Due to the disease, type 2 diabetics
die on average 8 years earlier than people without it [40].
There are several aspects that one needs to consider after being diagnosed with
diabetes. Not only the following diet and being physically active is crucial, patients
immediately need to change other habits and include tracking of blood sugar levels
as a daily routine. Some general healthy rules like being hydrated or elimination of
smoking and drinking are recommended. Too much of the stress might be dangerous
for the patient’s condition.
Behavior change should be perceived as a process, not as a one-time event [82],
thus keeping motivation on a high level is essential. When patients feel under pressure
they might immediately stop the treatment, thus setting reachable goals is important.
Therefore, in this study, the problem statement was defined by considering all
these issues and the answer for the following research question has been tried to be
answered:
How an app for facilitating diabetics’ lifestyle change can be designed
to lead to an improvement in patients condition?
• What elements should the user-centered design solution be made of to encourage
type 2 diabetics for lifestyle improvement?
• How would the app be used by diabetics?
• What would motivate users to use this solution?
The main research question was supported by three sub-questions presented above.
To find the right answer to the research question, the design process was structured
==PAGE:74==
66
8 Conclusion
by applying the Double Diamond method together with the Human-Center Design
model. To make a design thinking process more efficient couple of well-known co-
creation techniques were used. The iterative process helped with the definition and
development of problem statements and solutions. Literature study, analysis of ex-
isting solutions, general survey, workshops, interviews and persona creation were
performed to define a core of the solution with a participation of the end-user.
The Minimum Viable Product, that answers the main research question, is based
on findings gathered in all steps. It was designed with the assistance of the end-user,
therefore elements that are applied there answer the first sub-question.
The list of features that the user-centered design solution should be made of are:
• diabetes community,
• carbohydrates tracker,
• exercise tracker,
• sugar level tracker,
• setting up reminders,
• goal setting,
• exporting data.
Moreover, it is important to design a solution for behavior change with respect to
the Stage-Based model, which consists of five stages of change: preparation, collec-
tion, integration, reflection, and action [46]. It structured the design of the DiaBetter
app by showing how to help people with learning and adapting to a change.
Persona creation helped with showing specific use cases of the app.
The app
would be used by diabetics on a daily and periodically (weekly, monthly, etc.) basics.
The main daily interaction would be logging new entries (meals, blood sugar levels,
and exercises) and socializing with diabetics’ community. In terms of periodical use,
patients would be setting up reminders or goals for activities.
The main motivation for using an app would be a long-term lifestyle improvement,
however, this would not be something that users would see immediately after starting
to use this solution. The feature that would encourage them to start a lifestyle change
would be social engagement. Study shows that it increases general well being, and
therefore might play a motivator role in behavior change. In general, people love to
share their routine and as they would receive positive feedback from the community
they would be even more motivated for a change. Moreover, the reasonably set goals
might prompt the participants and show them the importance of the task. Finally,
==PAGE:75==
8 Conclusion
67
reminders would motivate them to keep their day to day routine, as they adjust the
notifications to their own schedules. With reminders, diabetics do not have any ex-
cuses for forgetting to do an activity.
All in all, the Minimum Viable Product for this study was designed upon three
answers to sub-questions of the main research question. By implementing these as-
pects which were designed and tested with the target audience, it is believed that
the solution would successfully facilitate diabetics’ lifestyle change and the DiaBetter
app would lead to an improvement in the long-term condition of patients.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization (WHO). “Behaviour change strategies and health:
the role of health systems”. In: WHO (2008).
[2]
adam23gray. Why the double diamond isn’t enough. url: https://uxdesign.
cc / why - the - double - diamond - isnt - enough - adaa48a8aec1. (accessed:
22.02.2020).
[3]
Adobe. The State of Content: Expectations on the Rise. url: https://blogs.
adobe.com/creative/files/2015/12/Adobe-State-of-Content-Report.
pdf. (accessed: 29.05.2020).
[4]
Alireza Ahmadvand et al. “Novel augmented reality solution for improving
health literacy around antihypertensives in people living with type 2 diabetes
mellitus: protocol of a technology evaluation study”. In: BMJ Open (2017).
[5]
Clifford P. Andrew, Tan Siang-yang, and Gorsuch Richard L. “Efficacy of a
self-directed behavioral health change program: Weight, body composition, car-
diovascular fitness, blood pressure, health risk, and psychosocial mediating vari-
ables.” In: J Behav Med. (1991).
[6]
Jamy D Ard and Gary D Miller. Lifestyle Medicine. A Manual for Clinical Prac-
tice. Chapter 22: Lifestyle Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus. Springer International
Publishing Switzerland, 2016.
[7]
Wallace AS et al. “Literacy-appropriate educational materials and brief coun-
seling improve diabetes self-management”. In: Patient Educ Couns (2009).
[8]
Diabetes Australia. Managing type 2. url: https://www.diabetesaustralia.
com.au/managing-type-2. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[9]
Holtz B and Lauckner C. “Diabetes management via mobile phones: a system-
atic review”. In: Telemed J E Health (2012).
[10]
Martínez-Pérez B, de la Torre-Díez I, and López-Coronado M. “Mobile health
applications for the most prevalent conditions by the World Health Organiza-
tion: review and analysis”. In: J Med Internet Res (2013).
[11]
Vamsi Batchu. Micro-interactions: why, when and how to use them to improve
the user experience. url: https://uxdesign.cc/micro-interactions-why-
when-and-how-to-use-them-to-boost-the-ux-17094b3baaa0. (accessed:
22.05.2020).
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
69
[12]
Paterson BL. “The shifting perspectives model of chronic illness”. In: Journal
of Nursing Scholarship (2001).
[13]
Hilde K. Brekke et al. “Lifestyle modification improves risk factors in type 2
diabetes relatives”. In: Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice (2005).
[14]
Cathy Tibbetts RN MPH CDE. “Case Study: Care Coordination and Case
Finding of Undetected Depression in a 72-Year-Old Man With Type 2 Diabetes”.
In: CLINICAL DIABETES (2003).
[15]
Sudesna Chatterjee, Kamlesh Khunti, and Melanie J Davies. “Type 2 diabetes”.
In: The Lancet (2017).
[16]
Diane Orr Chlebowy, Sula Hood, and A. Scott LaJoie. “Facilitators and Barriers
to Self-management of Type 2 Diabetes Among Urban African American Adults:
Focus Group Findings”. In: The Diabetes Educator (2010).
[17]
Sheldon Cohen and Thomas A. Wills. “Stress, Social Support, and the Buffering
Hypothesis”. In: Psychological Bulletin (1985).
[18]
Canadian Diabetes Association Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committee.
“Self-Management Education”. In: Can J Diabetes (2013).
[19]
Rebeca Costa. Moderated vs unmoderated usability testing: Which do you need?
url: https://www.justinmind.com/blog/moderated- vs- unmoderated-
usability-testing-which-do-you-need/. (accessed: 24.04.2020).
[20]
National Research Council. When I’m 64, Chapter 3 Motivation and Behavioral
Change. 2006.
[21]
Barnes CS et al. “Little Time for Diabetes Management in the Primary Care
Setting”. In: The Diabetes Educator (2004).
[22]
Sabate E. World Health Organization Adherence meeting report. 2001. url:
https://goo.gl/VxScC4. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[23]
Deci EL and Ryan RM. “Facilitating optimal motivation and psychological well-
being across life’s domains”. In: Can Psychol (2008).
[24]
Enginess. What is Iterative Design? (and Why You Should Use It). url: https:
/ / www . enginess . io / insights / what - is - iterative - design. (accessed:
23.02.2020).
[25]
Katherine Esposito et al. “Lifestyle Approach for Type 2 Diabetes and Metabolic
Syndrome”. In: Current Atherosclerosis Reports (2008).
[26]
eufic. Behaviour Change Models and Strategies. url: https://www.eufic.org/
en/healthy- living/article/motivating- behaviour- change. (accessed:
17.04.2020).
[27]
GriBiths F et al. “Why are health care interventions delivered over the internet?
A systematic review of the published literature”. In: Journal of Medical Internet
Research (2006).
[28]
Ruth F. Psychology and life. Scott Foresman, 1963.
==PAGE:78==
70
Bibliography
[29]
International Diabetes Federation. Diabetes: facts and figures 2005. url: https:
//goo.gl/JqMY8U. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[30]
International Diabetes Federation. Diabetes: Type 2 diabetes. url: https://www.
idf.org/aboutdiabetes/type-2-diabetes.html. (accessed: 22.05.2020).
[31]
A Gault. “Design for Health and Well Being: Knitted Products for Diabetics”.
In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (2016).
[32]
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. “REDUCTION IN THE INCI-
DENCE OF TYPE 2 DIABETES WITH LIFESTYLE INTERVENTION OR
METFORMIN”. In: N Engl J Med. (2002).
[33]
Falck Healtgcare. KRAMS-faktorer. url: https://www.falckhealthcare.dk/
sundhedsportal/fysisk-sundhed/krams-faktorer/. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[34]
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). “Behaviour change
at population, community and individual levels”. In: NICE public health guid-
ance (2007).
[35]
Bree Holtz and Carolyn Lauckner. “Diabetes Management via Mobile Phones:
A Systematic Review”. In: TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH (2012).
[36]
Rosenstock I.M. “Enhancing patient compliance with health recommendations”.
In: Journal of Pediatric Health Care (1988).
[37]
El-Kebbi IM et al. “Diabetes in urban African Americans: use of discussion
groups to identify barriers to dietary therapy among low-income individuals
with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus”. In: Diabetes Educ (1996).
[38]
Ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display terminals (VDT)s -
Part 11 Guidance on usability. Standard. ISO/IEC, 1998.
[39]
Corbin JM and Strauss A. “Unending work and care: Managing chronic illness
at home”. In: Jossey-Bass (1988).
[40]
Craig A. Johnston, Jennette P. Moreno, and John P. Foreyts. “Cardiovascu-
lar Effects of Intensive Lifestyle Intervention in Type 2 Diabetes”. In: Curr
Atheroscler Rep (2014).
[41]
Nemanja Jovancic. 5 Data Collection Methods for Obtaining Quantitative and
Qualitative Data. url: https://www.leadquizzes.com/blog/data-collection-
methods/. (accessed: 29.02.2020).
[42]
Lorig K and Holman H. “Self-management education: History, definition, out-
comes and mechanisms”. In: Annals of Behavioral Medicine (2003).
[43]
Mulcahy K et al. “Diabetes self-management education core outcomes mea-
sures”. In: Diabetes Educ (2003).
[44]
Syed Muhammad Sajjad Kabir. Basic Guidelines for Research: An Introductory
Approach for All Disciplines, Chapter 9. Book Zone Publication, 2016.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
71
[45]
Amy D. Otto PhD RD LDN, David O. Garcia MS, and John M. Jakicic PhD
FACSM. “Lifestyle Intervention Strategies to Prevent and Control Type 2 Dia-
betes”. In: Current Diabetes Reports (2008).
[46]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A Stage-Based Model of Personal Infor-
matics Systems”. In: CHI (2010).
[47]
Silje S Lie et al. “Written reflection in an eHealth intervention for adults with
type 2 diabetes mellitus: a qualitative study”. In: Patient Preference and Ad-
herence (2018).
[48]
Orozco LJ et al. “Exercise or exercise and diet for preventing type 2 diabetes
mellitus (Review)”. In: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2008).
[49]
Aitken M, Clancey B, and Nass D. “The Growing Value of Digital Health. Evi-
dence and Impact on Human Health and the Healthcare System”. In: Institute
Report (2017).
[50]
Franciosi M et al. “The impact of blood glucose self-monitoring on metabolic
control and quality of life in type 2 diabetic patients: an urgent need for better
educational strategies”. In: Diabetes Care 24 (2001).
[51]
Sanjay Mehrotra and Janice Chan. “Impact of Presentation of Risks Informa-
tion on Diabetics’ Self Management Response”. In: Unknown (2006-07).
[52]
Mario Moreira. The Agile Enterprise, Chapter 13 Capturing Ideas with Lean
Canvas. 2017.
[53]
Rachel Nall. An overview of diabetes types and treatments. url: https://www.
medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323627. (accessed: 22.02.2020).
[54]
NDSS. Online management tool. url: https://ndsslwwt2d.learnupon.com/
users/sign_in. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[55]
Don Norman. Design of Everyday Things. MIT Press Ltd, 2016.
[56]
Abdulfatai Olokoba, Olusegun Obateru, and Lateefat Olokoba. “Type 2 Dia-
betes Mellitus: A Review of Current Trends”. In: Oman Medical Journal (2012).
[57]
H. Olsen and S.A. Madsen. “Motivation for change in health behaviour in obese
men”. In: jmhg (2007).
[58]
World Health Organization. Diabetes, Data and Statistics. url: http://www.
euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicable-diseases/diabetes/
data-and-statistics. (accessed: 22.02.2020).
[59]
Rian Adi Pamungkas et al. “SELF MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AMONG
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS PATIENTS: A LITERATURE REVIEW”.
In: Belitung Nursing Journal (2016).
[60]
Effective Health Care Program. “Evidence-based Practice Center Systematic
Review Protocol Project title: Behavioral Programs for Diabetes Mellitus”. In:
www.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov (2014).
==PAGE:80==
72
Bibliography
[61]
Harvard Health Publishing. Why behavior change is hard - and why you should
keep trying. 2012.
[62]
Derrick K. Rollins et al. “Free-living inferential modeling of blood glucose level
using only noninvasive inputs”. In: Journal of Process Control (2010).
[63]
Elo S et al. “Qualitative Content Analysis: a focus on trustworthiness”. In:
SAGE Open (2014).
[64]
Lyubomirsky S, Sheldon KM, and Schkade D. “Pursuing happiness: The archi-
tecture of sustainable change. Review of General Psychology”. In: Educational
Publishing Foundation (2005b).
[65]
Dan Saffer. Microinteractions: Designing with Details. O’Reilly Media, 2013.
[66]
Istvan Sal and Ildiko Kohlne. “Behavioral therapy in diabetes mellitus and
obesity”. In: Global Journal of Obesity, Diabetes and Metabolic Syndrome (2018).
[67]
Margarete Sandelowski. “Combining Qualitative and Quantitative Sampling,
Data Collection, and Analysis Techniques in Mixed‐Method Studies”. In: John
Wiley Sons (2000).
[68]
Dena Schulman-Green et al. “Processes of Self-Management in Chronic Illness”.
In: J Nurs Scholarsh (2012).
[69]
Kristina P Schumann et al. “Evidence-Based Behavioral Treatments for Dia-
betes: Problem-Solving Therapy”. In: Diabetes Spectrum (2011).
[70]
Priyank Shah. User Story Mapping | Product Backlog Creation. url: https:
/ / medium . com / @priyank . it / user - story - mapping - product - backlog -
creation-7ea9a54f7f0e. (accessed: 22.05.2020).
[71]
Astrid N. van Smoorenburg et al. “Patients’ perspective on self-management:
type 2 diabetes in daily life”. In: BMC Health Serv Res (2019).
[72]
Helmrich SP et al. “Physical activity and reduced occurrence of non-insulin
dependent diabetes mellitus”. In: New England Journal of Medicine (1991).
[73]
Ronald P Stolk. “Screening for diabetes”. In: BMJ (2007).
[74]
Sydvestjysk Sygehus. Kost, Rygning, Alkohol, Motion (KRAM). url: http:
//www.svs.dk/wm440530. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[75]
Bodenheimer T, Wagner E, and Grumbach K. “Improving primary care for
patients with chronic illness: the chronic care model”. In: JAMA (2002).
[76]
Koch T, Jenkin P, and Kralik D. “Chronic illness self-management: locating the
“self””. In: J Adv Nurs (2004).
[77]
Roy Taylor. “Reversing type 2 diabetes”. In: Practical diabetes vol. 28 no. 9
(2011).
[78]
D. Todorovic. “Gestalt principles”. In: Scholarpedia (2018).
[79]
Neil Turner. 5 ways to use personas in your projects. url: http : / / www .
uxforthemasses.com/5-ways-use-personas/. (accessed: 23.05.2020).
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
73
[80]
Unknown. Diabetes Software and Management – How do you use yours? url:
https://www.diabetes.co.uk/features/diabetes-software-and-management.
html. (accessed: 23.02.2020).
[81]
Davy Vancampfort et al. Life-Threatening Effects of Antipsychotic Drugs. Chap-
ter 12: Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Elsevier Inc, 2016.
[82]
wichealth.org. Behavior change: a stage-based approach. url: http://www.
joinwichealth.org/behavior-change-a-stage-based-approach. (accessed:
17.04.2020).
[83]
Claire R. Williams and Barbara Buttfield. “Beyond Individualised Approaches
to Diabetes Type 2”. In: Sociology Compass (2016).
[84]
B. Wong. “Gestalt principles (Part 1)”. In: Nat Methods 7 (2010).
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX A
Articles analysis -
keywords
==PAGE:83==
A Articles analysis - keywords
75
Figure A.1:
Articles keywords analysis part 1.
==PAGE:84==
76
A Articles analysis - keywords
Figure A.2:
Articles keywords analysis part 2.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Existing Solutions
==PAGE:86==
78
B Existing Solutions
==PAGE:87==
B Existing Solutions
79
Table B.1:
Existing mobile solutions.
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX C
General Survey
C.1
Survey creation
Figure C.1:
Survey questions part 1.
==PAGE:89==
C.1 Survey creation
81
Figure C.2:
Survey questions part 2.
==PAGE:90==
82
C General Survey
Figure C.3:
Survey questions part 3.
==PAGE:91==
C.2 Survey responses
83
C.2
Survey responses
C.2.1
Demographic
==PAGE:92==
84
C General Survey
==PAGE:93==
C.2 Survey responses
85
C.2.2
Current lifestyle
==PAGE:94==
86
C General Survey
C.2.3
Overall situation
==PAGE:95==
C.2 Survey responses
87
==PAGE:96==
88
C General Survey
==PAGE:97==
C.2 Survey responses
89
C.2.4
App usage
==PAGE:98==
90
C General Survey
C.2.5
Comments
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX D
Workshops
D.1
Physical workshops plan
Table D.1:
Workshop 1 - plan.
==PAGE:100==
92
D Workshops
Table D.2:
Workshop 2 - plan.
==PAGE:101==
D.1 Physical workshops plan
93
Table D.3:
Workshop 3 - plan.
==PAGE:102==
94
D Workshops
Table D.4:
Workshop 4 - plan.
==PAGE:103==
D.2 Online workshops plan
95
D.2
Online workshops plan
D.2.1
Online workshops plan
Table D.5:
Online Workshop 1 - plan.
==PAGE:104==
96
D Workshops
Table D.6:
Online Workshop 2 - plan.
==PAGE:105==
D.3 Online workshops results
97
D.3
Online workshops results
D.3.0.1
Workshop 1
Figure D.1:
Results from Exercise 1, 2 and 3.
Figure D.2:
Results from Exercise 4.
==PAGE:106==
98
D Workshops
Figure D.3:
Results from Exercise 5.
Figure D.4:
Results from Exercise 6.
==PAGE:107==
D.3 Online workshops results
99
D.3.0.2
Workshop 2
Figure D.5:
Results from Exercise 1.
Figure D.6:
Results from Exercise 2.
==PAGE:108==
100
D Workshops
Figure D.7:
Results from Exercise 3.
Figure D.8:
Results from Exercise 4.
==PAGE:109==
D.3 Online workshops results
101
Figure D.9:
Results from Exercise 5.
Figure D.10:
Results from Exercise 6.
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX E
Interviews
E.1
Interview with Eddie, Denmark
1. How long do you know about the disease?
I was diagnosed with diabetes type 2 in August 2017.
2. What were the first symptoms, before you decided to go to the doc-
tor?
I noticed very fast that I feel differently, however, after being diagnosed I started
to feel a lot of stress and I needed to drop my job. The big issue concerning
diabetes has been that I have trouble with stress as well and the result from
this was that I lost control of my long-term blood sugar.
3. How often do you have consultations with the doctor?
Every 3 months.
4. What were the recommendations that you got from your doctor?
Diet and physical exercises.
5. What kind of difficulties do you experience while changing your lifestyle?
The biggest issue for me is to avoid eating sugar-based things like candies and
cakes. I do not have any issues with doing sport. I go to fitness and swim.
6. Do you have any comments on habits that you needed to apply after
the diagnosis?
I have done a little research in the FB group ”Diabetes 2 - Denmark” on which
issues people are struggling with and the most answers back were the lack of
motivation for doing sport, eating healthy and avoid the sugar devil.
E.2
Interview with Kazimierza, Poland
1. How long do you know about the disease?
10 years
2. What were the first symptoms, before you decided to go to the doc-
tor?
==PAGE:111==
E.3 Interview with Małgorzata, Poland
103
All the time I wanted to drink water, it was a real thirst. I could not drink
enough, I needed more and more.
3. Do you remember the first prescription that you got from your doctor
after being diagnosed?
It was physical activity and diet, however, it did not work for me. Later I was
on pills and now I need to inject insulin. It could be different from the lifestyle
change, still, I gave up and now I need to use insulin.
4. How often do you have consultations with the doctor?
Every 3rd month.
5. What are your motivations to apply these small changes in your life?
Motivations...
The thing is I do not have them because I got used to the
insulin. Sometimes I do not feel good, and I know that diet could improve it,
nevertheless, I cannot follow any of them.
6. So on top of the insulin injection, the doctor proposed a diet?
Yes, there should be a diet even if you get insulin, however, I allow myself to
too much and sometimes eat junk food.
7. Have you tried before any app, where you collect some data about
your everyday life?
No, I am not good at it and I do not use solutions like this.
8. Do you need to note any data on paper, before you go to the doctor?
I need to measure the sugar level and note it every morning, noon and evening.
Then I should show the whole list to my doctor, however, I do not do it regularly.
Often I do it shortly before I meet him.
9. Do you have any comments on habits that you needed to apply after
the diagnosis?
At the beginning it was tough, however now I am just used to things that I
need to do every day.
E.3
Interview with Małgorzata, Poland
1. As I know, you are no diabetics.
What are your experiences with
diabetes patients?
My mum and grandmum had diabetes type 2 - I was a close participant of their
disease. Now, I live with a type 1 diabetic - my husband was diagnosed while
being 29 years old (very late). Moreover, my younger daughter was diagnosed
when she was 5.5 years old.
2. From I hear you are quite familiar with those two types of diabetes.
Can you tell me, from your perspective, what are the differences?
==PAGE:112==
104
E Interviews
From my experiences, I do not think they have a lot of differences. The main
difference between diabetes type 1 and 2 is that type 2 diabetes patients are
older (around 40-50 years old). Typically there are almost no children in the
type 2 diabetics groups because the young generation is more active. Therefore,
for both types of patients, physical exercises are advisable, however, it needs to
be adjusted to a person’s needs.
Moreover, the fact that a person has diabetes type 2 does not mean that the
insulin injections will not be needed, because it depends on the disease develop-
ment. And that differs a lot from person to person.
What is even more interesting is the fact, that even for type 1 diabetics it is
possible to be diagnosed with type 2 as well. Therefore, even if injecting insulin
to stabilize the blood sugar after each meal is possible, it is not recommended.
More insulin in the body for type 1 diabetics = higher possibility of being
diagnosed with type 2 as well. Additionally, insulin resistance can be developed
- the body grows and needs more and more insulin.
3. Can you elaborate on recommendations for diabetics?
For all diabetes types diet is a key element.
Diabetics need to reduce and
minimize almost everything. It applies to weight (calorie redundancy), food,
etc. Physical exercises are important, however, the active lifestyle needs to be
optimized as well.
Each absorbed carbohydrate during exercise needs to be
taken into consideration.
For diabetics, calories are also important - more calories equal to gaining weight.
However, carbohydrates are more important (their proper level depends on
blood sugar). For each diabetic it is different, they know how much insulin
do they need for 1 carbohydrate (a need for insulin is not constant for each
person). If the insulin level is not proper, the person can get hypoglycemia or
hyperglycemia condition.
4. Is it easy to get to the point of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia?
Super easy. It can happen when you forget about 40 minutes of jogging and
inject the regular amount of insulin.
This can result in convulsions, loss of
consciousness, etc. It is a direct threat to life.
5. Are there any other complications that diabetics are struggling with?
Diabetics rarely die from having a disease but from its complications. Those
complications shorten the life of many patients, therefore if they show up later
in life the better for them.
Especially speaking of diabetics type 2, who are mostly obese from the begging,
they claim to eat little and gain weight continuously (this is how they are
often diagnosed with diabetes) - diet and physical exercises help to delay these
complications.
==PAGE:113==
E.3 Interview with Małgorzata, Poland
105
6. Are there any other aspects of life that diabetics need to change?
Diabetes is a chronic disease. It is invasive, especially while often insulin in-
jections it violates tissue continuity. Also, compared to other chronic diseases
there is a lack of discretion (injecting insulin with a pen or pump).
Moreover, there are many aspects that diabetic needs to consider - smoking
cigarettes, drinking alcohol, eating icecreams.
As mentioned before, diabetic can balance eaten meals with insulin injections.
It is not recommended to do, because patients need to eliminate the load on
the body, which already has a lot.
7. In your opinion, what could be the diabetics’ expectations of the
product designers?
For both types expectations are similar - for both, discipline is a must. They
need all devices to track their body sugar, pumps, etc.
However, all in all, they need all products which can help them with doing
less.
They would be grateful if they could think less because their disease
demands a lot of thinking from them already. Finding and reading small text
about carbohydrates of each product is an issue. Nowadays this information
is on each of them, however when my husband was diagnosed it was not that
obvious.
8. How often do diabetics have consultations with a doctor?
Every 3rd month. In Poland, quite recently, the doctor could only prescribe
medicines for 3 months maximum. However, it changed in 2020 and now pa-
tients can get it for 6 months. Still, it demands a lot of bureaucracy.
9. Is there anything that patients need to track before these appoint-
ments?
A notebook with measurements of sugar. This is something that does not work
- it does not matter if a patient is young or old. tedious, you have to think about
it continuously and bring it to your appointments. Information to include: date,
time, what I have eaten, how much did I eat, additional comments. Physical
exercises, emotions, and other illnesses like sore throat had to be included.
In the past, doctors were obliged to analyze it. Patients were cheating and not
noting the truth. Doctors could see it by testing glycemic hemoglobin (it is
done every 3rd month), where the results were not aligned with a notebook.
Nowadays, if a patient has a device constantly measuring blood sugar - data
can be copied from it.
10. What are your experiences of being a mother to a diabetic?
In Poland, when childer gets this disease, parents normally need to attend
courses to know how to calculate carbohydrates. Then you need to get to know
protein-fat exchangers, which is very complicated, especially for older people.
==PAGE:114==
106
E Interviews
Some books might help, but you still need to weigh each product.
Almost
impossible to do it every time your kid eats something.
11. Is it possible to get used to the disease?
Diabetes becomes an everyday life for a patient. For kids, it is harder, because
at the beginning of their life they need to count on their parents, and they
do not want to collaborate (they disconnect a pump, forget about a pen, etc.).
Later in their lives, they need to get used to carrying about it alone.
12. What do you think could motivate diabetics to change their lifestyle?
Maybe a community that they could join? If there would be more people they
would not be in this condition by themselves.
Maybe a group with similar
characteristics of people - age, goals, gender.
13. Do you have any general comments for me?
I think you need to create something simple - reduced to a minimum with a
maximum impact. If you created something for type 2 diabetics, you can easily
test it with type 1 and for sure it will help you. These two conditions do not
differ that much.
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX F
Iterations
F.1
Iteration 1
Iteration 1 XD link:
https://xd.adobe.com/view/d6b2b471-6057-483e-7308-65af9696654d-a083/
F.1.1
Testing
==PAGE:116==
108
F Iterations
==PAGE:117==
F.2 Iteration 2
109
F.2
Iteration 2
Iteration 2 XD link:
https://xd.adobe.com/view/0fdaa887-7759-49cb-7de6-94a0305b724c-79eb/
F.2.1
Testing
==PAGE:118==
110
F Iterations
==PAGE:119==
F.3 Iteration 3
111
F.3
Iteration 3
Iteration 3 XD link:
https://xd.adobe.com/view/dcb659bd-0c92-4ebd-6b1b-dc31c07c5978-aa87/
F.3.1
Testing
==PAGE:120==
112
F Iterations
==PAGE:121==
F.4 Iteration 4
113
F.4
Iteration 4
Iteration 4 XD link:
https://xd.adobe.com/view/3debf263-6eeb-4bd3-7dc0-ed78cc0840b1-4bda/
F.4.1
Testing
==PAGE:122==
114
F Iterations
==PAGE:123==
F.4 Iteration 4
115
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX G
MVP
MVP XD link:
https://xd.adobe.com/view/ec2e5166-d17f-4150-5a17-ea25248ff249-9a1f/
G.1
Annotated Wireframes
==PAGE:125==
G.1 Annotated Wireframes
117
Trigger: User taps arrow on the right
Rule: Next slide appears
Feedback: User sees second intro slide
Applies to all similar cases on introduction slides
Trigger: User taps skip button
Rule: Home screen with an overview appears
Feedback: User is sent to the home screen and can now browse the app
Trigger: User taps arrow on the left
Rule: The previous screen appears
Feedback: User sees previous intro slide
Trigger: User taps arrow on the right
Rule: Next slide appears
Feedback: User sees third intro slide
Trigger: User taps arrow on the left
Rule: Previous screen appears
Feedback: User sees previous intro slide
Trigger: User taps arrow
on the right 
Rule: Next slide appears
Feedback: User sees forth
intro slide
Trigger: User taps arrow on the right
Rule: Home screen with an overview appears
Feedback: User is sent to the home screen and 
can now browse the app, home icon on the 
upper left corner is highlighted
Trigger: User taps the 
add button
Rule: An overlay with 
different options appear
Feedback: User is sent 
to the screen where different 
actions might be chosen
Trigger: User taps skip button
Rule: Home screen with an
overview appears
Feedback: User is sent to
home screen and can now browse the app
Trigger: User taps a cross 
button
Rule: The overlay dissapears
Feedback: User is sent to the 
previous screen with an 
overview
(applies to all cases with a cross icon) 
Trigger: User taps a cross icon
Rule: Previously opened artboard appear
Feedback: User sees the last page before 
entering the section with the cross on the top 
right corner
(Applies to all cases with a cross icon in 
the setting section) 
Trigger: User taps a cross icon on the overlay
Rule: Previously opened artboard appear
Feedback: User is sent to the last page 
before entering the settings section
Trigger: User taps a chosen data 
type button
Rule: The button changes to 
an active mode
Feedback: Users sees the same 
page, but now some
buttons are active
Trigger: User taps the date textbox
Rule: Calendar slides up
Feedback: User sees the calendar, 
where there is a possibility to 
pick a specific date
Trigger: User taps the cancel
button
Rule: Calendar slides down
Feedback: User sees a 
screen with the previous
Trigger: User slides 
separately each date 
inputs (Day, Month, Year)
Rule: The date inputs are 
changing
Feedback: User sees 
different dates
Loop: Can go to any 
wanted date
Trigger: User decides on 
a date and taps insert 
button
Rule: Date is selected
Feedback: Chosen date 
appears in "Set a date" 
section
(applies to all cases 
where a light grey circle 
is next to the element)
Trigger: User taps the 
rounded shape next to the 
activity, can switch stages 
from "marked" and 
"unmarked" 
Rule: Specific activity is 
picked
Feedback: User sees the 
"tick" icon next to the 
chosen activity
Loop: Marked or 
unmarked
Trigger: User taps a "preview" button
Rule: Logs are displayed
Feedback: User sees all picked 
activities' logs from a specific date
Trigger: Users taps a button to export report to PDF
Rule: Email with logs is being sent
Feedback: User sees a notification that PDF report has been sent
Trigger: System sends 
an email
Rule: Next screen 
appears after 
notification
Feedback: User is 
sent back to the home 
page and receives an 
email with the report
(Applies to all cases of "Medication" button in settings section)
Trigger: User taps a button
Rule: The content in settings popup changes
Feedback: User sees the content of "Medication" tab
(Applies to all on/of buttons in "Reminders" section)
Trigger: User taps to switch the "on" state
Rule: Specific activities settings panel expands
Feedback: Users sees a panel to set up an reminder
Trigger: User taps
the dropdown box
Rule: Dropdown 
expands
Feedback: User 
sees different options
Trigger: User taps
selected option
Rule: Tapped option 
is highlighted
Feedback: User sees
selected option with a 
blue tick icon next to it
Loop: Marked or
unmarked
Trigger: User taps
a bin icon
Rule: A reminder is
deleted
Feedback: User
sees a screen 
without a previously 
set reminder
Trigger: User taps
an arrow
Rule: Dropdown 
narrows down
Feedback: User sees selected
options displayed on the
dropdown box
(applies to all cases of "Profile" button in settings section)
Trigger: User taps a button
Rule: The content in settings popup changes
Feedback: User sees personal details
(Applies to all cases of "Profile" 
button in settings section)
Trigger: User taps a button
Rule: The content in settings 
popup changes
Feedback: User sees the content 
of the "Profile" tab
(Applies to all cases with settings icon)
Trigger: User taps the settings icon
Rule: The overlay with settings appear
Feedback: User sees settings options
(Applies to all similar 
elements in settings)
Trigger: User taps a 
profile picture
Rule: Section for 
changing picture 
appears
Feedback: User is sent 
to a place where one 
can edit the profile 
picture
(applies to textboxes 
in settings section)
Trigger: User taps a 
textbox
Rule: A keyboard slides 
up
Feedback: User sees a 
keyboard where one 
can type new info
(Applies to all 
cases of 
"Reminders" 
button in 
settings section)
Trigger: User 
taps a button
Rule: The 
content in 
settings popup 
changes
Feedback: User 
sees the content 
of  the 
"Reminders" tab
(Applies to all 
cases of 
"Goals" button 
in settings 
section)
Trigger: User 
taps a button
Rule: The 
content in 
settings popup 
changes
Feedback: User 
sees the content 
of  the"Goals" tab
(Applies to all similar cases)
Trigger: User can set the switch to "on" state or "off" 
state 
Rule: The switch is by default off, tapping it once will 
result in on.
Feedback: Switch will be in on state when the user 
taps it
Loop: On or off
(Applies to all similar cases)
Trigger: User can set the switch to "on" state or "off" state 
Rule: The switch is by default off, tapping it once will result in 
on.
Feedback: Switch will be in on state when the user taps it
Loop: On or off
Trigger: User taps to switch the "on" state
Rule: When the state is on, the medication settings 
appear
Feedback: Users sees settings for medication intake 
and adjust it to his own needs
Trigger: User taps a plus 
button
Rule: Another reminder 
appears
Feedback: User sees 
another reminder 
displayed below the 
previously set one
(Applies to all overview 
elements on the home 
page)
Trigger: User taps a 
section in the overview
Rule: A screen for specific 
section appears
Feedback: User is 
redirected to a specific 
section visible on the 
bottom of the screen(eg. 
Glucose, Exercises, 
Meals)
(Applies to all similar cases)
Trigger: User taps "Exercise" icon 
in the bottom bar
Rule: Exercise screen appears
Feedback: User sees the exercise 
section, where the daily score is 
displayed. Exercise icon on the
bottom bar is highlighted
(Applies to all similar cases 
in exercises section)
Trigger: User taps the list
of logs text
Rule: Today's logs appear
Feedback: User sees all logs
from today. "List of logs" text
changes to bold
(Applies to all similar cases in exercises section)
Trigger: User taps "Monthly" text
Rule: Graph changes
Feedback: Users sees the monthly overview graph
for exercises and steps
(Applies to all similar cases 
in exercises section)
Trigger: User taps the 
overview text
Rule: Today's overview 
appears
Feedback: User sees an
overview with the goal and an
obtained score. "Overview" 
text changes to bold
(Applies to all similar cases 
in exercises section)
Trigger: User taps the add 
button
Rule: Logging an exercise
screen appears
Feedback: User sees a screen
where one can record a new entry
(Applies to all similar cases)
Trigger: User taps "Glucose" icon 
in the bottom bar
Rule: Glucose screen appears
Feedback: User sees the glucose 
section, where the daily score is 
displayed. Glucose icon on the
bottom bar is highlighted
(Applies to all similar cases)
Trigger: User taps "Meals" icon 
in the bottom bar
Rule: Meals screen appears
Feedback: User sees the meal 
section, where the daily score is 
displayed. Meals icon on the
bottom bar is highlighted
(Applies to all similar cases)
Trigger: User taps "Community" icon 
in the bottom bar
Rule: Community screen appears
Feedback: User sees the community 
section. Community icon on the
bottom bar is highlighted
(Applies to all similar cases
in logging new exercise entry)
Trigger: User taps a button 
with selected level
Rule: Screen changes
Feedback: Picked level button
is filled with color
Trigger: Slides a dot around the circle
Rule: Number increases while 
sliding
Feedback: User sees amount 
increment and can stop when 
a demanded number is displayed
Trigger: User taps a "LOG" button
Rule: Notification pops up
Feedback: User sees the 
notification with a text that the 
entry has been logged
Trigger: User taps the home icon
Rule: Home page appears
Feedback: User sees a home page with daily 
overview for all sections, home icon is highlighted
(Applies to all similar cases 
in blood glucose section)
Trigger: User taps the list
of logs text
Rule: Today's logs appear
Feedback: User sees all logs
from today. "List of logs" text
changes to bold
(Applies to all similar cases 
in glucose section)
Trigger: User taps the 
overview text
Rule: Today's overview 
appears
Feedback: User sees an
overview with the goal and an
obtained score. "Overview" text
changes to bold
(Applies to all similar cases in 
blood glucose section)
Trigger: User taps "Monthly" text
Rule: Graph changes
Feedback: Users sees the monthly overview 
graph for average blood glucose
(Applies to all similar cases 
in glucose section)
Trigger: User taps the add 
button
Rule: Next screen appears
Feedback: User sees a screen
when one can record a new entry
(Applies to all similar cases 
in meals section)
Trigger: User taps the list
of logs text
Rule: Today's logs appear
Feedback: User sees all logs
from today. "List of logs" text
changes to bold
(Applies to all similar cases in 
meals section)
Trigger: User taps "Monthly" text
Rule: Graph changes
Feedback: Users sees the monthly 
overview graph for carbohydrates
and water consumption
(Applies to all similar cases 
in meals section)
Trigger: User taps the 
overview text
Rule: Today's overview 
appears
Feedback: User sees an
overview with the goal and an
obtained score. "Overview" text
changes to bold
(Applies to all similar cases 
in meals section)
Trigger: User taps the add 
button
Rule: Next screen appears
Feedback: User sees a screen
when one can record a new entry
(Applies to all similar cases
in logging new carbs or water entry)
Trigger: User taps a button 
with selected level
Rule: Screen changes
Feedback: Picked buttons filled with color
(Applies to all similar cases 
in activity sections)
Trigger: User taps the  number inside
the slider circle
Rule: A numerical keyboard slides up
Feedback: User sees a keyboard
to insert a number 
Trigger: User taps different
numbers on the keyboard
Rule: Numbers are written inside
the circle
Feedback: User sees the numbers
and the slider changes
Trigger: User taps outside of the
keyboard or on insert button
Rule: Keyboard dissapears
Feedback: User sees the same
screen but without the keyboard
(Applies to all similar cases
in logging new carbs or water entry)
Trigger: Slides a dot around the circle
Rule: Number increases while 
sliding
Feedback: User sees amount 
increment and can stop when 
a demanded number is displayed
Trigger: User taps a "LOG" button
Rule: Notification pops up
Feedback: User sees the 
notification with a text that the 
entry has been logged
Trigger: User taps a button
Rule: The content under it changes
Feedback: User sees own post displayed below
Trigger: User taps a button
Rule: The content under it changes
Feedback: User sees community
posts
Trigger: User taps the 
add button
Rule: An overlay with 
different options appear
Feedback: User is sent 
to the screen where different 
actions might be chosen
Trigger: User taps a "Share your 
daily score" button
Rule: Next screen appears
Feedback: User sees a screen
where activities to share can be picked
Trigger: User taps a "Share a picture" button
Rule: Next screen appears
Feedback: User sees a screen to share a picture
Trigger: User taps a "SHARE" button
Rule: Notification pops up
Feedback: User sees the notification with a text that the post has been shared
Trigger: User taps a rounded 
button
Rule: Photo is taken, 
next screen appears
Feedback: User sees taken
picture
Trigger: User taps a back button
Rule: The previous page appears
Feedback: User is sent back to 
a shoot a picture page
Trigger: User taps a "SHARE" button
Rule: Notification pops up
Feedback: User sees the notification 
with a text that the post has been shared
Trigger: System 
records a new entry
Rule: Next screen 
appears after 
notification
Feedback: User is 
sent back to an 
exercise section, a new 
entry is added to 
today's overview
Trigger: System records a new 
entry
Rule: Next screen appears after 
notification
Feedback: User is sent back to a 
meals section, a new entry is added 
to today's overview
(Applies to all similar 
cases in the activity 
sections)
Trigger: User taps a date 
textbox
Rule: Calendar slides up
Feedback: User sees the 
calendar, where there is 
a possibility to pick a 
specific date
(Applies to all similar 
cases in the activity 
sections)
Trigger: User taps a note 
textbox
Rule: A keyboard 
appears 
Feedback: User sees the 
keyboard and the 
description can be typed
(Applies to all similar cases in the 
activity sections)
Trigger: User taps a time textbox
Rule: Time setter slides up
Feedback: User sees the time setter, where 
one can change a date
(Applies to all similar cases in 
the activity sections)
Trigger: User taps a time textbox
Rule: Time setter slides up
Feedback: User sees the time 
setter, where one can change a 
date
Trigger: Slides a dot around the circle
Rule: Number increases while 
sliding
Feedback: User sees amount 
increment and can stop when 
a demanded number is displayed
Trigger: User taps a "LOG" button
Rule: Notification pops up
Feedback: User sees the 
notification with a text that the 
entry has been logged
Trigger: System records a new 
entry
Rule: Next screen appears after 
notification
Feedback: User is sent back to 
anglucose section, a new entry is 
added to today's overview
Trigger: System adds new post
Rule: Next screen appears after 
notification
Feedback: User is sent back to a 
community section, a new post is 
added to the feed
Trigger: User taps "Add food 
from library" textbox
Rule: Next slides appear
Feedback: Users sees a slide 
with a possibility to pick a 
wanted product, which 
automatically counts carbs 
when approved
(applies to all cases 
where a light grey circle 
is next to the element)
Trigger: User taps the 
rounded shape next to the 
activity. Can switch stages 
from "marked" and 
"unmarked" 
Rule: Specific activity is 
picked
Feedback: User sees the 
"tick" icon next to the 
chosen activity
Loop: Marked or 
unmarked
(Applies to all similar 
cases in the community 
section)
Trigger: User taps a 
description textbox
Rule: A keyboard 
appears 
Feedback: User sees the 
keyboard and the 
description can be typed
(Applies to all similar cases in the community section)
Trigger: User taps a description textbox
Rule: A keyboard appears 
Feedback: User sees the keyboard and the description can be typed
Trigger: User taps a 
cross button
Rule: The overlay 
disappears
Feedback: User is sent 
back to a community 
screen
Trigger: User taps a 
"load more" button
Rule: More posts appear
Feedback: User sees 
more posts
Trigger: User taps a 
"camera roll" button
Rule: A new screen 
appears
Feedback: User sees a 
screen where one can 
pick a picture from a 
camera roll, the active 
button is filled with color
Trigger: User taps arrow on the
left
Rule: Previous screen appears
Feedback: User sees previous
intro slide
