==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Offshore Wind Farms Power Output and Model Validation 
Based on Publicly Available Datasets 
 
 
 
Ludovic Jan Thomas Blunat 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0369 
June 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Ludovic Jan Thomas Blunat 
Title: Offshore Wind Farms Power Output and Model Validation Based on 
Publicly Available Datasets 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03699 
June 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
Project period:  
January 2020 – June 2020 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Gregor Giebel 
Niels-Erik Clausen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Andrew Henderson 
Rémi Gandoin 
Copenhagen Offshore Partners, 
C2Wind 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to warmly thank my academic supervisors Gregor Giebel and Niels-Erik Clausen
for their weekly feedbacks and counselling all along with my thesis. Speciﬁcally, I’d like to
thank Gregor for receiving me at Risø campus for extended discussions.
I would like to sincerely thank R´emi Gandoin for oﬀering me this project opportunity, wel-
coming me in Fredericia at C2Wind oﬃce and helping me when I needed it. R´emi had the
right words to inspire me and make the project go forward.
I would like to thank Andrew Henderson for the insightful talks we had together, his sugges-
tions on the project and his support along this journey.
Finally, I would like to thank them all together for the time spent and the sincere feedbacks
they provided me on this written report.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Project Introduction
1
1
Data
4
1.1
Online Data Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Data sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Data quality assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Detailed data ﬂow charts in the UK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.5
Metering process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.6
Data - Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Methodology
20
2.1
Work objective overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2
Pre-construction EYA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Post-construction evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Wind Farm Power Curve approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Regular Monthly Data Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.6
Time Series approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.7
Validation Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.8
Comparison - Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.9
Data Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.10 Detecting Availability Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.11 Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.12 Methodology - Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
Analysis - Results
37
3.1
Wind Farm Power Curve Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Regular Monthly Data Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3
Time Series approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4
ERA5 Uncertainty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.5
Time-scale impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
3.6
Uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.7
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.8
Anholt Power Boost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
3.9
Analysis - Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4
Discussion - Conclusion
76
A Appendix
80
A.1 Filtering Study of the Time Series Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 Additional Figures for the Data quality assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 Reviewed Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
References
95
i
==PAGE:5==
Project Introduction
Since the commissioning of the ﬁrst oﬀshore wind farm at Vindeby in Denmark 29 years ago,
22 GW of Oﬀshore Wind Energy has been installed in Northern Europe as of December 2019
according to Wind Europe’s latest annual report [47]. The oﬀshore market, once a niche seen
by many as an economical non-sense only viable through state subsidies, became a thriving
and competitive industry able to recently launch tenders without public support in certain
areas. Therefore, SCADA data are rarely made public and overall exploitation information is
scarcely published, aiming to keep a competitive advantage over direct competitors. In that
context, learning from the installed projects and reﬂecting on past estimates and expectations
may prove to be challenging.
The North Sea Oﬀshore Wind market keeps expanding rapidly but very few [40] [38] post-
construction public investigations have been publicly released on the eﬃciency of both the
existing farms and the models predicting their energy outputs. So far, most available evalua-
tion studies are using monthly production aggregates provided by energy agencies unilaterally
and wind speed averages [36]. Oﬀshore Wind farms’ actual metered production exists and is
now available [28] but no trace of an existing study where datasets are being cross-checked
could be found.
A decisive measure of the project’s feasibility studies remains the electrical production esti-
mate, which, once correlated to the expected electricity wholesale price, will indicate whether
or not the project is viable. Pre-construction annual energy production (AEP) estimates are
a fundamental piece of a wind farm project but remain inevitably uncertain. Studying the
variation between the pre-construction AEP and the observed electrical output a posteriori
would help create more accurate estimates in the future.
Measurement campaigns for new projects can be long and expensive. Additionally, farm de-
velopers usually cannot reﬁne their new estimates with already existing data, as it rarely ex-
ists or is available to them. Involving a strengthened post-construction review from previous
projects could help reﬂect on the gathered information and improve the ﬁnal output.
Therefore, more accurate energy yield assessment could support future investments and bal-
ancing the transmission grid.
Power estimates only a few per cent more accurate could
generate huge savings in investments and in trading on the energy market. Emphasising the
potential added value available within the publicly available time series from TSOs could
also push for more open data in the industry.
In this document, available public data is ﬁrst detailed and evaluated. Then, the established
methodology is exposed and explained, presenting the diﬀerent approaches and methods used
and the consecutive steps followed. The results are then analysed and compared, as well as
other observations made on the datasets. Finally, methodologies and arising results are being
discussed and reﬂected upon. Possible extensions to the conducted study are being suggested
for further investigations.
1
==PAGE:6==
Research question
The following research questions are the focus points of the studies lead throughout the
project:
• How can publicly-available data provide accurate Energy Yield Assessments?
– How valid are these publicly-available power time series?
• How can wind turbine- and balance of plant losses be quantiﬁed and discriminated?
– Can one infer electrical losses and WTG availability from these time series?
– Can one characterise and quantify curtailment losses from these time series?
• How can using hourly-resolution data add value to the study compared to monthly-
resolution data?
– What are the underlying uncertainties related to the production estimates?
2
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
AEP Annual Energy Production
ENS Energistyrelsen - The Danish Energy Agency
ENSTOS-e European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
EYA Energy Yield Assessment
WFPCA Wind Farm Power Curve Approach
MW Mega Watt or 1e6 Watt
Studied Wind Farms
Anholt
Horns Reef 1
Horns Reef 2
Nysted
Installed Capacity
400 MW
160 MW
209 MW
165,6 MW
Number of Turbine
111
80
91
72
Turbine Model
SWT-3.6-120
V80-2.0
SWT-2.3-93
SWT-2.3-82
Farm Area
144 km2
20 km2
35 km2
22 km2
Commissioning
2013
2002
2009
2003
Distance to shore
15 km
14 km
30 km
10 km
Hub height
81,6 m
70 m
68 m
69 m
Westermost Rough (UK)
Rødsand II
Installed Capacity
210 MW
207 MW
Number of Turbine
35
90
Turbine Model
SWT-6.0-154
SWT-2.3-82
Farm Area
32 km2
35 km2
Commissioning
2015
2010
Distance to shore
8 km
10 km
Hub height
102 m
68.5 m
3
==PAGE:8==
1
Data
1.1
Online Data Platforms
Northern Europe is well known [39] for the strong and consistent winds found there, and as
such, the oﬀshore wind industry unsurprisingly was born there and remains its core market.
The area is commonly deﬁned as the water mass in between Great Britain, Norway, Denmark,
Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and France. Therefore, studying wind farms in this area
using publicly available data implies collecting information from diﬀerent national agencies,
each using diﬀerent processes and data formatting systems. Nevertheless, a collective eﬀort
was performed in the past years to create transnational/EU organisations or agencies such
as ENTSO-E to enable cooperation and ease direct access to multiple countries’ data inputs
from a unique platform [28]. However, additional or more precise data can sometimes be
only obtained from national data platforms [32] [26] [20].
Data used for the project, whether there are wind farm production, balancing mechanism
or weather inputs, were collected from multiple sources -detailed in subsection 1.2- and
processed beforehand by R´emi Gandoin from C2Wind, to make them tally with each other.
Organisations do not always share the same names for a single wind farm or publish their
inputs in speciﬁc formats and some preparatory work was therefore required. On ENTSO-E
platform, and usually on the other platforms as well, the datasets can either be accessed
directly on the website through the web interface and then downloaded under a .csv ﬁle or
other. For a project involving refreshing the dataset regularly, it can be more convenient to
use an FTP connection instead.
1.2
Data sources
The diﬀerent starting datasets identiﬁed as being potentially useful for this study are pre-
sented in the following sections:
1.2.1
ENTSO-E Production Time Series
ENTSO-E stands for European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity and
represents since 2008 the TSO from 36 diﬀerent countries in Europe. Its primary task is to set
a common framework and network codes within its members to harmonise the transmission
operations within Europe and facilitate transnational infrastructure development [31].
The EU Transparency Regulation [27] requires the TSOs to provide fundamental information
on the energy exchanged such as production units, balancing processes or outages. ENTSO-E
consequently gathers those data and provides the production levels of certain wind farms in
the North Sea at their point of connection to the grid.
In regards to this project, data available through ENTSO-E for Denmark is collected from
Energinet; data available through ENTSO-E for the UK is collected from the National Grid,
the System Operator for Northern Ireland, Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission and Scottish
Power Transmission, depending on which speciﬁc network each British wind farm is connected
4
==PAGE:9==
to. Given the current eﬀort of the UK government to leave the EU, it is unknown which
regulations the UK agencies will tend to follow in the coming years. Nevertheless, ENTSO-E
members include countries outside the EU and future collaboration on this project is likely
to happen.
Data is available here [28].
Data Collection Process
ENTSO-E members are expected to provide the relevant data following the Manual of Pro-
cedures (MoP), as required in Article 5 of EU Regulation 543/2013. The MoP is ”a technical
guide, developed by ENTSO-E following the discussions with Stakeholders, a Public Consul-
tation and review by ACER”. It indicates the data submission format, a standardised format
of submission and technical criteria to meet.
1.2.2
Elexon BRMS
BRMS stands for Balancing Mechanism Reporting Service and Elexon is responsible for the
balancing trade in the UK. Personal communications have been engaged through emails
between BMRS employees and C2Wind, notably on the data nature, the location of the
power meter and their aggregation rules.
From this correspondence, a few interesting points emerged:
• Elexon manages the transmission matters and as such it is only capable to measure
and record what’s visible from the grid, i.e. from the substation transformer.
• Rules regarding the metering equipment and location diﬀer depending on the trans-
mission voltage level in the UK due to the Oﬀshore Transmission Owner Regime (a
regulation creating separate competitive tenders for oﬀshore transmission systems):
– Under 132kV: Metering is typically oﬀshore on the LV side of the substation’s
transformer. (Except 3 older farms which names were not disclosed)
– Above 132kV: Metering is typically on the LV side of the onshore substation’s
transformer.
As the HV connection to shore above 132kV are usually not managed by the farm
operator (at least this is supposed to be two diﬀerent services), it can be said that
Elexon is metering the production where the farm operator stops to be accountable for,
i.e. at LV side of the oﬀshore substation’s transformer [13].
Data is available here.
Data Collection Process
The metering process and data ﬂow can be summarised as in Figure 1. The Gross Production
of the generating unit is either used internally on-site for auxiliary units (control, transformer,
measurements, communication devices, etc...) or exported to the grid. Some electricity may
be imported from the grid, particularly in case the generating unit is not producing but the
5
==PAGE:10==
auxiliary units still need to be connected. Transmission Loss Multipliers (TLM), sometimes
called Line Loss Factors, are calculated by Elexon according to the active exports and imports.
TLMs are a share of the overall grid losses the generator (here the whole wind farm at the
substation transformer) is accountable for and needs to pay for [12]. TLM values seem to be
site-speciﬁc, and their formulas are detailed in [11].
The meter aggregation requires to subtract any electricity imports from the exports. There-
fore, the metered net production transmitted to shore is NP = qN
i (AEi ≠AIi);
with NP the net production,
the index N corresponds to the total number of Units i,
AE meaning Active Exports and AI meaning Active Imports.
Figure 1: General Data Processing Chain’s Flow Chart for Elexon
The net diﬀerence between the active exports and imports of the farm is considered the
metered production of the farm by Elexon [13]. The value is then sent to their database servers
and can be collected for analysis purpose through their API under XML/CSV format.
1.2.3
OFGEM
OFGEM stands for Oﬃce of Gas and Electricity Markets and is the energy regulator in the
UK. The OFGEM delivers to renewable energy producers two types of green certiﬁcates:
• Renewable Obligation Certiﬁcates (ROCs) [22], which have a monetary value and can
be traded between energy producers to reach their individual green target
• Renewable Energy Guarantees of Origin (REGO) [23], which help producers explain to
their customers where their energy has come from.
The OFGEM issues one certiﬁcate per MWh produced to the farm operators. Therefore,
the amount of certiﬁcated delivered by OFGEM can serve as a good measure of the actual
6
==PAGE:11==
amount produced per farm.
Data is available here and here.
1.2.4
Energistyrelsen - Danish Energy Agency - ENS
The Danish Energy Agency is publishing the monthly electric production in Denmark per
energy source [33]. They also publish the detailed production per single wind turbine, even
though all turbines within a single wind farm have the same production levels.
On the contrary to ENTSO-E data, which is provided by the Danish transmission operator
Energinet, ENS directly gets the turbine’s output from the farm owners [32]. In regards to
the large wind farms studied here, farm owners are likely to use the same meter than the
one used by the TSO and send the values to ENS. Some deviations sometimes occur between
ENS and ENTSO-E.
Data is available here
Data Collection Process - OFGEM and ENS
OFGEM metering is declarative, which means that operators are responsible for providing
the corresponding data to the oﬃce in order to receive their certiﬁcates [25]. They oﬀer two
metering options: either a simple monthly production declaration, using a form similar to
the one in Figure 2; or using the half-hourly data metering and collection assessment that
has to be then sent to OFGEM. [24]
Figure 2: OFGEM’s manual declaration form of production levels, from [25]
Moreover, in section 4.16 of [24], OFGEM states that ”if input electricity to the generating
station does not exceed 0.5% of the station’s gross output in a month, the input electricity
7
==PAGE:12==
will not be deducted for issuing ROCs.” Therefore, OFGEM data could excess ELEXON data
by up to 0.5% just from this particular detail, not to mention the manual declaration process
that could imply human errors.
Finally, OFGEM policy regarding the metering position of oﬀshore farms is vague: they only
invite producers to contact them to agree on the metering location and method. Besides,
it is speciﬁcally said that in case no reliable measurement could be performed, production
estimates could be delivered to obtain the certiﬁcates [25].
ENS has a similar declarative policy regarding the wind energy production output in Denmark
and will not be presented in detail [32].
1.2.5
ERA5
ERA5 is the latest reanalysis dataset provided from the ECMWF (European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts) [5]. ERA5 give an estimate of multiple climate param-
eters worldwide with a 30km resolution, from 1979 to within 5 days of real-time. It can be
used to initialise a numerical weather prediction (NWP) system such as the WRF (Weather
Research and Forecasting) model. Therefore, ERA5 dataset can either be perceived as 900
km2 tiles with a single data point at its centre assessing the area’s average meteorological
conditions; or 900 km2 tiles with 4 data point, each at a corner, enabling an interpolation
at the wind farm site. The latter method was used to precisely correlate the meteorological
conditions at each wind farm site from ERA5 dataset.
Data is available here
1.2.6
Power Curves
The wind farms power curves were created on EMD WindPro [44] using the individual wind
turbine power curve and correlated to the farm’s layout and intra-farm wake losses using the
N.O. Jensen PARK2 2018 wake model with the default wake decay parameter set to 0.06.
The power curve calculation process is further detailed in subsection 3.1.
1.2.7
Anholt Lidar
In short, LiDAR, which stands for Light Detection And Ranging, ”is a remote sensing method
that uses light in the form of a pulsed laser to measure [distances]” [6]. LiDAR measurement
equipment is used in the wind assessment process as detailed in [7]: the pulsed lasers are
partly reﬂected by the surrounding air particles in movement and their relative speed can be
then computed based on the Doppler shift phenomenon.
Ørsted publicly released a few Lidar datasets on its website in 2009. Those are 10-minute
statistics for wind measurements from Lidars that were installed at Anholt oﬀshore wind
farm, Westermost Rough oﬀshore wind farm and FINO2 oﬀshore meteorological station [2].
Those datasets were released ”to make meteorological data more accessible, to facilitate
research, education and development in renewable energy.” Anholt’s dataset is being used in
this project as a validation set for ERA5 reanalysis dataset.
8
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Data quality assessment
Additional ﬁgures are available in Appendix A.2.
Each ﬁgure there is referenced in the
following section to the relevant paragraph.
1.3.1
Deﬁnitions
Each of the datasets mentioned before is evaluated according to the data quality assessment
described in [41]. The following six core data quality dimensions are a guidance to assess the
dataset’s global quality.
• Completeness - The proportion of stored data against the full potential of “100%
complete”.
• Uniqueness - Nothing will be recorded more than once based upon how that thing is
identiﬁed. It is the inverse of an assessment of the level of duplication.
• Timeliness - The degree to which data represent reality from the required point in
time.
• Validity - Conform to the syntax (format, type, range) of its deﬁnition.
• Accuracy - The degree to which data correctly describes the ”real world” object or
event being described.
• Consistency - The absence of diﬀerence, when comparing two or more representations
of a thing against a deﬁnition.
Note: If a wind farm is composed of multiple substations and point of connection to the
grid, each unit is studied separately for this data quality assessment as they sometimes do
not have exactly the same recovery rate (especially during low wind conditions). Further on,
it will be interesting and valuable to compare those multiple substation values, notably to
check if one part of the farm is producing at very low level, which could potentially explain
the absence of data. Later on in the investigation, substation data will be merged for a full
wind farm analysis. Notice that only farms in the UK in this assessment may display multiple
units.
1.3.2
BMRS / Elexon
Data Recovery Rate
To obtain the farms’ recovery rate, the dataset size was compared to a full and complete list
of timestamps for the same duration. Raw data from Elexon dataset has several timestamps
simply missing for a variable duration, from only one settlement period (30min) up to a
few months. The average recovery rate is close to 85% which is too low to be exclusively
representing ”lost” data.
It appears that the minimum production transmitted is 2kW -which also corresponds to the
highest data step resolution- and that no signal has the value 0W. Instead, the signal is just
9
==PAGE:14==
not received/registered, and no distinction is made between a period without production
(whether it is caused by a generator’s fault or maintenance, no wind or too much wind) or
the metering data not being transmitted and/or not registered to the dataset. The relatively
low recovery rate could be explained by the data not being recovered when the farm is not
producing or the output is too low, bellow the 2kW dataset resolution.
The dataset was grouped by wind farm and/or by month to see the possible variations (see
Figure 53, Figure 54, Figure 55 and Figure 56 in Appendix A.2). Low recovery months were
clearly spotted and seem to correspond to known production issues such as cable incidents.
The recovery rate also shows signs of seasonality which reinforce the intuition of data not
being transmitted when the farm is not producing in the UK.
In that case, it is simply not possible or too risky to evaluate the actual system’s recovery
rate, even looking at the local wind speed. For simpliﬁcation purpose, missing entries are
being simply ignored afterwards.
Data Quality
A data quality assessment can be provided according to the following points:
• Completeness - As just mentioned in the previous paragraph, missing data correspond
to non-production periods (indistinctly from outages, curtailment and maintenance) as
well as non-transmitted records. The recovery rate varies from one farm to another but
is on average close to 90%.
• Uniqueness - Elexon is theoretically not publishing multiple values for the same times-
tamp but two duplicates are found each year after the daylight saving time change in
Autumn (more precisely, that speciﬁc day contains 50 records instead of 48, which is
challenging to allocate to a regular timeline). Nonetheless, records can be modiﬁed/up-
dated later on to correct mistakes.
• Timeliness - The time step is 30min and most and each timestamp represents an
average over the following 30 minutes.
• Validity - There are no NaN in the regular data from Elexon and MATLAB ensures
that a single column contains a unique data type.
• Accuracy - Measurements are supposed to be done at the LV side of the oﬀshore
substation in most cases. It includes the few electrical losses from the turbine generator
and to that point. BMRS data accounts for the electricity imports of the wind farm
and is directly deducted from the exports. Double metering is enforced which reduces
drastically the uncertainty (see subsection 1.4).
• Consistency - ENTSO-E data have similar outputs after a few years (switching from
Energy to Power assessment).
10
==PAGE:15==
1.3.3
OFGEM
Two sets of data are available through OFGEM: the Renewable Obligation (RO) and the
Renewable Energy Guarantees of Origin (REGO) certiﬁcates.
18 farms (including some
farm clusters) are available: Barrow; Burbo Bank; Greater Gabbard; Gunﬂeet Sand 1, 2 and
3; Gwynt y Mˆor; Hywind; Lincs; LondonArray; Ormonde; RaceBank; Sheringham Shoal;
Thanet; Walney 1 and 2; West of Duddon Sands; Westermost Rough.
Only Burbo Bank is missing in the REGO dataset compared to the RO one.
Original data frequently display multiple values for a single month in several farms. Du-
plicates also appear over a few months. No analysis has been made so far to quantify this
problem. OFGEM is not the prioritised data source in the study.
1.3.4
ENTSO-E
The ENTSO-E dataset includes several wind farms from both the UK and Denmark, which
are split by their internal substations (up to four independent datasets for a single wind
farm). Whereas Elexon also provides half-hourly data for the UK, ENTSO-E is the only
available source in Denmark for hourly data.
One should remember those settlement periods are 30 minutes long in the UK when analysing
the recovery rate and data quality, as seen hereafter. On the early part of the dataset, the
half-hour values from ENTSO-E in the UK are half the amount of the ones from BMRS. It
indicates that ENTSO-E displayed energy values in MWh every 30 minutes whereas Elexon
displayed average power in MW every 30 minutes. Eventually, after a few months, Elexon
and ENTSO-E values end up being the same.
The two time series are on the same axis in Figure 3 for London Array. The plot starts end
of 2014, about 18 months after the wind farm’s commissioning, which is about enough to
consider it up and running properly. Two periods can be diﬀerentiated:
• December 2014 / July 2015: ENTSO-E is about half the amount of BMRS
• July 2015 / September 2019: ENTSO-E and Elexon are about the same value, with
some blanks.
The term about is used here on purpose, as some records show some discrepancies between
the two dataset, possibly due to diﬀerent aggregation rules.
11
==PAGE:16==
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Comparison between TSOE and BMRS time series
BMRS
TSOE
Figure 3: Comparing ENTSO-E and Elexon time series for London Array (substation #1) –
y-axis is Power Output [MW] (or Energy in MWh for ﬁrst few months of ENTSO-E time series)
It globally seems like ENTSO-E switched from transmitting Energy values to Power values
mid 2015 on their platform (see also Figure 58 in Appendix A.2). Danish farms do not display
such a signiﬁcant shift, but as danish data is given on an hourly resolution, average power
and energy in MWh would show up similarly on a graph.
A 0h30 to 1h30 displacement was also noticed, depending the time of the year, matching the
daylight save displacement discussed before (see Figure 59 in Appendix A.2). ENTSO-E data
seems to be provided according to UTC standard, whereas Elexon seems to follow GMT. The
30min displacement just corresponds to whether the timestamp describes the past 30 min or
the previous 30min. This was then corrected.
Data Recovery Rate
The ENTSO-E measurement resolution is 10kW. ENTSO-E sample only contains 18 time
series (11 wind farms, 4 of them having more than one substation), compared to 45 for
BMRS.
As the ENTSO-E dataset consists of wind farm from several countries, each wind farm was
studied separately in order to possibly identify patterns. Figure 4 displays the the average
availability each month per wind farm substation (see also Figure 60, Figure 62 and Figure 63
in Appendix A.2).
12
==PAGE:17==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
LondonArray_01
LondonArray_02
LondonArray_03
LondonArray_04
GunfleetSands_01
GunfleetSands_02
GreaterGabbard_01
GreaterGabbard_02
GreaterGabbard_03
EastAnglia_01
EastAnglia_02
Barrow_00
Burbo_00
BurboExtension_00
Anholt_00
HornsReef1_00
HornsReef2_00
HornsReef3_00
Wind Farm Names
Distribution of the monthly avaialbility per metered wind farms - ENTSO-E Data
Figure 4: ENTSO-E Boxplot - Data Recovery Rate per substation (x axis is ”Monthly Recovery
Rate [%]” and not Availability)
A clearly diﬀerent pattern can be observed between the four danish wind farms and the UK
dataset. Similarly to Elexon data seen previously, ENTSO-E data in the UK do not include
periods without production. Even though that does not justify the low recovery rate on its
own - as no data available for Gunﬂeet Sands Wind Farm in the UK between July 17th, 2015
until September 6th, 2016 - the impossibility to diﬀer no production from no communication
of data greatly diminishes the data quality.
13
==PAGE:18==
Data Quality
• Completeness - Varies widely depending on the country and the wind farms. Danish
farms’ recovery rate is close to 100%, whereas farms in the UK miss records without
production.
• Uniqueness - No duplicate timestamp values seem to exist in the dataset. Therefore,
only one value is assigned to a single point in time.
• Timeliness - The time step is 30min in the UK and 1 hour in Denmark. Power outputs
are periods averages. The period during which energy values were provided instead of
power is discarded.
• Validity - There is a potential error of MWh to MW in the UK that would mean a
change of unit along with the data capture, which is quite inconsistent. The period
during which energy values were provided instead of power is discarded.
• Accuracy - The metering equipment is thought to be the same than for Elexon. Double
metering is enforced which reduces drastically the uncertainty (see subsection 1.4).
• Consistency - Elexon and ENTSO-E data for the UK seems to be similar from a
certain point in time. Small inconsistencies are thought to be provoked by diﬀerent
aggregation methods.
1.3.5
ENS - Danish Energy Agency
ENS is only providing one energy production value per month but has a precise record of
each turbine monthly production in Denmark since their commissioning. Therefore, ENS
data is valuable as a validation set for long term past estimates.
ENS speciﬁes on its website [32] that
”The data regarding the turbines’ technical speciﬁcations and power output are
based on reports received from the power distribution companies.”
”Diﬀerences from previously published data may occur.[...] However, at aggre-
gated levels the changes are often minor.”
”It is mandatory for owners to report information on each individual wind tur-
bine.”
”From January 2019 the production data in the Register also includes the share
of turbines electricity production that may be consumed locally, and therefore
does not enter the power network.”
The last quote shows that ENS data gets more reﬁned from Jan 19, even though the potential
impact will probably remain marginal.
”Each record in the register contains information on one speciﬁc wind turbine. A
group of e.g. 5 wind turbines connected to the same meter must be reported as
5 distinct wind turbines, i.e. 5 separate records in the register.”
14
==PAGE:19==
However, it has been observed in that ﬁle that usually turbines in a single wind farm produce
exactly the same quantity of energy over the month. Power distribution companies probably
provide the farm production yield and simply divide it by the number of turbines, rather
than communicating the exact individual WTG yield, which would require using each turbine
metering data. For instance, the 90 WTG from Rødsand II (Nysted WF) have been deployed
and connected to the grid over a 4 month period, from April 1st 2010 until August 3rd 2010.
However, the 2010 yearly individual yield of each turbine is exactly the same.
Again, data are provided by the producers and their practice could be diﬀerent. Nonetheless,
as it has been shown that no conclusive information could be extracted from individual WTG
data, wind farms will be aggregated and analysed that way.
Data from ENS are also very interesting regarding the evolution of installed capacity in
Denmark.
It is an accurate source of information regarding historical power outputs of
danish wind farms since their commission.
1.3.6
Data Quality Assessment - Conclusion
Best quality data seem to come from Denmark due to almost full completeness and extra
validation information delivered by ENS from the farm’s commissioning. When it comes
to UK farms, even though Elexon and ENTSO-E datasets show almost exactly the same
values, non-UTC synchronisation of Elexon would be a challenge especially when creating a
correlation with meteorological data, making sure the two datasets represent the same period
of time, and the non-recovery of the data when the farm is not producing. In the meantime,
ENTSO-E dataset in the UK seems to be missing some periods, which reduces the sampling
set. A compromise needs to be found when investigating UK farms.
1.4
Detailed data ﬂow charts in the UK
The speciﬁc case presented in the following charts corresponds to a farm in the UK subject
to the Oﬀshore Transmission Regime (wind farm commissioned after 2009 with an oﬀshore
transmission system > 132 kV). This corresponds to most of the current oﬀshore capacity in
the UK and implies the metering is performed on the LV side of the oﬀshore substation.
The charts and the related descriptions have been carried out using Elexon documentation
mainly. Oﬀshore wind farms in other European countries display a similar data collection
process, with potential discrepancies in the meter location and storage standards. However,
the most precise publicly-available retrieved documentation data were from Elexon.
In the present case, the oﬀshore boundary point is set between the generator group and the
oﬀshore substation transformer, on its LV side. Extra meters are also installed on the LV side
of the auxiliary transformer units. The meter aggregation requires to subtract any electricity
imports from the exports. Therefore, the metered net production transmitted to shore is
(AE1 + AE2 + AE3 + AE4) ≠(AI1 + AI2 + AI3 + AI4); with AE meaning Active Exports and
AI meaning Active Imports.
15
==PAGE:20==
In the case (not shown) of a lower transmission voltage level to shore, the meters are located
on the LV side of onshore substation. However, at lower transmission voltage levels, it is rare
to see an oﬀshore substation and the chart would then still apply with one less transformer
unit.
Mx
Mx
Mx
Mx
M2
M1
M4
M3
Offshore Boundary Point
BM Unit
Onshore 
Transmission 
System
132/132 kV 
or 132/275 kV 
or 132/400 kV
33/132kV
33/0,4kV
Offshore / Onshore
Offshore Auxiliary Unit - LV asset 
Demand Primary BM Unit
Generators 
PPM Primary BM Unit
BM Unit 1
BM Unit 2
BM Unit 4
BM Unit 3
Mx
Meters
Offshore Substation Unit
Onshore Substation Unit
Generation Side
Offshore Transmission
Grid
Data Collection
Energy generation and transmission schema - Oﬀshore wind farm 
Boundary Point set at the LV side of the oﬀshore substation
Imports
Exports
Imports
Exports
Figure 5: Energy generation and transmission schema based on Elexon documentation [21] - UK
oﬀshore wind farm
The Elexon code of practice requires two sets of metering equipment per relevant metering
location, called the main meter and the check meter [19]. Each meter should include a voltage
transformer and a current transformer [21]. The measured values from both the main and
check meters are then stored in two distinct outstations, so that if one fails the other is
still able to communicate both meter values. Two optical interfaces need to be installed
and set to enable communication between the outstations and the shore.
If one optical
interface is temporarily unavailable, the second one should be capable of transmitting the
whole required data. Other commencement systems can be installed instead of an optical
interface if preferred [21].
16
==PAGE:21==
Optical Interface 1
Wind Farm Production Output Data Flow chart 
VT1
CT1
VT2
CT2
Meters
Check 
Meter
Main 
Meter
measures
measures
        Outstations 
stores
Outstation 2
Outstation 1
Optical Interface 2
Data ﬂow can be 
performed on either 
one or the other 
communication line in 
case of a failure 
stores
Central Data 
Collection Agent 
(CDCA)
communicates
ENTSO-e 
Transparency 
Platform
(TP)
Final 
User
Primary Data Owner
Data Collector
Data Provider
Balancing and 
Settlement Code 
Company
(BSCCo)
National 
Electricity 
Transmission 
System Operator
(NETSO)
publish
Data Platform
Figure 6: Wind Farm Production Output Data Flow chart in the UK - based on Elexon
documentation [21]
In the case of the UK framework, the Central Data Collection Agent (CDCA) is in charge of
collecting, validating, processing and aggregating the metered data. The CDCA is responsible
for the safety of the data communications and storage, both physically speaking by ensuring
a properly sealed environment for the metering equipment, and electronically speaking with
data security. The CDCA then send them to the relevant data providers (Balancing and
Settlement Code Company (BSCCo) or National Electricity Transmission System Operator
(NETSO)), which publish the data on their own platform or through other transparency
platforms such as ENTSO-E.
In summary, the double metering (main and check), data storage units and communication
interfaces secure the delivery of consistent and accurate data to the relevant agent. The exact
technical process and regulations may diﬀer per country and agent. Data is usually published
on the TSO website in addition to the recent EU transparent platform. The multitude of
agents involved in the process demonstrates how diﬃcult it may be to modify some practices
or raise concerns on some published outputs.
17
==PAGE:22==
1.5
Metering process
Elexon’s ”Code Of Practice for the metering of circuits with a rated capacity exceeding
100MVA for settlement purposes” [18] expects energy quantity (MWh) and demand power
(MW) to be measured and registered to the Central Meter Registration Service (CMRS)
by a Central Data Collection Agent (CDCA) (see subsection 1.4). UTC should be used for
time and date registration, even though Elexon publishes their data using local time. A data
resolution of better than ± 0,1% is expected.
According to the single line diagram of the Killingholme substation near Hornsea area [15],
active metering is compensated for VT (Voltage Transformer) and CT (Current Transformer)
errors and transformer losses. However, reactive metering remains uncompensated. Com-
pensation may be needed for measurement transformer error and/or power transformer and
line losses. If applied, the compensation values used shall be registered. As a minimum
requirement, there should be two sets of Measurement Transformers respectively feeding a
main and a check meter (as seen in [15] and detailed in Appendix F). Both sets of meter
data are required to be stored on two outstations to certify data consistency.
”Normally metering data will be collected by the Settlement Instations by a daily interro-
gation, but repeat collections of metering data shall be possible throughout the Outstation
data storage period.”
”The value of any energy measured in a Demand Period but not stored in that Demand Period
shall be carried forward to the next Demand Period”. This line is interesting as no record
was observed to exceed the installed capacity. Such carrying forward may have occurred at
low production / low wind speed. In fact, this could the reason no record is stored when the
farm is not producing.
”The Outstation time shall be set to the Universal Time Clock (UTC) also known as Green-
wich Mean Time (GMT). No switching between UTC and British Summer Time (BST) shall
occur.” It was observed in practice that Elexon can deliver their Data in local time.
A key line diagram of the Beatrice oﬀshore electrical installations protection devices [16]
show the main and check meters mentioned beforehand.
18
==PAGE:23==
1.6
Data - Conclusion
The Data section exposed and detailed the diﬀerent sets of data identiﬁed as potentially rel-
evant to the aim of the project’s investigations. After assessing the quality of each dataset, it
appears that some sources lack enough consistency to be properly used afterwards. Mainly,
Elexon data were very promising with half-hourly measurements for 19 diﬀerent farms. The
inability to distinguish disconnections and data not recovered makes the dataset unusable.
Additionally, OFGEM dataset displayed inconsistencies and repeated values over the same
months, complicating the validation process. The UK, still, had more documentation avail-
able to clearly assess the data ﬂow and collection processes, as well as the metering standards
implemented.
It was decided to focus primarily on the Danish wind farms which showed consistent data
both for training the model and for its validation.
Complementary information about the wind farms mainly used further on for the analysis
part is gathered in Appendix .
19
==PAGE:24==
2
Methodology
This section aims at explaining the analysis strategies aimed at and how they compare to
each other.
2.1
Work objective overview
To sum it up, the data available for this study are:
1. Production output: hourly and monthly data
2. Meteorological data, among which wind speed and wind direction
3. Modelled wind farm power curves
One of the purposes of the study is to establish long term production estimates from the
gathered public data and compare the results to pre-construction AEP. More importantly,
one would like to evaluate the potentially increased accuracy and precision on those estimates
by using the hourly resolution data through diﬀerent techniques compared to a more regular
method.
Two investigation strategies were elaborated to do so. They were labelled as ”Wind Farm
Power Curve” approach and ”Time Series” approach to better distinguish them and are
further detailed in subsection 2.4 and subsection 2.6. In subsection 2.9, necessary modiﬁ-
cations made to the meteorological dataset are detailed, and subsection 2.2 summarises the
fundamental steps of a pre-construction energy yield assessment.
2.2
Pre-construction EYA
A pre-construction energy yield assessment consists in investigating and extrapolating the
meteorological conditions of a speciﬁc site to several decades by correlating local speciﬁc
measurements to neighbouring long term meteorological stations’ records. The environment’s
roughness and impact assessment are combined with a farm layout optimisation process in
order to maximise the power output. A statistical distribution of the expected production can
then be derived. The whole detailed process can be found in a report from the US National
Renewable Energy Laboratory [45]. Complementary pieces of information on the assessment
procedure are available in ”Meteorology for Wind Energy: An Introduction” [43].
Pre-construction EYA therefore requires local measurements campaigns, in-depth evaluation
of the local impact on the wind and thorough study of the optimal hardware and layout
for the farm. The information produced at this point in the project is extremely valuable
and usually undisclosed by wind farm developers and owners. One of the reasons is that the
industry is not particularly keen on publicly disclosing its assessment methods and potentially
a mismatch between the preliminary work and the actual production post-commissioning. It’s
therefore very diﬃcult to assess whether or not the industry is well-performing overall or not.
Researchers have to either redo a similar extensive expertise, rely on data provided by some
farm developers - probably under NDA agreements - or use rough estimates.
20
==PAGE:25==
A Pre-construction EYA does not consist of a single value as it would be very hazardous to
provide a unique ﬁgure to describe the future output of an electrical production unit driven
by a stochastic phenomenon such as wind. Instead, the meteorological conditions of the
former few decades are correlated to the wind farm site and the expected AEP is computed
for known conditions in the past.
The obtained sample is then used to create a normal
distribution of the AEP estimates, as seen in Figure 7 for capacity factor estimates, which is
equivalent to normalising the AEP to the wind farm installed capacity.
Figure 7: Example of an histogram, normal distribution and cumulative normal distribution of
the AEP estimates for Nysted Wind Farm - 40 years period of 1979/2019
P-values, are extracted from the resulting normal distribution. In particular, the P-50 value,
which in this case is the AEP expected to be surpassed 50% of the time over the wind
farm’s lifetime, correspond to the sample’s mean value µ. The standard normal deviation ‡
indicates how spread the distribution can be and to what extent the AEP values are expected
to ﬂuctuate with the variations in the yearly wind climate. P-90 and P-10 values are also
provided in order to give an idea of potential extreme values. The ﬁnal uncertainty includes
the sum of all uncertainties from inputs as well as from the model itself.
2.3
Post-construction evaluation
A key performance assessment of commissioned wind farms is obtained by comparing the pre-
construction EYA to production estimates obtained after a few years of operation, correcting
for the actual production conditions. So far, evaluations were led using monthly aggregates of
production outputs [36] [34]. At this time scale, a linear correlation appears between average
measured wind speed and cumulative production output. This project is mainly focusing
on assessing the potential added value of using hourly production data in this assessment
process.
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 8: Diagram of the pre-construction energy estimate steps and corresponding uncertainties
- from [45]
Unfortunately, no publicly-released pre-construction EYAs of any of the studied wind farms
could be found online in order to compare them to actual generation. As one of the motives
for this project is to use data available in the public domain, a workaround is suggested in
subsection 2.4.
The CREYAP (Comparative Resource and Energy Yield Assessment Procedures) initiative
gathered teams from multiple countries and background (consultants, farm developers, aca-
demics, etc...) and invited them to independently proceed to a post-construction evaluation
of a deﬁned farm [40]. This led to an anonymous comparison of all the participants’ ability
to rightfully predict future production estimates and benchmark the accuracy of industry
players.
2.4
Wind Farm Power Curve approach
To circumvent the absence of pre-construction EYA for the farms investigated, similar energy
output estimates are gen rated using the Wind Farm Power Curve approach. The latter
consists in feeding meteorological data from the reanalysis dataset into the wind farm’s
generated power curve in order to recreate the corresponding power output time series. The
generated wind farm power curves are obtained by modelling the wind farm’s layout and
computing its power output for a set of wind speeds and directions, using the power curve
related of the turbine’s model and including the internal wake eﬀect as a loss factor. This
provides the expected theoretical gross (wake eﬀect losses deducted) output at each wind
turbines’ transformer, given the estimated wind conditions.
22
==PAGE:27==
Additional losses need to be deducted to reﬂect the electrical exports at the substation meter
and provide a net estimate, similarly to a regular EYA. Additional losses include electrical
losses until the metering point (usually the LV-side of the oﬀshore substation), availability
conditions, environmental impact and curtailment. This also means that the impact of these
losses needs to be precisely assessed and quantiﬁed. Environmental impact includes blade
icing, blade degradation or environmental shutdown. Other environmental impacts such as
surface’s roughness or atmospheric stability are related to the wind assessment study and
should be conducted on the selected meteorological dataset independently of the power output
model used.
As mentioned in subsection 2.2, pre-construction EYA are rarely available to the public and
require time and eﬀort to be created. This ”Wind Farm Power Curve” (WFPC) approach
can give a rough idea of the gross estimate and be a proxy to an accurate pre-construction
EYA. By subtracting the additional losses mentioned here above, the net production estimate
obtained can be considered an approximation of what a true pre-construction EYA computed
through an extended study could be.
The resulting EYA time series can afterwards be
compared to actual production output from the wind farm.
2.4.1
Method
The wind farm site’s meteorological information is extracted from ERA5 reanalysis dataset
and used as an input for the generated Wind Farm power curve computed for the farm,
providing the corresponding hourly power production.
Figure 9: Generic Power Curve of a Wind Turbine - From [53]
23
==PAGE:28==
2.4.2
Wind Turbine Power Curve
As visible on Figure 9, a regular wind turbine power curves follow four distinct regimes as a
function of the wind speed, which can be deﬁned as:
1. First, the turbine is not producing until the wind reaches the cut-in speed (about 3-4
m.s≠1);
2. Secondly, the output is proportional to the cube of the wind speed, up until the maxi-
mum rotational speed is reached;
3. Then, a constant production output plateau at the generator’s nominal capacity, until
the cut-out wind speed is reached;
4. Finally, the production is interrupted for any higher wind speed to preserve the turbine’s
integrity. On certain recent turbines, the transition consists of a decreasing production
around the cut-out wind speed to avoid brutal production drop on the grid, down to
0MW.
Roughness and turbine wake eﬀect have a consistent impact on the power curve shape for a
speciﬁc wind speed and direction. In real conditions, variations to the shape of the curve are
mainly due to atmospheric instability, which inﬂuences the shear and the turbulence. The
wind direction has a signiﬁcant impact on the output variability at medium speed and a 3D
power curve using wind speed and wind direction as x and y inputs shows it right away.
A Wind Farm Power Curve is the aggregation of all the turbines’ power output when sim-
ulating the ﬂow and wake models according to the farm’s layout and meteorological data.
The generated model includes then the ﬂow interaction of the turbines between each other
and with the surrounding environment.
2.4.3
What diﬀers from a pre-construction EYA?
Independently to this speciﬁc approach, no long term or local correction was performed on
the reanalysis dataset through a wind assessment campaign and applied to the model. The
landscape roughness’ impact on the wind proﬁle can be considered to be marginal for oﬀshore
wind farms, especially when they are located further away at sea and when dominant winds
come from the open sea. However, ERA5 reanalysis dataset has a resolution much larger
than the farms’ sizes.
Additionally, thorough pre-construction EYA would further reﬁne losses estimates given the
equipment chosen for the farm and additional information provided by their contractor.
24
==PAGE:29==
2.5
Regular Monthly Data Assessment
Using monthly production data such as what ENS provides is the type of assessment that
has been led most of the time so far. The monthly aggregated energy output of the farm
almost linearly correlates to the average wind speed over the month. The regression is then
very easy to perform.
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Monthly Average Wind Speed [m.s -1]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Monthly Power Output [MW]
104
ENS training dataset distribution
Monthly Power Output
Linear Fit
Confidence Interval
Figure 10: Example of a regular energy regression using monthly data - 95% conﬁdence interval
Large aggregates up to a month have the advantage of smoothing out errors such as mea-
surement errors or reanalysis deviation, as detailed in subsection 3.4. On the other hand, as
exposed in subsection 2.4, wind farm power curves are not linear at the hourly scale and it is
possible that using a higher resolution model could provide more accurate estimates and/or
reduce the related uncertainty.
2.6
Time Series approach
After having analysed both the creation of an AEP estimates similarly to a pre-construction
EYA study and the modelling of a regression model based on monthly data from ENS,
this section is focused on another approach using the power output hourly time series from
ENTSO-E. Just like the previous part subsection 2.5, the Time Series approach intends to use
production measurements and explore the potential that hourly time series can bring.
This approach fully grasps the potential of the hourly production output datasets through
a method commonly named MCP (Measure-Correlate-Predict). Using the nearly 5 years
available sample, power output data is compared and correlated to meteorological data in
order to create a production model. A 2D model only uses wind speed as an input, whereas a
3D model also includes the wind direction. Wake eﬀect is the main driver for wind direction’s
impact on the oﬀshore wind farm power curves.
In this particular case, it amounts to creating a custom wind farm power curve model from
25
==PAGE:30==
observations, which already include all sorts of losses, which would be reﬂected in the model
output. This part is quite a challenge itself as some type of losses, such as curtailment, need
to be included in the AEP estimate but turn out to be clear outliers on an hourly basis in
the model. The question is then, should they blindly included in the correlation sample, or
removed, or just corrected? If removed or corrected, the total impact of each loss should
be asserted upstream in order to include them in the ﬁnal AEP. The impact of such model
choices is later detailed in section 3.
The ﬁnal step is extrapolating the historical meteorological data through the model and
obtaining a historical time series prediction of what the energy output would have been in
the past few decades. This step limits the impact of climate variations over a couple of
years in the sample in order to provide a smoother and more accurate distribution of AEP
values.
Plotting the whole available sample would not really provide much insight. All measurement
points are therefore grouped by sector, split every 10° and 1m.s≠1, then sector’s average
power output value was plotted on Figure 11. Even though this greatly reduces the number
of outliers and their impact on the correlation, a major drawback is the restricted number of
points of several zones. Moreover, a few zones are missing measurements -which is not related
to the grouping step- and the model based on this data sample then needs to extrapolate the
output.
Figure 11: 3D Wind Farm Power Curve compared to sample density - Horns Reef 2 wind farm -
Color Scale depict the number of records corresponding to each zone
Using the average points presented before, a ﬁt surface can be created either by using a
LOWESS method (Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing) (see Figure 12) or a linear
interpolation. Production was set to 0 from 26 m.s≠1 onward and considered constant for a
given wind direction when no measurements were in fact observed.
26
==PAGE:31==
Figure 12: 3D Surface ﬁt of the power output levels using the Lowess interpolation method for
Horns Reef 2 wind farm
Once the surface function is generated, the power output can be extrapolated from the surface
ﬁt using the wind speed and direction of any corresponding meteorological dataset.
Diﬀerent correlation approaches will be discussed further on in section 3, each having a
diﬀerent impact on the ﬁnal AEP estimates.
27
==PAGE:32==
2.7
Validation Process
Each method will provide its own AEP statistical distribution and AEP time series that need
to be validated against measurements.
1. The wind farm power curve approach, which is used as a pre-construction EAP estimate,
can be validated against both hourly and monthly production records. However, as the
objective is to accurately reﬂect the long term AEP, it is likely to be more relevant to
use monthly aggregate to assess the accuracy of the model.
2. The Time Series approach should ideally be validated against hourly production data.
In that case, the whole hourly production data sample should not be entirely used for
the correlation process, and a smaller share should be kept for validation purpose. The
model should be further validated against monthly aggregates that usually go back
further in time.
The measurement datasets used for validating the models are also subject to errors, failing
to precisely represent reality. The measurement uncertainty is smaller than the model but
should not be omitted.
The validation step consists in evaluating both the model bias error compared to reality and
the error distribution around the bias, which can be used as the uncertainty on the method.
The bias can be reintroduced in the model generation to correct it.
2.8
Comparison - Analysis
Once the methods have been validated against reality, long term AEP estimate distribution
such as P50 or P90 can be generated. Methods performance can be compared looking at
their bias - which assesses their accuracy - and their uncertainty or deviation - which assess
their precision - as illustrated on Figure 13.
Sensitivity analyses should be led in order to assess the impact of a few parameters’ varia-
tions.
Figure 13: Diﬀerence between Accuracy and Precision - from [42]
28
==PAGE:33==
2.9
Data Correction
2.9.1
Vertical Wind Gradient
The ERA5 meteorological data are available at 10mASL (hereafter: m) and 100m and it
would be incorrect to use the latter as a ﬁrst approximation of the average wind speed
experienced by the wind turbine. In eﬀect, the wind gradient has a signiﬁcant impact on the
wind speed seen at hub height by the turbine, even though this value is still an approximation
as the wind speed exerted on the blades is not uniform along the whole swipe area. Usually,
more representative gradient models are used, such as the one following the equation
vw(h) = v10 ·
A h
h10
B–
(1)
with h the hub height and – the wind shear exponent depending on the surface roughness
and atmospheric stability conditions.
The wind shear exponent – is changing constantly along the current local environmental
conditions. By reversing the equation, it is possible to recover –t for every hour t of the
period studied using both v10 and v100:
–t =
ln
1 v100,t
v10,t
2
ln
1
100
10
2 = log10
Av100,t
v10,t
B
(2)
–t is then reintroduced in Equation 1 and the wind speed at turbine hub height can be
retrieved.
2.10
Detecting Availability Levels
In theory, a wind turbine power output is likely to be distributed as a U shape. In eﬀect, all
wind speed records between 0 m.s≠1 and the cut-in speed correspond to 0MW of production.
Similarly, wind speeds between the moment the maximum rotational speed of the turbine is
reached and the cut-out wind speed are supposed to produce at rated power, corresponding
to the power curve plateau. In between, the power output records are evenly distributed.
A wind farm power output is expected to follow a similar distribution pattern as seen on
the top plot of Figure 14. However, the bottom plot is the actual measurements at Nysted,
grouped in 1MW-wide bins.
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 14: Comparing the probability distribution of the power output measurements [Down] to
the theoretical distribution generated through the Wind Farm Power Curve approach [Up]
Simultaneously, when observing the wind farms’ power output hourly time series, signs of the
unavailability of a few turbines during day-to-day operations can be diﬀerentiated. Figure 15
shows points clustered at regular power output intervals.
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Wind speed [m.s-1]
146
148
150
152
154
156
158
160
162
164
Power Output [MW]
Nysted Wind Farm Power Output at high wind speeds
Figure 15: Detail of the wind farm power output at high wind speeds at Nysted - few plateaus at
regular intervals suggesting 1 to 3 turbines oﬀ- lines drawn at 163, 160.7, 158.4 and 156.1 MW
When looking at Nysted histogram again but focused on high power outputs like on Figure 16,
the record clusters can be well-identiﬁed once more.
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 16: Detail of the wind farm power output distribution at high power records for Nysted
Wind Farm - 50kW bins
Turbines at Nysted are rated at 2.3MW, and lines are drawn on Figure 15 and Figure 16 are
each spaced out by this amount of power. This could be explained by the unavailability of
zero to four, or more, turbines. In each case, under high wind speeds, the farm is producing
at about its maximum output, minus the rated output of a turbine, times the number of
turbines unavailable.
Partly because of the measurement uncertainty and of varying losses exerted on the farm,
but also because the meteorological conditions are rarely maintained fully stable throughout
an entire hour, the records within a cluster are distributed around a central value. Some of
the mentioned records could correspond to some curtailment event, even though curtailment
us usually designating larger cuts in the power output.
If the histogram bins are aggregated to match the bin width of one turbine’s rated power
output (2.3MW in Nysted’s case), this shows the surplus probability density of a lower power
output. Figure 17 shows the shift of some sample density to lower power output.
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 17: Wind farm power output distribution at Nysted Wind Farm - 2.3MW bins
In theory, the whole distribution should follow a U-shape and bins from about 145MW should
have a probability density closer to 0.01. The second bin from the last ([158.7MW 161MW]),
which correspond to 1 turbine down, implies a production coeﬃcient of 71
72 = 98.6%. This
bin has a probability density of 0.021, meaning that if the expected density was 0.01 instead,
the farm had a output reduced to 98.6% of maximum capacity at a density of 0.011. Table 1
displays the surplus probability density for up to 7 turbines unavailable.
# Turbine
Surplus probability density
X·p(X)
72
0.055
3.960
71
0.011
0.781
70
0.011
0.770
69
0.013
0.897
68
0.010
0.680
67
0.006
0.402
66
0.002
0.132
65
0.002
0.130
Total
3.792
Table 1: Surplus probability density on power output records at Nysted Wind Farm
q71
i=65 Xi · p(Xi)
X72 · p(X72)
= 3.792
3.960 = 95.8%
(3)
This means that in Nysted case, the long term impact of reduced production can be estimated
at around 4%. Unavailability is however not the only factor involved here and this estimate
cannot be only attributed to it.
In general, the surplus probability density that can be
allocated to a certain number of turbines highly depends on the sample’s extent and local
conditions experienced.
32
==PAGE:37==
2.11
Losses
2.11.1
Environmental losses
Ageing Wind Farm
A study conducted in 2016 on 282 wind farms in the UK, but only restricted to onshore farms
as ”only a small amount of data was available for the UK’s 20 oﬀshore farms”, estimated
that ”the turbines lose 1.6 ± 0.2% of their output per year (see Appendix A.3.1). As stated
in the paper, oﬀshore wind farm ”would need to be considered separately as they face a
very diﬀerent operating environment and maintenance issues to onshore farms”. The ﬁgures
provided by this study seem however very high to nowadays standards, both onshore and
oﬀshore. More than half of the study sample was commissioned before 2005.
1.4% (best case of 1.6 ± 0.2%) lost output every year accounts for 1 ≠(0.986)10 = 13.2%
after ten years, or 24.6% after 20 years, which does not seem to represent the power output
observed at Nysted or Horns Reef 1. As an example, 2 turbines got permanently out of
service at Horns Reef 1 about 10 years after the farm’s commissioning, out of the 80 turbines
installed [50]. That only accounts for 2.5% of the installed turbines, or of the farms’ output
consequently. Only a constant bias of that magnitude could be observed between the WFPC
approach and the measurements then, and no clear yearly decline could be identiﬁed.
It is unquestionable that oﬀshore wind farms also suﬀer from ageing and that a similar
evaluation of an ageing factor would be beneﬁcial to this study. If such a degradation factor
was evaluated for oﬀshore wind farms, it could be applied on top of the long term estimates
ahead in time, irrespective of the model used. It could also be applied to the wind farm
power curve approach to correct the net AEP after a few years of operations.
It could also be applied to the time series approach or the regular monthly assessment,
correcting the training set for this loss. Even though the factor takes climate variations into
account, this would probably over-complicate the model generation process in regards to the
available sample (a 4-year period already a few years into the farms’ operations).
Icing
Icing can aﬀect the measuring equipment and prevent optimal control of the turbine. It can
also lead to ice forming on the blade and reduce the aerodynamic performance of the turbine.
Icing consequences are extremely variable and site-speciﬁc. It’s therefore very diﬃcult to
make accurate estimates, especially oﬀshore.
Landscape roughness
Landscape roughness usually has little impact oﬀshore, but more speciﬁcally it is not possible
to make a general loss assumption as it is site-speciﬁc and related to the wind direction.
Extreme weather shutdown
Each correlation model used in this study should be generated so that power output is set at
0MW for wind speeds above 25 m.s≠1, and the impact of severe storms on the output should
be already included that way. In reality though, the average wind speed over an hour could
be lower than this threshold, but brief strong gusts could still trigger the safety mechanism
and lower the output. This explains that in average the farms tend not to produce at their
33
==PAGE:38==
rated capacity for average wind speeds close to 25 m.s≠1.
2.11.2
Electrical losses
A proposed method to estimate the electrical losses is by comparing the highest observed
values in the hourly measurements to the installed capacity of the farm. Indeed, at high
wind speeds, wind turbines reach their maximal rotational speed and start extracting less
energy than available from the wind. The wind turbines can then produce at rated power,
even under the inﬂuence of landscape roughness, wake eﬀect, icing or other potential external
losses.
The top production records statistically correspond to full availability, full production, con-
stant high wind speed period of the wind farm. This implies that the only diﬀerences between
the theory and the observation come from either electrical losses inside the inter-array cables
between each turbine and the substation meter, or from the turbine’s generator not exactly
producing as expected. Given the economical impact of only a few extra MWh produced
and the wind farm owners’ thorough eﬀorts to calibrate the turbines controller as precisely
as possible and run their asset to their full potential, it will be assumed that generators are
producing as they should.
Therefore, the top production records’ deviation from the installed capacity should be caused
by the inter-array electrical losses. Evaluating the maximum output of the farm from the
output record is however not as straightforward as simply taking the greatest numerical value
of the dataset. As seen on Figure 16 for example, the top values are grouped and distributed
around a local average value. In Nysted’s case, this value is 162.9MW, but the highest output
records is 163.31. This is a 0.25% variation. As stated in [18], the measurement error in the
UK should not exceed ±0.5%. The farms studied are located in Denmark and this value
should be used as an indication of the industry’s standards. Therefore, the average value of
the greatest grouped records is considered the highest observed value of the dataset.
The relative diﬀerence between installed capacity and greatest record registered are gathered
in Table 2
Wind Farm
Diﬀerence
Horns Reef 1
2.2%
Horns Reef 2
1.3%
Nysted
1.4%
Rødsand
1.5%
Westermost Rough
1.8%
Anholt
1.7%
Table 2: Electrical losses estimate - Relative diﬀerence between each wind farm’s installed
capacity and their greatest record registered during the period 2015-2019
Note: Anholt’s value only applies before the Power Boost trigger in December 2018. See
subsection 3.8.
34
==PAGE:39==
The average relative diﬀerence for those wind farms is about 1.6%. As pointed out in [45]
(Page 42 - Table 10), the inter-array losses vary between 1 and 2 %. The metering being
mostly enforced on the LV side of the transformer, the substation’s transformer losses are
not included. This supports the values found using the method exposed here. Finally, the
generator’s internal electrical losses (conversion losses) are not considered here. Indeed, it
depends on the turbine’s model and on how the turbine manufacturers decide to include
them in the theoretical turbine output they communicate or not
2.11.3
Curtailment
Curtailment is a deliberate artiﬁcial reduction of the farm output compared to what the farm
would normally produce under the same meteorological conditions. It’s either provoked by
grid requirements, environmental aspects (e.g. potential bird deaths) or permitting issues
(ﬂickering on neighbouring homes for some time of the day) and is usually planned at least a
few hours in advance. Farm’s partial or full shutdown under high wind speeds are considered
environmental losses. See subsubsection 3.3.2 for an example of curtailement.
Curtailment can highly vary through time and places.
Building a new transmission line
or climatic variations can lead to very diﬀerent numbers from year to another. Curtailment
losses are set a 2% by default for the purpose of this study and could be modiﬁed for sensitivity
analysis purposes.
2.11.4
Availability
Wind Turbine Generators are unavailable when no production is observed even though the
wind conditions would normally enable it so. This can be due to maintenance or a breakdown.
It usually aﬀects one or very few turbines at a time. Availability tends to decline after a few
years of operations with the turbines ageing and their reliability decreasing as well. In case
a breakdown happens, the turbine is usually unavailable for a few days until a maintenance
unit can be dispatched oﬀshore.
Oﬀshore maintenance and emergency repairs are very costly and wind farm operators try
to reduce them as much as possible. They gather as much SCADA data to monitor the
turbines in regular operations and predict when they are more likely to fail in order to
schedule maintenance operations in advance and avoid a few days of unavailability. Due
to diﬃcult access at sea, extra care is put to maintenance and therefore availability can be
expected to happen less often but can last longer.
Turbines tend also to suﬀer more from failures either shortly after commissioning where po-
tential conception defects would appear, or late in their life-time due to the ageing eﬀect and
the inﬂuence of their environment. To simplify, the unavailability factor would be considered
constant throughout the farm’s lifetime.
Publicly available data on that aspect of the wind farm management is obviously poor as
both farm operators and OEMs will prefer to remain discrete on the failures rate and turbine
unavailability. Numbers vary from 1 to 5 % depending on the studies and the countries.
35
==PAGE:40==
Unavailability is set a 2% by default for the purpose of this study and could be modiﬁed for
sensitivity analysis purposes.
Large scale failures, typically a substation transformer failure or an export cable failure, are
only expected to happen once or twice in the lifetime of a farm. Therefore, they are not
included in this category and are not considered in any of the possible loss factor that could
be applied to the study.
A method to estimate the unavailability loss factor from the power output hourly time series
is detailed in subsection 2.10.
2.11.5
Summary Table
The following table summarises the losses’ impact and whether or not they apply to each
method:
Losses
Impact
WFPC
Time Series
Regular
Approach
Approach
Monthly Appr.
Environmental losses
1% - 2%
3
7
7
Wake losses
0% - 10%
7
7
7
Electrical losses
≥1.6%
3
7
7
Availability
2%
3
7
7
Curtailment
2%
3
7
7
Table 3: Summary Table of the losses applying to a wind farm
Combining electrical losses, availability and curtailment together amount for 6,4% loss ap-
proximation. A default loss factor of 6% is applied to the wind farm power curve approach.
This value is further discussed later in the sensitivity analysis part.
2.12
Methodology - Conclusion
Because pre-construction EYA could not be found online for the farms investigated in this
study, a similar estimate was generated using the Wind Farm Power Curve approach. The
linear regression model regularly used to assess the performance of the farms at the monthly
scale is challenged by the ”Time Series” approach, which oﬀers to use hourly measurement
data to train an interpolation model. Diﬀerent methods can be applied at this step and will
lead to diﬀerent outputs. Once the estimates are generated through each method, their output
needs to be validated against a separate dataset. The estimates’ relevance and information
conveyed shall be discussed to assess the expected objectives.
Extra pieces of information are visible on the raw hourly data, such as the curtailment periods
and the availability levels of a farm. Independently to the time series, the losses generally
applying to wind farms have been recapped and quantiﬁed. The ”default” values presented
there will be discussed further in the investigation, notably in subsection 3.7.
36
==PAGE:41==
3
Analysis - Results
Now that the objectives and methods employed are exposed, each approach is applied to the
relevant data and benchmarked in the coming section. First, the Wind Farm Power Curve
(WFPC) approach is providing an estimate of what a pre-construction EYA approximation
could be. Then, a regular monthly-data assessment is generated, followed by the time series
approach using hourly-resolution data. The three methods are validated against the historical
outputs from the farms and their errors compared.
3.1
Wind Farm Power Curve Approach
To introduce this part, Nysted wind farm (sometimes called Rødsand I) will be used as an
example. This Danish wind farm located south of the Lolland island was commissioned in
2003 and is composed of 72 Siemens SWP 2.3-82 turbines, adding up to 166MW. The Danish
Energy Agency provides monthly production aggregates since the farm’s connection to the
grid which is valuable validation data [32]. An extension, Rødsand II, was commissioned in
2010 a few kilometres to the west where the dominant wind comes from. Nysted Wind Farm is
interesting for the extensive data available and for the disruptive event about halfway through
the ENS dataset’s available period - 2003 until 2018 - corresponding to the construction of a
new wind farm upwind.
Figure 18: Nysted’s generated Wind Farm Power Curve w/ Rødsand II wake eﬀect included -
Data generated on WindPro
As a reminder, the wind farm power curves used in this project only acknowledge the internal
wake eﬀect from the turbines and not external environmental impact such as the landscape
37
==PAGE:42==
roughness. Speciﬁcally for those two wind farms, theoretical wind farm power curves were
generated for both with and without wake eﬀects from their respective neighbouring farm to
accurately reﬂect this disruptive event and evaluate the inﬂuence the two wind farms have
on each other. Nysted’s generated 3D wind farm power curve using wind speed and direction
as inputs can be seen on Figure 18.
In a sense, Rødsand II’s wind farm power curve including Nysted wake eﬀect is the only one
representing the current reality as Nysted has always been there during operations. However,
as Nysted is 7 years older, the other wind farm power curve could be used to correct the
impact of early Nysted decommissioning. Moreover, comparing the two gives the opportunity
to assess the expected losses caused by Nysted’s wake eﬀect.
Figure 20 shows the impact of neighbouring wake eﬀect on the power output given the wind
direction at a speciﬁc wind speed (here 10.5 m.s≠1). It can also be observed that before
the rated turbine power is reached, the power output varies greatly according to the wind
direction: when the wind blows from the north or the south, which is how the turbines are
aligned, the production is almost halved. As mentioned before, the landscape roughness is
not taken into account when creating the wind farm power curves, and the landmasses nearby
do not inﬂuence it. As seen on Figure 19, Nysted’s turbines are aligned along a North-South
axis. The wake eﬀect would explain the drop at 0 and 180° visible on the wind farm power
curve.
Figure 19: Layout of Nysted Wind Farm [Right] and Rødsand II Wind Farm [Left], from [52]
As seen on Figure 19, Rødsand II was built upwind to Nysted for wind direction in the
range [212°, 312°]. On Figure 20 it can also be seen that, unsurprisingly, those angles exactly
correspond to na output reduction of Nysted’s wind farm power curve.
This is also the
dominant wind direction for Nysted, which implies that Rødsand II’s construction is going
to signiﬁcantly impact Nysted’s output.
38
==PAGE:43==
Figure 20: Nysted’s Wind Farm Power Curve at 10.5 m.s≠1 superimposed on the wind direction
distribution
The meteorological input from ERA5 is fed to the wind farm power curve for each available
timestamp in order to obtain the hourly power output. A default loss factor of 6% is applied
for each output record as an approximation. The loss factor was further discussed in subsub-
section 2.11.2. The resulting power output can be visualised as a time series and compared
to the hourly production measurements available from ENTSO-E as seen on Figure 21. The
time series without losses is plotted as a reference.
Jan 01
Jan 04
Jan 07
Jan 10
Jan 13
Jan 16
Jan 19
Jan 22
Jan 25
Jan 28
Jan 31
2016   
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Power Output [MW]
Hourly Power Output in January 2016 for Nysted Wind Farm
ENTSO-e Measurements
Power Curve Approach (No Losses)
Power Curve Approach (6% Loss Factor)
Figure 21: Nysted’s Hourly Production estimate from the WFPC approach including Rødsand’s
wake eﬀect, compared to ENTSO-E Measurements - With and without loss factor applied
39
==PAGE:44==
The Wind Farm Power Curve approach including the loss factor has a similar maximum
power output than the actual measurements from ENTSO-E. On an hourly basis, it regularly
underestimates or overestimates the power output, but the model’s focus is to predict long
term estimates and hourly residuals are expected. It’s therefore interesting to focus on the
monthly aggregated level and look further back in time using ENS dataset. On a larger
timescale such as a month, ERA5 accuracy error is less visible as shown on Figure 22.
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Energy Output [MWh]
104
Comparing Monthly Energy Output from ENS and Power Curve Approach for Nysted Wind Farm
ENS Data
Power Curve Approach
Figure 22: Nysted’s Monthly energy output estimate from WFPC Approach compared to the
ENS dataset
The early ramp-up in 2010, as well as a export cable failure in 2007, are clearly visible. Wind
farm power curve data with and without wake eﬀect has been combined in order to take into
account the construction and commissioning of Rødsand II in 2010. This mixed model is
used further on for Nysted.
The blue curve on Figure 22 shows a net estimate and deviation from the actual measure-
ments indicate the assumption errors. The loss factor is applied as a constant even though
curtailment does not occur equally throughout the months for example. Some months tend
to deviate more than expected, usually due to isolated events such as the ones described
earlier or due to large curtailment or unavailability. On Figure 23, markers were added to
clearly show the outlier points using Grubbs method [46], which assumes that the sample is
normally distributed.
40
==PAGE:45==
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Energy Output deviation from Estimate [%]
Residuals :6156 MWh in avg. (4817 MWh with outfits)
or16.39 % of the estimate (13 % with outfits)
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
0
2
4
6
8
10
Energy Output [MWh]
104
ENS data
Power Curve Net EYA
Outliers
1
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
Energy Output deviation from Estimate [%]
Residuals' Distribution
Nysted Wind Farm - Rødsand II wake effect from 2010 - Monthly Energy Output
Figure 23: Nysted’s Monthly Energy Production estimate from WFPC approach - Residuals and
outliers
The Grubbs’ test for outliers gives satisfying results as it seems to only detect the ramping-up
and large failure periods. Relative residuals during normal operations are kept within the
study sample, taking into account regular unavailability and curtailment losses. As for the
box-and-whisker plot, it displays as an outlier any point outside 1.5ú(q3≠q1) with q1 and q3 the
ﬁrst and third quartiles which are also the limits of the box. It corresponds to approximately
±2.7‡ and 99.3% coverage if the data are normally distributed. The comparison between the
two is interesting in order to detect either abnormal events or large losses within what can
be considered normal operations.
The residuals’ relative deviations seem to ﬁt correctly in a normal distribution as seen in
Figure 24. The residuals’ normal dispersion would be provoked by the random error on wind
speed from the reanalysis dataset, as well as the fact some losses tend to happen irregularly
one month to another, such as curtailment. The mean residual is positive for Nysted, which
means the WFPC approach underestimates in average the actual monthly production. The
bias is greater than the losses applied on the gross estimate, thus it implies an overall un-
derestimation of the wind speeds by ERA5 in the area or otherwise an overestimation of the
internal wake eﬀect before the loss factor was applied.
41
==PAGE:46==
Figure 24: Nysted Wind Farm’s Residuals Distribution from WFPC approach
How interesting monthly measures may be, a yearly AEP is expected. The Grubbs method
is only working at the yearly resolution if the sample is pre-ﬁltered to remove the years with
no production. Figure 25 shows the yearly residuals.
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Energy Output [MWh]
105
ENS data
Power Curve Net EYA
Outliers
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Energy Output deviation from Estimate [%]
Residuals :76248 MWh in avg. (42609 MWh with outfits)
or15.99 % of the estimate (9 % with outfits)
1
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Energy Output deviation from Estimate [%]
Residuals' Distribution
Nysted Wind Farm - Rødsand II wake effect from 2010 - Yearly Energy Output
Figure 25: Nysted’s Yearly Production estimate from WFPC approach compared to ENS
dataset - Residuals and outliers - Note: Correct Relative Average Residuals is 14%
Over the period 2004-2018 (2007 excluded), the AEP estimates are in average 14% below the
net measurements, which is unexpected and unrealistic. The same study is performed for a
larger sample of wind farms (mainly Danish farms) and the results gathered in Table 4. It
can be ﬁrst observed there that it is not really possible to generalise this bias, especially as it
partly reﬂects environmental losses that are site-speciﬁc. The extent of the study also goes
42
==PAGE:47==
from 16 years for Horns Reef 1 to only 4 years for Westermost Rough.
The process was repeated for the rest of the studied wind farms and the results gathered
in Table 4. Texts and ﬁgures in italic style refer to studies partially representing the real
conditions.
Farm Name
Average
Average
Sample
Hub
yearly µ
yearly ‡
Size [Years]
height [m]
Anholt
0.95%
0.86%
4a
81.6
Horns Reef 1
-0,58%
3.8%
13
70
Horns Reef 2
-2,5%
2.0 %
8
68
Nysted, w/ WEb from 08-2010
14%
1.6%
14
69
Nysted w/o Rødsand II’s WE
13%
2.0%
-
-
Nysted with Rødsand II’s WE
14%
1.9%
-
-
Rødsand II with Nysted’s WE
6.6%
2.0 %
8
68.5
Rødsand II
6.0%
1.9 %
-
-
Westermost Rough (UK)
5.4%
2.8 %
4
102
a Excluding ramping-up in 2013 and cable incidents in 2015 reducing the sample size by 25%
b WE stands for ”Wake Eﬀect”
Table 4: Average yearly bias (µ) and standard deviation (‡) on AEP estimate using the WFPC
approach applied on the studied wind farms
The impact is very diﬀerent from one farm to another. Positive bias means the model is
underestimating the actual net production. It may mean that the losses are overestimated.
For biases over 6% though (the constant factor applied here), it is likely not to be the
only reason. The gross model is the sheer combination of the wind farm power curve and the
meteorological data. One possibility could be that the wind farm power curve is not correctly
representing reality. A more likely explanation would be a constant bias underestimating the
local wind speed.
The bias numbers provided in Table 4 are given without any uncertainty range. Indeed,
as one set of input only leads to one output, the model is deterministic and therefore the
uncertainties do not come from the model itself but from its inputs - here the ERA5 dataset.
There is an uncertainty on the loss factor applied but it was chosen not to take it into account
here as the 6% factor applied is a broad assumption made.
Moreover, the provided bias values are the comparison between the net production value and
estimates heavily relying on a broad loss assumption, which partially explains the deviation.
Once the remaining losses are well quantiﬁed and applied to the model, the ﬁnal uncertainty
will be composed of the combined uncertainties on the meteorological inputs and on the
remaining losses.
A review of the statistical distribution of the AEP estimates is conducted with the Time
Series approach and displayed on Figure 33.
Losses are listed and assessed in subsection 2.11.
43
==PAGE:48==
3.2
Regular Monthly Data Assessment
This section investigates an approach using the ENS monthly data since commissioning as a
training dataset in order to provide AEP estimates.
To oﬀer a fair comparison to the hourly dataset available in the study, the ENS dataset is
restricted to the 4-year period 2015-2018 for training purposes. The dataset will be investi-
gated at the month scale, as only four points at a yearly scale would be too scarce to create
a correlation model. Figure 23 and Figure 25 however showed that the monthly dynamics
were not exactly comparable to the yearly ones. The rest of the available ENS dataset is
used for validation. Let’s see ﬁrst what Nysted’s sample look like at a monthly scale.
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Monthly Average Wind Speed [m.s -1]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Monthly Power Output [MW]
104
ENS training dataset distribution
Monthly Power Output
Linear Fit
Confidence Interval
Figure 26: Linear regression ﬁtting of monthly ENS data for Nysted Wind Farm within a 95%
conﬁdence interval
For this period and because Nysted is rarely subject to extreme wind conditions, the sample
matches well a linear ﬁt. Usually, data points corresponding to higher average wind speeds
tend to be bellow the linear ﬁt line (with higher wind speeds, a greater share of production
hour occur under the generator’s nominal regime, which proportionally reduces the produc-
tion increase margin).
The linear ﬁt follows the simple equation f( ˆw) = – · ˆw ≠— ,with – = 9824 and — = 38, 760
for this speciﬁc farm.
44
==PAGE:49==
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Monthly Average Wind Speed [m.s -1]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Monthly Power Output [MW]
104
ENS validation dataset distribution
Monthly Power Output
Linear Fit
Confidence Interval
Figure 27: Validation of the linear regression ﬁt using monthly ENS Validation dataset for
Nysted Wind Farm within the 95% conﬁdence interval
On Figure 27, the validation dataset is added to the same plot and 15 (+5 corresponding to
the 2007 transformer incident) out of 186 points, or 8% (or 11%) of the points are outside
the conﬁdence interval. This is more than the desired 5% from the conﬁdence interval but
could be expected in case of unforeseen events.
If the linear approximation used here is called f( ˆwt) and the actual production output mea-
surements are y( ˆwt), with ˆwt the average wind speed at time t, then
y( ˆwt) = f( ˆwt) + ‘(t)
The statistical distribution of the error ‘(t) provides the uncertainty on the method as pre-
sented in Figure 28.
45
==PAGE:50==
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Monthly Energy Error [MWh]
104
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Probabilistic Density
10-4
Distribution of the model error from the ENS linear model - Nysted Wind Farm
Training Set
Validation Set
Validation Set w/o aberrant values
Figure 28: ENS linear model’s distribution of residuals at Nysted Wind Farm - Validation
against ENS Validation dataset
The blue curve (’Training Set’) corresponds to the evaluation of the error from the four-year
sample used to create the regression. Mean value is unsurprisingly set at 0; standard deviation
‡ = 3.0GWh. The average monthly production output being about 45GWh, this gives an
average relative uncertainty is ±6.7%. The yearly estimate being 12 times the monthly value,
the related uncertainty is either absolute (540±36GWh) or relative (540GWh±6.7%).
The solid red curve (’Validation Set’) is displayed as a comparison to the extended validation
set available. When aberrant values from the 2007 disconnection event are removed (red
dashed curve), the resulting standard deviation is similar with ‡valid = 3.7GWh but an
underestimation bias can be observed as µvalid = 1.1GWh. Relative to the average monthly
energy production, this is a 2.3% bias at Nysted.
All Danish wind farms studied are being validated against their historical production data
and the results are reported in Table 5. Validation datasets use the full lifetime of the farms
and overlap with the training datasets. Years where failures happened have been removed
from the validation rate as they were not correctly representing the ability of the model to
predict the farm’s output during regular operations.
Farm Name
Average
Average
Average
Average
Sample
Monthly µ
Monthly ‡
Yearly µ
Yearly ‡
Size [Years]
Anholt
4.0%
7.6%
2.6%
1.8%
5
Horns Reef 1
4.2%
14%
11.4%
4.1%
13
Horns Reef 2
3.6%
9.1%
0.41%
2.5%
9
Nysted
2.3%
8.0%
3.3%
2.3%
14
Rødsand II
0.14%
6.8%
0.54%
2.4%
8
Table 5: Comparing the relative bias µ and relative standard deviation ‡ for Danish wind farms
when using a linear regression based on monthly training data
46
==PAGE:51==
The average yearly standard deviation is 2.6% for those ﬁve farms.
Westermost Rough, which was investigated in subsection 3.1, is not included in this section
as the power output time series in the UK were not of enough quality.
Horns Reef 1 average yearly bias µ stands out compared to the rest of the farms. It can be
observed on Figure 29 that the actual measurements of the training set tend to be inferior
to those of the validation set for similar average wind speeds, especially under high wind
speeds. As early as 2015, 2 of 80 turbines of the farm (2.5%) were indeﬁnitely out of service
and not planned to be replaced due to the farm’s limited remaining lifetime [50], which could
explain the slight drop of the measurements. Moreover, the model being trained on a sample
corresponding to the 12th to 15th years of exploitation of the farm, the ageing eﬀect might
inﬂuence the dataset with for example turbines more subject to failures in case of high wind
speeds [34].
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Monthly Average Wind Speed [m.s -1]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Monthly Energy Output [MWh]
104
ENS validation dataset distribution compared to the training dataset - Horns Reef 1
Monthly Energy Output - Training Set
Monthly Energy Output - Validation Set
Linear Fit
Confidence Interval
Figure 29: ENS linear model’s distribution of residuals for Horns Reef 1 Wind Farm - Green
dots = 2002 to 2014 (validation set) / Blue dots = 2015 to 2018 (training set)
This is a clear example of how biases active on a training set can have undesirable eﬀects
on the long term estimates. Using the farms at an advanced stage of operation may imply
extra loss factors in the models, which make the comparison with the WFPC Approach less
relevant on that side, but is necessary to be able to better compare with the Time series
approach of which data is only available for the last 4 years of exploitation.
47
==PAGE:52==
3.3
Time Series approach
As a ﬁrst example, it was decided to use Horns Reef 1 wind farm to introduce the results
of this approach as the wind farm has both a long measurement record available and no
major disconnection until October 22, 2018. In eﬀect, Nysted’s transformer issue in 2007 is
an interference to the validation set. Nysted’s results are presented afterwards as a mean of
comparison.
3.3.1
Horns Reef 1 example
Rather than using theoretical wind farm power curves to provide the expected estimate, the
Time Series approach oﬀers to use real-world power output hourly measurements and corre-
late them to the corresponding meteorological data in order to create a long term estimate
model. This follows the principles of the Measure-Correlate-Predict (MCP) method. The
correlation method employed has a signiﬁcant impact on the output. This will be shown in
this section.
The hourly power output measurement sample available is also reﬂecting abnormal produc-
tion signals happening at the wind farm. For instance, Nysted Wind farm did not produce
for almost 4 months in late 2007 due to a transformer malfunction. If this period of the
sample is included in either the model generation and/or validation steps, it would inﬂuence
what is perceived as a regular production output signal. Other outliers exist in the time
series signal, speciﬁcally possible mismatches between the ERA5 meteorological data and
the power output due to production control.
Outliers are therefore ﬁltered out of the time series in order to limit their impact on the model.
First, any point registered at 0MW is ﬁltered out whatever the wind speed is. At average wind
speed over 3m.s-1, this is a clear abnormal production period, and no-production condition
is added later to the model bellow cut-in speed and over cut-out speed. Then, data entries
are sorted by wind speeds and a sliding window identiﬁes points deviating more than 3 times
the median absolute deviation (MAD). An example of the 3 clusters of points is shown in
Figure 30.
48
==PAGE:53==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Power Output [MW]
Sample Filtering on Hourly Power Ouput data from Horns Reef 1
Selected Points
Exluded Points
No Production Points
Figure 30: Diﬀerent degrees of time series data ﬁltering for Horns Reef 1 wind farm
Points are then grouped by wind speed and angle intervals and a local average are computed.
Unfortunately, not all possible meteorological conditions were observed on the sample used for
generating the model, which leads to missing points as seen on A.1 and A.2 from Figure 31).
Cut-in and cut-out wind speeds are then set at 0MW as seen on B.1 and B.2. Finally, for
each wind speeds, the wind directions without a power output average value are populated
with the average power output at this wind speed, all directions combined, as seen on C.1
and C.2.
49
==PAGE:54==
Figure 31: Consecutive steps to complete the model’s generated power curve grid - Example of
Horns Reef 1
The points without data available on Figure 31 - A.1 are wind conditions that did not happen
over the course of 4 years according to the ERA5 dataset. Even though it is not impossible
that such conditions would be observed either in the future or past, their impact on the ﬁnal
output would be marginal. As such, they are mainly being assigned a value in the model
just so that the input space is fully deﬁned.
Higher wind speeds are statistically more sparsely populated and therefore the average values
generated from the training dataset much below the turbine rated power may come only a
few measurements. Even though this is not fully realistic, this can be considered again as
50
==PAGE:55==
having a marginal impact on the ﬁnal output.
As introduced in subsection 2.6, the generated power curve displayed on Figure 32 is the
linear interpolation of a regular grid made of the local average power output. The sample
was divided in 10° wide wind direction and 1m.s≠1-wide wind speed groups. The mean power
output was assigned as a value to this group on the grid. A similar curve can be created
using the lowess (Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing) interpolation method.
Figure 32: Wind farm power curve obtained from hourly power output data from Horns Reef 1
Wind Farm, using a linear interpolation ﬁt method
The generated wind farm power curves are then used as a transfer function to obtain the
power output estimate for each hour as shown later on Figure 35. Before reviewing the Time
Series produced from this approach, let’s focus on the AEP distribution eventually obtained
and reﬂect on the results.
51
==PAGE:56==
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
7.2
AEP Estimate [MW]
105
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Sample Density
10-5
Normal Distribution fits
Measurements
P50 Measurements
Lowless Fit
P50 Lowless Fit
Lineare Fit
P50 Linear Fit
Power Curve
P50 Power Curve
Figure 33: Normal Distribution Fits - Full ﬁltering steps applied (blue dots on Figure 30)
Figure 33 clearly shows that both ﬁt methods overestimate the actual power output. This is
not utterly surprising as the points corresponding to major curtailment times were ﬁltered
out as seen earlier on Figure 30.
In Figure 34, only records at 0MW were ﬁltered out in order to increase the sample size and
include curtailment points, but no major disconnections.
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
7.2
Power Output [MW]
105
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Sample Density
10-5
Normal Distribution - No Sample Filtering
Measurements
P50 Measurements
Lowless Fit
P50 Lowless Fit
Lineare Fit
P50 Linear Fit
Power Curve
P50 Power Curve
Figure 34: Normal Distribution Fits - Only 0MW records ﬁltered out of the sample (blue and
red dots on Figure 30)
52
==PAGE:57==
Table 6 displays the average relative bias µ and standard deviation of the estimate’s error ‡
for both linear ﬁt and lowess method depending on the type of ﬁltering applied to the data
input at Horns Reef 1.
Farm Name
Linear Fit
Lowess Fit
Average µ
Average ‡
Average µ
Average ‡
No Filtering
8.1%
4.1%
8.4%
4.0%
0MW Filtering
1.2%
3.8%
0.64%
3.8%
SW Mean Filtering
-4.1%
3.7%
-4.6%
3.6%
Table 6: Comparing Relative Bias µ on P50 with or without ﬁltering on the measurement sample
feeding in the model - Time Series Approach - Horns Reef 1 Wind Farm - No Filtering
corresponds to raw data fed to the model; 0MW Filtering corresponds to all records at 0MW
ignored; SW Mean Filtering means ”Sliding-Window Mean Filtering” - All Filtering situations
corresponds to Figure 30
Negative µ means the model overestimates reality. The larger the ﬁltering is, the more the
model overestimates the measurements as points including larger losses are discarded form
the model training. The same procedure was performed on the other Danish wind farms and
are available in Appendix A.1. It was observed that all farms display such variations, but that
the greatest impact came from ﬁltering out the 0MW entries, which tend to correspond at
medium and high wind speeds to large failures or curtailment. The SW Mean Filtering only
makes sense if the curtailment losses corresponding to the points ignored are then reapplied
to the estimate, which is not the spirit of the method.
It was decided to us the 0MW ﬁltering onto the input data for the Time Series approach.
53
==PAGE:58==
3.3.2
Filtered Points - Curtailment
Among the points ﬁltered out at ﬁrst (Figure 30), a clear cluster around 50MW stood out.
It can be observed in Figure 35 that a curtailment at about 50MW regularly happened for a
few hours on the displayed period in Figure 37. This also happens regularly throughout the
whole sample available for a variety of wind speeds.
Jul 26
Jul 27
Jul 28
Jul 29
Jul 30
Jul 31
Aug 01
Aug 02
Aug 03
Aug 04
2015   
0
50
100
150
Power Output [MW]
Hourly Time Series Comparision between model fits and measurements - Horns Reef 1
Fit
Linear Fit
ENTSO-e
Figure 35: Comparing Hourly Time Series Measurement and corresponding Fit Estimates - Fit
refers to Lowess Fit
It could also be thought that the observed reduction of production at 50MW is not a cur-
tailment required by the grid but rather a safeguard triggered when the wind is blowing too
strongly, automatically shutting down the turbines upwind in the farm cluster. However,
only 5% of the entries presented in Figure 37 have an average wind speed recorded above 20
m.s≠1, which then cannot explain the phenomenon on its own.
On Figure 36, a peak around 50MW clearly appear. It can clearly be seen on the ﬁgure that
even though much less ﬁt values are set at 0MW than the actual measurement records (1178
vs. 7302), the ﬁtting method tend to underestimate the actual power output with almost no
records above 140MW.
54
==PAGE:59==
Figure 36: Histogram of Horns Reef 1 power output measurements [Up] and linear ﬁt estimates
[Down]
On Figure 37, the zoomed-in histogram of measured power outputs shows the surge of records
at 50MW and the related time series show that it is happening regularly over 5 years.
Figure 37: Curtailment at 50MW for Horns Reef 1 - Distribution of the records through time
Following a similar approach than what was exposed in subsection 2.10 for availability losses,
the surplus sample probabilistic density around 50MW for Horns Reef 1 is estimated at 2.76%
of the samples over the 5 years available. Also as seen on Figure 37, the curtailment seems
to be happening more often in 2015 than on average. Nevertheless, over one year, this sums
up to about 10 full days where the output is set at 50MW, or 240 hours per year.
Hereafter, initial ﬁltering is no longer used for Horns Reef 1 as it proved not to have any
55
==PAGE:60==
clear positive impact on the estimates.
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
0
2
4
6
8
10
Power Output [MW]
104
Monthly Fit Comparison ofHornsReef1
ENS
Fit
Linear Fit
Calculated Power
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
7.2
Power Output [MW]
105
Yearly Fit Comparison ofHornsReef1
ENS
Fit
Linear Fit
Calculated Power
Figure 38: Comparing diﬀerent methods’ estimates at Monthly and Yearly scale - Fit refers to
Lowess Fit
Both linear and lowess ﬁts tend not to vary too much from one year to another, compared to
the actual measurements from ENS and the WFPC approach. This was already visible on
Figure 34 with smaller standard deviations. It can also be seen that both time series ﬁts tend
to follow the same yearly variation trend as the WFPC approach’s generated power output
time series. This is expected as both approaches use the ERA5 dataset as an input but each
has its own transfer function applied to it.
3.3.3
Turbine Unavailability
A detailed analysis of the detection and the estimation of the turbine unavailability from the
power output hourly time series is available in subsection 2.10.
3.3.4
Time Series Approach - Nysted example
The same work is performed on Nysted Wind Farm.
On Figure 39, disconnections and
failures at 0MW are ﬁltered out as well as clear outliers.
56
==PAGE:61==
Figure 39: Diﬀerent Filtering methods applied to Nysted Wind Farm’s power output sample
As the amount of points ﬁltered out in this process is this time much lower, this actually has
an insigniﬁcant impact on the P50 value and estimate distributions, and therefore the results
will not be compared. Therefore, both Horns Reef 1 and Nysted studies here are led without
ﬁltering. The estimate for 2007 is further on removed from the validation set to limit its
impact on the distribution as an outlier.
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
0
2
4
6
8
10
Power Output [MW]
104
Monthly Fit Comparison ofNysted
ENS
Fit
Linear Fit
Calculated Power
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Power Output [MW]
105
Yearly Fit Comparison ofNysted
ENS
Fit
Linear Fit
Calculated Power
Figure 40: Comparison of the generated time series at monthly and yearly resolution for Nysted
Wind Farm
57
==PAGE:62==
On both Figure 40 and Figure 41 it can be seen that both ﬁt methods give an overestimation
of the actual output, whereas the WFPC approach completely underestimates it.
4.6
4.8
5
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
Power Output [MW]
105
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Sample Density
10-5
Normal Distribution
Measurements
P50 Measurements
Lowless Fit
P50 Lowless Fit
Lineare Fit
P50 Linear Fit
Power Curve
P50 Power Curve
Figure 41: Comparison of the generated power output estimate distributions for Nysted Wind
Farm
The investigations were performed for all Danish wind farms and the relative errors on each
prediction method are gathered in Table 7. Nysted and Rødsand stand out as mentioned in
subsection 3.1, probably due to a wind speed bias on the ERA5 data.
Farm Name
Linear Fit
Lowess Fit
Sample
Average µ
Average ‡
Average µ
Average ‡
Size [years]
Anholt
-2.6%
0.75%
-3.3%
0.86%
4
Horns Reef 1
1.2%
3.8%
0.64%
3.8%
13
Horns Reef 2
-2.7%
2.1%
-2.9%
1.9%
9
Nysted
-6.5%
1.9%
-7.3%
1.9%
14
Rødsand II
-7.2%
1.3%
-7.3%
1.5%
8
Table 7: Comparing the relative bias error µ and relative standard deviation ‡ on the AEP
estimate for the linear ﬁt method and lowess method at all Danish Wind Farms studied - 0MW
entries ﬁltered out
Similar tables without any ﬁltering on the raw data and with a sliding window mean ﬁltering
are available in Appendix A.1 for comparison.
58
==PAGE:63==
Westermost Rough, which was investigated in subsection 3.1, is not included in this section
as the power output time series in the UK were not of enough quality.
As explained earlier in subsection 2.4, bias values are provided in Table 7 without an un-
certainty range. Indeed, ENTSO-E measurements were used to generate a ”net” wind farm
power curve to which ERA5 reanalysis data was fed in order to reconstruct a time series.
Similarly to the WFPC approach, the model provides only one output for a set of input and
therefore can be considered deterministic.
3.4
ERA5 Uncertainty
ERA5 meteorological data is compared to a LIDAR measurement campaign held in 2013
and 2014 on Anholt Wind Farm site and made publicly available by Ørsted [2]. The LIDAR
dataset, which originally has a 10-minute resolution, is aggregated (averages) at the hourly
resolution in order to match ERA5 data. The error between the two datasets at each hour
is then computed and displayed as a statistical distribution as on Figure 42.
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Wind speed error [m.s-1]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Probability Density
Distribution of the ERA5 error comapred to the Lidar measurements at Anholt - 2013/2014
Figure 42: ERA5 Error Distribution at Anholt - Hourly resolution
LIDAR values are measured at 102.8 meter high. The vertical wind gradient calculation tech-
nique is applied here once more on ERA5 dataset to adjust the wind speed accordingly.
At a 1-hour resolution, the bias µ‘ = 0.136m.s≠1 and the standard deviation ‡Ê = 1.37m.s≠1,
meaning the ERA5 reanalysis dataset at Anholt slightly underestimates the wind speeds.
The standard error of the mean is deﬁned as ‡¯Ê =
‡Ê
Ô
N with N the number of observations
in the sample used to estimate the mean. ‡¯Ê is a measure of the dispersion of sample means
around the population mean. In other words, it indicates how accurate the mean of any
given sample from that population is likely to be compared to the true population mean.
59
==PAGE:64==
N = 17, 414 as the sample corresponds to 2 full years of hourly data, with the exception of
a few timestamps (about 90). Therefore, ‡¯Ê = 1.04 ◊10≠2m.s≠1.
The same uncertainty evaluation is led at diﬀerent time resolution of the dataset:
Time Resolution
µ‘
‡Ê
‡¯Ê
1 hour
0.136 m.s≠1
1.37 m.s≠1
1.04 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
2 hours
0.136 m.s≠1
1.27 m.s≠1
1.36 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
3 hours
0.136 m.s≠1
1.20 m.s≠1
1.57 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
6 hours
0.136 m.s≠1
1.03 m.s≠1
1.91 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
12 hour
0.136 m.s≠1
0.844 m.s≠1
2.21 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
24 hour
0.136 m.s≠1
0.668 m.s≠1
2.48 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
2 days
0.137 m.s≠1
0.538 m.s≠1
2.82 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
5 days
0.134 m.s≠1
0.361 m.s≠1
2.98 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
7 days
0.139 m.s≠1
0.328 m.s≠1
3.20 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
14 days
0.144 m.s≠1
0.239 m.s≠1
3.29 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
28 days
0.151 m.s≠1
0.200 m.s≠1
3.85 ◊10≠2 m.s≠1
Table 8: Comparing ERA5 error uncertainty from Anholt LiDAR measurement dataset at
diﬀerent time resolution
It can be observed at Anholt that the average bias µ‘ remains constant for a temporal
resolution from an hour to a week. Up to a month, this bias increases by less than 10%.
On the other hand, the standard deviation ‡Ê is signiﬁcant at a 1-hour time resolution and
decreases greatly when the temporal resolution increases.
It will be further discussed in
subsubsection 3.7.2.
3.5
Time-scale impact
3.5.1
Why investigating the time-scale of the input data?
In subsection 3.4, it can be observed how aggregating the ERA5 input data could decrease its
uncertainty. The shape of the correlation model between wind speed and power output of the
wind turbine is also dependant on the aggregation time scale used. At the hour dimension,
the shape is similar to the wind farm power curves presented before. However, the more the
wind data are temporally aggregated, switching to longer time scales (2 hours, 6 hours, a
day, etc...), the smoother and more linear the correlation is, similar to the model presented
in subsection 3.2. It can nonetheless be argued whether or not the correlation is really linear
at that point.
Aggregating both ERA5 and measurement data can help to smooth out the potential outliers
in the samples during the model ﬁtting process and reduce the errors generated. Even at
a few hours time scale (2, 3, 6 or more), the points plotted on Figure 43 are less scattered
without changing the look and shape of the wind farm power curve.
As such, when such time aggregates may lose some high deﬁnition variability information,
the model correlation is much simpliﬁed, both in shape and with fewer outlier points.
60
==PAGE:65==
0
5
10
15
20
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
200
Average Power Output [MW]
1-hour resolution
0
5
10
15
20
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
200
Average Power Output [MW]
6-hours resolution
0
5
10
15
20
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
200
Average Power Output [MW]
12-hours resolution
0
5
10
15
20
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
200
Average Power Output [MW]
24-hours resolution
0
5
10
15
20
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
Average Power Output [MW]
2-days resolution
5
10
15
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
Average Power Output [MW]
5-days resolution
5
10
15
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
Average Power Output [MW]
8-days resolution
5
10
15
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
0
50
100
150
Average Power Output [MW]
14-days resolution
6
8
10
12
Wind Speed [m.s-1]
20
40
60
80
100
120
Average Power Output [MW]
30-days resolution
Influence of time aggregation on the model shape
Figure 43: Inﬂuence of time-sale aggregation on the power output measurement’s scatter shape
against average wind speed for Nysted Wind Farm
3.5.2
Method
Therefore, the same model is tested with the same sample aggregated at diﬀerent time
resolution for the time series approach. The whole period available for the hourly-resolution
power output is used as the training set to generate the model. Records with no production
at average wind speeds higher than 3.5 m.s≠1 are however removed from the sample, similar
to the time series approach. The hourly-resolution dataset is aggregated at diﬀerent time
scales, storing the average wind speeds and the sum of production in a new table. The latter
is then used to create a linear interpolation model of the aggregated data.
The generated model is then applied to the ERA5 dataset restricted to the period corre-
sponding to the available validation ENS dataset and aggregated at the corresponding time
resolution (e.g if the model is trained on data aggregated at a 6-hour resolution, the model
is applied to ERA5 data averaged at a 6-hour resolution). Finally, the estimates are re-
aggregated at a yearly resolution for validation against the ENS data.
61
==PAGE:66==
Comparing prediction and measurements at a monthly resolution would have added more
points to evaluate the error distribution. However, months ﬂuctuating from 28 to 31 days,
models generated above a day resolution are gradually deviating from the exact length of the
month once aggregated, even though they are more suited to ﬁt a linear regression. Therefore
after a few months, part of the aggregates at medium range (5, 7 or 14 days) are astride two
months but would be reaggregated and validated against only one.
The point of this section is not to ﬁnd the optimal time aggregate to be used for the time
series approach. Multiple other factors such as the local wind bias, the interpolation method
used or some errors in the sample will inﬂuence the results from one farm to another and no
generality is expected to emerge.
As displayed on Figure 43, the scatter points shape is almost linear from a 5-days resolution.
Therefore, an interpolation model will be applied to datasets at a resolution lower than 2
days, and a linear regression applied to datasets at a higher resolution than 5 days, in order
to provide sensible results.
3.5.3
Results
Hereafter on Figure 44 and Figure 45 can this comparison be observed for Nysted and Horns
Reef 1 respectively.
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Error on Yearly EYA (MWh)
104
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Sample Density
10-5
Comparing Error Distribution at different time resolution
1 month
1 hour
12 hours
2 days
7 days
14 days
Figure 44: Comparing at diﬀerent time resolution the EYA estimate’s error distribution from
ENS data for Nysted Wind Farm - Period 2004/2014
62
==PAGE:67==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Error on Yearly EYA (MWh)
104
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Sample Density
10-5
Comparing Error Distribution at different time resolution - Horns Reef 1
1 hour
1 day
7 days
1 month
Figure 45: Comparing at diﬀerent time resolution the EYA estimate’s error distribution from
ENS data for Horns Reef 1 Wind Farm - Period 2004/2014
As seen before on Figure 43, a linear regression between power output and average wind
speed does not really ﬁt the scattered points bellow a 1-day resolution. Therefore, the linear
interpolation model presented in subsection 3.3 is used for time resolutions inferior to a day
in Figure 46 and Figure 47 and expected to improve the observed error.
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Error on Yearly EYA (MWh)
104
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Sample Density
10-5
Comparing Error Distribution at different time resolution and different models - Nysted
1 hour
6 hours
12 hours
1 day
1 week
1 month
Figure 46: Comparing linear interpolation and linear regression of the EYA estimate’s error
distribution at diﬀerent time resolution - Error to ENS data - Nysted Wind Farm - Period
2004/2014 - Linear regression used from a day resolution
63
==PAGE:68==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Error on Yearly EYA (MWh)
104
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Sample Density
10-5
Comparing Error Distribution at different time resolution and different models - Horns Reef 1
1 hour
6 hours
12 hours
1 day
1 week
1 month
Figure 47: Comparing linear interpolation and linear regression of the EYA estimate’s error
distribution at diﬀerent time resolution - Error to ENS data - Horns Reef 1 Wind Farm - Period
2004/2014 - Linear regression used from a day resolution
In Nysted’s case, changing the model at time resolutions lower than a day increases the
precision (lower standard deviation) but decreases the accuracy (higher bias). In both cases, a
week range provides better precision than the regular month analysis but a slightly decreased
precision.
In Horns Reef 1’s case, changing model turns out to give worse results, and even a simple
linear regression at a 1-hour resolution is the most accurate and almost most precise of all
attempts. Interestingly, the month resolution method remains the worse one here.
64
==PAGE:69==
3.6
Uncertainties
The uncertainty related to the AEP estimates is formed of the uncertainties at each step of
the generation of the estimate. Hereafter are detailed the types of uncertainties generally
applying to the AEP estimates and which ones should be taken into account with the models
studied.
3.6.1
ERA5 Uncertainty
Short analysis work was introduced in subsection 3.4 to compare available LIDAR measure-
ments to the ERA5 reanalysis dataset. This review uniquely applies to Anholt and no general
insights can be taken there, except that an error margin exists on the reanalysis dataset and
impacts the model afterwards.
In concrete terms at Anholt, a bias of 0.136 m.s≠1 in the input wind speed can lead to
underestimating the output up to more than 10MW, or 2.5% of the installed capacity. Further
investigations on the impact of such a wind bias on the ﬁnal energy output are exposed in
subsubsection 3.7.2.
From subsubsection 3.7.3, the uncertainty of the ERA5 reanalysis dataset is approximated
to 2%.
3.6.2
Site Measurement Uncertainty
In general, site measurement uncertainties include uncertainty on the wind measurement
instruments (capturing both wind speed and direction) and on the ﬂow models.
For this study, the only wind measurement datasets used were one Lidar time series to
demonstrate ERA5 bias and, more importantly, the power output time series (both hourly
from ENTSO-E and monthly from ENS).
Additionally, hourly power output records were also used for the time series approach. As
stated in [18], the power metering error in the UK should not exceed ±0.5%.
No clear
information regarding metering uncertainty in Denmark could be found online in English.
The ±0.5% value is therefore used as an indicative reference, being the maximum uncertainty
tolerated by the balancing agency.
3.6.3
Spatial variation
Horns Reef 1’s layout is an oblique rectangle of 5km by 3.8km, for a total surface of 19 km2.
Nysted’s layout is similar, with a total surface of 24 km2. Even though wind ﬂow models
are simpler oﬀshore, the wind perceived by one part of the farm may be diﬀerent than on
the other side. At the same time, the meteorological reanalysis dataset has a 30km*30km
resolution (or 900km2), much larger than the two farms mentioned or any other wind farm
investigated in this report. The local meteorological variations at a smaller scale than this
cannot be fully captured and will not be reﬂected on the model, which will deviate from the
measurements.
65
==PAGE:70==
3.6.4
Plant Performance
”Plant performance uncertainty represents the uncertainty in the wind farm to convert the
wind resource into energy that is delivered to the point of revenue metering. This includes
turbine performance, electrical losses, wake losses, environmental eﬀects, and curtailment
[45]”.
This is the term that was chosen to describe the whole uncertainty on the losses
applied to the WFPC Approach.
3.6.5
Vertical extrapolation
The wind speed is provided by ERA5 at 10 and 100m high and a vertical extrapolation
method were used to assess the average wind speed at hub height. Wind speed at hub height
does not precisely reﬂect the wind applied to the blades during a full rotation but it is a
standard approximation in the wind assessment.
3.6.6
Summary Table
The following table summarises the uncertainties’ impact and whether or not they should be
applied to each method:
Uncertainty
Value
WFPC
Time Series
Regular
Approach
Approach
Monthly Appr.
Site Measurement
2% - 3%
7
7
7
ERA5 uncertainty
≥2%
3
3
3
Vertical Extrapolation
0% - 6%
3
3
3
Plant Performance
2% - 10%
3
7
7
Spatial variation
1% - 2%
3
3
3
Table 9: Summary Table of the uncertainties applying to the AEP estimates generation process -
partly from [45] and partly from the present investigations
66
==PAGE:71==
3.7
Sensitivity Analysis
This section aims at evaluating the inﬂuence of slight changes on particular parameters along
the model process making onto the ﬁnal estimate.
3.7.1
Loss factor variations
The loss factor applied to the WFPC approach intends to reﬂect the inﬂuence of external
losses on the production, such as electrical losses in the inter-array cables, availability losses
or curtailment losses. This factor highly depends on both the farm’s speciﬁcations and on
the point in time. A default loss factor of 6% was applied along with the report so far, this
parameter is now subject to modiﬁcation to assess its inﬂuence on the ﬁnal estimate’s error
to the measurements.
Loss Factor
0 %
3 %
6 %
9 %
12 %
15 %
Nysted
8,22 %
10,97 %
13,72 %
16,48 %
19,23 %
21,98 %
Horns Reef 1
-7,0 %
-3,79 %
-0,58 %
2,63 %
5,84 %
9,05 %
Horns Reef 2
-9,08 %
-5,81 %
-2,53 %
0,74 %
4,01 %
7,28 %
Anholt
-5,41 %
-2,24 %
0,92 %
4,08 %
7,24 %
10,4 %
Rødsand II
0,68 %
3,66 %
6,64 %
9,62 %
12,6 %
15,58 %
Table 10: Variations of the Energy Output estimate’s bias µ when applying diﬀerent loss factors
values in the generation process - WFPC Approach
Figure 48: Variations of the Energy Output estimate’s bias µ when applying diﬀerent loss
factors values in the generation process - WFPC Approach
67
==PAGE:72==
On Figure 48, it can be logically observed that when the loss factor applied to the model pos-
itively increases, the Energy Output Estimate’s bias increases (positive bias means the model
underestimates the output). Positive bias therefore possibly means the losses applied to the
model are too large, though other factors may cause the output to be underestimated.
3.7.2
Wind Speed bias
As pointed out in subsection 3.4, the meteorological inputs from ERA5 reanalysis dataset
can induce a local bias in the average wind speed. The error values on the AEP estimates
are regenerated while simulating a bias on the meteorological reanalysis dataset for each
farm.
Wind Speed
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
Bias [m.s≠1]
Nysted
16,6 %
15,7 %
14,7 %
13,7 %
12,7 %
11,8 %
10,8 %
Horns Reef 1
1,93 %
1,09 %
0,26 %
-0,58 %
-1,42 %
-2,26 %
-3,09 %
Horns Reef 2
-0,22 %
-0,99 %
-1,76 %
-2,53 %
-3,31 %
-4,08 %
-4,85 %
Anholt
3,34 %
2,53 %
1,72 %
0,92 %
0,11 %
-0,69 %
-1,49 %
Rødsand II
9,40 %
8,48 %
7,56 %
6,64 %
5,72 %
4,79 %
3,86 %
Table 11: Variations of the Energy Output estimate’s bias µ when applying diﬀerent loss factors
values in the generation process - Default loss factor (6%) applied on the WFPC Approach
Figure 49: Variations of the Energy Output estimate’s relative error µ when applying diﬀerent
wind speed bias upon the ERA5 reanalysis dataset - WFPC Approach
On Figure 49, it can be logically observed that when the wind speed bias applied to the
model’s wind input positively increases, the Energy Output Estimate’s bias decreases (neg-
68
==PAGE:73==
ative bias means the model overestimates the output).
In subsection 3.4, it was concluded that ERA5 underestimates the wind speeds by 0.136
m.s≠1 on average at an hourly resolution. Even though the end product is an annual esti-
mate, it is generated by aggregating 8760 hourly estimates. The average error on the energy
output estimate from the WFPC Approach is written ˆ‘. Including the default 6% loss factor
and correcting the wind speed bias by 0.136 m.s≠1, ˆ‘ is equal to -1,27% for Anholt Wind Farm.
From the Figure 49, it can be postulated that the energy output estimate’s bias is a linear
function of the wind speed bias applied to the model. This is not entirely surprising as it
was observed in subsection 3.5 and before in subsection 3.2 that, at time scales larger than a
week, a linear regression ﬁts very well the correlation between energy output estimates and
average wind speed.
Extrapolating the data collected and assuming such a linear correlation, this would mean
that Nysted Wind farm’s bias follow the equation ˆ‘(µÊ) = 11.76%≠13.72%
0.1
· µÊ + 13.72%, with
µÊ the wind speed bias. The error ˆ‘ would then reach 0 for µÊ = 0.827m.s≠1. Similarly,
Rødsand II wind farm would reach ˆ‘ = 0 with µÊ = 0, 359m.s≠1. All this assumes a 6% loss
applied to the model, which can be discussed.
3.7.3
ERA5 Uncertainty
In subsection 3.4, the relatively large standard deviation ‡Ê on the ERA5 reanalysis error at
Anholt has not been further discussed. In this section, a linear correlation has been identiﬁed
between the wind speed bias applied to the model and the resulting AEP estimate. A linear
correlation between average wind speed and energy output over a week-time resolution was
presented in subsection 3.5, supporting the evidence found here. Therefore, it can be thought
that the uncertainty of the wind bias on the model should be assessed at the same time scale
than the ﬁnal model aggregation, thus one year for the AEP estimate. The LiDAR sample
available being only 2 years long, assessing its uncertainty at that scale is not relevant.
The largest assessment point available is at 28 days. The standard deviation is also decreas-
ing with larger time scales. The uncertainty at the 28-day scale can be used as a worse-case /
upper bound uncertainty. The average wind speed average at that time scale on the Anholt
sample is 9.15 m.s≠1. With ‡Ê = 0.200m.s≠1, the relative standard deviation is ‡Ê = 2.19%.
This is only valid for Anholt but a 2% uncertainty approximation will be used for all the farms.
3.7.4
Estimating the loss using the established wind speed bias
In subsubsection 3.7.1, Anholt farm’s error ˆ‘, function of the loss factor applied, follows a
linear trend of ˆ‘ = 1.053x ≠5, 41%. When taking into account the established wind speeds
bias of 0.136 m.s≠1, the function is corrected to ˆ‘ = 1.053x ≠7, 57% and ˆ‘ tends towards 0
around 7,2%.
69
==PAGE:74==
Therefore, when including the 0.136 m.s≠1 bias on the wind input, it appears that the loss
factor to apply is closer to 7,2%.
It is worth reminding that in practice, the loss factors are not constant throughout the years
as curtailment and availability are ﬂuctuating. Additionally, the bias observed at Anholt
Wind Farm has been established over a 2-year period and mays also evolve with future iter-
ations of the reanalysis model.
3.7.5
Interpolation Model for Time Series Approach
As mentioned in subsection 2.6 and subsection 3.3, the interpolation method used to ﬁt the
hourly time series data have a great inﬂuence on the ﬁnal EAP generated through the Time
Series approach. A linear regression ﬁt and a lowess surface ﬁt were both used throughout the
investigation as examples of what could be used. Polynomial regressions, cubic interpolations
or piecewise custom functions are, among others, diﬀerent methods that could be applied to
the training dataset for the Time Series approach. Following up on the time aggregation
impacts detailed in subsection 3.5, diﬀerent methods may be more relevant at diﬀerent time
scales. The multiplicity of possible approaches will not be further studied here though.
70
==PAGE:75==
3.8
Anholt Power Boost
In Anholt’s case, it was observed that the maximum recorded value was above the installed
capacity and that it was happening at multiple times after December 2018, excluding the
hypothesis of a singular measurement error. The increase can be observed on Figure 50. The
whole power output time series covers the period January 2015-November 2019. The period
subject to the power increase represents about 18% of the total dataset.
Oct 2018
Nov 2018
Dec 2018
Jan 2019
Feb 2019
Mar 2019
Apr 2019
390
392
394
396
398
400
402
404
Power Output (MW)
Increase of Maximum Power Output - Power Boost Trigger
X 2018-12-16 01:00
Y 391.5
X 2019-01-07 16:00
Y 400.2
X 2019-02-11 05:00
Y 402.1
Figure 50: Increase of Anholt’s Maximum Power Output in late December 2018, identiﬁed as the
power boost activation - Red Curve is the Wind Farm Power Curve model output without losses;
Blue Curve is the ENTSO-E measurements
The power output increase was identiﬁed as being the triggering of the Power Boost at Anholt,
capable of increasing the energy output by up to 5% according to Siemens Gamesa [51].
The service is presented as a turbine update speciﬁc to each site by the company. Even
though the exact mechanisms of the Power Boost are unsurprisingly not disclosed on Siemens
Gamesa’s website, it can be imagined that it mainly consists of a turbine control software
optimisation.
Such a system applied to the turbines implies an increased production proﬁle then, as well as
a modiﬁed wind farm power curve. The triggering of the Power Boost also splits the training
set for the time series approach in two diﬀerent periods.
In order to correctly adjust the theoretical production obtained from the wind farm power
curve, the exact production increase obtained from the power boost enablement needs to be
quantiﬁed. In terms of distribution, a clear peak is observed above 400MW. Interestingly,
even though the power boost is enabled on about 20% of the whole dataset available, signs of
unavailability issues almost disappear, with much fewer production records at lower outputs
as seen on Figure 51.
71
==PAGE:76==
Figure 51: Comparing the time series’ histogram after and before the power boost triggering -
Upper plot = Power boost active - Lower plot = No Power Boost
The maximum production output before the power boost triggering is estimated at about
392.7MW and the maximum production output after having enabled the power boost is
estimated at about 400.2MW. This would mean that a 1.9% increase in maximum power
output before and after. The increased produced energy is probably much higher though,
given the low unavailability observed.
From Figure 52, it can be said that:
1. The power boost is enabled and exceeds 400MW in every Wind direction.
2. It can be observed twice clear outliers in power output on February 19 and March 19,
with up to 405MW. It could either be measurement issues (about 1% deviation, a bit
more than what the meter uncertainty is) or an intended increase of production to test
the Power Boost abilities, or else. Production output at 405MW corresponds to a 3.2%
maximum power increase. Those events correspond to a consecutive series of points,
decreasing the chance of a single outstanding metering error.
3. The average power output decreases from mid-September 2019 for more than a month,
which is much more than what could be expected to be the time required to ﬁx turbines.
The maximum power output during that period is also varying, suggesting that some-
thing prevents the farm from producing at its full capacity including the boost. It could
either be a long term maintenance operation or an intended reduction of production.
4. 5% increased AEP does not mean 5% increase of the maximum power output. The
stabilised output at a single maximum value, signiﬁcantly decreasing the eﬀect of un-
availability, implies a greater gain of energy. This is supported by the availability losses
investigated in subsection 2.10.
72
==PAGE:77==
Dec 2018
Jan 2019
Feb 2019
Mar 2019
Apr 2019
May 2019
Jun 2019
Jul 2019
Aug 2019
Sep 2019
Oct 2019
Nov 2019
392
394
396
398
400
402
404
406
Power Output (MW)
Production hours at Anholt with Power Boost activated
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Wind Direction (m.s-1)
Figure 52: Power Boost production events occurring indiﬀerently of the wind direction - Points
plotted correspond to power output records greater than the maximum output before the power
boost triggering in December 2018
This Power Boost activation occurs more than 5 years after the farm’s commissioning. This
is a disruption point in the time series for the modelling of both approaches and would ideally
need to be addressed. Regarding the WFPC approach, a correction factor should be applied
from 2019 onwards to the theoretical model in order to reﬂect the new maximum power
output. Regarding the time series approach, the correlation sample is also split into two
diﬀerent groups which will inﬂuence the model training diﬀerently.
The Power Boost seems to be able to push the production up to 405 MW, even though
it is mostly set at 400MW. A single turbine output being 3.6MW without the boost, this
production margin enables to produce seemingly at 400MW even though a turbine is out of
service. The farm owner might also not have the permitting to provide more than the farm’s
installed capacity to the grid. Or the export cable to the shore is just not designed to handle a
capacity higher than 400MW and simply limits the maximum output. This would mean that
a constant ”curtailment” is applied to the boost, which provides more stability and additional
resources available if required, due to the disconnection of a turbine for example.
Having the ability to produce some extra MW if required for balancing purposes is a valuable
asset that could be sold on the electricity market at a higher price than the regular production
proportionally. Numerous studies are being published on the further use of wind farms in
the balancing operational mechanisms [48] and the cost related [49].
Indeed, a reduced
production output without a deﬁned scheme surrounding it means a lost opportunity as
wind farms are only producing when the wind blows. From the lack of available pieces of
information that could be found online, reserved power for balancing purposes does not seem
to be a commodity traded on the electricity market yet. If technically possible though, this
would provide increased revenues to farm owners.
73
==PAGE:78==
3.9
Analysis - Conclusion
The following Table 12 and Table 13 gather the average bias µ and standard deviation ‡ of
the AEP estimate’s error for all investigated approaches and models.
Wind Farms
Monthly
Time Series
Time Series
WFPC
Approach
Data Linear
Approach’s
Approach’s
Regression
Linear Fit
Lowess Fit
Anholt
2.6%
-2.6%
-3.3%
0.95%
Horns Reef 1
11.4%
1.2%
0.64%
-0.58%
Horns Reef 2
0.41%
-2.7%
-2.9%
-2.5%
Nysted
3.3%
-6.5%
-7.3%
14%
Rødsand II
0.54%
-7.2%
-7.3%
6.6%
Westermost Rough
-
-
-
5.4%
Table 12: Comparing Relative Bias µ on P50 for the diﬀerent models
Bias is expected to appear on all methods, varying between each farm, mainly due to the
ERA5 wind speed bias exposed in subsection 3.4. The WFPC Approach also includes a loss
factor that is not calibrated for each farm but set at a default 6% value. Regarding the time
series approach, the Lowess ﬁt tends to overestimate the model a bit more than the linear
ﬁt.
The standard deviation ‡ nonetheless provides an idea of the relative uncertainty on the
diﬀerent methods.
Wind Farms
Monthly
Time Series
Time Series
WFPC
Approach
Data Linear
Approach’s
Approach’s
Regression
Linear Fit
Lowess Fit
Anholt
1.8%
0.75%
0.86%
0.86 %
Horns Reef 1
4.1%
3.8%
3.8%
3.8 %
Horns Reef 2
2.5%
2.1%
1.9%
2.0 %
Nysted
2.3%
1.9%
1.9%
1.6 %
Rødsand II
2.4%
1.3%
1.5%
2.0 %
Westermost Rough (UK)
-
-
-
2.8%
Average ‡
2.6%
2.0%
2.0%
2.1 %
Median ‡
2.4%
1.9%
1.9%
2.0 %
Table 13: Comparing Relative Standard Deviation ‡ on P50 for the diﬀerent models
In this section, it has also been shown that the ERA5 dataset can present a wind speed bias
and that the uncertainty on the records varies on the time resolution the data is aggregated at
(see subsection 3.4). It was then explained in subsection 3.5 how changing the time resolution
of the dataset and trained model through aggregation could potentially improve the accuracy
and/or precision of the estimates.
74
==PAGE:79==
After summarising the uncertainties generally involved in the estimate generation, a sensitiv-
ity analysis investigated the eﬀects of adjusting the loss factor on the WFPC approach and of
applying a wind bias to the same model. The latter analysis could have been relevant to lead
on the other models and approaches but is expected to display similar trends. Additionally,
using the same model for both analyses enabled to make comparisons.
Finally, the power boost triggering shows how an advanced controller on the turbines can
help to both stabilise the production proﬁle and increase the AEP. Such a control technology
brings a lot of advantages, all of which can be observed in the hourly time series.
75
==PAGE:80==
4
Discussion - Conclusion
This project sought to evaluate the use of publicly-available data, speciﬁcally hourly-
resolution data, in the creation and validation of Annual Energy Production (AEP) estimates
for oﬀshore wind farms, as well as their related losses and uncertainties. The resulting esti-
mates are to be compared with pre-construction Energy Yield Assessment (EYA) to assess
the performance of the farms.
A focus was ﬁrst put on assessing the quality of the publicly-available data for the
purpose of creating accurate AEP estimates. The requisite datasets are the studied farm’s
power output time series and a local meteorological time series including wind speed and wind
direction. An hourly resolution for the time series is a key point of the project’s objectives, but
extended monthly-resolution time series are also necessary for validation purposes. Additional
datasets such as mast LiDAR records allow us to perform complementary analyses.
Multiple data sources were investigated for the purpose of this study. A growing number of
public and private entities are publicly-releasing data in order to provide access to valuable
operational information to a greater number of people and support the research initiatives
in the wind energy ﬁeld. The datasets eventually selected are those that appeared to be the
most suitable for the study’s purpose at the given time. As demonstrated though, some high-
resolution datasets, such as the one from Elexon, can contain some ﬂaws that hinder their
proper use for investigation purposes [see 1.3.2]. The information displayed is valid but the
set’s incompleteness limits a full and accurate representation of the farm’s actual production.
On the other hand, the hourly power output dataset from ENTSO-E for Denmark was cross-
checked and validated with the energy records from ENS, the Danish Energy Agency, and
showed great consistency.
The ERA5 reanalysis dataset gives a good idea of the wind speed variation trends, even at
an hourly-scale resolution, but the uncertainty increases then [see 3.4]. The more aggregated
the data is, the more accurately it matches the meteorological measurements at the wind
farm site.
One of the ERA5 reanalysis dataset’s observed limitations is its 900km2-tiles
spatial resolution. The area covered by a single meteorological input is more than 30 times
larger than Horns Reef 1 or Nysted farms’ area. Improving spatial resolution might lead to
more accurate wind inputs for the models. Additional improvements to the estimates could
be achieved by the use of mesoscale models for the meteorological inputs. The Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) model is an example of those. It increases the prediction’s
precision by using the local characteristics and has a better horizontal resolution.
Simultaneously, some data needed for the present investigations are kept undisclosed, such
as the pre-construction EYA of the studied wind farms.
An approximate proxy of that
measure was then needed, which lead to developing the Wind Farm Power Curve (WFPC)
approach. This method mimics a true pre-construction EYA by feeding meteorological inputs
into a generated wind farm power curve, which, after losses are deducted, provides a power
output estimate [see 2.4]. Unfortunately, the method is limited by the amount of information
available: the meteorological assessment is incomplete and the losses applied are a broad
76
==PAGE:81==
approximation. The WFPC approach is not a true pre-construction EYA and, as such, should
be treated as a plain estimate inspired by the pre-construction EYA methodology.
Additionally, two other methods were used to generate AEP estimates from the farms’ power
output time series:
• As its name suggests, the monthly data’s linear regression model, which is the method
that was usually used in former research works, produces estimates from a linear re-
gression model generated from monthly production records of the farm [see 2.5]. The
ENS record has up to 15 years of energy data available for both model ﬁtting and
(especially) validation. The ﬁtting dataset was restricted to only four years for a fair
comparison with the hourly-resolution sample’s limited size.
• The Time Series approach follows the principles of the Measure-Correlate-Predict (MCP)
method: power output and meteorological time series are collected; the data are corre-
lated; the model is extrapolated [see 2.6]. This was used here onto extended meteoro-
logical time series where power output time series are unavailable. No additional loss
factor needs to be applied here, as losses already are reﬂected in the training set. The
Time Series approach proved to be able to provide precise AEP estimates compared to
the linear regression model and the WFPC approach.
The modelling aspect of the monthly data’s linear regression model is much simpler than
the Time Series approach and, except with Horns Reef 1, the estimate relative absolute bias
is the least of all the methods in average (1.7% against 3.3% for the Time Series approach
and 2.7% for the WFPC approach, when removing the worst bias). On the other hand, the
sample size is hence more restricted and the model uncertainty proved not to be as good as
the Time Series approach (respectively 2.4%, 1.9% and 2.0% in average) [see Table 13].
Regarding the Time Series approach, aggregating the available time series to time scales
between 1 hour and 1 month gradually reduced the number of outlier points in the ﬁtting
process. Moreover, the correlation between power output and average wind speed quickly
tends towards a linear distribution from only a few days time-resolution, which simpliﬁes
the modelling aspect and increase the number of sample records. Moreover, increasing the
temporal resolution of the dataset enables to provide a model estimate earlier than with
monthly data.
Validating some farms can prove to be quite challenging though. For instance, Anholt wind
farm was commissioned mid-2013, but the ﬁrst turbine was installed in September 2012 and
started producing at that time. Therefore, about year of ENS records are not representing
the full farm’s output but only a partial production. The last turbine was erected in late
May 2013. When ﬁltering the error between the ENS records and any estimation model with
the Grubb’s method, the ﬁrst record not labelled as an outlier is June 2013. Out of the 63
monthly records available for the period June 2013 - December 2018, 3 were considered out-
liers in 2015 due to a clear decrease in production. That leaves 60 records at the monthly scale
which is a good sample for validation. However, when aggregating at the yearly level, 2013
cannot be used because only half the year is valid and 2015 is also considered an outlier be-
cause of disconnections. This means the validation at the yearly resolution is done with only
77
==PAGE:82==
4 points, 3 of which correspond to years from the training set, which is a pretty poor practice.
Notwithstanding the ability to provide satisfying post-construction analysis, the most
promising information that could be extracted from the time series certainly are the electrical
losses estimation and the turbine availability loss impact, things that are not possible at the
monthly scale. That was another one of the main targets of this project’s investigations.
The analysis of the time series at the hourly time-scale allows to individually estimate the
electrical losses impact on each wind farm [see 2.11.2]. At high wind speeds, the only losses
applying to the farm are the inter-array electrical losses, the generator’s internal electrical
losses (conversion losses), the unavailability of a few turbines, potential disconnection due
to gusts, potentially icing and possibly small curtailment. The electrical losses are the only
ones applying continuously to the output, at all wind speeds and direction, and the highest
recorded outputs of the time series statistically correspond to periods where only the electrical
losses are predominant. The ratio between what is considered the maximum observed power
output and the installed capacity is a good approximation of the electrical losses. In average,
over all wind farms studied, a loss factor of about 1.6% was found, within the 1%-2% range
suggested by the literature [45].
The time series can also provide some information on the level of turbine availability in a
given wind farm. It could be observed on the time series distribution that the high power
output records are gathered at regular intervals, approximately corresponding to the capacity
of a single turbine. Each cluster corresponds to the temporary maximum output of the farm
while n turbines are not producing. The surplus sample density at those output levels could
be assessed and the resulting energy loss quantiﬁed [see 2.10].
The study performed at
Nysted estimates the availability loss at 4.2% which is within the 2%-5% range suggested by
the literature [45]. The related loss estimate is however based on multiple assumptions, such
as that the surplus probabilistic density of power output is only caused by availability issues,
and also does not consider the impact of availability issues at lower wind speeds.
Curtailment has been subject to some investigations but to a minor extent [see 3.3.2]. Events
corresponding to curtailment can easily be spotted on the ﬁgures plotting power output
against average wind speed, especially at the hourly timescale, with clustered plateaus at
lower power output than the rest of the sample [see Figure 30 (red cluster)]. Curtailment
also stands out of the power output histograms with density peaks at medium power out-
puts [see Figure 36 or Figure 37]. No distinctive method was developed to detect and assess
the impact of curtailment on the energy output. Something similar to what is done for the
availability loss, where the surplus sample density is reallocated to higher power outputs can
be used, but curtailment does not happen exclusively at high wind speeds and the sample
”reallocation” would be more complex. It is nonetheless possible to tell how frequent cur-
tailment happens throughout the year. For instance, at Horns Reef 1, curtailed outputs at
50MW represents 2.76% of the samples over the 5 years available, which sums up to about
10 full days per year, or 240 hours per year [see 3.3.2].
78
==PAGE:83==
Numerous underlying uncertainties are related to the generation process of an AEP
estimate. Because some steps were skipped in the present study, not all oﬀthem should
be taken into account for the ﬁnal uncertainty assessment. Moreover, a great share of the
related uncertainties is either approximations or estimations. It was hence decided not to
provide any general uncertainty on the AEP generation for any of the methods, but rather
qualitatively compare each model’s uncertainty. Focus is put on the uncertainties which are
directly impacted by shifting the data’s time scale from a month down to an hour.
The ERA5 dataset can include a wind speed bias and the uncertainty on the records varies
depending on the time resolution the data is aggregated at [see 3.4]. At Anholt, where ERA5
could be validated against a 2-year LiDAR dataset, a 0.134 m.s≠1 wind bias was assessed,
and the standard deviation would decrease from ‡ = 1.37 m.s≠1 at a 1-hour resolution down
to only ‡ = 0.200 m.s≠1 at a month resolution. A constant bias on the wind dataset was
exhibited to have a linear impact on the energy estimates. In eﬀect, the energy estimates
are linearly correlated to the average wind speed on the long term, and adding a constant
bias to the time series is equivalent to adding a bias to the average wind speed [see 3.7.2 and
3.7.3].
Changing the time-scale of the dataset and of the trained model through aggregation also
improved the accuracy and/or precision of the ﬁnal estimates [see 3.5]. Aggregating at a
week resolution turned out to be either the most accurate (lowest bias µ) or the most precise
(lowest standard deviation ‡) in all studied cases. Most interestingly, it showed that using a
week resolution on a linear model gives better estimates than at a month resolution.
An uncertainty also exists on the loss factor applied to the WFPC approach, as it was set
by default to 6% as an approximation. A sensitivity analysis showed that the ﬁnal estimate
was varying linearly with the factor’s value, implying that the loss factor linearly induced a
bias on the estimate [see 3.7.1].
In conclusion, this project displayed the advantages and drawbacks of the use of hourly
time series in the generation of AEP estimates.
Additional valuable usages of the time
series were exposed, such as the availability and electrical losses assessment. Some essential
information was either harder or impossible to ﬁnd, which hindered the smooth execution of
the investigations. More and more tools and datasets are being made available to the general
public to carry out such analysis work, and this hopefully will continue going forward.
Future work could include the expansion of the current sample of wind farms to the
UK if the data can be validated and assessed there, investigating the use of a mesoscale me-
teorological model such as WRF for more accurate weather input data, or further optimising
the MCP’s correlation models used in the Time Series approach.
79
==PAGE:84==
A
Appendix
Deﬁnitions
• Data reliability: The extent to which the results can be reproduced when the research
is repeated under the same conditions. As it is diﬃcult to experimentally reproduce
weather conditions, reliability could be assessed by cross-checking repetitive and similar
events on diﬀerent time series.
• Data validity: The extent to which the results truly reﬂects reality.
• Data availability or recovery: It is the ratio of the quantity of information trans-
mitted to the data collector over the expected quantity of information during that same
period. Data unavailability corresponds to the periods (e.g. hours) where no data is
transmitted, whatever the reason is.
• WTG availability: Is when the turbine is operating normally and ready to produce
according to the wind conditions. Wind Turbine Generators are unavailable when no
production is observed even though the wind conditions would normally enable it so.
This can be due to maintenance, excessive wind speeds or a breakdown.
• Wind farm availability: It is deﬁned as the ratio of farms ready to produce and
connected to the grid over the total number of farms installed among the wind farm.
If only 9 turbines out of 10 are producing, the Wind Farm Availability is set at 90%.
Wind farm grouping
The studied wind farms are grouped following geographical areas
UK
Wash zone: Westermost Rough
DK
Kattegat: Anholt
North Sea: HornsReef 1, 2 & 3
Baltic Sea: Nysted (Rødsand I); Rødsand II
80
==PAGE:85==
A.1
Filtering Study of the Time Series Approach
Hereafter are the results from the Time Series Approach but generated by applying diﬀerent
a ﬁltering step initially on the raw data.
In Table 14, the raw data are not ﬁltered at all.
Farm Name
Average µ
Average ‡
Average µ
Average ‡
Sample
Linear Fit
Linear Fit
Lowess Fit
Lowess Fit
Used [Years]
Anholt
2.2%
0.65%
1.7%
0.91%
4
Horns Reef 1
8.1%
4.1%
8.4 %
4.0%
13
Horns Reef 2
3.0%
2.1%
3.1%
2.0%
9
Nysted
-4.7%
1.8%
-5.1%
1.8%
14
Rødsand II
-6.8%
1.3%
-6.8%
1.5%
8
Table 14: Comparing the relative bias error µ and relative standard deviation ‡ on the AEP
estimate for the linear ﬁt method and lowess method at all Danish Wind Farms studied - No
Fitlering
In Table 15, 0MW records are removed from the raw data, as well as additional outliers.
Farm Name
Average µ
Average ‡
Average µ
Average ‡
Sample
Linear Fit
Linear Fit
Lowess Fit
Lowess Fit
Used [Years]
Anholt
-3.4%
0.82%
-3.8%
0.84%
4
Horns Reef 1
-4.1%
3.7%
-4.6%
3.6%
13
Horns Reef 2
-5.0%
2.2%
-5.0%
1.9%
9
Nysted
-6.6%
1.9%
-7.5%
1.8%
14
Rødsand II
-7.8%
1.3%
-8.3%
1.4%
8
Table 15: Comparing the relative bias error µ and relative standard deviation ‡ on the AEP
estimate for the linear ﬁt method and lowess method at all Danish Wind Farms studied - Sliding
Window Mean Filtering
81
==PAGE:86==
A.2
Additional Figures for the Data quality assessment
The following ﬁgures are completing the study led in subsection 1.3 and are referenced in the
main text there.
A.2.1
BMRS / Elexon
BMRS - Data Recovery Rate
Boxplot on Figure 53 represents the monthly recovery rate among the wind farms.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
2014_11
2014_12
2015_1
2015_2
2015_3
2015_4
2015_5
2015_6
2015_7
2015_8
2015_9
2015_10
2015_11
2015_12
2016_1
2016_2
2016_3
2016_4
2016_5
2016_6
2016_7
2016_8
2016_9
2016_10
2016_11
2016_12
2017_1
2017_2
2017_3
2017_4
2017_5
2017_6
2017_7
2017_8
2017_9
2017_10
2017_11
2017_12
2018_1
2018_2
2018_3
2018_4
2018_5
2018_6
2018_7
2018_8
2018_9
2018_10
2018_11
2018_12
2019_1
2019_2
2019_3
2019_4
2019_5
2019_6
2019_7
2019_8
2019_9
2019_10
2019_11
2019_12
2020_1
Months
Distribution of the avaialbility of metered wind farms per month
Figure 53: BMRS Boxplot - Monthly Recovery Rate
82
==PAGE:87==
Boxplot on Figure 54 is the aggregation of all wind farms per calendar month to show the
recovery rate’s seasonality over an average year.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months
Distribution of the avaialbility of metered wind farms per month
Figure 54: BMRS Boxplot - Year Calendar Recovery Rate
Boxplot on Figure 55 represents the recovery rate of each wind farm’s transformer. For each
farm, one point represents one month.
83
==PAGE:88==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
LondonArray_01
LondonArray_02
LondonArray_03
LondonArray_04
GunfleetSands_01
GunfleetSands_02
GreaterGabbard_01
GreaterGabbard_02
GreaterGabbard_03
EastAnglia_01
EastAnglia_02
Thanet01
Thanet02
Barrow_00
Ormonde_00
Burbo_00
BurboExtension_00
Walney1_00
Walney2_00
Walney3_00
Walney4_00
GyM_15
GyM_17
GyM_16
GyM_28
WoDS_01
WoDS_02
WestermostRough_00
Lincs_01
Lincs_02
RaceBank_01
RaceBank_02
Hornsea_01
Hornsea_02
Hornsea_03
SheringhamShoal_01
SheringhamShoal_02
Dudgeon_01
Dudgeon_02
Dudgeon_03
Dudgeon_04
Beatrice_01
Beatrice_02
Beatrice_03
Beatrice_04
Hywind_00
Wind Farm Names
Distribution of the monthly avaialbility per metered wind farms
Figure 55: BMRS Boxplot - Farm Recovery Rate
Boxplot on Figure 56’s sample is aggregated per month (average value per calendar month -
maximum 12 samples for the boxplot distribution), which smooths out the aberrant months.
84
==PAGE:89==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
LondonArray_01
LondonArray_02
LondonArray_03
LondonArray_04
GunfleetSands_01
GunfleetSands_02
GreaterGabbard_01
GreaterGabbard_02
GreaterGabbard_03
EastAnglia_01
EastAnglia_02
Thanet01
Thanet02
Barrow_00
Ormonde_00
Burbo_00
BurboExtension_00
Walney1_00
Walney2_00
Walney3_00
Walney4_00
GyM_15
GyM_17
GyM_16
GyM_28
WoDS_01
WoDS_02
WestermostRough_00
Lincs_01
Lincs_02
RaceBank_01
RaceBank_02
Hornsea_01
Hornsea_02
Hornsea_03
SheringhamShoal_01
SheringhamShoal_02
Dudgeon_01
Dudgeon_02
Dudgeon_03
Dudgeon_04
Beatrice_01
Beatrice_02
Beatrice_03
Beatrice_04
Hywind_00
Wind Farm Names
Distribution of the monthly avaialbility per metered wind farms
Figure 56: BMRS Boxplot - Farm Recovery Rate - Month Data Aggregation (12 points per farm)
In conclusion, it can be observed that most farms have a median above 90%, which would
indicate a good quality of data if considering about 10% that are non production periods.
There is a seasonality to the unrecovery rate, with a decrease in summer which matches lower
wind speeds and better weather for maintenance.
85
==PAGE:90==
A.2.2
ENTSO-E
Figure 57 for London Array 1 shows once more the shift of ENTSO-E’s data from Energy to
Power on July 2015.
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Comparison between TSOE and BMRS time series
BMRS
TSOE
Figure 57: Main Time Series
A snapshot of what the period before July 2015 looked like is plot on Figure 58, where it can
clearly be seen that ENTSO-E’s time series is half Elexon’s one.
86
==PAGE:91==
May 27
May 28
May 29
May 30
May 31
Jun 01
Jun 02
Jun 03
Jun 04
Jun 05
Jun 06
2015   
0
50
100
150
Comparison between TSOE and BMRS time series
BMRS
TSOE
Figure 58: First part of the Time Series
When zooming in the period post July 2015 as displayed on Figure 59, a 1 hour lag can be
observed in the summer.
Nov 05, 12:00
Nov 06, 00:00
Nov 06, 12:00
Nov 07, 00:00
Nov 07, 12:00
Nov 08, 00:00
Nov 08, 12:00
Nov 09, 00:00
2015   
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
Comparison between TSOE and BMRS time series
BMRS
TSOE
Figure 59: Second part of the Time Series
87
==PAGE:92==
ENTSO-E - Data Recovery Rate
Boxplot on Figure 60 displays the monthly recovery rate’s distribution among the wind farms
studied.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
2014_11
2014_12
2015_1
2015_2
2015_3
2015_4
2015_5
2015_6
2015_7
2015_8
2015_9
2015_10
2015_11
2015_12
2016_1
2016_2
2016_3
2016_4
2016_5
2016_6
2016_7
2016_8
2016_9
2016_10
2016_11
2016_12
2017_1
2017_2
2017_3
2017_4
2017_5
2017_6
2017_7
2017_8
2017_9
2017_10
2017_11
2017_12
2018_1
2018_2
2018_3
2018_4
2018_5
2018_6
2018_7
2018_8
2018_9
2018_10
2018_11
2018_12
2019_1
2019_2
2019_3
2019_4
2019_5
2019_6
2019_7
2019_8
2019_9
2019_10
2019_11
2019_12
Months
Distribution of the avaialbility of metered wind farms per month - ENTSO-E Data
Figure 60: ENTSO-E Boxplot - Monthly Recovery Rate
88
==PAGE:93==
Figure 61 groups the rates per wind farm, each point corresponding to a speciﬁc month.
Certain clear outliers on Figure 60 (such as 0% recovery rate) can be traced back to most
UK farms.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
LondonArray_01
LondonArray_02
LondonArray_03
LondonArray_04
GunfleetSands_01
GunfleetSands_02
GreaterGabbard_01
GreaterGabbard_02
GreaterGabbard_03
EastAnglia_01
EastAnglia_02
Barrow_00
Burbo_00
BurboExtension_00
Anholt_00
HornsReef1_00
HornsReef2_00
HornsReef3_00
Wind Farm Names
Distribution of the monthly avaialbility per metered wind farms - ENTSO-E Data
Figure 61: ENTSO-E Boxplot - Farm Recovery Rate
Figure 62’s sample is aggregated per calendar month for each farm (average value per calendar
month - maximum 12 samples for the boxplot distribution), which smooths out the aberrant
months.
89
==PAGE:94==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
LondonArray_01
LondonArray_02
LondonArray_03
LondonArray_04
GunfleetSands_01
GunfleetSands_02
GreaterGabbard_01
GreaterGabbard_02
GreaterGabbard_03
EastAnglia_01
EastAnglia_02
Barrow_00
Burbo_00
BurboExtension_00
Anholt_00
HornsReef1_00
HornsReef2_00
HornsReef3_00
Wind Farm Names
Distribution of the monthly avaialbility per metered wind farms - ENTSO-E Data
Figure 62: ENTSO-E Boxplot - Farm Recovery Rate - Month Data Aggregation (12 points per
farm)
Danish farms have an extremely high recovery rate, mainly because the danish source for
ENTSO-E (Energinet) transmits the value 0 when the farm is not producing whereas Elexon
is not transmitting any data.
Finally, Figure 63 is the aggregation of all wind farms per calendar month to show the
recovery rate distribution over an average year.
90
==PAGE:95==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Monthly Availability (%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months
Distribution of the avaialbility of metered wind farms per month - ENTSO-E Data
Figure 63: ENTSO-E Boxplot - Year Calendar recovery rate
The seasonality observed before for Elexon data is not as clear in this case, probably due to
the consistency of the data provided by Energinet.
91
==PAGE:96==
A.3
Reviewed Literature
A.3.1
How does wind farm performance decline with age? [34]
This paper uses public data to assess the potential decrease in the performance of wind
turbines in the UK through time. It estimates that ”the turbine loses 1.6 ± 0.2 % of their
output per year. This level of degradation reduces a wind farm’s output by 12% over a
twenty-year lifetime, increasing the levelised cost of electricity by 9%”.
The paper focuses on the monthly evolution of the performance ratio (PR) of each farm,
weighted by their lifetime’s mean ideal load factor. PR of each farm is estimated using the
theoretical power curves of the installed turbines and combined with public wind data to
obtain an ideal EYA, compared to the public actual production output from OFGEM and
Elexon. Interesting point there: the oﬃcial public data from OFGEM is said to be possibly
biased, as the obligation permit submission was sometimes used as the construction year for
old farms. It is reminded though that most recent wind farms had a greater CF, and therefore
could lower old farms performance compared to the average. General correction factors were
enforced to model machine unavailability periods, operating eﬃciency levels, wake eﬀects,
turbine ageing and site conditions (which is very site-speciﬁc but normally applies to all
farms) and applied to the ideal EYA.
In this report, the main focus is put on how the production is progressively drifting away
from the ideal EYA derived from the theoretical curves, taking losses and ineﬃciencies into
account. With regard to our project, we are not currently using such curves and rather
trying to correlate production levels with reanalysis model data. It is worth noticing that
long term noise phenomena, such as declining performance with age, as well as punctual
events, such as the power boost triggering, will have impacts on the production and will need
to be considered in the analysis.
A.3.2
Analysis of UK oﬀshore wind farm performance using public data: Im-
proving the evidence base for policymaking. [36]
The paper ﬁrst recounts the evolution of Oﬀshore Wind capacity in the UK and the support
policies alongside. They use the monthly reported Capacity Factor from OFGEM through
the RO scheme to assess the EYA. The monthly-data granularity seems too big to fully
assess the complex ﬂuctuations of energy yield. Through linear regression, only the farm
construction year seemed to highly correlate with the capacity factor. A rather interesting
point of the paper is the geographical correlation between wind farms when aggregated in
neighbouring subgroups.
Overall, the paper seems to lack a concrete and rigorous data analysis procedure. The main
focus was laid on the observed monthly capacity factor variations and its impact on project
LCOE.
92
==PAGE:97==
A.3.3
Using bias-corrected reanalysis to simulate current and future wind power
output. [35]
Wind farm developers tend to use downscaled models at mesoscale for individual projects,
with signiﬁcantly more accurate results but requiring more complexity and computational
resource as a downside. The paper demonstrates a simpler method to represent a national
ﬂeet output. It points out how simply using a correlation factor with the reanalysis data
would be accurate enough for a regional aggregation output, compared to a downscaled
model such as WRF.
Reanalysis data is used as a meteorological input and power curves from manufacturers,
smoothed out to represent the farm aggregation, are used to translate this into power output
estimates. A bias correction is then performed.
To get an overall outlook of the European countries performances and validate the previous
results, the paper mixes monthly and annual WF output data from 23 countries and hourly
data from selected countries, in order to compute a yearly national average of the capacity
factor. A long-run average is then set using the diﬀerent sources available. The reanalysis
set seemed rather spatially biased but showed inter-annual variations quite consistent with
the historical data.
The paper has a well-detailed validation process at several temporal and spatial scales. How-
ever, the bias method presented there does not really apply if a downscaled method such as
WRF is applied.
A.3.4
The ENTSO-E Transparency Platform – A review of Europe’s most am-
bitious electricity data platform [29]
This paper, based on parts of a study commissioned by the European Commission [30],
provides a very interesting and complete review of ENSTO-e transparency platform over two
years, 2015 and 2016. Even though the TP may have undergone improvements since the
study, it gives a good idea of the stakeholders involved in the data collection and distribution
as well of its quality.
Most relevant points extracted from the paper are:
• ”the ENTSO-E TP is not the only “transparency platform”: as a response to another
law, Regulation (EU) No. 1227/2011 (REMIT), which stipulates the publication of
inside information on energy markets, a number of inside information platforms have
emerged, some of which are called “transparency platforms”, e.g. EEX Transparency.
While there is some overlap in data, these platforms are based on independent legal
requirements.”
• ”ENTSO-E operates the technical platform but does not provide the data. Institu-
tions such as TSOs or generators continuously provide data to the platform; this is a
legal requirement of Regulation 543/2013. These institutions are called ’Primary Data
Owners’”
93
==PAGE:98==
• ”Hence data ﬂows as follows: Primary Data Owners →Data Providers →ENTSO-E
TP →data users.”
• Diﬀerent data sources might diﬀer in their deﬁnitions, therefore creating inconsistencies.
• Clear and almost permanent inconsistencies (about 70% of the time) were observed for
DK Oﬀshore between data available on the TP and from the TSO (Energinet), mainly
TSO displaying greater numbers.
• Interviewed stakeholders declared that ”GB data are problematic because oﬀshore
and/or plants connected at the distribution level are excluded from certain statistics,
but [no] written documentation of this discrepancy [could be found].”
• ”A recurring issue is the lack of accessible documentation. Some information on data
deﬁnitions and data quality are available, but it is scattered throughout the website,
cannot be found through search engines or is buried in PDF documents, sometimes
as annexes to minutes of meetings.
Moreover, the documentation leaves room for
interpretation by Data Providers and confusion on the user side.”
• ”The TP does not publish the identity of Data Providers or Primary Data Owners.”
• ”It is our understanding that automatic quality reporting is a capability the TP already
has; however, at this point it is used only internally.”
• ”Dispersed ownership and lack of incentives seem to lead to neglecting user needs.”
A.3.5
Evaluating the accuracy of CFSR reanalysis hourly wind speed forecasts
for the UK, using in situ measurements and geographical information
[37]
Review of past studies on the correlation and comparison between reanalysis climate datasets
and meteorological measurements worldwide. Applied in the UK to check the reanalysis
performance nationwide and estimate the country’s output potential. The study is led both
onshore and oﬀshore. Onshore part hows great inﬂuence of the topography on the correlation.
Downscaling is shown to have little performance improvement eﬀects: raw data is suﬃcient,
especially oﬀshore.
A.3.6
Measure-Correlate-Predict Methods: Case Studies and Software Imple-
mentation [44]
This paper is listing and deﬁning the diﬀerent MCP methods integrated in EMD’s WindPro
software. These methods are: Linear Regression, Matrix method, Weibull Scale and Wind
Index. Their pros and cons are detailed in length.
94
==PAGE:99==
References
Data
[1] ENTSO-E. (2020). Manual of Procedures (MoP). ENTSO-E. Retrieved 3 May 2020,
available here
[2] Ørsted Oﬀshore Wind Data - Lidar data: 10-minute statistics for Anholt oﬀ-
shore wind farm. Retrieved 16 May 2020, available here
[3] Ørsted Our oﬀshore wind farms - Anholt - Horns Reef 1 - Horns Reef 2 -
Nysted. Retrieved 16 May 2020, available here
[4] Power Technology Rødsand II Wind Farm. Retrieved 16 May 2020, available here
[5] ECMWF ERA5. Retrieved 16 May 2020, available here
[6] US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration What is lidar?. Retrieved 16
May 2020, available here
[7] University of Massachusetts Amherst Wind Energy Center - LIDAR. Retrieved 16
May 2020, available here
Elexon
[8] ELEXON. (2020). BSC Section T – Settlement and Trading Charges. Section 2,
page 14. ELEXON. Retrieved 16 January 2020, available here
[9] ELEXON. (2019). Elexon guidance: Transmission losses. ELEXON. Retrieved 16
May 2020, available here
[10] ELEXON. (2020). Aggregation Rules. ELEXON. Retrieved 16 January 2020, available
here
[11] ELEXON. (2020). BSC Section T – Settlement and Trading Charges. Section 2,
page 14. ELEXON. Retrieved 16 January 2020, available here
[12] ELEXON. (2019). Elexon guidance: Transmission losses. ELEXON. Retrieved 16
May 2020, available here
[13] ELEXON. (2020). Aggregation Rules. Page 18 - Section ”Worked Example - Oﬀshore
Wind Farm”. ELEXON. Retrieved 16 January 2020, available here
[14] ELEXON. (2020). BSC Section X-2 – Technical Glossary. Section 4.3.2, page 5.
ELEXON. Retrieved 10 February 2020, available here
[15] ELEXON. (2020). KILH Single Line Diagram. ELEXON. Retrieved 11 February
2020, available here
[16] ELEXON. (22-06-2015). Key Line Diagram - Beatrice Oﬀshore Wind Farm.
ELEXON. Retrieved 11 February 2020, available here
95
==PAGE:100==
[17] Elexon Guidance (2019-02-28). Constructing Aggregation Rules – Central Vol-
ume Allocation. Elexon. Retrieved 27 January 2020, available here
[18] ELEXON. (27 June 2019). Code Of Practice - CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
THE METERING OF CIRCUITS WITH A RATED CAPACITY EXCEED-
ING 100MVA FOR SETTLEMENT PURPOSES. Section 4.3. Issue 2, Verison 13
ELEXON. Retrieved 11 February 2020, available here
[19] ELEXON. (27 June 2019). Code Of Practice - CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE
METERING OF CIRCUITS WITH A RATED CAPACITY EXCEEDING
100MVA FOR SETTLEMENT PURPOSES. Section 5.3 ”Meters”. Issue 2, Verison
13 ELEXON. Retrieved 11 February 2020, available here
[20] Elexon (2020). Elexon Portal. Retrieved 27 May 2020, available here
[21] Elexon Guidance (2019). Settlement metering for Oﬀshore Wind Farms. Retrieved
27 May 2020, available here
OFGEM
[22] OFGEM. (2020). About the RO. OFGEM. Retrieved 13 January 2020, available here
[23] OFGEM. (2020). About the REGO Scheme. OFGEM. Retrieved 13 January 2020,
available here
[24] OFGEM. (11-Sep-2018). Guidance for generators that receive or would like to
receive support under the Renewables Obligation (RO) scheme. Paragraph 4.10
OFGEM. Retrieved 22 January 2020, available here
[25] OFGEM. (2016). Renewables Obligation output data - FAQ. OFGEM. Retrieved
16 January 2020, available here
[26] OFGEM. 2007. Ofgem Renewables and CHP Register. OFGEM. Retrieved 13
March 2020, available here
ENTSO-E
[27] Article 16, Paragraph 1, section (a) of the Commission Regulation (EU) No 543/2013 of
14 June 2013 on submission and publication of data in electricity markets and amending
Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council
Text with EEA relevance OJ L 163, 15.6.2013, p. 1–12 (BG, ES, CS, DA, DE, ET, EL,
EN, FR, IT, LV, LT, HU, MT, NL, PL, PT, RO, SK, SL, FI, SV) Special edition in
Croatian: Chapter 12 Volume 005 P. 274 - 285 In force available here
[28] ENTSO-E Transparency Platform available here or here
[29] Lion Hirth, Jonathan M¨uhlenpfordt, Marisa Bulkeley. 26 May 2018 The ENTSO-E
Transparency Platform – A review of Europe’s most ambitious electricity
data platform. ScienceDirect. Retrieved 12 February 2020, available here
96
==PAGE:101==
[30] VVA, Copenhagen Economics, Neon, Deloitte. December 2017 Study on the quality
of electricity market data – A review of the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform.
European Commission. Retrieved 12 February 2020, available here
[31] ENTSO-E About - Operations available here or here
ENS
[32] Danish energy Agency Overview of the energy sector. ENS.dk. Retrieved 4 February
2020, available here
[33] Danish energy Agency Monthly data 2002-2018. ENS.dk. Retrieved 4 February 2020,
available here
Literature
[34] Iain Staﬀell, Richard Green. 2013 How does wind farm performance decline with
age?. ScienceDirect. Retrieved 16 January 2020, available here
[35] Iain Staﬀell, Stefan Pfenninger. 2016 Using bias-corrected reanalysis to simulate
current and future wind power output. ScienceDirect. Retrieved 16 January 2020,
available here
[36] John Aldersey-Williams, Ian D. Broadbent, Peter A. Strachan. 2019 Analysis of
United Kingdom oﬀshore wind farm performance using public data: Improv-
ing the evidence base for policymaking. ScienceDirect. Retrieved 16 January 2020,
available here
[37] Ed Sharp, Paul Dodds, Mark Barrett, Catalina Spataru. 9 January 2015 Evaluating
the accuracy of CFSR reanalysis hourly wind speed forecasts for the UK, using
in situ measurements and geographical information. ScienceDirect. Retrieved 10
March 2020, available here
[38] Dr. Kai M¨onnich, Susanne Horodyvskyy, Felix Kr¨uger. 2016 Comparison of Pre-
Construction Energy Yield Assessments and Operating Wind Farm’s Energy
Yields. UL International GmbH – DEWI. Retrieved 16 May 2020, available here
[39] J¨urgen S¨undermann, Thomas Pohlmann. 17 September 2014A brief analysis of North
Sea physics. ScienceDirect. Retrieved 13 May 2020, available here
Other
[40] EWEA CREYAP benchmark exercises:
summary for oﬀshore wind farm
cases. Mortensen, Niels Gylling (Author); Nielsen, Morten (Author); Ejsing Jørgensen,
Hans (Author). 2015. Event: Wind Energy Denmark 2015, MCH Exhibition Centre Hern-
ing, Herning, Denmark. Available here
97
==PAGE:102==
[41] CDC. The Six Dimensions of EHDI Data Quality Assessment. Retrieved 23
January 2020, available here
[42] R´emi Gandoin (C2Wind), Gil Lizcano, Pau Casso and Elies Campmany (Vortex) (2019-
06-27). Model evaluation of downscaled ERA5 time series for British and Dutch
oﬀshore sites. Wind Europe Resource Assessment 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2020,
available here
[43] Lars Landberg. October 2015 Meteorology for Wind Energy:
An Introduc-
tion. John Wiley & Sons Ltd - National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Online ISBN:
9781118913451. References available here
[44] Morten Lybech Thøgersen, Maurizio Motta, Thomas Sørensen & Per Nielsen. 2007
Measure-Correlate-Predict Methods: Case Studies and Software Implemen-
tation. EMD. Retrieved 12 March 2020, available here
[45] Andrew Clifton, Aaron Smith, and Michael Fields. April 2016 Wind Plant Precon-
struction Energy Estimates: Current Practice and Opportunities. NREL - Na-
tional Renewable Energy Laboratory (National laboratory of the U.S. Department of
Energy Oﬃce of Energy Eﬃciency & Renewable Energy). Retrieved 12 May 2020, avail-
able here
[46] NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods. April 2016 Grubbs’ Test for
Outliers. Engineering Statistics Handbook. Retrieved 16 May 2020, available here
[47] Ivan Komusanac, Guy Brindley, Daniel Fraile. February 2020 Wind energy in Europe
in 2019: Trends and statistics. Wind Europe. Retrieved 10 May 2020, available here
[48] Abdul Basit; M¨uﬁt Altin; Anca Daniela Hansen; Poul Ejnar Sørensen. 2014 Balancing
modern Power System with large scale of wind power. DTU. Retrieved 31 May
2020, available here
[49] The European Wind energy Association. 2015 Balancing Responsibility and Costs
of Wind Power Plants. EWEA. Retrieved 31 May 2020, available here
[50] Sanne Wittrup. 24 January 2015 Horns Rev lærte Vattenfall lektien (”Horns
Reef taught Vattenfall the lesson”). Ingeniøren. Retrieved 20 May 2020, available
[in Danish] here
[51] Siemens GamesaIncrease annual energy output up to 5%. Retrieved 16 May 2020,
available here
External Figures
[52] van der Laan, M. Paul & Hansen, Kurt Schaldemose & Sørensen, Niels & R´ethor´e, P-E.
(2015). Predicting wind farm wake interaction with RANS: an investigation of the Cori-
olis force. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 625. 10.1088/1742-6596/625/1/012026.
Available here
98
==PAGE:103==
[53] Lars Landberg. October 2015 Meteorology for Wind Energy: An Introduction.
Figure 7.12 - Page 145 - John Wiley & Sons Ltd - National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Online ISBN: 9781118913451. References available here
99
