==PAGE:1==
Design & Evaluation of a Seed 
Stage Startup Accelerator
Simon Ringive | S143988
M.Sc. Design & Innovation
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis 
January 02 - June 02 2020
30 ECTS Points
Supervisors
Carina Lomberg, Associate Professor, DTU 
Entrepreneurship
Lasse Skovgaard Jensen, Entrepreneurship 
Agent, DTU Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Abstract 
The development of innovation and entrepreneurship capabilities is a major growing trend
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
and vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystems are growing at the universities. Universities are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incubators for technology innovation which is seen as a driver for national economic growth
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by governments. One of these capabilities is startup accelerators – another growing trend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since 2005. With this increase of accelerators a stream of research has begun questioning
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
accelerators’ ability to accelerate venture development and no overall accelerator effect has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been found. 
This thesis therefore seeks to ​design and evaluate the seed stage startup accelerator
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skylab Ignite by answering the questions ​how ​a university accelerator can be designed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthen the program and increase the entrepreneurial output of the participants ​and ​how a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
university accelerator can align and position itself according to the entrepreneurial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecosystem at the university​. Through a literature study on startup accelerators the need for
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further research on university accelerators is established by specifically investigating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiatives that drive accelerator impact. A single case study approach has been adopted to get
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
an in-depth understanding of the accelerator Skylab Ignite and the ​ecosystem it is positioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
in. Through a mixed method a study has been conducted, the methods include seven
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semi-structured interviews with startup founders, the program manager of Skylab Ignite and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecosystem actors together with observations of the accelerator. Furthermore quantitative data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been collected on 30 participants and 29 non-participants (those who were rejected). 
The results indicate that Skylab Ignite has an acceleration effect on participants compared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with non-participants which are measured on early stage performance parameters i.e.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
company establishment (CVR) and promotion (SoMe). To improve on this effect 14
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges are identified and 11 corresponding solution are developed in an Idea Catalog. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
catalog ideas suggest improvements to university accelerator programs including their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
position in the ecosystem and entrepreneurial output by increasing the knowledge sharing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities in the cohort, mentoring sessions and alumni events, and by creating shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations between the university departments of who benefits from the available
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities in the entrepreneurial ecosystem and how to communicate these opportunities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to stakeholders. 
These results indicate specific initiatives that can improve accelerator effect and provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
basis for further research investigating whether these solutions can be applied to all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accelerators. 
2 
==PAGE:3==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Learning objectives 
The following learning objectives have been agreed upon for the master thesis: 
 
Identify and analyse relevant literature about startup accelerators and how they impact 
startups to succeed. 
 
Develop a model for comparison of relevant literature using relevant categories. 
 
Plan and execute a participatory research looking into the Skylab Ignite accelerator, 
its challenges and key focus areas. 
 
Analyse and compare other existing accelerators available for startups with Skylab 
Ignite. 
 
Collect and evaluate data in connection with participatory research and literature 
study and develop a set of key areas for improvement. 
 
Create ideas and concept suggestions for how the Skylab Ignite accelerator can be 
improved based on the developed set of key areas for improvement. 
 
Design criterias for selecting concepts and further detail the selected concepts for how 
the Skylab Ignite accelerator can be improved. 
 
Develop and answer a research question in regards to the overall project topic. 
 
Communicate the process and findings in a larger project report and oral presentation. 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:4==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Acknowledgements 
 
First of all a big thanks to my supervisors Carina Lomberg and Lasse Skovgaard
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jensen for their supervision and support throughout the thesis. Your supervision has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
helped me greatly during the project – you have my thanks. 
 
I would also like to thank the startups for their time and provision of valuable insights
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the interviews and sparing during the workshops, letting me get an insight into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their experience with Skylab Ignite. I would especially like to thank to the startup that
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
allowed me to follow their coaching sessions. 
 
Also a big thanks to Thomas Howard and Jens Friholm for lending me their time
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding the ecosystem around Skylab Ignite. 
 
Finally a big thanks to Kristoffer Buch, the program manager of Skylab Ignite, for
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
letting me participate in the workshops as an observer and for provision of surveys,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
startup and program data throughout the project. 
 
4 
==PAGE:5==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Thesis structure 
The thesis and its chapter should be read chronologically. Appendices are attached for 
optional reading. A list of references is provided following chapter 8. 
 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
Introduces the project, the aim and research questions. 
 
Chapter 2. Method 
Provides an overview of the methods used throughout the thesis. 
 
Chapter 3. Literature study 
Gives an insight into the current research on the topic of accelerators according to  
accademia and practitioners. The thesis contribution to the topic is further  
outlined. 
 
Chapter 4. Analysis 
Presents the findings from the data collection and analysis. The chapter ends with an  
overview of key challenges with Skylab Ignite. 
 
Chapter 5. Concept development 
Presents the development of ideas based on the identified challenges and selected 
ideas are presented in an Idea Catalog. 
 
Chapter 6. Discussion 
Discusses research validity and the findings according to existing knowledge,  
gathered from literature study. 
 
Chapter 7. Conclusion 
Concludes on the project and research question based on literature study, analysis and  
development of Idea Catalog. 
 
Chapter 8. Reflection 
Reflects on the project according to the initial project plan and limitations,  
implication and potential for future work are outlined. 
 
 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:6==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Table of Contents 
Abstract
2 
Learning objectives
3 
Acknowledgements
4 
Thesis structure
5 
1. Introduction
8 
2. Method
10 
2.1 Research method and process
10 
2.2.1 Initial Research Question
11 
2.2.2 Literature study
11 
2.2.3 RQ + Case study
11 
2.2.3.1 Qualitative interviews and observations
12 
2.2.3.2 Quantitative data collection
16 
2.2.4 Analysis, key challenges and concept creation
17 
2.2.4.1 Ideation session
17 
3. Literature Study
18 
3.1 Accelerators according to academia
18 
3.1.1 Defining the accelerator
18 
3.1.2 Three streams of accelerator research
19 
3.1.3 Accelerators’ effect on startups
21 
3.1.3.1 Studies that find a positive accelerator effect
21 
3.1.3.2 Positive accelerator effect due to learning mechanism
21 
3.1.3.3 A study that finds a “negative” accelerator effect
22 
3.1.4 Key points on accelerators’ effect on startups
22 
3.1.5 Design elements of accelerators
22 
3.1.6 The Design Elements
23 
3.1.6.1 Cohorts and application process
24 
3.1.6.2 Funding, equity and accelerator business model
24 
3.1.6.3 Mentorship and advisory
24 
3.1.6.4 Location services, entrepreneurship education and graduation event
25 
3.2 Accelerators according to practitioners
25 
3.2.1 Entrepreneurship at the university as a major global trend
25 
3.2.2 Entrepreneurship in Denmark
27 
3.2.3 University accelerators in Denmark
27 
3.3 Summary of literature study
28 
3.4 Thesis contribution to topic
29 
6 
==PAGE:7==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
4. Analysis
31 
4.1 Skylab Ignite - The current situation
31 
4.2 Analysis of Skylab Ignite’s effect on participant startups
35 
4.3 Analysis of Skylab Ignite’s workshops
36 
4.4 Analysis of the services Skylab Ignite could offer
39 
4.4.1 Funding
39 
4.4.2 Co-working space
40 
4.4.3 External mentors
41 
4.4.4 Alumni
42 
4.5 Analysis of the challenges during the Covid-19 crisis
43 
4.6 Analysis of Skylab Ignite's position in the entrepreneurial ecosyste  
 46 
4.7 Summary and key challenges
50 
5. Concept development
54 
5.1 Visioning Ideation
54 
5.1.1 Workshops
55 
5.1.2 Services that could be improved/offered
56 
5.1.3 Digitizing Skylab Ignite
57 
5.1.4 Ecosystem
58 
5.2 Idea Catalog
59 
6. Discussion
68 
7. Conclusion
70 
8. Reflection
72 
References
75 
Appendix
77 
Appendix 1 - Results of finding literature
77 
Appendix 2 - Interviewguides
79 
Appendix 3 - Observation structure
94 
Appendix 4 - Detailed overview of the Skylab Ignite fall batch 2019
96 
Appendix 5 - Startup data (StDa)
97 
Appendix 6 - Supporting quotes of what works well with Skylab Ignite.
100 
Appendix 7 - Identified challenges and opportunities during the covid-19 crisis
101 
Appendix 8 - Quotes about pipelines into Skylab Ignite and after Skylab Ignite.
104 
Appendix 9 - Strength and weaknesses identified based on visioning brainstorms
106 
Appendix 10 - The planned time schedule
115 
Appendix 11 - The actual time schedule
116 
Appendix 12 - Initial project plan
117 
7 
==PAGE:8==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
1. Introduction 
Universities today are beginning to develop entrepreneurship and innovation (I&E) 
capabilities. It is a major global trend, also at the Danish universities where many students 
begin their entrepreneurial journey. Entrepreneurship can be taught and is done so through 
curricular and extracurricular activities supporting an increased entrepreneurial output 
(Graham, 2014; FFE, 2016). One of those activities is accelerators – a rapidly growing 
phenomenon, since the first one, called “Y-Combinator”, was launched in 2005. An 
accelerator is a program that takes in a cohort of startups through a fixed amount of time. 
Accelerators typically provide educational services such as workshops on different 
entrepreneurial topics (e.g. funding, pitching, team composition and customer validation) and 
mentorship and networking (e.g. with investors, entrepreneurs, accelerator alumni, 
accelerator peers, industry professionals and accountants). The accelerator usually ends with 
a public pitching event or Demo Day (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014). 
     Accelerators can be designed in many different ways, and its impact is affected by the 
accelerator sponsor, the participant startups and the program in itself. Research on 
accelerators is still in its infancy and no optimal accelerator design has been found, (Cohen et 
al, 2019). However, research points to areas that may drive impact and venture development 
(Hallen, Bingham and Cohen, 2019; Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee, 2016). 
     The universities have different approaches to how they host accelerator programs – some 
are industry focussed, some are for the early stage startups, and others focus on scaleups. 
DTU and DTU Skylab have since 2017 hosted the seed stage startup accelerator “Skylab 
Ignite” for students and researchers. Skylab Ignite is positioned in a vibrant entrepreneurial 
ecosystem at DTU, contributing to teams applying for the program. The startups accepted 
into the program are usually after the idea and team formation stage. The startup idea is 
formed during a student course, thesis or research project and through 10 weeks the goal is to 
build a customer driven startup with a strong team. The program ends with a pitch 
competition in front of a high profile jury with cash prices of 50.000 DKK (Skylab Ignite, 
2020).  
     Accelerators can be a tool for venture development and naturally questions arise, asking 
how best to undertake this task. The aim of this thesis is therefore to investigate and evaluate 
8 
==PAGE:9==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
how Skylab Ignite, as a university accelerator, can position and improve itself. Hence, this 
thesis seeks to answer the following research questions: 
 
How can a university accelerator be designed to strengthen the program and increase the 
entrepreneurial output of the participants? 
 
How can a university accelerator align and position itself according to the entrepreneurial 
ecosystem at the university? 
 
The research question is kept open and broad in order for the author to be able to investigate 
potential insights as they emerge during the project. To answer the research questions the 
following sub questions are developed. 
 
     How can an accelerator be defined? 
 
  How are participants in Skylab Ignite performing after the program vs. non  
participants who applied but got rejected? 
 
What works well and what can be improved in a university accelerator such as 
Skylab Ignite? 
 
The scope of the project is therefore to conduct a literature study on the topic of accelerators, 
investigate Skylab Ignite by collecting data on participant startups, analyse and evaluate the 
accelerator and design ideas for how the accelerator can be improved. The methods used are 
further elaborated in the next chapter. 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:10==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
2. Method 
The following chapter presents the research approach and strategy the author has used 
throughout the project to answer the research questions and accomplish the results. 
2.1 Research method and process 
The overall research method and process are based on the “Double Diamond” design process 
model (Design Council, 2020). It was chosen because the aim of the project is to evaluate and 
improve the accelerator Skylab Ignite. It consists of 4 stages: “discover”, “define”, “develop” 
and “deliver”. Figure 2.1 illustrates the activities that were conducted during the 4 stages. The 
arrows illustrate that the process is iterative. In the following sections each activity is 
explained in detail. 
 
Figure 2.1: Overall research approach based on The Double Diamond model. During the “discover” 
phase a literature study was conducted before a case study approach is adopted, collecting data on 
Skylab Ignite. Then the “define” phase is initiated, where the collected data is analysed and 
evaluated, and key areas that can be improved are identified. The “develop” phase is initiated with an 
ideation and idea selection before an Idea Catalog is developed in the “deliver” phase. 
10 
==PAGE:11==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
2.2.1 Initial Research Question 
An initial research question, which was kept very broad, was developed in the beginning eg. 
“What are accelerators and how do they accelerate startups”. This was used when conducting 
the literature study on accelerators described in the following section. 
2.2.2 Literature study 
To learn more about accelerators a literature study was conducted. This enabled an 
understanding of the research conducted to date and what needs to be further researched 
guiding the thesis aim. DTU’s search engine “DTU findit” was used together with select 
databases (web of science and scopus) to find literature. Three main types of searches have 
been performed to find relevant literature “search blocks”, “authors and citation check” and 
“reference lists”. An example of an initial search block which was used was ((startup OR start 
AND up OR start-up) AND (accelerator OR seed AND accelerator)). Known organisations 
working with entrepreneurship in Denmark and their websites have been included in the 
literature study as well as an international publication. The search results can be seen in 
appendix 1. After the literature study, a case study, which is described in the following 
section, was initiated. 
2.2.3 RQ + Case study 
The contribution of the thesis to the topic has been decided and research questions, see 
chapter 1, were formulated to guide the case study. A case study investigates a contemporary 
phenomenon in depth and within a real-world context (Yin, 2014, pp 16.). The case study 
method was found appropriate to get an in-depth understanding of a complex social 
phenomenon (Yin, 2014, pp, 4). Case studies are especially relevant in new research areas 
where existing theories are inadequate (Eisenhart, 1989 pp. 548-549). A case study may 
include single or multiple cases (Yin, 2014, pp. 51). The single case study was decided in 
order to get an in-depth understanding of Skylab Ignite within the timeframe of the project. A 
single case study can be holistic or include embedded units (Yin, 2014, pp. 50). Since Skylab 
Ignite is a part of DTU’s entrepreneurial ecosystem, different subunits are included, see table 
2.1. 
11 
==PAGE:12==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Table 2.1: Overview of data collected according to the different subunits in ignite and ecosystem. 
Data 
Unit being analysed 
Total System 
Individuals 
Ignite. 
Website information, surveys, 
program material*, slack**, 
observations. 
Interview with program manager, 
Kristoffer Buch. 
 
Interview with startups 
participating in Skylab Ignite. 
 
Performance data collected on 
participant startups e.g. CVR, 
Funding. 
X-tech Entrepreneurship. 
Website information. 
Interview with course professor, 
Thomas Harward. 
Tech transfer. 
Website information. 
Interview with Jens Friholm who 
runs the pre-startup mentoring 
programme. 
* program material is e.g. workshop slideshows, calendar overview and software guides ** A slack group 
was used to communicate program material and other messages during the fall 2019 and spring 2020 
program. 
 
A mixed method study was found appropriate. This included a quantitative study on how the 
startups in Skylab Ignite have performed and a qualitative study conducting interviews and 
observations. A mixed method study enables the collection of a richer and stronger array of 
evidence (Yin, 2014, pp. 66). A fuller picture of the case being studied can therefore be 
obtained, and the collected data can be triangulated ensuring more validity and depth. The 
data collection approaches are described in the following sections. 
2.2.3.1 Qualitative interviews and observations 
To get a full perspective, startups participating in Skylab Ignite, the program manager and 
stakeholders in DTU’s entrepreneurial ecosystem were interviewed. Both successful and 
closed down startups were interviewed to get different perspectives. The number of 
interviews, interviewee and purpose can be seen in table 2.2. 
 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:13==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Table 2.2:​ ​Overview of stakeholders interviewed, how they are referenced and focus of interview. 
Interview 
No. of 
interviews 
Reference 
Purpose 
Kristoffer Buch 
(Program 
manager). 
1 (+ a brief 
interview). 
PM_20. 
What are the goals of Skylab Ignite? What are 
successes/failures of previous batches? What is Skylab 
Ignite’s position in the ecosystem at DTU? 
Current 
participants. 
1 startup. 
CSt_20. 
Reason for being part of Skylab Ignite (goals)? What value 
do they get out of participation? What is missing / could 
be improved? How are they managing the situation during 
the Covid-19 crisis? 
Previous 
participants. 
3 startups. 
PSt(a-c)_19. 
Reason for being part of Skylab Ignite (goals)? What value 
do they get out of participation? What is missing / could 
be improved? What successes/failures are there after 
participation? 
Thomas Howard 
(Course professor 
of x-tech 
entrepreneurship 
collaborating with 
Skylab Ignite). 
1. 
XM_20. 
How can Skylab Ignite contribute to the course? 
How does the course position itself in the ecosystem? 
Interview with 
Jens Friholm 
(Runs the 
pre-startup 
mentoring 
programme of 
TechTransfer). 
1. 
TT_20. 
What are they doing? Is there possibility of a collaboration 
with Skylab Ignite? How do they position themselves in 
the ecosystem? 
 
Face to face interviews were prefered, but most interviews were conducted over Skype due to 
the Covid-19 lockdown. The interview plan also changed and a focus on interviewing Skylab 
Ignite participants from Fall 2019 was adapted since the cohort was not affected by Covid-19. 
A current participant (Skylab Ignite Spring 2020) was interviewed to investigate challenges 
and opportunities of Skylab Ignite during the Covid-19 lockdown.  
 
The qualitative interview was chosen as it can provide rich empirical data (Robson, 2011, pp. 
281). The interviews were semi-structured to enable the author to follow a set of topics to be 
covered and yet have freedom to explore insights not accounted for in the interview guide. 
The design of the interview followed the advice of Robson (2011, pp. 282) i.e. questions 
should not be leading, they should be simple, not too long and avoid jargon. The questions 
13 
==PAGE:14==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
were further categorized by aim. An example of the interview guide can be found in​ ​table 2.3. 
The full interview guides can be found in appendix 2.  
 
Table 2.3: example of how an interview guide was structured 
Questions 
Aim 
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this 
interview, as you may know I am doing my master 
thesis on accelerators and therefore I am using 
Skylab Ignite as a case study, the following questions 
are therefore about your experience with the 
program and about what you got out of it. Just to let 
you know I will record the interview so that I can 
refer to it at a later date. But let's get started. 
Briefly introducing the project for the interviewee, 
and reason for interview. 
Interview questions e.g. can you tell me a bit about 
your startup?, what is your role in the startups? 
Aim: warm up. 
Interview questions e.g. Why did you apply for the 
Skylab Ignite program?, What did you get out of the 
program? 
Aim: goals of applying. 
 
 
All interviews were transcribed and coded to identify themes used when analysing the data 
and followed the guidelines of Robson (2011, pp. 478-486). The coding table can be found in 
table 2.4. 
 
Table 2.4: coding table used when analysing the transcribed interviews 
Coding Index 
Code  
(highlight w./ color) 
Explanation of code 
Skylab Ignites program aim / goal of participation 
Skylab Ignites / Startups goal with the program. 
Structure 
Structure of the program. 
Opportunities / What works well 
What works well with the program. 
Challenges  
Challenges with the program. 
 ​Alumni 
Skylab Ignite’s alumni inclusion. 
Ecosystem 
Skylab Ignite according to the ecosystem. 
Pipelines 
Pipelines into or after Skylab Ignite. 
Startup Stage Relevans 
Startup stages and relevance of participating in 
14 
==PAGE:15==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Skylab Ignite (who benefits most). 
Services 
Services Skylab Ignite provides / should provide. 
Peer to peer learning / knowledge sharing 
Peer to peer learning or knowledge sharing 
evidence or opportunities. 
Entrepreneurial impacts 
Entrepreneurial impact the accelerator has on 
participants’ entrepreneurial output (Personal 
development, Startup development (e.g. become 
customer driven, better team)). 
Mentoring 
Mentoring or need of mentors in the program. 
Covid-19 
Covid-19 effect on Skylab Ignite and participating 
startups. 
Collaboration 
Collaboration with other initiatives. 
Interviewers role 
Role of interviewer. 
 
 
Often there are discrepancies between what people say and what people do (Robson, 2011, pp 
316). This was taken into account by observing the workshops and coaching sessions of 
Skylab Ignite, also giving a fuller picture of the program. Observation structures were created 
both for the coaching sessions and for the workshops, see appendix 3. A list of the 
observations made can be seen in table 2.5. Note that due to the Covid-19 lockdown, 
workshops were cancelled and the program continued more digitally.  Before the beginning 
of the master thesis, the author took part in the Skylab Ignite Fall 2019 workshops as an 
observer, where observation notes were collected. 
 
Table 2.5: List of observations made with how they are referenced. 
Workshops / coaching sessions observed 
Reference 
Workshops: Customer Validation #2, Team & 
Advisors and Funding Strategy (Fall batch 2019). 
FaW_19. 
Skylab Ignite Finals 2019. 
Finals_19. 
Workshops: Kickoff + Team and Customer 
Validation #1 (spring batch 2020). 
SpW_20. 
Zoom workshops: Covid-19 update, Investors Pitch 
Deck, Pitch Practice (Spring batch 2020). 
ZoomSpW_20. 
3 coaching session with a startup. 
CoachSp_20. 
15 
==PAGE:16==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
2.2.3.2 Quantitative data collection 
Quantitative data is gathered during the project in the form of “surveys” and “startup data”, 
see​ ​table 2.6. 
 
Table 2.6: List of data collected and how it is referenced. 
Startup data / survey 
Reference 
Surveys from the Skylab Ignite fall program. 
SurveyFa. 
Startup Data. 
StDa. 
 
The survey data has been provided by the program manager of Skylab Ignite. It is used to 
provide statistics and to support the findings from the qualitative data collection 
(triangulation) in the analysis. 
 
Startup data has been collected from Skylab Ignite participants and non-participants (those 
who were rejected) in the years 2019-2020. The purpose of collecting the data was to 
determine accelerator effect by comparing participants vs. non-participants on early stage 
startup success criterias, see table 2.7. The criterias were decided based on the data available 
using desk top research. The data has been collected by looking up startup names online. 
 
Table 2.7: overview of early stage success criteria and how they are obtained. 
Early startup success 
criteria 
Purpose and how it’s obtained 
CVR registered. 
Has the startup been officially registered. Found on virk.dk. 
No. of employees. 
To determine startup growth. Found on virk.dk. 
Website. 
To see if the startup has started branding the company. Found via 
google.dk. 
Media active. 
To determine if the startup is active on SoMe. Found via facebook.com and 
linkedin.com. If no post has been made after 4 months of participation in 
Skylab Ignite, the startup is evaluated as being “not active”. 
16 
==PAGE:17==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Funding e.g. Inno Founder 
graduate program, Skylab 
Funding. 
To see whether the startup has secured finances i.e. soft funding. Found via 
google.dk or facebook.com. 
 
Overall 30 participants and 29 non-participants were looked up. About 5 minutes was used 
per startup. If the startup or data could not be found an “-” was entered. The startup names 
have been anonymised after data collection. 
 
After the quantitative and qualitative data collection, the data was analysed as described in 
the following section. 
2.2.4 Analysis, key challenges and concept creation 
Based on the data collection, an analysis and evaluation are performed with the goal to come 
up with key challenges of Skylab Ignite. These key challenges will be used in an ideation 
session following a selection of ideas which are then finalised in an Idea Catalog. 
2.2.4.1 Ideation session 
The ideation session will take the key challenges as input and “visions” for how to improve 
the accelerator will be developed. Strengths and weaknesses based on the developed visions 
will be identified to guide the selection of visions. The advantage of the method is that more 
visions can be synthesised into one vision or idea. The visioning method is adapted from the 
workplace design methods described by Beyer and Holtzblatt (1998, pp. 275-283). 
 
This concludes the method approach, which also serves as a guide for how this master thesis 
has been conducted. The following chapter begins the literature study. 
 
 
17 
==PAGE:18==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
3. Literature Study 
Since accelerators are a new phenomenon, this literature study will be two-faced – both 
looking at the academic perspective and practitioner’s perspective. The academic perspective 
goes into depth with the most important research findings in the literature and the 
practitioner’s perspective is a broader study on accelerators and entrepreneurship according to 
its practitioners. 
3.1 Accelerators according to academia  
Accelerators have been a rapidly growing phenomenon since the first “Y-combinator” began 
in 2005 (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014, pp. 2). Though they are rapidly increasing, research on 
accelerators is still emerging (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1781), and no research suggests an 
overall positive effect on the average accelerator (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1796). This means 
that there is no generic and optimal way to design an accelerator improving startup 
performance. In the following section a definition of the accelerator will be defined, 
following an overview of the research on accelerators’ output on startups, concluding with 
the design elements of the accelerator. 
3.1.1 Defining the accelerator 
Accelerators help cohorts with the new venture process in a limited time period e.g. building 
their initial product, identifying customer segments and secure resources (Cohen and 
Hochberg, 2014, pp 4). The accelerator brings together services and functions that were 
previously costly for the entrepreneur to find and obtain individually (Hochberg, 2016, pp. 
33). They usually provide seed capital and/or a working space and may take equity from the 
startups participating. They typically host educational workshops and mentor and networking 
sessions. The latter includes peers/mentors from the community e.g investors, entrepreneurs 
who are successful, alumni from the accelerator, venture capitalist, angel investors, attorneys, 
accountants and corporate executives (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014, pp. 4; Cohen et al, 2019, 
pp 1782). The accelerator program may end with a Demo Day or public pitch event where 
startups get a chance to pitch in front of investors (Cohen and Hochberg 2014, pp. 4). Cohen 
18 
==PAGE:19==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
et al (2019) thus defines an accelerator as: 
 
“A fixed-term, cohort-based program for startups, including mentorship and/or educational 
components, that culminates in a graduation event.”  pp 1782 
 
Accelerators do not only have a direct effect on the participating startups but can also foster 
innovation in communities and build new ecosystems (Wright and Drori, 2018, pp. 1). This 
means that they have an effect on the local ecosystems they are established in and in society. 
Accelerators then work as an intervention to encourage entrepreneurship and increase startup 
activity in a new region (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1785). 
3.1.2 Three streams of accelerator research 
According to Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee (2016, pp. 1570), research on accelerators can 
be classified into 3 streams – the first stream focuses on conceptual descriptions of the 
accelerator, which the author understands as to include defining the accelerator and 
differentiating it from other interventions (e.g. incubators, angel investors). The second 
stream focuses on the accelerator’s effect on regional development. The third and last stream 
focuses on the accelerator’s effect on new ventures and their founders. Research regarding 
the third stream is investigated in section 3.1.3. 
19 
==PAGE:20==
Table 3.1: Overview of studies and results on how accelerators impact startups.
20
==PAGE:21==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
3.1.3 Accelerators’ effect on startups 
The study of accelerators is still emerging and researchers have tried to find 
correlations/causality between accelerator participation and the effect it has on the 
participating startups after the accelerator ends. Table 3.1 gives an overview of some of the 
research in this area or third stream. As can be seen, most of the research uses quantitative 
methods by comparing startups participating in select accelerators with non-participants. The 
outcome varies, but none of the studies find an overall accelerator effect on the participating 
startups.  
3.1.3.1 Studies that find a positive accelerator effect 
Hallen, Bingham and Cohen (2014) find that some but not all accelerators help startups reach 
key milestones. Winston Smith, Hanigan, and Gasiorowski (2013) find that startups, that are 
part of leading accelerators, raise funding sooner and are more likely to be acquired or fail 
sooner than non-participants. However, they also find that the founders come from leading 
universities. This indicates that the founders’ background may also affect accelerator impact 
which is supported by Cohen et al (2019, pp. 1783), who suggest that both accelerator and 
founders may drive impact which is hard to untangle. 
3.1.3.2 Positive accelerator effect due to learning mechanism 
Hallen, Bingham and Cohen (2019, pp. 19) also find that some but not all accelerators benefit 
participating ventures on key outcomes, and in a qualitative study they try to explain these 
outcomes by looking into the learning mechanism of participating in an accelerator (Hallen, 
Bingham and Cohen, 2019, pp. 12). They call this learning mechanism BIP (Broad, intensive, 
paced) consultation, which occurs when the startups consult with peers outside the startups 
during an accelerator program. Though accelerator participation may slow down trial and 
error learning, participation on the other hand may help accelerate overall venture 
development e.g. by helping the startup know what opportunities to explore or not. They also 
find that more experienced founders still benefit from this venture learning (Hallen, Bingham 
and Cohen, 2019, pp. 32-36). Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee (2016) also find that startups’ 
part of an entrepreneurship schooling program, combined with the basic services of StartUp 
21 
==PAGE:22==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Chile, has an impact on the venture’s performance. This entrepreneurship school has 
similarities with the BIP consulting, which may be why the study finds an acceleration effect. 
3.1.3.3 A study that finds a “negative” accelerator effect 
Compared to the previous mentioned studies that find a positive accelerator effect, Yu (2019) 
finds that accelerator startups are more likely to shut down and at a faster rate. However, it 
can be discussed whether this is a negative effect, since startups that choose to shut down 
faster can then focus on new opportunities instead continuing with an eventually “dying” 
startup. 
3.1.4 Key points on accelerators’ effect on startups 
The studies show that no overall positive effect is found from accelerator participation. Both 
accelerator and participating founders may drive accelerator impact and some leading 
accelerators may help accelerate startups on certain key outcomes but accelerator 
participation may also lead to startups shutting down faster. However, learning due to 
accelerator participation through consulting with peers outside the startup company may help 
with the venture development.  
 
It is important to mention that accelerators can differ from each other in their design, and 
most studies, including those mentioned above, have treated accelerators more or less as 
homogenous based on select parameters (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1781). They also look at 
accelerator effect more broadly and do not find specific initiatives that add value. In the 
following section the different design elements of an accelerator are identified. 
3.1.5 Design elements of accelerators 
There are many different design elements of an accelerator. Previous literature has tried to 
distinguish accelerators from incubators and angel investors (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014), 
noting down the most common features of an accelerator – that it is a fixed term and cohort 
based program (Cohen and Hochberg, 2014, pp. 10). Pauwels et al (2016) has investigated 
the 13 best performing accelerators in Europe (London, Paris and Berlin) and identified 5 
design elements. They further propose different types of design themes which determine how 
the accelerator is orchestrated e.g. is the focus of the accelerator to identify investment 
22 
==PAGE:23==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
opportunities for investors, or building economic growth in a region by creating jobs 
(Pauwels et al, 2016, pp. 16-22). This also suggests that different sponsors of the accelerator 
have influence on the design choices of the accelerator. Cohen et al (2019, pp. 1782) share 
this viewpoint – that accelerator founders and sponsors also drive the selection of startups and 
design elements of accelerators. 
3.1.6 The Design Elements 
Table 3.2​ ​gives an overview of select design elements identified from Pauwels et al (2016) 
and Cohen et al (2019). A description of the design elements will be given in the following. 
 
Table 3.2: Overview of design elements and options 
Design element 
Different options 
Accelerator business model / 
funding structure / 
sponsorship. 
For profit accelerator or funded accelerator e.g. investor, corporate, 
government, academia sponsored. 
Application process. 
Open call, use of externals for screening, team preferences vs. single 
founders. 
Cohort size. 
The number of startups accepted per cohort. 
Cohort composition. 
Generic, Vertical (e.g. Industry/sector). 
Development stage. 
The development stage of the participating startups. 
Program duration. 
The duration of the accelerator program. 
Funding provided. 
The amount of funding provided for each startup. 
Equity taken. 
The amount of equity taken (e.g. in exchange for funding provided or 
accelerator participation). 
Mentorship. 
Who are the mentors, when do they meet and frequency of meetings? 
Managing directors. 
Background of accelerator founders, advisory given to startups. 
Entrepreneurship Education. 
Educational program (workshops) or a la carte offerings. 
Graduation event. 
Demo Day with investors or other type of event. 
Location services. 
Office space allocated or not. 
Program location. 
Location of accelerator. 
 
23 
==PAGE:24==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
3.1.6.1 Cohorts and application process 
Cohort size is important as it determines the required resources needed to service each startup 
in the cohort. If the cohort size is too small it might make it less attractive for outside peers 
(mentors, business professionals, investors) to collaborate with the accelerator. If the size of 
the cohort is to large, each startup will receive less attention e.g. from the accelerator 
managers. The composition and development stage are also important to consider e.g. is the 
accelerator generic accepting startups from multiple industries or focused on a certain 
industry and what is the development stage of the accepted startups. The application process 
may also vary, but typically involves an open call at first where startups apply, following 
external screening of the startups. The startups may also be chosen by the accelerator 
managers. Usually teams are preferred over single founders. (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1789; 
Pauwels et al, 2016, pp. 18-19). 
 
3.1.6.2 Funding, equity and accelerator business model 
Some accelerators might provide funding to each startup. Funding has the advantage that it 
allows for the participating startups to experiment and develop during the program. Some 
take equity for this funding. Taking equity also influences the startups participating in the 
cohort and the business model of the accelerator e.g. does the accelerator need to provide 
favourable returns to its sponsors or continue seeking funding (from corporations / 
governments). Few accelerators are able to provide returns, but it may take several years 
before startups have noticeable exits. (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1789-1791; Pauwels et al, 2016, 
pp. 19). 
 
3.1.6.3 Mentorship and advisory 
Mentorship can come from both internal or external sources. Internal may be managing 
directors of the accelerator, partners or experts who are closely affiliated with the program. 
External mentors may be investors, program alumni, entrepreneurs, lawyers and experts. 
Consideration about the frequency of mentor meetings is also important (Cohen et al, 2019, 
pp. 1791). 
24 
==PAGE:25==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
3.1.6.4 Location services, entrepreneurship education and graduation event 
An accelerator may provide office space for the cohort, usually in the form of a coworking / 
open office space. Providing an open-office space creates an environment for the participants 
to communicate with and learn from each other. However, co-dependencies may arise 
between startups and the accelerator. Most accelerators also have an educational aspect and 
offer a curriculum related to entrepreneurship. They can either be general or tailored. The 
goal is to help the startup founders in the technical aspects of running a high-growth business. 
Topics may be finance, marketing or management, but differs greatly from accelerator to 
accelerator. Typically, the accelerator has a graduation event in the form of a Demo Day, 
connecting startups with possible investors (or at least introducing investors for the startups). 
(Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1791-1792 ; Pauwels et al, 2016, pp. 17). 
 
It is evident that an accelerator can be designed along many different parameters which all 
contribute to how an accelerator affects the participating startups. This concludes the 
academic perspective of the literature study. The following presents accelerators according to 
its practitioners. 
3.2 Accelerators according to practitioners 
Governments, universities, corporations and organisations have begun to develop 
entrepreneurship and innovation (I&E) initiatives which include the development of 
accelerators and it is a growing trend. This section explores entrepreneurship and accelerators 
according to its practitioners i.e. entrepreneurship in Denmark and at the universities. 
3.2.1 Entrepreneurship at the university as a major global trend 
According to a study by Graham (2014) there is a major global trend to develop 
entrepreneurial capabilities at the universities. Technology innovation is looked at as a driver 
for national economic growth by governments and universities are seen as incubators for this 
national capacity. Universities such as MIT, Stanford University and University of 
Cambridge are recognized as a source of inspiration for universities over the world in 
creating the most successful technology innovation ecosystems (Graham, 2014, pp. 1-37).  
25 
==PAGE:26==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Figure 3.1: Overview made by Venture Cup of curricular and extracurricular activities at the 
universities. 
26 
==PAGE:27==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
3.2.2 Entrepreneurship in Denmark 
According to The Danish Foundation for Entrepreneurship FFE, the national knowledge 
center and focal point for the development of entrepreneurship education including university 
level, entrepreneurial competencies can be taught (FFE, 2016, pp. 8). They also identify that 
there has been an increase in entrepreneurship education at the Danish universities with a 
small setback from 2018/2019 (FFE, 2019, pp. 9). This is based on ECTS giving I&E 
initiatives, but the universities also provide I&E extracurricular activities, including 
incubators and accelerators. (FFE, 2016, pp. 13). An overview of both curricular and 
extracurricular I&E initiatives has been made by Venture Cup in cooperation with FFE, see 
figure 3.1. As can be seen, there are many initiatives at each university. Some are student 
driven e.g. MBA or Stardust, some are curricular e.g. Hardtech Entrepreneurship (now 
known as X-Tech Entrepreneurship), and some are extracurricular e.g. Skylab Ignite. 
3.2.3 University accelerators in Denmark 
Most universities have created accelerator programs or accelerator-like programs, table 3.3 
gives an overview of some of these programmes and elements.  
 
Table 3.3: Overview of university and program elements 
University 
Accelerator 
/ program 
Duration 
(how often) 
Cohort 
(teams) 
Stage 
(focus) 
Education form 
Office 
space 
DTU. 
Skylab 
Ignite. 
10 weeks 
(twice a 
year). 
Yes (10 
teams). 
Early stage 
(broad). 
Workshops, business 
coaches. 
No. 
CBS. 
Go-Grow. 
7 months 
(once a 
year). 
Yes (not 
fixed). 
Ready to 
scale 
(broad). 
Workshops, business 
coaches, 
mentors/experts, 
travel. 
Yes. 
KU 
(DTU). 
Health 
Innovators. 
13 weeks 
(twice a 
year). 
Yes (8 teams). 
Early stage 
(Health). 
Workshops, 
mentors/experts. 
- 
AAU. 
AAU 
Startup 
Program. 
-
 
Yes. 
Early stage 
(broad). 
Workshops, business 
coaches. 
Yes. 
AU. 
Startup 
Essentials. 
3 
workshops. 
No. 
Early stage 
(broad). 
Workshops. 
(No). 
27 
==PAGE:28==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
A common goal is that the universities wish to help startups establish themselves and/or 
grow. However, each have their own offers and way of doing this, and therefore the list also 
encompasses accelerator-like programmes. What the programmes have in common is that 
they provide workshops/entrepreneurial education and that they have a fixed duration. The 
stages of the startups may be different, e.g. some may only need an idea and others need to be 
ready to enter the market to participate, and not all have a graduation event, or take in 
cohorts. One is focused on health startups, but the others take in a broad selection. 
 
It is evident that I&E activities are a growing trend at the universities around the world, 
including the Danish universities where entrepreneurial initiatives have increased and nearly 
all have some sort of accelerator-like program. This concludes the practitioner's perspective 
of the literature study. The following section presents a summary of the whole literature 
study. 
3.3 Summary of literature study 
Accelerators are a rapidly increasing phenomenon since the first accelerator began in 2005. 
Accelerator research is still emergent and can be divided into three streams i.e. defining the 
accelerators, accelerators’ effect on regional development, and accelerators’ effect on new 
ventures and its founders. Accelerators are typically a fixed-term, cohort-based program 
including mentorship and educational aspects, which ends with a graduation event. Most 
research so far has used quantitative methods comparing accelerator participants with 
non-participants on select parameters (e.g. time to raise funding,  No. of employees and 
website traffic) but the outcome varies i.e. some of the studies find that some but not all 
accelerators benefit startups on key outcomes, some studies find that these accelerated 
outcomes may be due to learning mechanisms e.g. by startup founders consulting with peers 
outside the startup and one study finds that accelerator startups are more likely to shut down 
faster. However no overall generic accelerator effect on the participating startups is found in 
these studies. Most studies have also looked at accelerators as homogenous even though 
accelerators may differ in many ways in their design, and the identified effects are more 
broad, meaning no specific initiatives which add value are investigated.  
 
28 
==PAGE:29==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Different design elements of an accelerator have been identified and there are multiple 
variables to consider in which an accelerator may be designed. The application process can be 
an open call following an external screening process or accelerator managers deciding which 
startups to accept. The cohort can vary in size, composition and the startup’s development 
stage. An accelerator can provide office/co-working space for the cohort and mentors, either 
internal, external or both. An accelerator can provide entrepreneurship education either 
tailored or general and have a graduation event at the end of participation. An accelerator can 
provide funding for the startups and decide on whether to take equity in exchange for 
participation. An accelerator’s business model can be to provide favourable returns to its 
sponsors (hence taking equity) or otherwise to seek funding continually from its sponsors. 
 
It has been a global trend to develop entrepreneurial capabilities at the universities in the 
world and the universities are seen as incubators for technology innovation which is a driver 
for national economic growth. At the Danish universities there has been an increase (with a 
minor setback 2018/2019) in entrepreneurship education. Entrepreneurial competencies can 
be taught and at the universities both curricular and extracurricular I&E initiatives exist, e.g. 
incubators and accelerators. An overview by Venture Cup identifies some of these curricular 
and extracurricular I&E initiatives, some student driven, some curricular and some 
extracurricular. Most Danish universities have also created accelerator programs with the 
common goal to help startups establish themselves and/or grow. They all provide 
workshops/entrepreneurial education and have a fixed duration. However, the stages may be 
different e.g. some startup teams just need an idea, and other startup teams need to be ready 
to enter the market in order to participate. One of those accelerators is Skylab Ignite with the 
goal to build a strong team and customer driven startup in 10 weeks. 
 
This concludes the summary of the literature study. In the following section, the contribution 
of the thesis to the topic will be described. 
3.4 Thesis contribution to topic 
Based on the literature study it is evident that accelerator programs are a growing trend. 
However, research on the topic is still emerging. No overall accelerator effect on the 
29 
==PAGE:30==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
participating startups has been found and accelerators have more or less been treated 
homogeneously even though accelerators can be designed along many different parameters. 
Therefore, further research is needed on the topic to determine if specific program elements 
contribute to an accelerator effect on the participating startups. Furthermore, accelerators 
have also emerged at the universities in Denmark, and to the knowledge of this study, there 
has been little to no research investigating a university-based accelerator. There is a need to 
conduct further research on university accelerators, and how they contribute to the 
development and growth of a startup i.e. what works and what can be improved. 
 
It is henceforth the goal to try and collect more data contributing to the research of 
accelerators, specifically university accelerators, using a case study approach, see section 
2.2.3. Furthermore, it is the goal to uncover what works and what can be improved with a 
university accelerator in order to further strengthen and develop the program. In the following 
chapter the analysis of Skylab Ignite is presented. 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:31==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
4. Analysis 
The following chapter presents the findings from the data collection. The findings are 
analysed, evaluated and key challenges are identified. 
4.1 Skylab Ignite - The current situation 
As mentioned in earlier sections, Skylab Ignite is part of the global trend developing 
entrepreneurial capabilities (Graham, 2014) and entrepreneurship can be taught (FFE, 2016, 
pp. 8). Skylab Ignite is a seed stage startup accelerator for students and researchers. Using the 
definition of Cohen et al (2019), Skylab Ignite is a fixed-term​ (10 weeks)​, cohort-based ​(10 
startups)​ program for startups, including mentorship ​(1:1 coaching) ​and/or educational 
components ​(workshops, PeaQs)​, that culminates in a graduation event ​(Ignite Finals)​. 
 
Figure 4.1: The Skylab Ignite Fall 2019 cohort. 
 
Skylab Ignite is a pipeline to achieve Skylab’s purpose of supporting student 
entrepreneurship and young researchers. The overall aim is to help DTU startups become a 
customer driven and strong team in 10 weeks: “if you want to build a startup business, you 
need to talk to customers and you need to have a strong team” (PM_20). The interviewed 
31 
==PAGE:32==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
participants are aligned with this aim (PSt(a-c), CSt_20). Sponsors (DTU/Skylab) may drive 
design elements of an accelerator (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1782) and when it comes to Skylab 
Ignite the focus is on learning. On one side the goal is learning and becoming a better 
engineer through entrepreneurship and on the other side the goal is to create successful 
startups which is a difficult mission “they’re young, they are inexperienced, they have zero or 
few startup attempts behind them, all factors that diminish chances of startup success” 
(PM_20). Therefore “getting real entrepreneurial experience is the key” (PM_20) both 
enabling learning and teams becoming more successful. That is what Skylab Ignite tries to 
do. 
 
Table 4.1: Skylab Ignite participants Fall 2019 
Startup 
Team 
members 
Oneliner  
Stage / aim of participation 
PSt(a). 
2. 
Software tool reducing the amount 
of experiments needed in the 
biotech/chemistry industry. 
Proof of concept / Get introduced to 
the startup world, decided on the 
startup itself / develop business plan. 
PSt(b). 
2. 
Product solving the problem with 
jet lag / underperforming due to the 
lack of light in your daily life. 
Developed MVP / develop business 
plan, discover new markets. 
PSt(c). 
(7). 
Software tool monitoring seaweed 
farms using satellite data. 
Proof of concept / develop business 
plan, getting customers, getting 
business skills. 
Startup #4. 
4. 
Coffee brewing machine that's 
aesthetically beautiful and with 
variables to brew prefered coffee. 
Developing MVP / - 
Startup #5. 
6. 
A one material tent that can be 
recycled without downgrading. 
Developing MVP / - 
Startup #6. 
2. 
Building a stove that can store solar 
energy for cooking. 
Proof of concept / - 
Startup #7. 
2. 
A childrens toy bringing gaming 
into the physical world. 
Developing MVP / build a strong 
team and sustainable business, find 
funding. 
Startup #8. 
2. 
Solving recyclability issues with 
snowboards. 
Developed MVP / - 
 
An overview of participants from Skylab Ignite fall 2019, what they do, stage and aim of 
participation can be seen in table 4.1 (figure 4.1 shows the teams at the finals). Participant 
32 
==PAGE:33==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
stages differ between teams having a proof of concept to developed MVP. Some are trying to 
explore if they want to continue with the startup, some need to test different markets and 
some are looking for business skills and to develop their business plan. Evidently there are 
different reasons why the participant startups apply for Skylab Ignite, but the overall aim 
seems to match the expectations. 
 
Skylab Ignite runs twice a year and can roughly be sorted into 4 parts the most important 
being the workshops and 1:1 coaching. Furthermore, there is a graduation event and two 
communication platforms are used throughout the program, see figure 4.2.  
 
Figure 4.2: Overview of Skylab Ignite and its elements in the fall of 2019 (FaW_19). Appendix 4 
illustrates a more detailed overview of the presented elements. 
 
Accelerators are not homogeneous in their design (Cohen et al, 2019). Table 4.2 presents all 
the design elements of Skylab Ignite based on the elements identified in the literature study, 
see section 3.1.6. The design element “platform” was added, which is the platform used for 
communicating with the teams. 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:34==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Table 4.2: The design of Skylab Ignite is presented based on the identified design elements from the 
literature study. 
Design element 
Different options 
Accelerator business model / 
funding structure / 
sponsorship. 
Skylab Ignite is funded by DTU (academia), however cash prices at Ignite 
Finals are funded through sponsoring.  
Application process. 
First there is an open application, then the startup coaches from Skylab 
score the startup applications (some teams they meet with) and the scores 
guide the selection of the startup teams. 
Cohort size. 
Each cohort is about 10 startups. 
Cohort composition. 
Composition of startups is very different from each other in terms of 
technology and level of experience also varies but to a less degree. 
Development stage. 
Startups are all in the early stage, usually after idea and team formation. 
Teams who have worked a year on their idea or who come from a DTU 
course (already working on their idea for about 13 weeks or more) are also 
accepted. 
Program duration. 
About 10 weeks depending on the semester structure and holidays. 
Funding provided. 
No funding is provided. However, prices are awarded at the Ignite Finals. 
Equity taken. 
No equity is taken. 
Mentorship. 
The program has internal mentors who are the Skylab business coaches. 
The 1:1 coaching is meetings between the startup and a Skylab business 
coach where “they can deep dive into each case” usually focussing on 
“whether or not there is a real problem and a real customer” but also to 
make sure that the startup is on track according to the workshops. 
Managing directors. 
There is one program manager who is responsible for engaging the other 
Skylab employees in the program e.g. Skylab coaches. The program 
manager has an entrepreneurial background (studying design and 
innovation (product development) and has been in multiple startups). 
Entrepreneurship Education. 
Educational program is offered through general workshops with different 
entrepreneurial topics. The focus is to bundle information and convey it to 
all the participants but also to get the startups in the same room where they 
can inspire each other and be inspired by the guest speakers (usually 
startups who were successful or failed) and work on exercises benefitting 
their startup. 
Graduation event. 
A big final event (Ignite Finals), open for the public, with 3-minute pitches 
from each team, who can win prize money decided by a panel of judges, is 
hosted. 
Location services. 
Office space is not allocated. 
Program location. 
The accelerator is located in Skylab at DTU. 
Platform. 
The platform used to communicate with and upload material to the 
participant startups are Slack. Furthermore, the participant startups use a 
gamification software called PeaQs for uploading material on their startup 
34 
==PAGE:35==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
and progress during the Skylab Ignite program. The startups can then peer 
review each other and “invest” in each other’s startups and a winner is 
found at the end. 
This concludes the overall presentation of Skylab Ignite and its elements. In the following 
section the analysis of Skylab Ignite’s effect on the participant startups is presented. 
4.2 Analysis of Skylab Ignite’s effect on participant startups 
Even though no overall acceleration effect has been found on the average accelerator (Cohen 
et al, 2019, pp. 1796) research points to a learning mechanism that may be replicable 
accelerating venture development. The learning mechanism is due to startups consulting with 
peers outside the startup (Hallen, Bingham and Cohen, 2019, pp. 32-36) and entrepreneurship 
schooling (Gonzalez-Uribe and Leatherbee, 2016). Skylab Ignite has these elements 
incorporated into the program (coaching, peer-to-peer learning, mentors on a need basis and 
workshops). To try and capture this acceleration effect, startup data has been collected on 
Skylab Ignite participants from 2019 and 2020, as described in the method section, see 
section 2.2.3.2. The collected data, see appendix 5, are summarized in table 4.3.  
 
Table 4.3: Participant and non-participant startup data (StDa). Sp/Fa indicates Spring or Fall. 
 
Participant and non-participant startups year 2019 Sp, Fa and 2020 Sp 
Metric 
Par.  
2019 Sp 
Non par. 
2019 Sp 
Par.  
2019 Fa 
Non par. 
2019 Fa 
Par.  
2020 Sp 
Non par. 
2020 Sp 
Total No. of startups 
9 
6 
10 
11 
11 
12 
No. of CVR registered 
startups 
3 
0 
4 
1 
4 
3 
No. of startups with 
website  
2 
0 
3 
2 
3 
2 
No of startups who are 
active on medias 
3 
0 
3 
2 
2 
1 
No. of Startups who 
received funding 
2 
0 
4 
1 
2 
0 
 
The startups are examined using early stage metrics e.g. website (yes/no) as opposed to 
website traffic and CVR registered. The results indicate acceleration of venture development 
35 
==PAGE:36==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
in line with the aim of Skylab Ignite i.e. has the company been established and has the 
company begun communication with customers or promoting the startup. 
In spring 2019 3-5 out of 9 participants and 0 non-participants are successful. In fall 2019 5-6 
out of 10 participants and 1-2 out of 9 non-participants are successful. These results indicate 
an acceleration effect of Skylab Ignite participants vs non-participants. As accelerator 
startups are more likely to shut down and faster (Yu, 2019) this may explain why not more 
participants score on the selected metrics. From the interviews it was also found that 2 
startups decided to shut down (PSt(b-c)_19). Looking at the current cohort (Spring 2020) 
participants perform slightly better than non-participants. Skylab Funding which is used as a 
recruiting channels may explain this, as non-participants may already know how to be 
customer driven. From the interviews it was also found that some participants already had 
learned/done many of the things Skylab Ignite tries to teach (PSt(c)_19, SurveyFa). 
 
The increase in performance can be explained due to the before mentioned learning 
mechanism i.e. the entrepreneurial impact the accelerator has on the participants’ 
entrepreneurial output. From the interviews (PSt(a-c)_19) it was found that the teams are able 
to learn from each other, guest speakers and workshops. Entrepreneurial competencies gained 
were learning how to pitch, networking and communicating to peers, getting out testing 
assumptions, focussing on customers vs. product, obtaining business skills and improving 
team. All contributing to Skylab Ignite’s aim and the accelerator’s learning mechanism. Also 
personal elements are touched upon if the participants see themselves as an entrepreneur and 
if they are passionate about their startup or some day wanting to create a startup (PSt(a-c)).  
 
This concludes the analysis of the accelerator effect on the participant startups. To improve 
on this effect the rest of the chapters in the analysis focus on identifying challenges with 
Skylab Ignite. In the following section challenges are identified based on an evaluation of 
Skylab Ignite’s workshops. 
4.3 Analysis of Skylab Ignite’s workshops 
Part of the Ignite Program is also to do surveys. They do simple but frequent surveys after 
each program and an overall survey at the end (PM_20). The surveys ask two questions on a 
36 
==PAGE:37==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
scale from 1-10. The first is about relevance of each workshop topic, i.e. is it something the 
participant startups need and the second is about the quality of each workshop topic  i.e. how 
well was the workshop designed and executed. The overall survey at the end asks the same 
questions but about relevance/quality of Skylab Ignite.  
 
 
Figure 4.3: Result of surveys from Skylab Ignite Fall 2019 program (SurveyFa). (a) Average 
relevance of Skylab Ignite and workshops from a scale of 1 to 10. (b) Average quality of Skylab Ignite 
and workshops from a scale of 1 to 10. 
 
The results are overall positive and both the workshops and Skylab Ignite score above 
average, see figure 4.3 (a-b), indicating that participant startups to a high degree need the 
information provided by Skylab Ignite and that the execution is done well. The numbers 
however also suggest that there is room for improvements. Follow up questions were asked in 
the survey (what was great, what was not so great and what was missing) which indicates 
what could be improved, see table 4.4. 
 
Table 4.4: Challenges identified from the surveys (SurveryFa) supported by the conducted interviews 
and observations. 
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Information that was given late resulting in less preparation time 
Participants in the survey reported that ​information was given too late ​and that they needed​ better time for 
preparations (SurveyFa)​. This is supported in the interview: “​sometimes, we would receive an email in the 
morning or the evening before (...) and I was like (...) we cannot do that because we should probably arrange 
a meeting with a customer (first ed.)​” (PSt(c)_19). The program manager confirms that they get negative 
feedback ​“if they think the flow of the program is not good, or the communication has been off”​ ​(PM_20). 
Cancellations by presenter reducing quality of workshop 
37 
==PAGE:38==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
An unforeseen event occurred where a presenter cancelled last minute and a participant in the survey reported 
that ​some good infos ​were provided​ but most of them were told before​. This is supported in the interviews 
that ​“maybe the workshop should just have been cancelled or also weighted in some other way, because the 
last minute preparing (...) was not that good, it was very repeating.” PSt(b)_19 
Too much listening at the workshops resulting in less time to work in the startup 
Participants in the survey reported that there was ​too much of listening to the other startups ​ and there should 
be ​less presentations and more work with the theory, in the internal teams (surveyFa). ​This is supported in 
the interviews that there sometimes was an overload of information e.g. 3 speakers in a short time and “​you 
wanted to have some time to work on the things (exercises ed.) that were being announced at the event” 
(PSt(c)_19)​. The program manager defends that he wants the teams to start on the exercises at the workshops 
but they need to continue on it afterwards (PM_20) but it’s different from team to team how much they work 
on the startups outside the workshops (PSt(c)_19). One startup further comments that the workshop topics is 
very broad and doesn’t go into much depth or provide many tools (PSt(a)_19). 
More time for peer-to-peer learning 
Participants in the survey request ​more group assignments ​where they can ​use each other’s resources 
creating more ​community​ (SurveyFa). The program manager agrees that ​“we have to scale up the 
presentation of outcomes from each team and scale up on how much they talk to each other” (PM_20)​. From 
observing the workshops it was also noted that there’s a lot of one way communication at the workshops and 
teams usually sit at their own table instead of together (FaW_19, SpW_20). It was further observed when the 
teams had group work that not all teams got to speak or give feedback (SpW_20). From the interviews it was 
also mentioned that you don’t get to work in depth with other startups as you switch a lot during the group 
work making it hard to remember what the startups were about and what their business models were 
(CSt_20). 
PeaQs is not working optimally 
One important finding from the interviews was that participants didn’t put an effort into using the online tool 
PeaQs (PSt(a)_19, CSt_20). One participant commented that: ​“people are not prioritizing it (...) the quality 
of what they are writing (...) is not that good”​ and right now ​“people are not giving each other feedback” 
(CSt_20). From the observations it was also found that PeaQs only were connected to the pitch and pitch 
deck the participants have to develop (CoachSp_20), and PeaQs could be included more with the workshop 
topics (PSt(a)_19) especially if the workshops are extended so there is time for going into depth with the 
topics. 
Missing workshop topics 
A participant in the survey reported that ​it would've been great with more knowledge about actually 
establishing a company, do's and don'ts​ (SurveyFa). This is supported by the X-Tech course responsible, 
where the winners are rewarded a seat in Skylab Ignite. According to him the X-Tech participants need to 
incorporate their company some point after X-Tech and that​ “Some help in some company formation would 
be quite useful”​ (XM_20). Not only X-Tech participants may need this, from the interview a participant 
responded that they would like to know the stepping stones of going from an idea to having a company from 
the legal aspects ​“we didn’t really know how to set up an APS (...) Ignite could have been better to show in 
detail the roadmap for startups”​ (PSt(a)_19). However the program manager explains ​“you can’t go to a 
workshop to solve all your problems, you get inspiration to do it yourself, right, and sometimes you miss a 
team” (PM_20) ​but in general the teams like the workshops. 
 
38 
==PAGE:39==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Evidently information that is given late affects the participants’ chance to prepare for the 
workshops and unforeseen events e.g. cancellations can occur which may affect the quality of 
the workshops. It is further difficult finding “the sweet spot” of having both presentations, 
guest speakers, exercises and peer-to-peer learning at the workshops. It is difficult to manage 
since the participants both want time to work on the startup, listen to speakers and learn from 
the other teams. When the teams do get to work with each other it is difficult to give quality 
feedback as they switch to new startups all the time and not all get to speak indicating you 
could be smarter in designing the feedback sessions. Also some topics may not be covered in 
the workshops e.g. on establishing a company from the legal aspects, but they are generally 
liked. It is important to mention that a lot of things worked well e.g. learning from the guest 
speakers, learning to pitch in different formats and the coaching sessions are praised. 
Supporting quotes can be found in appendix 6. 
 
This concludes the most important findings from the surveys supported with findings from 
the interviews and observations. During the literature study it was found that accelerators 
may offer funding, co-working space and external mentors as well as inclusion of the alumni. 
These are analysed in the following. 
4.4 Analysis of the ​services Skylab Ignite could offer 
Identified in literature study were design parameters of an accelerator including the option to 
provide funding and a co-working space and connect external mentors as well as inclusion of 
the alumni, see section 3.1.6. Also other university accelerators provide office space and 
external mentors/experts identified in section 3.21. These design elements or services were 
therefore investigated in the conducted interviews as Skylab Ignite doesn’t provide these 
services (to different extents). The participants were asked about said services and the results 
are presented in the following. 
4.4.1 Funding 
It is not uncommon for an accelerator to provide funding helping the startups experiment and 
develop during the program (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1789-1791, Pauwels et al, 2016, pp. 19).  
39 
==PAGE:40==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Even though Skylab has workshops and staff to help out with prototype building and 
provision of materials (to some extent), Skylab Ignite does not provide financial aid e.g. soft 
funding.  
 
Table 4.5: Challenges with provisions of funding identified from the interviews and observations. 
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Provision of funding 
The interviews reveal that 3 out 4 participants would like funding as part of the program (PSt(a-c)_19, 
CSt_20). It can be debated when to provide the funding as one participant explains “​I think Ignite shouldn’t 
offer in the beginning funding but maybe in the end (...) because Ignite is also (...) more of deciding the 
startup itself and not doing product development” ​and another explains ​”I think it would be nice to just have 
a little prototype pool (...) 4-5.000 (DKK ed.) (...) in the beginning of the course (...) I think it would (...) help 
the students get more movement and motivation” (PSt(b)_19). ​When asked what the funding would be 
needed for, legal documents and developing prototype/MVP were mentioned (PSt(a-b)_19), CSt_20). One 
participant further notes that it should be the internal people (Skylab Coaches) who decide who should 
receive the funding as opposed to a jury who only see pitches at the end (PSt(a)_19). The program manager 
also explains that ​”it’s sometimes a little bit random who wins (the Ignite Finals ed.)” (PM_20). ​A 
participant also observed that teams who won the Ignite Finals knew how to pitch based on their study lines, 
making it harder for teams from other study lines to compete (PSt(c)_19). From the observation and 
interviews it was also seen that a winner of Ignite Finals closed down the startup as opposed to a non winner 
who’s now in accelerace and the innofounder graduate program (PSt(a,c)_19, Finals_19) 
 
Evidently 3 out of 4 interviewed, see table 4.5, agree that they could use funding as part of 
Skylab Ignite either during or after the program. Funding could bring motivation and allow 
startups to develop even further during/after the program e.g. for MVP development or 
establishing the company. At the Ignite Finals the best pitches are awarded money based on 
an outside jury, however the money could be provided differently e.g. by following the teams 
more closely and provide it for those who are continuing with their startup. Evidently funding 
is given as a competition price, however more startups could benefit if a different structure of 
providing funding were to be adopted. 
4.4.2 Co-working space 
An accelerator may provide a co-working space to foster a community where the participants 
can communicate and learn from each other (Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1791-1792 ; Pauwels et 
al, 2016, pp. 17). The Skylab facility in itself works as an open office / working environment 
40 
==PAGE:41==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
with meeting rooms you can book and places to sit, however it’s open to all students and 
employees. 
 
Table 4.6: Challenges with provision of co-working space identified from the interviews.  
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Provision of co-working space 
First of all the participants agree they could use an office space in a co-working space (PSt(a-c)_19, CSt_20). 
The interviews also show both that having “​a space (...) where you can leave your stuff (...) a wall where you 
can set up posters and actually leave it for the next day”(PSt(c)_19)​ would be great but also that the 
participants “use ​skylab a lot, so in that sense we actually met just in the kitchen or whatever”(PSt(c)_19)​. 
One participant also questions whether the teams will actually be in the co-working space the same time “​so 
it would be more of a coincidence if you were to ran into people”(PSt(b)_19)​. According to a third 
participant “​there is something, kind of magic about, when people are really innovative and working on 
different projects and everyone like need help to everything (...) you elevate each other when you put all the 
people in the same spot”(CSt_20) ​and you can always ​“knock on the door”​ to exchange knowledge you 
really need and reverse (CSt_20). 
 
Evidently all the interviewed startups would like a co-working space, see table 4.6, however 
they also find Skylab sufficiently as it is now. The question is if the teams will be working at 
the same time in the co-working space. However from the experience of a participant, having 
used co-working spaces outside Skylab (CSt_20), putting innovative people in the same space 
really fosters knowledge sharing between startups. Evidently Skylab is very far in creating 
and atmosphere where the teams can work and meet, and it could be elevated even further by 
providing office space for the Skylab Ignite participants. A co-working space may also foster 
more peer-to-peer learning, removing the pressure from the workshops, which is investigated 
in section 4.3. 
4.4.3 External mentors 
Mentors are typically a part of accelerator programs. They can both come from internal 
sources (Managing directors, Partners) or external sources (investors, experts, program 
alumni, entrepreneurs, lawyers), and considerations about the frequency are important 
(Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 1791) e.g. some accelerators have 100 mentors connected in a short 
period while others only connect internal mentors in a fixed structure. Skylab Ignite provides 
the latter. 
 
41 
==PAGE:42==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Table 4.7: Challenges with provision of external mentors identified from interviews and observations 
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Provision of external mentors 
First of all the participants agree they could use an external mentor (PSt(a-c)_19, CSt_20). One participant 
explains that ​“Mentors would (...) be super exciting, because there was some knowledge we needed, which 
our coach couldn’t give us” ​and another participant adds that “​you could have a mentor that only cared about 
your startup” ​because the ​“skylab ignite (coaches ed.) (...) were very broad and needed to take care of a lot 
of different startups” ​and ​“they also had an agenda they needed to follow” (PSt(b)_19)​. One participant 
further adds that there could be “​different mentors who specialize on different things” ​but it could also dilute 
the mentoring during a 10 weeks program (PSt(a)_19). Two participants mention they could use a business 
mentor (PSt(b)_19, CSt_20), and one further adds that ​“I don’t think it needs to be as structured as the 
coaching sessions (...) but I think it would provide some of the same safety” ​to have someone to go to for 
questions. The program manager further explains that even though they don’t provide external mentors they 
“do connect them on a need basis, to stakeholders of all kinds” (PM_20). This was also observed at the 
workshop where the coaches went around sharing contacts with the participants (SpW_20). 
 
Evidently external mentors could be useful, which all interviewed startups agree on,​ ​see table 
4.7. Especially on areas/questions the coaches can’t answer/help with. Different mentors with 
different specialisations could be connected, however caution should be taken as it can dilute 
things. It would help provide safety having someone besides the coaches to go to but it 
doesn’t need to be structured the same way as the coaching sessions. Evidently, even though 
mentors are connected on a need basis, the participants could benefit from having an external 
mentor focussing only on them during/after the program in a more structured way. External 
mentors can also contribute to improving the learning mechanisms of an accelerator by 
helping the startups with both how to do things and what to do i.e. what activities to 
undertake and what to avoid. 
4.4.4 Alumni 
As mentioned in section 3.1.6.3, external mentors could be program alumni (Cohen et al, 
2019, pp. 1791), but Skylab Ignite does not have an alumni initiative. 
 
Table 4.8: Challenges with inclusion of alumni identified from the interviews.  
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Inclusion of alumni  
According to the program manager he ​“don’t know (how Skylab Ignite alumni are performing ed.), because 
42 
==PAGE:43==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
first of all we don’t see ignite alumni as something separate from all other startups in skylab" (PM_20). ​He 
adds that it’s easy to get a hold of the 10-30 percent best teams that continue with their startup and they 
usually continue using Skylab. Getting the bottom 40 percent that are quitting right after Skylab Ignite are 
however difficult (PM_20). One startup finds that Skylab makes it clear you can always come and talk about 
your startup in Skylab, so she doesn’t really miss an alumni club(PSt(c)_19), another however adds “So as a 
Ignite alumni, yeah definitely I miss somehow a bit of still being involved in Ignite” (PSt(a)_19), which a 
third interviewee agrees with (PSt(b)_19). 
 
Evidently Skylab Ignite doesn’t follow up with the alumni, but they do follow the teams still 
using Skylab and/or through the media, see table 4.8. It is worth mentioning that Skylab 
Ignite may include select alumni startups in the guest presentations. The participants however 
would like to still be included somehow as an alumni. It could also benefit the current 
participants as the alumni could be external mentors and/or peers to knowledge share with. 
 
This concludes the analysis of services Skylab Ignite could offer. As Skylab Ignite was 
affected by the Covid-19 lockdown, the challenges that followed are analysed and described 
in the following. 
4.5 Analysis of the challenges during the Covid-19 crisis 
The author would like to first ​acknowledge how Skylab Ignite has chosen to handle the 
situation ​in this unforeseen crisis. The following findings are therefore afterthoughts of how 
the situation could have been handled differently based on the interview with a current 
participant and observations. 
 
The Covid-19 lockdown has affected many programs and events in 2020. Skylab Ignite has 
therefore been run differently compared to the Fall 2019 program, see figure 4.4. 
43 
==PAGE:44==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Figure 4.4: Overview of Skylab Ignite and its elements in the spring 2020. The Covid-19 symbol 
marks elements that have been directly affected by, or are resulting from the Covid-19 crisis. 
 
The selected teams have participated in four workshops, two physically at Skylab and two 
digitally over Zoom + a Covid-19 update meeting. Many planned workshops were cancelled 
and 3 participants have paused their projects. The digital workshops were hosted via Zoom, a 
digital conference software. 1:1 coaching has been offered more frequently, as an extended 
service, since the workshops were cancelled. No changes occurred to the deliverables via 
PeaQs. (SpW_20, ZoomSpW_20). 
 
Table 4.9: Challenges with digitizing of Skylab Ignite, identified from interviews and observations. 
The full list of quotes and observations can be seen in appendix 7. 
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Reaching out to customers 
The lockdown has affected the program and ​“everything is just being done through a zoom meeting” 
(CSt_20) ​ a current participant explains. This poses both challenges and opportunities. The latter being more 
frequent coaching, eliminating travel time and easier scheduling (CSt_20). However Skylab Ignites aim 
(customer driven startups) faces challenges as the interviewed participant elaborates ​“getting into legal 
clinics (or physical spaces ed.) and asking (...) the main group target (questions ed.) (...) would be so much 
better” (CSt_20). ​There are however opportunities in “​catching people online now” ​and it’s been beneficial 
for other startups that everybody is online since getting in contact with people is easier (CSt_20).  
44 
==PAGE:45==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Digitizing Skylab Ignite 
One thing the current participant emphasizes is that ​“the quality of the program that was laid out, has been 
dramatical changed, and not for the better (...) it’s not the same value you get out of it, you don’t have the 
time, you don’t meet with people, you don’t get different perspectives and feedback from the other 
participants, which can be very valuable, at least  I think it was before the lockdown” (CSt_20). ​She notes 
that​ ​presentation, exercises and interaction could have been facilitated online (CSt_20). She further adds 
“you could have (...) provided (...) some of the knowledge or information about how to have a startup (...) by 
courses online”​ and not by condensing a workshop to a 20 minutes zoom meeting as Skylab Ignite did 
(CSt_20). The startups ​“would have moved (...) way more than we are able to move now, because we are just 
not getting the same access to the information”(CSt_20). ​Also Skylab Ignite did try to facilitate interaction 
but​ “there (was ed.) no interaction between the participants (...) people are a bit like holding back because 
(...) are we, everybody just supposed to speak at the same time”​ so the structure was not well thought out 
(CSt_20). Examples of how she experienced meetings with a better structure can be seen in appendix 7,​ ​but 
they included having a professional facilitator, a meeting structure, and getting everyone to speak. From the 
observations, it was also noted that only 1-2 startups were engaging, even though zoom features as raise your 
hand to speak and thumbs up were tried out (ZoomSpW_20). The current participant however mentions that 
the responsibility to interact and connect between teams also lies with the startups themselves, however since 
it was not happening Skylab Ignite could have tried to facilitate it (CSt_20). 
 
Evidently reaching customers online has in some cases been easier. However it can’t replace 
going to physical locations where the customers usually are, see table 4.9. Skylab Ignite’s 
decision to cancel workshops instead of having them digitally has affected the startups’ 
learning as the same knowledge was not provided. The workshops could have been hosted 
digitally, not condensed to only 20 minutes, but finding a way of having both presentation, 
exercises and interaction facilitated. The zoom meetings that were facilitated were therefore 
more of a one way communication than interactive. Evidently Skylab Ignite could have 
provided more knowledge through digital workshops and design a better structure facilitating 
interaction. 
 
This again was afterthoughts on how the situation could have been handled differently, since 
the challenges posed by Covid-19 have been new to all of us. This also concludes the 
challenges identified during Covid-19. In the following Skylab Ignite’s position in the 
entrepreneurial ecosystem is analysed and its challenges identified. 
45 
==PAGE:46==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
4.6 Analysis of Skylab Ignite's position in the entrepreneurial 
ecosystem 
DTU has innovation and entrepreneurship built into their DNA ​“We help students and 
employees translate inventions and discoveries into enterprising businesses and we engage in 
innovative collaborations with society as a whole”​(Innovation, 2020). ​There are three 
cornerstones of innovation and entrepreneurship at DTU illustrated in figure 4.5. 
 
 
Figure 4.5: Overview of the three cornerstones of innovation and entrepreneurship at DTU 
(Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 2020) 
 
According to a report on Entrepreneurship at DTU ​“The DTU campus accommodates one of 
the biggest and most well-developed ecosystems for entrepreneurship among technical 
universities in Europe”​ (IRIS Group, 2018, pp. 4) and does so by hosting a comprehensive 
ecosystem of organisations, initiatives and activities, available for entrepreneurs at different 
stages in development (IRIS Group, 2018, pp. 38). 
 
46 
==PAGE:47==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Figure 4.6: Overview of the startup ecosystem at DTU (IRIS Group, 2018, pp. 39) 
 
The whole ecosystem is illustrated in figure 4.6.​ ​As can be seen Skylab Ignite is positioned 
under “advisory services and acceleration programs”. The arrows further suggest a journey 
through the ecosystem e.g. entrepreneurial courses may spark a startup idea that gets formed 
during Skylab Ignite which leads to incubation and funding. However all these possibilities 
need to be communicated to the students and employees at DTU, including Skylab Ignite. 
 
Skylab Ignite promotes itself through DTU Skylab and is communicated in different ways 
e.g. info nights, posters, course presentations and digital campaigns (PM_20). A big effort is 
done by the program manager as he explains “I am the crusader of Ignite at DTU” (PM_20)  
and promotion is an ongoing mission, especially as a pipeline leading in, getting people to see 
Skylab Ignite as the next natural step. More recently an effort has been put into attracting not 
only students but also researchers (and the departments) at DTU: ​“it's not just the student 
program (...) it's actually something that is valuable for all the teams that really (...) want to 
do it (succeed ed.)” ​(PM_20). The effort is therefore to reach out to ​“everybody who’s taking 
decisions”​ and that is the startups themselves (students/researchers), but also those who could 
47 
==PAGE:48==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
be communicating that Skylab Ignite is an option either through ​“putting it up on the 
website” ​or ​“saying it 1 to 1”​(PM_20). That is the ​“people on the courses, that's the mentors 
and the business developers, the departments and Tech Transfer”​(PM_20).  
 
Figure 4.7: Pipelines into the Skylab Ignite program and after the program. Pipelines are identified 
from the interviews, see appendix 8. Note that the lists of pipelines are not exhaustive. 
 
Many of the pipelines into the Skylab Ignite program are due to Skylab Ignite’s effort to 
promote the program, see figure 4.7. This includes, but is not limited to, DTU courses e.g. 
entrepreneurship courses, research at the different DTU departments and theses or projects. 
Two examples of creating pipelines are Skylab Funding and X-Tech Entrepreneurship. 
Skylab Funding acts as a magnet for startups looking for soft funding. When startups apply 
they can also tick off a box that they are interested in Skylab Ignite, thus increasing the 
applicant No. (PM_20). X-Tech Entrepreneurship is a course that's “kind of like an 
accelerator” with the goal of the participating teams to “try and create a new startup or 
spin-out and to learn about how to do it on along the way” (XM_20). The winners at the end 
of the course get a seat in the Skylab Ignite program, thus providing a direct pipeline. The 
purpose of the collaboration is, as the X-Tech professor explains, a handover process because 
he noticed the teams tended “​to fall off a cliff”​ after X-Tech (XM_20). The pipeline is 
therefore a way to ​“continue support, mentorship, access to funding programs, a space, a 
regular checkup, but most important (...) keep traction and momentum in the teams” 
48 
==PAGE:49==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
(XM_20). This raises the question about how momentum can be ensured after Skylab Ignite, 
which is investigated in table 4.10. 
 
Table 4.10: Challenges with motivation, identified from interviews. 
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Motivation after Skylab Ignite 
Just as the X-Tech Entrepreneurship course professor noticed that his startups lost momentum after 
completion of the course, so has a participant startup from Skylab Ignite as she explained ​“after the Ignite I 
kinda lost my momentum”​ (PSt(c)_19) and another participant startup explained ​“I just think we ran out of 
motivation for it”​ (PSt(b)_19). Both also had issues with finding customers, and one had issues with the 
team, which must be taking into consideration but they still liked their individual projects a lot when 
speaking about them. One was even getting contacts after Skylab Ignite who still showed interest in the 
project. There is evidently the potential risk of the participant startups losing momentum and closing down 
their startups after participation of acceleration programs. The Program Manager also noticed this because 
they ​“have a coaching session after the (Ignite ed.) Finals, because those who don’t win sometimes get so 
disappointed that they lose a little bit of momentum”​ however they don’t actively follow up after that point 
(PM_20). 
 
Evidently Skylab Ignite tries to combat the teams losing momentum in a follow up meeting 
after Ignite Finals, but otherwise the teams have to go to Skylab themselves. Since the 
startups are early stage, Skylab Ignite being a seed stage accelerator, the teams are likely to 
benefit from continuing their journey e.g. getting office space in incubators or continuing in 
new acceleration programs and Skylab Ignite could help the teams move on to these. One 
startup even accredited Skylab Ignite for getting into the Innofounder Graduate program and 
Accelerace as they used Skylab Ignite to prepare for getting into accelerators and getting 
funding (PSt(a)_19) and another being nominated for Innovations Prisen hosted by VIA 
(CSt_20). All in all Skylab Ignite proves to be a valuable stepping stone for the startups to go 
on to new programs and initiatives, both within and outside the ecosystem of DTU. 
 
Looking at the years 2019 - 2020 it can be seen that the application No. has gone up, see table 
4.3 (section 4.2), which is an indication of the ecosystem stakeholders becoming more aware 
of Skylab Ignite. It also takes years to build up a reputation like Skylab has and years of 
campaigning finding all the platforms and methods to build a brand (PM_20). Evidently 
Skylab Ignite is succeeding in spreading the word. An accelerator doesn’t only directly affect 
the participants but also the ecosystem as it works as an intervention to encourage 
49 
==PAGE:50==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
entrepreneurship and startup activity (Wright and Drori, 2018, pp. 1, Cohen et al, 2019, pp. 
1785)). Also when observing the Ignite Finals 2019 and investor explained that he was 
looking for quality teams to invest in attracting his attention to Skylab and DTU (Finals_19). 
The program manager is however not yet satisfied with the position Skylab Ignite has in the 
ecosystem, as more stakeholders could be promoting it (PM_20). 
 
Table 4.11: Challenges with alignment of initiatives, identified from interviews. 
Evidence of challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Alignment of expectations 
Based on an interview with an employee from TechTransfer (helping employees at DTU translating 
inventions into startups) it became clear that there are alignment issues between Skylab Ignite and 
TechTransfer. First of all he doesn’t communicate Skylab Ignite to his stakeholders, even though he thinks it 
could be a beneficial program for especially the young / early teams or researchers that need to go through a 
facilitated process like Skylab Ignite (TT_20). In some cases however the employees may need more specific 
knowledge than Skylab Ignite as it’s a more broad program for general innovative topics (TT_20). He further 
notes that if all their research teams were to go into Skylab Ignite then TechTransfers training program 
wouldn’t be needed (as the theoretical topics are overlapping). He is unsure about coordinating more, because 
if it were a big success for researchers to go into the Skylab Ignite program then there would be a need for 
more internal coordination (TT_20). When asked about pipelines, and teams not losing momentum, he 
responds that DTU shouldn’t nurse the startups too much. In his mind it’s ok that the ecosystem is not too 
coordinated because it can help weed out the startups who rely too much on supporting programs who never 
really ask themselves if they really want it and know what it takes to create a startup (TT_20)  
 
Evidently since Skylab and Skylab Ignite are increasing their focus on DTU employees, 
coordination and alignment are needed between TechTransfer and Skylab, see table 4.11. 
Especially in promotion of the different opportunities that exist as both employees and 
students can benefit from the programs hosted by each department, e.g. TechTransfer could 
help the serious teams coming out of Skylab Ignite with their mentor program or counseling 
on IPR (TT_20) and Skylab can host researchers using their workshops and programs. 
 
This concludes the analysis of Skylab Ignites position in the ecosystem. In the following 
section the analysis is summarised.  
4.7 Summary and key challenges 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation capabilities are developed at the universities and it's a major 
global trend. One of those capabilities is Skylab Ignite a seed stage startup accelerator for 
50 
==PAGE:51==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
students and researchers. Using the definition of Cohen et al (2019) Skylab Ignite was 
defined as a fixed-term​ (10 weeks)​, cohort-based ​(10 startups)​ program for startups, including 
mentorship ​(1:1 coaching) ​and/or educational components ​(workshops, PeaQs)​, that 
culminates in a graduation event ​(Ignite Finals)​. The overall aim was identified to focus on 
building customer driven and strong teams. The mission was further identified to both having 
a focus on learning (becoming a better engineer through entrepreneurship) and helping teams 
to become successful. To achieve this real entrepreneurial experience is the key. An overview 
of the fall startups was identified, see table 4.1 (section 4.1). Their stages differ between 
having a proof of concept to developed MVP. Their aim was to test the startup, find new 
markets and build their business model. The program runs twice a year and is structured into 
4 parts, see figure 4.2, the most important being entrepreneurship education (workshops) and 
internal mentoring (Skylab Business Coaches). Accelerators are not homogeneous and the 
design elements found in the literature study were used to examine Skylab Ignite’s elements, 
see table 4.2. 
 
Even though no overall accelerator effect has been found, studies point to a replicable 
learning mechanism that drives accelerator effect i.e. venture development. This learning 
mechanism is due to startups consulting with outside peers and entrepreneurship schooling. 
Skylab Ignite has these elements incorporated and to try and capture this acceleration effect 
startup data was collected on participants from 2019-2020, see table 4.3 (section 4.2). Early 
stage success parameters were analysed. It was both found that Skylab Ignite has an 
acceleration effect on the 2019 participants compared to non-participants (those who were 
rejected). It was also found that Skylab Ignite may help startups determine to shut down why 
not more were successful.  
 
The before mentioned learning mechanism helps explain the results and to improve on this 
effect challenges with Skylab Ignite were identified, which are summarized in table 4.12. 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
==PAGE:52==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Table 4.12: summary and identification of challenges with Skylab Ignite identified in the analysis. 
Challenges with Skylab Ignite 
Section 4.3: Analysis of Skylab Ignite’s workshops 
Challenge 
Summary 
Information that was given 
late resulting in less 
preparation time. 
Participants have reported that information sometimes was given too late 
which affected the time they had to prepare for the workshops. 
Cancellations by presenter 
reducing quality of 
workshop. 
Unforeseen events can occur e.g. the cancelation by a presenter before a 
workshop. When this happened in the Fall 2019 program participants reported 
that the last minute preparations worked less well and information was very 
repetitive. 
Too much listening at the 
workshops resulting in less 
time to work in the startup. 
Designing the workshops so both presentations, guest speakers, exercises and 
peer-to-peer learning are included is difficult. Participants reported they 
wanted more time to work in their own startup on the exercises during the 
workshops. 
More time for peer-to-peer 
learning. 
Workshops have a lot of one way communication. Participants reported that 
they would like more group assignments using the other teams as a resource. 
When there is group work not all get to speak and always switching to a new 
team makes it difficult to give quality feedback going into depth. 
PeaQs is not working 
optimally. 
The software used to track startup progress and peer-review called PeaQs are 
not used optimally by the participants. 
Missing workshop topics. 
A workshop topic not included was establishing a business from the legal 
aspects. The participants reported that they were missing this. 
Section 4.4: Analysis of the services Skylab Ignite could offer 
Challenge 
Summary 
Provision of funding. 
Funding is not offered for the Skylab Ignite participants. Funding could bring 
motivation and allow startups to develop even further during/after the 
program. 3 out of 4 interviewed participants report they could use funding as 
part of Skylab Ignite and it would be needed for development of a MVP or 
establishment of the company. Soft money is given as part of the Ignite Finals 
based on an outside jury, but winners may close down startup. A different 
funding structure could therefore be benefitting more startups and/or those 
deciding to continue with the startup. 
Provision of co-working 
space. 
Skylab has an open co-working space but Skylab Ignite participants don’t get 
assigned their own space. The interviewed startups find Skylab to be sufficient 
but would like their own space (table, board) where they can leave stuff. A 
dedicated space for Skylab Ignite may also increase peer-to-peer learning and 
remove the pressure for this to happen at the workshops only. 
Provision of external 
mentors. 
External mentors are not provided as part of Skylab Ignite. All interviewed 
startups agree they could benefit from an external mentor, especially on 
areas/questions the coaches can’t answer/help. Having someone besides the 
coaches, who also have their own agenda at the meetings, could further 
52 
==PAGE:53==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
provide safety having someone else to go to. The external mentoring however 
does not need to be as structured as the coaching. 
Inclusion of alumni. 
Skylab Ignite doesn’t follow up with the alumni. They mostly follow the 
teams still using Skylab and/or through the media. They may however include 
Skylab Ignite alumni in guest presentations. The interviewed participants 
would however like to still be included. It could also benefit a new batch, 
since alumni could be external mentors and/or peers to knowledge share with. 
Section 4.5:​ ​Analysis of the challenges during the Covid-19 crisis 
Challenge 
Summary 
Reaching out to customers. 
Reaching customers online has in some cases been easier. It however can’t 
replace going to physical locations where the customers usually are.  
Digitizing Skylab Ignite. 
Skylab Ignites has canceled workshops. It has affected the startups’ learning 
as the same knowledge was not provided. An interviewed participant requests 
that workshops were digitized instead, having presentation, exercises and 
interaction facilitated. Skylab Ignite did have zoom meetings but they were 
more a one way communication without much interaction between 
participants. More interaction could have been facilitated by having a better 
structure for the meetings. 
Section 4.6:​ ​Analysis of Skylab Ignites position in the entrepreneurial ecosystem 
Challenge 
Summary 
Motivation after Skylab 
Ignite. 
Interviewed participants report that they lose their momentum after Skylab 
Ignite. As part of the program there is one follow up meeting after the Ignite 
Finals but otherwise the teams have to go to Skylab themselves. Since Skylab 
Ignite is a seed stage startup accelerator the teams deciding to continue could 
benefit from continuing their journey in new acceleration programs or 
incubators. An interviewed startup also accredited the program for getting into 
the Innofounder Graduate program and Accelerace, as the program helped 
them prepare for these. Skylab Ignite can be a valuable stepping stone for the 
startups to go onto new programs and initiatives as many entrepreneurial 
initiatives exist both inside and outside of DTU’s ecosystem. 
Alignment of expectations. 
DTU Skylab have increased their focus to include DTU employees. This poses 
alignment issues between Skylab Ignite and TechTransfers especially when it 
comes to promoting the opportunities of Skylab and TechTransfer. Currently 
overlapping programs exist and if all researchers were to go into Skylab Ignite 
more internal coordination would be needed between the departments. 
Furthermore both employees and students could benefit from the programs 
hosted by each department. Bringing the ecosystem together and coordinating 
initiatives and promotion are therefore needed. 
 
The overview and summary of the key challenges conclude the chapter. These key challenges 
will be the seed for the development of an idea catalog which is unfolded in the next chapter. 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:54==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
5. Concept development 
The analysis and evaluation of Skylab Ignite have revealed many findings i.e. challenges with 
the Skylab Ignite accelerator. Some challenges take more effort than others to solve and focus 
on different areas e.g. smaller improvements, accelerator impact or increasing No. of 
participants. The challenges have been input as a seed for a visioning ideation where 
strengths and weaknesses were identified to synthesise idea elements into one. 
 
The visioning ideation revealed solutions that can be implemented independently of each 
other. It was therefore decided to provide an Idea Catalog on the identified solutions. The 
Idea Catalog is designed so it can be read independently of the rest of the report. Each 
solution is given a name, a difficulty, what the idea is about, why it’s important, how Skylab 
Ignite can go about it and further readings and/or contacts. 
 
Furthermore it is up to Skylab Ignite, and readers for whom it may be relevant, to decide if 
and what concepts they would like to implement from the Idea Catalog. Testing the ideas has 
been outside the scope of the thesis but the author recommends that the chosen solution is 
shaped to the need of the accelerator, tested and evaluated to further improve on. 
 
The visioning ideation is presented in the following, before the Idea Catalog is presented. 
5.1 Visioning Ideation 
The following section contains the visioning brainstorms. Some identified challenges were 
put together under one challenge. 
 
 
54 
==PAGE:55==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
5.1.1 Workshops 
The visioning brainstorm on Skylab Ignite workshop challenges can be seen in figure 5.1, the 
brainstorm includes the four identified topics “Late Communication”, “Cancellations”, 
“Missing Topics” and “Structure”. The latter includes the three identified challenges “Too 
much listening at the workshops”, “More time for peer-to-peer learning” and “PeaQs is not 
working optimally” and are dubbed “Structure”. The stars mark the selected elements that 
will be synthesized into a final ideas. The selection is based on the identified strengths and 
weaknesses, see appendix 9. The final ideas can be seen in the Idea Catalog. 
 
Figure 5.1: Visioning brainstorm on workshop challenges. The ones marked with a star are selected. 
 
 
55 
==PAGE:56==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
5.1.2 Services that could be improved/offered 
The visioning brainstorm on services that could be improved/offered by Skylab Ignite can be 
seen in figure 5.2, the brainstorm includes the 4 challenge findings from section 4.4 in the 
analysis. The stars mark the selected elements that will be synthesized into a final ideas. The 
selection is based on the identified strengths and weaknesses, see appendix 9. The final ideas 
can be seen in the Idea Catalog. 
 
 
Figure 5.2: Visioning brainstorm on service opportunities which Skylab Ignite could offer. The ones 
marked with a star are selected. 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:57==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
5.1.3 Digitizing Skylab Ignite 
The visioning brainstorm on digitizing Skylab Ignite, see figure 5.3, has been dubbed digital 
opportunities, to come up with ideas for how Skylab Ignite can be more digital in the future. 
It is still unknown how long the Corona situation will affect us both now and in the future. 
The brainstorm is split into 3 sections, based on findings from the analysis, see section 4.5. 
The stars mark the selected elements that will be synthesized into a final idea. The selection 
is based on the identified strengths and weaknesses, see appendix 9. The final idea can be 
seen in the Idea Catalog. 
 
 
Figure 5.3: Visioning brainstorm on digital opportunities. The ones marked with a star are selected. 
 
 
57 
==PAGE:58==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
5.1.4 Ecosystem 
The visioning brainstorm on ecosystem challenges can be seen in figure 5.4, the brainstorm 
includes the 2 challenge findings from section 4.6 in the analysis. The stars mark the selected 
elements that will be synthesized into final ideas. The selection is based on the identified 
strengths and weaknesses, see appendix 9. The final ideas can be seen in the Idea Catalog. 
 
Figure 5.4: Visioning brainstorm on ecosystem. The ones marked with a star are selected. 
 
This concludes the visioning brainstorm. The Idea Catalog can be seen in the following. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
==PAGE:59==
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
This column explains the idea in details.
The name of idea.
The color indicates the difficulty 
level of implementing the idea: 
green (easy), yellow (medium), 
and red (hard).
This column explains why the idea is important.
This column highlights contacts & studies for further enquiry and action.
This column explains the suggested steps for implementing idea.
­Idea Catalog
­Catalog Guide
How to 
Improve uni.
accelerators 
Created by 
Simon Ringive
MSc Design & 
Innovation
 
59
==PAGE:60==
A Detailed Workshop Plan
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Startup accelerators must be careful in their program design to allow par-
ticipants time for homework. Creating a detailed workshop plan before 
commencing a new batch is important. Whether the plan is given to the 
startups or kept among managers, reminders should be sent out in due 
time regarding homework. Depending on the assignment in question at 
least one week’s notice should be given. The advantage of giving the plan 
to the participants, are that they can plan their schedule accordingly. How-
ever it may overwhelm them and changes need to be communicated.
If participants receive information late e.g. about an assignment before a 
workshop, it affects their preparation time for that workshop. This overall 
affects the preparedness of the cohort and may reduce the quality of the 
workshop session in question. Especially if the cohort is supposed to share 
their work with each other as research points to knowledge sharing as a vi-
tal ingredient in accelerators effect on participants venture development.[1]
No contacts or further reading are suggested.
1. Create and detail a program plan. Include the workshop topics, the 
program, the planned assignments and homework.
2. Give the plan to the participants (Optional).
3. Send out reminders of homework in due time.
 
60
How to Establish a Company
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
A seed stage startup accelerator may have many workshop topics included. 
One that may be overlooked is the topic on how to establish a startup from 
the legal aspects – do’s and don’ts. Though the startups may not be at the 
point where they are ready to get a CVR, it will at some point be beneficial 
for them to know about. Questions the workshop should focus on are: when 
do we need a CVR?, is it needed to apply for funding?, types of CVR, what 
does it costs?, who can help with the legal documents?. Overall a roadm-
ap of going from an idea to an established company should be provided.
From studying the seed stage startup accelerator Skylab Ignite at DTU, it 
was found that startups were missing a detailed roadmap of how to es-
tablish a company from the legal aspects in Denmark. Help on establish-
ing a company may also aid startup development even further as it pre-
pares them for getting funding, managing business expenses, taxes and 
it also prepares them for when they start earning money from customers.
A guide and example of a roadmap to CVR creation can be found at 
www.legaldesk.dk. They also provide the service to create the CVR from 
the legal aspects and they are one of the cheaper options out there.
1. Research CVR creation. Answer the above questions and perhaps 
interview previous participants about their experience.
2. Prepare a roadmap going from idea to company (CVR).
3. Prepare workshop assignments and homework (Optional).
==PAGE:61==
Backup Wtorkshop
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Even with the best accelerator program plan, unforeseen events can occur. 
It is therefore important to have a backup plan ready e.g. should a guest 
speaker cancel last minute. Having a backup exercise ready is also “work-
shop 101”, and can be useful in many occasions e.g. if there is time left to 
spare or a participant finishes earlier with another exercise. This can be ex-
tended to having a whole presentation ready, if a guest speaker cancels.
It was noticed in the study of the startup accelerator Skylab Ignite at 
DTU, that a guest speaker’s cancellation reduced the quality of the work-
shop. With all respect to the program manager and the people behind 
Skylab Ignite who made the best out of the situation, participants com-
mented that the last minute preparations turned out to be very repetitive 
and that perhaps the workshop should have been cancelled instead.
A suggestion for a backup presentation topic is pretotyping. A 
quick and easy way to test a startup idea using minimum resourc-
es and time. There are many examples online on pretotyping tech-
niques, one is given to the right. More information about this top-
ic can be found in the book “Pretotype It” by Alberto Savoia.[4]
1. Decide on a backup topic, perhaps something that initially was exclud-
ed from the program. 
2. Plan the workshop including program, assignment and homework. 
3. Plan backup exercises to each workshop topic (Optional).
Pretotyping Example
The mechanical turk is inspired by a late 18th century chess “machine” that 
was operated by a hidden chess player. According to Savoia (2011, pp. 41): “A 
Mechanical Turk pretotype is ideal for situations where you can replace costly, 
complex or yet-to-be-developed technology with a hidden human being per-
forming the functions of that technology.” As an example, a company wanted to 
develop an app that automatically ordered a taxi to the users location. Instead 
of developing the software, they had a person calling the taxi company based 
on the users input in the app. They could then test the solution before building it.
The Mechanical Turk
 
61
==PAGE:62==
Feedback Groups
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Knowledge sharing between startups in an accelerator cohort is an im-
portant aspect. Startups can help each other with contacts, how they are 
doing things, what tools they are using and suggest what to do. To im-
prove on this knowledge sharing the accelerator can be smart about how 
they design the feedback sessions e.g. during group exercises. Premade 
groups should be established by matching similar startups with each oth-
er. These groups are then used during exercises and feedback sessions.
If startups are always matched with new startups during exercis-
es it is hard for them to provide qualitative feedback as they have 
to go through the initial steps of getting to know the business mod-
el and startup again. Smarter groups will therefore save time at the ex-
ercises. Overall, the feedback quality will therefore be increased, in-
cluding the learning which research points to being an important 
aspect in startups venture development and accelerator effect.[1]
PeaQs is a learning platform where startups can follow each other’s devel-
opment during an accelerator and peer-review each other. It can be com-
bined with premade groups to enable startups to get a deeper insight into 
their assigned peers and learn from them. See more at https://peaqs.com.
1. Match cohort startups that are similar with each other 2 and 2.
2. Use these groups during group exercises where it is important to know 
more about the business model and startup when giving feedback e.g. if 
the subject is how to find customers, knowing about the other startup in 
advance is useful.
 
62
Development Funding
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
A seed stage startup accelerator may have its focus on developing cus-
tomer driven teams. It is a place where startups can test if there is a real 
problem/need and a customer willing to pay for the solution. Soft fund-
ing could therefore benefit the startups who decides to continue after the 
accelerator e.g. to develop/continue working on their prototype/MVP 
and/or establishing the company. Funding should be given, not based 
on a pitch competition, but a motivated application (1 page) with a re-
flection on the learnings during the accelerator program and a budget.
In the study of the accelerator Skylab Ignite at DTU, it was found that the 
winners of the graduation event in the form of a pitch competition do 
not reflect those actually deciding to continue with the startup. It could 
be given differently by having the managers who have followed the 
cohort closely during the accelerator screen the startups for who should 
receive funding, maybe together with externals (the funding sponsors).
Venture Cup can be consulted as they also tried different formats other than 
pitch competitions. Specifically in the Mentor Program where the teams could 
apply for 50.000 DKK grants. See more https://venturecup.dk.  Lists of poten-
tial sponsors can also be found online, one of those are the (danish compa-
ny) see https://www.aktivfundraising.dk who provides a free list of sponsors.
1. Finding sponsorships who can provide the soft funding. 4 x 25.000 
DKK should be applied for to help 4 startups.
2. An application procedure should be developed.
3. An Internal/external jury should be established.
==PAGE:63==
Co-working Space
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Not all accelerators provide a co-working space for its participants. How-
ever, if possible, this should be established as it will give the teams a place 
to work, leave their things, and most importantly network, knowledge-
share and socialize with peers. Fostering community and knowledge-
sharing enables the startups to learn from each other by being present in 
the same space. It also eliminates some of the pressure of this knowledge 
sharing to happen at the accelerator workshops only where time is scarce 
for having presentations, exercises, guest speakers and peer-review.
A study of Skylab Ignite, an accelerator at DTU, revealed that knowledge 
sharing had to happen at the busy workshops since no co-working space 
was provided. Research further points to accelerators having an effect on 
venture development when startups share knowledge with peers outside 
the startup learning both how to do things and what to do.[1] Elements 
of the co-working space should be tables and chairs with whiteboards 
and materials like post-its and markers to facilitate that the startups can 
work. It should also in an open-space to facilitate knowledge sharing.
The scale up accelerator Go-Grow at CSE CBS provides office 
spaces for its cohorts. Further enquiry with them could be benefi-
cial to learn what are successful elements of the co-working space 
they provide. Read more at their website here https://go-grow.dk
1. A dedicated area with tables, boards etc. needs to be found neer the 
accelerator.
2. The area needs to be reserved for the duration of the program.
3. The managers should encourage the use of the open space.
63
Important Aspects of a Co-working Space
The graph is from a study of motivation for 
working at a co-working space. [5] 
The graph to the left shows co-work-
ers motivation for working in a 
co-working space ranked from 1st 
to 3rd. The graph is from a study 
on user preferences for co-working 
space characteristics [5].
Working Outside Home.
Most respondents chose having a 
place to work outside the home as 
their first motivation.
Inspiring and Creative Atmosphere.
The most important second moti-
vation was being in a creative and 
inspirational place.
Social Interaction, Networking and 
Talking About Work.
Knowledge sharing opportunities 
are also part of the motivation for 
working in a co-working place.
Layout of Co-working Space.
The study further investigates the 
co-workers preference to the layout 
of the co-working space. Co-work-
ers prefer a semi-open layout with 
both concentrating/meeting rooms 
and an open space for meeting 
co-workers.
Modern Interior.
Co-workers with a higher education 
prefer a more modern and profes-
sional layout as opposed to a more 
homelike interior.
==PAGE:64==
External Mentors
WHAT
Mentor Contract Example
This contract example is inspired by Venture Cup’s mentor contract
WHY
HOW
?!
Not all accelerators have external mentors connected to the cohort. 
This could be beneficial as it can bring new expertise compared to 
the other forms of mentorship the accelerator has established, typi-
cally internal mentors. External mentors should be entrepreneurs and/
or industry experts that match the startups in the cohort based on in-
dustry, experience and competencies. It should be up to the startups to 
take contact to the mentors and structure the meetings. To keep mo-
tivation in the team, the mentorship should be extended to 6 months.
The external mentors can provide extra support and knowledge for 
the teams e.g. answering questions the internal mentors cannot. The 
teams can structure the meetings to their needs as the accelerator pro-
gram typically has an agenda during internal mentor meetings. Re-
search also suggests that learning due to consulting with peers out-
side the startup drives accelerator effect i.e. venture development[1]. 
DTU has further, in a report, established that mentors  help accelerate 
the startups[2] by bringing  perspectives and network  among others. 
The idea is green, since mentor networks, which the accelerator can 
tap into, are already established. At DTU this is TechTransfer and X-Tech 
Entrepreneurship. But for all universities Venture Cup has 160+ ex-
perts that have signed NDAs, who is ready to be matched.   More 
on the program can be found here: https://venturecup.dk/experts/
1. The rules of the mentorship should be established.
2. Applicants should provide details on their startup to better match the 
mentors (industry, experience and competencies).
3. The startups should be matched with the external mentors.
If the reader would like to establish an external mentorprogram as part of the 
accelerator, it is important to establish the rules of the mentorship. A mentorship 
contract should be developed – a tool to make sure the mentoring relation 
between mentor/mentee will be successful and effective. Also NDAs should be 
signed by the mentors. 
The following gives an example of how the mentorship contract could look 
like:
In order for you to establish a successful and effective mentoring relation-
ship it is important for both mentor(s)/mentee(s) to understand the expec-
tations and parameters of the partnership. Please devote 1-2 hours, if pos-
sible, to discuss the points below. Please write down the important points 
from the discussion. The document can be used by the mentor(s)/mentee(s) 
regularly to make sure you are still on the right track and evaluate results.
Practicalities
Contact information.
How often do we meet?
How long should a meeting last?
Where do we meet?
Procedures for changing meeting 
dates or arranging new meetings?
Other?
Ground rules
How do we handle confidentiality?
How do we prepare for each meet-
ing?
How will the startup work between 
the meetings?
Will we be in contact between meet-
ings?
Are there any subjects we do not wish 
to talk about?
How do we handle situations where 
one of us is not satisfied with the pro-
cess or collaboration?
Other?
Evaluation 
How do we end the mentoring pro-
cess?
How do we give each other feedback 
on the mentoring process?
Do we wish to continue our relation-
ship and how?
Other?
Mentorship Contract
 
64
==PAGE:65==
Alumni Club
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Not all accelerators have alumni initiatives. These could benefit from fol-
lowing up with the alumni. Both in a survey format to test the accelerator 
effect, but also by hosting meetings twice a year to mix the new cohort 
with the alumni. The survey should measure and keep track of the start-
ups performance to ensure that the accelerator goals are achieved and 
to keep improving the accelerator. The meetings should be exclusive for 
the alumni. Overall, the events will enable knowledge sharing between 
the new startups meeting more experienced startups and provide a way 
for the accelerator to keep track of the startups success and failures.
Isolating accelerator effect is important to find best practice and share 
knowledge. The survey can help this by measuring startup performance 
e.g. CVR registered, funding received, No. of employees, planned reve-
nue, sales, and internationalization. The alumni meetings will further en-
able knowledge sharing between the new startups meeting more expe-
rienced startups and provide a way for the accelerator to keep track of 
the startups success and failures. Research also points to startups learning 
from outside peers to drive accelerator effect i.e. venture development.[1]
Venture  Cup  has recently made an effort to keep track of who their 
alumni is and to isolate effect through a survey. The reader is suggest-
ed to consult with Venture  Cup to learn more about the process to see 
what they are able to mimic themselves. The communication manag-
er of Venture Cup can be found here: https://venturecup.dk/contact/
1. A survey should be designed to find out who is interested in being part 
of the alumni club.
2. The survey should be sent out with a deadline and reminders.
3. The meetings twice a year need to be planned and executed.
Digital Workshops
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
As a result of the Covid-19 lockdown, many events were digitised. Many 
accelerators provide entrepreneurial knowledge through workshops, and 
they can be digital too. It is important to structure the workshop smartly. 
It should not only be a one-way communication through presentations, 
but facilitate interaction, exercises and peer-review. This can be done 
by having a professional facilitator and clever structure by first having 
a presentation on the workshop topic, then giving the participants digi-
tal tools to work on, concluding with peer-review in digital group rooms.
From studying the seed stage startup accelerator Skylab Ignite at DTU, 
it was found that workshops were cancelled instead of being host-
ed digitally. With all respect to how Skylab Ignite handled things, 
the quality of the program was decreased according to a partici-
pant as they did not get access to the same knowledge that was in-
itially laid out. Research also points to entrepreneurship schooling 
as driving accelerator effect on the startups venture performance.[3]
It is important to learn from those who are successful with digital work-
shops. The author therefore recommends that the reader reaches out 
to universities and entrepreneurial organisations to learn how they 
have been doing things digitally before designing the digital workshop.
1. Research conferencing software that can work as both presenting one 
way communication and host digital group rooms. Decide on a facilitator 
who can ensure interaction and that everybody gets to speak.
2. Plan the workshop topics in detail. Prepare slides and digital exercis-
es. Try out different things and learn from them, the digital way is new to 
all of us.
 
65
==PAGE:66==
Ecosystem Map
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Creation of an ecosystem map of opportunities for startups is important 
to help guide them as best as possible. This map should contain the pro-
grams and initiatives structured after the startup stages they target. A de-
scription of who can apply should further be attached to each initiatives. 
Successful applications from previous startups should be collected and 
provided in a database under each initiative in the map to further help 
new startups with the application procedure. The map can further help 
the accelerator mentors to guide the teams after the end of program.
After participation in a structured program like a startup accelerator, start-
ups can lose momentum. To avoid this, startups can benefit from enter-
ing into new programs and initiatives. To make it as easy as possible, 
an ecosystem map can therefore help the accelerator guide the start-
ups after the accelerator. Furthermore, if possible, direct pipelines can 
be set up e.g. the university providing an incubation space or funding.
DTU has had an overview of the ecosystem made in a report, “Entrepreneur-
ship at DTU through two decades – initiatives, results and socioeconomic 
impact” by IRIS Group. Venture Cup has further created an overview of 
entrepreneurial initiatives at all universities. These can be used as an inspi-
ration for creation of an ecosystem map. An example is given to the right.
1. Initiatives and programs inside and outside the boundaries of the 
universities should be researched. The findings should be put into an 
ecosystem map and sorted after the development stages.
2. Successful application should be collected from these programs and 
put into a database.
3. Direct pipelines should be communicated on the map.
 
66
Ecosystem Map xample
The image shows the ecosystem overview developed by IRIS Group.
The ecosystem is divided into 6 categories “courses in entrepreneurship”, 
“events and culture “, “incubation”, “access to facilities”, “Access to capi-
tal”, and “advisory and mentoring services”. Under each category, several or-
ganisations are placed which cover different demands and target groups. 
The arrows suggest a pathway through the ecosystem e.g. from idea forma-
tion in a university course to acceleration program to incubation and funding.
Venture Cup has further, see image above, made a scale from idea to scaleup 
where they have placed the different organisations under.
These two examples can serve as an inspiration for how to make a stakeholder 
map of the entrepreneurial ecosystem at the university.
==PAGE:67==
Aligning Expectations
WHAT
WHY
HOW
?!
Building innovation and entrepreneurship capabilities is a major trend at 
the universities. For this reason, it is important to align expectations on how 
these initiatives are communicated. The departments working with entre-
preneurship should therefore both map out the ecosystem and meet to 
share expectations of which stakeholders (students, researchers, employ-
ees) can benefit from which solutions. This should further be communicated 
to important stakeholders at the university. That is the startups themselves, 
but also employees and departments who can suggest the initiatives.
From studying the seed stage startup accelerator Skylab Ignite at DTU, it 
was found that different departments were not aligned in the initiatives they 
provide for researchers and in how they are communicating these. Cre-
ating shared expectations and understanding of what each department 
can offer might further help increase the overall No. of applications to the 
initiatives as more people will be communicating it, saying it is an option.
DTU has had an overview of the ecosystem made in a report “Entre-
preneurship at DTU through two decades – initiatives, results and so-
cioeconomic impact” by IRIS Group. This can be used as an inspira-
tion for creation of an ecosystem map of initiatives inside the university.
1. A meeting should be set up between the departments working in the 
entrepreneurial ecosystem. The agenda should be to discuss the differ-
ent initiatives, who can benefit from them and how it can be communicat-
ed to stakeholders at the university.
2. Based on the meeting, an ecosystem map should be created with 
details on what initiatives exist and for whom.
 
67
References
[1] Hallen, B. L., Bingham, C. B. and Cohen, S. (2019), Do Accelerators 
Work? If So, How?, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2719810
[2] IRIS Group (2018), Entrepreneurship at DTU through two decades – 
initiatives, results and socioeconomic impact, IRIS Group
[3] Gonzalez-Uribe, J. and Leatherbee, M. (2016), The effects of business 
accelerators on venture performance: evidence from start-up Chile, The 
Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1566-1603.
[4] Savoia, A. (2011), “Pretotype It. Make sure you are building the right it 
before you build it right”
[5] Minou Weijs-Perrée, Jasper van de Koevering, Rianne Appel-Meulen-
broek & Theo Arentze (2019) “Analysing user preferences for co-working 
space characteristics”, Building Research & Information, 47(5), 534-548.
==PAGE:68==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
6. Discussion 
The following chapter will discuss the findings compared to existing knowledge in the field 
and the research validity. 
 
Overall no optimal accelerator design has been found in the literature, but research suggests 
that accelerators affect startups’ venture creation and development through learning 
mechanisms and entrepreneurship schooling. The findings of this study also suggest that 
Skylab Ignite has an accelerator effect on the teams’ venture development compared to 
non-participants, however this effect is measured on very early stage parameters, and other 
factors may influence the results. An example could be the sorting function that Skylab Ignite 
has i.e. the best teams are picked which are bound to achieve success on the selected 
parameters also if they got rejected from the program. It was further not possible to collect 
data from before 2019 nor possible to contact the startups to retrieve information e.g. on 
funding achieved or No. of employees which could provide further indications of success as 
it most likely will take more than one year for startups to achieve on these parameters. The 
learning mechanism identified from the literature study is found in Skylab Ignite to a certain 
extent through workshops and internal mentoring, but they don’t take full advantage of the 
learning opportunities they could be providing. This was identified in the challenges and 
solutions provided in the Idea Catalog. Because Skylab Ignite is a young program, the 
graduates are still in early stage development. Also since Skylab Ignite is a new initiative, it’s 
still learning and developing which makes it difficult to compare the cohorts. This has 
especially been the case this year because of the Covid-19 lockdown. Research further 
suggests that an accelerator will develop and improve over time, and Skylab Ignite has seen 
an increase in applicants also suggesting the efforts to position itself in the ecosystem are 
improving. 
 
Skylab Ignite can be classified as an accelerator according to the definition found in the 
literature, but the definition is very broad and does not tailor to all the different types of 
startup accelerators there is. It raises the issue of how accelerators can be compared as they 
are not homogenous in design and just by comparing Skylab Ignite with the different 
68 
==PAGE:69==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
university accelerators in Denmark it’s clear that they are different from each other. Caution 
should be taken if the results are to be compared. This study has not faced comparability 
issues as the method was to do an in-depth single case study focusing on Skylab Ignite. 
Pitfalls however arise as multiple case studies are more robust and can strengthen findings as 
opposed to a single case study. The conclusions of this study may not be generalizable and 
therefore need further inquiries or testing in the future to improve the validity of the result, 
however going into depth with a single case has provided important insights, which otherwise 
could have been overlooked if a multiple case study had been chosen. Even though a mixed 
method study approach was adopted, most of the data collection has been done using 
qualitative interviews. This has revealed rich data which further has pointed to challenges 
with a university accelerator based on people's experience, however further research should 
be done to both test if more participants of Skylab Ignite experience these issues and to see if 
these identified challenges apply to other accelerators. This could either be done interviewing 
more participants or by doing a quantitative survey as this is a good method to test findings 
on a larger scale. 
 
What could have been done differently if this study were to be carried out again would be to 
interview participants in the middle of the program (which was the plan before Covid-19) as 
it proved to be difficult for the previous participants to remember details about Skylab Ignite, 
especially when it comes to what worked less well and there is also recall bias to take into 
account. Further data should be collected in collaboration with Skylab Ignite on all 
participants since the beginning of the program to measure the startups’ success using 
parameters such as venture capital raised, website traffic and No. of employees. A survey 
based on the findings should be designed and sent out to multiple university accelerators to 
test the results and provide more validity, testing if the results only apply to a single 
phenomenon or are generalizable. 
 
69 
==PAGE:70==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
7. Conclusion 
Through the thesis project, an Idea Catalog has been developed on how a university 
accelerator can be improved and position itself in the entrepreneurial ecosystem. The 
university seed stage startup accelerator Skylab Ignite at DTU has been investigated using a 
single case study approach with the aim to answer the research question “​how can a 
university accelerator be designed to strengthen the program and increase the 
entrepreneurial output of the participants?​” and “​how can a university accelerator align and 
position itself according to the entrepreneurial ecosystem at the university?​”. Through a 
literature study on accelerators no overall accelerator effect on participating startups is found 
but a learning mechanism due to entrepreneurship schooling and startups consulting with 
outside peers are found to accelerate venture development. To try and capture this 
acceleration effect startup data was collected on Skylab Ignite participants from 2019-2020 
and by using early stage success parameters it was found that Skylab Ignite has an 
acceleration effect on the participants compared to non-participants (those who were 
rejected). To improve on this acceleration effect 14 challenges with Skylab Ignite were 
identified from investigating the workshops, the services provided, the Covid-19 effect on the 
accelerator and its position in the ecosystem. These were input in an ideation session and 11 
solutions were found. The solutions can be implemented independently from each other. To 
further strengthen a university accelerator program and increase the entrepreneurial output of 
the participants both smaller and larger scale solutions were found overall focusing on 
increasing the knowledge sharing opportunities and quality thereof with other startups in the 
cohort, external mentors and alumni. For a university accelerator to align and position itself 
according to the entrepreneurial ecosystem it was found that communication with 
stakeholders is important. That is both the startups themselves but also the departments, 
mentors and business developers that could be suggesting the accelerator as an option. 
Solutions for how to improve this were further identified focussing on understanding the 
ecosystem and its opportunities and creating shared expectation of who can benefit from 
those opportunities. 
 
70 
==PAGE:71==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
The thesis overall contributes to accelerator research, more specifically university 
accelerators, and provides a set of solutions, based on a single case study, for improving 
entrepreneurial output and ecosystem position. The study further suggests links between 
specific program elements and services which need further testing in the future. Accelerator 
research is still emerging and the study can help both practitioners design accelerator 
programs and/or elements in future and researchers in designing future studies by building 
and testing hypothesis on the findings. Caution should however be taken as the results build 
on the research and study of a single case and therefore the findings need further testing to 
prove/disprove generalizability. 
 
 
 
71 
==PAGE:72==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
8. Reflection 
The research method and strategy are not without limitations. First of all there are challenges 
applying the findings to the general population or accelerators. Findings are more reliable and 
trustworthy to the studied case and may not be found among other cases or participants. 
Overall the results may lack scientific rigour and provide little basis for generalisation. 
However this does not mean that the findings are less valuable. Since the topic of accelerators 
still are underexplored, a larger weight on the qualitative approach was found appropriate, 
and a larger quantitative study would in turn provide other challenges such as what is relevant 
to measure and how. It is therefore the author’s hope that these findings will provide a new 
perspective of improving accelerators and the ecosystem they are placed in, providing a basis 
for creation of hypothesis and design of studies investigating these, further testing the 
generalizability of the findings. 
 
Multiple data was collected from different sources using a mixed method approach in order to 
provide more validity and depth, it was however only possible to collect startup data from 
2019 onwards. Three previous startups were further interviewed but it proved difficult for 
them to recall details about Skylab Ignite. One current startup was interviewed but the 
Covid-19 lockdown gives rise to comparability issues. More data and interviews could have 
provided new relevant information, increasing the saturation level had circumstances 
permitted it. 
 
Finally the startups studied are similar to each other, they are very technically focused and 
nearly all came from DTU. Startups in a different context may have different experiences. 
Accelerators are also not homogenous in design and different accelerators may provide 
different results should the same research method be applied. However both successful and 
closed down startups were interviewed spanning different stages from very early to having an 
MVP. This ensured that different perspectives were included in the research. 
 
This study further provides implications for future research. This study has investigated a 
university accelerator and suggested specific elements/areas that if improved will increase 
72 
==PAGE:73==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
overall accelerator effect. There is a further need to investigate and link these suggested 
elements to having an accelerator effect and taking into account both accelerator startups and 
sponsors influence on these which can be difficult to untangle. Also the area of university 
accelerators needs to be further researched. As a place where innovation and inventions 
occur, both on a student and research level, it is interesting to further study what elements can 
best help accelerate newly formed startups to help bring future discoveries out into society. 
 
8.1. Reflection on project 
In the beginning of the thesis a project plan was made and timeline outlining the key 
activities and timeframe, see appendix 10. However the project plan and learning objectives 
were modified during the project. The updated timeline can be seen in appendix 11. The full 
project plan can be seen in appendix 12. 
 
The project has provided new challenges in conducting research on a topic that is in its 
emerging phases. Undertaking research as a novice researcher and alone has only added to 
the challenge, but provided valuable experience along the way i.e. learning to conduct a 
literature study, doing qualitative interviews and observations and interpreting results and 
providing recommendations based on the insights gathered.  
 
The project more or less went as planned during the first two months. A few weeks more 
were used on the literature study as it was decided to also include the practitioner’s 
perspective. However the case study phase was extended by a month due to the Covid-19 
crisis in planning and conducting interviews as well as analysing the results. This also 
changed the project scope, as it initially was the plan to both study Skylab Ignite and other 
university accelerators and initiatives to compare with. Even without the Covid-19 this scope 
may have proved too big for the author to take, and it was instead decided to get an in-depth 
understanding of the case. It was therefore further decided, since Covid-19 affected the 
Skylab Ignite spring 2020 program, to also include quantitative data on previous participants 
as well as researching on how Covid-19 has affected accelerators for future learnings. Instead 
of providing concepts and detailing them, it was also decided to provide an Idea Catalog 
instead, both since the Covid-19 pushed the schedule and also because the findings provided 
73 
==PAGE:74==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
challenges and solutions that would work independently of each other. In other words, it was 
decided not to select one concept to work with, but multiple ideas as they could all help the 
accelerator develop in the future. 
 
Taking all this into consideration, the author is happy with the results and hope to see Skylab 
Ignite implement some of the provided solutions, as well as seeing further research being 
conducted in the area. 
 
It is important to mention that the work has been iterative along the way, which is not 
reflected in the project plan. The author has also during the thesis had meetings with the 
supervisors to help keep the project on track, navigate the different activities and scope 
changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
==PAGE:75==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
References 
Beyer, H. and Holtzblatt, K. (1998), ​Contextual design: defining customer-centered systems​, 
Academic Press. 
 
Cohen, S., Fehder, C. D., Hochberg, V. Y. and Murray, f. (2019), ​The design of startup accelerators​, 
Research Policy 48, 1781-1797. 
 
Cohen, S. and Hochberg, Y. V. (2014), ​Accelerating startups: The seed accelerator phenomenon​, 
Available at SSRN: ​https://ssrn.com/abstract=2418000 
 
Design Council UK (2020). ​“Design Council's evolved Double Diamond” 
URL: 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/what-framework-innovation-design-councils-evolved-
double-diamond 
 
Drori, I. and Wright, M. (2018), ​ Accelerators: Successful Venture Creation and Growth​, Edward 
Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham (UK). 
 
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989), ​Building theories from case study research​, The Academy of Management 
Review 14(4), 532-550. 
 
FFE (2019), ​Entreprenørskab fra ABC til ph.d. Kortlægning af entreprenørskabsundervisning i det 
danske uddannelsessystem 2018/2019​, Fonden For Entreprenørskab, Available at: 
https://www.ffe-ye.dk/41224 
 
FFE (2016), ​Bedømmelse og evaluering i innovations- og entreprenørskabsundervisning på de danske 
universiteter​, Fonden For Entreprenørskab, Available at 
https://www.ffe-ye.dk/publikationer/publikationer 
 
Gonzalez-Uribe, J. and Leatherbee, M. (2016), ​The effects of business accelerators on venture 
performance: evidence from start-up Chile​, The Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1566-1603. 
 
Graham, R. (2014), ​Creating university based entrepreneurial eco-systems: evidence from emerging 
world leaders​, MIT Skoltech Initiative 
 
Hallen, B. L., Bingham, C. B. and Cohen, S. (2019), ​Do Accelerators Work? If So, How?​, Available 
at SSRN: ​https://ssrn.com/abstract=2719810 
 
Hallen, B. L., Bingham, C. B. and Cohen, S. (2014), ​Do Accelerators Accelerate? A Study of Venture 
Accelerators as a Path to Success”, ​Working paper. 
 
Hochberg, Y. V. (2016), ​Accelerating Entrepreneurs and Ecosystems: The Seed Accelerator Model​, 
Innovation Policy and the Economy 16 (1), 2016,  25-51. 
 
75 
==PAGE:76==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Innovation (2020), ​Innovation 
URL: ​https://www.dtu.dk/english/innovation 
 
Innovation and entrepreneurship (2020), ​Innovation and entrepreneurship 
URL: 
https://www.dtu.dk/english/collaboration/industrial_collaboration/innovation-and-entrepreneurship 
 
IRIS Group (2018), ​Entrepreneurship at DTU through two decades – initiatives, results and 
socioeconomic impact​, IRIS Group 
 
Naulin, T. and Moritz,  A. (2019). “The value adding impact of accelerators on startups 
Development”, Working paper 
 
Pauwels, C., Clarysse, B., Wright, M. and Van Hove, J. (2016), ​Understanding a new generation 
incubation model: the accelerator​, Technovation 50, 13-24. 
 
Robson, C. (2011), ​Real world research: A Resource for Users of Social Research Methods in Applied 
Settings​, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, West Sussex (UK) 
 
Skylab Ignite (2020), ​Skylab Ignite, 
URL: ​https://www.skylab.dtu.dk/programmes-and-services/skylab_ignite 
 
VC Experts (2020), “Experts” 
URL: ​https://venturecup.dk/experts/ 
 
Winston Smith, S., Hanigan, T. J. and Gasiorowski, L.  (2013), ​Accelerators and Crowd-Funding: 
Complementarity, Competition or Convergence in the Earliest Stages of Financing New Ventures?​, 
Available at SSRN: ​https://ssrn.com/abstract=2298875 
 
Yin, R. K. (2014), ​Case Study Research: Design and methods​, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks 
(CA). 
 
Yu, S. (2019), ​How Do Accelerators Impact The Performance of High-Technology Ventures?​, 
Management Science, 1-23. 
 
 
76 
==PAGE:77==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 
The following is a list of appendices. 
Appendix 1 - Results of finding literature 
The following shows some of the results of literature found as described in the method 
section, see section 2.2.2. 
 
Searches on DTU Findit 
Search block 
Article found 
University AND Startup AND Accelerator 
Cohen, S., Fehder, C. D., Hochberg, V. Y., Murray, 
f., 2019. “The design of startup accelerators”. 
Research Policy (48). 1781-1797. 
(startup OR start up OR start-up) AND (accelerator 
OR seed accelerator) 
Hochberg, Y.V., 2016.”Accelerating Entrepreneurs 
and Ecosystems: The Seed Accelerator Model”. 
Innovation Policy and the Economy 
Volume 16, Issue 1, 2016, Pages 25-51 
 
Searches on Scopus 
Search block 
Book found 
(startups OR start AND up OR start-up OR new 
AND venture AND creation) AND (accelerator OR 
seed AND accelerator) 
Drori, I. and Wright, M. (2018),  Accelerators: 
Successful Venture Creation and Growth, Edward 
Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham (UK). 
 
Articles that came from the litterature list of other articles or citations 
Article 
New articles found 
Naulin, T. and Moritz,  A. (2019). “The value adding 
impact of accelerators on startups Development”, 
Working paper 
Cohen, S. and Hochberg, Y. V. (2014), ​Accelerating 
startups: The seed accelerator phenomenon​, 
Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2418000 
Cohen, S., Fehder, C. D., Hochberg, V. Y. and 
Murray, f. (2019), The design of startup accelerators, 
Research Policy 48, 1781-1797. 
Hallen, B. L., Bingham, C. B. and Cohen, S. (2019), 
Do Accelerators Work? If So, How?​, Available at 
SSRN: ​https://ssrn.com/abstract=2719810 
 
Pauwels, C., Clarysse, B., Wright, M. and Van Hove, 
J. (2016), ​Understanding a new generation 
incubation model: the accelerator​, Technovation 50, 
77 
==PAGE:78==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
13-24. 
 
Gonzalez-Uribe, J. and Leatherbee, M. (2016), ​The 
effects of business accelerators on venture 
performance: evidence from start-up Chile​, The 
Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1566-1603. 
 
Yu, S. (2019), ​How Do Accelerators Impact The 
Performance of High-Technology Ventures?​, 
Management Science, 1-23. 
Cohen, S. and Hochberg, Y. V. (2014), ​Accelerating 
startups: The seed accelerator phenomenon​, 
Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2418000 
Hallen, B. L., Bingham, C. B. and Cohen, S. (2014), 
Do Accelerators Accelerate? A Study of Venture 
Accelerators as a Path to Success”, ​Working paper. 
 
Websites and other 
Website or other 
Article found 
https://www.ffe-ye.dk 
FFE (2019), ​Entreprenørskab fra ABC til ph.d. 
Kortlægning af entreprenørskabsundervisning i det 
danske uddannelsessystem 2018/2019​, Fonden For 
Entreprenørskab, Available at: 
https://www.ffe-ye.dk/41224 
 
FFE (2016), ​Bedømmelse og evaluering i 
innovations- og entreprenørskabsundervisning på de 
danske universiteter​, Fonden For Entreprenørskab, 
Available at 
https://www.ffe-ye.dk/publikationer/publikationer 
Supervisors 
Graham, R. (2014), ​Creating university based 
entrepreneurial eco-systems: evidence from 
emerging world leaders​, MIT Skoltech Initiative 
 
Naulin, T. and Moritz,  A. (2019). “The value adding 
impact of accelerators on startups Development”, 
Working paper 
 
 
 
 
78 
==PAGE:79==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 2 - Interviewguides 
The following are the interview guides used to conduct the qualitative interviews. 
 
Kristoffer Buch (program manager) 
Questions 
Aim 
Can you tell me a bit about your role in Skylab? 
 
What is your position? 
 
What are your main responsibility areas? 
 
For how long have you worked in skylab? 
 
Warm up questions 
What is skylabs role at DTU? 
 
What is skylabs role in the whole entrepreneurship ecosystem at 
DTU? 
 
Gain insight into skylabs role at DTU 
Can you tell me a bit about the Skylab Ignite program? 
 
For how long has Skylab Ignite run? 
 
How is skylab ignite structured? 
What are the benefits of being part of Skylab Ignite? 
What do the teams get out of participating in Skylab Ignite? 
 
What are the overall goals of the program? 
Can you elaborate on these goals? 
Are these goals met? 
Why / Why not? 
 
Can you elaborate on what works well with the Skylab Ignite 
program? 
Why does it work well? 
Anything that can be improved? 
(All the speakers, 1:1 coaching, workshops elements) 
 
Can you elaborate on some of the challenges Skylab Ignite faces? 
Why is it a challenge? 
How do you suggest to overcome this challenge? 
(Too much listening, less time to work on workshops themes. 
Lacking structure of the workshops, Lacking peer-to-peer 
learning.) 
Gain insight into the Skylab Ignite 
program (overall goals, what works 
well, less well) 
What value does Skylab Ignite create for the participating 
startups? 
 
What value does it create on an individual level (the entrepreneur 
as a person)? 
Value Skylab Ignite creates for the 
startups 
79 
==PAGE:80==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
e.g. how does it affect the entrepreneurial output of the 
participants? (​Personal development, Motivation​) 
 
What value does it create on the startup level? 
e.g. do the startups perform better, receive follow up funding 
faster, better sales? (​Team development, develop product mvp, 
communication, business skills, increased performance, better 
network​) 
 
Do the participants agree with Skylab Ignite creating this value? 
Why/ Why not? 
 
Are there some areas that could be improved in creating value for 
the participants? 
Can you elaborate on these areas? 
 
Are there some areas that are lacking in creating value for the 
participants? 
Can you elaborate on these areas? 
 
Are you following up with the Skylab Ignite Alumni? 
Why/Why not? 
How are you following up with them? 
 
What overall feedback did you get from previous participants? 
Can you elaborate on the positive feedback? 
Can you elaborate on the negative feedback? 
How are you taking this feedback into account in the current 
program? 
 
How are the alumni performing after being part of Skylab Ignite?  
What are Successes / failures of these teams? 
Do you keep track of this? 
How do you keep track of this? 
 
Do you include the alumni in the current Skylab Ignite program? 
How do you include them? 
What effect does this have on the program/teams? 
 
Does the participants get to share knowledge with the alumni? 
Skylab Ignite Alumni (performance of 
teams, inclusion in the program) 
How does Skylab Ignite fit into the entrepreneurial ecosystem at 
DTU? 
Are you satisfied with this position? 
Why/ why not? 
What could be done to improve this position? 
Which initiatives are you taking to maintain/improve Skylab 
Ignites position? 
 
Have you teamed up with other initiatives at DTU? 
E.g. courses, Tech Transfer Office ect. 
What are the goals if teaming up? 
Does these partnership work? 
Why/ Why not? 
 
Is Skylab Ignite recognized by the entrepreneurial ecosystem at 
Skylab Ignites position in the ecosystem 
(Position, Partnerships) 
80 
==PAGE:81==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
DTU? 
Why / why not?  
 
Does all DTU startups pass through skylab? (or does some go to 
future box, tech transfer ect.?) 
Why, why not? 
What could be done to improve this? 
 
Is it the goal to reach out to all startups at DTU? 
Why, why not? 
 
 
 
Note the following questions are about the current Skylab Ignite 
program, unless stated otherwise. 
 
What are the business model of skylab ignite? 
What is the funding structure? 
 
Can you elaborate on the application process? 
Do you screen the startups yourself? 
 
How many startups do you usually take in? 
 
What are the composition of the startups? 
e.g. are they similar, different from each other? All engineers? 
 
What stage are the startups at? e.g. early stage, experienced ect.? 
What do you do to accommodate for this difference? (If startups 
are at different stages) 
 
How long are the program? 
 
Do the startups receive any funding from participation? 
 
Do you take equity? 
 
Does the startups connect with mentors during the program?  
Who are these mentors?  
How often do they meet? 
What are the goals of these meetings? 
 
Who are the managing directors of Skylab Ignite? 
What are their backgrounds? 
 
What kind of education do you provide to the startups?  
Are they fixed for all or can they chose themselves (ala carte)? 
 
What kind of graduation event do you host at the end of the 
program? 
Can you elaborate on this event? 
Why this type of event? 
 
Do you provide office space for the startups? 
Why, Why not? 
 
Categorize Skylab Ignite as a university 
accelerator (Only ask these questions if 
there is time left) 
81 
==PAGE:82==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Where is Skylab Ignite located? 
Previous participants 
Questions 
Aim 
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this interview, as 
you may know i’m doing my master thesis on accelerators and 
therefore i’m using Skylab Ignite as a case study, the following 
questions is therefore about you experience with the program and 
about what you got out of it. Just to let you know i will record the 
interview so that i can refer to it at a later date. But let's get 
started. 
Introduction to the project 
What is the name of your startup?  
 
Can you tell me a bit about the startup, what problem are you 
solving? 
 
What are your role in the startup? 
 
For how long has the startup existed? 
Warm up, getting insight into the 
startup. 
What activities were your startup doing before entering the ignite 
program?  
(Course, thesis, research, another program) 
(Were you established as a startup) 
 
How did you find out about the Ignite program? 
 
What stage would you describe the startup to be at at the time 
entering the Ignite program? 
(Idea stage/early stage, concept development, paying customers, 
scaling) 
 
What are the reasons why you applied for the Ignite program? 
What were you looking to get out of the program? 
e.g. areas you would like to improve, hiring new team members, 
getting customers. 
 
Did you agree with Ignites goal to become a customer driven 
startup team in 10 weeks? 
What were the startup doing before 
Ignite, How the startup found Ignite, 
goals of applying. 
Since Skylab Ignite, where are the startup today? 
Does the company still exist? 
Have you been registered, with a CVR No.? 
Have you pivoted since? 
Have you gotten more traction? (e.g. customers) 
Have you hired new employees? 
Have you gotten increased traffic on your website? 
Has participating in skylab helped you achieve these things? 
 
What stage would you describe the startup to be at now? 
(Idea stage/early stage, concept development, paying customers, 
scaling) 
Has participating in Ignite helped you move forward to this stage? 
How would you say? 
 
Where are the startup today, does the 
company still exist, success / failures. 
82 
==PAGE:83==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Have you been able to use Ignite to brand yourself after 
participation? (e.g in front of investors or to get into other 
programs) 
Has it opened up opportunities e.g. participating in new 
programmes or getting funding? 
 
Have you attended other accelerators or programs since Ignite? 
How was the program compared to Ignite? 
What was good?  
What was less good? 
Is there something they are doing which the Ignite program 
should be doing? 
 
What other successes have you achieved since participating in 
Ignite? 
 
What about failures?  
Have you experienced any?  
Can you elaborate a bit on them? 
Could the Ignite program have helped you avoid it? 
What did you get out of participation in the Ignite program?  
Did it live up to your expectations? 
 
Where there any areas it particular that helped you move forward 
as a startup? 
Can you elaborate on that? 
 
Where there any areas that could be improved? 
Can you elaborate on that? 
 
Is there some areas that Ignite did not help you with? 
Would have liked them to include that in the program? 
Overall value they got out of 
participating in the program. 
Did you like the structure of the program? 
(Workshops and coaching in between) 
Why / why not? 
Improvements? 
 
Were the workshop topics important to you? 
Was there something you were missing? 
 
Was there enough time for the workshop exercises at the 
workshops? 
Did you continue working with the workshop exercises outside 
the workshops?  
(e.g. validation plan) 
Why / why not? 
 
Would you like to have had more time working on your own 
startup at the workshops? 
 
Did you like the 1:1 coaching?  
Was the coaching frequent enough? 
How did it help your startup during the Ignite program? 
 
Is there anything the coaching was lacking that could have been 
Structure of the program with focus on 
improvements 
83 
==PAGE:84==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
better? or that you would have needed? 
 
During the program were you incentivised to set and reach goals? 
Did you find it useful? / would you have liked it to be more goal 
oriented? 
Was the dialog tool useful for you to structure your tasks during 
the Ignite program? 
What services provided by the Ignite program did you find 
beneficial? 
(1:1 coaching, workshops, online tools, finding investors, finding 
customers) 
 
Is there other services you think the Ignite program should have 
provided? 
(providing online tools, access to counseling or free consulting, 
finding investors, finding customers, finding mentors) 
 
After participating in the Ignite program, is there some services 
you would like Ignite or skylab to offer? (Funding, directly access 
to incubator / program) 
 
Would you like Ignite to have provided some funding at the 
beginning? 
What would you need the funding for? eg. for developing a 
prototype during the program. 
 
What about getting outside mentors connected to your startup 
during the program? 
Any specific type of mentor you would have needed?  
What about help setting up advisory board or finding a mentor for 
your advisory board? 
 
What about co-working space? Would you have liked Ignite to 
offer a working space during the program? 
Services provided, services that are 
lacking and improvements 
Were you able to network with the other teams during the ignite 
program? 
Did you learn from the other startups in the Ignite program? 
Can you elaborate on some areas they helped you? 
Would you have liked more time to network and learn from the 
other teams? 
 
Do you think that a co-working space would encourage more 
peer-to-peer learning? 
 
Did you learn from the startup presentations / guest speakers?  
Were you able to network with the guest speakers? 
Would you have liked them to be included more? 
E.g. in the workshops? At dinner? 
How would you have liked them to be included? 
 
Would you have liked to network more with people outside the 
ignite program? 
Peer to peer learning with other startups 
Would you say Ignite has helped you increase your 
entrepreneurial competencies? 
Entrepreneurial impact the accelerator 
has on participants entrepreneurial 
84 
==PAGE:85==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Can you elaborate a bit on these competencies? 
How did Ignite help you obtain these? 
 
Have you developed personally during the program, in terms 
getting entrepreneurial experience? 
(motivation, better entrepreneur) 
 
Have you developed the startup during the program? 
(​Team development, developed product mvp, communication, 
business skills, increased performance, better network​) 
 
Did you gain any competencies from the Ignite program that has 
helped you become a better engineer? 
Can you elaborate what these competencies are? 
How did Ignite help you obtain these? 
output (Personal development, Startup 
development (e.g. become customer 
driven, better team)) 
 
What do you think the university's role should be in terms of 
helping startups?  
(Workshops, getting investment, finding customers) 
 
Would you recommend Skylab ignite to another startup?  
Why / why not?  
University's role in helping startups + 
end questions 
 
 
85 
==PAGE:86==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Current participants 
Questions 
Aim 
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this interview, as 
you may know i’m doing my master thesis on accelerators and 
therefore i’m using Skylab Ignite as a case study, the following 
questions is therefore about your experience with the program and 
about what you hope to get out of it. A part is also about how you 
are managing things during the corona situation. Just to let you 
know i will record the interview so that i can refer to it at a later 
date. But let's get started. 
Introduction to the project 
What is the name of your startup? 
 
What are your role in the startup? 
 
For how long has the startup existed? 
 
Are the startup CVR registered? 
Warm up, getting insight into the 
startup. 
What were your startup doing before entering the ignite program? 
(Course, thesis, research, another program) 
(Were you established as a startup) 
 
How did you find out about the Ignite program? 
 
What stage would you describe the startup to be at at the time 
entering the Ignite program? 
(Idea stage/early stage, concept development, paying customers, 
scaling) 
 
What are the reasons why you applied for the Ignite program? 
What are you looking to get out of the program? 
e.g. areas you would like to improve, hiring new team members, 
getting customers. 
 
Do you agree with Ignites goal of participation to become a 
customer driven startup team in 10 weeks? 
What were the startup doing before 
Ignite, How the startup found Ignite, 
goals of applying. 
Do you think you will be able to use Ignite to brand yourself after 
participation? (e.g in front of investors or to get into other 
programs) 
Why? Why not? 
 
Are you attending other accelerators or programs than Ignite? 
How is the program compared to Ignite? 
Is it a good program?  
Is there something that is less good? 
Is there something they are doing which the Ignite program could 
be doing? 
 
Has ignite helped you achieve some successes so far? 
Can you elaborate? 
 
What about failures or things that went less well?  
Have you experienced any?  
Can you elaborate a bit on them? 
Expectations after ignite participation, 
participation in similar programs. 
86 
==PAGE:87==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Could the Ignite program have helped you avoid it? 
What have you gotten out of participation in the Ignite program 
so far?  
Is it living up to your expectations? 
 
Are there any particular areas that are helping you move forward 
as a startup? 
Can you elaborate on that? 
 
Are there any areas that can be improved so far? 
Can you elaborate on that? 
 
Is there some areas that Ignite are not helping you with? 
Would have liked them to include that in the program? 
Overall value they are getting out of 
participating in the program. 
During the corona situation things have had to be done more 
digitally, so how are you coping with that in your startup? 
 
How has the corona situation changed the Ignite program? 
(Canceling workshops, One online workshop and coaching, 
PeaQs platform) 
 
As i understand it they have canceled the workshops, and made a 
plan for you to work on your pitch and pitch deck with your 
coach instead? 
Do you agree on this solution? 
Would you have liked more digital workshops 
Have they changed other things?  
Are there other things you are expected to work on for the 
remainder of the ignite program? 
 
Are there some good things with the way the program is running 
now, digitally? 
Can you elaborate? 
 
What about things that are less good about the digital way the 
program is running? 
(Cancelled workshops, less opportunity to network) 
Can you elaborate? 
 
Are you still able go out and do things but digitally in terms of 
becoming customer driven?  
(finding customers, reaching out to them, validating the 
customer/market) 
What about reaching out to investors? If your startup is ready for 
that? 
 
What about working on your team during the corona situation? 
Has there been opportunities or challenges here? 
 
Are you able to network with and learn from the other teams 
during the corona situation? 
Why? Why not? 
 
What about the PeaQs platform that are run digitally? How does it 
work? 
Coping with the corona situation 
87 
==PAGE:88==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
In terms of keeping up with the other teams? Peer reviewing? 
In terms of working with your startup? e.g. uploading information 
about your customer, market description, your product, partners 
and competitors ect. 
Is it valuable for your your startup to move forward? 
 
Do you like the 1:1 coaching?  
Is the coaching frequent enough? 
How has it helped your startup during the Ignite program? 
 
As i understand it the coaching has more or less replaced the 
workshops? 
What are you focussing on at the coaching? 
 
Is there anything the coaching is lacking that could have been 
better? or that you would have needed? 
 
Are you incentivised to set and reach goals? 
Do you find it useful? / would you have liked it to be more goal 
oriented? 
Are you using the dialog tool to structure your tasks during the 
Ignite program? 
 
 
There has been three workshops so far, kick-off and team, 
customer validation and investor pitch deck (the one you missed, 
but diana went through it at the coaching session) 
 
Are these topics important to your startup? 
Are there something you are missing? 
 
Was there enough time for the workshop exercises at the 
workshops? 
Did you continue working with the workshop exercises outside 
the workshops?  
(e.g. validation plan) 
Why / why not? 
 
Would you like to have had more time working on your own 
startup at the workshops? 
Structure of the program workshops 
with focus on improvements 
Would you like Ignite to have provided some funding at the 
beginning or after the program? 
What would you need the funding for? eg. for developing a 
prototype during the program. 
 
What about getting mentors connected to your startup during the 
program? 
Any specific type of mentor you would have needed?  
What about help setting up advisory board or finding a mentor for 
your advisory board? 
 
What about co-working space? Would you have liked Ignite to 
offer a working space during the program? 
Do you have experience with co-working space? 
Can you elaborate? 
Services provided, services that are 
lacking and improvements 
88 
==PAGE:89==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Would you say Ignite has helped you increase your 
entrepreneurial competencies? 
Can you elaborate a bit on these competencies? 
How did Ignite help you obtain these? 
 
Have you developed personally during the program, in terms 
getting entrepreneurial experience? 
(motivation, better entrepreneur) 
 
Have you developed the startup during the program? 
(​Team development, developed product mvp, communication, 
business skills, increased performance, better network​) 
Entrepreneurial impact the accelerator 
has on participants entrepreneurial 
output (Personal development, Startup 
development (e.g. become customer 
driven, better team)) 
 
Would you recommend Skylab ignite to another startup? 
Why / why not?  
University's role in helping startups + 
end questions 
 
 
89 
==PAGE:90==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Thomas Howard (Course professor of x-tech entrepreneurship collaborating with 
ignite) 
Questions 
Aim 
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this interview. As you 
may know, i am writing my thesis about acceleration programs 
and i’m using the Ignite program run by Skylab by Kristoffer as a 
case study.  Part of my investigation area is also the pipelines 
from the dtu courses to the program. I will therefore ask some 
questions about your course and how you are collaborating with 
the ignite program. 
 
What is the name of your course?  
 
Can you tell me a bit about the course? 
 
How is the course structured? 
 
What are your role in the course? 
 
For how long has the course program run? 
 
Can you briefly mention what entrepreneurial topics are covered 
in the course? 
(Pitching, Business creation, Customer validation, Market fit, 
Importance of the right team) 
(​Team development, developing product mvp, communication, 
business skills, increased performance, better network​) 
 
Would you say your course is more theoretical focused? Or 
practical? 
e.g. do the participants learn about these entrepreneurial topics 
through lectures, reading or by actively going out talking to 
customers, testing assumptions from business plan ect. 
Warm up, getting insight into the 
course. 
What is the goal of the course? 
(Increasing entrepreneurial competencies/mindset, gaining 
entrepreneurial skills, knowledge about entrepreneurship) 
 
Are these/this goal met? 
Why / why not? 
 
Insights into the goal of the course 
Who can participate in your course? 
 
Which study lines do you usually see participating in the course? 
 
Do the course participants have an idea / or a startup they enter 
into the course with? or do the course participants have to come 
up with an idea / startup during the course? 
 
How far do the course participants come in terms of creating 
either a startup or an idea with a business model ect.  
 
What stage would you say the created startups are at after the 
course? (Idea stage/early stage, concept development, proof of 
concept, paying customers, scaling) 
Insight into participants, do they enter 
with an idea / startup or make one 
during the course. 
90 
==PAGE:91==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Are you encouraging the teams to continue with their idea / 
startup after the course? 
 
How many continues with the idea / startup after the course? 
 
Are you referring the teams to other programs at dtu e.g. Skylab 
Ignite, Skylabs incubator, skylab funding, skylab in general). 
 
What about programs outside DTU 
(Venture Cup’s competition, danish tech challenge, accelerace, 
inno founder) 
 
Does participation in the course give the teams an advantage in 
getting into these other programs? 
Follow up after course 
Are you collaborating with other courses, programs or institutions 
at DTU or outside DTU? e.g. are there any pipelines after the 
course? 
 
Are you actively collaborating with Skylab, during the course? 
 
And what about Skylab Ignite. How are you collaborating with 
Skylab Ignite? 
 
Have you collaborated with Skylab Ignite before? 
Was it successful? 
 
What are you hoping to get out of the collaboration? 
Success criteria? 
Insights about the collaboration with 
Ignite and skylab. 
How can Ignite contribute to the team/ startup after participating 
in the course? 
 
Is there some specific areas you would like Ignite to focus on, 
helping the teams further? 
 
Are there some areas that your course aren’t covering which the 
teams could benefit from? 
 
A team participating in last years ignite program has mentioned 
they did not learn a lot of new things, because they also had 
participated in x-tech. So Ignite may cover the same topics as 
your course, do you think this is an issue? or is it beneficial for 
the teams to go through the important topics again? 
 
How Ignite adds value on top of the 
course 
What do you think the university's role should be in terms of 
helping students with an idea or startups?  
(Workshops, getting investment, finding customers) 
 
Is x-tech going to be incorporated into the new entrepreneurship 
master? 
DTU’s role in helping student startups. 
 
 
 
91 
==PAGE:92==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Jens Friholm (Runs the pre-startup mentoring programme of TechTransfer) 
Questions 
Aim 
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this interview. As you 
may know, i am writing my thesis about acceleration programs 
and i’m using the Ignite program run by Skylab by Kristoffer as a 
case study.  Part of my investigation area is also the ecosystem at 
DTU around entrepreneurship. I will therefore ask some questions 
about Tech Transfer to learn more about what you do, and also to 
hear how you relate to Skylab Ignite. 
Introduction to the project 
Can you tell me about Tech Transfer? What is it you are doing? 
 
And your focus is on DTU employees, who discover new 
technologies, inventions?  
What kind of positions? 
What about Researchers, PhD’s and students in general? 
 
How does it work when an employee comes up with a new 
invention? 
So they can choose to license it or create a startup? 
Do you supply entrepreneurial people? Or where do they come 
from, if they choose the startup path? 
What startup stage will they likely begin at? (Idea stage, proof of 
concept, prototype stage? 
 
What programs do you have at TechTransfer? 
 
Warm up, getting insight into Tech 
Transfer. 
How does Tech Transfer fit into the whole entrepreneurial 
ecosystem at DTU? 
(Skylab, DTU entrepreneurship, Tech Transfer) 
 
Are Tech Transfer collaborating with other initiatives, 
departments or programs at DTU? 
What about Skylab? 
What about Skylab Ignite? The accelerator? 
 
Or do you run your own programs mostly? 
 
To what degree do you mention Skylab and its possibilities like 
their workshops, funding, Ignite and incubator, to your 
stakeholders? 
Entrepreneurial Ecosystem at DTU. 
If an employee chooses the startup path, could you imagine that 
they could benefit from participating in Skylab Ignite, whose goal 
is to become customer driven and have a strong team, in 10 
weeks?  
Or would you prefer them to take part in your own program? 
 
And could there be a path from DTU employees participating in 
Skylab Ignite to getting IP(R)? Or they could be alongside each 
other? 
 
Could the teams from Ignite get help from Tech Transfer about 
IP(R) and so on? (The other way around) 
 
Possibilities of collaborating with 
Skylab Ignite. 
92 
==PAGE:93==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Could there be advantages in having your employees mix with 
students and PhD startups, in a program like Ignite? 
Or would there be disadvantages? 
 
So do you see Skylab and the Ignite program as something 
separate to Tech Transfer? 
What do you think the university's role should be in terms of 
helping students, researchers and employes with an idea or 
startups?  
(Workshops, getting investment, finding customers) 
DTU’s role in helping student startups. 
 
 
93 
==PAGE:94==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 3 - Observation structure 
Observation role 
The marginal participant (Robson, 2011, pp. 323) i.e observer with low degree of participation. Goal 
is simply to observe but not participate in workshop, exercises ect. Observer may occasionally ask 
questions to the participants if possible about focus areas, see observation themes. Questions should 
not be leading, e.g. “why do you like…” and they should be simple e.g. not double barreled. They 
should not be too long either, or involve jargon that participants cannot understand. 
 
Observation themes 
Workshops 
Descriptive observation 
What to look for 
Space: Layout of the physical setting; rooms, outdoor 
spaces ect. 
The setting of the workshops, where are workshops 
held, opportunities/challenges with physical setting 
Actors: Names and relevant details of the people 
involved 
Who are the startups, “teachers”, guests of the 
workshops 
Acts: Specific individual actions 
How do the teams interact with each other, do they 
share knowledge  
Activities: The various activities of the actors 
Workshop elements of interest, e.g. small 
assignments, discussions ect. 
Events: Particular occasions e.g. meetings 
What are the workshops about, content, goals 
 
 
Focused observations (specific things to look for  
What to look for 
Team expectations 
What are the teams expectations 
Mentor engagement 
Does the teams engage with the mentors (previous 
alumni, guests speakers, other) 
Knowledge sharing between cohort 
Does the team members share knowledge/ 
experiences with each other. 
Engagement 
Does the participant ask/answer questions, are they 
participating actively in the workshop. 
Building a network 
Do the participant build social relations with each 
other.  
ADDED 10 marts: Catering to new and experienced 
teams. 
Do the workshops cater to both new teams and 
people who already have some entrepreneurial 
experience? 
 
 
Off workshop observations 
 
Slack 
Does the team use slack actively, and what do they 
94 
==PAGE:95==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
use it for. 
 
1:1 sessions 
Descriptive observation 
What to look for 
Space: Layout of the physical setting; 
rooms, outdoor spaces ect. 
The setting of the business coaching, where are the coaching held, 
opportunities/challenges with physical setting 
Actors: Names and relevant details of 
the people involved 
Who are the startups and coach 
Acts: Specific individual actions 
How do the team interact with the coach 
Activities: The various activities of 
the actors 
Coaching elements of interest, e.g. small assignments, discussions 
ect. 
Events: Particular occasions e.g. 
meetings 
What are the coaching about, content, goals 
 
 
 
Focused observations (specific things to look 
for) 
What to look for 
Goals 
Do the coaching session involve setting goals to be followed (create 
a sense of urgency). 
Engagement 
Are the startup team participating actively in the coaching. 
Other relevant observations 
 
 
 
 
95 
==PAGE:96==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 4 - Detailed overview of the Skylab Ignite fall batch 2019 
A detailed overview of Skylab Ignite and its elements from the fall 2019 batch are presented 
in the following. The data is collected through observing the workshops (FaW_19, Finals_19) 
and from the workshop material provided by the program. 
 
 
 
 
96 
==PAGE:97==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 5 - Startup data (StDa) 
List of parameters for participant startups. 19 in total. Year Sp/Fa indicates the year and if it 
was from the Spring or Fall program. 
Participant startup 
Year 
Sp/Fa 
CVR 
Registered 
Y/N 
Nr of 
employees 
Website 
Y/N 
Media 
active Y/N 
Funding 
Y/N 
Startup #1 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
Y 
N 
Y 
Startup #2 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #3 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
N 
Y 
Y 
Startup #4 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
Y 
Y 
- 
Startup #5 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #6 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #7 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #8 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #9 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
Y 
- 
- 
Startup #10 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
-  
- 
Startup #11 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #12 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
Y 
Startup #13 
2019 Sp 
Y 
- 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Startup #14 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
N 
- 
Startup #15 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #16 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #17 
2019 Sp 
Y 
- 
N 
N 
- 
Startup #18 
2019 Sp 
Y 
- 
Y 
Y 
- 
Startup #19 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
Y 
- 
Startup #20 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
 
Startup #21 
2019 Fa 
Y 
- 
Y 
N 
Y 
Startup #22 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
Y 
Startup #23 
2019 Fa 
Y 
- 
Y 
Y 
Y 
97 
==PAGE:98==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Startup #24 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #25 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
N 
- 
Startup #26 
2019 Fa 
Y 
- 
N 
N 
Y 
Startup #27 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
Y 
Y 
- 
Startup #28 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #29 
2019 Fa 
Y 
- 
N 
Y 
- 
Startup #30 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
N 
- 
 
List of parameters for non-participant startups. 17 in total. Year Sp/Fa indicates the year and 
if it was from the Spring or Fall program. 
Non-participant 
startup 
Year 
Sp/Fa 
CVR 
Registered 
Y/N 
Nr of 
employees 
Website 
Y/N 
Media active 
Y/N 
Funding Y/N 
Startup #31 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #32 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #33 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #34 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #35 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #36 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #37 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #38 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #39 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
Y 
- 
- 
Startup #40 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #41 
2020 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #41 
2020 Sp 
Y 
- 
Y 
Y 
- 
Startup #42 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #43 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #44 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #45 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #46 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #47 
2019 Sp 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
98 
==PAGE:99==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Startup #48 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #49 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #50 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #51 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #52 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #53 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
Y 
Y 
- 
Startup #54 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #55 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #56 
2019 Fa 
Y 
- 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Startup #57 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
Startup #58 
2019 Fa 
N 
- 
N 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
99 
==PAGE:100==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 6 - Supporting quotes of what works well with Skylab 
Ignite. 
List of areas that worked well with the Skylab Ignite program and supporting quotes from the 
Skylab Ignite Fall 2019 survey and interviews can be found in the following table. 
What worked well 
Supporting quote  
Learning from guest 
speakers e.g. startups 
who were successful 
or failed. 
“Talks from former Startups, basically sums up what to do and what not to do” 
(SurveyFa) 
“what i liked a lot was all the different speakers at the events, i liked to hear real 
cases and real people and their experiences with creating a startup, also why some 
of the startups failed, and also what got them going, and how they maybe iterated 
along the way, changed path, something like that, that was maybe one of the most 
inspiring things” (PSt(c)_19) 
“(Response to a guest presentation ed.) it’s just interesting to see if you’re motivated 
and you have a drive and you have a good personality, often that is actually what the 
investors look at and not only the idea or product, so in that sense it was something 
you could learn, no matter what kind of product or project you would do in the 
future” (PSt(c)_19) 
Pitching 
“The one minute pitches really forced us to think about our value proposition and 
our scope throughout the program. It was great to be "pushed" into speaking in front 
of peers consistently and it was a good way to follow the other teams” (SurveyFa) 
“I am much better at Pitching now I think than for just 10 weekend ago” (SurveyFa) 
“I think they were good at telling the importance of deliver your story and also 
present your project in a nice way” (PSt(c)_19) 
“So we didn’t have any clue about startup pitching, that helped us” (PSt(a)_19) 
Coaching 
“Yes, so that helped very much (the coaching ed.) because (...) (the assigned 
business coach ed.) could tell us what to exactly pinpoint, and focus on and also he 
could then challenge our assumptions (...) and since he  has a lot of experience with 
other startups and to see how general a good pitch should be, that feedback of his 
side helped us” (PSt(a)_19) 
“having a personal coach was valuable” (SurveyFa) 
“(getting ed.) honest and experienced feedback on our projects, to get the final push 
to get stuff done” (PSt(b)_19) 
100 
==PAGE:101==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
“they (the coaches ed.) were prepared when we talked to them, they have listened to 
our project” (PSt(b)_19) 
 
 
Appendix 7 - Identified challenges and opportunities during the 
covid-19 crisis 
Evidence of opportunities of having digital meetings 
Digitizing meetings 
Having meetings online can also be done successfully by having a professional facilitator who can structure 
the meeting so everybody gets to speak, the current participant explains and she even experienced a meeting 
with 40 people where everybody had the opportunity to speak (CSt_20). She is also surprised because she 
finds DTU to be very innovative and that Skylab Ignite didn’t make use of such solutions (CSt_20). The way 
she’s experienced e.g. a successful Zoom meetings at The Kitchen, was that everybody send an agenda the 
day before which the facilitator collects, then at the meeting they did a quick round updating each other on 
how it’s going before going through every questions and topic people want feedback on, and the facilitator 
takes notes which are given to the participants afterwards (CSt_20). During the meeting people can then write 
questions in the comments or raise their hand and speak (CSt_20). 
 
Interview / 
observation 
Opportunities 
CSt_20 
“yeah, i think the mentorship has been more fluently, and they also told that because of the 
coronavirus, and the change in the program, that you are able to contact like your mentor 
much more, like if you needed anything you can just write or you know arrange a zoom 
meeting or anything, and i have really been, you know, taken advantage of that and it has 
been really great, that they had time for that” 
 
“Yeah, certainly, thats why, it’s a bit of, yeah it’s a great thing for me (not having to travel 
from aarhus to DTU ed.), because the transport, that works really good.” 
 
“if you have to participate in something physical you are kind of locked there, so in that 
way you it have been, perhaps a bit easier for us to communicate, also because we can 
communicate all through the day, because i’m not you know at uni or something” 
 
“So in that way we have been looking at facebook groups where people are asking for 
marriage, like legal answers to divorces, you know stuff like that, and that is also a way of 
working with users online in a more digital way, just to collect that kind of data, if that 
makes sense” 
 
“yeah, yeah, and also i was recruiting two people, who wants, which i’m going to 
interview, who has been through a divorce just to hear about, you know, their way, they do 
on it, and that's also someone i recruited online, yeah so it’s just like, yeah, i’m seeking the 
customers more even though i can’t do it physically, then i think, is there a way of doing it 
digitalised,” 
101 
==PAGE:102==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
“But i have heard people other startups say that they have really been, it have really been 
beneficial for them that people are digitalised on the internet, because they can just sitting 
at their homes and they can just catch people” 
 
“Yeah i don’t think it has to be physical (the workshops ed.), like because you know, 
obviously it would be best if it would be physical, but it would, but you could easily have 
done it digitalised, you just have to find someone who can host and navigate through it” 
 
“Also from the kitchen i’m part of a sales group, even though sebelix is not there yet, but 
they have just like a facilitator who is, just been brought in, and they just hosted like really 
professional and so there is like everybody is speaking but there is still like, it’s just very 
structured, i think you could have done that at dtu, and i was actually surprised surprised 
that they did not, because they’re so innovative, you know and the solution is so” 
 
“we used to have breakfast every friday just to hear how it goes, you know and now they 
are just been doing that digitized, at zoom, with the workers from the kitchen, so they just i 
think their approach have been a bit different from DTU.” 
 
“Every monday i have with the people i am sharing offices with we have like a meeting as 
well, where we are just catching up and speak and discuss about how do we cope with the 
coronavirus, in connection to our startups and can we help each other in ways, do we have 
our network that can help, you know someone else, and it’s completely different startups, 
but that’s really valuable” 
 
“we had a lot of plans of how we should navigate in the best possible way in the 
coronavirus, by speaking like more digitalised, by call each other up, and you know, so 
that's, i think there is plenty of possibility to work efficient with the team even though you 
can’t be sitting at the same office, and my communication intern, we have done that every 
sunday, we are speaking to each other, and now it’s just like, is just spoke with her now, 
and she has like a plan for each week that what she has to be doing and then you know we 
speak about the week after and plan what she should do know” 
 
 
ZoomSpW_20 
People were using the raise your hand feature of zoom if they wanted to speak. 
 
People were also using thumbs up emojis when kristoffer asked them to, e.g. thumbs up if 
you would like that. 
 
Challenges 
CSt_20 
“They have been rescheduled workshops, and also the quality of the program that was laid 
out, has been, dramatical changed, and not for the better, but you know of course they can 
only do as much as they can do, and i think the solution they have given to give us the best, 
to get most out of it, i think it’s fine, but it’s just, it’s not the same value you get out of it, 
you don’t have the time, you don’t meet with people, you don’t get different perspectives 
and feedback from the other participants, which can be very valuable, at least i think it 
was before the lock down” 
 
“But of course i think it has a huge effect on, you know, the coronavirus, you know, so you 
can’t continue with the program as it actually should be” 
 
“I just think like the ignite package of the program that they kind of send out before, that 
we all thought that we have to go through, would have moved us way more than we are 
able to move now, because we are just not getting the same access to the information that 
they thought that they should provide for us” 
102 
==PAGE:103==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
“at the beginning it was supposed to be for you know a couple of hours, so of course there 
has been some information you know, that we haven’t gotten or you know some exercises 
that perhaps were good to work with, and i think that could have been mentioned as well 
or maybe we should just have done the exercises one on one or in the group where 
everyone was muted on except you know two of them and everyone could hear what they 
were speaking and learn from kind of that” 
 
“and then i also think that, when you have the larger zoom meetings from the ignite with 
the other participants and kristoffer and the other mentors also i think are participating in 
it, there are no interaction between the participants, and i think they try to do that but 
people are a bit like holding back because its like are we, everybody just supposed to 
speak at the same time and there is not really a well thought out structure for it so it just 
get another meeting where we get some information then we drop out of the meeting and 
then it’s that” 
 
“Yeah, we have been trying to, we have been working on creating a survey and sending 
out to people online, but i don’t know why, but it really hasn't gone that well, but i think 
like maybe if you are working a bit more on it, maybe you get someone, i think it’s 
definitely possibilities in catching people online now, but compared to us getting into legal 
clinics and asking you know the main target or the main group target, it would be so much 
better and also but you know this is just something we have to do, to make the best out of 
it” 
 
“No, and as i mentioned before, of course you have your own responsibility, each startup 
to network as best as you can, and perhaps i could even reach out to them more, but it’s 
not being facilitated by DTU, and i think that's a shame, because that really could add 
some value for every participant,” 
 
“Also the coronavirus times has been a bit challenging for us to get outside in the field and 
to ask test things you know mockups and such” 
 
“the law language, and sometimes it’s easier for me in physical to sit with her, and just 
say, oh it means this and this is why the map of the law looks like this, but now she is like, 
she reads what i send her, and then she has like a lot of questions like at least like three 
pages, and then i have to like apply that, and then she perhaps she don’t understand and 
maybe it leads to more confusion, so it's like right now we are just going to do it 
digitalised, speaking about it, because to send an email back and forth, is just not 
working” 
 
“Yeah, but it’s also because like when she asks something, sometimes i need to show her, 
like this is how the system is going to be built in the platform and that is why that question 
comes here, and that's why you have to ask these two questions which means this, and so 
she just not have like the visual in front of her, and that’s of course a bit of a challenge 
because how can you navigate if you can’t like see something” 
 
“before (the physical workshops ed.), you had like a whole program, like perhaps a 
saturday from 10 to 20 at evening and you know, you get a lot of quality time to get the 
feedback and also provide feedback to the other startups from the knowledge you get from 
the teachers (...) people who are experts on a certain subject, and then you like make all 
these exercises together and apply it on your own startup but also apply it to others, and 
you know, so the synergy between that is, that's you don’t have that digital at all” 
 
“I think you could have been, i think you could have provided the, some of the knowledge 
or information about how to have a startup digital, just you know by courses online, i think 
the teachers are still working just as much as before, they just have to be working from 
home” 
103 
==PAGE:104==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
 
ZoomSpW_20 
There were not that many conversations back and forth, some answered the program 
managers questions. 
 
Appendix 8 - Quotes about pipelines into Skylab Ignite and after 
Skylab Ignite. 
Interviewee 
Pipelines before Skylab Ignite 
Pipelines after Skylab Ignite 
PM_20 
(Program 
manager of 
Ignite) 
“It’s (Skylab Ignite ed.) just something that 
is very valuable for the alumni from the 
courses both like the course from the center 
(DTU Entrepreneurship ed.) but also 
generally from the bachelor - master 
projects, and i also think for, as i said 
before, a segment of the researcher 
startups, and we always have researchers, 
we’ve had PhD post docs and an associate 
professor in the program, so it's always 
between 10 to 30 percent are young 
researchers” 
 
“The next layer are the other stakeholders 
of DTU, so you have the DTU 
Entrepreneurship Center, which i have 
connection to the Hardtech course (X-tech 
Entrepreneurship ed.) and the Knowledge 
Based Entrepreneurship, so we have 
arrangement of how to create pipelines, we 
have researchers coming over and helping 
with some topics from the center (e.g. team 
workshops ed.), i also want to engage Tech 
Transfer because a part of their teams are 
fit to go into ignite program” 
 
“then a very concrete recruiting tool is also 
skylab funding which is a big magnet for 
startup teams, so we now align the same 
deadline and people can apply for both at 
the same time, with one application” 
“We get more teams that are going to the next 
levels, steps after Skylab (Ignite ed.), In 
Skylab its going into the incubator, getting 
funding, outside of Skylab, its to go to the 
Innofounder Program, getting Innobooster, 
getting into Danish Tech Challenge, getting 
into Bioinnovation Institute, getting in the 
media” 
 
“If you look at the current Innofounder 
Program we actually have at least 2 or 3 
ignite alumni out of 5 DTU startups in the 
Innofounder Program. I think that's cool. In 
the Danish Tech Challenge we have 3,4 
alumni” 
 
“Well future box are post ignite for sure, so 
there is a really natural pipeline, straight 
after or half year after ignite you are going 
into Danish Tech Challenge if you can and 
you can get office space at future box” 
XM_20 
(Course 
professor 
X-Tech 
Entrepreneurs
hip) 
“​The winning teams automatically get (..) a 
place in the ignite program, and then it’s 
kind of a handover process, and after they 
leave X-Tech they should be going into 
ignite​” 
- 
TT_20 (Runs 
the 
 
“If you talk about the Ignite program, My talk 
with kristoffer is, we would like, if they are 
104 
==PAGE:105==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
pre-startup 
mentoring 
programme of 
TechTransfer 
successful, some of the teams coming out of 
the ignite program, normally, student startups 
should be at a stage where they could 
actually go into some of the mentor program 
we have” 
PSt(a)_19 
“Exactly (they were doing research before 
Skylab Ignite ed.) and we actually started 
setting up the startup with the Ignite 
program” 
“​We thought it (Skylab Ignite ed.) was the 
first easy step to go, and to get a feel of what 
we need to do, for participating in future 
startup accelerators and also apply for 
funding for startups​” 
 
“Ignite has definitely allowed us to go to the 
next steps, by, yeah for applying for the 
innofounder graduate program and also 
applying for the accelerace program. I don’t 
think we would have gotten through those, or 
recieved, or have been accepted to those 
programs if we wouldn’t have gone through 
the ignite program, so i think ignite is a very 
important step stone to go to the more lets say 
sophisticated accelerators” 
PSt(b)_19 
“we found out about the Ignite program 
when we were looking for fundings to our 
project” 
 
“Yes (we were doing our thesis ed.), in the 
end of it (Skylab Ignite ed.)” 
- 
CSt_20 
“we have also been funded from the 
Innovation Fonden, so we are using that 
now” 
“Right now we are in the competition of the 
innovation price 2020, from VIA (...) and we 
were writing that in the application and they 
thought like that was really good, what do 
you call it, they thought it was interesting 
because we were a part of the skylab ignite 
program at DTU” 
 
 
 
105 
==PAGE:106==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 9 - Strength and weaknesses identified based on visioning 
brainstorms 
Workshops 
The following four tables contains the strength and weaknesses identified in the visioning 
brainstorm on the four identified topics “Late Communication”, “Cancellations”, “Missing 
Topics” and “Structure”. The latter includes the three identified challenges  
“Too much listening at the workshops”, “More time for peer-to-peer learning” and “PeaQs is 
not working optimally” and are dubbed “Structure”.  
 
Late communication 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Detailed workshop plan from beginning: Will give 
the participant and overview of what they need to do 
during the whole program from beginning e.g. they 
can plan their time after it. Weekly reminders can be 
sent out on slack or email and perhaps after a 
workshop e.g. continue on exercise x and y and 
prepare a slide to present at the next coaching 
session. 
 
Exercises on website: Can be a consistent place to 
put exercises and assignments. Could also be done 
on slack or email. 
Detailed workshop plan from beginning: Can be a bit 
overwhelming to receive everything from beginning. 
Usually when doing workshops you also don’t show 
the whole template from the beginning. The 
workshop plan could be hidden from participants but 
reminders sent out in due time. 
 
Exercises on website: Be careful not to spam 
information. 
 
Cancellations 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Backup exercises / assignments: It’s workshop 101 
to always have backup exercises if something 
happens. Working on the PeaQs deliverable could be 
one of them. 
 
Backup presentation e.g. pretotyping. Having a 
backup presentation could also be an option if 
cancellations occur e.g. on pretotyping. It should be a 
new topic rather than repeating previous workshops. 
 
Standard cancellation procedure: Beneficial to have 
e.g. when do we cancel a workshop, can it be done 
digitally, moved or put together with another 
workshop. 
Backup exercises / assignments:  
 
Backup presentation e.g. pretotyping. Would be a 
shame if it doesn’t gets presented but on the other 
hand it only needs to be created once so shouldn’t 
take up that many resources. 
 
Standard cancellation procedure: 
106 
==PAGE:107==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Missing topics 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Interview / survey in beginning: Can plan ahead and 
keep a spot open for a workshop topic the 
participants decide on. Gives flexibility. 
 
Survey after skylab ignite: Ask more directly about 
workshop topics that were missing, can be easier for 
participants to know when they had the other 
workshops. 
 
Workshop topic poll: Can be an easy way to find out 
which topics the participants wants the most. 
 
How to establish a company from legal aspects: This 
was simply requested by the 2019 cohort. 
 
Online knowledge sharing platform: Enables the 
teams to share knowledge between cohorts e.g. on 
software that helped them out, or good legal 
advisors, programs ect. This can also help share 
knowledge on missing topics. 
 
Plan workshops on the go: Great flexibility but less 
structure. 
Interview / survey in beginning: How do you decide 
which topic to go with if different are suggested. Can 
be harder to plan accordingly to the program. 
 
Survey after skylab ignite: Can only benefit future 
cohorts. 
Workshop topic poll: Needs to be done before a 
cohort and it’s difficult to plan for since teams are 
selected just before the program starts giving less 
time to plan the program. 
 
How to establish a company from legal aspects: This 
may not be beneficial to all teams. 
 
Online knowledge sharing platform: Takes an effort 
to get people to use, and can become clouded with 
data quickly if not organised. 
 
Plan workshops on the go: can be stressful to 
execute.  
 
Structure 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
More comprehensive group system: This initiative 
will make participants give better feedback to each 
other as they get to know select startups and their 
business model ect. follow them on PeaQs. This will 
save time at group exercises as the participants 
doesn’t have to explain from scratch. Pre defined 
groups gives the advantage that startups alike can be 
matched. 
 
2 days workshops: Will give the opportunity to go 
into depth with exercise, connect PeaQs and give 
ample opportunity to have both presentations, guest 
speakers and peer-review. 
 
Peer-review groups: Will make it easier for teams to 
give more qualitative feedback as they follow certain 
startups, gives the opportunity to match similar 
startups with each other. 
 
Connection between PeaQs and exercises: PeaQs are 
not used that much by the teams and to increase this, 
More comprehensive group system: Can exclude 
some startups from talking with each other but this is 
still possible at dinners and less intensive group 
assignments. 
 
2 days workshops: Takes more resources from both 
participants and employees side. Perhaps not all 
startups has time for 2 day workshops. 
 
Peer-review groups: Dependant on good matches 
between the groups, participant startups will get less 
feedback from people outside their group 
 
Connection between PeaQs and exercises: Other 
important exercises my be excluded. 
107 
==PAGE:108==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
perhaps the exercises at the workshops should be 
connected with the deliverable on PeaQs. This will 
ensure better material created for peer-review, 
pitches and pitchdeck. 
 
Services that could be improved/offered  
The following four tables contains the strength and weaknesses identified in the visioning 
brainstorm on the four identified topics “Soft Funding”, “Co-Working Space”, “Mentors 
(External Mentors)” and “Alumni”. 
 
Soft Funding 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
DTU Pool for funding: No fundraising needed, more 
control on which startups should receive the funding. 
 
Skylab Funding Partnership: Already established 
contacts to companies providing the Skylab Funding, 
bigger amounts can be applied for. 
 
Early stage investors brought in to fund startups: Can 
provide learning experience for the startups talking 
to investors, investors connections can be beneficial 
for Skylabs mission and strengthening the ecosystem 
e.g. opening up the opportunity for investors to focus 
on Skylab startups in future. 
 
Prototype pool of money: Can help motivate and 
move the startups during the program, money are 
only provided if startups apply for it e.g. if each 
startup has 5000 DKK available, and only use 3000 
DKK, the rest can go into the next cohort. 
 
Sponsorship for soft funding: Bigger amounts can be 
applied for 
 
Preseed Ventures discovery loan: Larger amount of 
money, X-Tech Entrepreneurship already has 
agreement with them (Winners gets a 200.000 kroner 
discovery loan) so similar arrangement may be 
possible. 
 
Funding based on startups progress: The startups can 
be evaluated on their progress during Skylab Ignite 
by the internals, e.g. Skylab coaches, who has 
followed them during the 10 weeks and can better 
decide who should receive funding e.g. who are 
passionate about continuing with the startup, and can 
benefit the most getting funding, externals can be 
involved in the evaluation e.g. the sponsors 
DTU Pool for funding:  
Lower amount of money meaning less startups can 
receive the funding, rules and regulations may affect 
the DTU’s ability to fund the startups 
 
Skylab Funding Partnership: Less control from 
Skylab Ignites side on who should receive the 
funding,  
 
Early stage investors brought in to fund startups: 
Teams may be too early stage to get funding from 
investors, no control from Skylab Ignites side on 
who should receive investment. 
 
Prototype pool of money: Smaller amounts of 
money, not aligned with Skylab Ignites goal which is 
more on getting customers, finding market and 
building team. 
 
Fundraising / partnerships for money for funding: 
Less control from Skylab Ignites side on who should 
receive the funding. 
Preseed Ventures discovery loan: Few to one startup 
who can receive it, loan are guaranteed on conditions 
i.e. money are not provided at the end of Skylab 
Ignite. 
 
Funding based on startups progress:  
 
 
108 
==PAGE:109==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
Co-working Space 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Workshop on skylab opportunities: Startups learn 
what they can use Skylab for during the 10 weeks 
e.g. looking for team members on the wall of 
opportunities, workshops, group rooms ect, No space 
required to host the teams 
 
Dedicated work space area for 10 weeks: The 
startups can network, knowledge share and socialize 
with each other outside workshops, Skylab are 
getting bigger which gives the opportunity to find the 
space for it, startups can come and go as they please 
 
Fostering community and knowledge sharing: The 
startups can learn from each other  
 
Co-working days e.g. before a workshop: Doesn’t 
take up a whole space during the 10 weeks, only on 
selected days, startups can work on and get feedback 
on exercises they didn’t have time to finish at 
workshops, could provide opportunity to deep dive 
into the workshop topics if facilitated 
 
Preworkshops e.g. on PeaQs or pitch: Can motivate 
startups to use PeaQs more elevating their pitch as 
well, peer-review can happen orally and not written 
only. 
 
 
Workshop on skylab opportunities: Peer-to-peer 
knowledge sharing between startups in the cohort are 
up to the teams themselves  
 
Dedicated work space area for 10 weeks: The 
startups may not be in the workspace at the same 
time leaving the space unused or decreased 
knowledge sharing 
 
Fostering community and knowledge sharing: 
Co-dependencies may arise 
 
Co-working days e.g. before a workshop: Startups 
may not have time in their schedule for that day 
 
Preworkshops e.g. on PeaQs or pitch: Startups may 
not have time in their schedule for that day 
 
Mentors (External Mentors) 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
10 weeks mentoring program: Can provide extra 
support and knowledge for the teams during Skylab 
Ignite e.g. answer questions the coaches cannot, 
teams can have their own agenda at meetings 
opposed to the coaching session, mentor networks 
are already established e.g. TechTransfer, Venture 
Cup. 
 
6 month mentoring: Can provide extra support and 
knowledge for the teams during Skylab Ignite e.g. 
answer questions the coaches cannot, teams can have 
their own agenda at meetings opposed to the 
coaching session, the mentoring continues after 
Skylab Ignite giving more value than a shorter period 
and mentors can follow the teams more closely as 
they evolve, mentor networks are already established 
e.g. TechTransfer, Venture Cup. The teams continue 
10 weeks mentoring program: Shorter period, too 
many elements during Skylab Ignite e.g. both 
coaching, mentoring, workshops, PeaQs, Finals. 
 
6 month mentoring: A long time if the match are less 
good 
 
Team mentoring (3-4 mentors per startup, MIT 
method): More resources required, the startups may 
be too early stage for getting 3-4 mentors. 
 
Speed mentoring e.g. one day speed dating w. 
mentors: Too many inputs resulting in diluted 
mentoring 
 
Host workshops outside Skylab: Requires more 
resources to find and plan. 
109 
==PAGE:110==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
getting help and support i.e. avoiding them losing 
momentum after Skylab Ignite. 
 
Team mentoring (3-4 mentors per startup, MIT 
method): More knowledge/expertise will be available 
to the startups, dialog can foster the best help in 
learning what activities the startups should do, 
mentoring isn’t focused on one aspect e.g. only IPR, 
mentor networks are already established e.g. 
TechTransfer, Venture Cup. 
 
Speed mentoring e.g. one day speed dating w. 
mentors: Many inputs provided to the teams, longer 
term mentorship agreements may aries 
 
Host workshops outside Skylab e.g. in other 
ecosystems: Startups get to know networks outside 
DTU e.g. CBS 
 
Booster Package w. useful services: An overview of 
good tools and services the Startups can benefit from 
using will be provided, Can be used ad-hoc by the 
startups, partnerships can benefit Skylab as well as 
Skylab Ignite, doesn’t require the matching of 
mentors w. startups. 
 
Mentors connected at the end of Skylab Ignite: 
Startups may be more ready for a mentor, the teams 
continue getting help and support i.e. avoiding them 
losing momentum 
 
Mentors matched with startup pre Skylab Ignite: 
Mentors are ready to help from day one in the 
program, Mentors can provide extra support and 
knowledge for the teams during Skylab Ignite e.g. 
answer questions the coaches cannot, teams can have 
their own agenda at meetings opposed to the 
coaching session 
 
Fixed meeting times: Startup will be encouraged 
actively to meet with mentor,  
 
Ad hoc meetings: Startups can better fit meetings 
according to their schedule and when they have 
questions they need answers to, it also 
accommodates the different stages of the participant 
startups and those who may not be ready for 
mentoring can wait contacting their mentor. 
 
 
Booster Package w. useful services: Services may 
only be offered for free for duration of time 
 
Mentors connected at the end of Skylab Ignite: 
Teams can only go to coaches during the program (or 
those who they connect with during the program) 
 
Mentors matched with startup pre Skylab Ignite: The 
startups may not be ready for a mentor. 
 
Fixed meeting times: Startup, who usually are 
students also who has a lot to do, will have difficulty 
fitting more meetings into their schedule, it may be 
difficult to plan in the already packed schedule of 
Skylab Ignite. 
 
Ad hoc meetings: Startup may make less use of the 
assigned mentor. 
 
 
Alumni 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
110 
==PAGE:111==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Alumni portal for knowledge sharing: Enables the 
startups to share best practice, good tools ect. 
between the co-horts 
 
Alumni club (meeting twice a year, inclusion of 
current Skylab Ignite batch): Startup can stay update 
and continue knowledge sharing, new Skylab Ignite 
startups get to meet more experienced alumni 
 
Mix Ignite w. Skylab alumni:  
More startups / stakeholder can meet and network, 
knowledge share. 
 
Alumni newsletter sharing of success stories and 
opportunities: A way for the alumni to stay updated 
on how the teams are performing and getting tips and 
offers e.g. skylab consultants, requires less effort 
than e.g. hosting alumni events, 
 
Alumni survey to measure effect (better engineer, 
better entrepreneur, success stories, focus groups): 
Following up with the alumni enables the measuring 
of startups performance e.g. are the goals achieved, 
what are lacking, where are the startups today and 
success stories, why did some quit.  
 
Alumni portal for knowledge sharing: Requires 
resources to get developed, requires an effort to 
make people use it, a slack group already does this in 
Skylab for all users. 
 
Alumni club (meeting twice a year, inclusion of 
current Skylab Ignite batch): Requires resources to 
host, will there be a big enough interest from alumni? 
 
Mix Ignite w. Skylab alumni: Less exclusive. 
 
Alumni newsletter sharing of success stories and 
opportunities: Will the startups and stakeholders read 
it,  in the time of information overload. 
 
Alumni survey to measure effect (better engineer, 
better entrepreneur, success stories, focus groups): 
Requires resources to plan, collect, analyses and 
follow up on. 
 
Digital opportunities 
The following three tables contains the strength and weaknesses identified in the visioning 
brainstorm. The challenges from section 4.5, was combined and split into three topics 
“Workshops”, “Peer-to-peer Learning” and “Coaching Sessions”. 
 
Workshops 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Homework exercises: The participant startups will 
have looked at the tool or exercise beforehand and 
the digital workshop can then focus on sharing the 
results, discussion with peers ect.  
 
Facilitated workshop and structure: can ensure 
everyone gets to speak and rules are set up for having 
an efficient digital workshop, having a professional 
facilitator can increase success change 
 
Online presentations: Skylab Ignite can share 
important knowledge on workshop topics, slides can 
be accompanied by presentation, guest speakers can 
also present and doesn’t have to show up physically 
in Skylab 
 
Homework exercises: only works if all participant 
has done it 
 
Facilitated workshop and structure: dependant on 
participant being active, a facilitator needs to be 
hired, perhaps multiple depending on how many 
groups the workshop is split into  
 
Online presentation: Communication is one way and 
doesn’t facilitate interaction between participant, at 
most questions and answers. 
 
Multiple Classrooms / working groups 
 
Digital tools and exercises: Perhaps more difficult to 
work on when team members are apart from each 
111 
==PAGE:112==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Multiple Classrooms / working groups: Participant 
startups can be divided into groups discussing 
workshop topics, peer-reviewing and knowledge 
share 
 
Digital tools and exercises: Exercises and tools can 
be worked on during workshops, information is 
saved instantly 
 
Finding customers online: Important workshop topic 
for some participant startups 
other  
 
Finding customers online: not all startups may need 
this as a workshop topic 
 
Peer-to-peer Learning 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Feedback software (PeaQs): Good to use a software 
for handling peer-review, PeaQs already are set up 
for uploading of startup material and peer-review. 
 
Feedback groups: Will make it easier for teams to 
give more qualitative feedback as they follow certain 
startups, gives the opportunity to match similar 
startups with each other  
 
Feedback forms: Simplest way of designing a 
feedback scheme 
 
Friday “breakfast” meetings: A way for the teams to 
socialise, informally interact and keep up with how 
each other is doing 
 
Facilitated feedback: Can make sure everybody gets 
to speak and encourage people to speak up. 
Feedback software (PeaQs): Dependant on 
participant startups actively using the software, 
feedback are given written and not orally giving less 
opportunity to clarify things 
 
Feedback groups: Dependant on good matches 
between the groups, participant startups will get less 
feedback from people outside their group 
 
Feedback forms: feedback are given written and not 
orally giving less opportunity to clarify things 
 
Friday “breakfast” meetings: Participant startups 
may have classes that day or otherwise unable to 
participate 
 
Facilitated feedback: Requires the hiring of possible 
multiple facilitators depending on how many 
feedback groups there will be 
 
Coaching sessions 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Eliminate travel time: Having the coaching digital 
makes travel time obsolete, also makes it easier to 
plan 
 
Invite experts: Easier to invite experts in if the coach 
can’t answer specific questions 
 
Have the whole team join: Possibility to have more 
team members join and listening in especially if they 
have a long distance to e.g. Skylab, possibility to set 
up rules for who can speak ect. 
 
Team members can join from far away: As it says, if 
some team members are in other parts of the country 
Eliminate travel time: 
 
Invite experts: can dilute the coaching session with 
more inputs 
 
Have the whole team join: Too many inputs unless 
rules are set up 
 
Team members can join from far away: 
 
More frequent meetings or ad hoc: 
112 
==PAGE:113==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
or world, they can still join in 
 
More frequent meetings or ad hoc: Easier to schedule 
and host online meetings than meeting physically, ad 
hoc meetings can be planned as needed e.g. outside 
the normal physical meetings 
 
Ecosystem 
The following two tables contains the strength and weaknesses identified in the visioning 
brainstorm on the two identified topics “Alignment of Initiatives” and “Motivation After 
Skylab Ignite”. 
 
Alignment of Initiatives 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Redesign programme: Can create a better portfolio of 
offerings from both TechTransfer and Skylab that are 
not overlapping i.e. differentiated opportunities. The 
workshops could also be opened for all enabling the 
researchers to join ad hoc, like TechTransfer does it, 
but still be mandatory for Skylab Ignite participants. 
 
Researcher/employee profiles: Enabling a shared 
understanding of which profiles are fit to enter which 
programmes i.e. researchers who’s worked on 
commercialising invention before or who need very 
specific knowledge vs. young / early stage 
researchers.  
 
Stakeholder meetings: Can open up the possibility 
for discussing shared expectations e.g. on the 
programmes and who should participate and how it’s 
communicated. A further mapping of stakeholders 
can help in finding those who needs to be reached 
out to and what information. A DTU ecosystem 
mapping can further help create an understanding of 
all the initiatives and who can enter what initiatives. 
Redesign programme: Takes time and effort to 
design, test and evaluate. Opening up the workshops 
may lower knowledge sharing opportunities.  
 
Researcher/employee profiles: You may miss a 
researcher or two who could benefit from a 
programme. 
 
Stakeholder meetings: Disagreements can occur 
which may not be solved. 
 
Motivation After Skylab Ignite 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Direct pipelines: A good way to connect programs 
and ensure momentum e.g. direct access to Venture 
Cup’s bootcamp and competition or a space in the 
incubator. 
 
Follow up meetings with coaches: Perhaps 3 month 
after Skylab Ignites last coaching session, e.g. by 
Direct pipelines: Can keep teams going that 
eventually will close down. 
 
Follow up meetings with coaches: Takes resources to 
plan and execute. 
 
Detailed overview of opportunities: Depending on 
113 
==PAGE:114==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
creation of a 100 day plan and then follow up 
sessions 3 months later, to ensure momentum in 
teams. This also enables Skylab Ignite to get an idea 
of who continues and who closes down startup. 
 
Detailed overview of opportunities: Can help 
participants get an overview of what opportunities 
exist after Skylab Ignite. Can also help coaches to 
guide the teams of what opportunities they can take 
advantage of after. A way to help the teams could be 
to collect successful applications from Skylab alumni 
and create a database of them. Stakeholders could be 
invite to present opportunities or have a marketplace 
day with stands ect. 
what initiatives are chosen, it will take resources to 
plan and execute e.g. market place, where database 
of successful applications only needs to be done 
once. 
 
 
 
 
114 
==PAGE:115==
Appendix 10 - The planned time schedule
Project plan
Litterature study
Case study
Idea catalog
Writing report 
Methodology
Interview guides
Perform & 
transcribe 
interviews
Observations
Analysis and 
key challenges 
identified
Come up with 
ideas
selection and 
detail of ideas
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
Week 16
Week 17
Week 18
Week 19
Week 20
Week 21
Week 22
115
==PAGE:116==
Appendix 11 - The actual time schedule
Project plan
Litterature study
Case study
Idea catalog
Writing report 
Methodology
Interview guides
Perform & 
transcribe 
interviews
Observations
Analysis and 
key challenges 
identified
Come up with 
ideas
selection and 
detail of ideas
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
Week 16
Week 17
Week 18
Week 19
Week 20
Week 21
Week 22
116
==PAGE:117==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Appendix 12 - Initial project plan 
Design & evaluation of a seed stage startup accelerator 
Master thesis project plan 
 
Introduction 
Accelerators are a rapidly growing phenomenon since the first “Y-combinator” began in 2005. An 
accelerator is a program that takes in a cohort of startups through a fixed amount of time and provide 
services such as workshop on different entrepreneurial topics (e.g. funding, pitching, team 
composition and customer validation) and networking (e.g. with investors, entrepreneurs, accelerator 
alumni, accelerator peers, industry professionals and accountants). The accelerator usually ends with a 
public pitching event or Demo Day. 
     Many universities have also initiated accelerator programs on their own to increase the 
entrepreneurial output. One of those accelerators exist at DTU which is a seed stage startup 
accelerator for students and researchers, which means that they take in early stage startups. The 
startups accepted into the program are usually after the idea and team formation stage. The program 
runs for 10 weeks with the goal to expand the participants entrepreneurial mindset, strengthen the 
teams, help them build a business case and build a strong community. The program ends with a pitch 
competition with cash prices of 50.000 DKK.  
     An interesting aspect is that the universities are starting to build ecosystems around 
entrepreneurship e.g. hosting entrepreneurial courses where teams may form startups. These courses 
typically include lessons similar of those in the accelerators, which means that the startups 
participating in the university accelerator have different prerequisites. It is therefore a challenge how 
to accommodate for these differences i.e should the university accelerator tailor its educational 
program to the individual startup or keep it generic for the cohort. The number of study lines at the 
universities poses a similar challenge, since the participating startups work in different industries.  
     The universities are also hosting different accelerator programs, which affects the cohorts they take 
in e.g. early stage startups (Skylab Ignite at DTU) or ready to scale startups (Go Grow at CBS). It 
poses the question what these differences are and how they affect the entrepreneurial output.  
     Furthermore accelerators exist outside the universities taking in the best startups when they are 
mature enough which poses a similar question. 
     Accelerators can evidently be designed in many different ways. 
     Other intermediaries and interventions also exist in the ecosystem which contributes to the 
entrepreneurial process e.g. startup competitions, mentor programs, incubators and startup fairs. 
117 
==PAGE:118==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
     The aim of this master thesis is to investigate how the university accelerator Skylab Ignite can be 
further strengthened and improved by looking into the entrepreneurial ecosystem at DTU, other 
universities and outside the universities. Here it is interesting to compare Skylab Ignite with similar 
initiatives, evaluate it by doing interviews with its participants and look into current literature on the 
subject. 
 
Overview of Skylab Ignite 
 
Figure A1: Overview of Skylab Ignite and its elements 
Figure A1 illustrates an overview of the Skylab Ignite accelerator held in the autumn 2019. The data is 
collected through observing the workshops and from the workshop material provided by the program.  
 
The overall themes of the workshops and program was: 
●
1 on 1 team sessions with the business coaches from skylab 
●
Team & advisors 
●
Customer validation 
●
Pitching 
●
Funding 
●
Ignite Finals 
 
118 
==PAGE:119==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Through 10 weeks, the selected teams have been participating in 7 workshops and the Ignite Finals 
where winners was selected and awarded cash prizes. The teams all came from various backgrounds 
e.g. some have participated in entrepreneurial courses which has led to the startup creation or more 
experience on entrepreneurial topics, others have started from a master thesis or from research at the 
university and may have less entrepreneurial experience. 
 
Goal and scope 
The aim of the master thesis project is to investigate the seed stage startup accelerator Skylab Ignite in 
order to evaluate and improve the accelerator. The scope of the project will include investigating the 
accelerator in regards to its role in the DTU ecosystem and the entrepreneurial output and impact of 
the participating startups. Furthermore similar initiatives outside DTU may be included in the 
research. 
 
The overall goal is to: 
●
Investigate the accelerator Skylab Ignite in regards to its position at DTU and entrepreneurial 
output 
●
Compare and evaluate the accelerator with similar initiatives 
●
Design concepts for how the accelerator can be improved 
 
During the project period the scope may be limited further, to ensure the quality of the research. 
 
Problem statement and research question 
Problem Statement 
Skylab Ignite is a seed stage startup accelerator for university students / researchers at DTU. The 
entrepreneurial program take in cohorts of startups and is generic based in its educational aspect 
which poses a challenge how it can be improved to further strengthen the accelerator and the 
entrepreneurial output of its participants. 
 
Research Questions 
How can a university accelerator be designed / improved to strengthen the program and increase the 
entrepreneurial output of the participants? 
 
How can a university accelerator align and position itself according to the entrepreneurial ecosystem 
at the university? 
 
119 
==PAGE:120==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
 
 
Overall Method 
 
Figure A2: Double Diamond (Design Council, 2020) 
 
The overall method is based on the ‘Double Diamond’ design process model (Design Council, 2020), 
see figure A2. It consist of 4 stages “discover, define, develop, deliver” and a major part of the 
process will be in the first ‘diamond’ investigating and evaluating the accelerator, before the second 
‘diamond’ designing concepts for how the accelerator can improve. 
 
1.
Discover:​ A literature study of accelerator programs will be conducted with focus on how an 
accelerator can be defined, designed and how they help startups succeed and key areas that 
need to be further researched. Then a study of Skylab Ignite will be conducted looking into its 
focus areas and the challenges it currently face. Insights into the accelerator will be gathered 
by participating in selected parts of the program and interviewing participants, staff and 
stakeholders in the entrepreneurship ecosystem at DTU. Focus will both be on how the 
accelerator currently positions itself and its role in the entrepreneurship ecosystem at DTU 
and the outcome of the startups participating in the accelerator. In addition a study of similar 
accelerators at both university and corporate level will be included in the research in order to 
compare them with the Skylab Ignite accelerator. 
 
2.
Define / Evaluate:​ Then an evaluation of Skylab Ignite will be conducted including the 
knowledge gathered from the literature study and study of skylab ignite. Focus will be to 
compare the knowledge and find similarities and differences. Key areas and insights will 
be identified for how to further develop the Skylab Ignite accelerator. 
3.
Develop & Deliver: ​Based on the evaluation, the key insights will be used to create 
detailed concepts on how to improve the accelerator e.g. improvements to the workshop 
120 
==PAGE:121==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
and the role Skylab Ignite could have in the future to provide a more coherent platform 
at DTU. 
 
Milestone plan 
 
Figure A3: Most important deadlines during the project 
This gives an overview of the milestones planned during the project. 
●
By​ Milestone 0​, the 1st of February, the project plan should be done. 
●
By, ​Milestone 1​, the 10th of February the literature study should be done. 
●
By, ​Milestone 2​, the 16th of March data collection (e.g. interviews) should be done 
●
By, ​Milestone 3​, the 13th of April the evaluation of Skylab Ignite should be done 
●
By, ​Milestone 4​, the 4th of May design of concepts for how the accelerator can 
improve should be done. 
●
By, ​Milestone 5​, the 2th of June the project report will be handed in. 
 
 
 
121 
==PAGE:122==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
Learning Objectives 
Based on the learning objectives from Design & Innovation 
“​https://sdb.dtu.dk/2019/42/970#Master's_thesis​“ it has been described how these objectives will be 
taken into account of the project. 
A graduate of the MSc Eng programme from DTU​: 
●
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between 
the various components that make up an issue 
○
By doing a systematic literature study and empirical collection on the topic of 
accelerators and reflection on the results hereof 
●
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at 
international level to develop ideas and solve problems 
○
By conducting a larger project work 
●
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to take a 
holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal 
perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions 
○
By investigating the accelerator Skylab Ignite, evaluating it based on data collection 
and working with concepts for how it can improve. Models, theories and tools learned 
during the master will be selected during the project where relevant. 
●
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problems 
○
By evaluating the skylab Ignite accelerator and developing models for comparison, 
finding key insights and designing concepts to solve identified challenges with the 
accelerator.  
●
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing 
○
By the project report and oral defense. 
●
is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area. 
○
 By systematically collecting new information on the topic of accelerators and by 
doing a literature study on the topic of accelerators. 
●
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and 
specialization 
○
By evaluating the project and reflecting on learning objectives at the end of the 
project 
●
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity 
to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, design, 
solution and documentation 
122 
==PAGE:123==
Simon Ringive | S143988 | DTU Master Thesis 
○
By using a Gantt chart to structure the project tasks and working with milestones 
together with supervisors to make sure the project is well planned and deadlines are 
met. 
Own defined learning objectives: 
Identify and analyse relevant literature about startup accelerators and how they impact 
startups to succeed. 
 
Develop a model for comparison of relevant literature using relevant categories. 
 
Plan and execute a participatory research looking into the Skylab Ignite accelerator, its 
challenges and key focus areas. 
 
Analyse and compare other existing accelerators available for startups with Skylab 
Ignite. 
 
Collect and evaluate data in connection with participatory research and literature study 
and develop a set of key areas for improvement. 
 
Create ideas and concept suggestions for how the Skylab Ignite accelerator can be 
improved based on the developed set of key areas for improvement. 
 
Design criterias for selecting concepts and further detail the selected concepts for how 
the Skylab Ignite accelerator can be improved. 
 
Develop and answer a research question in regards to the overall project topic. 
 
Communicate the process and findings in a larger project report and oral presentation. 
 
References 
Design Council UK (2020). ​“Design Council's evolved Double Diamond” 
URL: 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/what-framework-innovation-design-councils-evolved-
double-diamond 
123 
