==PAGE:1==
A Framework for Self-Adjusting
Evolutionary Algorithms
Nikolaj Birck Frederiksen(s130184)
DTU Supervisor: Carsten Witt
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to develop a framework in order to test and evaluate
diﬀerent self-adjusting evoltionary algorithms. Diﬀerent theory behind evolu-
tionary algorithm is ﬁrst presented, followed by diﬀerent design principle, which
were used in order to structure the code project in order to make sure the code
structure was clean as well as make it easy to further develop upon and add
more algorithms or problems. A range of algorithms were tested such as, (1+1),
(1+λ) with self adjusting mutation rate, (1+1) with stagnation detection, (1+λ)
with self-adjusting mutation rate on diﬀerent benchmark problem such as One
Max, Leading Ones, Jump and Minimum Spanning Tree.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at udvikle et rammeværk der skal kunne teste
og evaluere forskellige selv-justerende evolutionære algoritmer. Forskellig teori
der ligger til grunde for evolutionær algoritmer er først præsenteret, efterfulgt at
forskellige design principper der ligger til grunde for hvordan kode projektet blev
strukturet, for at sørge for en ordenlig kodestruktur og lige så vel gøre det muligt
nemt at kunne videreudvikle og derved tilføje ﬂere algoritmer eller problemer.
En række algoritmer er testet, heri (1+1), (1+λ) med selv-justerende mutation
rate, (1+1) med stagnation opdagelse, (1+λ) med selv-justerende mutation rate
og stagnation opdagelse, på forskellige benchmark problemer såsom One Max,
Leading Ones, Jump og Minimum Spanning Tree.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
In this thesis a framework for evaluating and comparing diﬀerent self-adjusting
evolutionary algorithm is explored. A standard (1+1) evolutionary algorithm
and a set of self-adjusting evolutionary algorithm is presented. The diﬀerent
between them is explored to see how they perform in diﬀerent problems.
Lyngby, 07-June-2020
Nikolaj Birck Frederiksen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First I would like to thank my supervisor Carsten Witt.
His help with the
choice of project topic and the support provided throughout the project have
been invaluable.
Secondly I would like to thank my colleague Frederik Østerbye, who helped me
greatly by sparring on best practices for .NET as well and help with picking
useful external projects from NuGet.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Evolutionary Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Evolutionary algorithm format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Bit Mutation & Mutation Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Parameter control and self adjustment . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
1/5 Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
(1+1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.3
(1+1) with stagnation detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.4
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation de-
tection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
One Max
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Leading Ones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Jump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.4
Minimum Spanning Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.5
Traveling Salesman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
The Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Design
15
3.1
Key subjects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Polymorphism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Dependency Inversion & Injection
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Onion Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Model View ViewModel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Graphical User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Implementation
21
4.1
C# & .NET glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
External Dependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
Caliburn.Micro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
EPPlus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.3
Automapper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.4
GraphX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.5
Oxyplot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Architectural Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Application Core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1
IAlgorithm interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4.2
IProblem interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.3
IStatsmaster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5.1
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5.2
Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5.3
Utility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.4
Export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
UI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6.1
ViewModel & View . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6.2
Implementation issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results
39
5.1
Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.1
One Max
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.2
Leading Ones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.3
Jump
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.4
Minimum Spanning Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3.1
Note to (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rates’s perfor-
mance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Discussion
49
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
7
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Traditional Evolutionary algorithms have many diﬀerent possible parameters,
population size, crossover rate, mutation probability are among these. From
Empirical knowledge it has been shown that ﬁnding the best possible parameter
settings in a optimization scenario is both hard and often a laborious task. It is
also entirely possible there may not even be a perfect static parameter setting.
For example often algorithms should perform more risky and exploratory steps
in the beginning in order to discovers diﬀerent regions of the search space,
which may contain promising solutions, and later the algorithm should instead
focus on small steps and thus ﬁne-tune towards the optimal solution.
From
recent rigorous research on nature-inspired algorithms a body of a speciﬁc type
of evolutionary algorithm have been proposed, these goes by the name self-
adjusting evolutionary algorithms.
This group of algorithms do not need a
speciﬁc parameter settings in advance, but instead try to learn and ﬁne tune
parameters during the run.
This master’s project have two goals. First goal is to develop an framework,
where diﬀerent evolutionary algorithms may be implemented, compared and
evaluated in typical optimization scenarios. The second goal is to use this frame-
work to evaluate a selection of self-adjusting evolutionary algorithms (SAEAs)
and compare them against each other.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter contains some of the theory behind evolutionary algorithm, both
regular ones and the self-adjusting variants. This chapter is divided into several
chapters, ﬁrst presenting evolutionary algorithm and self-adjusting evolutionary
algorithm, then presenting a set of algorithms, followed by diﬀerent benchmark
problems also called ﬁtness function and lastly a section covered the framework
itself.
2.1
Evolutionary Algorithm
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are population-based meta heuristics. The his-
tory behind EAs is that they are inspired by natural evolution in a biological
population.
EAs are sometimes refereed to by another term, which is that
of evolutionary computation, but this is a more generic. The term evolution-
ary computation is used to deﬁne optimization algorithms that are motivated
by other processes, that generally involve a population of diﬀerent solutions
that are adapting and thus improving over time.
The section on evolution-
ary algorithm[CL18], covered in the book "Handbook of Heuristics" written by
David Corne and Michael A. Corne, serve as a key inspiration to the baseline
information about evolutionary algorithm covered in this report.
==PAGE:18==
4
Background
EA’s have an inherent design ﬂexibility, which makes it possible to specify dif-
ferent algorithms, in innumerable ways, while still functioning according to the
core concepts of evolution. Each maintains a population, where a single unit
or a group of them will be refereed to as a solution(s) (But in other papers
this can have varying name i.e candidates, individuals chromosomes or agents).
Typically these are generated at random in the beginning of the algorithms
lifetime and is then iterated upon over a series of generation. Each generation
will apply diﬀerent operations and selection. In a single generation some kind
of transformation is applied to the solutions, creating a new set of solutions,
these new solutions are refereed to as children. One of the common example
of these transformation is that of mutation. In mutation transformation one or
more parts of a solution is changed at random. Another example is cross-overs,
where two solutions is used to create a new solution, created by taking some of
the information from one solution and the rest from the other solution. After a
new children have been generated a ﬁtness function is used to evaluate the all
of the solutions and the more ﬁt solutions are kept. From the collection of the
solution kept a new generation is started repeating the change operation and
selection. Compared to a deterministic algorithm using a heuristic, both types
of algorithm have a speciﬁc search point, but EAs will be searching randomly
through the diﬀerent search spaces, where a deterministic heuristic dependant
algorithm would evaluate a set of solution and search further through the one
with the best heuristic.
2.1.1
Evolutionary algorithm format
EA’s shares common features, including the broad concepts of variation and
selection and operating over a series of generations, just as noted earlier. EA’s
work by seeking out the best solution which can be found given a optimization
problem. Described in another way EAs is generally used to ﬁnd the solution
x, which optimize according to a function f(x). In theoretical studies often the
solution x is a string of bits and the function f(x) is a mathematical function
whose results is a scalar value. Some of the function is explored in the subsection
2.4 of this chapter. The general steps of a EAs is as follows:
• Step 1: Generate and evaluate an initial population
• Step 2: Apply selection to produce a set of parents
• Step 3: Apply variation to produce a set of children and evaluate them
according to a speciﬁc ﬁtness function.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Evolutionary Algorithm
5
• Step 4: Increment generation and select the best ﬁt solutions.
• Step 5: If an stop criteria is not met, go to step 2, otherwise the algorithm
terminates and return the most ﬁt solution.
Step 2–5 constitute a generation, where the major components are: selection,
variation and then updating the population, leading to a new set of population
ready for the next generation.
2.1.2
Bit Mutation & Mutation Rate
Bit mutation is a common mutation method used in EAs, where given a solution
in the form of a bit string, the algorithm performs a mutation by ﬂipping a bit
and thus changing the solution. Often the algorithm will go through the string
of bits and with a possibility of r
n it will perform the bit mutation independently
of other bits, where n is the total numbers of bits and r is the mutation rate.
With the variable r it is possible to adjust the possibility of mutation, this
will be explored in the next subsection introducing parameter controls and self
adjustment.
2.1.3
Parameter control and self adjustment
One challenge that evolutionary algorithms faces is the choice of diﬀerent pa-
rameters, even more so because often diﬀerent problems require a very speciﬁc
set of parameters speciﬁc to that problem and as noted earlier sometimes a
static parameter set is not even the best choice. In order to address this issue,
diﬀerent parameter control schemes are explored. In Theory of parameter con-
trol for discrete black-box optimization[DD20] by Benjamin Doerr and Carola
Doerr, diﬀerent kind of parameter control schemes are introduced. The theories
of these schemes are heavily relied upon for this thesis so they will be brieﬂy
described. The parameters controls can be divided into three sub components:
• Deterministic: Parameters are noted as deterministic when the choice
of parameters does not depend on a ﬁtness landscape throughout the algo-
rithm’s lifetime. Since it does not rely upon feedback the parameter may
only be changed in relation to generation count or a time counter.
==PAGE:20==
6
Background
• Self-Adaptive: Parameters are called self-adaptive if they are encoded
into the representation of the search point, and because of this is subject
to variation operators. The key idea here is that the changed parameters
will yield better oﬀspring, which is more likely to survive further gen-
erations. With Self-Adaptive parameters, the parameters rely upon the
ﬁtness function to evaluate most "ﬁt" parameters.
• Adaptive:Lastly adaptive parameters are when there is a an explicit de-
pendence on the optimization process. This category is broader and con-
tains learning based technique, where parameters are chosen based on
statistics from the optimization process. An example of Adaptive schemes
is the 1/5-th success rule, where 1/5-th of the generation iteration should
lead to a success and thus the the mutation rate should be changed de-
pending on if there is too many or too few successfully improvements.
In the next subsection further sub components of the three parameter controls
will be explored.
2.1.3.1
State-Dependant
State-dependant parameter control is part of the deterministic parameter con-
trols. As noted in earlier these parameter controls relies entirely on the current
state and may not use any historical information in the search space. One pos-
sibility is to have an very high mutation rate in the beginning and after a set
amount of generation the mutation rate is decreased. Since no information on
ﬁtness is used, it is entirely possible that the algorithm will be caught in a local
optimum. Another possible algorithm is to have a possibility to replace a par-
ent, with a child for the next generation, where the possibility relies upon the
current generation count.
2.1.3.2
Success-Based
Success-based parameter controls is part of self-adaptive parameters. Here the
parameters relies upon information from two generation, the previous and the
current.
The parameters can be tuned according to the previous generation
and current generation by comparing success based upon a ﬁtness function.
Whenever or not the new generation was successfully more "ﬁt" the parameters
can be tuned according to this.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 1/5 Rule
7
2.1.3.3
Learning-Inspired
Learning-inspired parameters controls works very much like success-based, but
takes it a step further.
Rather than relying entirely on a current and pre-
vious generation, learning-inspired may rely upon information from obtained
from more than one of the previous iteration. Just as with success-based this
parameter control scheme is also considered self-adaptive.
2.1.3.4
Endogenous (Self-adaptation)
Endogenous or self-adaptation parameter controls takes the step even further
than learning-inspired. In this parameter control the information shared be-
tween generation also contains information on the mutation rate. This lets the
parameter control both rely upon a history of information on mutation rate as
well the success of those mutation rates.
2.1.3.5
Hyper-Heuristics
Hyper-heuristic parameter control works by either selecting from a list of pre-
deﬁned low level heuristics or try to generate them from existing components.
From these a partial solution is generated, which may be able to achieve a
solution that are also ﬁt for the full problem.
2.2
1/5 Rule
One of the earlier evolution strategies utilized a simple, yet still powerful tech-
nique to adapt parameters. The 1/5 success rule, which where independently
discovered in [KG73][Dev72][SS68]. The algorithm suggest adjusting the muta-
tion rate, referred to as step-size in the article, of the algorithm in a manner such
that 1/5-th of the generations leads to an ﬁtness improvement. The thought be-
hind this was that when the success was greater than 1/5-th the algorithm were
likely to be taking too small steps, and thus wasting time on minor improve-
ments. On the other hand when the success was less than 1/5-th the algorithm
were wasting time on waiting for any improvements.
==PAGE:22==
8
Background
2.3
Algorithms
This section will cover a few diﬀerent algorithms, each will have a segment of
pseudo-code as well as a text with a short explanation.
2.3.1
(1+1)
(1+1) is a well-known algorithm in the subject of evolutionary algorithm. The
article On the analysis of the (1+1) evolutionary algorithm[DJW02], works as
the baseline for the algorithm in this report. In 1 the pseudo code for (1+1) is
shown. In the algorithm solutions are created uniformly at random, by setting
each bit in a solution to either 0 or 1. Afterwards each generation the algorithm
randomly ﬂip each bit in a copy of the solution with a probability of r/n, where
r = 1, this will be the child of a parent.
If the child is more ﬁt the child
overwrites the parent.
Algorithm 1 (1+1) EA with static r = 1
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n
for t ←1, 2, ... do
Create y by ﬂipping each bit in a copy of x independently with a proba-
bility r
n.
if f(y) ≥f(x) then
x ←y
2.3.2
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate introduced in the article The (1+λ) evo-
lutionary algorithm with self-adjusting mutation rate[DWGY17]. Pseudo code
covering this algorithm can be seen in 2. The algorithm start by creating so-
lutions randomly just as in 2.3.1, but also sets an initial mutation rate. The
mutation rate is picked arbitrarily but must be within 2 and n/4, which in gen-
eral is always the case for the mutation rate in this algorithm. In the mutation
section of the algorithm, instead of simply mutating with the mutation rate, the
parents is divided into two segments of solutions. The ﬁrst segment performs
mutation with a mutation rate that is half of the current mutation rate. The
other segment performs mutation with a mutation rate that is double of the
current mutation rate. A child with a more ﬁt solution replaces it’s parents as
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Algorithms
9
usual. Afterwards the mutation rate is adjusted, this is done by one of two ac-
tions which is picked with a 1/2 probability each. First action sets the mutation
rate to that of the segment with the most ﬁt solution, and the second action
picks either mutation rates at random, by 1/2 probability.
Algorithm 2 (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n and set r1 ←rinit.
for t ←1, 2, ... do
for i ←1, ..., λ do
Create xi by ﬂipping each bit in a copy of x independently with prob-
ability rt
2n if i < λ/2 and with a probability 2rt/n otherwise.
x∗←arg maxxif(xi)(breaking ties randomly).
if f(y) ≥f(x) then
x ←x∗.
Perform one of the following two actions with probability. 1/2:
- Replace rt with the mutation rate that y has been created with.
- Replace rt with either rt/2 or 2rt, each with a probability of 1/2.
rt+1 ←min{max{2, rt}, n/4}.
2.3.3
(1+1) with stagnation detection
(1+1) with stagnation detection introduced in the article Self-Adjusting Evolu-
tionaryAlgorithms for Multimodal Optimization[RW20] works similar to 2.3.1,
the pseudo code can be seen in 3. The main diﬀerent is that the algorithm
has a counter value u. u is incremented each time after mutation is performed.
If a new solution is strictly better u is reset to 0 and the mutation rate is set
to 1. Otherwise if u > 2(en
rt
)rt ln nR, stagnation detection is activated. When
stagnation detection is activated the mutation rate is incremented once, but it
may not be bigger than n/2. R may be adjusting, but in case nothing is known
about the problem r = n is suggested.
2.3.4
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagna-
tion detection
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection, also introduced
in[RW20]. The algorithm is a mix between the algorithm seen in 2.3.2 and 2.3.3.
The pseudo code can be seen in 4. The algorithm starts similar to 2.3.3, but
initiate a boolean value g = false as well. The Boolean g denotes whenever
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
Algorithm 3 (1+1) EA with stagnation detection (SD-(1+1) EA)
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n and set r1 ←1.
u ←0.
for t ←1, 2, ... do
Create y by ﬂipping each bit in a copy of x independently with a proba-
bility rt
n .
u ←u + 1.
if f(y) > f(x) then
x ←y.
rt+1 ←1.
u ←0.
else if f(y) = f(x) and rt = 1 then
x ←y.
if u > 2(en
rt
)rt ln nR then
rt+1 ←min{rt + 1, n/2}.
u ←0.
else
rt+1 ←rt.
stagnation detection is active. In each generation the algorithm have two states.
State 1, which is follow when g = true meaning that stagnation detection is
active. The algorithm performs a normal mutation with the current mutation
rate. This is continued until a solution which is strictly better is found, which
then sets g ∈false. State 2 performs the same actions as seen in 2.3.2, with the
slight change that u > 2(en
rt
)rt ln nR/λ is tested in the end and if it is true, then
stagnation detection is activated by changing g to true, u to 0 and mutation
rate to 2.
2.4
Problems
Problems or ﬁtness functions is used as benchmarks, used to evaluate the perfor-
mance of diﬀerent EAs. One Max, Leading Ones and Jump are all well-known,
often refereed to as "toy problems" since they do not have many real world
application. Rather they serve as tools used as simple benchmarks in order to
test certain properties of evolutionary algorithm.
Instead well-known problems such as Minimum Spanning Tree, a commonly
known P! problem, and traveling Salesman, a commonly known NP-complete
problem, can be used to see more practical application for EAs.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Problems
11
2.4.1
One Max
The function OneMax : 0, 1n →R is deﬁned by the equation 2.1. This is simply
the total amount of 1’s in a string of bits.
OneMax(x) := ||x||1, for all x ∈{0, 1}n
(2.1)
2.4.2
Leading Ones
The function LeadingOnes : 0, 1n →R is deﬁned by the equation 2.2. This
problem have a similar solution to One Max, but because we count the leading
ones instead of overall amount of 1’s it makes ﬁnding the optimal solution a lot
harder.
LeadingOnes(x) :=
n
X
i=1
iY
j=1
xj, for all x ∈0, 1n
(2.2)
2.4.3
Jump
The multimodal Jumpm : 0, 1n →R is deﬁned by 2.3. This means that until the
point of n −m is met, the function works the same as OneMax, but to improve
beyond that, the gap of m bits must be ﬂipped at once in order to "jump" over
it and improve.
Jumpm(x1, .., xn) :=
(
m + |x|1,
if |x|1 ≤n −mor|x|1 = n
n −|x|1,
otherwise
(2.3)
2.4.4
Minimum Spanning Tree
Given a graph G containing a set of vertices V = v1, .., vn, and a set of edges
E = e1, ..., em, where each edge contains a weight wm, source and target. The
minimum spanning tree problems requires a solution which is an subgraph G′,
containing a subset of E′ with the minimum amount of weight, while still con-
necting all vertices and containing no cycles. In Figure 2.1 an example of this
can be seen.
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
Figure 2.1: Example of minimum spanning tree the red colour is the edges in
the minimum spanning tree graph
2.4.5
Traveling Salesman
Given a graph G containing a set of vertices V = v1, .., vn, and a set of edges E =
e1, ..., em, where each edge contains a weight wm, source and target. The weight
is often the euclidean distance between each nodes.
The traveling salesman
problem, requires an solution which is a subgraph G′, containing a subset of E′
again with the minimum amount of weight, where it should be possible from
any initial node to follow the edges and visit each node exactly once, as well
a only using each edge once, and end up at the initial node. An example of a
subgraph can be seen in Figure 2.2
2.5
The Framework
The goal of the framework is to be an tool, which present a set of algorithms
and problems. From this the user should be able to select an algorithm and a
problem, have some control over the problem solution, and be able to run the
algorithm until either no further improvements is possible or the user decides
==PAGE:27==
2.5 The Framework
13
Figure 2.2: Example of traveling salesman the red colour is the edges in travel-
ing salesman graph, edge weight is omitted as it is their euclidean
distance
to stop it. While the algorithm is running information related to ﬁtness score,
mutation rate, generation, best current solution, best overall solution should be
visually available. It should also be possible to export relevant information to
a external ﬁle.
==PAGE:28==
14
Background
Algorithm 4 (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate and stagnation detection
Select x uniformly at random from {0, 1}n and set r1 ←rinit.
u ←0.
g ←False(boolean variable indicating stagnation detection).
for t ←1, 2, ... do
u ←u + 1.
if g = True then
State 1 - Stagnation Detection
for i ←1, ..., λ do
Create xi by ﬂipping each bit in a copy of x independently with a
probability rt
n .
y ←arg maxx1f(xi) breaking ties randomly).
if f(y) > f(x) then
x ←y.
rt+1 ←rinit.
g ←False
u ←0.
else
if u > 2(en
rt
)rt ln nR/λ then
rt+1 ←min{rt + 1, n/2}
u ←0
else
rt+1 = rt
x ←y.
else (i.e., g = False)
State 2 - Self-adjusting (1+λ) EA
for i ←1, ..., λ do
Create xi by ﬂipping each bit in a copy of x independently with
probability rt
2n if i < λ/2 and with a probability 2rt/n otherwise.
y ←arg maxxif(xi)(breaking ties randomly).
if f(y) ≥f(x) then
if f(y) > f(x) then
u ←0
Perform one of the following two actions with probability. 1/2:
- Replace rt with the mutation rate that y has been created
with.
- Replace rt with either rt/2 or 2rt, each with a probability of
1/2.
rt+1 ←min{max{2, rt}, n/4}.
if u > 2(en
rt
)rt ln nR/λ then
rt+1 ←2.
g ←True.
u ←0.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Design
In this chapter, diﬀerent aspects of the design choices behind the architecture
will be explored. A few basic basic subjects is explored ﬁrst, this is some of the
key subjects required when exploring the architecture. The code project struc-
ture have been inspired by two major architecture standards, called the Onion
Architecture and the Model View ViewModel (MVVM). Lastly this chapter will
take a look at some of the ground ideas behind the user interface, which have
led to the diﬀerent iterations of the graphic user interface.
3.1
Key subjects
3.1.1
Polymorphism
Object-oriented programming (OOP) and polymorphism is an import part of
the architecture structure. The strength of polymorphism is that it allows for
information to be shared to sub-classes.
This will come in handy for both
algorithms and problems. A lot of algorithm will share information, rather than
implement the same information twice utilizing polymorphism allows for the
same code to be reused. Having the same code more than one place, requires
that the same bug ﬁxes is applied all of the diﬀerent places. OOP is a well
==PAGE:30==
16
Design
establish programming paradigm, where classes are modelled after real world
objects. An simple example could be animals. Here you would have animals
as a class, and speciﬁc types of animals would be separated into sub-classes. A
simple example can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Simple example of subgroups of animals.
3.1.2
Dependency Inversion & Injection
Dependency inversion[Kin] is a guidelines used to decouple software modules.
Rather than have a certain module rely directly upon another high level mod-
ule instead the module should rely on abstractions (e.g. interfaces). The ab-
stractions should not depend on details, rather the details, here the concrete
implementation should depend on the abstractions. The goal is a have diﬀerent
modules which can easily be changed or replaces as long as they follow the de-
ﬁned abstractions.
Dependency injection[Micb] is a technique often used with the dependency inver-
sion principle. The idea is rather than a certain object rely directly on another
object, instead the former relied upon object is "injected" into the ﬁrst object.
The receiving object is often referred to as the client and the objects injected
is referred to as services. This way when the client is used somewhere else, the
code using the client is able to select which services the client should use. This
works both as a way to decouple code by not having a client rely on a certain im-
plementation of an abstraction, but it also works to cut down on lines of codes
since constructions of diﬀerent objects can be handled in the injector, rather
than in diﬀerent client objects. Certain services can also be shared throughout
diﬀerent clients.
The principles can be seen in Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Architecture
17
Figure 3.2: Example of dependency inversion and injection
3.2
Architecture
Two major major architectures is used through the project. The Onion Archi-
tecture is used to help out structure code in a more clean way and help loos-
ening the coupling between diﬀerent components. The model view View Model
(MVVM)[DBSO17] is an architecture often used for application containing a
graphical user interface in ASP.Net.
3.2.1
Onion Architecture
Onion architecture, also more ambiguously called clean architecture[Mica], is a
an architecture which follows many of the same principles as seen in 3.1.2 or
domain driven design. The architecture is illustrated in Figure 3.3. In the ﬁgure
diﬀerent layers is shown, which is why it goes by the name onion architecture.
This architecture is commonly used among .NET web application, but also
works great for other application.
Application core is the center and should contain the business logic and ap-
plication models. Rather than have business logic depending on certain data
access or other infrastructure concerns the dependency is instead inverted. The
next layer Infrastructure depends on Application Core, this is done by having
diﬀerent abstractions and interfaces which may be implemented by this layer.
The third layer can contain many diﬀerent types of layers, one of such might
be a User Interface layer. This layer depends both on Application Core and
indirectly Infrastructure through abstraction. Commonly there is diﬀerent in-
terfaces and models deﬁned in the Application Core, where business logic is
found in Infrastructure, which performs task utilizing the diﬀerent models.
==PAGE:32==
18
Design
Figure 3.3: Overview of tradition onion architecture
3.2.2
Model View ViewModel
The Model View ViewModel(MVVM) pattern originates from another pattern
called Model-View-Presenter pattern, which is a variation of the very common
Model-View-Controller(MVC) pattern. A short explanation to MVC is: View is
what is shown on the screen, model is the data shown and the controller is what
binds this together. Model view viewmodel was ﬁrst introducted in a blogpost
[Gos05] by John Gossman in 2005, who is one of the Windows presentation form
(WPF) and Silverlight architects at Microsoft. The MVVM pattern was heavily
designed to work with WPF and as such is not really program language agnostic.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Graphical User Interface
19
In MVVM, there is most the parts usually seen in a model view controller.
Model is used to describe some form of data. View is what the user see. View-
Model is an objects which helps communicate changes to and from the view, by
utilizing bindings between view and viewModel. The viewModel is set as the
DataContext of a view, this allows changes to the viewModel to automatically
propagate into the view by data bindings. An example of this could be that we
have a simply text ﬁeld in the view, by binding this to a ﬁeld in the viewModel,
all changes made in the viewModel will automatically apply to the view and
thus change the text ﬁeld.
3.3
Graphical User Interface
The design of the Graphical User Interface was designed by breaking down
the interesting information of a self-adjusting evolutionary algorithm as well as
diﬀerent ﬁelds required in order to control ways of testing the algorithms. Some
of the key features from this where:
• Algorithms, way of picking as well as showing chosen one.
• Problems, way of picking as well as showing chosen one.
• Possibility to control solution of some problem e.g diﬀerent gaps for jump
and graphs in Minimum Spanning Tree.
• Diﬀerent stat information.
– Current number of generation.
– Current best score.
– Best score in total.
– Mutation Rate.
• Display of best and overall best solution.
• Graph displaying the entire population’s average ﬁtness function.
• Buttons to control things: Start, Pause, Reset, Export.
From this a mock-up was created seen in Figure 3.4
==PAGE:34==
20
Design
Figure 3.4: Mock-up for graphical user interface
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Implementation
This covers will cover the actual implementation of the application. The appli-
cation was developed using the programming language .NETFramework v.4.8.
.NETFramework, unlike .NET Core is a Windows only programming language.
The programming language was chosen because of former experience with .NET-
Core.
The reason why .NETFramework was chosen over .NETCore is that
.NETFramework works better with Windows Presentation Forms (WPF). .NET-
Core did receive support for WPF at the start of this master thesis, around
February 2020. Although of this support, WPF still only worked for Windows
OS, so it did not make sense to use .NETCore, rather than .NETFramework.
Furthermore the project were not requested to run on either Linux and MacOS.
The application contains three projects, Application Core, Infrastructure
and UI. Each project will have it’s own section explaining implementation as
well as dependencies, both internals as well as externals.
==PAGE:36==
22
Implementation
4.1
C# & .NET glossary
This sections gives an overview of the ambiguous technical terms speciﬁc for
that of .NET application.
• .sln solution: A solution is a ﬁle, which bundles diﬀerent projects together.
Instead of having to compile each project the solution can be used to
compile everything at once.
• Project: One group of code, a project contains a .csproj ﬁle deﬁning ver-
sion of .NET as well as dependencies.
• NuGet: A package manager for .NET. This tool helps import external
code refereed to as "Package".
• Class ﬁelds: variable ﬁelds on a class object.
• Class Properties: Properties exposes class ﬁelds. Often these are get/set
methods for a class ﬁeld.
4.2
External Dependencies
These are some of the External dependencies installed with NuGet, which is a
package manager for .NET. All of them can be found on NuGets own homepage1
by searching for the name.
4.2.1
Caliburn.Micro
Caliburn.Micro is a framework, which helps building application following the
MVVM architecture. It automatically creates the bindings between a View and
a Viewmodel, if name convention matches. An example for this is if there is a
view GraphView, then by naming the ViewModel GraphViewModel, then
Caliburn.Micro detects that these two classes should be linked and creates the
data binding. The important part when using Caliburn.Micro is the naming
conventions, the developer have to ensure that the naming ﬁts with each other
and no names is used more than once. This framework also helps with internal
ﬁelds, if the View contains a textﬁeld, which should be linked to a string in the
ViewModel, then by letting both be named the exact same the mapping is done
1https://www.nuget.org/
==PAGE:37==
4.2 External Dependencies
23
automatically. All of this eases the development required when working with a
graphical user interface.
Caliburn.Micro also provides diﬀerent classes to help control and change the user
interface, one used in this project is screen, which is required when embedding
graphic is required. This will be explored in further details later.
4.2.2
EPPlus
EPPlus provides a framework which makes it possible to read and write excel
documents from a .NET program.
4.2.3
Automapper
Automapper provides functionality to convert one class into another class. As
standard out of the box Automapper can convert one class to another if both
classes contains some of the same named ﬁelds. This could be two classes both
containing a ﬁeld called "Name", this is not case sensitive so "name" also works.
More advanced data conversion between classes may also be speciﬁed. Automap-
per is required since exporting to an excel format requires for all information to
be of the type string.
4.2.4
GraphX
GraphX is a graph visualizations library for .NET. The library contains diﬀerent
layout schemes and helper methods, which let’s the developer chose diﬀerent
algorithms for graph visualizations.
4.2.5
Oxyplot
Oxyplot is a plotting library. It provides tools to create visualization of diﬀerent
plots.
==PAGE:38==
24
Implementation
Figure 4.1: Implemented architecture showing dependencies between each
project.
4.3
Architectural Overview
An overview of the implemented architecture can be seen in Figure 4.1. It follows
most of the principle described in section 3.2. The key diﬀerence between is that
the UI part depends directly upon infrastructure. The main reason behind this
is to have a static helper class, which can provide instantiated objects for the
classes implementing IProblem and IAlgorithm. In the next sections of this
chapter the details behind each of the diﬀerent parts of the application will be
explored, these are referred to as projects.
4.4
Application Core
Project structure can be see in Figure 4.2.
Dependencies:
• Caliburn.Micro
Currently this project must depend on Caliburn.Micro, because of the class
BaseSolutionViewModel, since everything inheriting, must also be a sub-
class of Screen, which is a class from Caliburn.Micro. Removing this depen-
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Application Core
25
Figure 4.2: ApplicationCore project structure as seen from visual studio.
dency would be ideal, but due to time constraint and because this is a minor
ﬂaw which currently does not cause issues, this has yet to be changed.
This project contains two sub-folders.
One containing all the interfaces and
another containing models all used throughout the project. This project serves
as a base to the application and all other projects must rely on this project in
order to have a common language to communicate between projects.
Two of the more advanced interfaces will be covered in details since their sub-
classes will contain some of the more interesting part of the code.
4.4.1
IAlgorithm interface
All algorithms implemented must be a sub-class of IAlgorithm. The interface
cover some of the basic information such as: name, mutation rate, a pause
boolean, and population size.
The interface also contains two methods, Clear() and RunAlgorithm(IProblem
problem). These two methods should be self-explainatory, one clear information
and the other runs the algorithm.
==PAGE:40==
26
Implementation
4.4.2
IProblem interface
Likewise IProblem is required for all problem used to evaluate diﬀerent algo-
rithms.
Again there have some basic information such as: Name and size.
There is also two variables containing the reference to a viewModel, this is used
in order to communicate with the view of the best solution for the current gen-
eration and that of the overall best solution.
There is also two methods, CreateSolution(int options = 0), this method is
used for problems where the solution might not always be the same, an example
could be graph related problems, this method may be used to deﬁne how the
graph should be created. This method is needed in order to have an general way
of controlling a problem’s solution. Evaluate(Solution s) which as the name
implies is used to evaluate a solution.
4.4.3
IStatsmaster
The interface IStatsmaster is an interface describing diﬀerent information, which
could prove interesting after a algorithm have been run. The general idea is
that diﬀerent parts of the system can rely on IStatsmaster in order to append
information, which later may be exported. Some of the information stored is:
• Current number of generation
• Current best solution
• Generation containing the best solution
• The best solution
• A list containing all the best solutions given a certain generation point
• List of events. Where events is a object containing a generation counter
and string message.
There is also methods such as AddEvent(string msg), Clear() and Eva-
lAndUpdate(List<Solution> solutions, double average.
The two ﬁrst does
exactly the name implies, while the latter takes in a list of solutions and the
average score and and should update information depending if it’s required.
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Infrastructure
27
4.5
Infrastructure
Project structure can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Infrastructure as seen from visual studio
Dependencies:
• Application Core
• Caliburn.Micro
• Automapper
• EPPlus
==PAGE:42==
28
Implementation
Caliburn.Micro is required because some of the algorithm data is linked with the
view, this means that they must inherit from PropertyChangedBase, which
allows a class to use the method NotifyOfPropertyChange(() => variable).
If a variable, in this case one called variable, is bound to anything in a UI an
message telling the UI to update the ﬁeld which is bound to the variable is
sent. This way the UI does not have to rely on code making sure to ask for any
changes between a set of intervals.
Both Automapper is used to change information into a format more suited for
export, when using EPPlus to create and .xlsx export ﬁle. This will be covered
in 4.5.4.
This project contains four diﬀerent folders.
Three of them is unambiguous,
Algorithms and Problems, Export.
Lastly Utility contains a set of diﬀerent
classes used to supply some kind of helper functions to other classes.
4.5.1
Algorithms
All algorithm must inherit from BaseAlgorithm, which also means that the
algorithm is inheriting from IAlgorithm. BaseAlgoritm contains all of the
diﬀerent ﬁelds required for all for all algorithm. Common practice is to denote
private or protected ﬁelds with a a starting underscore "_". In most cases pro-
tected is over private, since the inheriting algorithms uses the same information
is many cases.
• Pause boolean, to control whenever the algorithm is running.
• _done boolean, to control whenever the algorithm’s run is complete. Since
Pause i publicly available it may be changed from elsewhere. This ﬁeld
allows the code to distinguish between a pause and a complete run.
• _noImprovCount, a counter used to count of numbers of step without
improvements.
• _statsmaster, a ﬁeld with a IStatsmaster used to collect data for later
use.
• _Rand, a .NET Random object used to pick random numbers.
This
object is injected in the constructor.
• PopSize, integer value of the population size.
• Solutions, a list of solutions for the current generations.
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Infrastructure
29
• MuRate, integer containing the mutation rate.
The class also contains a set of protected methods, these are intended to work
as a toolbox for inheriting algorithms which may specify how to use them. Some
of the more important is listed below.
• Init(IProblem problem): creates a set of solutions given the size of prob-
lem. These are added to the Solutions list. This is done by ﬁrst creating
a bit answer full of zeroes and then randomly ﬂipping each bit indepe-
dently with a probability of 1/2. This method is virtual, meaning that it’s
possible for a child to override it, in case an algorithm requires for other
ways of initializing solutions.
• RunAlgorithm(IProblem problem): Is the method actually starting the
algorithm. This method is pretty simple, it starts a Tasks/Thread which
runs the abstract method Once. This abstract method is should be im-
plemented by inheriting algorithms and let’s them decide what happens
each generation. After Once is done, _noImprovCount is checked, if
it’s above a certain threshold _done will be set to true and returned.
• Mutate(IProblem problem, int muRate, Solution sol), given a solution
this method creates a new solution by ﬂipping bits. In the end the old
solution and the newly mutated one is compared and the solution with
the highest solution ﬁtness, denoted as solution score, is returned.
• Update(List<Solution> newSolutions, IProblem problem): Evaluates a
new set of solutions, performs changes to the statsmaster if some of the
solutions performs better than what is previously seen. Propagate changes
to the problem view, since this is done with interfaces the method need
only to know that a solution is required. Function view is also updated,
instead of a solution the average score and a generation is required here.
Solutions is then overwritten with the new set of solutions.
The reason to have all of these methods in BaseAlgorithm is to only have
them at once place in the code. They could all have been implemented inside
their own algorithm, but that would create a lot of redundancy. This way when
a algorithm inherit, they should only consider implementing Once(IProblem
problem) and have a toolbox available. Each algortihm have it’s own section in
where the implementation of Once and for some Init, will be explained.
Something that is common for all of the algorithms’ implementation of Once
method, but do not belong in BaseAlgorithm is that all of the algorithm
check if the current length of the Solutions list is empty. This is used to know
whenever it is the ﬁrst time the algorithm is run and if so Init method is called.
==PAGE:44==
30
Implementation
4.5.1.1
(1+1)
The implementation of the common (1+1) evolutionary algorithm. The imple-
mentation follows the pseudo code 1. (1+1) uses the standard implementation
of Init from BaseAlgorithm. This algoirthm very simply iterates and mu-
tates the solutions, where the better performing child replaces their parent. An
temporary list is used to collect the current generations best solutions, which is
required for the Update method.
4.5.1.2
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
The implementation of this algorithm follows the pseudo code of 2. This al-
gorithm overrides the Init method, but uses the base implementation as well.
The expanded Init method chooses a initial mutation rate as well as deﬁne
the upper- and lowerbound of the mutation rate. The lower bound, denoted as
_muLowerBound is set to 2 and the upper bound denoted as _muUpperBound
is set to problem.Size/4. In case the upper bound is less than the lower bound
it’s value is changed to that of the lower bound, this could be if the problem.size
is less than 8. The mutation rate is uniformly chosen at random between the
two bounds.
The algorithm splits Solutions list into two lists, mutating the ﬁrst half with
half the mutation rate and the second half with double the mutation rate. New
solutions is picked as with (1+1). Afterwards PickMuRate is called. This
method, as the name suggest, handles picking the mutation rate and simply
follows the pseudo code, the probability is handled by picking a random number
between 1 and 2. Before changing the actual ﬁeld MuRate it is ensured that
the value is within the upper- and lowerbound.
Both of the two list are joined and Update is called with the newly created list.
4.5.1.3
(1+1) with stagnation detection
The implementation of this algorithm follows the example seen in 3.
Init is expanded with an integer _SDcount, corresponding to g in the pseudo
code.
Once: This method follows that of (1+1), but _SDCount is incremented
once for each solution and reset to 0 if improvements is found. After a solution
have been evaluated _SDCount > 2(en
rt
)rt ln nR is checked and if so stagnation
detection begins. Mutation rate is incremented and _SDCount is reset to 0.
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Infrastructure
31
4.5.1.4
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate and stagnation de-
tection
The implementation follows the example seen in 4. This algorithm is slightly dif-
ferent implemented than the others, instead of inheriting directly from BaseAl-
gorithm the class iherit from OnePlusLambda. This let’s the class use the
PickMuRate and Init from OnePlusLambda.
Init is overridden, but still uses the inherited method. The method sets up
the same variables seen in the (1+1) with stagnation detection 4.5.1.3, plus the
boolean ﬁeld _G.
Once is a mix between (1+1) with stagnation detection and the regular (1+λ)
with self adjusting mutation rate. The boolean _G is used to decide, where true
leads to the (1+1). If _G is not true, the method follows that of (1+λ), but with
the slight change to have check seen in stagnation detection after PickMuRate
have been called.
4.5.2
Problems
All of the problems inherit from the class BaseProblem, this class contains all
the required ﬁelds that all problem should have as well as get/set methods. All
of the problem inheriting from this class must implement a get method for name,
in all cases this is just implemented to return a hard-coded string name for the
speciﬁc problem, and a Evaluate function, taking in a solution and returning
a double score. A problem may, but is it required, to override the function
CreateSolution, if it’s not overridden, the method simply return null.
The next subsections will look into how the diﬀerent problems implemented
Evaluate and some of them CreateSolution.
4.5.2.1
One Max
The OneMax class implement Evaluate, by having a for loop, on the bits in
a solution. A counter is utilized in order to keep track of how many bits is 1.
The counted value is then returned.
The class does not override CreateSolution, since the solution to a One Max
problem is always the same.
==PAGE:46==
32
Implementation
4.5.2.2
Leading Ones
The LeadingOnes class implements Evaluate, by again having a loop going
through all of the bits, but as soon as the ﬁrst "0" is met, the code breaks out
of the loop and return the same way as OneMax.
This class also does not override CreateSolution, because the problem solution
is static.
4.5.2.3
Jump
Jump is somewhat similar to OneMax in the way that all the "1" bits is
counted together, but instead of simply returning a value a check to is performed.
This ensures that the counted value is less than the problem length minus the
gap or if the counted value is exactly the length of the problem. In case that
either of these is true the gap, plus the counted value is returned. Otherwise
the solution is within the gap and the problem length minus the counted value
is returned.
Jump Overrides the CreateSolution, it takes in an integer "options", the gap
is set to this value, in case that the options is 0 a value is randomly selected
and the gap is set to this value. For this project this will be called from the UI
inside a viewModel, but the viewModel does not know before run-time which
problem it is, only that it is of type IProblem.
4.5.2.4
Minimum Spanning Tree
MinimumSpanningTree is a far more advanced. The class contains a set of
private ﬁelds used for evaluation. These are: the original size of the problem,
denoted as originalSize, an integer array, edgeWeight, which as the name
stats contains the weight of all the edges.
CreateSolution is overridden. ProblemSize is used to deﬁne the amount of
nodes, from this an Array of size (ProblemSize −1)2 + ProblemSize −1
2
, the
triangle number, this becomes the Matrix containing all the edges between every
set of two nodes. The reason why we have a ProblemSize−1 is that we are not
interested in the ﬁrst spot which would normally be the edge between node 1
and 1. The visualization of this generated matrix can be seen in Table 4.1 with
the node size of 5.
After this is created, the programs ﬁlls out the Array with randomly selected in-
tegers between -2001 and -1. This was chosen because of two reasons, ﬁrst often
when comparing for improvements it will often be one edge moved somewhere
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Infrastructure
33
2
3
4
5
1
w12
w13
w14
w15
2
-
w23
w24
w25
3
-
-
w34
w35
4
-
-
-
w45
Table 4.1: Example of a matrix covering edge weight for any two nodes i and
j by wij.
else i.e comparison between 2 edges, second edge weight have three options in
comparison: greater, smaller or equal. These two reasons is why a edge weight
choices were chosen statically within -2001 and -1. These values are negative
because the algorithms always tried to ﬁnd the highest score, but in Minimum
Spanning Tree problem the solution requires the lowest number. After the val-
ues have all randomly been chosen. Lastly the problemSize is set to the size
of the edgeWeight array.
Option may either be 0, for randomly generated graph, 10 giving a speciﬁc
graph with 10 nodes, or 20 for a speciﬁc graph with 20 nodes.
Evaluate works by going through the solution, which is now the length of the
edgeWeight array. If a certain bit is 1, the corresponding value in edgeWeight
is put into a counter value, otherwise nothing happens. After all the bits have
been evaluated a check is performed to ensure that it once again is one graph,
where everything is connected. If this is the case nothing happens, otherwise a
high penalty is given to the counter value.
4.5.3
Utility
Utility contains two classes, DataProvider and Statsmaster.
The ﬁrst is
a simple helper class which contains one method method to generate all the
algorithm objects and another method to generate all the problem methods.
The reason why they are all generated at the same time is to share a Random
object, which is a library in .NET used to get random numbers. Random is
best used by generating it once and then sharing it throughout the application,
because a seed is chosen at the time of generation of the object.
Statsmaster is the actual implementation of the former stated interface, the
method Clear() simply sets all of the objects ﬁelds to their initial value or null.
EvalAndUpdate(List<Solution> solutions, double average) changes certain
ﬁeld, if a better solution is found for overall best and current generation best.
After this history information is saved containing: generation, best score, best
solution, average score. The statsmaster then notiﬁes the UI of changes using
the NotifyOfPropertyChange(() => "variable") method from Caliburn.Micro.
==PAGE:48==
34
Implementation
Lastly the current best solution and overall best solution is returned.
4.5.4
Export
This folders contains the ExcelManager, as well as the ExcelMapper. The
ExcelManager contains all the functionality used when a certain algorithm’s run
is requested to be exported to an .xlsx ﬁle. In order to save the information an
IProblem, IAlgorithm and IStatsmaster is needed.The later of the classes
is used to help convert certain information to the right format.
4.6
UI
The project structure of UI can be seen in Figure 4.4
Dependencies:
• Application Core
• Infrastructure
• Caliburn.Micro
• GraphX
• EPPLus
• Oxyplot
• Automapper
The UI project has the most of the dependencies, since it draws upon the
functionality of the two other projects. The idea is that the UI should not as
little as to which problem and algorithm is selected, but simply provide the
information and start the algorithm.
Most of the dependencies required are diﬀerent NuGet package containing tools
to create plots or visualize certain problems.
The project follows the structure of MVVM as a such has a folder for each of
these parts. The models folder will not have it’s own section, since the classes
containing within is thin implementations of required to use GraphX. The
project also contains a class Bootstrapper in the main folder, this is a helper
class for Caliburn.Micro, which simply states which ViewModel to start when
the application is launched.
==PAGE:49==
4.6 UI
35
Figure 4.4: UI project structure as seen from visual studio.
4.6.1
ViewModel & View
ViewModel and View is containing within same subsection, because they are
so interconnected. You may have a view without a viewModel, but having a
viewModel without a view does not make sense.
There are three types of viewModels in this project.
• The intial viewModel ShellViewModel, which starts up the view of the
main window.
==PAGE:50==
36
Implementation
• The FunctionViewModel, which inherit directly from screen.
• SimpleBitViewModel and GraphViewModel, both of these inherit from
BaseSolutionViewModel, which inherit from Screen.
ShellViewModel inherit from Conductor<Screen>.Collection.AllActive.
This allows for the ShellView to display a collection of Screen within the view,
in other words it is possible to embed diﬀerent screens within the view. This is
required in order to show the current best solution, overall best solution as well
as the function displaying overall ﬁtness.
Most of the ﬁelds and properties contained within ShellViewModel is related
to diﬀerent bindings in the view. There are also several methods, which are
bound to the click of certain buttons. These perform simple validation and then
calls methods within other objects. A rundown of The button Start, which is
bound to StartAlgorithm, is as follows:
• Ensure that a algorithm, problem and problem size is picked
• Set the problem size within the problem object if needed and calls Cre-
ationSolution(option) on the selected problem, option is set to 0 as stan-
dard.
• The required Screen ﬁtting the problem is added to the ShellView.
• The algorithm is started calling RunAlgorithm with the speciﬁed prob-
lem.
• As RunAlgorithm returns a boolean, if the algorithm is ﬁnished this is
used to show a message showing this to the user.
The other methods are far more trivial and simply sets diﬀerent values in order
to set the application to a certain state. ExportStats simply takes the avail-
able information and send it to the ExcelManager function SaveFile, then
shows a success or failed message depending on the boolean response.
Both FunctionViewModel and SimpleBitViewModel should be considered
trivial, in the way that they both creates required objects in the constructor and
both have a single method, which update the information by either replacing or
adding information.
GraphViewModel is slightly more advanced. The Update contains a couple
of helper values used to decode a solution into a graph edges. Since updating the
graphView is also costly on the performance there is a decreasing limit on the
amount of generation between each update. This is denoted by integer values c
==PAGE:51==
4.6 UI
37
and d. When c is larger the graph is updated, otherwise it’s incremented. Each
time the graph is updated d is decremented by d ∗0.1 (But set to 0 in case it’s
lower than 10 already). The idea is that in the infant stages of a evolutionary
algorithm solutions will see a lot of changes. GraphX, provides graph creation
out of the box, but creating a new graph is a little taxing, this is only an issues
in the beginning where a new better graph is found nearly every generation.
4.6.2
Implementation issues
This section will brieﬂy covers some of the issues or improper design the appli-
cation has at current stage, which should be reconsidered upon further develop-
ment.
1. Algorithm/Problem should be initialized upon click of the start button.
This may clean up methods such as CreateSolution, since the solution
may be created in the constructor instead.
2. Caliburn.Micro should only be required in the UI
3. BaseSolutionViewModel should be reconsidered if necessary
4. Clean of ShellViewModel
1. Currently all of the algorithm or problems is initialized at the same time and
returned from the DataProvider. Instead of using "reset" functions a more
clean way could be for a method asking for a new object of either algorithm or
problem. This would most likely be done using the string Name of either.
2. Caliburn.Micro is something that is very much linked to the UI, the other
project require it inorder to call PropertyChanged in order to notify the UI of
changes. As both ApplicationCore and Infrastructure should be non-dependant
on a certain type of UI this should be reworked.
3. This is required in order to fulﬁll 2. Since the object is only used in the UI,
it may simply be possible to move it into that project.
4. This class simply contains a lot of lines of codes, this might be possible to
simplify in order to ease further development.
==PAGE:52==
38
Implementation
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter in split into three sections, the ﬁrst section covering the test data,
then a section about the hypothesis on how the diﬀerent algorithm will perform
in diﬀerent problems and the last section covering the actual results.
5.1
Test data
All of the ﬁve diﬀerent algorithm is to be tested on every problem described,
except for traveling salesman. Because of the random nature of the algorithm
tests should be performed several times, in this project each test were performed
10 times.
• One Max and Leading Ones with size 100 and 200
• Jump with problem size of 100 and 200 and a gap of 2.
• Minimum Spanning Tree the algorithm were evaluated on two complete
graphs. In Figure 5.1 an example of a complete graph but with 5 nodes
is shown, both of the tested graphs work similarly but with more nodes.
The ﬁrst graph contains 10 nodes and 45 vertices and the second graph
contains 20 nodes and 190 vertices.
==PAGE:54==
40
Results
Figure 5.1: Example of a complete graph containing 5 nodes
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
623
1957
660
663
551
1604
1996
1175
701
2
-
576
1499
1956
868
340
471
19
1692
3
-
-
1829
1186
1106
1085
1067
1547
1652
4
-
-
-
679
771
1980
1769
29
1751
5
-
-
-
-
1951
1783
1677
822
326
6
-
-
-
-
-
1938
532
357
126
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
1452
1528
1488
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
599
385
9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
947
Table 5.1: Vertice matrix with edge weight between two nodess, for problem
with node size of 10
For the problems, such as One Max, Leading Ones and Jump, diﬀerent sizes
between 1-100 was used throughout the development of the framework, because
of the general generation counts of these tests 100 was chosen was a initial start
point. Afterwards the problem size was doubled in order to further increase
diﬃculty of the problem. In the problem Jump the diﬃculty heavily depends
on the gap size, 2 was chosen as the initial value since it was the lowest point
without making the problem trivial. Often gaps of 2 and 3 is used. A few tests
on the gap size of 3 was evaluated, but this proved to require far to long time
and was abandoned.
The graph with 10 nodes in the test data can be seen in Table 5.1, which covers
the weight on all edges between two nodes. The same can be seen for the other
graph of size 20 in Table 5.2
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Test data
41
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
38
1929
52
1889
172
1834
190
750
18
1551
875
309
1218
1909
1493
37
1791
366
702
2
-
1681
1407
1268
941
390
1933
846
792
1031
1937
1793
658
419
679
579
700
563
880
3
-
-
559
1256
1696
627
1140
385
1401
1878
835
256
580
714
1726
1447
711
154
1002
4
-
-
-
1971
263
1601
413
1680
560
245
1408
1148
1717
1738
1032
182
1750
1793
626
5
-
-
-
-
1157
1295
588
1808
232
912
1768
1055
1701
808
1160
740
257
1851
850
6
-
-
-
-
-
367
1017
1368
23
1265
1350
7
1061
1164
1345
1822
382
352
187
7
-
-
-
-
-
-
336
955
809
58
58
1839
110
1597
1651
760
942
170
1861
8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1072
113
699
1136
483
1391
1252
1260
1904
1141
1512
1338
9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1978
1634
355
1088
746
270
308
22
600
403
1075
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1851
168
396
1735
1721
99
1414
1345
375
923
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2001
398
336
426
1012
537
845
1402
596
12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1645
350
1859
527
1256
1521
1008
668
13
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
907
1697
1965
1301
1240
1600
1353
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
1781
802
961
1817
111
15
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1983
760
1124
1083
167
16
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1845
93
64
1259
17
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
538
762
528
18
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
447
1159
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
807
Table 5.2: Vertice matrix with edge weight between two nodess, for problem with node size of 20
==PAGE:56==
42
Results
5.2
Expectation
5.2.1
One Max
In the problem One Max most of the algorithm is expected to generally perform
the same.
Algorithms which have a higher mutation rate, should generally
perform better in the beginning when there is more 0’s. When the solutions
start getting closer to the optimum a lower mutation rate should perform better,
since a lower mutation rate usually means ﬂipping fewer bits at a time. Hopes
are that the algorithm (1+λ) with self adjusting mutation rate is able to adjust
the mutation rate for this and perform better than (1+1). In case either of
the algorithms struggles ﬁnding the last bits the algorithm counterpart with
stagnation detection might perform better, but this is likely not the case.
5.2.2
Leading Ones
The closer the solution gets to the optimum the closer it should start to perform
like One Max. Generally this problem is a harder version of One Max, in order
to improve 1 speciﬁc bit of 0 must be ﬂipped, rather than ﬂipping any 0. The
problem follows One Max, where a higher mutation rate may be helped in the
beginning, but as the solution gets closer to the optimum a lower mutation rate
often performs better. A possible bad situation for a high mutation rate, could
be having a solution 10000, then due to having a high mutation rate each bit
is ﬂipped to 01111, the second solution is near complete solution, but since the
ﬁrst bit was ﬂipped it is discarded. This way a higher mutation rate might
sabotage itself.
Just as in One Max, hopes are that the mutation rate adjust for this and per-
forms better than the standard (1+1). Generally stagnation detection should
not change much in this problem, we will see how it can help in the next prob-
lems.
5.2.3
Jump
This problem performs exactly like One Max, until the last couple of bits cov-
ering the gap. In order to jump the gap, an algorithm have to ﬂip an amount
of bits, with the value 0 at once, equal to the size of the gap. For a gap of size 2
exactly 2 bits must be ﬂipped. An algorithm with higher mutation rate is more
likely to perform multiple ﬂip, but a too high mutation rate is also likely to ﬂip
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Reality
43
too many. Both algorithms are likely to get stuck just before the gap in those
cases the stagnation detection counterpart might perform better.
5.2.4
Minimum Spanning Tree
Often the randomly generation solution in the beginning of an algorithm’s life-
time will contain graphs with nodes either connected by more than one edge
than necessary or nodes which are not connected at all. Therefore in the be-
ginning an algorithm will most of the time be able to perform single bit ﬂips,
which makes easy improvements by either adding necessary or removing unnec-
essary edge. After a while the solution will have an graph containing a spanning
tree. If this is not the minimum spanning tree it means that two bits can be
ﬂipped in order to achieve another spanning tree with lower total weight. Since
two or more bits is always required in order to improve, just as in Jump the
self-adjusting algorithms should perform better.
5.3
Reality
In Table 5.3 the average amount generations required in order to solve the prob-
lem One Max of size 100 and 200 can be seen. For both of the algorithm with
stagnation detection there seem to be no particularly performance changes, both
performed slightly worse than their non stagnation detection counterpart. Given
the stagnation detection comes into play when no improvements can be found
for a while, this have likely not played a part in this problem and the slightly
worse performance is likely more due to the random nature of EAs.
It was theorized that (1+λ) with self-adjustment would perform better than
the static (1+1), by having a higher mutation rate in the beginning, from the
results this have not been the case.
Algorithm
100
200
(1+1)
704.8
1861.2
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
906
2407.9
(1+1) with stagnation detection
716.4
1861.1
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection
995.5
2566.7
Table 5.3: Benchmark of Algorithm’s average performance on One Max with
varying size of 100 and 200
==PAGE:58==
44
Results
Table 5.4 shows the average performance on Leading Ones problem with the
size 100 and 200. Just as with One Max stagnation detection does not seem to
have an major impact on the performance. Again (1+λ) with self-adjustment
performs slightly worse than the static mutation rate algorithm (1+1).
Algorithm
100
200
(1+1)
6140.5
28780.1
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
7344.2
35300.5
(1+1) with stagnation detection
7201.5
29848.3
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection
8442.6
35031.3
Table 5.4: Benchmark of Algorithm’s average peformance on Leading Ones
with varying size of 100 and 200
In Table 5.5 the results on Jump is seen.
As (*) denotes, (1+λ) with self-
adjustment had 5 good runs and 5 horrible runs on the problem size 200. Gen-
erally the algorithm would get a all the population to the score just before the
jump and then change the mutation rate at random, since no better solution
was found. This meant that the algorithm were guessing an mutation rate by
halving or doubling the mutation rate each generation.
In order to make (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection
it was necessary to set the value of R to 0.1, instead of equal to the problem
size. Test had shown that the quicker the algorithm went into stagnation de-
tection the more likely it were to perform the jump. Generally both stagnation
detection algorithm performed better than their counterpart.
Algorithm
100
200
(1+1)
5550
18952.5
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
15143.5
16822.6(*)
(1+1) with stagnation detection
3907.4
16887.7
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection
9512.8
19548.6
Table 5.5: Benchmark of Algorithm’s average performance on Jump with vary-
ing size of 100 and 200 and gap of 2. Among (*) only 5 out of 10
managed to ﬁnd a proper solution. The rest was terminated after
36000+ generations without managing to jump the gap.
The results of Minimum Spanning Tree with a graph containing 10 node can be
seen in Table 5.6 the graph containing 20 node can be seen in Table 5.7, each
algorithm were stopped after 100.000 generation.
For the graph containing 10 nodes, all of the algorithm were able to achieve the
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Reality
45
same solution. The solution "000010000100010100000000000010000010011000010",
which is is visualized in Figure 5.2. By comparing with the edge matrix in Ta-
ble 5.1 it can be seen that this solution is the optimal solution as no edges that
may be replaced in order to gain a lower total weight.
The performance of
the diﬀerent algorithms do not diﬀerentiate much from each other. The most
clear diﬀerence is between (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate and (1+1)
with stagnation detection, where there is a diﬀerence of nearly 1000 generations.
Figure 5.2: Best possible solution to the Minimum Spanning Tree problem on
the graph containing 10 nodes.
In the results on the graph containing 20 nodes in general it appears that (1+1)
outperforms (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate slightly, by having around
1000 better score average score. The solution score of (1+λ) with self-adjusting
mutation rate appears to be more spread out meaning that the solution it pro-
pose diﬀers from each other, where as (1+1) generally had more similar solu-
tions. The best score of 1505 can be seen in Figure 5.3, this solution is the same
for all benchmark with this score. This solution is also the optimal solution, as
before comparing edges with Table 5.2 no replacement edges may be found.
In general it appears stagnation detection did not play a big role in this bench-
mark, both algorithm performed similar to their counterpart without stagnation
detection.
==PAGE:60==
46
Results
Figure 5.3: Best possible solution to the Minimum Spanning Tree problem on
the graph containing 20 nodes.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Reality
47
5.3.1
Note to (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rates’s
performance
Figure 5.4: Diﬀerent mutation rates picked between reaching the gap and per-
forming the "jump".
In Figure 5.4 diﬀerent mutation rates is listed. This information is taken from
the information on a run where the jump happened at generation 21598, and the
former best solution where at 1748, meaning it took 20120 generation to jump.
8958 of the mutation rates is between 2 and 8 and the rest 8486 is between 12
and 50, this means that nearly half of the attempted mutation rates were fairly
high. In generation 21597 the mutation rate was changed from 4 to 2, and was
unchanged the next generation, due to being unable to go below 2.
==PAGE:62==
48
Results
Algorithm
avg gen to hit 2709
(1+1)
5524.1
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
6149.9
(1+1) with stagnation detection
5177
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection
5731.9
Table 5.6: Benchmark of Algorithm’s of minimum spanning tree with 10 nodes. Every algorithm managed to hit a
solution with total weight of 2709.
Algorithm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
avg.
(1+1)
1662
1582
1530
1505
1607
1507
1507
1505
1505
1505
1541.5
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate
1660
1684
1505
1971
2042
1586
1505
1727
1530
1673
1688.3
(1+1) with stagnation detection
1632
1632
1524
1549
1507
1530
1532
1507
1505
1507
1542.5
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate & stagnation detection
1607
1812
1582
1849
1994
2069
1698
1706
1726
1582
1762.5
Table 5.7: Benchmark on graph with 20 nodes.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In previous section we have seen the diﬀerent benchmark for ﬁve diﬀerent algo-
rithms, where one is the standard (1+1) EA, and the four others are self-adaptive
using a success-based parameter control.
Both for problems One Max and Leading Ones the expectations were that (1+λ)
with self-adjusting mutation rate would outperform (1+1) and that stagnation
detection would not have an major eﬀect on the performance. The ﬁrst expecta-
tion did not come to pass and data shows that the regular (1+1) outperformed
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate, where the bigger the problem grew the
bigger the gap between the two algorithms became. The second expectations
were fulﬁlled, generally both of the algorithm variant with stagnation detection
performed similarly to their counterpart.
For the problem Jump the expectations were that a slightly higher mutation
rate would make ﬂipping the two bits required more possible. (1+λ) with self-
adjusting mutation rate did not perform well and was outperformed by all of the
other algorithms. Generally stagnation detection gave a better performance as
expected, this is likely due to the nature of which stagnation detection picks it’s
mutation rate, starting low and slowly increasing. Stagnation detection helped
a lot for (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate, but had to be tuned for this
speciﬁc problem in order to help. Generally a low value of R is likely to have
helped in both cases, since both algorithm were likely to reach the gap before
==PAGE:64==
50
Discussion
triggering stagnation detection, meaning that a lower value of R would decrease
the waiting time between reaching local optimum before the gap and stagnation
detection activating and increasing the chance of "jumping" the gap.
In the results of Minimum Spanning Tree with the graph of 10 nodes, there
is not a major diﬀerence between the diﬀerent algorithm, this is likely due to
the problem size, i.e the total amount of vertices, being smaller. In the graph
containing 20 nodes a diﬀerence start to appear. (1+1) reliably outputs diﬀer-
ent graphs with very similar weight count, having only one result which is very
diﬀerent from the others. (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate on the other
hand have more diﬀerent and worse performing results. The expectations were
that when the solutions were ﬁrst pruned of the extra nodes, a higher mutation
rate would perform better, since at this point ﬂipping two bits would always be
required, but for these results a lower mutation rate performed better. Stagna-
tion detection did not seems to have a major impact on the results once again,
having near the same performance as their counterparts.
The algorithm (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate did not perform very
well. In 5.3.1 the reason behind why this algorithm did not perform well is
looked into. When the algorithm hits a point, where progression stagnates and
all of the solutions have the same score the algorithm start to randomly chose
the mutation rate. With an increase in problem size it also means that the
algorithm have more possibilities of mutation rate.
In a scenario where the
algorithm would need to ﬂip exactly two bit a lower mutation rate appears to
perform better. If this algorithm gets stuck in this scenario it will starts trying
out all the diﬀerent possible mutation rates at random, which is likely the cause
of why this algorithm is outperformed.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
A framework for running, testing and thus evaluating diﬀerent EAs have been
developed. The framework have diﬀerent components which visualize how an
algorithm perform as well as which solution it proposes at a certain generation
counter. The project have been developed in such a way that further algorithms
and problems may easily be appended by simply following the deﬁned interfaces.
From the diﬀerent benchmark test performed a few key behaviours can be con-
cluded about the diﬀerent SAEAs.
For (1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate the algorithm shown similar
behaviour when running the the issue of not being able to ﬁnd a better solution.
The algorithm would start try out diﬀerent mutation rates at random, which
caused the algorithm to perform worse than the others.
For (1+1) with stagnation detection was a clear improvement upon the
standard (1+1) by either performing about just as well or slightly improving.
In the problem Jump there were the most diﬀerent, where it seemed a slightly
higher mutation rate than 1 was required. Sadly not much diﬀerent between
the two algorithms were present in Minimum Spanning Tree where both
algorithm performed almost the same.
(1+λ) with self-adjusting mutation rate and stagnation detection greatly
improved upon the same algorithm without stagnation detection in jump. If the
opposite where the case, where a much higher mutation rate was favored then
==PAGE:66==
52
Conclusion
stagnation detection would likely harm this algorithms performance instead. In
order for stagnation detection to prove helpful the value of R had to be adjusted.
Further investigation into R and ﬁnding a non static value for it could improve
upon this algorithm greatly.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[CL18]
David Corne and Michael A. Lones. Evolutionary algorithms. In
Handbook of Heuristics, volume 1-2, pages 409–430. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, aug 2018.
[DBSO17]
C. Dunn, D. Britch, N. Schonning, and J. Osborne. The model-
view-viewmodel pattern.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
xamarin/xamarin-forms/enterprise-application-patterns/
mvvm, 2017. Last Accessed: 01-06-2020.
[DD20]
Benjamin Doerr and Carola Doerr. Theory of parameter control
for discrete black-box optimization:
provable performance gains
through dynamic parameter choices. In Natural Computing Series,
pages 271–321. Springer, 2020.
[Dev72]
Luc Devroye.
The compound random search. ph.d dissertation.
Purdue Univ. West Lafayette, 1972.
[DJW02]
Stefan Droste, Thomas Jansen, and Ingo Wegener. On the anal-
ysis of the (1 + 1) evolutionary algorithm. Theoretical Computer
Science, 276(1-2):51–81, apr 2002.
[DWGY17] Benjamin Doerr, Carsten Witt, Christian Gießen, and Jing Yang.
The (1+λ) evolutionary algorithm with self-adjusting mutation
rate. In GECCO 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 Genetic and Evolu-
tionary Computation Conference, pages 1351–1358. Association for
Computing Machinery, Inc, jul 2017.
[Gos05]
John
Gossman.
Introduction
to
model/view/viewmodel
pattern
for
building
wpf
apps.
https://docs.
==PAGE:68==
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
microsoft.com/en-us/archive/blogs/johngossman/
introduction-to-modelviewviewmodel-pattern-for-building-wpf-appshttps:
//blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/johngossman/2005/10/08/
introduction-to-modelviewviewmodel-pattern-for-building-wpf-apps/,
2005. Last Accessed: 02-06-2020.
[KG73]
Günther Holzboog KG.
Evolutionsstrategie.
Stuttgart, 1973.
Friedrich Fromman Verlag.
[Kin]
Brannon King. The dependency inversion principle. https://docs.
microsoft.com/en-us/archive/msdn-magazine/2014/may/
csharp-best-practices-dangers-of-violating-solid-principles-in-csharp#
the-dependency-inversion-principle.
Last Accessed: 02-06-
2020.
[Mica]
Common
web
application
architectures.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/
architecture/modern-web-apps-azure/
common-web-application-architectures.
Last
Accessed:
01-06-2020.
[Micb]
Mark Michaelis.
Dependency injection with .net core.
https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/archive/msdn-magazine/2016/
june/essential-net-dependency-injection-with-net-core.
Last Accessed: 03-06-2020.
[RW20]
Amirhossein Rajabi and Carsten Witt. Self-Adjusting Evolutionary
Algorithms for Multimodal Optimization. apr 2020.
[SS68]
Michael A. Schumer and Kenneth Steiglitz. Adaptive Step Size Ran-
dom Search. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 13(3):270–
276, 1968.
