==PAGE:1==
Comparative Life-cycle assessment of a CLT building and a concrete 
building with special focus on biogenic carbon 
 
Master’s thesis 
 
Julie Hansted Andersen1 (s144588), Nana Lin Rasmussen1 (s141652) 
Supervisors: 
Morten Ryberg2, Jørn Toftum1 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
2Technical University of Denmark, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Kgs. 
Lyngby, Denmark 
 
2nd of June 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
ii 
 
Foreword 
This Master’s thesis was carried out from January 2020 to June 2020 by Julie Hansted Andersen 
and Nana Lin Rasmussen in connection with graduating from the Master of Science program 
Architectural Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark. The workload has been 
sheared equally between the two master students and accounts for 30 ECTS points per student. 
We would like to thank to our supervisors Morten Ryberg and Jørn Toftum for constructive 
guidance throughout the project process. We would especially like to thank Morten Ryberg for 
always allowing time for discussions and bringing clarity to questions regarding our Master’s 
thesis. Furthermore, we would like to thank the companies CF Møller and Veidekke for providing 
data for the two case study buildings. Additionally, we would like to thank Anton Thorell Steinø for 
providing inputs to the proofreading of the article.  
Finally, we would like to thank our family and friends for supporting us throughout this project 
process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Master’s thesis is conducted by 
 
 
 
Julie Hansted Andersen, s144588 
 
Nana Lin Rasmussen, s141652 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
iii 
 
Abbreviations 
CLT 
Cross laminated timber 
EoL 
End of life 
ESL 
Estimated service life 
FU 
Functional unit 
GLT 
Glue laminated timber 
GWP 
Global warming potential 
GWPbio 
Biogenic global warming potential 
LCA 
Life cycle assessment 
LCI 
Life cycle inventory 
LCIA 
Life cycle impact assessment 
ReCiPe 
The applied LCIA method in this LCA 
SI 
Supporting information 
TH 
Time horizon 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
iv 
 
Reading guidance  
This Master’s thesis is conducted as an article with appurtenant supporting informations, which 
allows for a transparency of the project.  
Supporting information I is a literature review of the state-of-the-art of CLT within historical 
development of construction methods, indoor environment and the environmental impact compared 
to a concrete building found in previous LCA studies. 
Supporting information II is an elaboration of the LCA methodology and assumptions made to 
conduct the LCA. Furthermore, the results have been elaborated further in-depth and a validation of 
the results have been discussed.  
Supporting information III provides assumptions made for the LCI and ecoinvent processes used 
to conduct the LCA. 
Supporting information IV is an Ecxel sheet of the inventories with quantities of the building 
materials and the construction and operational energy for the case study buildings.  
Supporting information V contains three Excel sheets with the overall results of the LCA, the 
results of the LUC and the results of the sensitivity and robustness check.  
==PAGE:5==
1 
 
Comparative Life-cycle assessment of a CLT building and a concrete 
building with special focus on biogenic carbon  
 
Julie Hansted Andersen1, Nana Lin Rasmussen1 
Supervisors: 
Morten Ryberg2, Jørn Toftum1 
1Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
2Technical University of Denmark, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Kgs. 
Lyngby, Denmark 
Abstract 
The purpose of this study is to compare environmental impacts between applying either concrete or 
cross laminated timber (CLT) as the main structural material in mid-rise apartment buildings. The 
study seeks to further investigate how the inclusion of biogenic carbon will affect the environmental 
impacts for Global warming and how the two structural systems will affect the Land use differently. 
To conduct the study a comparative Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of two case study buildings in 
Norway, one constructed in concrete and the other constructed in CLT, has been modelled for two 
scenarios of each building. A Base scenario applies the standard ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) LCIA 
method, where a Biogenic carbon scenario includes a GWPbio factor in the same LCIA method. This 
includes the sequestrated CO2 from the atmosphere, which is then stored as biogenic carbon in the 
wood building material. The two modelled scenarios allow for a comparison between a concrete 
and a CLT building with and without the inclusion of biogenic carbon. 
In this study it is found that the CLT building has the lowest impact score for Global warming. 
With the inclusion of biogenic carbon, the difference in the Global warming impact score between 
the CLT and the Concrete building increases from a factor 1.5 to 4.5 when only regarding the 
building materials, with the CLT building having the lowest impact score. Presenting the Global 
warming impact score as a function of time it clearly shows the effect from including biogenic 
carbon. The impact score in Land use is 5.3 times higher for the Concrete building compared to the 
CLT building, when only regarding the building materials. From the obtained results in this LCA 
==PAGE:6==
2 
 
study, it is not possible to conclude which building type performs best environmentally, as the 
results are close to each other, but the CLT building has the lowest impact score in 12 out of the 18 
impact categories. 
Keywords: LCA, biogenic carbon, carbon sequestration, cross laminated timber, concrete, GWPbio 
factor, land use, dLUC, global warming 
1. Introduction 
In 2018, the building and construction sector was responsible for 39% of the world’s process and 
energy related CO2-emissions, and these had increased by 2% from the previous year. An increase 
in the emissions within the building and construction sector makes the Paris Agreement, which 
strives not to reach an average global temperature rise above 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels in 
this century by reducing emissions, more difficult to meet (IEA, 2019; UNFCCC, 2016). This 
increase calls for efforts in the building and construction sector to find solutions which help 
decrease building and energy related emissions (Abergel, Dean, & Dulac, 2017). With an estimated 
growth in population of between 2-2.5 billion by 2050 and up to 3.2 billion by 2100 (IEA, 2019; 
United Nations, 2019), it is estimated that by 2060 new buildings of approximately 230 billion m2 
will be built (Abergel et al., 2017). One of the ways to reduce building related emissions is by 
incorporating a life cycle approach for buildings, where the quantitative method of conducting Life 
Cycle Assessments (LCAs) can help evaluate the sustainability of building constructions of future 
buildings.  
Wood has been a common construction material for hundreds of years, and it has been applied with 
different construction techniques (Brandner, Flatscher, Ringhofer, Schickhofer, & Thiel, 2016; 
Hüttemann, 2018). Cross Laminated Timber (CLT) is a relatively new wood construction material 
from the early 2000’s which can be used as the main load bearing element in a building. CLT 
provides the building sector, as it is today, with the possibility of expanding into new territory. CLT 
is not viewed as a competitor to the already existing timber building sector, as the focus of CLT is 
on linear timber elements. It can thus be regarded as a direct competitor to solid mineral-based 
building materials, such as reinforced concrete elements which are commonly used in buildings 
today (Brandner et al., 2016). Studies have shown that wood in general, and CLT in particular, has a 
lower environmental impact as a building material than concrete measured in CO2-eq (Dodoo, 
Gustavsson, & Sathre, 2014a; Liu, Guo, Sun, & Chang, 2016; Lolli, Fufa, & Kjendseth Wiik, 2019; 
==PAGE:7==
3 
 
Pierobon, Huang, Simonen, & Ganguly, 2019; Skullestad, Bohne, & Lohne, 2016; Žigart, Kovačič 
Lukman, Premrov, & Žegarac Leskovar, 2018).  
An increased use of CLT in the building and construction industry during the next decades requires 
the biosphere’s carbon pool to be maintained. Thus, the timber production is required to follow the 
same rate as the use of CLT. How to calculate the environmental benefit from using CLT is not 
commonly agreed upon in the field of LCA, but the most common practice is to calculate the wood 
as carbon neutral and thereby climate neutral (Skullestad et al., 2016). One m3 wood with a density 
of 470 kg/m3 and a moisture content of 12% can sequestrate 770 kg CO2 from the atmosphere 
which is stored as 210 kg biogenic carbon (Dansk Standard, 2014). The assumption that the 
biogenic carbon stored in the wood from CO2 sequestration is climate neutral has been identified in 
several studies as a general problem, because factors such as forestry management and temporal 
impacts are not properly accounted for (Guest, Cherubini, & Strømman, 2013; Head, Bernier, 
Levasseur, Beauregard, & Margni, 2019; Levasseur, Lesage, Margni, & Samson, 2013; Skullestad 
et al., 2016). A literature review on CLT in relation to development in construction method, indoor 
climate and methods for conducting LCAs of biomaterial can be found in Supporting information 
(SI) I.  
This study seeks to investigate the differences and consequences between applying concrete and 
steel against CLT as the main construction material for mid-rise buildings. The focus is on 
analyzing the environmental impacts of two case study buildings by conducting an LCA. It is 
investigated how the inclusion of biogenic carbon in the LCIA method will impact the 
environmental results. The results are examined with particular attention to the impact categories; 
Global warming and Land use.  
 
 
==PAGE:8==
4 
 
2. Methods and materials 
To investigate the consequences of applying concrete or CLT as structural material, different 
materials and methods are applied. This section begins with a description of the study method and 
the applied methods for carbon sequestration and land use change. This is followed by a description 
of the case study and the conducted LCA.  
2.1. Study method 
The methodological steps for this study that have been performed are shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1 - Steps of the study method 
The starting point of this study was to gain theoretical background knowledge of the topic by 
conducting a systematical literature review (methodology for the literature review in SI I, section 1). 
The following step was to collect empirical data of the case study buildings by contacting Veidekke, 
the entrepreneurs of the case study buildings. The empirical data was applied to perform the LCA in 
the calculation program SimaPro. Different methods and parameters were used to test the 
robustness and sensitivity of the LCA model and its results. In the end results were interpreted and 
discussed in relation the theoretical knowledge and future perspectives.  
2.2. Carbon sequestration 
Biomaterial such as wood consists of biogenic carbon, which has been sequestrated from CO2 in the 
atmosphere. This means that in the time the tree stands as a living tree in nature, it sequestrates 
CO2, which is then stored in the wood as biogenic carbon. When the tree is harvested and used as a 
product, such as building materials, the biogenic carbon is retained in the wood until either an 
incineration or composting process starts. This releases the biogenic carbon. Upon reacting with the 
oxygen in the atmosphere, it is then transformed into CO2.The same amount of carbon which is 
sequestrated in the wood is released in an incineration or composting process. Based on this theory, 
different LCA studies consider wood as a carbon neutral material when a 100% incineration of the 
wood occurs at the End of Life (EoL). Thus, carbon sequestration is not included in many studies 
(Dodoo, Gustavsson, & Sathre, 2014b; Forster et al., 2019; Lolli et al., 2019; Pierobon et al., 2019).  
Literature review 
for theoretical 
background
Empirical data 
collection
Conducting LCA
Investigate different 
methods and 
parameters
Interpretation of 
results with 
theoretical 
knowledge
==PAGE:9==
5 
 
According to Guest et al. (2013) biogenic carbon should be considered in relation to the storage 
period of the biogenic carbon in the wood and the rotation period of harvesting and replanting of 
trees, since the potential carbon benefits of using wood products depend on this. Furthermore, the 
time horizon (TH) for the Global warming potential (GWP) in the applied LCIA method also has an 
influence on the amount of released carbon accounted for in the individual LCA studies, where a 
longer TH accounts for additional emissions from greenhouse gasses with a slower reduction time. 
By considering the storage period, the rotation period and the GWP TH, a factor for the biogenic 
Global warming potential (GWPbio factor) have been developed (Guest et al., 2013). This method 
has been applied for the Biogenic carbon scenario of the two buildings in this study. A storage 
period, τ, of 100 years, a rotation period, r, of 80 years and a TH of 100 years, results in the applied 
GWPbio factor of -0.66. The GWPbio factor of -0.66 results in a 66% higher carbon sequestration 
compared to the carbon released during incineration at the EoL. Further information in SI II, section 
1.2. 
2.3. Land use change 
Land use change (LUC) is defined as the transformation from one use of land into another e.g. the 
change from forest land into arable land for agriculture. LUC can influence greenhouse gas 
emissions and thereby global warming. This might occur if sources, such as trees, with a higher 
carbon sequestration, will be replaced by crops which have lower carbon sequestration, whereby 
less CO2 is sequestrated from the atmosphere, which in turn will affect the global warming. LUC is 
divided into two categories; direct Land Use Change (dLUC) and indirect Land Use Change (iLUC) 
(Plassmann, 2018).  According to Schmidt et al. (2015) dLUC is defined as change in land in the 
same area where the land use occurs. Opposite, iLUC is the change in land elsewhere than where 
the land use occurs (Schmidt, Weidema, & Brandão, 2015). In this study the dLUC is considered 
when investigating which change in land is needed for the future building stock if the structural 
system is either concrete or CLT. The dLUC is studied by examining the transformation from forest 
in SimaPro, which consists of the transformed area of intensive, extensive, primary, secondary and 
unspecified forest. The iLUC has not been examined further in this study.  
2.4. Case study 
This study is based on an LCA of two case study buildings. Both buildings are located in 
Trondheim, Norway, in the area Lilleby, and were built between 2016-2018. The buildings are 
called Maskinparken 2 and Maskinparken TRE and were constructed using two different structural 
==PAGE:10==
6 
 
systems. Maskinparken 2 is constructed with the commonly used structural system of concrete and 
steel for a mid-rise building in Norway, whereas Maskinparken TRE is constructed with the newer 
structural system of CLT elements, and it has become the first mid-rise building constructed in CLT 
in Norway. Throughout this article Maskinparken 2 and Maskinparken TRE are referred to as the 
Concrete building and the CLT building, respectively. The Concrete building consists of five floors 
and has a heated area of 2449 m2, whereas the CLT building consists eight floors and has a heated 
area of 3973 m2. The two buildings share a large basement that has a total area of 1395 m2. The 
basement areas under the Concrete building and the CLT building are 700 m2 and 695 m2 
respectively, and it is unheated. The basement foundation, walls and slab below ground level of 
both buildings are constructed in concrete, thus the CLT building does not only consist of CLT as 
the structural element.  
The two case study buildings in Norway are designed in comparable ways with roughly the same 
floor plan per story and apartments varying between 1-4 rooms. The conditions of the two case 
study buildings enable the conduction of a comparable LCA of a concrete and a CLT building, 
which is the aim of this study. Further elaboration of the case study in SI II, section 1.1. 
In order to answer the problem statement for this study, two scenarios for each investigated building 
have been studied in the LCA, see Table 1. 
Table 1 - Scenarios investigated in this LCA study 
Base scenario 
Biogenic carbon scenario 
CLT 
Concrete 
CLT 
Concrete 
 
2.5. Life Cycle Assessment 
The LCA has been conducted based on DS/EN ISO 14040:2008, DS/EN ISO 14044:2008, DS/EN 
15978:2012 and the ILCD Handbook (Dansk Standard, 2008a, 2008b, 2012; European Commission 
& Joint Research Centre Institute for Environment and Sustainability, 2010). In the following, the 
basis for the LCA modelling is described.  
2.5.1. Functional unit 
The scope of this LCA is defined as cradle-to-grave and results will be reported for all impact 
categories as normalized and characterized results. 
==PAGE:11==
7 
 
The function of the product systems for the CLT and the Concrete building is to allow people to live 
in an apartment as their home, thus the functional unit (FU) is defined as:  
“Use of one average m2 of a mid-rise livable apartment building with 5-8 stories and apartment 
sizes ranging from 1-4 rooms for 100 years in the Scandinavian countries.” 
The defined FU ensures the possibility of conducting a comparative LCA of the two product 
systems. The reference flows in the product systems include materials, energy and waste during the 
buildings’ lifespan of 100 years.  
Recycled material is considered to be the only multi-functional process in the LCA, and it has been 
handled as system expansion by crediting the system for what is recycled as an open loop.  
2.5.2. System boundaries 
The system boundaries for the LCA include all life cycle stages based on DS/EN 15978:2012 
(Dansk Standard, 2012) and they are illustrated in Figure 2. 
As a comparative LCA, the reference flows that are identical in both buildings can be excluded 
from the study. It should be noticed, that the only material reference flows that are excluded from 
the LCA are the technical installations. These are excluded because no data has been available on 
the technical installations in the two buildings, but since they are most likely to be identical, an 
 
 
Figure 2 - System boundaries for the two product systems of the CLT and the Concrete building 
Extraction of raw materials: 
- Wood 
- Sand 
- Iron 
- Stone 
- Others 
Production of building materials: 
- CLT 
- Concrete 
- Steel 
- Stone wool  
- Others 
Construction of 
building constructions 
Electricity
District heating
Replacements
Use of the Concrete 
and the CLT building 
Landfill
Recycling
Incineration
Foreground system
Energy recovery
Raw materials
Background system
Avoided products
==PAGE:12==
8 
 
exclusion of them is acceptable. The completeness of the LCA is not 100% since the technical 
installations are excluded and because assumptions had to be made for some reference flows. 
However, the majority of the materials are modelled based on specific material properties.  
All the unit processes for the product systems are modelled as a consequential LCA in the LCA 
software tool SimaPro version 9.0.0.49 with processes from the ecoinvent 3.5 database (Ecoinvent, 
2018; Oele, 2019).  
Further information regarding the Goal and Scope of the LCA can be found in SI II, section 1.3.1 
and 1.3.2.  
2.5.3. Life Cycle Inventory  
The Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) is modelled per life cycle stage, partial dynamic, with intervals of 5 
years from year 0-100. Most of the data for the LCI was provided by Veidekke as first-hand 
material, and the majority of the data has a low uncertainty. However, assumptions were made 
regarding insufficient data on quantities for some of the building components. Reference flows for 
material inputs in the product stage and use stage include an estimated waste share specific to each 
type of building construction and material. Furthermore, the replacements of building materials 
during the use stage are dependent on the chosen Estimated Service Life (ESL) for each building 
component. The waste treatments were not defined by Veidekke, and assumptions based on 
statistics of Danish waste treatment were thus made (The Danish Environmental Protection Agency, 
2019). The ecoinvent processes for the LCI were selected in order to comply with the original 
material properties. 
The quantities of the most important material reference flows applied in the CLT and the Concrete 
building are shown in Table 2.  
Table 2 - Quantities of the most important materials in the CLT and the Concrete building. The quantities are listed for the entire 
buildings and per m2 which is in line with the results per FU. 
Most important materials  
CLT building 
[kg] 
Concrete building 
[kg] 
CLT building 
[kg/m2] 
Concrete building 
[kg/m2] 
Wood  
1.89E+05 
1.17E+05 
4.05E+01 
3.72E+01 
CLT 
6.90E+05 
- 
1.48E+02 
- 
Concrete 
2.91E+06 
4.32E+06 
6.24E+02 
1.37E+03 
Steel 
7.37E+02 
1.18E+04 
1.58E-01 
3.75E+00 
Gypsum board 
4.67E+05 
5.18E+04 
1.00E+02 
1.64E+01 
Mineral wool 
1.36E+05 
3.98E+04 
2.91E+01 
1.27E+01 
==PAGE:13==
9 
 
Assumptions regarding energy in the construction stage are based on scientific papers on 
construction energy applied for different types of structural building systems (Cole, 1999; Liu et al., 
2016). Thus, this data is not specific for the case study buildings. The energy mixes of electricity 
and district heating for the operation have been modelled for current Danish conditions and two 
future scenarios based on projections from the Danish Energy Agency (Energinet, 2019; 
Energistyrelsen, 2014, 2019). Since the energy in the operation is modelled as a function of time, it 
is a dynamic development.  
Further information on the modelled LCI can be found in SI II, section 1.3.3, SI III and SI IV.  
2.5.4. Life Cycle Impact Assessment 
The LCIA method ReCiPe 2016 v1.1 Midpoint (H) with global normalization references from 2010 
is applied in SimaPro and all the impact categories for this method are reported. A further focus and 
interpretation are conducted of the impact categories; Global warming and Land use. 
Two scenarios for the LCIA method are modelled. One scenario, defined as the Base scenario, is 
calculated with the standard ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) method. The other scenario, defined as the 
Biogenic carbon scenario, is also calculated with ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) method, where the 
characterized substances Carbon dioxide, biogenic and Carbon dioxide, in air are added with the 
factors 1 and -1.66 respectively. These factors indicate that the biomaterial has sequestrated 66% 
more CO2 from the atmosphere than it will release during incineration at the EoL stage. The factors 
are based on the chosen GWPbio factors described in 2.2 Carbon sequestration. It should be noticed 
that the energy, both district heating and electricity, in the use stage is only calculated without the 
inclusion of biogenic carbon and applied in the results for both scenarios. This is due to the applied 
GWPbio factor, which is only valid for wood materials and not energy modelled with reused wood 
chips (Guest et al., 2013). More information can be found in SI II, section 1.2.3 and 1.3.4. 
The LCIA results are illustrated with the development of the environmental impacts during the 
buildings’ lifespan and the magnitudes of the environmental impacts at specific times. This is 
highly relevant when biogenic carbon is involved in the product system, since the carbon 
sequestration occurs as a negative CO2 impact in the beginning of the buildings’ lifespan and is 
released again at the end of its lifespan as a positive CO2 impact.  
==PAGE:14==
10 
 
2.5.5. Uncertainty and sensitivity 
To assess the uncertainty and sensitivity of the LCA a qualitative uncertainty analysis and a 
quantitative sensitivity analysis are conducted to evaluate some of the input parameters. For the 
sensitivity analysis, a total of ten different parameters are tested: Insulation, Concrete construction, 
Steel construction, CLT, Lifespan of buildings, Energy mix – Electricity, Energy mix – District 
heating, Construction energy, two times GWPbio factor (rotation period) (see SI II, section 1.3.5 
Table 8). A calculated normalized sensitivity coefficient greater than 0.5 for the impact categories, 
and greater than 0.3 as an average across the impact categories, indicate that the specific product 
system is sensitive towards the tested parameter (Ryberg, Owsianiak, Laurent, & Hauschild, 2015). 
Furthermore, a calculated relative change greater than ±10% for the impact categories also indicates 
that the specific product system is sensitive towards the tested parameter (Dansk Standard, 2008b). 
Since this study is a comparative LCA, the LCA is considered sensitive towards the tested 
parameter if the overall result changes compared to the original result. It is interesting to consider 
the results of the sensitivity analysis in both ways because the results might differ from each other. 
More information on the basis of uncertainty and sensitivity can be found in SI II, section 1.3.5
==PAGE:15==
11 
 
3. Results 
The normalized results at midpoint level using the LCIA method ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) are 
illustrated in Figure 3. The normalized results are in alignment with the FU and illustrated for the 
CLT and the Concrete building for the Base scenario and the Biogenic carbon scenario. For the 
normalized results, all impact categories have the same unit of person-equivalent [PE], which 
enables a comparison across the impact categories.  
 
 
Figure 3 - External normalized results at midpoint level using the LCIA method ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H). This method uses 
global normalization factors from 2010. The normalized results include all impacts from Building, Construction and Operation 
and is in alignment with the FU; per m2 for 100 years. The results are illustrated for each building and scenario. Since the results 
have been normalized from the characterized results it now enables for a comparison across the impact categories because they 
all have the same unit; person-equivalent [PE]. As four of the impact categories are >>1 PE, the x-axis has been split at 1 PE. 
The scale from 0-1 is linear and the scale from 1-100 is logarithmic.   
 
Normalized results at midpoint level for the CLT and Concrete building
Base Scenario and Biogenic carbon scenario 
Base scenario CLT
Base scenario Concrete
Biogenic carbon scenario CLT
Biogenic carbon scenario Concrete
0,0
0,5
1,0
Water consumption
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Terrestrial acidification
Stratospheric ozone depletion
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems
Ozone formation, Human health
Mineral resource scarcity
Marine eutrophication
Marine ecotoxicity
Land use
Ionizing radiation
Human non-carcinogenic toxicity
Human carcinogenic toxicity
Global warming
Freshwater eutrophication
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Fossil resource scarcity
Fine particulate matter formation
[PE]
[PE]
1
10
100
==PAGE:16==
12 
 
The results show that the CLT building has a lower impact score in 12 out of the 18 impact 
categories for both scenarios. The results for the Biogenic carbon scenario only changes for one 
impact category, Global warning. This is expected as the biogenic carbon is only included with a 
GWPbio factor for the impact category Global warming in the ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) method. 
Between the Base scenario and the Biogenic carbon scenario, the total environmental impact score 
for Global warming decreases with just 3% for the Concrete building but 33% for the CLT 
building. 
From the normalized results in Figure 3 it is illustrated that neither building has the lowest 
normalized impact score in all the midpoint impact categories and the results are very similar for the 
two buildings. Furthermore, uncertainties are also involved in the LCA modelling and might 
influence the result of the LCA. Uncertainties can be found in SI II, section 2.5.2. 
A further investigation of the normalized results shows that the construction and operational energy, 
compared to the building materials, is the largest contributor to the total impact score in the 
majority of the impact categories. The five impact categories with the highest normalized impact 
scores (>>1 PE) for the CLT and the Concrete building are the toxicity categories; Freshwater 
ecotoxicity, Human carcinogenic toxicity, Human non-carcinogenic toxicity, Marine ecotoxicity and 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity. Within the energy’s contribution to the total impact score for these five 
impact categories, the electricity process of biogas and gas engine has a contribution of 57% to 
101%. Further information on the external normalized results at midpoint level and the 
characterized results at midpoint level can be found in SI II, section 2.1-2.2. 
In the following sections the characterized results at midpoint level will be presented with a focus 
on the impact categories Global warming and Land use. The characterized results at endpoint level 
indicate that the impact categories Global warming and Land use have a large impact on the 
endpoint categories Human health and Ecosystem for both buildings. Hence, the endpoint results 
substantiate the reason for investigating Global warming and Land use further. Further information 
on characterized results at endpoint level can be found in SI II, section 2.3. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
13 
 
3.1. Global warming 
Figure 4 illustrates the development of the characterized results of Global warming for the two 
buildings for each scenario during the study period of 100 years defined in the FU. The Building 
includes the embodied carbon in the building materials from the product stage, replacements in the 
use stage as well and the EoL stage. The Construction includes the electricity needed to construct 
the buildings and the Operation includes the electricity and district heating in the use stage.  
 
Figure 4 - Characterized results at midpoint level for the impact category Global warming in the LCIA method ReCiPe 2016 
Midpoint (H) in kg CO2-eq per m2. The results illustrate the time of the Global warming impact during the study period of 100 
years for the two buildings. This gives a more coherent result compared to all the impacts summed up to one result for the entire 
studied period. The Building includes the embodied carbon from the materials in the product stage, the use stage and EoL, the 
Construction includes the electricity in the construction stage, Operation includes electricity and district heating in the use stage. 
As illustrated in Figure 4, the Construction has a small influence on the total Global warming 
impact score, whereas the Building as well as the Operation have great influence on the total Global 
warming impact score. The partial dynamic results for Global warming in the Base scenario 
Building
Construction
Operation
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
[kg CO2-eq / m2]
Year
Global warming
Concrete - Base scenario
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
[kg CO2-eq / m2]
Year
Global warming
Concrete - Biogenic carbon scenario
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
[kg CO2-eq / m2]
Year
Global warming
CLT - Base scenario
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
[kg CO2-eq / m2]
Year
GLobal warming
CLT - Biogenic carbon scenario
==PAGE:18==
14 
 
illustrate a high impact from the Building in the product stage at year 0 for both the CLT and the 
Concrete building, with the Concrete building having the highest impact score. Furthermore, 
replacements during the study period show a high impact in year 50 for both the CLT and the 
Concrete building. At the EoL stage, which occurs at year 100, the disposal and recycling potential 
is illustrated by a negative impact for the Base scenario. This is most distinguished for the CLT 
building, due to the high amount of CLT which is incinerated with energy recovery at EoL.  
In the Biogenic carbon scenario, the effect from the GWPbio factor is clearly illustrated for the CLT 
building, where the impact is negative at the product stage at year 0 and positive at the EoL stage at 
year 100. The high amount of wood products, especially CLT, is the main driver of this result for 
the CLT building. The product stage at year 0 for the Concrete building shows a decreased impact 
for the Biogenic carbon scenario compared to the Base scenario. It should be noticed that the impact 
score is still positive, as opposed to the CLT building, where the impact score has become negative. 
This is caused by a relatively lower amount of wood in the Concrete building compared to the CLT 
building. Furthermore, the included wood in the Concrete building has a waste scenario of 80% 
recycling and 20% incineration (See Table 2). The recycled wood material results in a positive 
impact score for Global warming in the Biogenic carbon scenario. The consequences by including 
biogenic carbon in an LCA is clearly illustrated in Figure 4, where all the CO2 sequestered from the 
atmosphere and stored as biogenic carbon in the wood when harvested, is calculated as having a 
negative impact. 
The results in Figure 4 illustrate the change in the three energy scenarios for 2018, 2035 and 2050, 
where the Global warming impact for the use stage is decreasing between each energy scenario. 
The highest decrease occurs from the 2018 scenario to the 2035 scenario. A lower decrease occurs 
from the 2035 scenario to the 2050 scenario. The greatest decrease in the impact is caused by 
district heating, where the contribution from hard coal, which accounts for 42% of the total impact 
in 2018, is removed in 2035.  
The most contributing element to the Global warming impact for the Concrete building is the 
Building with 56% and 55% for the Base scenario and Biogenic carbon scenario respectively. For 
the CLT building the Operation is the most contributing element with 51% and 77% for the Base 
scenario and the Biogenic carbon scenario, respectively. The large increase of the percentage share 
for the Operation in the Biogenic carbon scenario for the CLT building is caused by a decrease of 
68% in Global warming for the Building. In the Base scenario the Building has a 1.5 times higher 
==PAGE:19==
15 
 
Global warming impact score in the Concrete building compared to the CLT building. In the 
Biogenic carbon scenario this difference increases to 4.5.  
The overall characterized results for Global warming for the Concrete and the CLT building, as 
well as the factor variation between the two buildings, are shown in Table 3. The results are shown 
for the total impact score, as well as the contribution from the Building and the Energy. The Energy 
is defined as a combination of the Operation and the Construction. More information on the Global 
warming impact scores from the different life cycle modules can be found in SI II, section 2.2. 
Furthermore, a hotspot analysis on which building constructions and materials have the largest 
impact on the Global warming impact score can be found in SI II, section 2.4.  
Table 3 - Characterized results for Global warming of the CLT and the Concrete building. Results for Global warming are shown for 
the Base scenario and the Biogenic carbon scenario. Furthermore, the results are divided into the Building (embodied carbon 
emissions), the Energy (operational and construction energy) and for the total of both the Building and the Energy 
Impact category 
 
Scenario 
Concrete 
CLT 
Factor variation 
Global warming 
 [kg CO2 eq] 
Total 
Base scenario 
1.12E+03 
8.63E+02 
1.3 
Biogenic carbon scenario 
1.09E+03 
5.78E+02 
1.9 
Building 
Base scenario  
6.24E+02 
4.18E+02 
1.5 
Biogenic carbon scenario  
5.94E+02 
1.33E+02 
4.5 
Energy 
Base scenario  
4.94E+02 
4.45E+02 
1.1 
Biogenic carbon scenario  
4.94E+02 
4.45E+02 
1.1 
 
3.2. Land use 
The impact category Land use is one of the six impact categories, where the CLT building has a 1.1 
times higher total impact score compared to the Concrete building. The Operation has the largest 
contribution to Land use for both the CLT and the Concrete building. Within the Operation the 
electricity has a very small negative impact on the total impact score whereas the district heating 
represents the main contribution to the total impact score. See SI II, section 2.2. for the contribution 
from the different life cycle stages for Land use. 
When only considering the Building, the CLT building has a 5.3 times higher Land use impact 
score compared to the Concrete building. Within the Building, 90% of the impact score is caused by 
the Primary building components for the CLT building. The slab is the Primary building component 
with the greatest contribution to the impact score, followed by the internal walls, balconies and 
external walls. This is primarily caused by the amount of CLT in the constructions, where a large 
==PAGE:20==
16 
 
amount of land area is needed to supply the raw material. Further information on Land use can be 
found in the hotspot analysis in SI II, section 2.4.  
Table 4 lists the overall characterized results for the impact category Land use including the 
calculated factor variation between the CLT and the Concrete building.  
Table 4 - Characterized results for the impact category Land use for the Concrete and the CLT building in the Base scenario. The 
total impact scores as well as the contribution from the Building (building materials) and the Energy (construction and operation 
energy) are listed. Lastly the factor variations of the impact scores between the two buildings are also shown.  
Impact category 
 
Concrete 
CLT 
Factor variation 
Land use [m2a crop eq] 
Total 
1.14E+03 
1.28E+03 
1.1 
Building  
7.03E+01 
3.72E+02 
5.3 
Energy 
1.07E+03 
9.06E+02 
1.2 
 
3.3. Sensitivity  
The results of the sensitivity analysis for the 10 tested parameters showed that the Concrete building 
still has the highest impact score for the same 12 out 18 impact categories compared to the CLT 
building, as the original results showed. Thus, the LCA is not sensitive towards any of the tested 
parameters and the results are robust. This is valid only because it is a comparative LCA study. If 
the product systems are regarded individually towards the tested parameters, the results for the 
relative changes showed that the CLT and the Concrete building for the Base scenario would be 
sensitive towards the parameters; Energy mix – Electricity, Energy mix – District heating. In 
addition, the CLT building would also be considered sensitive towards Lifespan of buildings. 
Further information can be found in SI II, section 2.5. 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
17 
 
4. Discussion  
4.1. Choosing CLT instead of concrete? 
The results of this study illustrate an overall lower environmental impact for the CLT building for 
the impact category Global warming in both scenarios. The variations in impact scores for Global 
warming are not very high with a factor variation of only 1.30-1.88, thus it can be discussed if the 
results clearly state that the CLT building performs environmentally better compared with the 
Concrete building. From the results of the hotspot analysis in SI II, section 2.4, it is illustrated that 
CLT as a material has a negative Global warming contribution for the Base scenario and for the 
Biogenic carbon scenario. Opposite, the structural materials of concrete and steel (reinforcement) in 
the Concrete building have a large contribution to the Global warming impact score. This argues 
that the CLT material in itself is a better choice of structural material regarding Global warming. 
This is in line with a previous study (Žigart et al., 2018). In addition, the hotspot analysis showed a 
relatively large contribution to Global warming associated to the extra requirement of gypsum 
boards and concrete screed, which ensure fire safety and reduce noise transportation respectively. 
This is in line with previous studies of fire protection of CLT building (Pierobon et al., 2019). The 
development of new techniques to solve the issues concerning fire protection and noise 
transportation, which has lower environmental impact, would increase the argument for choosing 
CLT above concrete in relation to Global warming.  
Results for Land use showing a higher environmental impact for the CLT building compared with 
the Concrete building indicates contrary that concrete is a better choice as a structural material. The 
question is then, which of the two impact categories should carry the largest weight in the decision 
making regarding the structural system in future buildings. Different actors may also affect this 
decision making, thus resulting in variating outcomes.  
According to the Global Status Report 2017, coordinated by the United Nations, the floor area of 
the buildings in 2060 will be doubled compared with today (IEA, 2019). This is estimated to 230 
billion m2 which is going to be built within the next 40 years across the world. If CLT is to be 
selected for the entire new building mass in the future, the environmental impact for Global 
warming will be lower compared with concrete according to the results obtained in this study both 
with and without the inclusion of biogenic carbon. Opposite, the Land use and dLUC will increase. 
The results of dLUC from transformation from forest for the CLT and the Concrete building is 
shown in Table 5 per m2 building and for the entire future building mass of 230 billion m2 in 2060. 
==PAGE:22==
18 
 
Table 5 – Direct land use change, transformation from forest, for the Concrete and CLT building illustrated per m2 building floor 
area and for the entire future building mass of 230 billion m2 building floor area in 2060. 
Transformation from forest 
Building 
Energy 
Total 
Per m2 building floor area 
[m2] 
[m2] 
[m2] 
Concrete building 
1.42E+00 
4.22E+01 
4.36E+01 
CLT building 
1.37E+01 
3.56E+01 
4.93E+01 
230 billion m2 building floor area (year 2060) 
[1000 ha] 
[1000 ha] 
[1000 ha] 
Concrete building 
3.27E+04 
9.71E+05 
1.00E+06 
CLT building 
3.14E+05 
8.19E+05 
1.13E+06 
 
The results of dLUC illustrate that not only the Building but also the Energy contribute to dLUC, 
and that the latter is the largest contributor to the total impact. When regarding only the Building, 
the CLT building has a dLUC of 9.6 times higher than the Concrete building. The results of the 
total dLUC, including the impact from the Building and the Energy, show that the CLT building has 
an impact that is just 1.13 times higher than the Concrete building. This is caused partly by a 28% 
higher energy performance (district heating) for the Concrete building and by a high amount of 
wood chip as input for renewable fuels to decrease the use of fossil fuels for district heating in the 
future energy scenarios. See SI III, section 2.6 for the ecoinvent processes for district heating and SI 
V, LUC, for contribution from wood chip to transformation from forest.  
Put into perspective an increased building floor area of 230 billion m2 in 2060 corresponds to 5.9 
and 6.7 times the forest area in Europe for the Concrete and the CLT building, respectively, 
including both the Building and the Energy (European Commission, 2015). When only considering 
the Building and not the Energy, the forest area needed for 230 billion m2 building floor area would 
correspond to 0.19 and 1.85 times the forest area in Europe for the Concrete and the CLT building, 
respectively. This illustrates that a large area of forest is required for the future building stock, 
especially if constructing with CLT. Hence, it is essential that new forest is planted to maintain a 
sustainable forestry management and preserve the trees, which sequestrates CO2 and prevent a 
larger increase of CO2 in the atmosphere. In relation to the large amount of land use required for the 
future energy mix and the building stock, it can be questioned what the wood should be used for in 
the future. It would be interesting to investigate if it would be possible to increase the amount of 
both energy and building materials produced of wood in the future, or if it would only be possible to 
increase the use of land within one of these areas. 
==PAGE:23==
19 
 
However, it should be noticed that the LCA of the CLT and the Concrete building in this study is 
modelled for Scandinavian conditions and for mid-rise buildings of 5-8 stories. Thus, multiplication 
of these building models with 230 billion m2 will most likely not represent the actual future 
building stock, but the consequences of choosing either CLT or concrete as the structural material 
can be indicated.  
4.2. Including biogenic carbon? 
When only considering the Building the inclusion of the biogenic carbon, by adding a GWPbio 
factor, showed how the difference in impact score for Global warming between the CLT and the 
Concrete building increased by a factor 3 from the Base scenario to the Biogenic carbon scenario. 
Thus, the results can be influenced highly by including biogenic carbon and it is important to 
discuss whether it should be included in the LCIA method.  
The question of including biogenic carbon in a product system is a matter of what should be 
accounted for in the system boundaries. When biogenic carbon is included, the processes occurring 
in the ecosphere are accounted for and not just the processes in the technosphere when the tree is 
being harvested and processed into building materials. An argument for including the processes 
occurring in the ecosphere is that an LCA would illustrate a more accurate representation of the 
environmental impact as a consequence of the investigated product system. In a broader perspective 
the inclusion of processes occurring in the ecosphere might however not always illustrate a lower 
total environmental impact score, but the results would be more accurate.  From this, it could be 
argued that a product system should be credited for including a material which actually sequestrates 
CO2 from the atmosphere. 
Another reason to include the biogenic carbon in the analysis can be further substantiated by an 
update of the standard DS/EN 15804 from 2019, for which it over a period of the next three years 
will become mandatory to include biogenic carbon in the conduction of environmental product 
declarations (EPDs) (Dansk Standard, 2019; Gaasbeek, 2019). This means that it will be necessary 
to declare both fossil and biogenic CO2 emissions. Furthermore, a new Global warming impact 
category accounting for the transformation of land area will additionally be added (epddanmark, 
n.d.). This substantiates the importance of including biogenic carbon in the LCIA method when 
conducting LCAs of buildings, as well as the importance of focusing on the transformation of land, 
which has also been emphasized in this study.  
==PAGE:24==
20 
 
A complication of including biogenic carbon can occur as a result of the defined waste treatment in 
the EoL. When the waste treatment of a product includes recycling, it is defined as an avoided 
product. An avoided product is normally considered to have a positive influence on the 
environmental impact, because less material is accounted for, meaning that the material process 
from ecoinvent is accounted for as a negative input. However, when considering a biomaterial such 
as wood, where biogenic carbon is stored in the material, a recycling waste treatment will be 
accounted for the opposite way than usually. The wood material which is avoided will be calculated 
as a material that will not sequestrate CO2 from the atmosphere and thereby result in a higher 
Global warming impact score compared to an incineration waste treatment. That being said, it can 
be questioned if the correct result of Global warming impact score is shown for recycled material 
when biogenic carbon is included in the LCIA method.    
To substantiate this statement, an analysis of 1 m3 pine wood has been conducted for two waste 
treatment scenarios; 100% incineration and 80% recycling combined with 20% incineration. CLT is 
the only wood material in this study that has a 100% incineration as waste treatment, whereas all 
other wood products have a waste treatment of 80% recycling and 20% incineration. These two 
waste treatment scenarios were calculated using the LCIA method in Biogenic carbon scenario. The 
results in Table 6 show a great difference in the Global warming impact score of 755 kg CO2-eq 
between the two waste treatment scenarios. This result supports the view that a particular attention 
to recycling is needed when biogenic carbon is included in the LCIA method, as incineration will 
result in a total negative impact score and recycling will results in a total positive impact score.  
Table 6 - Global warming impact score of 1 m3 pine wood modelled with the same product input and two different waste treatment 
scenarios. 
Waste treatment scenarios of pine wood 
100% incineration 
20% incineration 
80% recycling 
Total difference 
Global warming  
[kg CO2 eq] 
-604 
151 
755 
 
The problem which is also shown in relation to recycling of biogenic material illustrates that when a 
biomaterial is included it will always give credit to the product system. This could create a problem 
if biomaterials were to be added to the product systems only to compensate for the emissions of 
CO2-eq and not to replace another material which has a necessary function for the building.  
==PAGE:25==
21 
 
4.3.  Limitations and improvement  
4.3.1. Lifespan of the CLT building  
In this study the CLT and the Concrete building have the same lifespan of 100 years, which in 
addition is the same as the study period for the LCA. Thus, only one of each building is needed to 
be built during the study period to fulfill the FU. However, the lifespan of a CLT building is not 
proved to be 100 years, since it is a relatively new material (Enso, 2013). Furthermore, since the 
CLT is an organic material a special caution should be taking in relation to prevent moisture 
problems and biological decay. This can lead to a shorter lifespan of the building (McClung, Ge, 
Straube, & Wang, 2014). See SI I, section 2.6 for moisture and mold risk in CLT panels 
It is investigated what the consequences will be if the CLT building has a lifespan of 80 years 
instead of 100 years. If the CLT building only has a lifespan of 80 years, the building should be 
demolished and constructed again as new a building in year 80 to comply with the same FU as for 
the Concrete building. This would result in larger amounts of materials needed for the construction, 
since 1.25 building is accounted for during the study period, compared to only one building with a 
lifespan of 100 years. Furthermore, if the lifespan of the CLT building is 80 years, the GWPbio 
factor would be different, since the storage period of the sequestrated carbon is changed. For the 
CLT building with a lifespan of 80 years the GWPbio factor is -0.38 with both a rotation and a 
storage period of 80 years. A lower GWPbio factor of -0.38, compared to the originally applied 
GWPbio factor of -0.66, results in less sequestrated carbon and thereby a higher Global warming 
impact score, only as a result of the changed GWPbio factor.  
These changes are listed in Table 7, where the results of the CLT building including biogenic 
carbon with a lifespan of 80 years has a higher impact score for Global warming compared to the 
CLT building in the Biogenic carbon scenario with a lifespan of 100 years. However, the result for 
Global warming for the CLT building of 100 years in the Base scenario is still higher than the 
Global warming for the CLT building with a lifespan of 80 years including biogenic carbon. 
Table 7 - Characterized results of the total Global warming for the CLT building in the Base scenario and Biogenic carbo scenario 
for 100 years and in the Biogenic carbon scenario for 80 years. 
Impact category  
Scenario 
Lifespan of CLT building 
Total 
Global warming 
[kg CO2-eq/m2] 
Base scenario 
100 years 
8.63E+02 
Biogenic carbon scenario 
100 years 
5.78E+02 
80 years including biogenic carbon 
80 years 
6.35E+02 
==PAGE:26==
22 
 
Even though the results showed that the lifespan of the CLT building affects the Global warming 
impact score, the sensitivity analysis showed that the model is not sensitive towards neither the 
lifespan of the building nor the GWPbio factor in relation to the conclusion of the comparative LCA.  
Hence, the conclusion of the comparative LCA would most likely stay the same even if the CLT 
building had a lifespan of 80 years and the biogenic carbon is included with a GWPbio factor of  
-0.38.  
4.3.2. The GWPbio factor 
When the biogenic carbon is considered by including the a GWPbio factor in the LCIA method, all 
processes which are defined with a substance Carbon dioxide, in air in SimaPro will be affected by 
the GWPbio factor. As mentioned in 2.5.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment the Energy is only 
calculated for the Base scenario, and not the Biogenic carbon scenario, since the GWPbio factor is 
only valid for wood materials (Guest et al., 2013). Other materials such as steel, concrete and 
gypsum boards also include the substance Carbon dioxide, in air in SimaPro, thus they will also be 
affected by the GWPbio factor. However, the value of Carbon dioxide, in air for other materials than 
wood is relatively low, hence it would not influence the results highly.  
The GWPbio factor is chosen based on the storage and the rotation period for the construction wood 
material (CLT and timber framing). The additional wood material in the product systems does not 
all have the same ESL, thus the storage period will vary and thereby also the GWPbio factor. It can 
be discussed if these uncertainties for the GWPbio factor of other materials than construction wood 
allows for the methodology to apply the GWPbio factor in SimaPro for all the substances which 
includes Carbon dioxide, in air. With the applied method in this LCA the representation of the 
biogenic carbon is not accurate. However, since the variation between the Base scenario and 
Biogenic carbon scenario for the Concrete building was relatively small the method can be 
considered acceptable in this study. To obtain a more accurate result of all the biogenic carbon 
included in the product systems a GWPbio factor should be determined for each type of material 
included in the product systems. This would demand a further study of GWPbio factor for other 
materials than wood. Furthermore, to improve the method of applying GWPbio factors for wood 
materials in this study, each type of wood material should be applied with an individual GWPbio 
factor corresponding to its storage period.   
==PAGE:27==
23 
 
4.3.3. Results without basement  
For the studied CLT and Concrete building in this LCA both product systems include a basement. 
The basement is approximately the same size in both product systems and is constructed of 
concrete. In Table 8 the percentage difference in the environmental impacts for Global warming 
and Land use compared to the original results is shown to indicate the influence from the basement. 
This clearly illustrates that the concrete basement has a great influence on the impact score for 
Global warming within the Building for the CLT building compared to the Concrete building. From 
this it could be argued that replacing the concrete material with CLT for the basement in the CLT 
building would enhance the environmental impact as the concrete has a large influence on the 
impact score. To enable this, new design solutions and studies within moisture transportation in 
CLT elements need to be developed further to avoid moisture problems (McClung et al., 2014). 
Opposite Global warming, the impact score within the Building for Land use increases highly for 
the CLT building when excluding the concrete basement as the wood materials now is distributed 
among less building m2. This demonstrates that the results can change a lot depending on the 
inclusion or exclusion of the basements. Thus, it could be discussed if the results of this LCA can 
be scaled into a larger perspective. On the other hand, the tendency of the results remains the same 
with CLT having the highest impact score in Land use and lowest in Global warming. This further 
substantiates, as stated earlier, that the focus on impact categories can change or determine the 
choice of structural material based on the lowest environmental impact scores.  
Table 8 - The percentage difference of the results when the concrete basement is not included in the environmental impact per m2 for 
100 years. The results are divided between the Building (product stage, replacements, EoL) and Energy (construction, operation). 
Furthermore, the percentage difference is also shown for the total product system. To calculate the results per m2 only the heated 
area has been applied opposite for the original results where the total area of the building has been applied.  
Impact category  
Scenario 
Building 
Building 
Energy 
Total 
Global warming [kg CO2 eq] 
Base scenario 
CLT 
-25% 
18% 
-3% 
Concrete 
-7% 
29% 
9% 
Biogenic carbon scenario 
CLT 
-111% 
18% 
-12% 
Concrete 
-7% 
29% 
9% 
Land use [m2a crop eq] 
Base scenario 
CLT 
13% 
18% 
16% 
Concrete 
2% 
29% 
27% 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
24 
 
4.3.4. Future perspective  
The background theory and the results of this study state that the sequestrated CO2 will be released 
at incineration in the EoL of the buildings. In relation to this, it is a large research area to investigate 
if technology can remove CO2 from the atmosphere (Mathieu, 2006). Furthermore, the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that these technologies are necessary in 
order to comply with the requirement in the Paris Agreement of not exceeding a temperature rise of 
1.5°C (UNFCCC, 2016; Wigley, Jones, & Kelly, 2019). If technology to subtract CO2 in the 
atmosphere have been developed at the time the wood building materials are incinerated, it will not 
result in the same impact score in Global warming as the results showed in this LCA. This argues 
that a temporary storage of the biogenic carbon in buildings can help reach climate goals in the near 
future, while technology to secure the climate goals for a longer perspective is developed. 
A new research study has shown that trees cannot keep sequestrating CO2, but trees will stop the 
sequestration process when it reaches a certain limit (Jiang et al., 2020). This argues that harvesting 
old trees and using the timber as e.g. building materials could have the potential to reduce global 
warming even more. Instead of the harvested old trees, new trees can be planted, which will 
increase the overall carbon sequestration and thereby reduce the global warming. This should also 
be a part of a sustainable forest management to optimize the use of trees and the forests (Knudsen, 
2020). 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
25 
 
5. Conclusion 
This study has investigated the environmental impacts of a concrete building and a CLT building, 
with a special focus on the impact categories; Global warming and Land use. It was found that the 
CLT building has a lower environmental impact score in 12 out of 18 the impact categories, but the 
variation is very small, thus it cannot be concluded which structural system is environmentally 
better than the other. This result is valid for both the Base scenario and the Biogenic carbon 
scenario.  
The total characterized Global warming impact score is calculated to be 1.12E+03 kg CO2-eq/m2 
and 8.63E+02 CO2-eq/m2 in the Base scenario and 1.09E+03 CO2-eq/m2 and 5.78E+02 CO2-eq/m2 
in the Biogenic carbon scenario for the Concrete building and the CLT building respectively. The 
Building accounts for 48% and 23% of the CLT building and 56% and 55% of the Concrete 
building, in the Base scenario and the Biogenic carbon scenario respectively. When only 
considering the Building, the factor variation in the impact score increased from 1.5 to 4.5 from the 
Base scenario to the Biogenic carbon scenario between the CLT and the Concrete building, with the 
CLT building having the lowest impact score. These results indicate that the environmental impact 
for Global warming will decrease 4.5 times when constructing a mid-rise CLT building compared 
to a mid-rise concrete building, when the biogenic carbon is included and only the Building is 
considered. Opposite, the environmental impact for Land use will be 5.3 times lower when 
constructing a mid-rise concrete building compared to a mid-rise CLT building, when only the 
Building is considered. Furthermore, constructing mid-rise CLT buildings instead of mid-rise 
concrete buildings can potentially be a solution to reduce the global warming in a near future and 
thereby reach the FN’s climate goals.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
26 
 
6. References 
Abergel, T., Dean, B., & Dulac, J. (2017). Global status report 2017 - Towards a zero-emission, 
efficient, and resilient buildings and construction sector. In Global Status Report. 
Brandner, R., Flatscher, G., Ringhofer, A., Schickhofer, G., & Thiel, A. (2016). Cross laminated 
timber (CLT): overview and development. European Journal of Wood and Wood Products, 
74(3), 331–351. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00107-015-0999-5 
Cole, R. J. (1999). Energy and greenhouse gas emissions associated with the construction of 
alternative atructural Systems. Building and Environment, 34, 335–348. 
Dansk Standard. (2008a). DS/EN ISO 14040: Miljøledelse - Livscyklusvurdering - Principper og 
struktur. 
Dansk Standard. (2008b). DS/EN ISO 14044: Miljøledelse - Livscyklusvurdering - Krav og 
vejledning. 
Dansk Standard. (2012). DS/EN 15978: Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg – Vurdering af 
bygningers miljømæssige kvalitet – Beregningsmetode. 
Dansk Standard. (2014). DS/EN 16449: Træ og træbaserede produkter - Beregning af det biogene 
carbonindhold i træ og omdannelsen til carbondioxid. 
Dansk Standard. (2019). DS/EN 15804: Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg - 
Miljøvaredeklarationer - Grundlæggende regler for produktkategorien byggevarer. Retrieved 
from www.ds.dk 
Dodoo, A., Gustavsson, L., & Sathre, R. (2014a). Lifecycle carbon implications of conventional and 
low-energy multi-storey timber building systems. Energy and Buildings, 82, 194–210. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.06.034 
Dodoo, A., Gustavsson, L., & Sathre, R. (2014b). Lifecycle primary energy analysis of low-energy 
timber building systems for multi-storey residential buildings. Energy and Buildings, 81, 84–
97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.06.003 
Ecoinvent. (2018). ecoinvent 3.5. Retrieved May 14, 2020, from 
https://www.ecoinvent.org/database/older-versions/ecoinvent-35/ecoinvent-35.html 
Energinet. (2019). Miljødeklarering af 1 kWh el - 2018 (pp. 27–29). pp. 27–29. 
==PAGE:31==
27 
 
Energistyrelsen. (2014). Energiscenarier frem mod 2020, 2035 og 2050. https://doi.org/ISBN: 978-
87-93071-64-3 
Energistyrelsen. (2019). Energistatistik 2018. Retrieved from https://www.drivkraftdanmark.dk/wp-
content/uploads/2018/10/DrivkraftDanmark_Energistatistik_2017_WEB-002.pdf 
Enso, S. (2013). CLT | Stora Enso. Retrieved April 29, 2020, from 
https://www.clt.info/en/product/faq/ 
epddanmark. (n.d.). Ny revision af EN15804. Retrieved May 19, 2020, from 
http://www.epd.dk/nyheder/ny-revision-af-en15804/ 
European Commission. (2015). Generelt - Skove. Retrieved May 7, 2020, from 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/basics/natural-capital/forests/index_da.htm 
European Commission, & Joint Research Centre Institute for Environment and Sustainability. 
(2010). International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook. General guide for 
Life Cycle Assessment - Detailed guidance. In Constraints. https://doi.org/10.2788/38479 
Forster, E. J., Healey, J. R., Dymond, C. C., Newman, G., Davies, G., & Styles, D. (2019). Linking 
construction timber carbon storage with land use and forestry management practices. IOP 
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 323(1). https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/323/1/012142 
Gaasbeek, A. (2019). What the revised EN 15804 EPD standard means for you | PRé Sustainability. 
Retrieved May 19, 2020, from https://www.pre-sustainability.com/news/what-the-revised-
en15804-epd-standard-means-for-you 
Guest, G., Cherubini, F., & Strømman, A. H. (2013). Global Warming Potential of Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions from Biomass Stored in the Anthroposphere and Used for Bioenergy at End of Life. 
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 17(1), 20–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00507.x 
Head, M., Bernier, P., Levasseur, A., Beauregard, R., & Margni, M. (2019). Forestry carbon budget 
models to improve biogenic carbon accounting in life cycle assessment. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 213, 289–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.12.122 
Hüttemann. (2018). History - The story of glulam’s success. Retrieved January 15, 2020, from 
https://huettemann-holz.de/index.php/en/glulam/history 
==PAGE:32==
28 
 
IEA. (2019). 2019 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction. In UN Enviroment 
programme (Vol. 224). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41370‐017‐0014‐9 
Jiang, M., Medlyn, B. E., Drake, J. E., Duursma, R. A., Anderson, I. C., Barton, C. V. M., … 
Ellsworth, D. S. (2020). The fate of carbon in a mature forest under carbon dioxide 
enrichment. Nature, 580(7802), 227–231. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2128-9 
Knudsen, J. K. (2020). Stik mod forventning: Voksne træer optager ikke ekstra CO2, når niveauet i 
atmosfæren stiger | Klima | DR. 
Levasseur, A., Lesage, P., Margni, M., & Samson, R. (2013). Biogenic Carbon and Temporary 
Storage Addressed with Dynamic Life Cycle Assessment. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 
17(1), 117–128. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00503.x 
Liu, Y., Guo, H., Sun, C., & Chang, W. S. (2016). Assessing cross laminated timber (CLT) as an 
alternative material for mid-rise residential buildings in cold regions in China-A life-cycle 
assessment approach. Sustainability (Switzerland), 8(10). https://doi.org/10.3390/su8101047 
Lolli, N., Fufa, S. M., & Kjendseth Wiik, M. (2019). An assessment of greenhouse gas emissions 
from CLT and glulam in two residential nearly zero energy buildings. Wood Material Science 
and Engineering, 14(5), 342–354. https://doi.org/10.1080/17480272.2019.1655792 
Mathieu, P. (2006). The IPCC special report on carbon dioxide capture and storage. In ECOS 2006 - 
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Efficiency, Cost, Optimization, 
Simulation and Environmental Impact of Energy Systems. 
McClung, R., Ge, H., Straube, J., & Wang, J. (2014). Hygrothermal performance of cross-laminated 
timber wall assemblies with built-in moisture: Field measurements and simulations. Building 
and Environment, 71, 95–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.09.008 
Oele, M. (2019). What’s new in SimaPro 9.0? Retrieved May 14, 2020, from 
https://simapro.com/2019/whats-new-in-simapro-9-0/ 
Pierobon, F., Huang, M., Simonen, K., & Ganguly, I. (2019). Environmental benefits of using 
hybrid CLT structure in midrise non-residential construction: An LCA based comparative case 
study in the U.S. Pacific Northwest. Journal of Building Engineering, 26(May). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2019.100862 
==PAGE:33==
29 
 
Plassmann, K. (2018). Chapter 16 - Biokerosene, Status and prospect (M. Kaltschmitt & U. 
Neuling, Eds.). Springer. 
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Laurent, A., & Hauschild, M. Z. (2015). Power generation from 
chemically cleaned coals: Do environmental benefits of firing cleaner coal outweigh 
environmental burden of cleaning? Energy and Environmental Science, 8(8), 2435–2447. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ee01799h 
Schmidt, J. H., Weidema, B. P., & Brandão, M. (2015). A framework for modelling indirect land 
use changes in Life Cycle Assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 99, 230–238. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.03.013 
Skullestad, J. L., Bohne, R. A., & Lohne, J. (2016). High-rise Timber Buildings as a Climate 
Change Mitigation Measure - A Comparative LCA of Structural System Alternatives. Energy 
Procedia, 96, 112–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2016.09.112 
The Danish Environmental Protection Agency. (2019). Waste statistics 2017 - Environmental 
project no. 2012 (in Danish: Affaldsstatistik 2017 - Miljøprojekt nr. 2012). 
UNFCCC. (2016). The Paris Agreement. Retrieved May 24, 2020, from https://unfccc.int/process-
and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement 
United Nations. (2019). How certain are the United Nations global population projections? 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1713628115 
Wigley, T. M. L., Jones, P. D., & Kelly, P. M. (2019). Global warming of 1.5 degree. In IPCC 
report (Vol. 291). https://doi.org/10.1038/291285a0 
Žigart, M., Kovačič Lukman, R., Premrov, M., & Žegarac Leskovar, V. (2018). Environmental 
impact assessment of building envelope components for low-rise buildings. Energy, 163, 501–
512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.08.149 
 
 
 
 
