==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Study on artificial intelligence based con-
trol strategies for window opening and so-
lar shading using deep learning methods
with support of building energy simulation
software
In collaboration with:
Department of Civil Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
at Technical University of Denmark
and
Knowledge centre for Daylight, Energy & Indoor Climate
at VELUX Group A/S
by Renjue Sun (s181294)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
English title:
Study on artificial intelligence based control strategies for window opening
and solar shading using deep learning methods with support of building
energy simulation software
Author:
Renjue Sun, s181294
Supervisors:
Jakub Kolarik, Associate Professor, DTU Civil Engineering
Tue Herlau, Assistant Professor, DTU Compute
Thorbjørn Færing Asmussen, VELUX Group A/S
Education:
Master of Science
Field:
Civil Engineering
ECTS: 30 ECTS
Project period:
February 3rd, 2020 - July 4th, 2020
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Section for Energy and Services
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 17 00
E-mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was conducted as a partial fulfilment of the requirements for
the degree of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark. The project was written in cooperation with the Department of Civil
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science and VELUX
Group A/S. The project was started on February 3rd, 2020 and submitted on July
4th, 2020. The project is credited 30 ECTS.
I would like to thank for my supervisors, Jakub Kolarik, Associate Professor at
DTU Civil Engineering, Tue Herlau, Assistant Professor at DTU Compute and Thor-
bjørn Færing Asmussen at VELUX Group A/S, for their much appreciated guidance
and vital assistance throughout the project both through our regular meetings and
written communication.
Kongens Lyngby, July 4, 2020
by Renjue Sun (s181294)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master’s thesis is aiming at exploring the use of artificial intelligence (AI) in
the field of building system control and to be specific it is window opening and solar
shading control. The main method is inspired from the concept of model predictive
control (MPC) and a machine learning model for the purpose of predicting operative
temperature is saved as an intermediary to give Reward for the reinforcement learning
based controller. Therefore, a prediction model and reinforcement learning algorithm
is interacting with each other to control the operative temperature of a VELUX test
house implemented in IDA ICE within pleasant range. Two machine learning models
to predict operative temperature based on time series variables are compared and
they are Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network and Extreme Gradient Boost
(XGBoost). Also two reinforcement learning algorithms are applied and they are Q-
learning and SARSA both with tabular method. The performance of machine learning
models for prediction is evaluated by how well they imitate the simulation of IDA ICE
by learning simulation data output from the building energy simulation software. The
performance of reinforcement learning algorithms for the control of window opening
and solar shading is judged by how the controlled operative temperature complies
with Danish building regulations.
Regarding the result for performance of prediction models, XGBoost regression
model performs better than LSTM network because XGBoost regression model is
evaluated to have smaller root mean square error (RMSE) for the prediction of op-
erative temperature based on the test set of a 5-year simulation data with different
user settings such as climate conditions and internal gains in IDA ICE. Therefore the
saved well-trained XGBoost regression model is acting as the intermediary to give
Reward based on the prediction on operative temperature of sequential time points
for reinforcement learning algorithms. Concerning the result of controlled operative
temperature, Q-learning and SARSA perform similarly although they can have dif-
ferent control signal in detail. The trend of the output control signal for Q-learning
and SARSA is quite similar in general.
The proposed AI-based control strategy has the potential to make wiser decision
when experiencing sufficient trial and error but the accuracy of the prediction model
should be improved by, for example, adding attributes concerning thermal mass of
the building into the data-set for training the machine learning model for prediction,
expanding the data-set with more data simulated on critical outdoor thermal condi-
tions in IDA ICE, using available real life data and narrowing down the time step.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Abstract
The performance of reinforcement learning control algorithms can also be improved
by more scientific tuning and applying deep reinforcement learning networks instead
of with tabular method.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and motivation
3
2.1
Intelligent buildings and artificial intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Regulations for operative temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Model predictive control (MPC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
11
3.1
Case description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Available data and correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
AI algorithms to predict operative temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar
shading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Model optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results and analysis
41
4.1
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Discussion
61
5.1
Argument for defining pleasant operative temperature range . . . . . .
61
5.2
Model performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Precision of the prediction of XGBoost model on operative temperature 63
5.4
Discussion on reinforcement learning based control . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6
Conclusion
83
7
Future work
85
7.1
Diversity of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7.2
Model optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7.3
Real life practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A Project plan
91
B Schedules
93
C Learning curves
99
C.1 AI algorithms to predict operative temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.2 Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar
shading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
D Bayesian optimization
107
E XGBoost regression trees
113
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature 119
References
127
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
For the purpose of maintaining comfortable indoor living environment for occupants
and reducing human intervention of building control systems, building systems need to
be more intelligent. Intelligent building control system has been becoming a technical
hot-spot in the field of architectural and civil engineering. Window opening and solar
shading control are important to maintain pleasant operative temperature especially
in naturally ventilated buildings.
Some studies on intelligent window control systems ([Pso17] and [TGL07]) de-
signed the system working flow to make windows adjust opening intensity in reaction
to environmental changes, for example, temperature and relative humidity of indoor
and ambient air. The system working flow was then programmed in chips to make
automatically controlled window products. This is the traditional way to design intel-
ligent windows based on embedded system. With the development of technology, ar-
tificial intelligence (AI) is becoming widely used in prediction and decision-making. If
AI can learn from sufficient experience on how the operative temperature will change
based on both window opening and indoor and outdoor influential factors, it will
have the possibility to sense the impact of window opening behavior on the operative
temperature in advance and then guide the opening of windows more wisely. Ad-
vances in building sensing technology, for example, the implement of wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) allowing easier access to utilize data collected by different types of
sensors installed in buildings [Hel15], can contribute to provide AI with large amount
of building data to learn from experience and also help AI to make better control deci-
sions by analyzing how the operative temperature of the building will react to various
control strategies applied in many different indoor and outdoor circumstances.
IDA ICE is a popular building energy simulation software and it is mainly widely
used in both academy and industry in Nordic region for its user-friendly interface and
strong functions. IDA ICE can play the role of data generator in this master’s thesis
project because it should be more flexible than using the real life data collected by
building sensors. Also there is no available high-quality real life data found for this
project. IDA ICE will produce sufficient data as experience for AI to learn from with
changes of settings, for example, different locations (climate conditions), schedules of
internal gains and window and solar shading control strategies.
This master’s thesis investigates different machine learning methods to predict
operative temperature of present state based on observation of ambient climate con-
ditions, internal gains, window opening intensity and solar shading action of both
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
previous states and the present state. Then the proper method is saved as a model
to interact with reinforcement learning agents to make decision on window opening
intensity and whether solar shading device should be drawn or not of a VELUX test
house implemented in IDA ICE based on Copenhagen climate file of sequential time
points. The model to predict operative temperature is analyzed by judging how well
it imitates the simulation of IDA ICE. Further more, AI-controlled operative tem-
perature along with the decision-making is analyzed and compared with traditional
control algorithms designed by VELUX Group A/S. The fulfillment of the master’s
thesis gives valuable experience on applying AI-based window and solar shading con-
trol, which corresponds to the goal of making building systems more intelligent.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
motivation
2.1
Intelligent buildings and artificial intelligence
Intelligent buildings are becoming increasingly on demand due to their potential for
applying innovative and sustainable design initiatives in addition to emerging tech-
nologies that optimizes its users’ comfort, well-being, space, energy and operational
management [Gha+16]. Many different technologies and approaches have been exe-
cuted to make buildings intelligent. Apart from many traditional ways, researchers
and scientists are also trying to apply data-driven and artificial intelligence (AI) ap-
proaches. [Ser20] proposes artificial intelligence embedded into intelligent buildings
that enables their adaptation to its environment by learning from its users and mon-
itoring its usage and functionality in terms of assets, space and energy therefore
assisting building managers or developers to make informed investment or commer-
cial decisions. Building energy use prediction plays an important role in building
energy management and conservation as it can help us to evaluate building energy
efficiency, conduct building commissioning, and detect and diagnose building system
faults [WS17]. AI has also been applied to predict energy consumption and therefore
increases the system reliability and sustainability. Several machine learning regression
models are trained and compared to predict full load electrical power output of a base
load operated combined cycle power plant based on four variables, such as ambient
temperature, atmospheric pressure, relative humidity, and exhaust steam pressure
[Tüf14]. [TX12] develops a statistical machine learning framework to study the ef-
fect of eight input variables (relative compactness, surface area, wall area, roof area,
overall height, orientation, glazing area and glazing area distribution) on two output
variables, namely heating load (HL) and cooling load (CL), of residential buildings.
This research provides valuable experience on how to estimate loads based on building
construction and how inner influential factors can be optimized to lower down both
HL and CL to save energy. Several other research outputs, for example, [CFD17]
and [Arg+12], also apply data-driven and AI approaches to analyze the energy use
in buildings, which is beneficial to optimize building control strategies and suggest
better occupants’ behavior inside buildings, helping to make buildings intelligent.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Background and motivation
2.2
Objectives
The first goal of this master’s thesis project is to use IDA ICE as data generator to
produce a data-set for training machine learning models. Then a proper machine
learning model should be selected and tuned by appropriate methods to imitate the
simulation of IDA ICE. The model should be possible to predict the operative temper-
ature of every sequential hour based on time series variables. Reinforcement learning
agents will interact with the prediction model to make decision on window open-
ing intensity and solar shading behavior of every sequential hour. Finally results of
AI-based control will be compared with traditional control algorithms designed by
VELUX Group A/S and the performance of all AI models will be documented and
analyzed.
The master’s thesis project aims at combining the knowledge in the field of civil
engineering and artificial intelligence (AI). The research output will suggest how AI
can be used for predicting indoor environment based on multiple time series influential
variables and also how AI can be used for automatic control of building systems.
The fulfillment of the project enables the author’s ability in using building energy
simulation software (IDA ICE) to design control macros, extract simulation data and
adjust user settings. The competency of selecting and comparing different machine
learning models and understanding mathematical details behind them is also involved.
The experience of implementing different machine learning models in Python script
with the help of proper packages along with skills in data processing and debugging
contributes to the master’s thesis as well.
2.3
Regulations for operative temperature
(DS/EN ISO 7730:2006 [Sta06]), (DS/EN 16798-1:2019 [Sta19a]) and (DS/CEN/TR
16798-2:2019 [Sta19b]) are main Danish standards for referring indoor environment
design parameters. ((DS/EN 15251:2007 [Sta07]) has been renewed by (DS/EN 16798-
1:2019 [Sta19a]) and (DS/CEN/TR 16798-2:2019 [Sta19b]).)
As documented in Table B.2 - Default design values of the indoor operative tem-
perature in winter and summer for buildings with mechanical cooling systems of both
(EN16798-1 [Sta19a]) and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]), for living spaces (bedrooms, living
rooms, kitchen etc) in residential buildings with occupants exerting sedentary activity
(1.2met), minimum operative temperature for heating (winter season) with clothing
level around 1.0clo of Building Category II is 20°C and maximum for cooling (sum-
mer season) with clothing level around 0.5clo of Building Category II is 26°C. The
requirement for Building Category I is 21°C and 25.5°C respectively. Building Cate-
gory II is what expected to be met normally in Denmark and Building Category I is
for buildings requiring higher standard. A clear description can be seen in Table 2.1.
As documented in Table A.5 - Example design criteria for spaces in various types
of building of (ISO7730 [Sta06]), for single office, landscape office, conference room,
auditorium, restaurant and classroom with occupants exerting a heat of 70W/m2
==PAGE:13==
2.4 Literature review
5
(sedentary activity with 1.2met), design operative temperature range of Building
Category A and Building Category B is illustrated in Table 2.2. Building Category B
is the basic requirement in Denmark and Building Category A is for higher standard.
Table 2.1: Operative temperature regulation for living spaces of residential buildings
for Building Category I and Building Category II in (EN16798-1 [Sta19a])
and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]).
Category
Minimum for heating
Maximum for cooling
I
21.0°C
25.5°C
II
20.0°C
26.0°C
Table 2.2: Operative temperature regulation for single office, landscape office, con-
ference room, auditorium, restaurant and classroom for Building Cate-
gory A and Building Category B in (ISO7730 [Sta06]).
Category
Winter (heating season)
Summer (cooling season)
A
22.0±1.0°C
24.5±1.0°C
B
22.0±2.0°C
24.5±1.5°C
With consideration of both Table 2.1 and Table 2.2, the control set-point of both
VELUX control strategies and AI-based control strategies is determined to be 25°C
for summer and 23°C for winter. This is for the purpose of maintaining operative
temperature to get to Building Category II in (EN16798-1 [Sta19a]) and (TR16798-2
[Sta19b]) and Building Category B in (ISO7730 [Sta06]). The summary of control
set-point is illustrated in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Summary of control set-point of the case residential building (VELUX
test house) in the master’s thesis project.
Category
Winter (heating season)
Summer (cooling season)
II/B
23.0°C
25.0°C
2.4
Literature review
A literature review has been performed in order to obtain information and inspiration
from appropriate studies.
An article published by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory [Wet11] described
development and utilization of an interface which can connect different simulation
software and programming script to exchange data, achieving the function of co-
simulation. It gave an example of the use of Modelica and EnergyPlus to test control
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Background and motivation
sequence of a variable air volume (VAV) System, which allowed the data flow between
Modelica and EnergyPlus. However, IDA ICE is more commonly used in industries
in Nordic countries for its user-friendly interface and heterogeneous functions. More-
over, Python is becoming popular and it should be interesting to investigate if there
exists a possibility of exchanging data between IDA ICE and Python script, either
by synchronized co-simulation or an alternative way.
Machine learning (ML) algorithms were used to predict occupants’ thermal com-
fort (TCV) and thermal sensation (TSV) votes, using 5512 sets of thermal comfort
data collected in naturally ventilated residential buildings in fourteen cities in China
[Cha+20]. The study [Cha+20] determined the best combination of influencing pa-
rameters for predicting TCV and TSV by using artificial neural networks (ANNs)
and support vector machine (SVM). Due to the low relative humidity in Nordic coun-
tries, operative temperature can be more representative than PMV (Fanger’s indices)
used in the paper to evaluate occupants’ comfort in residential buildings with natural
ventilation in these regions. Moreover, for the concern of artificial intelligence (AI)
based control, how to make predictions and further on decisions based on time series
data should be more practical.
Window opening behaviour has been shown to have a significant impact on air-
flow rates and hence energy consumption [VAC12]. The conference paper [VAC12]
established a logistic regression model to predict the possibility of window opening
based on variables like outdoor temperature and CO2-concentration level. The lo-
gistic regression model was then written in an external file with predicted window
opening possibility every 10 minute based on climate file of Copenhagen reference
year. Embedded in IDA ICE control macro with proper logic components, the exter-
nal file can decide whether the window should be opened or not in IDA ICE models.
This method was also introduced in [WH19]. Inspired by [VAC12] and [WH19], there
should be a possibility to insert window opening signal controlled by AI into IDA
ICE with the help of external source file for analysis.
In colder temperate climatic conditions (Nordic countries), automated window
opening control systems based on indoor natural ventilation cooling set points and
monitoring of the outdoor conditions with integrated simple heuristic ventilative cool-
ing algorithms may significantly diminish the overheating risk [Pso17]. [Pso17] also
developed cooling, indoor air quality and shading function to control the window
opening and solar shading. The control algorithm still used traditional control flow
chart based on different functions. AI-based control will not rely on the flow chart
and traditional PI controllers but the inner ANNs, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), Markov chain or other forms of model construction based on learning suffi-
cient experience from observations to make the decision.
2.5
Model predictive control (MPC)
[Cig+12] built up a medium weight office building with two zones separated by a
concrete wall in TRNSYS environment. With the co-simulation between TRNSYS
==PAGE:15==
2.5 Model predictive control (MPC)
7
and Matlab with the time step of 0.25h, the performance of different controllers was
evaluated by zone temperature and PMV fluctuation within the simulation period.
Fig 2.1 describes the co-simulation progress of [Bol+18]. A plant together with its
energy system was programmed in Modelica. The model predictive controller was
implemented in Matlab and tried to deliver more energy in the form of heat based on
the knowledge of Modelica plant model as well as realistic weather and demand data.
[Bol+18]
Figure 2.1: Co-simulation setup. The upper half represents the simulated environ-
ment including heating system and consumers, the lower part represents
the controller and state/parameter identification algorithms. The MPC
contains a simplified plant model [Bol+18].
Inspired from [Cig+12] and [Bol+18], a co-simulation setup between IDA ICE
API and reinforcement learning based control algorithms implemented in Python
is proposed as illustrated in Fig 2.2. Parameters associated with outdoor thermal
conditions and internal gains of the current time point t will be continuously sent to
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Background and motivation
the Python script programmed with reinforcement learning based control algorithms
by IDA ICE API. Then the reinforcement learning based model predictive controller
will decide the window opening intensity and solar shading status of the present time
point t according to its experience. The control signal will be sent back to IDA ICE
API to guide the window opening and solar shading of the test house implemented in
the building energy simulation software. Then the indoor operative temperature at
t will be simulated by IDA ICE and the time point will be forwarded to (t+1). The
process will continue until reaching the last time point. However, according to our
current knowledge, IDA ICE API is still under development and cannot have that
kind of sophisticated direct communication with external programming environment
such as Python. An alternative way should be found to be instead of the functionality
of IDA ICE API.
Figure 2.2: Co-simulation setup between IDA ICE API and reinforcement learning
based control algorithms implemented in Python script.
An alternative way to execute co-simulation is to have co-simulation between a
machine learning model for the purpose of predicting operative temperature based on
time series variables and reinforcement learning control algorithms both implemented
in Python script as illustrated in Fig 2.3. The machine learning model is trained on
outdoor thermal conditions of different locations, different schedules of internal gains,
different control strategies for window opening and solar shading and the resulted op-
==PAGE:17==
2.5 Model predictive control (MPC)
9
erative temperature output from IDA ICE simulation of every sequential time point.
The machine learning model should have the memory of sequential time points and
can make prediction on operative temperature based on time series variables. The
outdoor climate file of Copenhagen reference year and default schedule of occupancy
and equipment operation can be written in an Excel spreadsheet. When the Excel
spreadsheet is input into Python along with the window opening intensity and solar
shading condition determined by reinforcement learning algorithms, the saved predic-
tion model can make prediction on operative temperature continuously. The direct
communication is no longer between IDA ICE and reinforcement learning algorithms
implemented in Python script but between the saved well-trained prediction model
and reinforcement learning algorithms instead. As illustrated in Fig 2.3 that the ma-
chine learning model is based on the outdoor conditions of Copenhagen and internal
gains of the test house at time point t written in the Excel spreadsheet and window
opening and solar shading signal also at t determined by reinforcement learning based
control to give the prediction on operative temperature at t. Reinforcement learning
is based on the outdoor thermal conditions and internal gains at current time point
t to decide the action of window opening and solar shading of t according to its ex-
perience. After the indoor operative temperature of t is predicted by the machine
learning model, the time point should be forwarded to (t+1). The entire loop will
continue until the end of every epoch.
Figure 2.3: Co-simulation setup between machine learning model to predict opera-
tive temperature and reinforcement learning based control algorithms
implemented in Python script.
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Background and motivation
Model predictive control (MPC) has developed much in recent years. Most of
the research, for example, both [Wal+12] and [Roy+14] realizing data exchange be-
tween building systems implemented in EnergyPlus and Matlab script, is to have
direct communication between grey-box model and control script. However, due to
the unavailability of IDA ICE API, our proposal has changed into the communication
between black-box model and control script. This turns into two machine learning
models (prediction model and reinforcement learning based MPC controller) inter-
acting with each other in Fig 2.3. The interface of reinforcement learning control is
not connecting to a kind of API but a well-trained machine learning model for the
prediction instead.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Case description
3.1.1
VELUX test house with 3 windows
A test house implemented in IDA ICE with 3 available window openings was provided
by VELUX Group A/S. The test house is one-storey and covers an area of 20m2.
There is 3 windows in total and 2 of them is on the south-facing roof and the remaining
is on the exterior wall to the north. Windows are numbered in Fig 3.1. It also groups
the 3 windows in two categories and gives detailed description of each. The 2 windows
on the southern roof (marked in purple in Fig 3.1) have the same total window area
and maximum relative opening. The one to the north (marked in orange in Fig 3.1)
has smaller total window area as well as the maximum openable area than the other
two windows to the south. The test house is a typical Danish small residential building
with only one occupant inside. The default occupancy schedule was defined in the
building model that the occupant will be outside the house for work from 8:00 to 17:00
in every working day and be inside the house of the remaining time from Monday to
Friday and the entire weekend of the whole year. The equipment is always operated
by default, emitting a heat of 43.8W of all time. The default schedule of internal
gains, including occupancy and equipment operation, is what should be applied for
controlling window opening and solar shading of the test house in Copenhagen later.
As the house has only one zone, 3 windows will react the same to different sig-
nals such as indoor and outdoor temperature changes and solar gains by IDA ICE
simulation. That means that they will always open and close together with the same
proportion if they have the same control macros of window opening in IDA ICE. This
also applies to the solar shading of 3 windows. In order to simplify the process, only
Window 1 in Fig 3.1 can have opening and solar shading. Window 2 and Window 3
are kept closed and their shading device is never drawn of all time.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Methods
Figure 3.1: Detailed description of 3 windows in VELUX test house.
3.1.2
VELUX control algorithms implemented in IDA ICE
The design of control macros implemented in IDA ICE for both window opening
control and solar shading control was also provided by VELUX Group A/S. They
are used for generating data-set for training AI algorithms and later compare with
AI-based control strategies.
3.1.2.1
Window opening control
The control macro of ’VELUX opening control’ and ’VELUX roof opening control’
implemented in IDA ICE can be seen in Fig 3.2.
The outdoor air temperature minus 2°C is compared with 25°C and the higher
value (processed by Max 1) is set as the control set-point of the proportional controller
in Fig 3.2. The sleeping hour of the occupant was illustrated in ’velux-night’ Schedule
and it is from 22:00 at night to 7:00 in the morning. During the sleeping hours, the
occupant will not be able to open windows. If the zone temperature is higher than
the control set-point of the proportional controller and the occupant does not sleep,
zone temperature under this situation will give one signal for the joint control (Max
2).
The ventilation schedule is to have ventilation from 7:00 to 7:10 in the morning
and 18:00 to 18:10 in the evening, which is named ’Morning + evening, 10 min
(Velux)’. When the 10-min morning and evening ventilation is on with the outdoor
air temperature above 0°C, the outdoor air temperature gives the other signal for the
joint control (Max 2). The higher value of two import signals of joint control (Max
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Case description
13
2) will be connected to the last Vent joint (Max 3) and the pre-check is to ensure the
context of the output from joint control (Max 2) has occupant inside the house.
When the occupant is asleep, the zone temperature is firstly compared with the
preferred maximum summer temperature (26°C) and secondly compared with the
outdoor air temperature. If the zone temperature is higher than both, and then it
will be compared with the output signal from joint control (Max 2) after occupancy
check in vent joint (Max 3). The higher one will be allowed to have the window
opening under defined situation.
The ’VELUX opening control’ actually prioritizes three conditions and they are
’Opening for cooling (day)’, ’Opening for ventilation’ and ’Night ventilation’. Each of
them is restricted in specific squares in Fig 3.2.
Figure 3.2: VELUX opening control (for training AI algorithms).
’VELUX flap control’ is illustrated in Fig 3.3. ’Flap schedule’ is always on during
the whole year. The control set-point of the proportional controller in Fig 3.3 is 0°C,
which indicates that when the outdoor dry-bulb air temperature is higher than 0°C,
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Methods
windows will have opening signal. ’VELUX flap control’ has very limited application
in real condition for as long as the outdoor air temperature is not below 0°C, windows
will be forced to open. This control strategy is only beneficial to train AI algorithms
for it will output many window opening signals, helping AI to learn how the operative
temperature will behave with opening signals for large amount of the time.
Figure 3.3: VELUX flap control (for training AI algorithms).
’VELUX opening control’ will be applied to Window 1 in Fig 3.1 for training
proper AI models. As AI agent will adjust the window opening automatically of all
time but ’VELUX opening control’ shown in Fig 3.2 will not always be automatic, for
example, the window opening can be adjusted only if there is one or more occupants
inside the house. In order to abandon all these restrictions to automatic window open-
ing control, a simplified version of ’VELUX opening control’ is used to compare with
AI-based control strategies (see Fig 3.4). The simplified version takes the maximum
value between 25°C and the ambient air temperature minus 2°C as control set-point
of the proportional controller and if the zone temperature is higher than the set-point,
Window 1 will be opened. If the comparison is for the case of winter, 25°C should
be replaced by 23°C due to the change of defined control set-point. ’VELUX flap
control’ will not be used for comparing with AI-based control strategies but only for
training AI algorithms.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Case description
15
Figure 3.4: VELUX opening control simplified (for comparing with AI-based con-
trols).
3.1.2.2
Solar shading control
Fig 3.5 shows the control macro of ’VELUX shading control’ and the solar shading
control strategy is quite straight-forward in this case. The temperature set-point given
to the proportional controller is 24°C, which means that when the zone temperature
is higher than 24°C, the shading will be on.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Methods
Figure 3.5: VELUX shading control (for training AI algorithms).
The other shading control macro designed by VELUX Group A/S named ’VELUX
active shading control’ can be seen in Fig 3.6. For the purpose of illustrating its
workflow clearly, a flowchart [PC] of how the solar shading is actively controlled by
solar irradiation and outdoor temperature can be seen in Fig 3.7.
Based on the inputs from the sensor for solar radiation the system determines
if it is day or night, e.g. daytime representing risk of overheating, while nighttime
represents risk of heat loss. If it is daytime, the system determines the risk of over-
heating based on knowledge of the outdoor temperature and the solar radiation on
the window. If it is nighttime, then based on the outdoor temperature, the system
determines if it makes sense to active the shutter/solar shading device for reducing
heat loss through the window.[PC]
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Case description
17
Figure 3.6: VELUX active shading control (for both training AI algorithms and
comparing with AI-based controls).
Fig 3.7 presents the workflow of Fig 3.6. Firstly, if the solar radiation on the
window is higher than 50W/m2, there will be 3 choices of shading actions based
on the ambient temperature. If the outdoor temperature is lower than 10°C, the
shading device moves up.
If the outdoor temperature is between 10°C and 14°C,
the shading device keeps its position. Finally, if the outdoor temperature exceeds
14°C, the device action will depend on ’Intelligent Algorithm’, which corresponds
to that the adder in Fig 3.6 adds sampled solar radiation and ambient temperature
with coefficient together and then if the result value is bigger than 1, the device
is drawn, otherwise the value is smaller than 0, the device is off. Secondly, if the
solar radiation on the window is between 10W/m2 and 50W/m2, the shading device
moves up. Thirdly, if the solar radiation is lower than 10W/m2, indicating it is night
time at the moment, there will be 2 choices of actions based on the judgement made
on outdoor temperature. If the ambient temperature exceeds 10°C, shading device
moves up to compensate the heat loss at night. On the other hand, if the ambient
temperature is lower than 10°C, the shading device is drawn to avoid too much heat
loss from indoor to outdoor at night.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Methods
Figure 3.7: VELUX active shading control flowchart [PC].
’VELUX shading control’ is only used for training AI models to predict operative
temperature but ’VELUX active shading control’ is used for both training AI models
and later comparing with AI-based shading controls.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Available data and correlation
19
3.2
Available data and correlation
A data-set based on 5-year IDA ICE simulation was produced. The simulation data of
each years is based on different locations (climate conditions) and different combina-
tions of occupancy schedules, equipment schedules, window opening control strategies
and solar shading control strategies.
A detailed summary of the data-set is shown in Table 3.1. The 5-year simulation
data with the time step of one hour is based on the climate condition of Prague (Czech
Republic), Aktion Airport (Greece), Oslo (Norway), Bregenz (Austria) and Helsinki
(Finland). The choice of locations has the diversity for it includes hot climate, mod-
erate climate as well as cold climate in Europe. Different schedules implemented in
IDA ICE are described in Appendix B. Some schedules were designed by VELUX
Group A/S for the purpose of defining occupants’ behavior, how equipment is oper-
ated or how artificial lighting is controlled. However, some of these schedules are not
used as their initial purposes, for example, an occupancy schedule can be used for
controlling the equipment here. This is fine because it provides more opportunities
for AI to learn and this is also the reason why a randomly generated schedule varying
with different months is produced for training machine learning models (see Fig B.5
in Appendix B). As stated in [Gen19], AI is learning from trial and error but not
sophisticated choices with precise logic:
Trial and error is one of the most fundamental learning strategies
employed by animals, and we’re increasingly using it to teach intelligent
machines too.
—’Like animals, AI is learning from experience’
Table 3.1: Summary of the data-set generated for training AI models (’S’ stands
for Schedule and ’C’ stands for Control; C1: ’VELUX opening control’
illustrated in Fig 3.2, C2: ’VELUX flap control’ illustrated in Fig 3.3,
C3: ’VELUX shading control’ illustrated in Fig 3.5, C4: ’VELUX active
shading control’ illustrated in Fig 3.6).
Location
Occupancy
Equipment
Window
Shading
Prague
S1 (Fig B.1)
Always on
C1 (Fig 3.2)
C4 (Fig 3.6)
Aktion
S2 (Fig B.2)
S3 (Fig B.3)
C2 (Fig 3.3)
C3 (Fig 3.5)
Oslo
Always present
S4 (Fig B.4)
C1 (Fig 3.2)
C4 (Fig 3.6)
Bregenz
S5 (Fig B.5)
Always off
S6 (Fig B.6)
Never drawn
Helsinki
S7 (Fig B.7)
S5 (Fig B.5)
C2 (Fig 3.3)
C4 (Fig 3.6)
3.2.1
Case without consideration of solar shading
There is 12 attributes in total, included in the data-set for training AI models. Values
of all attributes have been scaled within 0 and 1 to make the correlation matrix in
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Methods
Fig 3.8.
Time is the time point with the time step of 1 hour.
Other attributes
are temperature of ambient air [°C], relative humidity of ambient air [%], direct
normal radiation [W/m2], diffuse radiation [W/m2], wind speed on X-component
[m/s], wind speed on Y-component [m/s], cloudness [%], occupancy signal, equipment
signal, window opening signal and operative temperature [°C]. The original occupancy
signal and equipment signal are both binary, indicating whether the occupant is
at home and the equipment is operated or not. ’1’ stands for the occupant is at
home and the equipment is operated, while ’0’ represents the occupant is outside
of the house and the equipment is off. The window opening signal can be binary or
continuous between 0 and 1. It depends on what type of controller is used, for example,
proportional controller will give continuous numbers between 0 and 1 indicating the
percentage of relative window opening but the controller can also only have on (1)
and off (0) mode. The solar shading is never drawn in this case.
Operative temperature is the prediction target of AI models. It has the highest
positive correlation with the temperature of ambient air.
There also exists high
correlation between operative temperature and two types of radiation (direct normal
radiation and diffuse radiation). The operative temperature can also depend on the
window opening control strategy. The operative temperature has quite low correlation
with internal gains of the house (occupancy and equipment) as described in Fig 3.8.
3.2.2
Case with consideration of solar shading
It is also interesting to have the study on the impact of solar shading and how to
control it with the combination of window opening. The correlation matrix shown
in Fig 3.9 includes the attribute of solar shading. Again, the shading signal can be
binary or continuous between 0 and 1, depending on what type of controller is used.
Compared with window opening intensity, shading intensity has lower correlation
with the operative temperature. Ambient air temperature, direct normal radiation
and diffuse radiation, relative humidity of outdoor air and cloudness are attributes
relatively highly correlated with the operative temperature of sequential hours in the
case that both window opening and solar shading are controlled by different strategies.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Available data and correlation
21
Figure 3.8: Correlation matrix of all attributes (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Methods
Figure 3.9: Correlation matrix of all attributes (with shading control).
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Data processing
23
3.3
Data processing
3.3.1
Memory of previous 4 time points
Listing 3.1 reveals a created function in Python script to transform the discrete se-
quential variables into the form to be input into machine learning models with the
memory of previous time points. The function is named ’series−to−supervised’ and
it has 3 inputs. The first input is the data from Excel spread sheet output from
IDA ICE simulation. The second is how many previous time points to be added as
memory and in this case is evaluated to be 4. The third is the number of output and
it is always set to be 1.
1 # How to transform the sequential data to the form with memory of states of
previous four time points:
2
3 def series_to_supervised(data, n_in=4, n_out=1, dropnan=True):
4
n_vars = 1 if type(data) is list else data.shape[1]
5
df = DataFrame(data)
6
cols, names = list(), list()
7
# input sequence (t-n, ... t-1)
8
for i in range(n_in, 0, -1):
9
cols.append(df.shift(i))
10
names += [('var%d(t-%d)' % (j+1, i)) for j in range(n_vars)]
11
# forecast sequence (t, t+1, ... t+n)
12
for i in range(0, n_out):
13
cols.append(df.shift(-i))
14
if i == 0:
15
names += [('var%d(t)' % (j+1)) for j in range(n_vars)]
16
else:
17
names += [('var%d(t+%d)' % (j+1, i)) for j in range(n_vars)]
18
# put it all together
19
agg = pd.concat(cols, axis=1)
20
agg.columns = names
21
# drop rows with NaN values
22
if dropnan:
23
agg.dropna(inplace=True)
24
return agg
Listing 3.1: Series to supervised.
A detailed visual description of the ’series−to−supervised’ process can be found
in Fig 3.10. In Fig 3.10, it is assumed that the raw available data contains sequential
variables of one whole year and they are discrete with the time step of an hour.
Therefore the raw data has 8761 lines and 12 columns of attributes (matrix shape:
[8761×12]) if the case is shading is never drawn, including 11 features and 1 prediction
target (label). When it is input to the function, the output turns out into the shape of
[8757×60]. Each lines additionally contains the information of previous 4 sequential
lines. The number of observations has reduced from 8761 to 8757, because the first
4 sequential hours of the year should be sacrificed as memory to make the prediction
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Methods
on operative temperature for the fifth hour of the year. Then the prediction can be
continuously made until the last hour of the year.
Figure 3.10: Example visualization of ’series−to−supervised’.
3.3.2
Scaler and random sets
MinMaxScaler is used to restrict the value of features within the range from 0 to 1.
Listing 3.2 shows how MinMaxScaler is enabled to transform the value of features
and how the transformation is given [sci]. What should be noticed is that the value
of label, which is operative temperature here, will not be transformed.
1 # Enable MinMaxScaler and use it to transform value of features:
2
3 scaler = MinMaxScaler(feature_range=(0, 1)).fit(values)
4 # values[:, :-1] includes all features and values[:, -1] is the target
5 values[:, :-1] = scaler.fit_transform(values[:, :-1])
6
7
8 # How the transformation is given:
9
10 X_std = (X - X.min(axis=0)) / (X.max(axis=0) - X.min(axis=0))
11 X_scaled = X_std * (max - min) + min
# where min, max = feature_range
Listing 3.2: MinMaxScaler.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
25
If f is the function that we need to acquire to predict the label of the data-set,
observations we will use to train, or teach, our method to estimate f are called
the training data [Rob+13].
But in general, we do not really care how well the
method works on the training data. Rather, we are interested in the accuracy of the
predictions that we obtain when we apply our method to previously unseen test data
[Rob+13]. When splitting the prepared data into training set and test set, 90% is for
training and 10% is for testing. In order to make prediction models robust, 1% of the
data was randomly selected 10 times to make the test set. It was ensured that there
was no overlapping in these selections. The remaining data naturally formed into the
training set.
3.4
AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
Fig 3.11 captures the difference and relationship between Artificial Intelligence (AI),
Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL). AI is the broad discipline of creat-
ing intelligent machines. ML refers to systems that can learn from experience, while
DL refers to systems that can learn from experience on large data sets. [son] There-
fore, DL is the subset of ML and ML is the subset of AI as described in Fig 3.11.
For the prediction of sequential operative temperature of the zone, two algorithms are
proposed and they are Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network and Extreme Gra-
dient Boost (XGBoost). LSTM network belongs to the category of DL and XGBoost
is thought of a ML algorithm. Both of them are taken as AI algorithms.
Figure 3.11: Deep Learning is part of Machine Learning and Machine Learning is
part of Artificial Intelligence [Gro17].
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Methods
3.4.1
Long Short-Term Memory network
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network is well-suited to make predictions based
on time series data [Wika]. It has memories of conditions on previous time points,
aiming to make prediction on the present time point based on them.
3.4.1.1
Structure of Recurrent Neural Network and LSTM network
Fig 3.12 and Fig 3.13 describe the structure of traditional Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) and LSTM network respectively [blo15]. ’X’ stands for the input and ’h’ means
the output. ’A’ is the hidden construction of each neural networks. LSTMs have
chain-like structure like RNNs, but the repeating module has a different structure.
Instead of having a single neural network layer, there are four, interacting in a very
special way [blo15]. This enables LSTMs to have more precise both long-term and
short-term memories.
When the gap between the relevant information and the point where it is needed
grows large, RNNs become unable to learn to connect the information.
However,
LSTMs can perfectly solve this. LSTMs are explicitly designed to avoid the long-
term dependency problem.
Remembering information for long periods of time is
their default behavior.
Figure 3.12: Structure of traditional Recurrent Neural Network [blo15].
==PAGE:35==
3.4 AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
27
Figure 3.13: Structure of LSTM network [blo15].
The structure of ’forget gate layer’ of LSTM is illustrated in Fig 3.14. This layer
will decide on what information should be thrown away from cell state. The sigmoid
function looks at the last output ht−1 and present input xt and then outputs a number
between 0 and 1 for each numbers in the cell state Ct−1. The number indicates the
proportion of information being kept. 0 represents ’completely get rid of this’ and 1
represents ’completely keep this’. The output of sigmoid function ft is calculated as
Equation 3.1:
ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
(3.1)
Figure 3.14: Forget gate layer of LSTM [blo15].
Evaluating what new information is going to be stored in the cell state is the next
step (see Fig 3.15). This step has two parts. Firstly, a ’sigmoid layer’ named ’input
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Methods
gate layer’ will select values to be updated for the reason of compensation as some
information has been thrown away in the previous step. Secondly, a ’tanh layer’ will
create a vector of candidate values ˜Ct, that has the possibility to be stored in the cell
state. The process can be described as Equation 3.2 and Equation 3.3:
it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
(3.2)
˜Ct = tanh(WC · [ht−1, xt] + bC)
(3.3)
Figure 3.15: Second gate layer of LSTM [blo15].
Then it is time to update the old cell state Ct−1 into the new cell state Ct (see
Fig 3.16). The previous two steps have already decided what to do and here we only
need to sum them up. The old cell state Ct−1 firstly multiplies by ft for the purpose
of filtering out less related information and then it adds up with new candidate values
scaled by how much to be updated for each states. The newly updated Ct can be
calculated as Equation 3.4:
Ct = ft · Ct−1 + it · ˜Ct
(3.4)
==PAGE:37==
3.4 AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
29
Figure 3.16: Update cell state in LSTM [blo15].
The final step is to decide what should be the output ht (see Fig 3.17). The output
will be based on the cell state Ct, but a filtered version. Firstly, a ’sigmoid layer’ will
decide what parts of the cell state should be output. Then Ct is put through a ’tanh
gate’ (to push values to be between -1 and 1) and finally multiplies by the output of
the ’sigmoid gate’, ensuring only the wanted information of the cell state will decide
on ht. Equation 3.5 and Equation 3.6 illustrate how to determine the output ht:
ot = σ(Wo[ht−1, xt] + bo)
(3.5)
ht = ot · tanh(Ct)
(3.6)
Figure 3.17: Generate output of present state in LSTM [blo15].
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Methods
With the rapid development of LSTM network, there has existed some LSTMs
having different structures from the one described above. They have been applied
to many different conditions and specific cases but we use the LSTM network with
the mentioned model structure to predict the operative temperature in the one-zone
VELUX test house in our case.
3.4.1.2
Input of LSTM network
Fig 3.18 below describes the input of LSTM network. Features can be referred to
Fig 3.10 for the visual description of ’series−to−supervised’ process. For the case
of shading is never drawn, there is 11 features in total to predict the target. Target
stands for operative temperature. ’X’ is the sequential input of LSTM network. When
training the network, every ’X’ includes features of the previous 4 time points and
features as well as the target of the present time point. That means when the raw
data has been reframed by ’series−to−supervised’ function, operative temperature
of previous 4 time points should be deleted at each lines. This also indicates that
when using LSTM network to make predictions, the operative temperature of the 4
time points at the beginning cannot be predicted. They should be sacrificed to make
prediction for the fifth time point. When the built-up LSTM network is used for
predicting new conditions, each ’X’ should be 11 features of 5 sequential time points.
The output ’h’ is the operative temperature of the last time point in every ’X’.
Figure 3.18: Input structure of LSTM network.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
31
3.4.2
Extreme Gradient Boost
Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost) is a machine learning model used for large data
sets. It is built on the principles of gradient boosting framework and designed to ’push
the extreme of the computation limits of machines to provide a scalable, portable and
accurate library.’ [Nis17]
3.4.2.1
XGBoost tree for regression
Residuals is described as the distance between the true value yi and model predicted
value pi:
Residuals = yi −pi
(3.7)
The similarity score is described as Equation 3.8, where n is the number of obser-
vations and λ stands for the regularization factor. The introduction of regularization
factor can reduce the risk of having over-fitting problem. The definition of over-fitting
in Statistics is that the production of an analysis which corresponds too closely or
exactly to a particular set of data, and may therefore fail to fit additional data or
predict future observations reliably [Oxf].
Similarity Score = (∑n
i=1(yi −pi))2
n + λ
(3.8)
A simplified XGBoost regression tree with only one layer of division can be seen
in Fig 3.19. Gain is to determine how to split the data and can be calculated as
Equation 3.9. It adds the similarity score of left division and right division and then
minus the similarity score of the root.
Gain = LeftSimilarity + RightSimilarity −RootSimilarity
(3.9)
Figure 3.19: Simplified XGBoost regression tree with only one layer of division.
We prune the tree by calculating the differences between Gain values and a user
defined Tree Complexity Parameter γ (see Equation 3.10). If the calculated value
of Equation 3.10 is positive, there is no need to prune, otherwise we should prune
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Methods
the tree. That also refers that large Gain value is always what to be expected. The
decision of splitting rule of the Root should orientate to large Gain.
Gain −γ
(3.10)
Finally, the output value of each tree leaves is described as Equation 3.11. When
the regularization factor λ > 0, it results in more pruning by shrinking the Similarity
Score (see Equation 3.8) and it also turns into smaller Output Values for the leaves.
Output Value =
∑n
i=1(yi −pi)
n + λ
(3.11)
When the first XGBoost regression tree is built up, the final output will be the
value of initial prediction plus the value of output of a specific leaf times the learning
rate.
There should actually be a learning rate before each new trees in Fig 3.20.
Learning rate decides how much the final output will depend on each new regression
trees. By adding new trees continuously, new predictions for all observations will have
smaller residuals than before, suggesting each small steps is in the right direction. The
algorithm will keep building trees until the residuals are super small or having reached
the maximum number. The process of building up new XGBoost regression trees is
illustrated in Fig 3.20.
Figure 3.20: How the prediction of XGBoost algorithm is made.
3.5
Reinforcement learning for the control of window
opening and solar shading
Reinforcement learning (RL) is learning what to do—how to map situations to actions—
so as to maximize a numerical reward signal. The learner is not told which actions
to take, but instead must discover which actions yield the most reward by trying
them.[SB12] Typically, a RL setup is composed of two components, an agent and
an environment. Then environment refers to the object that the agent is acting on
(e.g. the game itself in the Atari game), while the agent represents the RL algorithm.
The environment starts by sending a state to the agent, which then based on its
knowledge to take an action in response to that state. After that, the environment
sends a pair of next state and reward back to the agent. The agent will update its
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar shading
33
knowledge with the reward returned by the environment to evaluate its last action.
The loop keeps going on until the environment sends a terminal state, which ends
to episode.[Kun] Fig 3.21 illustrates a typical setup of reinforcement learning. RL
belongs to the category of deep learning and it is widely applied to large data sets.
Figure 3.21: Reinforcement learning illustration.
Agent in our case is Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm. Environment is
7 attributes of Copenhagen climate file with the simulation year of 2019 in IDA ICE,
default occupancy signal and default equipment signal also defined in the building en-
ergy simulation software. State is the time points correspondent with Environment.
Action is window opening intensity from 0 to 100% of maximum relative opening
within the interval of 25% ([0, 25%, 50%, 75%, 100%]) and whether shading is drawn
(1) or not (0). Reward is given by saved XGBoost model based on the evaluation of
operative temperature. As the control set-point of ’VELUX opening control simpli-
fied’ is 25°C in cooling season, here if the operative temperature is more approaching
25°C, the reward will be higher. How the reward is given in summer is illustrated in
Equation 3.12 below:
Reward (summer) = 0−|25−(XGBoost−predicted−operative−temperature)| (3.12)
The control set-point of ’VELUX opening control simplified’ for heating season is 23°C.
As Nordic region is always experiencing extremely cold climate in winter, the reward
for heating season is directly determined by the predicted operative temperature by
XGBoost algorithm. The higher the predicted operative temperature, the higher the
reward given in winter. Equation 3.13 illustrates how the reward is given:
Reward (winter) = XGBoost−predicted−operative−temperature
(3.13)
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Methods
3.5.1
Tabular Q-learning
Q-learning is an off-policy Temporal-Difference (TD) reinforcement learning control
algorithm defined by Equation 3.14:
Q (St, At) ←Q (St, At) + α
[
Rt+1 + γ max
a
Q (St+1, a) −Q (St, At)
]
(3.14)
Algorithm 1 below illustrates Q-learning algorithm in procedural form [SB12]:
Algorithm 1 Q-learning (off-policy TD control) for estimating π ≈π∗
1: Algorithm parameters: step size α ∈(0, 1], small ε > 0
2: Initialize Q(s, a),
for all s
∈
S+,
a
∈
A(s),
arbitrarily except that
Q(terminal, .) = 0
3: for each episode do
4:
Initialize S
5:
for each step of episode do
6:
Choose A from S using policy derived from Q(e.g., ε-greedy)
7:
Take action A, observe R, S
′
8:
Q(S, A) ←Q(S, A) + α[R + γmaxaQ(S
′, a) −Q(S, A)]
9:
S ←S
′
10:
end for until S is terminal
11: end for until done with all episodes
In both Equation 3.14 and Algorithm 1, S, A and R stand for State, Action and
Reward respectively. α is the learning rate, which is a hyper-parameter decides how
much the algorithm learns from each update.
γ is the discount factor.
ε-greedy
policy enables the algorithm mainly follows the path maximizing the Reward but
also has the possibility to randomly explore other Actions. The value of ε is the
percentage for exploitation and (1 −ε) is the percentage for the random exploration
of other Actions. The meaning and expression of these hyper-parameters is the same
in SARSA algorithm.
3.5.2
Tabular SARSA
SARSA is an on-policy TD reinforcement learning control algorithm defined by Equa-
tion 3.15:
Q (St, At) ←Q (St, At) + α [Rt+1 + γQ (St+1, At+1) −Q (St, At)]
(3.15)
Algorithm 2 below illustrates SARSA algorithm in procedural form [SB12]:
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar shading
35
Algorithm 2 Sarsa (on-policy TD control) for estimating Q ≈q∗
1: Algorithm parameters: step size α ∈(0, 1], small ε > 0
2: Initialize Q(s, a),
for all s
∈
S+,
a
∈
A(s),
arbitrarily except that
Q(terminal, .) = 0
3: for each episode do
4:
Initialize S
5:
Choose A from S using policy derived from Q(e.g., ε-greedy)
6:
for each step of episode do
7:
Take action A, observe R, S
′
8:
Choose A
′ from S
′ using policy derived from Q(e.g., ε-greedy)
9:
Q(S, A) ←Q(S, A) + α[R + γQ(S
′, A
′) −Q(S, A)]
10:
S ←S
′ ; A ←A
′ ;
11:
end for until S is terminal
12: end for until done with all episodes
Q-learning is off-policy for it tries to choose the next action having best reward
for the next state. However, SARSA is on-policy for it does not aim at selecting
the maximum reward towards next state (not using greedy policy) but still uses
current policy to exploit. Apart from the update equation (see Equation 3.14 and
Equation 3.15), the order and strategy of choosing actions are also different between Q-
learning and SARSA. The different order of choosing actions is illustrated in Fig 3.22.
In Q-learning algorithm, the choice of action of the next state is made when the next
state has reached, however, the choice of action of the next state is made before going
to the next state in SARSA. The main difference is that SARSA algorithm always
makes the decision of actions before Q-learning algorithm.
Figure 3.22: How Q-learning and SARSA choose actions.
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Methods
3.6
Model optimization
3.6.1
Manual tuning
Manual tuning is widely used for tuning hyper-parameters of machine learning models
to optimize model performance.
3.6.1.1
LSTM network
Listing 3.3 shows the setup of LSTM network with proper hyper-parameter settings.
There is only one layer between the input and output of LSTM network containing 5
LSTMs connecting with each other and a bias. The number of LSTMs was gradually
reduced by manual tuning and model with only 5 LSTMs will have the prediction
with smallest error. The impact of adding fully connected layer or not has also be
evaluated and the result suggested to keep the simple model construction without
adding any layers between LSTMs and the output. ’adam’ optimizer can deal with
the problem of over-fitting and also reduce the error. 450 epochs was chosen for it
can be enough to reach convergence without having over-fitting problem by trial run.
The batch size was set to be 36. Learning curves of LSTM network for both cases
that without and with consideration of solar shading control can be seen in Fig C.1
and Fig C.2 respectively in Appendix C.
1 # Set up LSTM network model:
2
3 model = Sequential()
4 # 5 LSTMs
5 # The first dimension of input shape is the number of time points in each
inputs, here is 5, including the present time point and previous 4
memories
6 # The second dimension of input shape is the number of features, here is 11
or 12, including ambient climate conditions , internal gains, window
action and shading action if the impact of solar shading is considered
7 model.add(LSTM(5, input_shape=(train_X.shape[1], train_X.shape[2])))
8 model.add(Dense(1)) # 5 LSTMs along with one bias directly connected to the
output
9 model.compile(loss='mean_squared_error', optimizer='adam')
10 # Fit network
11 # X is for features and y is the target (label)
12 history = model.fit(train_X, train_y, epochs=450, batch_size=36,
validation_data=(test_X, test_y), verbose=2, shuffle=False)
13 model.save('3_window_model_no_shading.h5')
14 # model.save('3_window_model_with_shading.h5')
Listing 3.3: Setup of LSTM network.
3.6.1.2
Q-learning and SARSA
Hyper-parameters of two Reinforcement Learning algorithms (Q-learning and SARSA)
are also tuned by manual tuning. Learning rate α is 0.1 for summer case (August)
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Model optimization
37
and 0.4 for the case of winter (February) because they have different ways of giving
Reward. Discount factor γ is 0.9. The ε-greedy policy is that 90% of the total time
points is randomly selected for exploitation in each iterations and the remaining 10%
is for random exploration of different actions. This indicates that ε is equal to 0.9.
The number of iterations is determined to be 5000, which ensures the full convergence
of yielding most rewards. Learning curves of reinforcement learning can be seen in
Appendix C.
3.6.2
Hyper-parameter tuning based on Bayesian optimization
Bayesian optimization is a rather clever algorithm that basically consists of choosing
the sampling points from which to evaluate the function in a much more intelligent
way than simply choosing them randomly or on a grid. [Umb18]
3.6.2.1
Overview of Bayesian optimization
The goal of Bayesian optimization is to find the maximum value at the sampling point
for an unknown function f(x) as illustrated in Equation 3.16. [BCF13] [Wu+19]
x+ = arg max
x∈A f(x)
(3.16)
Where A denotes the search space of x. Inspired from Bayes’ theorem [HQ20], for
example, given evidence data E, the posterior probability P(M|E) of a model M is
proportional to the likelihood of E given M multiplied by the prior probability of M:
P(M|E) ∝P(E|M)P(M)
(3.17)
Equation 3.17 describes the core idea of Bayesian optimization. In Bayesian optimiza-
tion, the prior represents our belief about the space of possible objective functions.
The posterior information is used to find where the function f(x) is maximized ac-
cording to the acquisition function. Acquisition function is used to determine the
next sampling point in order to maximize the expected utility. When searching the
sampling space, both exploration and exploitation should be enabled. Exploitation is
to sample following the path of high values and exploration is to sample from space
with high uncertainty. This is similar to the ε-greedy policy in RL to both randomly
explore actions and select actions yielding most rewards for exploitation. [JL19]
The Algorithm of Bayesian optimization is described in Algorithm 3, where D1:t−1 =
{xn, yn}t−1
n=1 stands for the training data-set consisting of t-1 observations of the func-
tion f(x). Step 2 of Algorithm 3 is for the purpose of maximizing the acquisition
function and Step 3 and 4 is for updating the posterior distribution. As more sam-
pling points are found, the posterior distribution is updated within the process. In
terms of the new posterior, the point which maximizes the acquisition function is
found and added to the training data-set [Wu+19]. The update progress will end un-
til reaching the maximum number of iterations or the current value and the optimal
value found exerting less difference than the pre-defined threshold.
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Methods
Algorithm 3 Bayesian optimization
1: for t = 1, 2, ... do
2:
Find xt by optimizing the acquisition function over the Gaussian Process (GP):
xt = argmaxx u (x|D1:t−1).
3:
Sample the objective function: yt = f(xt) + εt.
4:
Augment the data D1:t = {D1:t−1, (xt, yt)} and update the GP.
5: end for
3.6.2.2
XGBoost
A snippet of Python code to execute Bayesian optimization on hyper-parameters of
XGBoost algorithm is illustrated as Listing 3.4. Hyper-parameters to be optimized
include learning rate, the number of iterations which is also known as the total num-
ber of XGBoost regression trees built and the maximum tree depth. Learning rate
is optimized within the range [0, 1] and the range for optimization of the number
of iterations and maximum tree depth is set as [10, 100] and [1, 100] respectively.
Different acquisition function is also applied to search for best fits.
1 from bayes_opt import BayesianOptimization
2 import xgboost as xgb
3 from bayes_opt.logger import JSONLogger
4 from bayes_opt.event import Events
5
6 # Change training set and test set into the form able to be processed by
XGBoost package
7 D_train = xgb.DMatrix(train_X, label=train_y)
8 D_test = xgb.DMatrix(test_X, label=test_y)
9
10 # Bayesian optimization is on learning rate, the number of iterations (
XGBoost regression trees) and the maximum tree depth
11 def Bayesian_optimization(eta,steps,max_depth):
12
param = {
13
'eta': eta,
14
'max_depth': int(max_depth),
15
'objective': 'reg:squarederror'}
16
steps = int(steps)
17
model = xgb.train(param, D_train, steps)
18
preds = model.predict(D_test)
19
return -sqrt(mean_squared_error(test_y, preds))
20
21 # The range of hyper-parameters to be optimized
22 pbounds={'eta':(0,1),'steps':(10,100),'max_depth':(1,100)}
23 optimizer = BayesianOptimization(
24
f=Bayesian_optimization ,
25
pbounds=pbounds,
26
verbose=2,
27 )
28
29 # Save the optimization process
30 logger = JSONLogger(path="./logs.json")
31 optimizer.subscribe(Events.OPTIMIZATION_STEP , logger)
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Model optimization
39
32
33 # Default acquisition function
34 optimizer.maximize(
35
init_points=30,
36
n_iter=100,
37 )
38 # Acquisition function: 'poi'
39 optimizer.maximize(
40
init_points=30,
41
n_iter=100,
42
acq='poi'
43 )
Listing 3.4: Bayesian optimization for optimizing hyper-parameters of XGBoost.
The optimization progress of Bayesian optimization is illustrated in Appendix D.
The best fit is to have learning rate as 0.39, maximum tree depth as 36 and the
number of iterations as 32. This can be found in Fig D.2 (27th line) in Appendix D.
==PAGE:48==
40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results and analysis
4.1
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network
4.1.1
Model structure
The visualization of the structure of LSTM network can be seen in Fig 4.1. If the
assumption is that the available data is for one whole year, when the data has been
processed to be input into LSTM network, the input shape will be [8757, 5, 11] for
the case without consideration of solar shading and [8757, 5, 12] for the case that
solar shading control is considered.
The first dimension of the input is the total
number of reframed observations of the data. The second dimension is the number
of sequential time points of each reframed observations, calculated by adding 4-hour
memory and one-hour present state together here. The third dimension is the number
of features for different cases. The output shape turns out to be [8757, 1] for both
cases, representing the sequential predicted operative temperature from the fifth hour
of the year to the last hour of the year. There is only one inner layer of the model,
containing 5 connected LSTMs and an added bias, which is normally known as ’LSTM
layer’. It is essential to keep the model structure simple and straight-forward for the
reason that different AI models to predict operative temperature are just intermediary,
helping to give the Reward for Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms but not the
ultimate models used to control the window opening and solar shading. RL agent
takes the control and if the concept of giving Reward is too complicated, there will
be problems executing RL controls.
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Results and analysis
Figure 4.1: Visualization of model structure of LSTM network.
4.1.2
Model summary
The model summary of LSTM network for the case that solar shading is never drawn
and the case with shading control is shown in Fig 4.2 and Fig 4.3 respectively. The
model structure of both cases is the same (see Fig 4.1). The only difference is that
more parameters will be added to different gates of LSTM network when adding the
attribute of solar shading behavior. The number of parameters in ’LSTM layer’ in
Fig 4.2 is 340 and in Fig 4.3 is 360. There is also 20 more total parameters in the
case that solar shading control is added as an extra attribute (366) than the case that
solar shading control is not considered (346).
Figure 4.2: Model summary of saved LSTM network exported from Python (shad-
ing is never drawn).
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost)
43
Figure 4.3: Model summary of saved LSTM network exported from Python (with
shading control).
4.2
Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost)
4.2.1
Model structure
Fig 4.4 illustrates the model structure of XGBoost optimized by Bayesian optimiza-
tion. As the number of iteration is 32 and every iteration will build up a new XGBoost
regression tree with tree depth no more than 36, there should be 32 XGBoost regres-
sion trees in total as explained in Fig 4.4. The learning rate of XGBoost algorithm
is also optimized by Bayesian optimization, determining to be 0.39. The output of
each tree leaves will be weighted by the learning rate, deciding how much information
should be updated by building up a new tree. What should be noticed is that the tree
depths in Fig 4.4 are all 2 but this is only for this schematic diagram. The tree depths
are much more than 2 in reality and varying between trees with different indices.
Figure 4.4: Visualization of model structure of XGBoost.
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Results and analysis
Detailed description of XGBoost regression trees directly exported from Python
script can be seen in Appendix E. Fig E.1 and Fig E.2 illustrate the first XGBoost
regression tree (Index:0) and second XGBoost regression tree (Index:1) for the case
that solar shading is never drawn. The actual structure of trees is much more com-
plicated than the schematic diagram in Fig 4.4. As the tree depth is defined as the
maximum distance between nodes and the root node, the depth of the first regression
tree is 6 and the depth of the second regression tree is 7.
Fig E.3 and Fig E.4 show the tree structure of the first tree (Index:0) and the
second tree (Index:1) respectively for the case that solar shading is controlled by
different algorithms. The tree depth of the first tree is 5 and for the second tree
is 8. Although cases with and without the consideration of solar shading share the
same hyper-parameters, for example, the maximum depth of trees, the total number
of trees which is also the total number of iterations and the learning rate, trees with
the same index of two cases can still be different.
4.3
Model performance
The root mean square error (RMSE) of predicted values ˆyt for times t of a regres-
sion’s dependent variable yt, with variables observed over T times, is computed for T
different predictions as the square root of the mean of the squares of the deviations
[Wikb]:
RMSE =
√∑T
t=1 (ˆyt −yt)2
T
(4.1)
RMSE is commonly used to evaluate the performance of machine learning models.
4.3.1
AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
4.3.1.1
Shading is never drawn
For the case that solar shading is never drawn, the RMSE of the test set of LSTM
network is calculated to be 1.181. Fig 4.5 reveals how the operative temperature
predicted by LSTM network can correspond to the true operative temperature in
the test set.
The model predicted value can shift towards lower value when the
true operative temperature is relatively high. The prediction can also be opposite to
the true value, sometimes causing large residuals when the operative temperature is
relatively low.
Fig 4.6 describes how the operative temperature predicted by XGBoost associates
with the IDA ICE simulated operative temperature in the test set. The test set for
evaluating the performance of XGBoost is the same as the one to assess the precision
of LSTM network. The RMSE of XGBoost is 0.756. Fig 4.6 shows that even the
extremely high temperature and unwanted low temperature exist, the line for model
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Model performance
45
prediction and the other for true value still share the same trend and overlap for
majority of the time.
4.3.1.2
Solar shading control is considered
For the case that shading is controlled, the RMSE of LSTM network for the test set is
calculated to be 0.868. Fig 4.7 compares the model predicted operative temperature
and true operative temperature simulated by IDA ICE in the test set. Again, when
the operative temperature is quite high or low, the model predicted value is not
precise to imitate the trend of IDA ICE simulation. The accuracy of LSTM network
also has a significant drop when the operative temperature exists sharp fluctuations
in Fig 4.7.
Fig 4.8 illustrates how the prediction of XGBoost model can correspond to the
simulation of IDA ICE, which is known as the true value of the figure. The RMSE of
the test set for the case of with shading control of the XGBoost model is 0.669. Apart
from the calculated RMSE is smaller than LSTM network, two lines in Fig 4.8 have
much more overlapping than that of LSTM network comparison in Fig 4.7. Even
when the operative temperature has many fluctuations or exists quite high or low
values, the prediction of XGBoost can still follow the trend of true values in Fig 4.8.
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Results and analysis
Figure 4.5: Comparison of LSTM network predicted operative temperature and true
operative temperature of test set (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Model performance
47
Figure 4.6: Comparison of XGBoost predicted operative temperature and true op-
erative temperature of test set (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Results and analysis
Figure 4.7: Comparison of LSTM network predicted operative temperature and true
operative temperature of test set (with shading control).
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Model performance
49
Figure 4.8: Comparison of XGBoost predicted operative temperature and true op-
erative temperature of test set (with shading control).
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Results and analysis
4.3.1.3
Summary of prediction models
Table 4.1 summarizes RMSE of two cases applying different machine learning models.
The result shows that XGBoost performs better in both cases than LSTM network.
RMSE of XGBoost is much smaller than LSTM network for the case that solar shad-
ing is never drawn. This can be due to test sets of two cases include different periods
of the year and different climate conditions. Randomly selected test set of the case
without consideration of shading control has periods that the IDA ICE simulated
temperature even reaches 35°C (see Fig 4.5 and Fig 4.6). There is also more peri-
ods in the test set with significant fluctuations than the test set of the case with
consideration of shading control. XGBoost takes its advantage to predict operative
temperature accurately in conditions with extremely high or low operative temper-
ature and operative temperature with sharp fluctuations. This explains the reason
why XGBoost has more advantages in the case that shading is never drawn. Both
LSTM network and XGBoost will perform better in normal situations with bearable
temperature range and mild temperature fluctuations and this illustrates why both
models perform better in the case with shading control than their own in the case
that shading is never drawn.
As XGBoost has smaller Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) in both cases and per-
forms much better in situations with significant operative temperature fluctuations
and extremely high or low operative temperature, XGBoost is chosen to be the in-
termediary to interact with RL agent. How the Reward of RL algorithms is given in
summer is described as Equation 3.12. XGBoost will make the prediction on operative
temperature every sequential hour and when the predicted operative temperature is
closer to the control set-point 25°C, the Reward will be higher. How the Reward is
given in winter with heating is illustrated in Equation 3.13. When the XGBoost pre-
dicted operative temperature is higher, the Reward will be higher concerning winter
in Copenhagen. RL is always trying to acquire a higher accumulated Reward for the
control period enrolled.
Table 4.1: RMSE summary of different machine learning models to predict operative
temperature based on randomly selected test sets of the 5-year training
data simulated by IDA ICE.
Case
LSTM network
XGBoost
Shading is never drawn
1.181
0.756
With shading control
0.868
0.669
4.3.2
Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening
and solar shading
Fig 4.9 illustrates how the window opening can be guided by signal written in the
external source file by designing a control macro with appropriate logic components
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Model performance
51
in IDA ICE. The adder has two input variables, the first is the control signal written
in the source file and the other is a constant value 0. The design macro enables that
window opening signal updated by RL algorithms can guide the window opening in
IDA ICE for the purpose of comparison. Fig 4.10 shows how the solar shading device
can be controlled by signal written in the external source file with the same strategy
as for window opening. The shading signal written in the source file is binary, having
only two control modes. ’1’ indicates the shading is drawn and ’0’ is for the shading
is not drawn.
Figure 4.9: Window opening signal given by signal written in external source file.
Figure 4.10: Solar shading signal given by signal written in external source file.
One summer month (August) and one winter month (February) are chosen to
evaluate the performance of Reinforcement Learning based controls. Table 4.2 shows
the RMSE of different control signal for the case with and without consideration
of solar shading control in both August and February. RMSE here is the error of
operative temperature with the same signal input into IDA ICE and XGBoost. For
example, the decision of window opening intensity and solar shading behavior made by
Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm is firstly written in an external source
file and then input to IDA ICE to do the simulation as described in Fig 4.9 and
Fig 4.10. The simulated operative temperature of sequential hour is then extracted
to compare with the operative temperature predicted by saved XGBoost model with
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Results and analysis
completely the same signal updated by Q-learning and SARSA. Concerning VELUX
control algorithms (’VELUX opening control simplified’ and ’VELUX active shading
control’), when the IDA ICE simulation is done, both control signal and operative
temperature of every sequential hour are output. The control signal is then input
into XGBoost model to have the predicted operative temperature. The RMSE is
calculated by assessing the difference between IDA ICE simulation and XGBoost
prediction with the same signal controlled by specific algorithms.
Table 4.2 reveals that the RMSE in February is much larger than that of in
August.
As RMSE actually represents the similarity of IDA ICE simulation and
XGBoost prediction, XGBoost model imitates the simulation of IDA ICE better in
August than in February.
Table 4.2: RMSE of different control signal for Case1: Shading is never drawn and
Case2: With shading control based on Copenhagen climate file of August
and of February (RMSE represents the similarity of IDA ICE simulation
and XGBoost prediction and the smaller RMSE is, IDA ICE simulation
and XGBoost prediction share more similarity).
Month
August
February
Case
VELUX
Q
SARSA
VELUX
Q
SARSA
1
3.086
2.501
2.542
5.085
4.737
4.705
2
2.717
2.561
2.601
4.602
4.356
4.318
As the control set-point for August is 25°C and for February decreases to 23°C,
both traditional VELUX control strategies and AI-based control strategies can be
evaluated by the average distance between the controlled operative temperature and
the control set-point of time points enrolled. Table 4.3 and Table 4.4 show the average
distance between control set-point and operative temperature controlled by different
strategies with different agents every sequential hour in August and in February re-
spectively. Bold numbers are for paired discrete control signal and agent. As VELUX
control macros are implemented in IDA ICE, the paired control agent should be IDA
ICE. Also, as Reward of Q-learning and SARSA is given based on the prediction on
operative temperature of XGBoost model, the paired control strategies for XGBoost
prediction agent should be Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm as well.
The shortest average distance in Table 4.3 is acquired by ’VELUX opening control
simplified’ (see Fig 3.4) and ’VELUX active shading control’ (see Fig 3.6) simulated
in IDA ICE in August. It is obtained by control algorithms simulated in the paired
agent. For Table 4.4 the smallest value is window opening signal updated by SARSA
algorithm simulated in IDA ICE and solar shading is never drawn at meantime. This
is for signal updated by an AI-based control strategy simulated in the unpaired IDA
ICE agent. However, Table 4.3 and Table 4.4 are only for approximate evaluation
for they are lacking in much detailed information regarding operative temperature
fluctuation.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Model performance
53
Table 4.3: Average distance from control set-point 25°C with different control sig-
nal and agent in August (Case1: Shading is never drawn; Case2: With
shading control).
Agent
IDA ICE simulation
XGBoost prediction
Case
VELUX
Q
SARSA
VELUX
Q
SARSA
1
1.28
1.89
1.94
3.45
3.11
3.11
2
1.12
1.74
1.72
3.36
3.18
3.18
Table 4.4: Average distance from control set-point 23°C with different control signal
and agent in February (Case1: Shading is never drawn; Case2: With
shading control).
Agent
IDA ICE simulation
XGBoost prediction
Case
VELUX
Q
SARSA
VELUX
Q
SARSA
1
2.46
1.70
1.68
2.68
2.46
2.48
2
2.46
1.75
1.73
2.46
2.34
2.31
Fig 4.11 and Fig 4.12 illustrate signal updated by different control strategies
(’VELUX opening control simplified’ and ’VELUX active shading control’, Q-learning
and SARSA) running in different agents (IDA ICE simulation and XGBoost predic-
tion) in August with and without consideration of solar shading control respectively.
They give detailed information of how the operative temperature fluctuates around
control set-point (25°C in August). There is quite slight difference between opera-
tive temperature comparison based on Q-learning control signal and SARSA control
signal. Although Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm can perform very differ-
ently in some control tasks for the reason that they apply different rule and order to
choose actions but they perform similarly in our case for the window opening control
and solar shading control referring to values in Table 4.3 as well as operative tem-
perature fluctuation in Fig 4.11 and Fig 4.12. The RMSE of VELUX control signal
running in IDA ICE and XGBoost is larger than the other two, which can be due
to ’VELUX opening control simplified’ uses proportional controller. The sequential
signal of every hour for window opening can be any numbers ranging between [0, 1]
of ’VELUX opening control simplified’ but it is chosen from 5 fixed intensity ([0, 25%,
50%, 75%, 100%]) for Q-learning and SARSA control signal. When solar shading is
controlled, peaks and valleys of operative temperature predicted by XGBoost regres-
sion model both significantly lower down. Although the trend of XGBoost prediction
corresponds to IDA ICE simulation well, the fluctuation of operative temperature
is much sharper in XGBoost prediction than that of in IDA ICE simulation. The
assumption is that the unrealistic decrease of both peaks and valleys as well as unre-
alistic significant operative temperature fluctuation of XGBoost prediction can be due
to the lacking of consideration on thermal mass of the building, for example, weight
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Results and analysis
of building envelope. XGBoost model mainly overestimates the effect of ambient air
temperature and solar radiation change. Simulation data for training AI models for
prediction is based on the VELUX test house with specific building construction and
there is no more test houses included, therefore attributes concerning thermal mass
and building construction are not added in the output data-set for building up AI
models to predict operative temperature. Using more test buildings with different
building construction to produce the data-set can add attributes such as thermal
mass, exterior wall construction and characteristics of glazing. This will be discussed
further in Chapter 5: Discussion.
Fig 4.13 and Fig 4.14 show operative temperature comparison for case with and
without solar shading control in February. XGBoost model predicts operative tem-
perature far from the real condition for some time in February, for example, the
predicted operative temperature even exceeds 30°C for some periods, especially at
the end of the month. When solar shading is controlled with different control sig-
nal, peaks and valleys of XGBoost prediction both decrease. The upper temperature
range in Fig 4.13 is 36°C and in Fig 4.14 deceases to 34°C for the reason that solar
shading control is enabled. As the ambient air temperature in February is quite low,
the result indicates that XGBoost model can overestimate the influence of solar gains
severely. Apart from neglecting the impact of thermal mass of the building, lacking
in sufficient data regarding critical outdoor thermal conditions such as extremely cold
climate to train prediction models can also be the cause of inaccuracy of XGBoost
model. SARSA control signal and Q-learning control signal also perform quite simi-
larly in February regarding figures for average distance between controlled operative
temperature and control set-point (23°C in February) in Table 4.4 and temperature
fluctuation curves in Fig 4.13 and Fig 4.14.
As we cannot find a proper way to have direct data exchange between IDA ICE
and reinforcement learning control algorithms realized in Python environment, pre-
diction models are trained to take the place of IDA ICE simulation.
The direct
communication is between saved XGBoost model to predict operative temperature
and Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm. Therefore, paired control signal
and agent is VELUX control algorithms simulated in IDA ICE (the blue line of the
upper graph in Fig 4.11, Fig 4.12, Fig 4.13 and Fig 4.14 for VELUX control signal)
and Q-learning and SARSA signal running in XGBoost regression model (the orange
line of the middle and bottom graph in Fig 4.11, Fig 4.12, Fig 4.13 and Fig 4.14 for
Q-learning control signal and SARSA control signal respectively). Paired VELUX
control algorithms for window opening and solar shading have better performance
than paired AI-based control strategies but as there is lacking of precision in XG-
Boost model, a more valid analysis of reinforcement learning based control should be
detailed signal analysis along with the fluctuation of controlled operative temperature
(see Chapter 5).
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Model performance
55
Figure 4.11: Same signal controlled by different agents in August; control signal
from above to bottom is updated by ’VELUX opening control simpli-
fied’, Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm respectively (shad-
ing is never drawn).
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Results and analysis
Figure 4.12: Same signal controlled by different agents in August; control signal
from above to bottom is updated by ’VELUX opening control simpli-
fied’ and ’VELUX active shading control’, Q-learning algorithm and
SARSA algorithm respectively (with shading control).
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Model performance
57
Figure 4.13: Same signal controlled by different agents in February; control sig-
nal from above to bottom is updated by ’VELUX opening control
simplified’, Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm respectively
(shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Results and analysis
Figure 4.14: Same signal controlled by different agents in February; control signal
from above to bottom is updated by ’VELUX opening control simpli-
fied’ and ’VELUX active shading control’, Q-learning algorithm and
SARSA algorithm respectively (with shading control).
According to Chapter 2: Background and motivation, the operative temperature
in summer should be controlled below 26°C in order to comply with Category II of
(EN16798-1 [Sta19a]) and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]) and controlled ranging from 23°C to
26°C to comply with Category B of (ISO7730 [Sta06]). The requirement for winter is
to be controlled above 20°C for complying with Category II of (EN16798-1 [Sta19a])
and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]) and controlled ranging between 20°C and 24°C for the pur-
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Model performance
59
pose of complying with Category B of (ISO7730 [Sta06]). As the time step is set as 1
hour, there should be 745 time points in August and 673 time points in February in
the year 2019. A way to analyze how VELUX control and AI-based control comply
with Category II and Category B is to calculate the number of time points within
the temperature restriction in August and in February. For it is pure comparison
between VELUX control algorithms and reinforcement learning based control algo-
rithms, only the case for paired control signal and agent is included. That means the
operative temperature controlled by VELUX control algorithms is simulated by IDA
ICE and the operative temperature controlled by reinforcement learning agents is
output by XGBoost prediction model. Table 4.5 and Table 4.6 illustrate the number
of hours complying with operative temperature regulation in August and in Febru-
ary respectively for paired control signal and agent including case that shading is
never drawn and solar shading is controlled. Table 4.5 reveals that the operative tem-
perature controlled by Q-learning and SARSA has much time even lower than 23°C.
Operative temperature controlled by Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm has
much more unexpected low values in August. That can be caused by the inaccuracy
of XGBoost prediction. It is opposite in February that Q-learning and SARSA con-
trolled operative temperature has much more periods with unrealistic high values
than VELUX control algorithms from looking at Table 4.6. There are many hours in
February with controlled operative temperature more than 24°C by both Q-learning
and SARSA.
Table 4.5: The number of hours complying with operative temperature regulation
in August for paired control signal and agent (Case1: Shading is never
drawn; Case2: With shading control).
II/B
< 26°C
Ranging between [23°C, 26°C]
Case
VELUX
Q
SARSA
VELUX
Q
SARSA
1
555
656
655
536
114
115
2
631
678
681
570
133
136
Table 4.6: The number of hours complying with operative temperature regulation
in February for paired control signal and agent (Case1: Shading is never
drawn; Case2: With shading control).
II/B
> 20°C
Ranging between [20°C, 24°C]
Case
VELUX
Q
SARSA
VELUX
Q
SARSA
1
673
673
673
673
378
378
2
673
667
666
673
397
401
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Argument for defining pleasant operative
temperature range
As described in Chapter 2: Background and motivation, the control set-point of
both VELUX control strategies and AI-based control strategies is defined according
to regulations for operative temperature in (ISO7730 [Sta06]), (EN16798-1 [Sta19a])
and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]). The VELUX test house does not have mechanical cooling
system and it is mainly naturally ventilated according to the report for energy delivery.
However, Table B.2 of both (EN16798-1 [Sta19a]) and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]) and
Table A.5 of (ISO7730 [Sta06]) are references for buildings with mechanical cooling
systems.
Fig 5.1 illustrates recommended indoor operative temperature range for
some specific building types without mechanical cooling systems as a function of
running mean outdoor temperature. These building types include office buildings,
residential buildings and other similar types of buildings, where occupants are mainly
with sedentary activity and can have easy access to adapt their clothing and also to
open or close the window due to changes of indoor and outdoor thermal conditions.
Fig 5.1 only presents changes of upper and lower limit of indoor operative temperature
of Category I, II and III with the running mean outdoor temperature in summer and
shoulder seasons (spring and autumn). The regulation of operative temperature for
buildings without mechanical cooling systems in winter should still apply to Table B.2
of both (EN16798-1 [Sta19a]) and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b]) and Table A.5 of (ISO7730
[Sta06]) as illustrated in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2 in Chapter 2. The upper and lower
limit of operative temperature for different categories in winter is also not presented
in Fig 5.1.
As illustrated before, operative temperature of the VELUX test house should refer
to Fig 5.1 in summer and shoulder seasons and regulations described in Chapter 2 in
winter. However, as it is hard to evaluate the running mean outdoor temperature of all
time in summer, regulations designed for buildings with mechanical cooling systems
are still used to define the control set-point in summer. According to Fig 5.1, the
comfortable operative temperature as well as both upper and lower limit of Category
II will increase with the increase of running mean outdoor temperature in summer.
This indicates that a more precise way to define the control set-point in summer is
to make it dynamic, corresponding to the fluctuation of ambient air temperature.
The control set-point can be set as the line of comfort temperature in Fig 5.1. The
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Discussion
pleasant operative temperature range in our case can also be dynamic instead of
having a fixed restriction in summer. The assessment of indoor thermal conditions
should take into account that operative temperature in summer and shoulder seasons
will more depend on the outdoor thermal conditions than winter in our case. The
evaluation of operative temperature controlled by different algorithms in summer and
shoulder seasons should refer to Fig 5.1 for a more valid assessment.
Figure 5.1: Default design values for the indoor operative temperature for buildings
without mechanical cooling systems as a function of the exponentially-
weighted running mean of the outdoor temperature (Figure B.1 of
(EN16798-1 [Sta19a])).
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Model performance analysis
63
5.2
Model performance analysis
According to model performance results in Chapter 4: Results and analysis, XG-
Boost model performs better than LSTM network regarding prediction on operative
temperature and tabular Q-learning and tabular SARSA perform similarly regarding
applying reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar shading.
LSTM network is most effective in time series analysis concerning variables exist-
ing strong time series features, for example, predicting the last word in a sentence
in language processing task. The prediction of last word in the sentence should be
strongly relied on previous words and the context and sometimes even the first word
should be considered as memory for the prediction. In prediction tasks similar to
this, suggesting precise grasping of both short-term and long-term memory, LSTM
network is one of best tools. However, in our case the outdoor thermal conditions
can fluctuate sharply within a short segment of time so the time series feature is not
that notable. Moreover, available simulation data output from IDA ICE is with time
step of one hour and it is a bit long. The relatively long time step can also reduce
time series relations among time points neighbored.
These all result in that XG-
Boost regression model performs better than LSTM network if the data is processed
to have memory of sequential time points as illustrated in Fig 3.10. The less time
series related variables and long time step have turned the prediction into more of a
regression task than time series analysis. XGBoost regression model is to be used as
intermediary to give reward for reinforcement learning based controller rather than
LSTM network accordingly.
For the part of reinforcement learning based control, tabular Q-learning and tab-
ular SARSA perform quite similarly although their control signal can be different.
The way of choosing action of SARSA is more conservative than that of Q-learning.
However, this instinct does not differ the resulting controlled operative temperature
significantly. The general fluctuation trend of control signal of Q-learning and SARSA
is similar (see detailed signal analysis in this Chapter) and this causes the similar re-
sults of controlled operative temperature of them.
5.3
Precision of the prediction of XGBoost model on
operative temperature
The smallest RMSE between XGBoost model predicted and IDA ICE simulated oper-
ative temperature is illustrated in Table 4.1. It is obtained from the randomly selected
test set of the 5-year training data-set for building up prediction models. The RMSE
is based on the IDA ICE simulation of a combination of outdoor climate of different
locations with different months. Therefore it can be smaller than RMSE for months
and locations with critical ambient thermal conditions such as August in Aktion air-
port in Greece and February in Copenhagen and bigger than months and locations
with mild climate. Table 4.1 is only for a general summary and RMSE should vary
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Discussion
from different locations and different periods of the year. That explains why values
of RMSE in Table 4.1 are much smaller than values of RMSE in Table 4.2 for both
the case of August and February in Copenhagen.
5.3.1
The impact of building weight
Thermal mass is known as the ability of a material to absorb and store heat energy.
Much heat energy is required to change the temperature of materials with high density,
for example, concrete, bricks and tiles. They are therefore said to have high thermal
mass. Light-weight materials such as timber have low thermal mass [hom]. The weight
of building envelope is an essential factor to evaluate the ability of buildings to resist
interventions of outdoor thermal conditions. Heavy-weight buildings normally have
better competency to maintain the temperature within pleasant range than that of
light-weight buildings.
Table 5.1 describes the construction of external walls of VELUX test house and it is
heavy-weight with good resistance against outdoor thermal conditions. Gypsum and
brick are materials with heavy weight, while mineral wool is an insulation material.
Table 5.2 illustrates materials of roof layers. Although roof material and gypsum are
with heavy weight, layers for them are quite thin. Frames cc600 is a kind of material
for insulation.
The U-value of the roof is high and approximately 0.4W/m2 · K.
Therefore, roof of VELUX test house is thought of having light weight. Table 5.3
shows the construction of slab towards ground with detailed description of thermal
conductivity, density and specific heat of materials for different layers.
Although
wood is a commonly known light-weight material, the layer of wood is thin. The
layer of concrete is much thicker than the layer of wood. The U-value of the slab is
about 0.3W/m2 ·K and the slab is regarded as exerting moderate weight. Apart from
external walls, roof and slab towards ground, glazing areas also take large space of
the building envelope. Table 5.4 illustrates U-value, solar transmittance (g-value) and
visible (light) transmittance (LT-value) of two glazings used in the VELUX test house.
U-value as well as g-value of both glazings are a bit high. In winter, high solar gain is
expected for this will reduce the heating input. However, high solar gain in summer
is not pleasant for this may result in increase in mechanical cooling energy demand
and more over-heating hours. As the outdoor climate condition of Copenhagen in
winter is quite cold and in summer is moderate, a bit high g-value can be considered
reasonable. Lower U-value is always to be expected. The U-value of window frame
is much higher than glazings but as the frame area is small, it is not illustrated here.
The shading device used for Window 1 was designed and manufactured by VELUX
Group A/S named ’MHL’. When the solar shading device is drawn, the g-value of the
glazing should be multiplied by 0.217, while 0.169 for LT-value and 0.871 for U-value.
’MHL’ has good performance to prevent solar gain and daylight from coming into the
test house. The solar shading device of Window 2 and Window 3 in Fig 3.1 is never
drawn in order to simplify the process as described in Chapter 3: Methods.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Precision of the prediction of XGBoost model on operative temperature
65
Table 5.1: Construction description of external walls of VELUX test house (the
order of layer is from wall inside to wall outside; the external walls is
with total thickness of 0.346m and U-value of 0.297W/m2 · K).
Layer
Thermal conductivity
[W/m·K]
Density
[kg/m3]
Specific heat
[J/kg·K]
Gypsum (0.026m)
0.220
970
1090
Brick (0.110m)
0.580
1500
840
Mineral wool (0.100m)
0.037
20
750
Brick (0.110m)
0.580
1500
840
Table 5.2: Construction description of roof of VELUX test house (the order of layer
is from roof inside to roof outside; the roof is with total thickness of
0.133m and U-value of 0.394W/m2 · K).
Layer
Thermal conductivity
[W/m·K]
Density
[kg/m3]
Specific heat
[J/kg·K]
Roof material (0.020m)
0.580
1500
840
Frames cc600 (0.100m)
0.044
56
1720
Gypsum (0.013m)
0.220
970
1090
Table 5.3: Construction description of slab towards ground of VELUX test house
(the order of layer is from slab inside to slab outside; the slab towards
ground is with total thickness of 0.325m and U-value of 0.313W/m2 · K).
Layer
Thermal conductivity
[W/m·K]
Density
[kg/m3]
Specific heat
[J/kg·K]
Wood (0.025m)
0.140
500
2300
Mineral wool (0.100m)
0.037
20
750
Concrete (0.200m)
1.420
2000
1000
Table 5.4: Glazing description of VELUX test house (glazing3-45 is used for win-
dows on southern roof including Window 1 and Window 2 marked in
purple in Fig 3.1; glazing3-90 is used for Window 3 on northern exterior
wall marked in orange in Fig 3.1).
Glazing
U-value
[W/m2 · K]
Solar transmittance
(g-value) [%]
Visible (light)
transmittance
(LT-value) [%]
glazing3-45
1.471
54
77
glazing3-90
1.107
54
77
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Discussion
According to Table 5.1, Table 5.2, Table 5.3 and Table 5.4 and detailed descrip-
tion of the building envelope of VELUX test house above, the test house can be
thought of having medium to heavy weight, representing good resistance to outdoor
thermal environment. However, attributes regarding building envelope construction
and other potential attributes to present thermal mass are not included in the data-
set for training machine learning models to predict operative temperature. That can
be the reason that when completely same signal input into XGBoost model and IDA
ICE, the operative temperature simulated by IDA ICE acts like having heavy-weight
building structure and the operative temperature predicted by XGBoost model acts
like having light-weight building structure. XGBoost predicted operative tempera-
ture has longer distance between peaks and valleys and sharper fluctuations than
IDA ICE simulated operative temperature. It seems like the model underestimates
the building’s competency to maintain the indoor temperature to large extent. This
indicates that more test buildings with different design of building envelope and build-
ing construction, for example, different materials, thickness and U-value of external
walls, roof and slab towards ground, different types and space of glazings and different
types of shading device should be applied to generate the data-set for training pre-
diction models and attributes representing thermal mass should be added with the
same time step as outdoor thermal conditions, internal gains and window opening
and solar shading signal to the data-set as well. This can be done as a part of the
future work.
White-box approach is based on knowing detailed information about the building
construction. Grey-box is an intermediate state between black-box and white-box.
The relations between ambient and indoor environment and building constructions
can be determined by grey-box building model. We proposed a black-box model to
predict the indoor operative temperature without knowing any needed information
concerning the construction of the test building. It is a pure data-driven approach.
[Mad+94] proposed various types of models, e.g. general transfer function models,
non-linear transfer function models, smooth threshold transfer function models and
neural network models to forecast the future heat load of district heat systems based
on variables such as the ambient air temperature, the wind velocity (and direction),
humidity/precipitation, the temperature of the supply water, the temperature of
the return water, the water flow, the time of day and type of day (weekend and
workdays). The simplest general transfer function models were evaluated to have the
best fit with the data-set. The prediction was also made based on pure data-driven
black-box approach in [Mad+94], which is the same as in our case. However, as the
heat energy is firstly generated by district heating systems and then supplied to many
different households, the heat load of district heating systems is the sum of heat load
of different types of buildings. Therefore it would not rely much on the construction of
a specific building in that district. [Mon+18] predicted the indoor temperature based
on the indoor temperature of previous 9 time points and it also added variables such
as the external temperature, whether it rains and whether the day is holiday or not
for optimization. Although this is also a pure data-driven method, the prediction
target can be predicted based on records for the target itself in previous time points.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Precision of the prediction of XGBoost model on operative temperature
67
In addition, the data was collected in many buildings situated in different cities rather
than a same building. These characteristics make the prediction result quite accurate
without specifying the thermal mass of buildings enrolled. [NM06] modelled the heat
consumption in district heating systems using a grey-box approach. The statistical
model considered heat transfer through a wall, energy transfer through a window
and ventilation air flow. Parameters regarding the thermal mass helped to establish
a precise model for the prediction of the heat consumption.
Therefore attributes
in terms of thermal mass can also help to build up the model to predict sequential
operative temperature in our case.
5.3.2
The impact of critical temperature and temperature
fluctuation
In order to evaluate the performance of AI-based controls, one summer month (Au-
gust) and one winter month (February) were selected. They are months with most
critical outdoor thermal conditions in Copenhagen. For the purpose of evaluating the
impact of critical temperature and significant temperature fluctuation, a month with
moderate outdoor conditions (May) in Copenhagen is chosen. The relative window
opening intensity is randomly selected among [0, 25%, 50%, 75%, 100%] and the
solar shading behavior is randomly selected between 0 (not drawn) and 1 (drawn)
for every sequential hour in May. Table 5.5 describes the RMSE between IDA ICE
simulation and XGBoost prediction based on randomly generated signal for case with
and without consideration of solar shading control for the climate of May in Copen-
hagen. Compared with Table 4.2 for August and February, values of RMSE for both
cases is much smaller in Table 5.5. Fig 5.2 and Fig 5.3 visualize how IDA ICE sim-
ulation and XGBoost prediction correspond to each other for the case that shading
is never drawn and the case that solar shading control is enabled respectively. Both
cases, especially the case that shading is never drawn, exist more similarity between
IDA ICE simulation and XGBoost prediction based on completely the same signal in
May (Fig 5.2 and Fig 5.3) than that of in August (see Fig 4.11 and Fig 4.12) and in
February (see Fig 4.13 and Fig 4.14) in general. This indicates that XGBoost model
predicts the operative temperature better in moderate outdoor thermal conditions
than outdoor conditions with critical temperature and sharp temperature fluctuation.
A wise way to alleviate this is to expand the data-set for training machine learning
models for prediction, for example, including more different locations with various
climate conditions. The accuracy of model prediction will be improved if AI has had
enough experience from learning the operative temperature change based on many
critical outdoor conditions.
The main difference between Fig 5.2 and Fig 5.3 is that the solar shading control
lowers down peaks of operative temperature for both agents, especially for XGBoost
prediction. However, the availability of solar shading control does not lower down
valleys of IDA ICE simulation but lowers down valleys of XGBoost prediction signif-
icantly. The shrink of peaks for both agents decreases the RMSE but much lower
==PAGE:76==
68
5 Discussion
valleys of XGBoost prediction increases the RMSE severely for the case that solar
shading control is considered. This indicates that XGBoost model overestimates the
impact of solar radiation on indoor operative temperature. The same conclusion can
be drawn in August and in February, reflecting that thermal mass should be added
as attribute for training prediction models and also more test houses with different
weight should be enrolled for producing training data. The demand for expanding the
training data-set for predicting operative temperature based on time series variables
with attributes regarding thermal mass of buildings and more locations with critical
outdoor thermal conditions should be met in future work (see Chapter 7).
Table 5.5: RMSE of randomly generated control signal for case with and without
consideration of solar shading control based on Copenhagen climate file
of May (RMSE represents the similarity of IDA ICE simulation and XG-
Boost prediction and the smaller RMSE is, IDA ICE simulation and
XGBoost prediction share more similarity).
Case
RMSE
Shading is never drawn
1.574
With shading control
2.035
Figure 5.2: Same random signal controlled by different agents in May (shading is
never drawn).
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
69
Figure 5.3: Same random signal controlled by different agents in May (with shading
control).
5.3.3
The impact of time step
The time step of signal extraction and reinforcement learning based control is one
hour. This is mainly for the outdoor climate file of Copenhagen reference year is with
the initial time step of one hour in IDA ICE. However, there can be many different
window opening and solar shading behaviors within one hour. The window opening
intensity and solar shading behavior at a specific time point cannot present how the
window opening intensity will change and how the solar shading device will change
its status in the following one hour. For example, if both window opening intensity
and solar shading status are the same in two sequential time points, it is hard to
judge if they keep their status of all time in this one hour or they have changed but
return to the initial status at the end of the hour. It is better to change the time step
to be shorter, for example, 10 minutes or 15 minutes. The window opening intensity
and solar shading behavior can be better defined then. The shrink of time step can
be done by using real life data extracted by different kinds of building sensors with
proper settings rather than simulation data of IDA ICE or finding a way to output
outdoor thermal conditions, internal gains, window opening and solar shading control
signal and other related time series parameters from IDA ICE with shorter time step.
5.4
Discussion on reinforcement learning based
control
5.4.1
Argument for the way of giving Reward in February
For the consideration of cold climate condition in winter in Copenhagen and the re-
quirement for Building Category II in (EN16798-1 [Sta19a]) and (TR16798-2 [Sta19b])
==PAGE:78==
70
5 Discussion
that the minimum zone operative temperature in winter is 20°C, the way of giving Re-
ward for reinforcement learning in winter is defined as Equation 3.13, that the higher
model predicted operative temperature is, the higher the Reward would be. However,
as shown in Fig 4.13 and Fig 4.14 that the XGBoost predicted operative temperature
has some periods with unexpected high values, even exceeding 34°C. That can be due
to XGBoost prediction model underestimates the building’s ability to resist high solar
radiation in winter. As the control set-point in winter for VELUX control strategies
is 23°C, it is interesting to see how the result will be if the way of giving Reward in
February changes to the same as the way of giving Reward in August as illustrated
in Equation 5.1. The learning rate α has also been changed from 0.4 to 0.1, which is
the same as the learning rate for the case of August.
Reward (February) = 0−|23−(XGBoost−predicted−operative−temperature)| (5.1)
Equation 5.1 indicates that the closer the XGBoost predicted operative temper-
ature to the control set-point 23°C, the higher Reward will be acquired. Only the
case of Q-learning in February where solar shading is never drawn is redone with the
new approach of giving Reward with smaller learning rate α attached. The learning
curve of Q-learning algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen in February for the case
that shading is never drawn with the Reward given by Equation 5.1 can be seen
in Fig 5.4. The average distance between control set-point and controlled operative
temperature predicted by XGBoost regression model in February is approximately
2.2°C as illustrated in Fig 5.4 when the learning curve is convergent.
Figure 5.4: Learning curve of Q-learning algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen in
February (shading is never drawn and Reward is given by Equation 5.1).
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
71
Fig 5.5 shows the operative temperature predicted by XGBoost model with control
signal updated by Q-learning algorithm in February without consideration of solar
shading control. Two lines in different colors in Fig 5.5 indicate different ways of
giving Reward for Q-learning algorithm and the blue line is for the Reward given by
Equation 3.13 and the orange line stands for the Reward given by Equation 5.1. The
blue line has higher values than that of orange line in general, which corresponds to
their different approaches of giving Reward for Q-learning. The blue line is trying
to yield higher operative temperature, while the orange line is trying to approach
the control set-point 23°C. We previously used Equation 3.13 to give Reward for
winter in order to avoid having unpleasant low operative temperature. Because in
Equation 5.1, for example, 24°C and 22°C will have the same Reward as they share the
same distance to the control set-point 23°C, but in cold winter people usually will more
expect higher temperature to keep warm. In addition, normally control strategies in
winter are aiming at avoiding low indoor temperature but not preventing occupants
from high indoor temperature.
However in Fig 5.5, the line in orange has more
periods in February within the range from 20°C to 24°C (requirement for Building
Category B of (ISO7730 [Sta06])) while the line in blue has exceeded 24°C, but the
line in orange is almost the same with the line in blue when existing extremely high
operative temperature. As there is lacking in precision of XGBoost prediction model,
it is still hard to judge which way of giving Reward in winter is better. Equation 3.13
and Equation 5.1 can be both applied to be compared when the problem regarding
the accuracy of prediction model is solved.
Figure 5.5: Reward given by different equations for Q-learning in February without
consideration of solar shading control.
5.4.2
Detailed signal analysis
For a detailed evaluation of the performance of reinforcement learning based con-
troller, detailed control signal analysis along with the zone operative temperature
fluctuation should be proposed. The operative temperature for control signal analy-
==PAGE:80==
72
5 Discussion
sis of VELUX control strategies should be simulated by IDA ICE and of reinforcement
learning control strategies should be predicted by XGBoost regression model for the
reason of having paired evaluation. The adjustment of control signal of VELUX con-
trol strategies is based on the simulation output of IDA ICE, meanwhile the Reward of
reinforcement learning algorithms is given by interacting with saved XGBoost model.
Therefore only the evaluation of paired control signal along with controlled operative
temperature can contribute to find inner relationships of how the control signal of
different strategies is updated.
5.4.2.1
August case
Fig 5.6, Fig 5.7, Fig 5.8, together with Fig F.1, Fig F.2, Fig F.3 and Fig F.4 in
Appendix F illustrate the window opening signal updated by ’VELUX opening control
simplified’, Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm along with paired controlled
indoor operative temperature fluctuation from 1st of August to 31st of August for the
case that solar shading is never drawn. Darker color in these figures indicate more
relative window opening of Window 1 and control set-point 25°C is also shown in grey
dash line. When the operative temperature is high, normally all 3 control strategies
will increase the window opening intensity. This trend is more evident in ’VELUX
opening control simplified’ than in two reinforcement learning control algorithms. The
control signal of ’VELUX opening control simplified’ can correspond to the feature of
traditional PI controller. However, for reinforcement learning control algorithms, the
control signal is quite continuous and it seems that the decision of AI will consider
the impact of current action on next time points instead of focusing only on current
condition as traditional PI controller does. This is due to that reinforcement learning
based controller can learn from the trial and error of each epochs. When the learning
process is convergent, the controller is thought of having enough experience on making
the decision.
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
73
Figure 5.6: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
1st of August to 5th of August (shading is never drawn).
Figure 5.7: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
6th of August to 10th of August (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:82==
74
5 Discussion
Figure 5.8: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
11th of August to 15th of August (shading is never drawn).
For the case that solar shading is controlled by determining whether the solar
shading device should be drawn (1) or not (0) along with the window opening con-
trol in August, different control signal for 3 strategies are also shown combining the
window opening signal and solar shading signal. Fig F.5, Fig F.6 and Fig F.7 in
Appendix F together with Fig 5.9, Fig 5.10 and Fig 5.11 illustrate window opening
signal and solar shading signal controlled by ’VELUX opening control simplified’ and
’VELUX active shading control’, Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm along
with controlled operative temperature in entire August. Yellow color bar is for the
control signal of solar shading and orange color bar is for the control signal of win-
dow opening. There should be a preset in VELUX control for window opening and
solar shading in IDA ICE that solar shading has higher priority than window open-
ing, indicating that when the operative temperature increases, solar shading will be
drawn at first and then if the operative temperature still cannot drop down to the
control set-point, the window should be opened. The feature of this preset is quite
evident in Fig 5.11 for the period of 30th of August and 31st of August of VELUX
control strategies where only solar shading is drawn but window is not opened. In
other segments of time having both window opening signal and solar shading drawn
(1) signal of VELUX control strategies, it is also solar shading signal turns from 0
to 1 first and then the intensity of window opening signal gradually increases. This
corresponds to people’s common sense of controlling window opening and solar shad-
ing device. However, reinforcement learning algorithms do not know the priority of
window opening control and solar shading control. They only choose the combination
of window opening signal and solar shading behavior yielding most Reward. That is
the reason why solar shading signal of both Q-learning and SARSA seems quite ran-
dom. The same as only having window opening control, when the zone temperature
==PAGE:83==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
75
increases sharply, the intensity of both window opening control signal and solar shad-
ing control signal will increase for all 3 strategies but it is more evident for VELUX
control strategies. This is for traditional PI controller looks at only the current zone
temperature, outdoor thermal conditions and internal gains but AI-based control will
make its decision also focusing on previous experience to forecast the future effect of
current decision-making.
Figure 5.9: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 16th of
August to 20th of August (with shading control).
==PAGE:84==
76
5 Discussion
Figure 5.10: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 21st of
August to 25th of August (with shading control).
Figure 5.11: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 26th of
August to 31st of August (with shading control).
==PAGE:85==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
77
5.4.2.2
February case
Fig 5.12, Fig 5.13, Fig 5.14, together with Fig F.8, Fig F.9 and Fig F.10 in Appendix F
show the window opening signal with paired controlled zone operative temperature
from 1st of February to 28th of February applying ’VELUX opening control simplified’,
Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm respectively. Only the signal of VELUX
control strategy has the grey dash line indicating the control set-point 23°C, because
the goal of reinforcement learning algorithms in February is to yield highest indoor
operative temperature as the Reward is given directly by the XGBoost predicted
operative temperature. Window 1 is never opened in February if it is controlled by
’VELUX opening control simplified’ for the zone temperature has never reached the
control set-point. However Q-learning and SARSA still guide the window to open in
winter and the intensity will increase when solar radiation is high. This corresponds
to the assumption that XGBoost regression model overestimates the impact of solar
gains.
The window opening intensity will also increase when there is increase in
ambient air temperature even the increase of the temperature is quite slight. The
XGBoost regression model can overestimate the influence of the increase of ambient
air temperature severely in the context of cold outdoor thermal conditions.
Figure 5.12: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies
from 1st of February to 5th of February (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:86==
78
5 Discussion
Figure 5.13: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies
from 6th of February to 10th of February (shading is never drawn).
Figure 5.14: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies
from 11th of February to 15th of February (shading is never drawn).
Fig F.11, Fig F.12 and Fig F.13 in Appendix F, together with Fig 5.15, Fig 5.16
and Fig 5.17 illustrate comparison of 3 different control signal in entire February
==PAGE:87==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
79
with the consideration of both window opening control and solar shading control.
The solar shading control signal of both Q-learning and SARSA is quite random for
they focus on only choosing the combination of window opening intensity and solar
shading behavior resulting in high zone operative temperature in winter.
The accuracy of XGBoost regression model to predict the sequential zone operative
temperature is lower in winter than that of in summer. This indicates that XGBoost
model overestimates the impact of ambient temperature change and solar radiation
fluctuation more severely in winter than in summer. For example, XGBoost model
can amplify the effect of increase of ambient air temperature in winter in Copenhagen
on the indoor operative temperature. When there is only a increase of 2°C or 3°C
of ambient air temperature, XGBoost regression model will estimate a significant
increase on the zone temperature, but actually the zone temperature simulated by
IDA ICE will stay quite stable in winter. More simulation data based on critical
cold climate conditions should then be added to the data-set for training XGBoost
regression model for operative temperature prediction. Tuning the prediction model
every month can help the model adapt to different hyper-parameters for different
outdoor thermal conditions of months. This can also contribute to better prediction.
Figure 5.15: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 16th of
February to 20th of February (with shading control).
==PAGE:88==
80
5 Discussion
Figure 5.16: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 21st of
February to 25th of February (with shading control).
Figure 5.17: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 26th of
February to 28th of February (with shading control).
==PAGE:89==
5.4 Discussion on reinforcement learning based control
81
5.4.2.3
Lifetime of motor
The lifetime of motor is closely related to the frequency of the change of control signal.
The frequency of change of control signal of reinforcement learning algorithms is high,
especially for the control of solar shading device. This can result in the decrease of
the life expectancy of the motor. Therefore it is needed to restrict the frequency of
change in control signal updated by both Q-learning and SARSA. This can be done
by writing extra codes as preset in reinforcement learning algorithms implemented
in Python. Also the priority of window opening control and solar shading control
should be specified in the script. The general rule can be to adapt solar shading first
and then if the operative temperature still cannot drop down to the control set-point,
window opening should be enabled.
==PAGE:90==
82
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This master’s thesis project lays emphasis on applying interdisciplinary approach to
control the window opening and solar shading of the building.
To be specific, in
our case is the opening and solar shading control of Window 1 shown in Fig 3.1
of the VELUX test house naturally ventilated. The proposed approach combining
building environmental science and artificial intelligence (AI) is inspired from the
concept of model predictive control (MPC). A machine learning model in the control
loop is for predicting the indoor operative temperature based on time series variables,
for example, ambient air temperature, direct normal radiation and diffuse radiation,
outdoor relative humidity and internal gains of every sequential hour. Reinforcement
learning algorithms are based on the predicted operative temperature to control the
opening and solar shading of Window 1 of the test house within the time step of one
hour.
Two machine learning models are trained to predict the operative temperature and
they are Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network and Extreme Gradient Boost
(XGBoost). XGBoost regression model tuned by Bayesian optimization is evaluated
to perform better than LSTM network tuned manually because it has smaller Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the randomly selected test set of the 5-year data gener-
ated for training machine learning prediction models based on the simulation of IDA
ICE. Therefore XGBoost regression model is chosen to play the role of intermediary
to interact with two reinforcement learning algorithms. The Reward of reinforcement
learning is closely related to the operative temperature of every sequential hour pre-
dicted by XGBoost. Q-learning algorithm and SARSA algorithm are reinforcement
learning algorithms using tabular methods for the purpose of yielding most accumu-
lated Reward to control the window opening and solar shading of Window 1.
Concerning the result of controlled operative temperature, paired evaluation and
unpaired evaluation are both proposed.
Paired case is for VELUX control signal
simulated in IDA ICE and reinforcement learning control signal running in XGBoost
regression model. Unpaired case is for VELUX control signal running in XGBoost
regression model and control signal updated by reinforcement learning algorithms
simulated in IDA ICE. Unpaired evaluation is for the purpose of accessing how XG-
Boost prediction model imitates the simulation of IDA ICE. The result shows that
RMSE is much larger in August and in February than that of in the test set. The
RMSE will increase if the outdoor thermal condition is critical and with significant
fluctuation. That can be the reason that RMSE exerts sharp increase in the summer
==PAGE:92==
84
6 Conclusion
month (August) and in the winter month (February) selected. The RMSE between
IDA ICE simulated and XGBoost predicted operative temperature based on the same
control signal can be reduced if attributes regarding building weight can be added
to the data-set for training machine learning prediction models and the data-set can
be expanded with more data simulated based on critical outdoor climate conditions.
Shorter time step might also work out for optimizing the prediction model because
the behaviour of window opening and solar shading is more accurately recorded then.
More scientific tuning, for example, tuning hyper-parameters of the prediction model
based on different periods of the year with multiple outdoor thermal conditions, can
contribute to the model optimization as well. Tabular Q-learning and tabular SARSA
perform similarly in terms of the paired controlled operative temperature. Compared
with traditional VELUX control algorithms following the concept of PI controller,
they have the potential to make wiser decision based on learning sufficient experience
with trial and error. However, as there exists lacking in precision of XGBoost predic-
tion model, paired AI-based controlled operative temperature has more fluctuation in
both summer and winter and unrealistic high temperature in winter compared with
the operative temperature controlled by VELUX algorithms in IDA ICE.
This master’s thesis project develops AI-based control strategy which enables the
MPC based controller can learn from the surroundings where the test building sit-
uated. AI-based control strategy can adjust its decision-making by having enough
experience on how the Action in reinforcement learning can affect the Reward. There-
fore it will optimize its decision to shift towards higher Reward. However there is still
some aspects regarding both prediction and decision-making can be improved. The
precision of XGBoost regression model to predict operative temperature of sequential
time points should be enhanced and the reinforcement learning algorithms can also
be optimized by better tuning or changing into deep reinforcement learning networks.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7
Future work
7.1
Diversity of data
7.1.1
Expansion of training data-set
The expansion of training data-set for building up models to predict operative temper-
ature based on time series variables includes two major aspects. The first is to add
attributes concerning thermal mass of the building, for example, construction and
characteristics of building envelope, types and areas of glazings and types and char-
acteristics of solar shading device. This is associated with introducing more different
test houses for IDA ICE simulation. The second is to include more simulation data
based on critical climate conditions in critical months to give AI more opportunities
to learn from diverse experience. These actions are likely to improve the precision of
prediction models.
Moreover, as in this master’s thesis project, only the window opening and solar
shading of Window 1 on the southern roof of VELUX test house described in Fig 3.1
is controlled, it is also interesting to include the control of Window 2 and Window 3 in
future work with combination of control for Window 1. For the test house has only one
zone, if 3 windows have the same control macros implemented in IDA ICE, they will
have completely the same window opening signal and solar shading signal. However,
if different control macros are with different windows, they will have different signal.
Therefore there is also two orientations to analyze the effect of combination of different
window control in one zone. The prerequisite for the first is to ensure all windows
in the zone are controlled by the same window opening and solar shading control
strategies, indicating they will have the same intensity of window opening and solar
shading behavior of all time points. Then the impact of having only one specific
window controlled and having different combinations of controlled windows should be
analyzed. For example, in VELUX test house, the choices can be controlling only one
of Window 1, Window 2 and Window 3, controlling two of the three and controlling all
of the three. The second orientation is to have different control strategies for different
windows in the zone. Windows will have different window opening and solar shading
control signal then. This can be achieved by adding more attributes to define the
window opening control and solar shading control of different windows in the data-set
for training prediction models.
==PAGE:94==
86
7 Future work
7.1.2
Real life data
Real life data collected by building sensors can better present the real conditions of
outdoor climate, internal gains and control signal. The characteristics of the building
itself and its surroundings are better illustrated with sensors in different locations
and for different usages. The time step of output building sensor data can be set as
10 minutes or 15 minutes by proper setting of sensors.
7.2
Model optimization
The optimization of machine learning models for the purpose of predicting sequential
operative temperature can be done by more scientific tuning of models and adapt-
ing hyper-parameters with different months or specific periods with similar ambient
climate conditions.
Reinforcement learning based control algorithms can be optimized by more scien-
tific tuning as well. Deep reinforcement learning networks can also be applied to see
whether they will perform better than Q-learning and SARSA with tabular method.
7.3
Real life practice
It is essential to bring the concept of the master’s thesis work to the real life practice.
This will also give the inspiration for VELUX Group A/S to design automatically
controlled window and solar shading products based on artificial intelligence (AI).
Fig 7.1 illustrates the workflow of the real life practice of AI-based control for both
window opening and solar shading following the concept of model predictive con-
trol (MPC). The process of Fig 7.1 is very similar to that of Fig 2.3 in Chapter 2:
Background and motivation. The most significant difference between Fig 7.1 for the
real life practice and Fig 2.3 for the workflow of the master’s thesis project is that
data of outdoor thermal conditions and internal gains is no longer recorded in Excel
spreadsheet but directly output from sensors inside the building at every time point
in real life practice. The zone operative temperature is also expected to be detected
and output from the building sensor at every time point in real life practice and this
will give the feedback on the prediction made by machine learning models (XGBoost
and LSTM network) timely. The entire loop in Fig 7.1 still follows the concept of
MPC. Firstly variables such as ambient air temperature, solar radiation and internal
heat emission are detected by specified building sensors at time point t. Secondly
the reinforcement learning agent will decide the window opening intensity and solar
shading behavior at t according to its experience. Finally either XGBoost model or
LSTM network or other fitted machine learning models will predict the operative tem-
perature of t based on related variables and control signal decided by reinforcement
learning based controller. The next time point (t+1) should be reached then. Model
predicted operative temperature at t and operative temperature detected by zone
==PAGE:95==
7.3 Real life practice
87
sensor (label) also at time point t should be compared and saved as experience for
the model to learn. Therefore AI will enhance its precision on the prediction on zone
operative temperature within the progress of experiment because the more time it
has been, the more experience is gained. As the operative temperature at time point
t can either be acquired by the zone sensor or machine learning model prediction,
there should be an approach getting rid of the concept of MPC.
Figure 7.1: Real life practice following the concept of model predictive control
(MPC).
Fig 7.2 illustrates how data exchange can be done between sensor data and re-
inforcement learning agent. Outdoor parameters and indoor heat emission detected
by building sensors are input as State to reinforcement learning agent. Actions of
==PAGE:96==
88
7 Future work
window opening and solar shading is then determined and executed. Sensor detected
indoor operative temperature is closely associated with Reward in reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms and when it is obtained, the time point is forwarded. This approach
does not follow the concept of MPC but more of a pure AI-based control strategy.
The advantage is that the operative temperature is directly detected by building sen-
sor so there is no more error concerning model predicted operative temperature and
operative temperature in real condition. However, there is still some disadvantages.
The control strategy described in Fig 7.1 following the concept of MPC is based on
the model predicted operative temperature to give Reward for reinforcement learning
algorithms, so State of reinforcement learning (RL) is transformed to be only the
time point of the year and it has only one dimension accordingly. However, State in
Fig 7.2 has multiple dimensions, it is hard for RL to process. A way to decrease the
dimension of State should be proposed. Principle component analysis (PCA) might
work but there is definitely some information loss of variables output from building
sensors by conducting PCA. Also it is difficult to handle problems regarding sensor
failure.
Figure 7.2: Real life practice not following the concept of model predictive control
(MPC). State, Action and Reward of reinforcement learning are marked
in red.
To sum up, the advantage for the strategy following MPC (see Fig 7.1) is that the
introduction of prediction model can process variables concerning outdoor thermal
conditions and internal gains of the house in advance, therefore there is only one
dimension for State in reinforcement learning and it is the time point of the year.
Apart from this aspect, there is always checking between sensor detected and model
predicted operative temperature, so it is better for sensing both sensor and prediction
model failure. The advantage for the strategy only concerning AI-based control (see
==PAGE:97==
7.3 Real life practice
89
Fig 7.2) is that the Reward for RL closely related to operative temperature is directly
detected by zone sensor therefore the uncertainty regarding model predicted operative
temperature can be eliminated. Both proposals can be conducted in laboratory for
the purpose of comparison and optimization, where conditions permit.
==PAGE:98==
90
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX A
Project plan
The initial plan of this master’s thesis project is illustrated in Fig A.1. The final
fulfillment of the project is with some corrections of the initial plan. The regular
supervising meeting was conducted every week with supervisors even in Covid-19
quarantine periods (the meeting had been changed into online form) and it normally
lasted for around one hour.
==PAGE:100==
92
A Project plan
Figure A.1: Project plan.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX B
Schedules
Figure B.1: Schedule1: Workdays from 8:00 to 17:00 is 0 and the remaining time
of workdays as well as entire weekends is 1.
==PAGE:102==
94
B Schedules
Figure B.2: Schedule2: Workdays from 7:00 to 8:00 and from 17:00 to 23:00 is 1
and the remaining time of workdays is 0; from 7:00 to 23:00 is 1 and
the remaining is 0 for entire weekends.
Figure B.3: Schedule3: From 7:00 to 22:00 is 0 and the remaining time of the day
is 1 for the entire year.
==PAGE:103==
B Schedules
95
Figure B.4: Schedule4: From 6:00 to 18:00 is 1 and the remaining time of the day
is 0 for the entire year.
==PAGE:104==
96
B Schedules
Figure B.5: Schedule5: A randomly generated schedule, varying from month to
month of the entire year (everyday of a specific month will strictly
follow the schedule of that month).
==PAGE:105==
B Schedules
97
Figure B.6: Schedule6: Workdays from 8:00 to 12:00 and from 13:00 to 17:00 is 1
and the remaining time of workdays as well as entire weekends is 0.
Figure B.7: Schedule7: Workdays from 6:00 to 18:00 is 1 and the remaining time
of workdays as well as entire weekends is 0.
==PAGE:106==
98
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Learning curves
C.1
AI algorithms to predict operative temperature
C.1.1
LSTM network
The learning curve of LSTM network for the case of with and without consideration of
solar shading can be seen in Fig C.1 and Fig C.2 respectively. With the use of ’adam’
optimizer, the risk of having over-fitting problem can be dramatically reduced. Both
training error and test error have sharp decrease for epochs at the beginning of the
model training and the error is gradually reduced at a quite low speed until reaching
the last epoch. This can also be due to the characteristics of ’adam’ optimizer.
Figure C.1: Learning curve of LSTM network (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:108==
100
C Learning curves
Figure C.2: Learning curve of LSTM network (with shading control).
C.2
Reinforcement learning for the control of window
opening and solar shading
Reward for reinforcement learning algorithms in August is the accumulated distance
from control set-point divides by the total number of time points enrolled in August
(745). As reinforcement learning is always trying to yield most reward, the value of
distance is set as negative, indicating that the shorter distance between controlled
operative temperature and control set-point 25°C the better.
Therefore, Reward
in Fig C.3, Fig C.4, Fig C.7 and Fig C.8 for August is the negative form of average
distance between reinforcement learning controlled operative temperature and control
set-point 25°C of every time point. Reward for both Q-learning algorithm and SARSA
algorithm in February is quite straight-forward. It is the average XGBoost predicted
operative temperature of every hour in February and there is 673 time points in total
in February. Therefore, Reward in Fig C.5, Fig C.6, Fig C.9 and Fig C.10 is the
average predicted operative temperature of every time point.
==PAGE:109==
C.2 Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar shading
101
C.2.1
Q-learning
Figure C.3: Learning curve of Q-learning algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen
in August (shading is never drawn).
Figure C.4: Learning curve of Q-learning algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen
in August (with shading control).
==PAGE:110==
102
C Learning curves
Figure C.5: Learning curve of Q-learning algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen
in February (shading is never drawn).
Figure C.6: Learning curve of Q-learning algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen
in February (with shading control).
==PAGE:111==
C.2 Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar shading
103
C.2.2
SARSA
Figure C.7: Learning curve of SARSA algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen in
August (shading is never drawn).
Figure C.8: Learning curve of SARSA algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen in
August (with shading control).
==PAGE:112==
104
C Learning curves
Figure C.9: Learning curve of SARSA algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen in
February (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:113==
C.2 Reinforcement learning for the control of window opening and solar shading
105
Figure C.10: Learning curve of SARSA algorithm for the climate of Copenhagen
in February (with shading control).
==PAGE:114==
106
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D
Bayesian optimization
Figure D.1: Progress Log File1:
Bayesian optimization with default acquisition
function (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
==PAGE:116==
108
D Bayesian optimization
Figure D.2: Progress Log File2:
Bayesian optimization with default acquisition
function (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
Figure D.3: Progress Log File3:
Bayesian optimization with default acquisition
function (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
==PAGE:117==
D Bayesian optimization
109
Figure D.4: Progress Log File4:
Bayesian optimization with default acquisition
function (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
Figure D.5: Progress Log File5:
Bayesian optimization with default acquisition
function (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
==PAGE:118==
110
D Bayesian optimization
Figure D.6: Progress Log File6: Bayesian optimization with acquisition function
’poi’ (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
Figure D.7: Progress Log File7: Bayesian optimization with acquisition function
’poi’ (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
==PAGE:119==
D Bayesian optimization
111
Figure D.8: Progress Log File8: Bayesian optimization with acquisition function
’poi’ (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
Figure D.9: Progress Log File9: Bayesian optimization with acquisition function
’poi’ (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
==PAGE:120==
112
D Bayesian optimization
Figure D.10: Progress Log File10: Bayesian optimization with acquisition function
’poi’ (30 initial points and 100 iterations).
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX E
XGBoost regression
trees
The actual XGBoost regression trees exported from Python script can be seen in
Fig E.1, Fig E.2, Fig E.3 and Fig E.4. Here only trees with Index:0 and Index:1 for
both cases without and with consideration of solar shading control are shown. With
the progress of iterations, normally the tree structure will be more complicated and
the maximum depth of trees will also have the trend to increase.
==PAGE:122==
114
E XGBoost regression trees
Figure E.1: XGBoost regression tree with Index:0 (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:123==
E XGBoost regression trees
115
Figure E.2: XGBoost regression tree with Index:1 (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:124==
116
E XGBoost regression trees
Figure E.3: XGBoost regression tree with Index:0 (with shading control).
==PAGE:125==
E XGBoost regression trees
117
Figure E.4: XGBoost regression tree with Index:1 (with shading control).
==PAGE:126==
118
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX F
Paired control signal
along with controlled
operative temperature
Figure F.1: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
16th of August to 20th of August (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:128==
120
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature
Figure F.2: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
21st of August to 25th of August (shading is never drawn).
Figure F.3: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
26th of August to 30th of August (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:129==
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature
121
Figure F.4: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies of
31st of August (shading is never drawn).
Figure F.5: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 1st of
August to 5th of August (with shading control).
==PAGE:130==
122
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature
Figure F.6: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 6th of
August to 10th of August (with shading control).
Figure F.7: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 11th of
August to 15th of August (with shading control).
==PAGE:131==
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature
123
Figure F.8: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
16th of February to 20th of February (shading is never drawn).
Figure F.9: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from
21st of February to 25th of February (shading is never drawn).
==PAGE:132==
124
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature
Figure F.10: Window opening signal comparison of 3 different control strategies
from 26th of February to 28th of February (shading is never drawn).
Figure F.11: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 1st of
February to 5th of February (with shading control).
==PAGE:133==
F Paired control signal along with controlled operative temperature
125
Figure F.12: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 6th of
February to 10th of February (with shading control).
Figure F.13: Control signal comparison of 3 different control strategies from 11th
of February to 15th of February (with shading control).
==PAGE:134==
126
==PAGE:135==
References
[Arg+12]
Nicoleta Arghira et al. “Prediction of appliances energy use in smart
homes”. In: Energy 48.1 (2012), pages 128–134. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.
2012.04.010.
[BCF13]
Eric Brochu, Vlad M. Cora, and Nando de Freitas. “A Tutorial on Bayesian
Optimization of Expensive Cost Functions, with Application to Active
User Modeling and Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning”. In: (2013).
[blo15]
colah’s blog. Understanding LSTM Networks. 2015. url: https://colah.
github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
[Bol+18]
Peter Bolt et al. “Model predictive control for building automation”.
In: Proceedings of the Ises Eurosun 2018 Conference - 12th Interna-
tional Conference on Solar Energy for Buildings and Industry (2018),
pages 1330–1341. doi: 10.18086/eurosun2018.11.05.
[CFD17]
Luis M. Candanedo, Véronique Feldheim, and Dominique Deramaix. “Data
driven prediction models of energy use of appliances in a low-energy
house”. In: Energy and Buildings 140 (2017), pages 81–97. doi: 10.1016/
j.enbuild.2017.01.083.
[Cha+20]
Qian Chai et al. “Machine learning algorithms to predict occupants’ ther-
mal comfort in naturally ventilated residential buildings”. In: Energy and
Buildings (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2020.109937.
[Cig+12]
J. Cigler et al. “On predicted mean vote optimization in building climate
control”. In: 2012 20th Mediterranean Conference on Control Automation
(MED). 2012, pages 1518–1523.
[Gen19]
Edd Gent. Like animals, AI is learning from experience. 2019. url: https:
//singularityhub.com/2019/03/18/like-animals-ai-is-learning-
from-experience/.
[Gha+16]
Amirhosein Ghaffarianhoseini et al. “What is an intelligent building?
Analysis of recent interpretations from an international perspective”. In:
Architectural Science Review 59.5 (2016), pages 338–357. doi: 10.1080/
00038628.2015.1079164.
==PAGE:136==
128
References
[Gro17]
Human-Centered AI Lab (Holzinger Group). What is the difference be-
tween Artificial Intelligence (AI)/ Machine Learning (ML)/ Deep Learn-
ing (DL)? 2017. url: https://human- centered.ai/2017/11/11/
difference-ai-ml/.
[Hel15]
Alfred Heller. “The Sensing Internet: A Discussion on Its Impact on Rural
Areas”. In: Future Internet 7.4 (2015), pages 363–371. doi: 10.3390/
fi7040363.
[hom]
Australia’s guide to environmentally sustainable homes. Thermal mass.
url: https://www.yourhome.gov.au/passive- design/thermal-
mass#:~:text=Thermal%5C%20mass%5C%20is%5C%20the%5C%20ability,
timber%5C%20have%5C%20low%5C%20thermal%5C%20mass..
[HQ20]
Jun Hu and Xianggui Qu. “Bayes’ Theorem under Conditional Indepen-
dence”. In: (2020).
[JL19]
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. “Generative Exploration and Exploita-
tion”. In: (2019).
[Kun]
Huang Kung-Hsiang. Introduction to Various Reinforcement Learning Al-
gorithms. Part I (Q-Learning, SARSA, DQN, DDPG). url: https://
towardsdatascience.com/introduction-to-various-reinforcement-
learning-algorithms-i-q-learning-sarsa-dqn-ddpg-72a5e0cb6287.
[Mad+94]
Henrik Madsen et al. “On flow and supply temperature control in district-
heating systems”. In: Heat Recovery Systems and CHP 14.6 (1994), pages 613–
620. doi: 10.1016/0890-4332(94)90031-0.
[Mon+18]
Pedro Lima Monteiro et al. “Indoor Temperature Prediction in an IoT
Scenario”. In: Sensors 18.11 (2018). doi: 10.3390/s18113610.
[Nis17]
Kan Nishida. Introduction to Extreme Gradient Boosting in Exploratory.
2017. url: https://blog.exploratory.io/introduction-to-extreme-
gradient-boosting-in-exploratory-7bbec554ac7.
[NM06]
Henrik Aalborg Nielsen and Henrik Madsen. “Modelling the heat con-
sumption in district heating systems using a grey-box approach”. In: En-
ergy and Buildings 38.1 (2006), pages 63–71. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.
2005.05.002.
[Oxf]
OxfordDictionaries.com. Definition of ’overfitting’. This definition is spe-
cially for Statistics. url: https : / / www . lexico . com / definition /
overfitting.
[PC]
Bruno Harald Philipson and Nicolas Couillaud. Indoor Comfort and En-
ergy Savings by Intelligent Solar Controlled Windows in Southern Europe.
[Pso17]
Theofanis Ch Psomas. “Ventilative Cooling in Energy Renovated Single-
Family Houses in Temperate Climates”. PhD thesis. Aalborg University,
2017.
==PAGE:137==
References
129
[Rob+13]
Tibshirani Robert et al. An introduction to statistical learning: with ap-
plications in R. Springer, 2013.
[Roy+14]
Sullivan Royer et al. “A procedure for modeling buildings and their ther-
mal zones using co-simulation and system identification”. In: Energy and
Buildings 78 (2014), pages 231–237. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.04.
013.
[SB12]
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An
Introduction. 2012.
[sci]
scikit-learn. sklearn.preprocessing.MinMaxScaler. url: https://scikit-
learn . org / stable / modules / generated / sklearn . preprocessing .
MinMaxScaler.html.
[Ser20]
Will Serrano. “iBuilding: Artificial Intelligence in Intelligent Buildings”.
In: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 1043 (2020), pages 395–
408. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-29933-0_33.
[son]
sonix.ai. What’s the difference between artificial intelligence (AI), ma-
chine learning (ML) and natural language processing (NLP)? url: https:
//sonix.ai/articles/difference-between-artificial-intelligence-
machine-learning-and-natural-language-processing.
[Sta06]
Standard. Ergonomics of the thermal environment – Analytical deter-
mination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the
PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria : DS/EN ISO
7730:2006. 2006.
[Sta07]
Standard. Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assess-
ment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality,
thermal environment, lighting and acoustics : DS/EN 15251:2007. 2007.
[Sta19a]
Standard. Energy performance of buildings – Ventilation for buildings –
Part 1: Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assess-
ment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality,
thermal environment, lighting and acoustics – Module M1-6 : DS/EN
16798-1:2019. 2019.
[Sta19b]
Standard. Energy performance of buildings – Ventilation for buildings
– Part 2: Interpretation of the requirements in EN 16798-1 – Indoor
environmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy per-
formance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment,
lighting and acoustics (Module M1-6) : DS/CEN/TR 16798-2:2019. 2019.
[TGL07]
Jingwen Tian, Meijuan Gao, and Jin Li. “Intelligent window based on
embedded system”. In: SNPD 2007: 8th ACIS International Conference
on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking, and Paral-
lel/Distributed Computing (2007), page 4287716. doi: 10.1109/SNPD.
2007.323.
==PAGE:138==
130
References
[Tüf14]
Pınar Tüfekci. “Prediction of full load electrical power output of a base
load operated combined cycle power plant using machine learning meth-
ods”. In: International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems
60 (2014), pages 126–140. doi: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2014.02.027.
[TX12]
Athanasios Tsanas and Angeliki Xifara. “Accurate quantitative estima-
tion of energy performance of residential buildings using statistical ma-
chine learning tools”. In: Energy and Buildings 49 (2012), pages 560–567.
doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2012.03.003.
[Umb18]
Michelucci Umberto. “Hyperparameter Tuning”. In: Apress, 2018. Chap-
ter 7.
[VAC12]
Fabi Valentina, Rune Korsholm Andersen, and Stefano Paolo Corgnati.
“Window opening behaviour: simulations of occupant behaviour in res-
idential buildings using models based on a field survey”. In: 7th Wind-
sor Conference 2012: Changing Context of Comfort in an Unpredictable
World (2012).
[Wal+12]
Matt Wallace et al. “Energy efficient model predictive building tempera-
ture control”. In: Chemical Engineering Science 69.1 (2012), pages 45–58.
doi: 10.1016/j.ces.2011.07.023.
[Wet11]
Michael Wetter. “Co-simulation of building energy and control systems
with the building controls virtual test bed”. In: Journal of building perfor-
mance simulation (2011), pages 185–203. doi: 10.1080/19401493.2010.
518631.
[WH19]
Siri Wistoft and To Quyen Hoang. “Detailed modelling of mechanical
ventilation and occupancy behaviour in Danish residences using a com-
mercial building simulation tool”. In: (2019).
[Wika]
Wikipedia. Long short-term memory. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Long_short-term_memory.
[Wikb]
Wikipedia. Root-mean-square deviation. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Root-mean-square_deviation.
[WS17]
Zeyu Wang and Ravi S. Srinivasan. “A review of artificial intelligence
based building energy use prediction: Contrasting the capabilities of sin-
gle and ensemble prediction models”. In: Renewable and Sustainable En-
ergy Reviews 75 (2017), pages 796–808. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2016.10.
079.
[Wu+19]
Jia Wu et al. “Hyperparameter optimization for machine learning models
based on Bayesian optimization”. In: Journal of Electronic Science and
Technology 17.1 (2019), pages 26–40. doi: 10.11989/JEST.1674-862X.
80904120.
