==PAGE:1==
Practical issues with coupling ventilation
simulations in case of fire induced pressure
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Frederik Hyllested Seerup
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Smokeview rendering
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Civil Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of fire dynamics, com-
putational fluid dynamics and mechanical ventilation systems.
Frederik Hyllested Seerup - s153943
Signature
27/06/2020
Date
ii
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:5==
Abstract - Danish
Dette speciale diskuterer forskellene mellem forskning og praktisk ingeniørvidenskab, in-
den for brandsikkerhed af mekaniske ventilations systemmer. Inklusive de metoder in-
geniører bruger i deres arbejde med normer og input fra den nyeste forskning. Aktuelle
modelleringsværktøjer som FDS og CFAST er almindeligvis brugt både til forskning og til
praktisk anvendelse og kan i mange tilfælde forudsige branddynamik med ekstraordinær
præcision. Præcision, tid og kompleksitet er dog tæt forbundet, og den praktiserende
ingeniør vil ikke have tid til at opsætte en fuldt detaljeret simulering. Tilnærmelser og
abstraktioner er nødvendige for at skabe effektive og sikre løsninger som kan anven-
des i virkelige situationer. Med udgangspunkt i et litteraturstudie vil afhandlingen sam-
menfatte det omfattende katalog af branddynamik med fokus på underventilerede brande
eller brande i meget aflukkede rum. Nyere udvikling og forskning indenfor brandsikkerhed
omhandler høje brandprovokerede tryk i de tidlige stadier af branden. Som forberedelse
til de tre casestudier præsenteres teorien bag forbrænding og kvælning, samt dimen-
sionering af ventilationssystem og anvendelse af FDS. Anvendelse af relevant FDS-input
præsenteres løbende i afhandlingen med fokus på let-anvendeligt og brugbart FDS-input,
som kan benyttes ved simulering af lignende scenarier. Et parameterstudie undersøger
tre tilfælde af tiltagende kompleksitet. Case 1 introducerer den grundlæggende geometri
og forsøger at validere branden. Case 2 øger kompleksiteten ved at inkludere et kom-
plet ventilationssystem. Konfigurationen (sammensætningen) af netværket testes med
og uden brand. Forskellige konfigurationer af netværket; ingen ventilator, aflukkede ind-
blæsningskanaler/luftrør m.m. testes og sammenlignes. Case 3 simulerer en røgventil-
eret løsning hvor forskellige dedikerede røgventilatorer testes mod stigende tryktab i sys-
temet. Resultaterne viser at røgventilatoren ingen indflydelse har på varmeafgivelsesen
og kun minimal indflydelse på trykket. Tryktabet i systemet anses som mere vigtigt i
forbindelse med det tryk der ses i brandrummet. Fluktuering i varmeafgivelsen er årsag
til fluktueringer i trykket og derved også i luftstrømmene i ventilationssystemmet. Ved brug
af en løsning med udblæsning ses kun lidt eller ingen røg spredning ved det maksimale
tryk. Røg spredes til alle de forbundne rum efter det maksimale tryk grundet fluktueringer,
som er et resultat af en aftagende koncentration af ilt. FDS kan bruges til at underbygge
et system dedikeret til røgventilering hvis det maksimale tryk antages som det værste
punkt i forbindelse med omvendte luftstrømme i systemmet. Resultaterne viser at tryk i
scenariet med lav ventilation og lav lækage i rummene er store nok til at have indflydelse
ikke alene på beboere, men også andre områder hvis røgen spredes. Begrænsninger af
ventilationssystem-modellen ses som øjeblikkelig spredning af røg forårsaget af selv små
fluktueringer af luftstrømme i kanalerne.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract - English
The thesis discusses the differences between research and practical engineering regard-
ing fire safety of mechanical ventilation systems. Including which methods engineers
use in their work with norms and input from state-of-the-art research. Use of modelling
tools like FDS and CFAST are widespread throughout research and practice and in many
cases the models can predict fire dynamics with extraordinary precision. However, pre-
cision, time, and complexity are interlinked and a practising engineer will not have the
time to setup a fully detailed simulation. Approximations and abstractions are needed to
efficiently create safe solutions applicable to real life situations. Starting with a literature
study the thesis summarizes the comprehensive catalogue of compartment fire dynamics
with an emphasis on under-ventilated fires or fires in very tight enclosures. A recent devel-
opment within fire safety research concerns high fire induced pressure peaks in the early
phase of a fire. In preparation of three case studies the theory behind fuel combustion
and extinction, ventilation-network-dimensioning, and application of FDS is presented.
Application of relevant FDS inputs are presented throughout the thesis with emphasis on
presenting easy to implement FDS input when simulating similar scenarios. A parame-
ter study investigates three cases of increasing complexity. Case 1 introduces the basic
geometry and tries to validate the fire compartment. Case 2 increases the complexity to in-
clude an entire HVAC network. The configuration of the network is tested with and without
fire. Different configurations of the network, no fan, closed supply ducts, etc. is tested and
compared. Case 3 simulates an exhaust only solution where different dedicated smoke
fans are tested against increasing pressure losses of the system. The results show no
impact from the fan on the heat release rate and minor impact on the pressure. The pres-
sure loss of the system is seen to be much more important in terms of the pressure peak
seen in the fire compartment. Fluctuations in the heat release rate causes fluctuations in
the pressure and duct flow of the ventilation network. Using a solution with exhaust only
shows little to no smoke spread at the time of the pressure peaks. Smoke is spread to all
of the connected rooms after the pressure peak because of the fluctuations caused by a
decreasing concentration of oxygen. FDS can be used to validate a system dedicated to
smoke eviction if the pressure peak is assumed as the worst point in terms of reversed
duct flow. The results show that pressures in the scenario of low ventilated, low leakage
compartments are large enough to affect not only any occupants in the fire compartment,
but also other compartments as smoke may spread. Limitations of the HVAC model is
seen as instantaneous spread of smoke caused by even small fluctuations of the volume
flow in the ducts.
iv
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Frederik Hyllested Seerup, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
I would like to thank the following people for guiding me through the full six months of
my master project. I have truly learned a lot from the experience and cannot wait to dive
deeper into the world of fire safety and fire dynamics.
Frank Markert, Associate professor at DTU’s Department of Civil Engineering, Fire group,
head of firelab.
Thanks to my supervisor Frank Markert for believing in the project that I introduced to him.
From the start he was open and helped guide me in the right direction. From academic
talks to personal interests in fire safety, it has truly been a great experience.
Jens Kastvig, Head of Department, Fire Safety Engineer at MOE A/S.
Thanks to Jens Kastig for introducing me to the world of practical engineering. Help with
FDS (which I had never used before), help with bad decisions, help with general fire
dynamics. Thanks for taking the time to introduce a student to several exiting projects in
the industry and helping me come up with the subject of the project.
A thanks to Simo Hostikka professor at Aalto university, Finland. Inspiration and motiva-
tion given in YouTube videos of conferences and comprehensive reports on the matter.
The thesis was written during the peak of the COVID-19 epidemic in Denmark. Pretty
much stationary an entire 5 months in my apartment. A huge thank you to my girlfriend
for putting up with me constantly sitting in front of the computer. Thanks to my parents for
supporting me during the time we could not meet in person.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Scope and strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Readers guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature study
5
2.1
Approach and search strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Search results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Research on ventilated compartment fires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Experimental research on pressure-induced issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Verification and validation work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
Real life cases of blocked doors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.7
Blind simulation work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.8
Summary of the literature study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Danish regulations
17
3.1
Fire safety in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
HVAC and fire safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Theory and Application
21
4.1
Choice of CFD code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
The compartment fire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
The combustion process for liquid fuels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Design fire modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5
Flame extinction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.6
FDS-HVAC module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.7
Pressure loss theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.8
Pressure loss application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.9
Envelope leakage application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Parameter study
35
5.1
Defining the goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Choice of parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6
Parameter study: Case 1
37
6.1
The standard compartment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Case 1: Base setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.3
Introducing relaxation parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.4
Case 1: Mesh independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.5
CFAST modeling and validation of FDS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.6
Case 1: Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
vii
==PAGE:10==
7
Parameter study: Case 2
63
7.1
Case 2: Test 0 - Nominal flow test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.2
Case 2: Test 1 - HVAC on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.3
Case 2: Test 2 - HVAC off . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
7.4
Case 2: Test 3 - Standard practise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
7.5
Case 2: Concluding remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
8
Parameter study: Case 3
81
8.1
Dedicated smoke ventilation configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
8.2
Case 3: FC150 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
8.3
Case 3: FC270 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
8.4
Case 3: FC400 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
8.5
Case 3: FC500 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
8.6
Case 3: Effects of buoyancy in HVAC ducts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
8.7
Case 3: Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
9
Guidelines
101
10 Conclusion
103
10.1 Further studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Bibliography
107
A FDS input snippets
109
B Case 2 and 3 duct dimensions
112
C Case 3 Buoyancy effect
113
D FDS files
115
E
Matlab script
140
F
Case 3 soot density renderings
143
G HVAC network components
155
viii
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In fire safety engineering the threat of fire has usually been focused around determining
the development of fire and smoke to be able to predict the tenability for occupants. In
a fire scenario the fully developed fire, with a free availability of oxygen, has been the
normal approach up until recently. A shift has now happened in the community where
focus on the under-ventilated fire is considered as well.
The reason for this shift is best seen in the way buildings have developed over the later
years. Both in newly built and renovated buildings, a focus on energy savings are be-
coming more prevalent. One of the most effective ways to save energy is to reduce the
amount of energy/heat lost through the envelope of the building. The best (”worst”) way
heat can escape the building is through advection or transport of hot mass to cold. As
such the openings and leakages of the envelope where looked to first. Windows espe-
cially have seen major improvements in their insulation capabilities. Double or even triple
panes in windows are now regular or even mandatory to reach energy demands. Earlier
assumptions regarding enclosure fire dynamics have changed since the increased use of
glass layers in windows. Earlier windows used single layer glass panes and would break
in case of fire. This in turn meant that the fire was supplied with plenty of air. Today, at
least in the Nordic countries, the windows are found not to break during fires. The as-
sumption of oxygen availability to the fire is not a reasonable assumption anymore, and
several issues now arise because of the increased air-tightness of buildings.
Engineers wants to simplify the physics to meet more general application to a problem.
This is also called the level of abstraction which every branch of science uses to be able
to describe real world phenomena. The t2 fire is one of the most commonly used models
of fire growth. Investigations into the pressure development of an air-tight building show
that the growth factor have a large influence on early pressure development. Formerly the
pressure rise in a compartment was not considered as important, at least less important
than other fire-induced issues, because the windows where assumed to break relieving
the pressure.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
1
==PAGE:12==
The practising engineers now face a problem where two possible fire developments must
be considered. The figures below generalises the development of a fuel controlled and
ventilation controlled fire.
Temperature
or
Heat Release Rate
Time
Decay
Post-flashover
Pre-flashover
Fire
growth
Flashover
Fully developed
fire
Fuel controlled
Ventilation controlled
1
2
3
X
Figure 1.1: Enclosure fire development, with inspiration from [1]
Ventilation controlled fires are dominant in closed compartments where the oxygen con-
centration limits the output of the fire. Fuel controlled fires are dominant in compartments
open to ambient conditions. The general behaviour of compartment fires is summarised
in the following figure.
Early on the fire is
fuel controlled
Fire growth
Oxygen is depleted
and combustion will
begin to reduce
Fuel controlled
Flashover
Temperature and
pressure increases
1
2
3
X
Temperature and
pressure decreases.
New air can enter the room
beacause of pressure drop
Flames may die out,
but smouldering fire
can still be present
New air increases
combustion and the
cycle may start anew
Peak output of fire
Ignition of fire
Cycle stops when
fuel is depleted or
fire is extinguished
Figure 1.2: Ventilation controlled enclosure fire cycle
2
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Motivation
The interest for this particular subject was found when looking at resent research con-
cerning computation fluid dynamics (CFD) and fire dynamics. A recent belief was that the
building fire phenomena was understood and could be predicted by CFD and numerical
simulations with enough computational power. However, researchers and designers can-
not sit idly by as the building industry keeps innovating and changing. The focus on low
energy building has caused the envelope of buildings to become more and more air-tight,
a trend that will likely continue [2].
Making a building air tight means that a mechanical ventilation system is required to keep
the indoor climate up to standard. However, the air-tightness of newer buildings has
created a new problem in fire dynamics which was not regarded as a problem before.
Pressure build up because of heated air from a fire can in some cases create such large
over pressures that inwards facing doors cannot be opened and smoke spread via. the
ventilation ducts are becoming a real concern. Fire safety engineering has seen a ma-
jor rise in the use of functionality-based codes, meaning that verification and validation
of calculation/simulation procedures are now more relevant than ever. Recent work and
presentations by S. Hostikka and R. K. Janardhan [3] (Finland) introduced the concerns of
inwards facing doors in smaller air-tight compartments. Two cases and a test in residen-
tial apartment buildings have been investigated, one in Germany [4], and one in Finland
[5]. Tragically, the residents in the Finnish case died whereas the German occupant fortu-
nately managed to escape after several attempts to open an inwards-facing door, manag-
ing to escape through another. Accounts from the German occupant made researchers
believe that an increase in pressure had prevented the occupant from opening the door
for several minutes. This was later supported by CFAST simulations. Also, from a test
case [3] and [5] video material exists showing firemen having trouble opening a door as
a result of the pressure build-up. These cases and the trend of buildings becoming more
airtight as energy regulations demand better performance, lead some researches to look
back on the pressure development of fires in confined airtight spaces.
Simulations of fire-induced pressure issues such as smoke spread via ventilation ducts
have been shown to be possible referencing research going back to the 1980’s. But, the
actual validity of these are yet to be fully determined as experimental work and parameter
investigations are lacking. However, the practical use of CFD simulations is prevalent
throughout the industry and some guidelines may be needed to get appropriate estima-
tions in practical use when applied to compartment fires.
1.3
Scope and strategy
The aim of this thesis is to develop further understanding into the compartment fire sce-
nario, especially concerning pressure related issues such as smoke spread and large
over-pressures which may hinder evacuation or lead to structural damage. The following
objectives are defined:
1. Summarise and categorise the existing literature on compartment fire pressure build
up, focusing on simulation and experimental work.
2. Use a parameter study to show the practices and limitations of the current software
and methods.
3. Develop simulation guideline work for researchers and practitioners to reference
when doing similar simulations.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
3
==PAGE:14==
1.3.1
Hypothesis
Smoke spread is possible between rooms connected with mechanical ventilation ducts
because of large over-pressures in the beginning of a compartment fire.
- Current regulations have not fully covered high over-pressure related issues in the be-
ginning phases of the compartment fire scenario.
- The coupling of field-models and node-models can lead to numerical problems and/or
limitations of the simulation.
- The severity/frequency of early pressure build-up in compartment fires is not yet fully
understood. It may be that the size of the problem cannot justify the time used by an
engineer.
1.4
Readers guide
This thesis is organised into chapters 1, 2, 3,... etc. which further divides in smaller
sections eg. 2.4. Each chapter roughly deals with the objectives defined under the scope
and strategy section.
The thesis uses English style connotation of decimals where a comma-”,” denotes a thou-
sands separator and a period-”.” denotes a decimal point.
Commonly used abbreviations
FDS
-
Fire Dynamics Simulator
CFD
-
Computational Fluid Dynamics
HVAC
-
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
AIT
-
Auto Ignition Temperature
ACH
-
Air Changes an Hour
HPC
-
High Performance Computer
Snippet
-
Copy and paste of code
Snippets of example code is present throughout the thesis.
The code snippet is highlighted by a box.
This is a snippet of FDS code defining simulation time
&TIME T_BEGIN=0, T_END=180 /
4
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature study
The intended outcome of the literature study is to:
1. Get en overview of the history of research going into fire and pressure modelling in
compartments.
2. Present most recent developments in the subject of fire induced pressure related
problems
3. Find literature describing practical and/or estimation difficulties with CFD and HVAC
coupling.
4. Find literature describing experiments and validation studies for input to parameter
study.
5. Give an overview of the current danish building regulations with regards to fire safety,
focusing on pressure related initiatives.
2.1
Approach and search strategy
A comprehensive report by S. Hostikka and R.K. Janardhan called ”Pressure manage-
ment in compartment fires” [3], summarises several projects considering pressure related
issues in compartments. The report was made to answer research questions arising from
firefighting experiences and norm inadequacies regarding high over pressures in build-
ings.
The following two paragraphs are directly quoted from the report [3]:
Ventilation model parameter estimation: ”Both the model validation and case studies
indicated that the real ventilation networks cannot be modelled in FDS using the detailed
system layout and component level information because the specification of all the system
properties would be an exhaustive task, and practically impossible in other applications
except the design of new buildings, where the HVAC designers could contribute to the
modelling. Therefore, new modelling capability is needed for estimating the essential
model parameters, such as the fan curve and loss coefficients, from the known design
basis.”
Acceptability of new management solutions: ”New solutions are here proposed for
the simultaneous management of pressure and smoke spreading. The general accept-
ability of these solutions may require further sensitivity studies and discussion of practical
implications in HVAC design. For instance, how does the system size/complexity and the
relative position of the burning apartment (distance from the fan) affect the pressure levels
in the exhaust ventilation system and the fulfilment of smoke compartmentalisation?”
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
5
==PAGE:16==
These research questions proposed by S. Hostikka and R.K. Janardhan (and other cred-
ited authors in that project) form the rough basis of this thesis. It is from these research
questions the literature study will be based. In order to narrow down the study, the first
couple of references investigated are from this project, as these should contain the same
subjects and/or keywords.
In order of relevance, the following parameters where used to determine whether the
references were of interest to the thesis subject:
- Title
- Year
- Keywords (if any)
- Abstract
The following list contains the relevant keywords inspired by the references in [3].
Table 2.1: Table containing relevant keywords
Keyword
Similar
Airtightness
Air-tightness, Airtight, Seals,
Envelope air-tightness
Leakage
Building envelope
Envelope, Envelope leakage,
Building, construction, compartment
CFD
FDS
Experiments
Validation, Full scale
Pressure
Fire-induced Pressure, Over-pressure,
Pressure management, Room air pressure
Fire
Fire safety, Fire growth, Fire growth rate,
Compartment fires
Smoke
Near-zero buildings
Low-energy buildings, Green buildings,
Passive house
HVAC
Mechanical ventilation, Damper configuration,
Ventilation
Modelling
Network modelling, Coupled modelling,
Multi-scale modelling
6
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Search results
The keywords have then been used to create search strings in DTU’s own database-
search engine ”DTU findit1”. The DTU database search engine uses 80 international
databases2 and it is considered academically as the best choice over other possibilities.
The results of using keywords will depend hugely on the authors initiative to create fitting
and appropriate keywords that describes their works well.
Using reference managers (such as Mendeley3) can make this process much easier. The
manager directly access the keywords in the documents and orders them accordingly.
Thus highlighting a specific keyword can be used to search for other documents in the
library with exact matches (this is also a downside since Mendeley searches for exact
matches that are case sensitive).
The following table contains the search strings and their outcome, where ’kw:’ stands
for keyword and the apostrophes ”” makes the keyword specific, meaning - only find ex-
act matches but ignore case sensitivity. The ”AND” string command is very effective in
reducing results, yet still keeping all words relevant.
Table 2.2: 1-st search
String
Results
kw:”FDS” OR kw:”HVAC”
26,631
kw:”FDS” AND kw:”HVAC”
16
kw:”FDS” AND kw:”Smoke spread”
28
kw:”FDS” AND kw:”Smoke spread” AND kw:”Ventilation”
13
kw:”Pressure” AND kw:”Smoke spread”
14
kw:”Ventilation” AND kw:”Smoke spread”
68
kw:”compartment” kw:”pressure” kw:”fire”
113
kw:”compartment fires” AND kw:”pressure” AND kw:”fire”
58
kw:”compartment fires” AND kw:”pressure” AND kw:”ventilation”
26
kw:”Mechanical ventilation” AND kw:”FDS” AND kw:”fire”
12
kw:”Mechanical ventilation” AND kw:”compartment fire”
16
From the basis given by the research questions the following parameters should be fo-
cused on when reading the relevant references:
- Compartment parameters; dimensions, air-tightness etc.
- Fire characteristics (HRR, fuel type, etc.)
- Estimations of ventilation system parameters.
- Practical problems in modelling.
- Implementation of HVAC.
1https://findit.dtu.dk/ updated as of 29/01/2020
2https://findit.dtu.dk/en/about/providers updated as of 30/01/2020
3https://mendeley.com/ updated as of 30/01/2020
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
7
==PAGE:18==
2.3
Research on ventilated compartment fires
The compartment fire scenario is a stable of research areas within fire dynamic research.
From continuity equations of mass and energy transport to and from a control volume the
first abstractions of the compartment fire phenomena was made.
The simplest is to assume a fully mixed case where the temperature is the same every-
where in the compartment. Somewhat simple relations between burning rate, tempera-
ture, and pressure development can be deduced from the ideal gas law and continuity of
mass and energy in a control volume of gas. From the fully mixed case the stratified case
was developed. The stratified case or two-zone layer model is based on the fact that
buoyancy is a main driving factor in compartment fires. In many cases of an enclosed
fire the smoke will form a layer of hot gases (burned and un-burned). A distinct temper-
ature difference is assumed between these layers with the smoke layer at the top often
being much hotter than the lower layer. The stratification behaviour is dominant at earlier
stages of a fire and also if large ventilation openings are present in the compartment. The
smoke layer development is dependant on the balance of mass flowing in and out of the
compartment and on the fire/fuel that is burning.
Stratified
Uniform
Tgas
Tgas
Tambient
mout
min
Figure 2.1: Distinction between single and two-zone models
When discussing the mass/flow output of the fire, the distinction between a fuel controlled
or ventilation controlled fire is relevant. The influence of the availability of oxygen becomes
apparent as a major factor in the compartment fire.
In an article from 1997, M.J. Peatross and C.L. Beyler [6] experiments on forced ventilated
fires in a steel lined compartment. The goal of the experiments where to determine if the
two-zone layer model was appropriate for low-ventilated compartments. Mass loss rate
from the fire, temperature, and oxygen concentration were among the primary parame-
ters examined. A noteworthy observation was that for a force-ventilated fire the oxygen
concentration was almost uniform throughout the height of the compartment. The forced
ventilation tests showed a one zone model better predicted parameters such as tempera-
ture and product concentrations. A normalised linear correlation between mass loss rate
of the fire and oxygen concentration in the compartments was developed based on data
from the tests and also data from earlier experiments by A. Tewarson et. al. (1981):
˙m′′
˙m′′
21
= 0.1 · O2[%] −1.1
(2.1)
8
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:19==
J.G. Quintiere4 and Y. Utiskul did research on compartment fires summarised mainly in two
articles from 2005. Y. Utiskul et. al [7] collects several studies that observe the behaviour
of heptane pool fires in limited ventilation, small-scale compartments. Three distinct fire
behaviours were observed.
- Behaviour 1; Extinction due to filling of smoke, i.e pressure build-up. Oxygen de-
pletion was the cause of extinction.
- Behaviour 2; Oscillating and ghosting flames, the flames would travel away from the
fuel source toward the vents where oxygen/air was supplied.
- Behaviour 3; steady oscillating, the flames would not go extinct but reduce in size
when oxygen was used and after some time increase again when oxygen could
enter the compartment.
The ghosting flames are of interest since these can be problematic in simulations, more
on this in later chapters.
Extinction behaviour was found to be dependant on oxygen concentration and tempera-
ture. A theoretical limit (comparable to the relation found in [6]) was presented for heptane,
the temperature was found at the point of extinction.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Temperature [C]
4
6
8
10
12
O2 concentration [mol/mol]
Figure 2.2: Extinction temperature of heptane with decreasing oxygen concentration, re-
drawn after [7]
French institute of nuclear protection security - IRSN (later also PRISME project) has
done much research on the ventilated compartment fire. H.Petrél is one of the researches
involved in many of the relevant research projects. The angle of the IRSN research was
to better the fire safety of heavy air-tight concrete compartments in the nuclear power
industry.
The articles investigated run from years 2003 to 2012. Of these the most interesting in-
vestigates the effect on the fire, mass loss rate, and pressure developments in sealed
mechanically ventilated compartments. PRISME research investigated the impact of par-
titioning compartments, open or closed doors, larger or lower HRR, etc.
With regards to the pressure, significant pressure developments were seen in the PRISME
experiments [8]. Increases of up to 1500 Pa (or more) at peaks where observed. An
4J. G. Quintiere co-author of the prominent book ”Enclosure Fire Dynamics
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
9
==PAGE:20==
under-pressure was observed at extinction of the fire down to -700 Pa. Both the over-
and under-pressure peaks where connected to the size of the fire.
In a parametric study in the same article [8], the main parameters were found to be, in
order of importance, the fire, HRR (especially at growth phase), the ventilation, air flow
resistance in ventilation ducts, and for the compartment, the lining used, and amount of
air supplied and exhausted by the ventilation system.
One very important note on the compartment fire scenario is window breakage. The dif-
ference between windows breaking an not breaking means completely different behaviour
of the fire. If the window breaks ,air may enter and the fire usually becomes much hotter
as it usually will be fuel controlled. If the window does not break then the fire will most
likely be ventilation controlled. During a fire where the windows does not break a sig-
nificant pressure build up can happen if the fire is large enough to heat up the air in the
compartment.
It is therefore of large importance for engineers to be able to say if windows break or not.
V. Babrauskas [9] 1998, present a literature study, where glass breakage is investigated.
For single pane windows temperatures of 300-450 °C caused breakage. Double pane
windows where not seen to break before after flashover fires with temperatures up to 600
°C.
Today (2020) many new houses have energy saving windows with no less than 2 or 3
panes. A scenario where the windows breaks and falls away is no longer the only sce-
nario that a designer must consider [10]. The window not breaking is the reason for the
current issues investigated in this thesis and recent studies throughout the research of
fire dynamics.
2.4
Experimental research on pressure-induced issues
From reviewing several refrences it seems that research on compartment fires began to
change as energy considerations of buildings also began to change in the early 1990’s
with the introduction of the ”passive-house” [2] (Low-energy, Near-zero, etc.) The strict de-
mands on energy use, gave rise to consideration among researches as it was suspected
that changes in the construction (windows with multiple panes, sophisticated HVAC sys-
tems etc.) would affect the fire dynamics of such buildings. Swedish researchers have
known and researched the phenomena of pressure and smoke spread in ventilation sys-
tems since the 1980’s [11].
Several other experiments have been carried out from then, different researches in differ-
ent countries have given their contribution to examine the different aspects of fire-induced
pressure or compartment fire dynamics. Some of the more notable that deals more di-
rectly with pressure related phenomena are summarised in the following sections.
2.4.1
Swedish research
Swedish regulations have procedures to prevent pressure-induced smoke spread in their
regulations introduced in 19945 with basis in research done from mid 80’s to mid 90’s
(1988, 1992, and 1993). In 1997 a comprehensive report from Lund university was pub-
lished, it goes over the major points concerning pressure-induced smoke spread via ven-
tilation ducts. P. Gordonova [11] presents several models, experimental data, and case
studies to evaluate the phenomena of smoke spread via ventilation ducts. L. Jensen and
B. Hägglund were acknowledged as some of the main researchers refrenced in the report.
5”Brandskydd, Boverkets Byggregler, Teori och Praktik”, Brandskyddslaget, LTH- Brandteknik, Stockholm
(1994) (in swedish).
10
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:21==
2.4.2
The FOA experiments
Some of the earliest and most referenced data on pressure-induced smoke spread in ven-
tilation systems, stems from experiments done in 1996-1998 by B. Hägglund, K. Nireus
and P. Werling, [12] and [13]. These experiments attempts to study fire-induced pressure
and the influence of pressure on smoke spread via a ventilation system. The first set of
experiments in 1996 explored a single room with a fixed leakage path. The main param-
eters that was changed was the growth rate and the total heat release of the fire. Medium
and Fast growth rates where tested and the conclusion was that The growth rate impacts
the temperature change which in turn impacts the pressure build up.
100
200
300
400
500
Time [s]
-200
-100
0
100
200
Pressure difference [Pa]
Figure 2.3: Pressure development in FOA experiment Test 2, redrawn after [12]
A second set of experiments also conducted by B. Hägglund in 1998 [13] explored the
influence of fire from a connected ventilation system and whether or not the pressure build
up would spread smoke through the ventilation ducts. The fire room (also used in the 1996
experiments) was connected to a ventilation system and some smaller compartments.The
tests showed that the fire growth rate, leakage area and ventilation system configuration
had great impact on if the smoke would spread or not. If the ventilation system kept
running as normal smoke spread was observed. By only running the exhaust system
(closing of the supply) the spread of smoke could be reduced or even eliminated.
Following the tests a simple zone model was used to compare the experimental results
with theory. The model was configured such that the fire was controlled by the amount of
available oxygen in the compartment. The tests had shown that the fire would die down
when the oxygen concentration reached roughly 15 % (Vol). The researches where able to
estimate the gas temperature, gas velocity, and pressure rise with reasonable agreement
to the measured data. In the case where the growth rate was fast and the maximum HRR
was 1150 kW the pressure developed as seen in the following figure:
150
200
250
300
350
Time [s]
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
Pressure difference [Pa]
Figure 2.4: Pressure development in FOA experiemnt Test 32, redrawn after [13]
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
11
==PAGE:22==
2.4.3
The PRISME experiments
Several experiments during 2006 to 2011 touched on the subject of confined ventilated
compartment fires. The research was conducted by researchers from OECD-PRISME
project. The project had strong focus on how ventilation of a compartment influenced the
fire and how the ventilation network may propagate smoke spread. The applicability of
these works may not directly correlate to a residential building as the main objective was
to test for nuclear facility type purposes. With that said, the theory or application should
be considered as the basics are the same. Under-ventilated fire, pressure build up, and
risk of smoke spread through ventilation system are all touched on in the PRISME project.
A summarising article presenting the major PRISME project results was presented in 2013
[14]. Of the relevant results for this thesis the main points to take away are the pressure
build up observations and ventilation duct behaviour. In the following figure the volume
flow in the supply and exhaust ducts are seen for one of the experiments.
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Q volume flow [m3/s]
Supply
Exhaust
Figure 2.5: Volume flow in ventilation ducts, redrawn after [14]
During the experiments an over pressure in the compartment reversed the flow in the
supply duct, meaning that the fan was overcome by the pressure induced by the fire. This
is the concern which may lead to smoke spread to other compartments. At some point the
oxygen is depleted in the compartment and the pressure now develops into a pressure
drop. At around 300 seconds the volume flow is switched, ie. the fire is now drawing in
air through both supply and exhaust.
2.4.4
Belgian experiments
In Belgium [15] (2018) experimental tests were conducted in order to study the effect of
fire induced pressure. The experiments was done as a reaction to an incident in which
a man nearly couldnt open the door to his compartment believed to be caused by an
pressure [4]. The test compartment consisted of a container lined with concrete with
simple ventilation ducts connected. Main points of measurements were pressure, gas
temperature, mass loss rate, and volumetric flow rate in ventilation ducts. Over pressure
peaks with ventilation was 420 to 750, while peaks of 850 to 2035 were seen with the
vents closed. The tests were used to validate the CFAST model capability of simulating
pressure.
2.4.5
The Aalto experiments
Simo Hostikka and several of his peers from Finland has done much research into the
specific problems of fire induced pressure in air-tight apartments. The culmination was a
final report [3] as described earlier. The report summarised experiments and simulations
12
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:23==
studies done in Finland. In addition to the risk of smoke spread the report also suggested
that occupant safety and structural resistance could be diminished by the pressure build
up. Large over pressures could inhibit occupants from opening doors and even larger
pressure might damage structural components.
An article done by R. K. Janardhan and S. Hostikka [16] (2016) investigated a incident
from 2014 where a test in a series of experiments where conducted in a compartment
from the 1970’s with renewed windows. The compartment had a floor area of 58.6 m2
and a height of 2.57 m. The compartments were fitted with mechanical ventilation tested
with different configurations of open and closed ducts.
One of the series of experiments resulted in a fire fighter not being able to open an inwards
opening door after ignition of some Poly Urethane Foam. Also in one of the tests, structural
damage was seen when one of the windows were pushed out by over pressures of roughly
1400 Pa. The series of experiments intended to mainly study the pressure (among other
parameters) in air-tight compartments with mechanical ventilation. The experiments are
modelled in FDS to validate and test further research questions like influence of envelope
leakage and fire growth.
2.5
Verification and validation work
The article referenced in the prior section is based of the master thesis by R. K. Janardhan
[17]. The thesis tries to simulate and validate both the FOA and Aalto experiments in
FDS. Both simulations showed good agreement between experiment and simulation. The
thesis discusses modeling uncertainties or limitations when using FDS. The thesis found
problems in some cases when using the FDS AIT parameter (more on this in a later
chapter). In conclusion the thesis showed that FDS could predict quantities like pressure,
oxygen concentration, and flow in ducts quite well, if the leakage, HRR, and ventilation
layout was implemented in detail.
2.5.1
Oscillatory behaviour of enclosure fires
In some of the references a certain oscillating behaviour unique to under ventilated en-
closures is investigated. Experiments with limited availability of oxygen in a compartment
with varying ventilation rates show three critical behaviours [7] and [18].
In an article by H. Petrel et. al. [18] experiments and numerical simulations of a me-
chanically ventilated compartment is presented. The article focuses on low frequency
oscillatory behaviour seen for some regimes of ventilation rates. The compartments had
a floor area of 30 m2 and a height of 4 m with walls made of concrete but lined with insu-
lation matts. The compartment was mechanically ventilated with rates of 1.7-8-7 h−1 or
0.057-0.29 m3/s. In the experiments three distinct behaviours where seen for the under
ventilated fire.
1. Steady burning
2. Oscillatory burning
3. Rapid extinction
The behaviours where dependant on the oxygen concentration, temperature, mass loss
rate, and GER. GER or Global Equivalence Ratio6 is a figure first explored experimentally
by Beyler [19] describing well- or under- ventilated compartments. Steady burning was
6Ratio between mass flux of fuel to the mass flux of oxygen into a compartment divided by the stoichio-
metric ratio.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
13
==PAGE:24==
seen at lower temperatures with a higher oxygen concentrations and low GER. Rapid ex-
tinction was seen at higher temperatures, lower oxygen concentrations, and higher GER
than with the steady burning. Oscillatory behaviour was observed in a space between
steady burning and rapid extinction.
A simulation study by T. Sikanen and S Hostikka [20] covers many of the problems high-
lighted in this thesis concerning simulation difficulties with ventilation controlled fires in
FDS. The Article studies a liquid pool fire in a closed compartment modelled after the
experiments described by [18] where only steady burning was observed. The performed
simulations are very specialised, trying to incorporate a detailed evaporation model in a
modified FDS code.
The results showed that the modified FDS code could accurately predict the mass loss rate
of the ventilated fire. In some of the simulations strong oscillations were seen, contrary
to the experimental data where no oscillations were observed. The appearance of the
oscillations where found to be dependant on the grid cell size and the combustion model
options like the auto ignition temperature.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Time [s]
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
HRR
[kW]
Figure 2.6: HRR oscillations of TBH pool fire, redrawn after [20]
The oscillations seen in the simulations where mitigated by experimenting with the AIT
parameter, where setting it at a too low value resulted in oscillations until the fuel burned
out, and a too high value resulted in too early extinction of the fire. The authors also argue
that the AIT parameter is not accurately chosen as the default value found in literature
because combustion seems to be dependant on the grid cell size in FDS. Oscillations
were seen to disappear with a grid size of 0.2 meter and appear with grid sizes of 0.1 and
0.05 meters.
2.6
Real life cases of blocked doors
Real cases where fire-induced over pressure where an occupant was believed to be pre-
vented from opening the compartment door, have been investigated. One from Germany
in 2013 [4], and one from Finland in 2016 [5]. Two other cases have of doors that could
not be opened by over pressures have been filmed by Finnish firefighters [5]. One was a
fire drill and the other was during one of the experiments descried in [16].
In Belgium [4] An investigation and simulation with CFAST concluded that over pressure
was the likely cause of the German occupant not being able to open the front door in
a newly renovated apartment. The apartment was renovated to meet a passive house
standard which means that the acceptable envelope leakage at 50 Pa is 0.6 h−1. The
14
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:25==
apartment was 60 m2 and had a ventilation rate of 0.4 h−1. The article also discusses the
increased risk of back-draft7 because of airtight enclosures.
2.7
Blind simulation work
A blind simulation model is a modelling scenario where data from an experiment is not
available for validation or verification. The simulation can as such not be directly seen as
valid but may be used to further the understanding of how different parameters change the
behaviour. These are generally much cheaper to do than full-scale experiments accom-
panied by modelling and this is why blind simulations are prevalently used in research.
A Master by M. riaz [21] used FDS to test a simple apartment type floor modelled with
different levels of air-tightness and fire growth rates. The simulations showed that fast
growing fires could result in over pressures so high that structural damage could be ex-
pected. Even with slow or medium fire growths the pressure could get above 100 Pa in
the modern or near-zero building types, which is where problems with opening inwards
opening doors could be problematic. Different damper configurations were also inves-
tigated. The risk of smoke spread was investigated for the different configurations and
smoke spread was only avoided with dampers closed in the inlet ducts and open in the
exhaust, the other configurations both resulted in smoke spread to other compartments.
Numerical simulations of the ﬁre scenarios showed that the peak over pressure is sen-
sitive to damper conﬁguration, envelope air-tightness and ﬁre growth rate, but practically
independent of the fan operation.
In an article by J. Wahlquist and P. van Hees [22] the authors acknowledge the risk of
smoke spread through ventilation systems and discuss several methods of mitigation.
The article focuses on using simulation as a tool for predicting the behaviour of the smoke.
Time and expense savings are considered as simulations compared to large-scale exper-
iments are relatively cheap.
The simulation tool used was FDS 6.1.1 with custom code implemented by the authors
to account for oxygen depletion and radiative feedback. A total of 10 setups were inves-
tigated with varying configurations of the ventilation system and pressure relief valves in
th envelope etc. As with the other articles investigated this study also looked at differ-
ent leakage classes, ranging from ”very loose” (traditional) to ”tight” (passive /near-zero
house). The simulations resulted in similar pressures as seen in other works, ranging
from 200 for the ”Loose” class and up to 1900 Pa for the ”tight” class. The investigation
similarly concluded that the growth’s rate had major impact on the pressure development,
with the fast fire being the worst. The authors argued that ultra fast fire growth resulted
in such high pressures, so quickly that structural damage to windows etc. would happen.
in their model they would open a path to ambient when the pressure in the room reached
3000 Pa creating an instant pressure relief. With only a fast fire growth the pressure
would keep at high values for longer not resulting in any structural damages meaning that
smoke spread was more prevalent in these cases. In most of the simulations done an
oscillating pattern would emerge for many of the medium to fast growth rates after the
peak pressure had expired. The validity of these oscillations were not investigated further
but discussed as important to study further if they where not the result of some coupled
model interactions.
7When a sudden supply of oxygen causes explosive combustion of confined super heated gasses.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
15
==PAGE:26==
2.8
Summary of the literature study
The following is seen as important factors by research in identifying the compartment fire
phenomena and how the impact of containing the fire in a room may change its behaviour.
The oxygen depletion and its impact on mass loss rate, heat release rate, and temper-
ature. A decrease in oxygen impacts the combustion processes and alters the yields of
smoke, soot, CO, and other incomplete combustion products. In many of the references
the oxygen concentration is used as a criteria for extinction.
The behaviour of the fire seen in Utiskul and Quintiere’s work [7], and also in the work
of H. Petrel et. al. [18], seems very interesting to the average engineer. The engineer
would have to make decisions on when the fire could develop these behaviours as they
are imperative to the smoke, temperature and pressure developments.
There is indeed a large difference in, steady burning, rapid extinction, or even oscillatory
flames. Modelling a design fire in an under ventilated compartment is much more complex
than for the well established compartment with large openings.
The extinction behaviour was seen when an over-pressure would not allow any new air
to enter the compartment. The article refers to this as ”filling the compartment (with hot
gases etc.)” where both of the vents had a mass-flow out of the compartment. With this be-
haviour extinction happened before any new oxygen could enter and the ghosting flames
or oscillatory behaviour was not seen. In the second article [23] Utiskul and Quintiere
acknowledges that behaviour 1 is mainly a result of smaller vent sizes.
It is of great interest to see if the oxygen concentration drops to the extinction point before
new air can enter the compartment i.e. the mass flow is restored. It is important to remem-
ber here that the vents used were quite big in relation to the compartment size and that
the entrainment of air through the vents where not forced by any mechanical means as
would be the case for a real ventilation system. One can imagine that if smaller vents were
used, the pressure and thereby behaviour 1 could be strengthened, meaning that filling
could be the dominant behaviour when very limited ventilation is used in compartments.
In many of the ISRN and PRISME experiments of nuclear fire safety, the tests used much
higher ventilation rates (over 300 L/s to single compartments) and in addition, also heavier
(bare concrete) and tighter compartments. This may invalidate the usage of some findings
for residential buildings somewhat.
The major conclusion of the literature study is that pressure developments of fires are
not to be taken lightly. Serious real life incidents have been reported, even filmed, and
show that the increasing energy saving demands have introduced problems of fire safety.
Impeding escape, structural damage, and smoke spread via HVAC networks, are the main
concerns of researchers.
16
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:27==
3
Danish regulations
3.1
Fire safety in general
In Denmark the building regulations are collected on the website BR18.dk [24] where
everything is comprised in chapters dealing with a civil engineering field. Within BR18
chapter 5 deals with general fire safety, chapter 22 deals with ventilation, and chapter 11
deals with energy and envelope requirements. These three are the main relevant chapters
with regards to this project.
The most basic regulations regarding fire is summarised below, cite [24].
With regards to design, performance, use, and maintenance the following should be up-
held throughout the service life of the building:
1 Materials; their fire resistance and contribution to fire spread are chosen based on
placement and use.
2 Safe evacuation of occupants in and around the building.
3 The building having sufficient structural capacity during fire.
4 Limiting smoke and fire spread in and around the building in the time needed for
evacuation.
5 Rescue services having necessarily sound possibilities of rescuing occupants, ex-
tinguishing fire, and limiting fire spread
6 Use of the building should not contribute to a lower fire safety throughout the lifetime
of the building.
7 Technical installations are controlled, maintained, and tested throughout the lifetime
of the building.
These are the very general fire safety regulations that must be considered when designing
a building. The different statements may be applied in different ways depending on the
building. Geometry and use play a major factor in how the fire safety of the building can
or must be designed.
As in many other countries Denmark has adopted both prescribed- and performance-
based fire safety codes. Similar for both, is the application category that describes the
use of a building. The application category also directs designers with prescribed solutions
or with good practise as per the performance based codes.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
17
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.1 redrawn after [24] summarises the criteria for each category
Table 3.1: Application category, translated from BR18 with examples
Application
Number of
Knowledge of
Self
Day/
Examples
category
persons
escape routes
dependant
Night stay
1
Yes
Yes
Day
Warehouses,
offices
2
< 50
No
Yes
Day
Education/ class-
rooms
3
> 50
No
Yes
Day
Assembly halls
4
Yes
Yes
Night
Storey buildings
5
No
Yes
Night
Hotels
6
-
No
Day/Night
Nursing homes
The application category can be used on entire complexes, but also on individual sections
of a building. In the case of this thesis the issue of smoke spread via the HVAC system
is most applicable to the highlighted categories in table 3.1. Category 4, 5, and 6 typi-
cally involve multi storey buildings of high compartmentalisation where a defend-in-place
strategy [25] is more realisable than full or partial evacuation.
Because (most) category 4, 5, and 6 buildings are designed and thus assumed to with-
stand fire and smoke spread, the defend-in-place strategy is valid as long as no fire or
smoke spreads from the original fire compartment to other compartments. In these types
of buildings it is therefore crucial that the passive and active fire protection solutions func-
tion properly and effectively.
3.2
HVAC and fire safety
In HVAC engineering the amount of ventilation solutions are plenty, and describing all of
them would be an exhaustive task. Overall two concepts are used regularly, diffusion
ventilation and mixing ventilation.
The diffusion concept relies on the natural buoyancy of hot air. Usually air is blown in
through a vent placed at floor level with small velocities. The air flows along the ground
until it hits a heated object/human etc. The cool air is heated and rises to the ceiling
entraining any contaminants.
The mixing concept relies on turbulence to mix the supply air both heating it up and mixing
with contaminant. The usual implementation is made by installing diffusers (not to be
confused with the prior concept) in the ceiling. The diffusers supply the air usually along
the ceiling gradually falling because of buoyancy.
18
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:29==
Supply
Exhaust
Diffuse ventilation
Contaminated air layer
Supply
Mixing ventilation
Exhaust
Mixed air
Figure 3.1: Basic HVAC concepts.
The differences between these concepts are quite large under nominal conditions, but
under a fire scenario the difference has not been studied. Research and experiments into
smoke spread via ventilation networks consider only the main parameters like pressure
and smoke layer formation.
In terms of the highlighted application categories the most applicable of these concepts
is the mixing ventilation. This is also the simplest method of implementation into FDS.
Simple vents can be created on the walls or ceiling. The basic parameters like geome-
try of ventilation networks and air change rate should be implemented in accordance to
minimum requirements.
According to the danish building regulations [24] a minimum air change of 0.30 l/s pr.
heated floor area is needed in residential buildings. This is roughly equivalent to 0.5 h−1
ACH. This is the absolute minimum and it must only be used as a base ventilation need.
For most residential buildings the required minimum air supply is usually determined by
the need for ventilation in bathrooms and kitchens.
In Denmark the standard concerning fire safety of ventilation systems is called DS 428 [1].
This standard describes two methods of ensuring the safety of ventilation systems. The
first method is prescribed general solutions with appropriate measures such as dampers
and detectors. The second method is performance based where the fire safety must be
supported by calculations. In the newest issue of the DS428 standard [1] the prescribed
(standard) solutions are based on calculations with the following assumptions.
For application category 4, 5, and 6 without sprinkling and either medium or fast growing
fire (0.012 or 0.047 kw/s2):
- Fire safety measures activate at detection of 72 °C in connected ducts.
- It is assumed that there is no heat, or pressure loss in the duct system. Only pres-
sure loss at the armatures are considered.
- The solutions are based on fire compartments of the size 50-100 m2. Where the
leakage is between 1.0 - 1.5 L/s pr. floor area at 50 Pa.
- For a closed compartment (low leakage) the smoke layer temperature is assumed
to have a temperature of 400 °C and an over pressure of 200 Pa.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
19
==PAGE:30==
All of these assumptions are made in order to create prescribed solutions of centralised
and decentralised systems with standard HVAC layouts. The descriptions of the closed
fire compartment in DS428 mentions risk of smoke spread during high over pressures of
30 to 120 seconds in the early faces of the fire.
With the performance based method the designer should consider the following points in
relation to risk of fire and smoke spread through the HVAC network.
- Pressure developments in fire compartment.
- Buoyancy effects due to high temperatures.
- The air distribution between fire compartment and connected compartments, during
the fire, with effects of density differences.
3.2.1
DS428 on smoke ventilation systems
A short summary of important points from chapter 4 in DS428 on prescribed smoke ven-
tilation systems.
(4.3.1) Use of smoke ventilated systems are generally usable for application categories
4, 5, and 6. A smoke ventilation system may not be applied to application category 1, 2,
and 3 or compartments with ultra fast fire growth.
(4.3.4) A smoke ventilated system is seen as adequate if a smoke fan is used and the
pressure loss over vents in connected compartments is 30 Pa minimum at nominal flow.
(4.3.5-6) The smoke fan can be either the default HVAC unit exhaust fan or a dedicated
fan. A bypass duct must be installed where large pressure losses are present, large losses
are seen for filters, coils, etc. The bypass duct must be open during fire and closed during
normal use.
(4.3.10) The smoke fan should be controlled such that it can not produce under pressures
of over 100 Pa in the connected compartments.
The concerns of inwards opening doors is covered in chapter 7. In section 7.4 it is ex-
plicitly stated that the HVAC solution must not cause pressure differences that result in
forces on doors over 100 N. It is not explicitly stated if this includes the 30-120 seconds
of the fire-induced high pressure in air tight compartments. The master thesis by M. Riaz
[21] investigates the needed opening area of for pressure reliefs during the high pres-
sure. Based on a fast fire in a compartment with low leakage rate (0.036 m3/s at 50 Pa)
the opening area needed to prevent pressures over 100 Pa is roughly 0.03 m2. This is
quite a large hole to have in the envelope when considering heat loss and energy use
calculations.
Reflecting on the hypothesis of the notion that current danish regulations does not cover
high over pressures during the early phase of fire is clearly false. However, any actual rec-
ommendations or mitigation methods are not given. The phenomenon of high pressures
are merely mentioned as a cause for concern that the designer must consider in specific
cases. The differences between an open and closed compartment fire is clearly illustrated
with figures and supplementing text to describe the relevant phases of both fires. Some
initiatives like not allowing smoke ventilated systems for ultra-fast fires, indicates some
notion of the high pressures that this kind of growth can cause.
Several of the recommendations in DS428 4.3 and 7.4 are investigated throughout this
thesis.
20
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:31==
4
Theory and Application
The most relevant theory is presented in the following chapter. The first part will explain
the choice of CFD code. The later part of the chapter will focus on how the CFD code
implements the theory and how it may be applied in a model.
4.1
Choice of CFD code
Several CFD codes exist and could be used in this thesis, however FDS or Fire Dynamics
Simulator is a code specifically made for running simulations where fire is involved. The
first version of FDS was introduced in 2000 and today (as of April 2020) the newest stable
version is 6.7.4. The code sets itself apart from most other codes as it employs a low
mach number estimation of the Naiver-Stokes equations and a Large Eddy Simulation
(LES) of the turbulence. This means that speeds of Mach 0.3-0.4 (∼100 m/s) will cause
numerical instability. FDS is chosen on the basis of availability and specialisation, it is an
open source code meaning that is is freely available to all.
The version used in this thesis is 6.7.4. This version of FDS is available on a general
purpose HPC cluster at DTU, which means that simulations can be done more quickly
and with multiple processes running simultaneously. FDS version 6.7.4 is used on the
following machines, where the home computer is mostly used for trouble shooting.
Table 4.1: Computer specifications
Home computer
CPU
1x i5-4670K (4 cores @ 3.4 GHz)
Memory
8 GB DDR3
HPC cluster
Most common node configuration
CPU
2x Intel Xeon (12 cores @ 2.20-2.60GHz)
Memory
256 GB
User-limits
Max 80 processes with 20-22 processes pr. node
4.2
The compartment fire
In this section the theory behind enclosure/compartment fires is presented. Some promi-
nent works include ”An Introduction to Fire Dynamics” by Drysdale [26] and ”Enclosure
Fire Dynamics” by Karlsson and Quintiere [27]. These are the main sources used in this
chapter to describe compartment fires. Along with the literature study the theory behind
a low-ventilated compartment fire is explored.
For a fire to exist three criteria must be met; A source of fuel, A source of heat or ignition,
and A source of oxygen (air), all of these three have an impact on the fire and also each
other. If one of the three are not present a fire can not propagate (under normal condi-
tions). In compartment fires the source of oxygen is often the most critical of the three,
but to understand the dynamics of a compartment fire the fuel type is explored first.
Fuels are often placed in three categories; gaseous, liquids, and solids. Typically also
growing in complexity in the order given. The combustion of any fuel generally follows the
principle that a certain concentration of volatiles must be present in gaseous form before
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
21
==PAGE:32==
combustion can occur. The concentration is usually referred to as the concentration in
air. Gaseous fuels must first dilute into the air to reach the concentration necessary to
combust, then be ignited by some source of heat. For liquids to combust one more step
is required; evaporation into gas. This means that some latent energy must first be added
to the fuel for it to evaporate then dilute and finally combust. For solid fuels the steps are
generally much more complex. Chemical decomposition or pyrolysis creates the volatiles
that further reacts with oxygen in the gas phase [26].
As seen in the literature study, most of the experiments and data available is found using
liquid fuels. The availability and simple nature of liquid fuels makes this a good choice
in full scale experiments. Other benefits of using liquid fuels is the relatively simple com-
bustion process and extensive theoretical work compared to solid combustion, which in
many ways is much more complex.
4.3
The combustion process for liquid fuels
Typical liquid fuels are hydrocarbons, chains of carbon atoms with hydrogen atoms con-
nected. The complete combustion of a hydrocarbon fuel in air generally has the form seen
in equation 4.3.
CxHy + a · (O2 + 3.76N2) = xCO2 + b · H2O + 3.76aN2
Where a = (x + y/4) and b = (y/2). The number before the nitrogen molecule comes
from the ratio between air and nitrogen in background concentration. The atmosphere
consist of approximately 21% O2 and 79% N2 meaning that there is 0.79/0.21 = 3.76 atoms
of nitrogen per atom of oxygen. If the combustion is complete, or in other words, enough
air is present for all of the fuel to be converted into CO2 and H2O, no other products are
formed. However, if oxygen is not sufficient, other products are formed, such as carbon
monoxide (CO) or other incomplete hydrocarbons. For the simple combustion model in
FDS [28] every reaction is assumed of the form:
CxHyOzNv + νO2O2 →νCO2CO2 + νH2OH2O + νCOCO + νSoot + νN2N2
Where all of the coefficients ν are balanced accordingly to the type of fuel and condition
in the reacting grid cell. In the technical reference guide the simple chemistry model is
explained further with the inclusion of background concentrations of N2, CO2 and H2O.
With ventilation controlled fires, incomplete combustion will be present and the CO and
Soot yields are important parameters that the user must specify. The CO and soot yields
are by default 0 for the simple chemistry model in FDS. For well ventilated fires the values
for these yields are 0.010-0.012 g/g for CO and 0.037-0.042 g/g for soot (SFPE [25] Ap-
pendix 3). It should be noted that it is quite possible for these values to be too low when
considering oxygen limited environments. By limiting the oxygen more CO and soot will
form as the concentration becomes more fuel rich.
There are different ways to describe the completeness of a combustion, usually it is de-
scribed by a ratio.
Air to fuel = (A/F)stoic =
( mair
mfuel
)
stoic
In regular air the air to fuel ratio of a hydrocarbon combustion can be expressed in molec-
ular weight as:
(A/F)stoic = a · (1 + 3.76) MWair
MWfuel
(4.1)
22
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:33==
This is the stoiciometric air to fuel ratio, if one wants to express whether the fuel is lean
or rich the equivalence ratio Φ is used:
Φ = (A/F)actual
(A/F)stoic
(4.2)
A ratio Φ < 1 implies a fuel-lean mixture and a ratio Φ > 1 implies a fuel-rich mixture. In a
lean combustion there is plenty of oxygen to react with the fuel. In a fuel-rich mixture not
enough oxygen is present for complete combustion.
This ratio is crucial in compartment fires as one of the limiting factors is the amount of air
available to the fire. A rich combustion usually gives rise to additional combustion prod-
ucts, un-burned carbon ie. soot and smoke. The combustion or reaction will take place
where the mix between oxygen and fuel is optimal and flames are usually described by
two regimes; premixed- or diffusion-flames. Premixed flames are seen in bunsen burnes
etc. where the fuel is premixed with air.
Diffusion flames are typical for liquid fuels. As the name suggests diffusion of the fuel
vapour has to happen for an optimal mixture of combustion. In liquid pool fires where the
concentration of fuel is high close to the surface, the liquid has to evaporate and diffuse
with the surrounding air to meet the ideal mixture ratio for combustion. The diffusion is
usually helped by the entrainment phenomena where air is drawn into the fire plume.
Combustion of liquids are generally limited by the mass loss rate from the surface of the
liquid to the air. The energy released by a liquid pool fire may be expressed by:
˙Qc = χ · ˙m′′ · Af · ∆Hc
(4.3)
Where χ is a factor that accounts for incomplete combustion (fuel-rich combustion), ˙m′′
is the rate of burning , Af is the surface area of the pool, and ∆Hevap is the latent heat
of evaporation of the liquid.
The heat of combustion deemed ∆Hc is quantified as the total amount of heat released
for some amount of fuel (i.e. [kJ/kg]). For fires the latent heat of evaporation is usually
not incorporated, as the water present is usually already evaporated.
Combustion in reality is rarely complete, and products other than water and carbon dioxide
will be present. These may react further and create additional combustion steps. Calcu-
lating these multi-step reactions can be cumbersome and in practise not feasible. Another
way to describe the combustion is to use the energy released per mole of oxygen. This
is because the energy released is roughly the same for all hydrocarbons [26].
∆Hc,ox,liquids = −12.72 ± 3% kJ/g
(4.4)
This means that the heat release of some organic liquid can be estimated by the amount
of air available. If the reaction is complete the following relation may be used:
˙Qc = (0.21 −ηo2) · ˙V · 103 · ρo2 · ∆Hc,ox
(4.5)
where ˙V is the volumetric flow of air, ηo2 is the mole fraction of O2 after burning, ρo2 is the
density of oxygen at STP. A similar, but more relatable equation in practise would be to
express the energy release in terms of air consumed (i.e. oxygen and nitrogen as seen
in section 4.3).
˙Qc = ˙V · 103 · ρO2 · ∆Hc,air
(4.6)
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
23
==PAGE:34==
If CO and other combustion products are discounted, the heat of combustion in terms of
air for most hydrocarbons is:
∆Hc,air = −3.03 ± 2% kJ/g
(4.7)
A simple calculation of the possible energy release of a fire in a ventilated compartment
could be done assuming: a density of 1.2 kg/m3, a volume flow of air supplied to be 0.1
m3/s (100 L/s), then eq. (4.6) is used to calculate the HRR under ventilated conditions:
˙Qc = 0.1m3/s · 1.2kg/m3 · 3kJ/g · 103 = 360.0 kW
(4.8)
This assumes that all of the oxygen is used and that the volume flow to the fire is constant,
which it rarely will be in a real fire scenario. But, the calculation gives a rough idea of the
size of fire to expect. Running a simple simulation of a compartment with a balanced
ventilation of 0.1 m3/s and a detailed 1 m2 ethanol pool fire, the following figure shows
that it is a good approximation. (see FDS user-guide on ”Complex Pyrolysis Models/Liquid
Fuels”).
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
200
400
600
800
1000
HRR [kW]
HRR of Ethanol pool
360 kW
Figure 4.1: Ethanol pool fire in ventilated compartment
4.4
Design fire modeling
In FDS the most simple way of expressing a fire is to define the Heat Release Rate (HRR
in kW/m2) or Mass Loss Rate (MLR in kg/(m2 · s)). However, most if not all references
suggests that the growth phase is of large significance to the increase in pressure. The
growth phase of the fire must be modelled as well. In fire safety engineering the most
common way of defining a design fire is to use the ”t-squared” definition. The t2 fire
describes the initial phase of a fire by an equation defined as:
˙Q(t) = αt2
(4.9)
where α is the growth rate, and t is the time in seconds.
Table 4.2: Standard definition of the t2 fire (NFPA) with examples of application
Growth rate
α kW/s2
Seconds to reach 1055 kW
Application
Ultra Fast
0.19
75
Shopping/enertainment -centers
Fast
0.047
150
Hotels, schools, offices etc.
Medium
0.012
300
Dwellings etc.
Slow
0.003
600
-
24
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:35==
The t2 fire only describes the initial growth phase of the fire, the maximum HRR or constant
HRR must be defined by either assuming some output dependant on the compartment
type or by the fuel burning. For pool fires equation 4.3 could be used to define a max
HRR.
The applicability of the t2 fire should be investigated since the availability of oxygen and
linings of the compartment may alter the growth phase and max HRR. A study by J.
Wahlqvist and P. van Hees [29] in 2015 investigated the influence of the compartment on
the growth rate. It was done by implementing custom code into FDS. The custom code
changed the way mass loss rate was calculated based on oxygen depletion and radiative
feedback. The resulting growth rates showed that the linings of the compartment could
have some impact on the growth rate. For insulating materials the impact was significant
and causes higher higher growth rates than the standard definition. For high heat storage
capacity materials the difference was negligible. A larger growth rate was seen for all
cases, meaning that the current t2 fire may over estimate the time to reach max HRR (ie.
it will take less time to reach max HRR in compartments).
The way one would implement a t2 fire in FDS could be by the following line of code
defining a fast growing HRR with a max of 1000 kw/m2.
FDS definition of a fire with growth phase and constant HRR
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE', HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-146/
The keyword TAU_Q indicates at which point max HRR is reached. This time can be found
by re-arranging eq. (4.9):
t =
√
˙Q
α
(4.10)
For a fast growing fire with a max HRR of 4000 kW, t =
√
4000/0.047 ≈293 s
Another way to model a fire is by using a RAMP. Most of the referenced simulation studies
used this because the HRR or MLR was available from experiments. A RAMP is a pre-
defined curve FDS uses as ”over time input”. The following snippet of code defines a
1000 kW/m2 fire, were the HRR is lowered to 0 kW after 180 seconds.
FDS definition of a HRR RAMP
&SURF ID='FIRE',RAMP_Q='HRR_ramp', COLOR='ORANGE' HRRPUA=1000/
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 0
, F= 0.00 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 30
, F= 0.04 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 60
, F= 0.17 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 90
, F= 0.38 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 105 , F= 0.52 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 120 , F= 0.68 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 135 , F= 0.86 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 150 , F= 1.00 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 160 , F= 0.90 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 170 , F= 0.50 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 180 , F= 0.00 /
It is important to know that by defining a HRR of 0 (see final line of ramp) FDS will not
release any more mass from the surface defined after 190 seconds. Contrary to the prior
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
25
==PAGE:36==
constant HRR which will try to meet the HRR even after a extinction has happened. The
default value of AIT will mean that ignition happens even if the fire has been extinguished.
As stated in the section on combustion of liquid fuels, the CO and soot yields must be
defined for the simple combustion model in FDS. The values chosen in this thesis are
found in [25] for well ventilated fires. This is an assumption and could as mentioned be
higher in the case of oxygen depleted environments. With complex combustion models
the yields such as CO and soot are not assumed but computed by FDS. Using a complex
model the user is no longer in practical use but in research territory, the use of complex
models requires further validation of the computed parameters.
FDS definition of simple single step combustion.
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
FYI = 'Heptane, C_7 H_16, SFPE Fith ED. App. 3-4 TABLE A.39-40'
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03/
Complex fire models are not often used in practise as assumptions done on other param-
eters simply cannot justify the use of very sophisticated models. The initial phase of the
fire defined by the growth and max HRR, is of more importance to engineers because
these phases are where factors such as heat and smoke influence occupant safety. In
later phases only the temperature is of much importance to structural engineers. From
an engineering approach the t2 fire is more flexible than a complex and very defined fire,
and creates a larger space of possible applications.
4.5
Flame extinction
As a convenience FDS employs a default Auto Ignition Temperature (AIT) of -273 °C for all
fuels. This means that even if the temperature is below the actual AIT of the fuel (eg. 223
°C for Heptane) combustion will still occur if the mix of fuel and oxygen allows it. This can
and will create problems in oxygen starved environments. The main problem seen in lit-
erature and in initial test simulations are ghosting flames or un-wanted burning. Ghosting
flames are not a numerical or simulation problem in and of it self, as it is a physical phe-
nomena that can occur in the real world. However, in the experimental work investigated
concerning large scale compartment fires, no ghosting flames were observed. It is quite
possible that this is because the fire/burner was extinguished early and temperatures did
not reach the high temperatures required to ignite fuel below the oxygen limits.
A designer would have to take into consideration whether the fire will extinguish or keep
burning to the point where the temperature might facilitate ghosting flames.
A small ventilation area (ie. limited availability of air entering) will as mentioned in the liter-
ature study [7] lean more toward extinction due to oxygen starvation before any ghosting
flames occur. Thus should a simulation try either to limit the ghosting flames or make sure
that the combustion after oxygen depletion is physically correct.
An option that may be implemented with benefit to the accuracy is the AIT temperature,
which is done by implementing the ignition temperature of the fuel used in the reaction.
For n-heptane this is around 223-255 °C. When the AIT is set the fuel will not ignite on its
own and a source of heat is needed. There are two ways to ignite the fuel in FDS. The first
26
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:37==
is simply to create some form of igniter, a box of some sort with surfaces that emit a heat
flux. The igniter box should be timed carefully by iteration of size, heat flux, and duration
of ignition. This is usually done by simulating several times to find a ”sweet spot” where
continued ignition and propagation of the flame is sustained. A new feature of FDS version
6.7.4 is a form of igniter box that can be created by introducing AIT_EXCLUSION_ZONE. This
is a zone were spontaneous combustion will occur regardless of temperature (default in
FDS). Everywhere outside of this zone the Auto Ignition Temperature is employed.
A few test simulation were run with the AIT_EXCLUSION_ZONE, but in many cases the zone
either produced wrong HRR, or caused back draft like phenomena when oxygen entered
the box where the default AIT (-273 °C) was defined.
A problem with the AIT in FDS is that one cannot be sure if it correctly predicts the com-
bustion in a grid cell. Combustion depends on many factors and by using only the simple
combustion model in FDS the AIT value only reflects one single fuel. In reality many more
combustion products are formed with their own AIT. As stated in the technical reference
guide [30] and [20] the default model of combustion in a cell is dependant on the oxygen/-
fuel ratio and energy (temperature). In [20] it is stated that grid sizes of 0.05 meter did not
fully resolve the temperature field for LES simulations. Because of this the authors argue
that the AIT parameter can be iteratively altered to reflect the experimental results.
4.6
FDS-HVAC module
The HVAC module implemented in FDS is a separate solver that is coupled to the com-
putational domain (mesh) of FDS. C.D. Ang, G.Rein, J Peiro, and R Harrison (2015) has
made comparisons of full CFD and multi scale modelling with FDS validated with on-site
data to see if computational time could be saved by using the simpler HVAC module in-
stead of using a fully detailed 3D CFD model. The article considers tunnel fires where
the domain scope (maybe a tunnel of several kilometres) may get so large that the com-
putational time will increase dramatically to unobtainable levels. By using a simpler 1D
model, substituting a full 3D domain the computational cost and time could be reduced.
The results show a decrease of a factor 2.2 in computational time and reasonable results
when the 1D modelled domains are over 80 meters long. The work might not be directly
related to HVAC systems in general as the usage is somewhat different, but is shows the
main point which is, if the entire duct system were to be modelled fully, the computational
cost may negate the practical use of simulations.
The module uses the following governing equations based on conservation of mass, en-
ergy, and momentum in the ducts [30].
Mass
∑
j
ρjujAj = 0
[kg/s]
(4.11)
Energy
∑
j
ρjujAjhj = 0
[J/s]
(4.12)
Momentum
ρjLj
duj
dt = (pi −pk) + (ρg∆z)j + ∆pj −1
2Kjρj|uj|uj
[Pa]
(4.13)
where j indicates the duct segment in between nodes i and k.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
27
==PAGE:38==
The flow in a duct is driven by pressure differences which can be seen from the momentum
conservation. The last two terms in eq. (4.13) may describe a gain or loss in the pressure
of the duct. This could be a pressure gain from a fan or a pressure loss from a fitting or
friction loss in the duct.
The loss term 1
2Kjρj|uj|uj is equivalent to the headloss and can be found by calculating
the nominal dynamic pressure pd described in the next section.
At the interfaces between the HVAC solver and the FDS domain the pressure, species
concentrations, etc. are taken as averages over the cells covering the surface of the vent.
By introducing HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE=.TRUE. on the misc line the zone pressure is used
as input instead of the averaged vent surface pressure. This may sometimes reduce
fluctuations of the HVAC pressure solution. [28].
4.7
Pressure loss theory
The following theory is referenced from comprehensive danish ventilation practise text-
books [31] and [32].
For an HVAC engineer one of the more important steps in designing a ventilation network
is the dimensioning of the supply/exhaust fans. The choice of fan is based on the following
parameters:
- Application, type of system.
- Volume flow, satisfying the application or indoor climate.
- Pressure loss, resistance of moving air in system.
The last parameter is of significant interest to this project as it will be the pressure losses in
the ducts that may allow or hinder significant smoke spread together with the configuration
of smoke dampers.
The basics of pressure losses in ducts are derived using Bernoulli’s equation employing
constant mass continuity.
ps + pd + ρgh = constant
(4.14)
Where, ps is the static pressure and pd = 1
2ρv2 is the nominal dynamic pressure at some
cross section of the duct. As the mass is assumed constant, the state of the fluid at some
place in the duct can be found as follows:
ps1 + pd1 + ρgh1 = ps2 + pd2 + ρgh2 + Hl
(4.15)
Dividing both sides with ρg a more recognisable form of the equation can be found. The
term Hl, named the ’headloss’ is the loss of pressure or energy between the to points 1
and 2. The headloss is the collected loss due to friction and/or momentum losses from
change in flow-direction or -velocity. Using Bernoulli’s equation, experimental relations
are found for determining this headloss for several ventilation system components.
4.7.1
Friction loss
The pressure loss due to fluid friction is calculated using a pressure loss gradient p∆,
derived from semi-analytical formulas.
∆p = p∆· l = λ pd
Dh
=
λ
2Dh
ρv2
(4.16)
28
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:39==
Where, Dh is the hydraulic diameter that for circular ducts is equal to the diameter. For
rectangular ducts with side lengths a and b the hydraulic diameter is expressed as:
Dh = 2ab
ab
(4.17)
The friction coefficient λ can be found by iteratively solving Colebrooks formula for turbu-
lent flow in ducts:
1
√
λ
= −2 · log
( 2.51
Re
√
λ
+
k
3.71Dh
)
(4.18)
The friction coefficient is a function of the Reynold’s number and material specific quan-
tities. It can be determined using a so called Moody diagram. Several experiments have
fortunately been carried out and the most widely used duct material friction coefficients
have been tabulated in such diagrams. k is the absolute roughness of the surface that cre-
ates friction and for galvanised steel (the most commonly used duct material) the rough-
ness for new ducts is 0.1 - 0.3mm (usually 0.15 mm) [31] A.08.01.
4.7.2
Fitting loss
Fitting or component -losses are defined by a loss coefficient specific to the type of fitting.
∆pf = ζ · pd
(4.19)
Where, ζ is the loss coefficient. It is important that the loss coefficient refers to the correct
dynamic pressure. Usually the loss coefficient is determined using tables where the flow
directions in the fitting is shown such that the appropriate dynamic pressure is used.
Some examples of fittings where a pressure loss must be found:
- Contractions
- Expansions
- Bends
- Tees (branching)
- Vents
- Dampers
4.7.3
Leakage loss
All ventilation duct components should be tested for air-tightness. Ducts are commonly
tested at 400 Pa and divided into three classes (A, B, C). The leakage is determined using
a leakage coefficient where the ’worst’ of the three classes have a leakage coefficient of
0.00132m3/(sm2). This means that 1.32 litres of air escapes the duct each second for
each square meter of surface area at 400 Pa.
It is usually not necessary to account for the leakage in ducts as it will usually be a very
small loss compared to the rest of the loss contributions. Another reason not to account
for this is that fact that the HVAC module in FDS can not store mass. The leakage would
therefore have to be modelled by some imaginary vent or additional pressure loss. The
benefit of including this is deemed so small that the effort of modelling the leak would
be wasted. However it may be necessary for further studies to explore the impact since
pressure peaks of 400 Pa or more are seen in many of the simulation studies.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
29
==PAGE:40==
4.8
Pressure loss application
In FDS the total flow loss should be found as a sum of the friction losses (in FDS called)
Kwall and fitting losses which FDS calls minor losses Kminor [30]. The friction loss is most
appropriately found by having FDS estimate the loss, as it will depend on both volume-
flow, temperature, and density. This is done by input of the absolute roughness ϵ (k
in danish refrence). FDS employs an approximation to the friction loss [30]. FDS will
therefore be able to account for the change in parameters and produce more reliable
results. The friction loss is accounted for by FDS if the ROUGHGNESS is set to some value
eg. 0.15 mm.
The minor losses (fittings) vary depending on the type of fitting, connection or appliance
(ie. filters, coils, etc.) that is present in the duct system. Most manufactures will give
specific losses for a product and this is usually the way a designer would acquire informa-
tion. Collecting the information may be an extensive task depending on the system. The
information can usually be shared between the fire and HVAC engineers, this is easiest if
the ventilation system is designed from the ground up and not renovated.
If the pressure loss and nominal flow of the system is known the loss coefficient Kminor
can be found. Rearranging the last term in eq. (4.13) gives:
K = 2∆p
ρu2
(4.20)
An example is given below using eq. (4.20) where a vent supplying a room with fresh air
will be dimensioned to have a pressure loss of 30 Pa at a nominal flow speed of 2.5 m/s.
K =
2 · 30
1.2 · 2.52 = 8
(4.21)
The dimensionless factor that should be given to the node or the duct is thus 8. The
following snippet of code defines a duct with a fan, a supply vent node, and an ambient
node. The naming of nodes and ducts will be explained further in the next chapter.
FDS definition of nodes and ducts
---NODES
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA',VENT_ID='VENT_A',LOSS=8,8/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA', AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=...,LOSS=1,1/
---DUCTS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_BA',
NODE_ID='NODE_B','NODE_A',
FAN_ID='SUPPLY_FAN',
DIAMETER=0.160, LENGTH=1,LOSS=1,1, ROUGHNESS=0.0015/
---VENT
&VENT ID='VENT_A',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=.../
30
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:41==
4.8.1
The LOSS input and Tee’s
The loss coefficient K can be implemented as seen in the prior code snippet. If more than
two ducts connect to a node (ie. a Tee) the LOSS input must be implemented in a slightly
different way. One must be careful when defining the losses which can be understood
from the technical reference guide:
”The losses need to be applied in a manner that represents the flow conditions within the
node. For example, if a tee has flow into one leg and out of two legs, it would not make
sense to apply the loss to the upstream leg as there would be no way to distinguish losses
due to any changes of the flow splitting in the downstream legs” [30].
Consider the following illustration of a tee with branching flow.
1
2
3
Figure 4.2: Simple tee with branching flow.
At normal conditions the flow may have the direction as seen on the figure. A HVAC
designer needs only include two pressure losses in this condition.
- Loss from flow through 1 →3
- Loss from flow through 1 →2
If however a fire develops in a room connected to either duct 2 or 3, the flow may change
direction and depending on the volume flow in either direction the pressure loss will also
change. This means that a fire engineer facing this exact tee will have to account for 6
possible flow conditions.
- Loss from flow through 1 →3
- Loss from flow through 1 →2
- Loss from flow through 2 →1
- Loss from flow through 2 →3
- Loss from flow through 3 →1
- Loss from flow through 3 →2
This and the fact that pressure loss in tee’s are dependant on the flow ratio between each
duct, makes the task exhaustive and not practical. Another implication is that the loss
factors for 2 →3 and 3 →2 are not usually given in tables or data-sheets and must be
approximated.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
31
==PAGE:42==
For a tee node in FDS the loss must be defined as follows assuming the same fitting as
in fig. 4.2.
FDS definition of a Tee node
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='TEE',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_1','DUCT_2','DUCT_3',XYZ=...,
LOSS(1,1)=0
,LOSS(1,2)=K12,LOSS(1,3)=K13,
LOSS(2,1)=K21,LOSS(2,2)=0
,LOSS(2,3)=K23,
LOSS(3,1)=K31,LOSS(3,2)=K32,LOSS(3,3)=0/
This is essentially a matrix where the appropriate K factor should be used as input. The
logic is as follows:
- LOSS(1,3) = Loss from DUCT_1 →DUCT_3
- LOSS(1,2) = Loss from DUCT_1 →DUCT_2
- and so on...
The diagonal should be zero if the loss of the duct is defined elsewhere eg. the duct
itself. Naming of the ducts DUCT_1,DUCT_2,... does not matter, the matrix is defined in
the listed order of DUCT_ID.
The losses are assumed minor in comparison to other losses in the system, this is not
saying that this field can be ignored. The task of implementing correct losses for all flow
conditions are simply too exhaustive a task for the precision gained. The volume flow is
only mainly balanced by the vent losses and the area of the ducts connected to the tee
node. In order to do this the losses in all directions of the tee are set equal eg. 0 or 1.
The impact of not including the correct tee losses are not large, but can be significant
when the branching duct is much smaller in cross section compared to the main duct, or
if the flow is very unbalanced in some other vay [31]. As a test one might try to simulate
a tee node in FDS and look at the implications of not including the 6 losses.
4.9
Envelope leakage application
Since leakage in buildings is often a sub grid phenomena the leakage has to be modelled
by other means. Two of the most prominent methods present in FDS are the ”bulk” and
”localised” -leakage methods. Both of these methods uses a leakage area. The area may
be determined from the following relation which is based on flow through a duct orifice.
˙Vleak = ALsign(∆p)
√
2|∆p|
ρ∞
(4.22)
The standard way of testing leakage is to use the so called ”Fan-blower” test. Where a
fan is usually installed in an exterior doorway, creating an over pressure inside the house
of 50 Pa. From the volume flow and pressure of the fan the leakage can be determined.
This means that ˙Vleak and ∆p are known in eq. (4.22). The leakage area can then be
found according to the danish building regulation, where the limiting leakage is determined
based on the floor area.
32
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:43==
Assuming a floor area of 50 m2 and a room height of 2.6 m, the following table is made:
Table 4.3: Leakage area according to BR18 [24]
Class
˙Vleak
n
∆p
AL
[L/s pr m2]
[h−1]
[Pa]
[m2]
Normal
1.0
1.5
50
0.055
Low-energy
0.7
1.0
50
0.038
If one assumes that eq. (4.22) can describe pressure differences above 50 Pa and below
0 Pa the following relation on fig. 4.3 is observed.
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
Pressure [Pa]
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Volume leak [m3/s]
Normal class, AL = 0.0055
Low-Energy class, AL = 0.0038
Figure 4.3: Relation between leakage flow and pressure.
The simplest way to define bulk leakage is to define the leak to go from the created zone
to ambient (zone 0). This is done by adding the LEAK_PATH parameter to an external
surface. Setting LEAK_PATH=1,0 means that the leak is flowing from zone 1 to zone 0:
FDS definition of bulk zone leakage
&ZONE XB=..., LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/
&SURF ID='LEAKY EXTERIOR WALL', LEAK_PATH=1,0/
The localised leak method is intended to be used where cracks or openings are known,
like cracks under doors or around windows. The localised method does not use the zone
pressure but the local surface averaged pressure. This method is preferred if stratifica-
tion is assumed to have an impact on the leakage flow as it will better account for the
temperature loss/gain due to advection of air.
FDS definition of localised leakage
&SURF ID='INTERNAL',DEFAULT=.TRUE./
&VENT XB=...,SURF_ID='INTERNAL',ID='LEAK_VENT',COLOR='BLUE'/
&HVAC ID='LEAK',TYPE_ID='LEAK',
VENT_ID='LEAK_VENT',VENT2_ID='AMBIENT',AREA=0.0055/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
33
==PAGE:44==
34
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:45==
5
Parameter study
5.1
Defining the goals
The most important factor is the size and course of the fire and one should ask the practical
questions:
Is the oxygen depletion relevant?
Is the pressure peak and/or pressure drop relevant?
Are all of the HVAC network pressure losses relevant?
Is a physically correct placement of the fire relevant?
How much time is available?
These questions together with the literature study and danish regulations lead to some
concerns of the limitations with the current modelling capabilities. FDS can in fact sim-
ulate very detailed fires given the correct input and by using more detailed combustion
models. However, the amount of time and/or knowledge of the program and physical phe-
nomena is not always realisable. Shortcomings of the user guide and shortcomings or
differences of the users may lead to different assumptions, or in severe cases, errors that
lead to incorrect solutions. In a study by N. Johansson [33] simulations are compared by
making different users simulate the same case in FDS. Eight practising engineering firms
were tasked to simulate a case and give back pre-defined output. Large discrepancies
were seen between the participants. Different assumptions, mistakes, insufficient knowl-
edge about FDS or about fire dynamics, all contributed to variations and mistakes in the
solutions. The findings in the study are quite worrying, and should be taken seriously in
regulations that allow documentation by use of simulation programs.
Pressure related issues due to low leakage of the envelope of smaller compartments
is a relatively new subject in fire dynamics. While not applicable to every practitioner the
study by [33] shows that guidelines in specialised (even simple) cases might become very
helpful in the future where FDS most likely will increase in use, size and complexity. The
Parameter study together with the literature study will be used to form a basic guideline
with practises of simulating pressure related issues in under-ventilated compartment fires.
The guide will give practitioners a helping hand in determining what input might be useful
to mitigating problems.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
35
==PAGE:46==
5.2
Choice of parameters
The several tests done prior to the actual parameter analysis have given some insight
into how the study must be carried out. It has also given insight into what problems may
occur when trying to simulate such closed compartments as has been described. The
default value of AIT has proven to complicate things when trying to model a design fire.
If the design fire is created with a constant HRR after a t2 growth, the combustion model
in FDS will try to reach the given max HRR. But, if the oxygen in the room is not sufficient
the combustion will drop before the intended max HRR is reached.
At this point the designer must choose to go in one of two directions:
- Keep it simple and have unwanted burning at the vents that may contribute to oscil-
lations of the pressure, thus impacting the flow in the ventilation network.
- Create a detailed fire (as in [20]) where exact parameters of the fuel is taken into
account, such as type of fuel, burnout due to oxygen or fuel depletion, impact of
radiation to the pool surface, etc.
The first direction is best in terms of scaleability and flexibility, but the current combustion
model of FDS somewhat limits the use of the simpler design fire at the point of oxygen
depletion. In this thesis the focus lies on the smoke spread due to the pressure build-up
in the compartment, and the focus should lie on the pressure peaks. The oscillations
due to burning at the vents should be limited as the experiments and detailed simulations
does not show ghosting flames. Whether this is due to the experimental setups where
some control of the flame was employed is not easy to say. By using the simple combus-
tion model the user has to take into consideration that the output of the fire after oxygen
depletion may not be modelled correctly and the physical location of the fire is uncertain.
In an engineering sense the later choice is too restrictive in the way the it limits the fire
to one very detailed fuel with a specific size and growth based on several factors. The
benefit of using a more detailed fire and fuel is that the observed phenomena are more
believable.
The leakage of the envelope is stated as a very important parameter by several of the
references. This is also why many of the theses investigate different leakage values by
means of parameter studies. Especially by the many references from Aalto university, who
consider the leakage to be one of the main parameters. From several of the parameter
studies the impact of the leakage area can be seen. As a result this project will not try to
replicate these findings, but instead go in another direction. The default leakage method
and area chosen in the following parameter study is the danish normal-class leakage
defined in table 4.3 by means of the bulk leakage model at an air change of 1.5h−1.
As well as the leakage model the t2 fire growth model has also been extensively inves-
tigated in many of the references. The default fire model in the parameter study will be
the fast growing fire, as this seems most appropriate for the multi floor apartment building
case. In one case an ultra fast and medium fire is simulated as well for comparison to
reference data.
The parameter study will therefore try to enlighten with regards to different HVAC con-
figurations as they are normally seen in multistory apartment buildings. Different cases
will test the robustness of a simple yet realistic ventilation system, exploring worst-case
scenarios. The first couple of cases will try to locate problems with simple setups and
give inspiration to a final case where everything is collected.
36
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:47==
6
Parameter study: Case 1
This case will be used to study the mesh independence of the solution. Starting with three
mesh sizes the solution is compared by plotting several of the relevant parameters. Only
one room will be meshed, the second will be mimicked by having HVAC vents connecting
to ambient conditions. After the mesh independence study, a mesh for the connected
room will be created and tested with two different mesh sizes to study the impact on the
computational time.
After the mesh independence study, several other test are performed on the setup, testing
the capabilities of FDS. These include: design fire testing, leakage method testing, HVAC
network pressure loss and general testing, etc. A quick comparison between a simple
zone model and the results from FDS is also performed. These tests are meaningful
as they give insight into what parameters may help or be detrimental when simulating a
compartment fire scenario.
6.1
The standard compartment
A simple geometry with a floor area of 50 m2 is chosen with a ceiling height of 2.6 meters.
This is almost the same base room geometry used in the simulations by M. Riaz [21].
The current layout has no internal walls and no furniture in order to reduce the amount of
parameters. Walls are named according to their orientation (N,W,E,S) and the room they
enclose. Concrete is chosen as material for the walls so the t2 fire can be used as stated
in the study by J. Wahlqist and P. van Hees. [29].
A
Fire
10 m
5 m
C
B
D
North
East
West
South
Room01
Figure 6.1: Geometry of the compartment with terminology.
HVAC vents are drawn on the figure 6.1 to demonstrate the default placement and naming
procedure. Nodes are named alphabetically starting with the supply duct (blue), when
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
37
==PAGE:48==
all of the supply network nodes are named the procedure continues alphabetically with
the exhaust system. The ducts connecting the nodes are named according to the flow
conditions at normal use. The supply duct on fig. 6.1 is named DUCT_BA because the air
at normal conditions would be moving from node B to node A.
The location of the fire is chosen such that wall and corner effects are neglected as much
as possible. A central positioning of the fire satisfies this choice best.
Figure 6.2: Fire room as seen in smoke view.
38
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:49==
6.2
Case 1: Base setup
The base setup of the case is one room (the fire room) connected to an HVAC network. In
this case no fans are installed in the network, but pressure losses are implemented such
that they are correct at nominal volume flow of 0.05 m3/s. The only duct losses that are
present is the loss from friction and from the bend between A, B and E, F. The vents A,
E, G, and C all have a loss of 8 which at nominal flow is equal to a loss of 30 Pa. The
intake and exhaust nodes (D, H) are open to ambient with a loss coefficient of 1 to make
the solution more stable.
A
B
C
D
Fire
10 m
5 m
E
F
G
H
Room 01
Room 02
Figure 6.3: Case 1: two compartments connected by HVAC.
Table 6.1: List of HVAC nodes and ducts for case 1.
Component
Supply
Exhaust
Nodes
A, B, C, D
E, F, G, H
Ducts
BA, BC, DB
EF, GF, FH
Vents
A, C, D
E, G, H
Ambient
C, D
G, H
Fans
-
-
Table 6.2: List of HVAC nominal duct parameters for case 1.
Ducts
Diameter [m]
Volume flow [m3/s]
Flow speed [m/s]
BA, BC, EF, GF
0.160
0.05
2.5
DB, FH
0.200
0.10
3.2
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
39
==PAGE:50==
6.3
Introducing relaxation parameters
FDS has some measures to try an alleviate instabilities when using the HVAC module.
Since the FDS pressure solution and the HVAC module are not directly coupled but im-
plicitly coupled by using the average pressure at the node vent, some stability issues may
arise. The keyword HVAC_PRES_RELAX can be used to lag the iteration pressure at the
next time step. Setting this parameter close to 1 will make the solution better at predict-
ing short, transient changes in the pressure, but worse in predicting long term pressure
changes. Setting it closer to 0 increases the dependence on the FDS domain pressure
which is seen to influence the pressure solution of both solvers.
In this case where the pressure change is quite drastic (sharp HRR drop) over a short
amount of time, it makes sense to have the relaxation set closer to 1. In the actual solution
procedure this means that the HVAC node pressure at time step n+1 is close or equal to
the previous node pressure:
pn+1
node = pFDS · (1 −HVAC_PRES_RELAX) + pn
node · HVAC_PRES_RELAX
(6.1)
Where pFDS is the FDS domain pressure averaged at the vent.
Another method than can be applied is the HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE keyword, this parame-
ter can also help reduce the fluctuations. When set to .TRUE. the HVAC solver uses the
zone pressure and the local stagnation part of the pressure at the vent. With the keyword
set to .FASLE. the local stagnant and dynamic part of the pressure solution is used at the
vent, and this can lead to fluctuations between the solvers.
A short parameter study is conducted to show the two keywords impact on a fast growing
fire with the base setup of compartment geometry and HVAC network. The data points are
averaged over 1 second to avoid ”smoothing” over the fluctuations. Left figures fig. 6.4a,
6.5a, and 6.6a show comparison between two settings of the HVAC_PRES_RELAX keyword.
Right figures 6.4b, 6.5b, and 6.6b show comparison between the true and false setting of
the HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE keyword with HVAC_PRES_RELAX set to 0.8.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case1_Fast_r02_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_r08_hrr.csv
(a) HVAC_PRES_RELAX set to 0.2 or 0.8
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Case1_Fast_r08_LPfalse_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_r08_hrr.csv
(b) HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE set to T/F
Figure 6.4: HRR comparisons.
40
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:51==
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case1_Fast_r02_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_r08_hrr.csv
(a) HVAC_PRES_RELAX set to 0.2 or 0.8
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
Case1_Fast_r08_LPfalse_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_r08_hrr.csv
(b) HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE set to T/F
Figure 6.5: Room 01 pressure comparisons.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-100
-50
0
50
100
ZONE_2
[Pa]
Case1_Fast_r02_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_r08_hrr.csv
(a) HVAC_PRES_RELAX set to 0.2 or 0.8
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
Case1_Fast_r08_LPfalse_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_r08_hrr.csv
(b) HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE set to T/F
Figure 6.6: Room 02 pressure comparisons.
Clear benefits of increasing the HVAC_PRES_RELAX is seen on the left hand figures. Com-
paring the right hand side figures with HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE true (red) or false (blue) and
HVAC_PRES_RELAX set to 0.8, also show clear reduction in the size of the fluctuations.
Some other measures to take is to configure the tolerances of the pressure solution by
increasing the number of iterations done by the solver on the pressure solution. Simply
done by setting the keyword MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS to a value higher than 10. While
also setting the PRESSURE_TOLERANCE to a value less than the default 2000.
Another place where some instability issues may arise is where high velocities are present.
Velocities over 100 m/s may lead to inaccurate or even wrong values as the low mach
number approximation is exceeded. In a low ventilated compartment the volume flow cre-
ated by a fire may cause the velocity at vents and in ducts to reach quite high values. In or-
der to resolve the flow entering and leaving these HVAC vents the velocity tolerance (size
of error acceptance) can be lowered by introducing the keyword VELOCITY_TOLERANCE
with a value lower than δx/2 (ie. half of the grid cell size).
The best way to check whether the pressure solution has achieved an acceptable level
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
41
==PAGE:52==
of error is to monitor the number of pressure iterations done at each time step. Setting
the keyword VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE=.TRUE. creates a file where the number pressure
iterations, velocity, and pressure error, can monitored. If the MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS
is 10 (default max iterations) for many of the time steps one should consider to increase
the maximum iterations and decrease the PRESSURE_TOLERANCE. The same procedure
can be done for the VELOCITY_TOLERANCE where values of a magnitude larger than δx/2
should not be observed in the VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE.
FDS definition of relaxation parameters and other instability relieving keywords
&MISC ...,
HVAC_PRES_RELAX=1.0,
HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE=.TRUE./
&PRES CHECK_POISSON=.TRUE.,
PRESSURE_TOLERANCE=2000,
MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS=20,
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE=0.001/
&DUMP NFRAMES=...,
VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE=.TRUE./
//Keep the number of dump frames small enough to
//
//capture any fluctuations, ex. 1 seconds intervals:
//
//NFRAMES = T_END - T_BEGIN,
//
42
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:53==
6.4
Case 1: Mesh independence
Because of the difficulties with modelling an enclosure fire in FDS, the mesh resolution
must be taken out as an uncertain parameter. Case 1 will be used to determine an appro-
priate cell size for the following cases. It is assumed that an adequate mesh study can be
achieved by looking only at the compartment where fire is present. Meaning that room 02
is mimicked as ambient by setting the nodes G and C to ambient conditions. The criteria
for combustion at low oxygen levels is based on the energy (heat) and oxygen/fuel ratio
of the cell, which is why it is important to reach a satisfactory mesh independence in the
fire compartment.
The fire is defined by a simple vent with an assigned constant HRR. A fast t2 fire is im-
plemented in for the growth phase of the fire. The fire base is 4 m2 with a max HRR of
4000 kW, meaning that the HRRPUA input is set equal to 1000 kW/m2 with TAU_Q = -293
seconds.
To achieve a well resolved fire the FDS user-guide and technical reference guide suggest
following some validation cases created to test FDS. These validation cases uses a the-
oretical description of the dimension of a fire to try and give quantity to coarse and fine
mesh cell sizes.
D∗=
(
˙Q
ρ∞cpT∞√g
)2/5
(6.2)
Equation 6.2 is the characteristic diameter of a fire, it may be used to approximate an
appropriate cell size that can resolve the turbulent nature of a fire plume. The user guide
and technical reference guide gives some rough guides to define a coarse, medium, and
fine mesh. In the following table 6.3 these are given for the current fire investigated in this
thesis.
Table 6.3: Grid cell size by resolution of characteristic diameter.
Resolution
Cell size
Rounded
Description
D∗/δx = 4
δx = 0.23
0.20 m
Coarse
D∗/δx = 8
δx = 0.12
0.10 m
Medium
D∗/δx = 16
δx = 0.06
0.05 m
Fine
Because of FDS’s affinity for rectilinear cells (best case is Cartesian cubes), the best
practise for general use is to have cells of equal size in length, width, and height. The
grid sizes shown in table 6.3 are simulated on the cluster and the cpu-time is given in the
following table. For each level of refinement the amount of cells become 8 times higher.
Table 6.4: Comparison of mesh sizes.
Resolution
Cell count
CPU time [h:m:s]
Coarse
16250
[00:06:51]
Medium
130000
[01:57:10]
Fine
1040000
[30:50:00]
The influence of increasing the cell sizes on the pressure should be relatively minor. This
is because the pressure is not a function of the subgrid-scale turbulence or boundary layer
modeling. The pressure is resolved by solving the global mass and energy conservation
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
43
==PAGE:54==
which could theoretically be resolved on a single control volume if the energy and mass
transport are known. The pressure is investigated in any case, but the temperature, heat
release rate, and flow in the HVAC network should be compared more closely.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case1_02_hrr.csv
Case1_01_hrr.csv
Case1_005_hrr.csv
Figure 6.7: Mesh comparison of HRR.
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case1_02_hrr.csv
Case1_01_hrr.csv
Case1_005_hrr.csv
Figure 6.8: Mesh comparison of HRR, zoomed in.
The most crucial part of the HRR to make sure is resolved, is the growth, the max HRR,
and the point of oxygen depletion. On fig. 6.7 the growth phase is seen as quite stable with
no real discrepancies between the meshes. This is expected as the simple combustion
model is employed and FDS only allows combustion to the prescribed point at the given
time. Observing fig. 6.8 makes it clear that the cell size impacts the combustion model
when oxygen concentration is low. Since both combustion is based on concentration and
energy of the cell the finer resolution will capture combustion more accurately. Looking at
the max HRR reached, the mean is the same for all meshes (around 1500 kW).
44
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:55==
The pressure development in the compartment is resolved well by all mesh sizes. This
makes sense since the pressure solution is dependant on global conservation which
should be resolved reasonably by coarser meshes.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case1_02_hrr.csv
Case1_01_hrr.csv
Case1_005_hrr.csv
Figure 6.9: Mesh comparison of pressure in compartment.
One difference that separates the coarse grid from the finer meshes is the time of oxygen
depletion. The difference between the meshes result in a phase shift of the oscillations.
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
Time [s]
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case1_02_hrr.csv
Case1_01_hrr.csv
Case1_005_hrr.csv
Figure 6.10: Mesh comparison of pressure in compartment, zoomed in.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
45
==PAGE:56==
Next is examining the HVAC network performance, like flow velocity and node tempera-
tures. These are directly dependant on the pressure and HRR conditions in the room and
thus important to monitor.
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
Time [s]
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
DUCT_EF_VEL
[m/s]
Case1_02_devc.csv
Case1_01_devc.csv
Case1_005_devc.csv
Figure 6.11: Mesh comparison of exhaust duct velocity, zoomed in.
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
E_TEMP
[C]
Case1_02_devc.csv
Case1_01_devc.csv
Case1_005_devc.csv
Figure 6.12: Mesh comparison of exhaust node temperature, zoomed in.
The node temperature does not vary by much, the sizes are seen to lie close together.
Slight discrepancies are seen at 200-210 seconds. At this time the oxygen depletion is
beginning to take effect and differences become clearer. From fig. 6.10 it can be seen that
the pressure shifts from over to under pressure and that this happens at slightly different
times for the three meshes.
The oscillations have a period of 5-7 seconds, compared to 200 seconds that seems in-
significant. A reasonable assumption might be to take a momentary picture of the average
value that the oscillations hover around. However, one then assumes that the combus-
tion is physically correct even though the fire might be located away from the origin (in
this case the vents).
46
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:57==
Even if the oscillations are a product of some unwanted burning they are of interest. Ob-
serving the later part of the graphs, 200-300 seconds, it is seen that the oscillations are
much better captured by the fine resolution, again leaning into the points made about the
combustion model. The concentrations of fuel and air are captured better as well as the
temperature field. The comparisons seem to indicate that combustion is better facilitated
by smaller mesh sizes.
The mesh refinement is seen to somewhat stabilise between cell sizes of 0.1 and 0.05
meter. Considering the time taken to simulate on the fine mesh the cell size of 0.1 meter
for the fire compartment is chosen.
(a) 200 seconds.
(b) 210 seconds.
(c) 220 seconds.
(d) 230 seconds.
Figure 6.13: Oxygen depletion and beginning of oscillations with combustion at vents.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
47
==PAGE:58==
6.4.1
Meshing of connected rooms
In this test a mesh is created for the connected room, such that the computational time
and results can be compared. The ambient vents C and G are both now assigned a vent
of the same size as vent A and E. In order to reduce the number of unknowns in the
parameter study the heat conduction between rooms are removed by leaving a small gap
between the rooms. This also means that the meshes (thereby pressure zones) become
fully independent of each other, other than the connection by the HVAC network. This
also circumvents the specific meshing rules implied by FDS, and it creates the possibility
of having different mesh sizes for the connected rooms.
Other advantages of not having the meshes ”touching” each other is the use of the
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE pressure solver keyword. Changing the tolerance will impact the
computational time. If the meshes are ”touching”, the VELOCITY_TOLERANCE might need
to be lowered to increase the accuracy between the touching boundaries where more
pressure iterations might be needed. This is also the case if an obstacle (internal wall)
is present in the room, as the velocity close to the obstacle needs to be resolved more
accurately.
The mesh size of the connected room can be any size that the user wants, since the
meshes are not interacting with each other’s boundaries. One might think that since the
connected rooms do not have any fire occurring, calculation can be reduced on the con-
nected rooms by lowering the cell size in these rooms. But this is not a not ideal since
FDS will use equal time stepping for all meshes.
In other words, timings of the solvers are dictated by both the mesh size and the time
steps. If there is more than one mesh FDS will use the time step size dictated by the
mesh where the smallest time step is needed to keep the solver stable. So, even if one
meshes time step is run quickly, it will have to go through the same number of time steps
as a mesh where a time step takes longer to compute.
It would then be detrimental to keep connected mesh smaller as accuracy could be lost.
With no penalty to computational time the meshing of the connected rooms should at least
have the same number of cells as the room with fire present. To illustrate this a simple
test was run where the two different meshes were used in the connected room. The test
was run on case 1 with two cores and each assigned one mesh threaded by 4 processors.
In table 6.5 below the time used waiting for calculations to be concluded is shown as the
COMM header (from the ’_cpu.csv’ output file). The time used waiting is a reflection of
efficiency, where for optimal cases should be equal to both the fire room and connected
room meshes.
Table 6.5: Comparison of CPU time usage for meshing of connected room.
Test name
Mesh 1
Mesh 2
COMM
CPU time
Time steps
time spent waiting
[h:m:s]
Equal mesh
0.1 m
0.1 m
7%
[02:17:18]
16433
Un-equal mesh
0.1 m
0.2 m
82%
[02:11:50]
16846
The 82% of time spent waiting, shows that decreasing the number of cells in the connected
room is in-efficient even if the two meshes are not interacting directly. This is a result
showing that the time steps are being determined by the fire mesh, meaning that many
more time steps than ”needed” are processed for mesh 2.
48
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:59==
6.4.2
Case 1: Design fire tests
There are some different methods that should be considered when implementing the fire
as mentioned in the prior chapter. With the relaxation parameters and settings the stan-
dard t2 fires are simulated without any fans in the HVAC network.
The HRR is implemented in FDS after the definitions in table 4.2 and the following results
are seen:
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
HRR
[kW]
Case1_Medium_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_hrr.csv
Case1_Ultra_fast_hrr.csv
Figure 6.14: HRR profile of different growth factors.
The HRR never reaches the 4 MW that has been set as maximum. The fire is starved
of oxygen because of the pressure build-up is forcing air out of the open vents. Until this
oxygen depletion takes effect the t2 curve is followed very accurately by FDS as can be
seen in fig. 6.15.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Time [s]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
HRR [kW]
FDS HRR
Fast t2 definition
Figure 6.15: Comparison of FDS fast HRR and defined t2 fire.
Looking at the main result, the pressure development, similar effects compared to results
in the literature study are found. A comparison between the results of this thesis and the
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
49
==PAGE:60==
thesis by M. Riaz [21] can be seen on the following figures 6.16 and 6.17. The actual
numbers should not be compared but the shape of the different growth factors should be.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Time [s]
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case1_Medium_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_hrr.csv
Case1_Ultra_fast_hrr.csv
Figure 6.16: Pressure development found in Room 01 of case 1.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Time [s]
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Pressure
[Pa]
Ultra fast
Fast
Medium
Figure 6.17: Pressure development in ”Near-zero” Envelope redrawn after M. Riaz [21].
As seen the general shape of the pressure is similar. As also found in the literature study,
the pressure is seen to be hugely dependant on the growth speed of the fire. Where the
faster growth speed greatly increases the peak pressure. The reason for the similarity
between the two separate simulations is that the mass of readily available oxygen in the
compartment is the same as the geometry of the two are identical. The point of oxygen
depletion must then be similar as is also seen.
50
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:61==
The HRR never reaches the 4000 kW as defined in the input file. It is therefore interesting
to take a closer look at the oxygen concentration in the room. The development of the
oxygen concentration is found by taking a point measurement away from the fire, making
a more stable readout of values.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Time [s]
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
O2vol
[mol/mol]
Case1_Medium_devc.csv
Case1_Fast_devc.csv
Case1_Ultra_fast_devc.csv
Figure 6.18: Oxygen depletion in the compartment.
Together with the HRR and the oxygen concentration figures, it becomes apparent that
two scenarios are of importance. The first considers a full extinction of the fire, meaning
a HRR of 0 at the point where the oxygen concentrations reaches the lowest stable point.
On fig. 6.18 this is around 11-12 % which is a lower value than the table value of LOC for n-
Heptane which is 13.4 % [34]. This is due to model FDS uses to predict if combustion will
happen as the temperature lowers the limit of combustion. The other scenario is where
new oxygen enters the room and combustion of the fuel can re-ignite. This could as seen
in [7] give rise to oscillating combustion.
6.4.3
Impact of surface material
Wahlqvist and van Hees [29] did, as stated in the literature study, similar and more thor-
ough simulations on this exact subject. The purpose of their investigations were to see
if a design fire such as the t2 fire was well represented in a compartment fire scenario.
The simple answer was that the t2 growth in compartments generally reached peak HRR
earlier than with the normal definition. The effect was most apparent if the surfaces was
made of some very insulating material like gypsum or insulation bats. The effect was
less severe (negligible) for thermally thin or large heat storing capacity materials. The
researchers concluded that materials such as concrete could be used with little to no
repercussions. The choice has been taken here to go forth with concrete as the envelope
material to keep the validity of the t2 fire.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
51
==PAGE:62==
6.4.4
Extinction or continued burning
As mentioned in the literature study and in the theory section, three phenomena should
be considered. Steady continued burning, oscillating behaviour, or rapid extinction. The
steady burning must be supplied by oxygen to be able to continue combustion.
With the simple combustion model applied in FDS, the three behaviour regimes of under
ventilated fires are hard to recreate or predict. In terms of the simple combustion model the
rapid extinction of the fire shortly after the point of oxygen depletion seems appropriate.
However, continued burning is also seen and both regimes may be equally valid, where
the HRR becomes dependant on the supplied air flow. The oscillations seen in the early
tests are of much higher frequency than most references have reported. The study [18]
references other work reporting oscillations of 0.2-0.002 Hertz or periods of 5-50 seconds.
The study it self finds periods of 150-200 seconds, finding that the range is relatively large.
A specialised design fire is made in this section to test how a designer could implement
either continued burning or rapid extinction. The simple fast fire is already shown above,
this is where the default setting of AIT is used. The resulting HRR development shows
continued burning at the locations where oxygen can enter the compartment, ex at vents
or over entire leakage surfaces with high frequency oscillatory behaviour.
If a designer would want to simulate a fire continuing to burn after the point of oxygen
depletion the method shown above could satisfy this with the caveat of not being able to
verify/validate the physical location of the fire.
A more realistic prediction of extinction may be implemented by including the AIT parame-
ter. The default AIT definition allows for fire to burn wherever the oxygen/fuel ratio allows
it. The Auto Ignition Temperature of the current fuel, n-Heptane, lie in the span of 223-255
°C depending on the test vessel size [26]. But, even by implementing the AIT one can not
be sure that the combustion limits are correctly predicted for low ventilated compartments
by FDS, as discussed in [20]. Five AIT values are here tested with the following FDS
input.
The AIT keyword should be given on the REAC line. The following lines of FDS input
creates a fast growing fire with a max HRR of 4000 kW.
FDS definition of fuel and fire with AIT implemented.
---FUEL
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
FYI = 'Heptane, C_7 H_16'
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 44600
AUTO_IGNITION_TEMPERATURE=223/
---OUTPUT
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE',
HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-293, TMP_FRONT=98.0/
---FIRE VENT
&VENT XB=..., SURF_ID='FIRE'/
52
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:63==
Because the AIT value is now larger than ambient temperature, the fuel will not ignite
on its own. A source of ignition needs to be introduced to initiate combustion. In this
case a box with surface temperatures of 900 °C is used to heat up the fuel and initiate
combustion. The box is timed by iterative testing and found to sustain a fast fire if present
for 80 seconds. The inclusion of this box is purely a means of igniting the fuel and should
not impact the growth or output of the fire, it is removed after 80 seconds of heating, with
little impact to the HRR as seen on fig. 6.19 and fig. 6.21.
FDS definition of fuel igniter configured for fast fire
---FUEL IGNITER
&OBST XB=..., DEVC_ID='TIMER',
SURF_IDS='HOT_SURF','HOT_SURF','HOT_SURF' /
&DEVC ID='TIMER', XYZ=..., QUANTITY='TIME',
SETPOINT= 80.0,INITIAL_STATE=.TRUE. /
&SURF ID='HOT_SURF', TMP_FRONT=900.0, TMP_INNER=900.0,
RAMP_T='HotRamp', COLOR='RED' /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T= 0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T= 1.0, F=1.0 /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T=80.0, F=1.0 /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T=81.0, F=0.0 /
The resulting HRR and pressure developments are compared.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case1_AIT_220_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_230_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_240_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_250_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_260_hrr.csv
Figure 6.19: Comparison between HRR profiles with different values of AIT.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
53
==PAGE:64==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case1_AIT_220_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_230_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_240_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_250_hrr.csv
Case1_AIT_260_hrr.csv
Figure 6.20: Comparison between pressure profiles with different values of AIT.
From the figures it is seen that all of the fires die out some time after the point of oxygen
depletion. A large variation between the Heat release rates after the oxygen depletion is
seen. The reason for this is the resulting pressure drop causing oxygen to enter the room.
As reported in the previous test the influx of new oxygen creates an oscillatory behaviour
of the HRR and pressure. Inclusion of the auto ignition temperature shows a different
behaviour. The oscillating behaviour is still present and in some cases enlarged, but all
of the simulations show that the fire is eventually extinguished. The simulations with AIT
250 and 260 show huge spikes in HRR after the pressure drop, almost back-draft like
phenomena is seen.
A designer may have to consider the case where the fire dies out completely. With an
AIT of 240 °C complete extinction occurs exactly at the point of oxygen depletion. This
test also shows a larger pressure drop than the tests without AIT defined. The HRR
development between the simulation with and without AIT of 240 °C is shown in the figure
below.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case1_AIT_240_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_hrr.csv
Figure 6.21: Comparison between HRR profiles of test with and without the AIT.
54
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:65==
The influence of the grid size may have an effect on the behaviour as discussed in [20].
A grid analysis would be interesting to conduct with the inclusion of the AIT parameter to
see how it would affect the behaviour after oxygen depletion. Because of time constraints
a grid analysis with AIT is unfortunately omitted.
A design fire is developed to simplify the the full extinction seen with an AIT of 240 °C. From
the figure above 6.21 it is seen that the growth phase is not really affected by the inclusion
of the AIT. From a designers perspective the simulation might as well have been run with
default AIT, meaning fuel will ignite independent of the temperature. To simulate the full
extinction a HRR RAMP can be created which drops to 0 at the same time simulated by
the AIT tests.
A simple script is created to help time the point of oxygen depletion and create an ap-
propriate RAMP (see appendix E). The script takes the FDS output files _hrr.csv and
_devc.csv of the fast growing fire test FDS working folder and finds the limiting oxygen
concentration in the compartment.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
O2vol [mol/mol]
Extinction point
Mean of LOC = 0.11706 [mol/mol]
Figure 6.22: Oxygen in compartment showing a stable limiting oxygen concentration.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR [kW]
Simulated HRR
RAMP HRR
Extinction point
Figure 6.23: Comparison between created ramp and simulated HRR without AIT.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
55
==PAGE:66==
The resulting HRR and pressure profiles clearly show that the simplification of not includ-
ing the AIT parameter can be done as long as it is assumed that the fire will extinguish
itself at the point of oxygen depletion.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case1_AIT_240_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_RAMP_hrr.csv
Figure 6.24: Comparison of HRR profiles for AIT, simple, and Ramp simulations.
A difference is seen in the pressure drop between the AIT_240 and RAMP tests. From
the HRR it is seen that the combustion is not entirely stopped at the same time. The small
amount of extra combustion at 220-250 seconds, for the RAMP test, results in an earlier
pressure relief compared to the AIT_240 test. The impact of this will however depend on
how abruptly the HRR is cut off and an appropriate HRR RAMP may be different than the
one suggested.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-2500
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case1_AIT_240_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_hrr.csv
Case1_Fast_RAMP_hrr.csv
Figure 6.25: Comparison of pressure profiles for AIT, simple, and Ramp simulations.
From a designers perspective the inclusion of the AIT parameter further increases the
complexity and workload. Assuming that the combustion behaviour after oxygen depletion
is dependant on more than just the AIT value as discussed in the literature study. It is then
up to the designer to determine whether or not this assumption is okay and also how the
HRR RAMP should scale down the HRR at the point of oxygen depletion. In this thesis
the rest of the simulations is done with the default value of AIT (-273 °C) to show the
implications of the continued burning and subsequent oscillating behaviour.
56
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:67==
6.4.5
Leakage test
The first couple of test simulations concern the leakage methods described earlier. Best
procedure is to first test the method with no fire. This is usually done by implementing a
simple vent with a specified volume flow rate. This flow rate should be equal to the flow
specified when defining the leakage area in eq. (4.22). The following figure shows the
impact of implementing the bulk- or localised-leakage methods. In these simulations the
supply and exhaust vents are removed so that only the leakage model is tested.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Bulk_wFire_hrr.csv
Localised_wFire_hrr.csv
Localised_wFire_wLeakEnthalpy_hrr.csv
Figure 6.26: Heat release rate in compartment with different leak methods
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
-10000
-5000
0
5000
10000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Bulk_wFire_hrr.csv
Localised_wFire_hrr.csv
Localised_wFire_wLeakEnthalpy_hrr.csv
Figure 6.27: Pressure development in compartment with different leak methods
The first thing observed is the appearance of oscillations when going from bulk- to lo-
calised leakage. It seems that having a more localised leakage better facilitates combus-
tion creating oscillations due to the shifts in positive and negative pressure. Since both the
bulk, and localised methods use a modification of the HVAC module, the concentration of
the leak must be of influence to the oscillations.
This simple test shows that both methods behave the same way during the pressure
increase, but different when the pressure drop happens. The abrupt drop in HRR is due
to oxygen depletion (more on this later) and this abrupt loss in heat gain creates an under
pressure where new air can be drawn in through the specified leak. When this influx of
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
57
==PAGE:68==
new air happens the two models behave differently. The localised leak draws in air faster
than the bulk leakage due to a re-ignition close to the specified local leakage vent.
(a) Bulk leakage
(b) Local leakage
Figure 6.28: Combustion happening after oxygen depletion due to leaking air entering the
compartment.
The localised leak seems to help increase the HRR, possibly because of the concentrated
area of air entering. For the bulk leakage sporadic combustion is happening at every
surface specified with a leakage. Due to the concentrated burning a spike in is seen for
the local leakage (at 225 seconds) were the pressure follows shortly as the temperature
and thus pressure will increase as a result. The same is seen to a lesser degree for the
bulk leak, here the sporadic burning increases the pressure more gradually.
6.5
CFAST modeling and validation of FDS
Best case for validation of results, would be to have experimental data to compare against.
This is rarely the case with regular work done by engineers in practise, as the problems are
most probably outside the scope of experimental applicability. Another validation method
is to compare against idealised models were one is certain that physical laws are obeyed
and the simpler model can be better defended. These idealised models usually give some
bounds on the parameters ie. maximum or minimum of expected quantities. One such
model concerning fire dynamics is the two (or one) zone model governed by transport
equations applied to mass and energy of a control volume.
The zone model is widely applied by both researchers and engineers because of its very
simple nature. As an engineering approach the zone model is more attractive because of
the simple application and time consumption versus a CFD code such as FDS. The two
zone model excels where defined stratification is present in the gas of the control volume.
The simple zone model is used to gain some form of validity in the more complex re-
sults of FDS. Even though the reviewed literature states that low-ventilated compartment
fires develop more gradual temperate profiles. The comparison is also used to show the
limitations of a simpler model.
Instead of calculating by hand or script, which would take some time away from the thesis
and is somewhat out of scope, the program CFAST is employed. CFAST is similar to FDS
and developed by the same organisation (NIST). CFAST essentially solves the two/single
zone model where the governing equations solves two balances; one between mass,
based on pressure differences; and one between energy, based on balance between
energy released by the fire and energy leaving the compartment.
Because CFAST is a simpler model, some effects like leakage and combustion, are not
as detailed as they are in FDS. In the CFAST model a vent is created at one of the walls
with a area of 0.0055 m2 simulating the leakage defined in FDS with the same area.
58
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:69==
In the following figures, leakage-test comparisons are shown between FDS and CFAST.
Several parameters are monitored including the CFAST zone temperatures and FDS ap-
proximated zone temperatures.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
HRR
[kW]
FDS HRR
Two zone LOC=15%
Two zone LOC=13%
Single zone LOC=15%
Single zone LOC=13%
Figure 6.29: HRR comparison between CFAST and FDS.
From the comparison between the significance of correcting the limiting oxygen concen-
tration is seen. The limiting oxygen concentration for heptane is 13.4% while not account-
ing for temperature rise. CFAST simply monitors the mass concentration of oxygen in the
room and limits the HRR accordingly. Both the two zone and single zone model closely
follows the oxygen depletion. However, the single zone model better predicts the oxygen
starved HRR after the oxygen depletion. Observing the oxygen concentration fig. 6.30 for
the single zone model the importance of configuring the LOC is seen.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
Oxygen concentration
[mol/mol]
FDS
Single zone LOC=15%
Single zone LOC=13%
Figure 6.30: Oxygen concentration comparison between single zone and FDS.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
59
==PAGE:70==
A two zone model only captures the temperature in the upper and lower zones where
FDS can capture the temperature at the center of every mesh cell. It is therefore possi-
ble to make continuous measurements in FDS, which usually results in more gradually
changing temperature profiles. To be able to compare FDS against two zone models an
approximation of a two zone model has been implemented as an output quantity in FDS
this is what is compared with CFAST in the following figure.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
Temperature
[C]
FDS Upper layer
FDS Lower layer
Two zone Upper layer
Two zone Lower layer
Single zone
Figure 6.31: Upper- and lower-layer temperature comparison between CFAST and FDS.
By comparing the temperatures it is seen that the single zone model better describes the
conditions in the FDS model but the temperatures in the FDS model is significantly higher
than the zone models. The temperatures found in FDS lie somewhat close together imply-
ing a much more uniform distribution of the temperature. Referring back to the literature
study this was also found in some experiments where the smoke layer relatively quickly
filled the entire enclosure. Looking at the smoke layer height fig. 6.32 the difference is
explained more clearly. The smoke layer quite drastically dominates in the FDS simula-
tion, and the stratified assumption is clearly a worse choice compared to the single zone
model in this case.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
Layer height
[m]
FDS
FDS mean
Two zone LOC=15%
Two zone LOC=13%
Figure 6.32: Layer height from ceiling, comparison between two zone and FDS.
60
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:71==
A significant effect that CFAST can not predict is the pyrolysis rate in oxygen starved
environments. CFAST purely reflects the HRR specified by the user, the paralysis rate
is assumed fixed and only the magnitude of the plume energy released is changed by a
empirical relation based on the amount of available oxygen (per CFAST technical guide).
In FDS the pyrolysis rate changes with the availability of oxygen reducing the release of
burned species. The differences between CFAST and FDS results in CFAST predicting
higher pressures in oxygen starved compartments because of the comparatively higher
release rate of combustion species. Part of this effect is seen on fig. 6.33 where the
predicted pressure by CFAST is much higher than found by FDS. This must, as explained,
be partly because of the limitations in CFAST but may also be attributed to the difference
in leakage modelling between the two models.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Time [s]
-10000
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
Pressure
[Pa]
FDS Pressure
Two zone LOC=15%
Two zone LOC=13%
Single zone LOC=15%
Single zone LOC=13%
Figure 6.33: Pressure development comparison between CFAST and FDS.
CFAST quite accurately represents the HRR and especially the point of oxygen depletion.
A question then arises, ”why not use CFAST instead of FDS?”
Although benefits of using a simpler model are large in terms of time spent simulating.
FDS can handle many more effects of a fire, in addition to also being able to simulate a
HVAC network. Another reason not to choose CFAST in this particular case with low leak-
age compartment fires, is that the literature study showed that the two zone model may
not be applicable to these kinds of scenarios. A defined upper and lower zone or single
zone may not develop in these cases and this is a problem for CFAST which assumes
either strong stratification or uniform zone parameters. The discussion made on the differ-
ences between FDS and CFAST should not be taken as definitive answers. For a better
comparison the FDS model could be configured to use simpler models, but this some-
what goes against the use of FDS in the first place. All in all FDS can predict the fire more
accurately while simultaneously taking into consideration several more effects. From the
results in this test CFAST is seen to predict the HRR relatively accurately. An engineer
should be able to use CFAST for a quick estimate of the point of oxygen depletion.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
61
==PAGE:72==
6.6
Case 1: Concluding remarks
Stability keywords
A short description of the most relevant HVAC and pressure solver settings are found.
Supplemented by a short parameter study on the HVAC_PRES_RELAX, HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE
is carried out showing the effect of including either one or both. The pressure solver it-
erations are examined by including the VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE on the DUMP line. When
simulating several compartments the amount of iterations by the pressure solver can be
lowered substantially by not having the meshes touch boundaries.
Mesh analysis
During the mesh analysis it became apparent that the majority of the main outputs like
HRR, pressure, and duct velocities differ only very slightly. A difference is seen in the
timing of the rapid drop of HRR. For the 0.1 and 0.05 meter grids the time to the drop
is longer than the 0.2 grid. The fluctuations or oscillations of the HRR is seen to be
slightly dependant on the grid size. The fine mesh of 0.05 grid show larger (not extremely)
oscillations than the other grids, especially for the duct velocities. It is explained by the
combustion’s dependence on the fuel to air ratio, which can be more accurately estimated
by smaller grid volumes. Meshing of multiple rooms is explored by running simulations
of two different grid sizes for the connected room. For efficient use of FDS, all meshes
should have equal gridding. A coarse mesh would result in wasted CPU time as it would
sit idle and wait for the finer mesh to be resolved.
Design fire
With the findings of the previous analyses the medium, fast, and ultra-fast t2 definitions are
tested. For all fire growths the MAX HRR of 4000 kW is never reached. At some point the
level of oxygen concentration causes a drop in the HRR and thereby the pressure. The
shapes of the different pressure developments are seen to correlate well with literature.
Extinction
Three different behaviours of the fire is portrayed in literature. In order to try and get
a more precise solution different values of the AIT parameter was tested. In this case
the rapid extinction behaviour seemed most appropriate. All tests eventually showed
complete extinction of the fire. Some of the higher value ignition temperatures resulted in
back-draft like phenomena where a lot of air would enter the compartment before it was
ignited. A design fire modelling the rapid extinction was made using a script that could
find the limiting oxygen concentration. The rapid extinction design fire correlates well with
the AIT test.
Leakage
In literature it has been seen that leakage of the envelope has large impact on the pres-
sure peak. FDS operates between two models of leakage, both are tested. No significant
difference is seen for either HRR or pressure until after the HRR drop. The Bulk leakage
method introduces new air slower than the localised leakage method. A larger concen-
tration of air enters at the localised leakage compared to over the entire envelope surface
for the bulk leakage method.
CFAST model
A CFAST simulation is conducted to show the limitations and validate the base FDS cal-
culations. HRR and oxygen concentration are well represented, as well as the drop in
HRR or point of oxygen depletion. The temperature is higher in the FDS model compared
to CFAST and a single zone model is seen to better predict the conditions of the room. A
large difference is seen for the pressure development, the simpler combustion model of
CFAST is believed to be the main cause.
62
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:73==
7
Parameter study: Case 2
A two story building with five compartments connected on each floor. A vertical main duct
connects the two floors. The case will be used to study different configurations of the
HVAC network. The different configurations should show the current method of mitigating
smoke spread via HVAC networks. The case is simulated with realistic fans and pres-
sure losses (with the assumptions made in the previous case) in order to capture realistic
figures of the different configurations.
Criteria for success is also introduced by monitoring smoke spread to the connected
rooms. Any smoke spread will result in a failure since the danish standard requires no
spread of smoke between rooms. The results of the tests are shown qualitatively by look-
ing at the soot density on smokeview, supplemented with figures of the flow in the relevant
ducts.
Floor 0
Floor 1
Room 01
Room 02
Room 03
Room 04
Room 05
Room 11
Room 12
Room 13
Room 14
Room 15
Figure 7.1: Two floor setup of compartments and HVAC connections for case 2.
Case 2 should be considered a worst case scenario with a fire that is almost purely ventila-
tion controlled. From the earlier case it was seen that the initial amount of oxygen available
in the room strongly dictates the point of oxygen depletion. The fire implemented is the
worst fast growing fire that can be present in a closed compartment with this geometry.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
63
==PAGE:74==
Five HVAC configurations are simulated to show and compare the performance of the
current system.
Test 0: Nominal flow case, fans are configured to give correct flow.
Test 1: Running the supply and exhaust normally with no dampers.
Test 2: Exhaust and supply fans are turned off.
Test 3: Standard practise, Exhaust fan running, dampers closed in supply ducts.
For clarification the geometry and layout of the compartments and HVAC system is shown
in the following figures 7.2 and 7.3. From results found in the earlier case it is seen that the
calculation can be simplified substantially by leaving a gap between the meshes (10 cm
is used in this case). No heat transfer or leakage is modelled between the compartments.
Leakage is applied only to the external walls.
Fire
10 m
5 m
Room 01
Room 02
Room 03
Room 04
Room 05
A
B
D
F
H
J
C
E
G
I
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
5.1 m
5.1 m
1 m
1 m
0.1 m
Figure 7.2: Case 2 floor naming of HVAC network nodes.
Table 7.1: List of HVAC floor nodes and ducts for case 2
Floor 1-2*
Supply
Exhaust
Nodes
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J
K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T
Ducts
BA, BC, DB, DE, FD, GH, IH, HJ
KL, ML, LN, ON, NP, QP, PR, SR, RT
Vents
A, C, E, G, I
K, M, O, Q, S
Dampers
BA, BC, DE, FG, HI
-
*HVAC network nodes and ducts are named after the floor level ex. floor 1: node A1, B1,
duct BA1
64
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:75==
The vertical main supply and exhaust HVAC layout is seen on the following figure. A small
duct with a length of 1 meter is created to house the fan. The fan is placed 4 meters above
the branch going to floor 1.
T0
3 m
J0
Exhaust Fan
Room05
Room15
4 m
T1
J1
Supply Fan
T2
J2
T3
J3
2 m
2.6 m
Figure 7.3: Case 2 naming of vertical main HVAC network nodes.
Table 7.2: List of HVAC main vertical nodes and ducts for case 2
Vertical mains*
Supply
Exhaust
Nodes
J0, J1, J2, J3
T0, T1, T2, T3
Ducts
J1J0, J2J1, J3J2
T0T1, T1T2, T2T3
Ambient
J3
T3
Fans
J3J2
T2T3
*Vertical HVAC network nodes and ducts are named in a similar way to the floor branches.
The connected nodes dictates the naming of the ducts, where the nominal flow direction
dictates the order.
The FDS job is run on the HPC cluster by asking for 10 MPI processes split 5 per node.
Each MPI process is threaded by using 4 cores on the node. 5 · 4 = 20, one node has 20
cores, meaning the entire job will use two nodes. See the following batch script snippet
#BSUB -n 10
#BSUB -R "span[ptile=5] affinity[core(4)]"
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
65
==PAGE:76==
7.1
Case 2: Test 0 - Nominal flow test
The size of the HVAC network is relatively large compared to the previous tests. As
suggested in the FDS theory and application section, a test is performed to verify the
nominal flow conditions in the network. Five rooms that all must be supplied by 0.05 m3/s
of air gives 0.25 m3/s for one floor and 0.5 m3/s for both floors.
The implemented fan is modelled by a quadratic fan curve tuned to give the correct volume
flow of 0.5 m3/s at a pressure loss of roughly 50 Pa.
The performance is tested without fire and the following figures verify that the fan imple-
mented can satisfy the supply requirements and the model accurately depicts the intended
flow. In the main ducts the volume flow should start from duct JH with a value of 0.25 m3/s
and fall by 0.05 m3/s for each tee. The HVAC solver is seen to find a steady solution at
around 5 seconds fig. 7.4.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Volume flow [m3/s]
BA0
DB0
FD0
HF0
JH0
(a) Main supply ducts.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
BA0
BC0
DE0
FG0
HI0
(b) Branch supply ducts.
Figure 7.4: Volume flow in supply ducts of floor 0.
The stable value for the supply vent ducts are not precisely 0.05 m3/s. In a real HVAC
system, dampers would be installed in each branch duct and adjusted to balance the flow.
For example, the damper in duct HI0 and FG0 would be closed slightly to decrease the
flow, this would in turn increase the supplied flow to ducts, DE0, BC0, and BA0. The dif-
ference seen in fig. 7.4b is not large considering the relative accuracy when dimensioning
HVAC networks. It is assumed that possible effects of not fine tuning the system would
be negligible.
An entire separate study could go into detail of the impact of hot gasses and smoke trans-
port in ducts. FDS can not model heat loss or damage to the ducts and should in this
case be considered as transporting of mass only.
The pressure that a fan must deliver is given by the largest total pressure drop in the
system. In this case where the tee losses are neglected the largest pressure loss is found
at the point longest from the fan (ie. nodes connected to room 01).
66
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:77==
A quick hand calculation of the pressure loss from room 01 to the fan assuming a friction
loss of 0.5 Pa/m (good estimate acc. [31]) gives a pressure loss of 47 Pa. Note the differ-
ence in height has minuscule effect as the temperature is constant and the atmospheric
presssure change is very small.
∆pvent,A = 30 Pa
∆pfriction = 0.5 Pa/m · 34.5 m = 17.25 Pa
∆p = pvent,A + pfriction = 47.25 Pa
The fan pressure found by the HVAC solver is slightly larger than the estimate, this is
due to the assumption of a constant loss of 0.5 Pa/m. In the actual simulation the friction
loss is calculated dynamically and the loss may be slightly larger than the assumed value.
Again the value stabilises at around 5 seconds.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time [s]
35
40
45
50
55
60
 Pressure [Pa]
SUPPLY_FAN_PRES
EXHAUST_FAN_PRES
Figure 7.5: Pressure supplied by the fans.
In reality the loss would be larger because of other components in the network. The
HVAC unit especially contributes to the pressure loss as it usually consists of filters and
other components that hinder the flow. A rough estimate of the pressure loss of an HVAC
unit is given in [31] were a variable air volume unit that has to deliver 0.5 m3/s has an
approximate loss of 200 Pa.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
67
==PAGE:78==
7.2
Case 2: Test 1 - HVAC on
In this test the default performance of the HVAC network will be monitored. A more realistic
fan curve is implemented along with a loss of 200 Pa over the fan to simulate the HVAC
unit components as described in the earlier section. Realistic vent fittings are also found
to show that the implemented 30 Pa pressure loss is realistic appendix G.
The needed volume flow is as specified above eaual to 0.5 m3/s or 1800 m3/h.
A
BESB315-4-1FC ventilator unit from Exhausto1 is implemented as supply and exhaust
fan. It has its optimal operating range at a flow of 1930 m3/h at a total driving pressure of
371 Pa appendix G.
The quadratic fan curve is defined by a max pressure and max volume flow. The maximum
pressure defines the point where the volume flow is 0 and the maximum volume flow
defines the point of 0 pressure. The fan flow that FDS employs is found at the point
where the HVAC solver find equilibrium between the pressure loss (∆p) in the system
and the flow at that point on the fan curve. The quadratic fan curve is defined by the
following relation [28]:
˙V (∆p) = ˙Vmax · sign(∆Pmax −∆p)
√
|∆p −∆Pmax|
∆Pmax
(7.1)
Using a max pressure of 600 Pa and a max flow of 1000 L/s (or 1.0 m3/s) a reasonable
approximation to the box ventilator fan curve can be seen on fig. 7.6. This is not the same
fan curve used in the HVAC test(0) because now the fan is working to its full capacity and
not limited in power as in the previous test.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Volume flow [L/s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Total Pressure [Pa]
Figure 7.6: Quadratic fan curve compared with box ventilator BESB315 appendix G
The quadratic curve can go outside of the limits of the actual ventilator. It is assumed that
this is an appropriate assumption as volume flows above the max flow would result in a
negative pressure difference acting as a hindrance rather than a drive of the flow. Just
like a stationary fan would hinder the flow like a damper.
1Industry developer and manufacturer of HVAC units and components
68
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:79==
In reality the outer limits of a ventilator fan are not defined and the designer would have
to make assumptions on the characteristics outside of the technical information, as is
done here. It is possible that some ventilator fans would not be able to operate outside
of its limits. Temperature and air density will have an impact en the fan curve but the
impact of high or very high temperatures are not tested or documented by manufactures.
The BESB315 ventilator box is functional at temperatures up to 80 °C according to the
manufacturer.
7.2.1
Test 1: Results
The results of test 1 should show smoke spread through the HVAC network as the supply
dampers are open. Contrary to standard practise were dampers are closed in the supply
network when the temperature sensors detect temperatures of 72 °C2. The primary results
to consider first is the output of the fire and the pressure development in the compartment.
The results can be seen in the following figures where the output is averaged over 9
seconds.
From FDS the print interval is user configured to output every 1 seconds, but by averaging
over 9 seconds the oscillations are ”removed”. The oscillations are still a result of com-
bustion close to the vents and the instantaneous transport of flow from the HVAC solver
at each time step. The physical location of the fire has not been verified after oxygen
depletion, as described in the previous sections.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Moving mean over 1 sec.
Moving mean over 9 sec.
(a) HRR
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Moving mean over 1 sec.
Moving mean over 9 sec.
(b) Pressure
Figure 7.7: Primary results of case 2 - test 1
By averaging the output an assumption is made; the fire is seen as only an output of heat,
smoke, and pressure. The flow impact of the oscillating combustion is neglected but the
mean value is kept intact. The model has been verified with CFAST up to the point of
oxygen depletion. Validity of the results after this point (roughly 200-210 seconds) are
uncertain.
2A temperature of 72 °C is used because of two reasons, 1: it was historically (also used today) the melting
point of a mechanical fuse installed in the damper. The fuse would melt causing the damper to close by a
spring mechanism, 2: the detection temperature should be high enough to not cause unwanted activation of
the damper.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
69
==PAGE:80==
HVAC parameter results will show the conditions in the ducts and if smoke spread is
occurring. The volume flow in the ducts is captured in fig. 7.8 for both the supply and
exhaust ducts. The dashed line indicates a flow of 0 m3/s, that if crossed means reversed
flow in duct. The flow is clearly seen to change closely related to the pressure conditions
in the compartment. In the supply ducts especially the flow is seen to reverse. Duct BA0
is the supply duct connected to the fire compartment and is first to experience a negative
flow, allowing for smoke to spread into the HVAC system.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Volume flow [m3/s]
BA0
DB0
FD0
HF0
JH0
(a) Supply ducts.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
KL0
LN0
NP0
PR0
RT0
(b) Exhaust ducts.
Figure 7.8: Volume flow in HVAC ducts on floor 0.
For the exhaust ducts it is seen that the flow is not changing direction for the majority of
the time, until the point of oxygen depletion where a sharp drop happens. Because of the
pressure drop the flow reverses in duct KL0 and LN0 meaning that smoke is entering the
exhaust HVAC system. This can be seen if studied in smokeview as ”pulsating” puffs of
smoke in the remaining compartments.
70
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:81==
The smoke is visualised qualitatively by looking at the soot density in smokeview. The
next figures are seen from the south facade looking directly into the compartments.
Figure 7.9: Soot density at 60 seconds (first visual indication of smoke spread).
Figure 7.10: Soot density at 135 seconds (pressure peak).
Figure 7.11: Soot density at 210 seconds (point of oxygen depletion).
Looking at the figures above it is clearly visualised why the procedure of placing dampers
in the supply ducts is the current method for avoiding smoke spread via ventilation net-
works. In fig. 7.9 a slight indication of smoke spread trough the supply duct can be ob-
served in room 02 (supply vent is placed toward the east wall of the rooms).
The maximum reversed flow is found at the pressure peak at around 135 seconds. fig. 7.10
captures this point where slight smoke spread is also observed at the supply vents on floor
1. This smoke is quickly dissipated and disappears from visibility shortly after the peak.
The HVAC solver model is clearly seen in this figure as the node model instantaneously
at 135 seconds, shows smoke spread in all of the rooms on floor 1.
The reversed flow is ongoing for roughly 140 seconds until the point of oxygen depletion
that can be observed on fig. 7.11. In this test the stay-in-place practise would not be
appropriate.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
71
==PAGE:82==
It is of interest to take a look at the temperatures in the room and duct system. The
temperature in the fire compartment is captured by a vertical array of 10 points.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
Temperature [C]
0.00 m
0.29 m
0.58 m
0.87 m
1.16 m
1.44 m
1.73 m
2.02 m
2.31 m
2.60 m
Figure 7.12: Temperature profile monitored halfway between fire source and vents.
Dampers normally installed in HVAC networks are triggered by a temperature sensor.
These sensors are normally configured to activate at 72 °C. A closer look at the supply
vent temperatures can be seen on fig. 7.13.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
Node temperature [C]
A0
C0
E0
G0
I0
Figure 7.13: Temperature at supply vent nodes, black line indicates 72 °C.
From the results it is seen that a temperature of 72 °C is reached at 84 seconds. In this
case that means that some smoke spread would have been possible.
72
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:83==
7.3
Case 2: Test 2 - HVAC off
Because the reliability is of interest to designers a scenario where the HVAC fans are
not running can be used as a bounding scenario. This configuration in fact simulates a
scenario where the dampers are malfunctioning (not closing) and both fans are stopped.
The fans are not removed but simulated by a pressure loss, or so called ”flue gas resis-
tance”. The loss is given by the manufacturer and acts like a vent loss appendix G. The
loss is implemented instead of the fan in the FDS input file.
7.3.1
Test 2: Results
The primary results are shown below for the fire compartment. From the perspective of
the HVAC network the driving force is now the fire in the compartment. Smoke spread
seems inevitable as the fire is now essentially acting as a fan.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Moving mean over 1 sec.
Moving mean over 9 sec.
(a) HRR
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Moving mean over 1 sec.
Moving mean over 9 sec.
(b) Pressure
Figure 7.14: Primary results of case 2 - test 2
The HRR is mirroring the previous test in regards to maximum HRR and point of oxy-
gen depletion. A slight difference is seen in the oscillations which are more pronounced
around 200-250 seconds, resulting in larger pressure oscillations as seen on fig. 7.14b.
The pressure peak is also lower as a result of the fans being removed meaning a lower
pressure loss from inside to ambient.
Smoke spread is observed qualitatively again by looking at the soot density in smokeview.
Figure 7.15: Soot density at 145 seconds (pressure peak).
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
73
==PAGE:84==
Figure 7.16: Soot density at 183 seconds (smoke spreads to floor 1).
Figure 7.17: Soot density at 210 seconds (point of oxygen depletion).
No smoke spread is visible before the pressure peak. After this point the HRR and as a
consequence the pressure start to fluctuate because of the decreasing level of oxygen.
This causes the smoke to travel ”backwards and forwards” at the vents (no mass is stored
in the HVAC system as per the solver model). The fluctuations causes some smoke to
enter the other compartments.
Only very slight smoke spread is observed at the peak pressure seen on fig. 7.15 where
the maximum duct flow is also seen.
The reason for the relatively low smoke spread compared to test 1 is because the pressure
loss at the vents are larger than the loss over the stationary fan. The flow follows the path
of least resistance which in this case is directly to the ambient through the main vertical
duct. This shows that the presumed safety of vents are to a large extent okay so far as
the fire is not causing large oscillations in the pressure. Vents installed in Denmark must,
as discussed in the regulations section, have a pressure loss of at least 30 Pa (at nominal
flow) and sustain this loss at a temperature of 400 °C.
74
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:85==
When the flow is claimed to mainly choose the path of least resistance it is based on the
pressure loss at the vents versus stationary fan. To show this more clearly the flow in the
branch ducts and main vertical ducts are studied below.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Volume flow [m3/s]
BA0
DB0
FD0
HF0
JH0
(a) Supply ducts.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
KL0
LN0
NP0
PR0
RT0
(b) Exhaust ducts.
Figure 7.18: Volume flow in main ducts on floor 0.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Volume flow [m3/s]
BC0
DE0
FG0
HI0
(a) Supply ducts.
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
ML0
ON0
QP0
SR0
(b) Exhaust ducts.
Figure 7.19: Volume flow in branch ducts on floor 0.
The flow characteristics are almost exactly equal in the supply and exhaust ducts, only
mirrored about the y-axis. This is due to the flow direction definition in the input file where
flows opposite to the duct naming is considered negative (ie. flow from node A to node B
is negative).
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
75
==PAGE:86==
The fluctuating nature is clearly visualised in fig. 7.19 a and b. Smoke spread is present
despite the very small velocities in the ducts. To validate these velocities the claim re-
garding the flow using the path of least resistance is further explained by looking at the
stationary fan at low volume flows. See fig. 7.20 redrawn after the technical data of the
box ventilator and the vent armature from the manufacturer.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Volume flow [L/s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
 Pressure [Pa]
Fan loss
Vent loss
Figure 7.20: Comparison of pressure loss over the fan and the vent, appendix G
It is clearly visible that the loss is much grater at the vents, and this is seen in the simulation
were the flow is highly dictated by the largest pressure losses in the system. If a designer
has very limited resources a simple comparison between the pressure losses can give
some insight into the reliability of the system preventing smoke spread. The practise of
comparing pressure differences is comparable to the method used in the danish norm [1]
concerning the prescriptive solutions of HVAC systems.
Temperature in the fire compartment is captured by a vertical array of 10 points.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Temperature [C]
0.00 m
0.29 m
0.58 m
0.87 m
1.16 m
1.44 m
1.73 m
2.02 m
2.31 m
2.60 m
Figure 7.21: Temperature profile monitored halfway between fire source and vents.
76
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:87==
7.4
Case 2: Test 3 - Standard practise
Dampers are installed in the branch ducts connected to the supply vents and the supply
fan is shut off. The test now in some ways simulates a building with an exhaust system
only. A setup with only an exhaust system would in reality be accompanied by some sort
of fresh air intake [31]. The under pressure created by the exhaust system at normal
operation would draw in fresh air by this passive intake. The presence of such intake
would in this test result in a lower pressure and possibly lower risk of smoke spread. In
this test a fresh air intake is not modelled because an intake was not present to begin
with.
The exhaust fan is running with the same max pressure and flow as before. The expected
results are a higher pressure peak and larger duct flow velocities. Based on the reduced
area of pressure relief from the supply ducts that have now been closed by dampers.
7.4.1
Test 3: Results
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Moving mean over 1 sec.
Moving mean over 9 sec.
(a) HRR
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Moving mean over 1 sec.
Moving mean over 9 sec.
(b) Pressure
Figure 7.22: Primary results of case 2 - test 3
The HRR has again not been affected much by the HVAC configuration, the max HRR
and the point of oxygen depletion is still roughly the same as for the other tests. A large
difference can, however, be seen on the pressure development.
The pressure has almost doubled (roughly by a factor of 1.7) from the previous tests,
fig. 7.23b the two previous tests are compared against the current. It is seen that the
pressure development of test 3 first drops because of the negative pressure created by
the exhaust fan. The pressure from the fire counteracts this negative pressure and quickly
overpowers the fan (at least in the fire compartment).
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
77
==PAGE:88==
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case2_T1_hrr.csv
Case2_T2_hrr.csv
Case2_T3_hrr.csv
(a) HRR
0
100
200
300
400
Time [s]
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case2_T1_hrr.csv
Case2_T2_hrr.csv
Case2_T3_hrr.csv
(b) Pressure
Figure 7.23: Comparison between case 2 test 1, 2, and 3.
The higher pressure is both a result of a reduction in vent area but also a result of an
increase in temperature. On fig. 7.24 the temperature in the fire compartment is seeen.
Temperature in the fire compartment is captured by a vertical array of 10 points.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
200
400
600
Temperature [C]
0.00 m
0.29 m
0.58 m
0.87 m
1.16 m
1.44 m
1.73 m
2.02 m
2.31 m
2.60 m
Figure 7.24: Temperature profile monitored halfway between fire source and vents.
The temperatures are generally higher in test 3 than in the other tests. The main tem-
perature difference is seen for the highest two measurements points. The rest of the
monitoring points show comparable temperatures to the other tests. Seeing that the tem-
peratures is only slightly higher means that the reduced vent area is impacting the peak
pressure more than the temperature is.
The large drop in pressure can mainly be attributed to the exhaust fan creating an under
pressure. But it can also be argued that because of the higher temperatures and sudden
decrease in HRR, a larger difference between room temperature and ambient temper-
ature, creates a higher rate of heat loss through conduction and advection than for the
other tests.
78
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:89==
Smoke spread is observed qualitatively again by looking at the soot density in smokeview.
Figure 7.25: Soot density at 126 seconds (pressure peak).
Figure 7.26: Soot density at 188 seconds (smoke has been removed by exhaust fan).
Figure 7.27: Soot density at 210 seconds (point of oxygen depletion).
The intended outcome of this test was to show if the standard practise of closing the supply
network helps prevent the spread of smoke. In this test, even with the large increase in
pressure, only comparatively little smoke spread is seen.
It is of interest to point out that smoke did spread to all rooms on both floors at the pressure
peak seen on fig. 7.25, but the exhaust fan gradually removed this smoke again as seen in
fig. 7.26, where smoke can only be observed in the room closest to the fire compartment.
Just before the point of oxygen depletion the fluctuating nature of the oxygen starved fire
results in smoke spread throughout the system. Although to a much smaller degree than
seen in the previous tests because of the under pressure created by the exhaust fan.
In this test the temperatures found in the ducts would inhibit or damage the fan unit as
temperatures are substantially higher than the verified operational temperature of 80 °C.
This is assuming no loss of heat through the duct walls and connections which would
happen in reality.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
79
==PAGE:90==
7.5
Case 2: Concluding remarks
Test 0
As demonstrated in the estimation of the pressure loss is is seen that the HVAC solver
accurately models a given ventilation network at nominal conditions. Limitations in terms
of the HVAC solver is not seen in cases with no fire present.
Test 1
Running the HVAC network with no changes is demonstrated as bad practise. A counter
acting fan, in this case the supply fan, creates very defined reversed volume flows in
the main ducts of the HVAC system. Reversed flow was seen for the majority of the time
during the pressure build up. Smoke is seen primarily spreading through the supply vents,
as demonstrated by the soot density renderings. The exhaust system does not contribute
to smoke spread before the drop in HRR. At the rapid drop in HRR and pressure the flow
is reversed in the exhaust ducts and any smoke present in the main ducts is suddenly
rushed backwards in the system and into the compartments.
The vertical compartment temperatures lie close together implying a uniform distribution.
Most of the temperature profile shows temperatures between 100-300 °C. Investigating
the temperature in the ducts it is seen that roughly 20 seconds of smoke spread would be
possible before activation of any dampers that might be present.
Test 2
Shutting the HVAC fans off and passively exhausting the smoke seems a worse case in
terms of spread to multiple floors. In terms of overall smoke spread, a total shut down
of the HVAC system seems to work better than leaving the fans running. Investigating
the flows in the ducts reveal that the pressure loss at the vents have large impact on the
behaviour. By shutting down the fans, a path of least resistance is created where for the
smoke moves with the help of the pressure build-up and buoyancy, past the branch ducts
creating only small flows in these. However, the small fluctuating flows cause a problem.
”Puffs” of smoke are seen during the limited availability of oxygen causing the fluctuations
in the ducts to spread smoke.
Temperatures are slightly higher than test 1.
Test 3
A standard practise procedure is tested. Not being the one and only standard solution,
but a configuration that could be thought of as simple and in accordance with normal
practise. Installing dampers in every supply branch and closing them from the start of the
simulation. Because of the decrease in effective ”leakage” area or relief of the pressure
from the HVAC network the pressure increase is larger than previous tests.
The exhaust fan is seen to create a substantial negative pressure before and after the
pressure peak is seen. The HVAC solver is perfectly air tight and the fan is operating to
the conditions presented. This means that for a compartment of low leakage the fan will
run at maximum capacity because it sees a large pressure hindrance which is in fact the
room it self. The negative pressure at the start and end of the simulation is roughly -200
Pa, which is quite large and may be dangerous to any occupants. If the doors open in such
a way that the negative pressure inhibits opening of the doors, which is the same effect as
seen with over pressure in the fire compartment, but now the problem is spread to every
room. In real systems a damper would be installed just before the smoke fan, which is
controlled by a pressure sensor, such that too large under pressures will be mitigated.
Temperatures are higher than both test 1 and 2, especially at the upper layers.
80
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:91==
8
Parameter study: Case 3
8.1
Dedicated smoke ventilation configuration
In this case the previous tests are used to study the implications of a more realistic config-
uration of the HVAC system. The geometry of the compartments and the HVAC system
is exactly the same as case 2 but now is now fitted with a dedicated smoke ventilator.
It is common practise to have a separate smoke ventilator as part of an HVAC system
in multistory buildings or buildings with centralised HVAC solutions. This is due to the
relatively large pressure loss (as described above) over the HVAC unit. Another reason
is the damage to components. In the event of a fire where only one compartment has
burned, the damage to the HVAC unit, filters, etc. can be large and costly to repair. A
separate smoke ventilator can be coupled onto both the supply and exhaust network, cir-
cumventing the entire HVAC unit and the major pressure loss thus easing the workload
on the smoke ventilator.
T0
3 m
J0
Smoke Fan
Room05
Room15
4 m
T1
J1
T2
T3
2 m
Figure 8.1: Case 3 naming of smoke HVAC vertical network nodes.
Table 8.1: List of HVAC main vertical nodes and ducts for case 3
Vertical mains
Supply
Exhaust
Nodes
J0, J1, T2, T3
T0, T1, T2, T3
Ducts
J0J1, J1T2, T2T3
T0T1, T1T2, T2T3
Ambient
T3
T3
Fan
T2T3
T2T3
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
81
==PAGE:92==
In a scenario like this the smoke ventilator is not used to keep tenable conditions in the fire
compartment. It is used to prevent smoke spread from the fire to other compartments. A
smoke fan should be chosen on the basis of ability to keep a negative pressure in all of the
compartments (omitting the fire compartment) at the pressure peak. In real systems with
dedicated smoke ventilators a damper would be installed before the fan to dynamically
change the flow such that a pressure difference of max 100 Pa is present in the network.
This is to prevent occupants from not being able to open the doors. In the danish code
[1] a system like this one is explained and the occupants may not experience pressures
that result in 100 Newtons of force on doors. It is in fact the same exact problematic (only
under pressure) found for the over-pressure created by the fire in the fire compartment.
100 Newtons translate roughly into 10 kg of pulling on the door handle.
The parameters investigated in this case are the influence of the ventilator fan and vent
loss on the default fire and the RAMP fire investigated in the design fire test. By default
fire meaning a HRR defined by a growth phase and a constant max HRR. The RAMP
fire will be defined by the same procedure used in the design fire tests, where a RAMP
is created to drop the HRR to 0 at the point of oxygen depletion. The fan curves are
modelled similar to case 2 with a quadratic relation between flow and pressure. A unit
from the same manufacturer is used to show a realistic max pressure and volume flow for
the FDS input.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Volume flow [L/s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Total Pressure [Pa]
Fan_curve_150
Fan_curve_270
Fan_curve_400
Fan_curve_500
Fan_curve_580
Figure 8.2: Quadratic model compared with fan curves of Exhausto SEF.
Because the HVAC network in this case has a quite small overall pressure loss, a fictional
fan curve is made ”FC150” (cyan). FC150 has roughly half the capacity of FC270 in
terms of both max pressure and max volume flow. The fan FC500 is very much over
dimensioned, as will come apparent in the results below.
82
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:93==
Table 8.2 shows the parameter changes between 35 simulations, apart from two of the
fan curve tests where the fan location is changed (10 of the 35).
Table 8.2: Case 3 parameter tests
Fan curve definition
Max volume flow
Max driving pressure
[m3/s]
[Pa]
Fan_curve_150
0.200
150
Fan_curve_270
0.400
270
Fan_curve_400
0.750
400
Fan_curve_500
1.100
500
Fan_curve_580
1.600
580
Test
Fan curve ”FC”
Vent pressure loss ”PL”
Loss coefficient
See definition above
[Pa] @ 0.05 m3/s
[-]
C3_FC150_PL10
Fan_curve_150
10
2.7
C3_FC150_PL30
Fan_curve_150
30
8.1
C3_FC150_PL50
Fan_curve_150
50
13.5
C3_FC150_PL100
Fan_curve_150
100
27.0
C3_FC150_PL200
Fan_curve_150
200
53.9
C3_FC270_PL10*
Fan_curve_270
10
2.7
C3_FC270_PL30*
Fan_curve_270
30
8.1
C3_FC270_PL50*
Fan_curve_270
50
13.5
C3_FC270_PL100*
Fan_curve_270
100
27.0
C3_FC270_PL200*
Fan_curve_270
200
53.9
C3_FC400_PL10*
Fan_curve_400
10
2.7
C3_FC400_PL30*
Fan_curve_400
30
8.1
C3_FC400_PL50*
Fan_curve_400
50
13.5
C3_FC400_PL100*
Fan_curve_400
100
27.0
C3_FC400_PL200*
Fan_curve_400
200
53.9
C3_FC500_PL10
Fan_curve_500
10
2.7
C3_FC500_PL30
Fan_curve_500
30
8.1
C3_FC500_PL50
Fan_curve_500
50
13.5
C3_FC500_PL100
Fan_curve_500
100
27.0
C3_FC500_PL200
Fan_curve_500
200
53.9
* Simulated with smoke fan placed at 10 m (above ground) and at -2 m (below ground)
Fan curve FC_580 is not simulated as it is much too over dimensioned for this case study.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
83
==PAGE:94==
8.2
Case 3: FC150 results
All figures have been averaged over 9 seconds by the same practise as shown in case 2.
8.2.1
C3_FC150
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case3_FC150_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.3: HRR development of FC_150 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case3_FC150_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC150_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.4: Pressure development of FC_150 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
50
100
150
SMOKE_FAN_PRES
[Pa]
Case3_FC150_PL10_devc.csv
Case3_FC150_PL30_devc.csv
Case3_FC150_PL50_devc.csv
Case3_FC150_PL100_devc.csv
Case3_FC150_PL200_devc.csv
Figure 8.5: Fan pressure development of FC_150 simulations.
84
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:95==
Table 8.3: Key numbers of test FC150.
Test
Peak HRR*
TPP**
POD***
Peak pressure
Relative change
[kW]
[s]
[s]
[Pa]
[%]
C3_FC150_PL10
1645
132
198
437
-
C3_FC150_PL30
1625
131
202
809
46.1%
C3_FC150_PL50
1659
137
197
1132
26.8%
C3_FC150_PL100
1655
135
197
1636
33.8%
C3_FC150_PL200
1623
137
204
2255
25.6%
Mean
1641
134
200
-
-
Standard deviation
16.7
2.8
3.2
-
-
% of mean
1.0%
2.1%
1.6%
-
-
* Averaged during peak between 190-200 seconds
** TPP, Time to Peak Pressure
*** POD, Point of Oxygen Depletion.
Table 8.4: Zone pressures of test FC150.
Room
Zone
Pressure at pressure peak* [Pa]
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
Room01
ZONE_1
+437
+809
+1132
+1636
+2255
Room02
ZONE_2
+14
+6
+2
-4
-5
Room03
ZONE_3
-4
-5
-6
-9
-12
Room04
ZONE_4
-7
-8
-9
-11
-14
Room05
ZONE_5
-8
-9
-10
-12
-15
Room11
ZONE_6
-5
-6
-6
-8
-9
Room12
ZONE_7
-5
-6
-6
-8
-10
Room13
ZONE_8
-5
-6
-6
-8
-10
Room14
ZONE_9
-5
-6
-7
-8
-10
Room15
ZONE_10
-5
-6
-7
-8
-10
* Max pressure in fire compartment (ZONE_1)
8.2.2
Test C3_FC150 qualitative remarks on the fire
The shape of fire plume is similar for all tests up until just before POD. At this point the
Flame is still connected to the designated fire surface. Shortly after the POD the flame
erratically moves away from the fire surface, moving to where ever the oxygen concen-
tration allows combustion. Just before 250 seconds the erratic flames moves towards the
vents. At roughly 250-260 seconds combustion originates from the vents with an oscillat-
ing behaviour. from 250-260 seconds until the end of the simulation combustion slowly
shifts from originating purely from the vents, to only burning at the surfaces of the leaking
walls.
At the pressure peak in the fire compartment very slight smoke spread is seen for test
C3_FC150_PL10 and C3_FC150_PL30, and C3_FC150_PL50 in room 02 (zone 2).
All tests show smoke spread in all rooms on both floors appendix F, and appendix F,
appendix F. The worst FC1500 test in terms of smoke spread overall is C3_FC150_PL10.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
85
==PAGE:96==
8.3
Case 3: FC270 results
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case3_FC270_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.6: HRR development of FC_270 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case3_FC270_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC270_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.7: Pressure development of FC_270 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
SMOKE_FAN_PRES
[Pa]
Case3_FC270_PL10_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL30_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL50_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL100_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL200_devc.csv
Figure 8.8: Fan pressure development of FC_270 simulations.
86
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:97==
Table 8.5: Key numbers of test FC270.
Test
Peak HRR*
TPP**
POD***
Peak pressure
Relative change
[kW]
[s]
[s]
[Pa]
[%]
C3_FC270_PL10
1652
138
199
439
-
C3_FC270_PL30
1644
134
201
815
46.1%
C3_FC270_PL50
1632
134
203
1114
26.8%
C3_FC270_PL100
1682
133
196
1654
33.8%
C3_FC270_PL200
1649
137
205
2260
25.6%
Mean
1652
135
201
-
-
Standard deviation
18.5
2.2
3.5
-
-
% of mean
1.1%
0.8%
1.7%
-
-
* Averaged during peak between 190-200 seconds
** TPP, Time to Peak Pressure
*** POD, Point of Oxygen Depletion.
Table 8.6: Zone pressures of test FC270.
Room
Zone
Pressure at pressure peak* [Pa]
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
Room01
ZONE_1
+439
+815
+1114
+1654
+2260
Room02
ZONE_2
+13
+6
+2
-4
-16
Room03
ZONE_3
-7
-10
-13
-17
-27
Room04
ZONE_4
-13
-16
-19
-23
-31
Room05
ZONE_5
-15
-18
-20
-24
-33
Room11
ZONE_6
-10
-12
-14
-16
-21
Room12
ZONE_7
-10
-12
-14
-16
-21
Room13
ZONE_8
-11
-12
-14
-16
-21
Room14
ZONE_9
-11
-13
-14
-16
-21
Room15
ZONE_10
-11
-13
-14
-16
-21
* Max pressure in fire compartment (ZONE_1)
8.3.1
Test C3_FC270 qualitative remarks
The flame behaves roughly the same as in previous test, with erratic flame followed by
oscillating combustion originating at vents, falling in amplitude until burning happens only
at leaking walls.
At the pressure peak in the fire compartment very slight smoke spread on the first floor is
seen for all tests.
All tests show smoke spread in all rooms on both floors despite a negative pressure in
most zones appendix F, appendix F, and appendix F. The worst FC270 test in terms of
smoke spread overall is C3_FC270_PL10.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
87
==PAGE:98==
8.4
Case 3: FC400 results
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case3_FC400_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.9: HRR development of FC_400 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case3_FC400_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC400_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.10: Pressure development of FC_400 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
SMOKE_FAN_PRES
[Pa]
Case3_FC400_PL10_devc.csv
Case3_FC400_PL30_devc.csv
Case3_FC400_PL50_devc.csv
Case3_FC400_PL100_devc.csv
Case3_FC400_PL200_devc.csv
Figure 8.11: Fan pressure development of FC_400 simulations.
88
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:99==
Table 8.7: Key numbers of test FC400.
Test
Peak HRR*
TPP**
POD***
Peak pressure
Relative change
[kW]
[s]
[s]
[Pa]
[%]
C3_FC400_PL10
1627
138
198
377
-
C3_FC400_PL30
1647
137
299
727
48.1%
C3_FC400_PL50
1620
138
202
948
23.3%
C3_FC400_PL100
1654
136
202
1484
36.1%
C3_FC400_PL200
1620
139
203
2219
33.1%
Mean
1634
138
200
-
-
Standard deviation
15.9
1.1
2.3
-
-
% of mean
1.0%
0.8%
1.2%
-
-
* Averaged during peak between 190-200 seconds
** TPP, Time to Peak Pressure
*** POD, Point of Oxygen Depletion.
Table 8.8: Zone pressures of test FC400.
Room
Zone
Pressure at pressure peak* [Pa]
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
Room01
ZONE_1
+381
+731
+948
+1495
+2228
Room02
ZONE_2
-64
-128
-173
-226
-274
Room03
ZONE_3
-89
-149
-191
-241
-285
Room04
ZONE_4
-97
-156
-197
-246
-289
Room05
ZONE_5
-100
-158
-199
-247
-290
Room11
ZONE_6
-91
-148
-189
-236
-278
Room12
ZONE_7
-91
-148
-189
-236
-278
Room13
ZONE_8
-91
-149
-189
-236
-278
Room14
ZONE_9
-91
-149
-189
-236
-278
Room15
ZONE_10
-91
-149
-189
-236
-278
* Max pressure in fire compartment (ZONE_1)
8.4.1
Test C3_FC400 qualitative remarks
The flame behaves roughly the same as in previous test, with erratic flame followed by
oscillating combustion originating at vents, falling in amplitude until burning happens only
at leaking walls.
At the pressure peak in the fire compartment very slight smoke spread on all floors is seen
for all tests.
All tests show smoke spread in all rooms on both floors despite a negative pressure in
most zones appendix F, appendix F, and appendix F. The worst FC400 test in terms of
smoke spread overall is C3_FC400_PL10.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
89
==PAGE:100==
8.5
Case 3: FC500 results
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
HRR
[kW]
Case3_FC500_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.12: HRR development of FC_500 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
ZONE_1
[Pa]
Case3_FC500_PL10_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL30_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL50_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL100_hrr.csv
Case3_FC500_PL200_hrr.csv
Figure 8.13: Pressure development of FC_500 simulations.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
SMOKE_FAN_PRES
[Pa]
Case3_FC500_PL10_devc.csv
Case3_FC500_PL30_devc.csv
Case3_FC500_PL50_devc.csv
Case3_FC500_PL100_devc.csv
Case3_FC500_PL200_devc.csv
Figure 8.14: Fan pressure development of FC_500 simulations.
90
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:101==
Table 8.9: Key numbers of test FC500.
Test
Peak HRR*
TPP**
POD***
Peak pressure
Relative change
[kW]
[s]
[s]
[Pa]
[%]
C3_FC500_PL10
1691
133
198
226
-
C3_FC500_PL30
1644
132
204
591
61.8%
C3_FC500_PL50
1725
139
200
937
36.9%
C3_FC500_PL100
1624
144
104
1457
35.7%
C3_FC500_PL200
1657
137
203
2147
32.1%
Mean
1666
137
202
-
-
Standard deviation
41.8
4.9
2.7
-
-
% of mean
2.5%
3.5%
1.3%
-
-
* Averaged during peak between 190-200 seconds
** TPP, Time to Peak Pressure
*** POD, Point of Oxygen Depletion.
Table 8.10: Zone pressures of test FC500.
Room
Zone
Pressure at pressure peak* [Pa]
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
Room01
ZONE_1
+226
+591
+937
+1457
+2147
Room02
ZONE_2
-264
-324
-346
-389
-429
Room03
ZONE_3
-293
-347
-367
-405
-441
Room04
ZONE_4
-303
-355
-374
-410
-445
Room05
ZONE_5
-307
-357
-376
-412
-446
Room11
ZONE_6
-297
-347
-366
-401
-434
Room12
ZONE_7
-298
-347
-366
-401
-434
Room13
ZONE_8
-298
-348
-366
-401
-434
Room14
ZONE_9
-298
-348
-366
-401
-434
Room15
ZONE_10
-299
-348
-366
-401
-434
* Max pressure in fire compartment (ZONE_1)
8.5.1
Test C3_FC500 qualitative remarks
The flame behaves roughly the same as in previous test, with erratic flame followed by
oscillating combustion originating at vents, falling in amplitude until burning happens only
at leaking walls.
At the pressure peak in the fire compartment very slight smoke spread on the first floor
and room 14 and 15 is seen for all tests. Except for C3_FC_500_PL200 where no spread
is seen.
All tests show smoke spread in all rooms on both floors despite a negative pressure in
most zones appendix F, appendix F, and appendix F. The worst FC400 test in terms of
smoke spread overall is C3_FC400_PL10.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
91
==PAGE:102==
8.6
Case 3: Effects of buoyancy in HVAC ducts
In the 25 simulations above, the fans is in fact ”helped” by the fire and the also by the fact
that it is placed above the vents of the compartments.
T0
3 m
J0
Smoke Fan
Room05
Room15
T1
J1
T2
T3
4 m
Figure 8.15: Case 3 HVAC vertical network nodes with smoke fan placed below floor 0.
Table 8.11: List of HVAC main vertical nodes and ducts for case 3
Vertical mains
Supply
Exhaust
Nodes
J0, J1, T2, T3
T0, T1, T2, T3
Ducts
J1J0, J0T2, T2T3
T1T0, T0T2, T2T3
Ambient
T3
T3
Fan
T2T3
T2T3
A further 10 simulations are run. The first 25 tests showed that fan curve FC270 could not
sustain negative pressure in zone 2 with PL10. Fan curve FC400 could sustain negative
pressures but was close to 0 Pa in zone 2 for the PL10 test. These two tests (10 in all)
are run again, but now with the smoke fan placed below floor 0 as shown in fig. 8.15.
92
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:103==
Looking again at the equation governing pressure in the ducts and nodes eq. (8.1), the
highlighted term demonstrates the inclusion of buoyancy.
ρjLj
duj
dt = (pi −pk) + (ρg∆z)j + ∆pj −1
2Kjρj|uj|uj
[Pa]
(8.1)
Assuming the fire creates temperatures of roughly 300 degrees in the HVAC network, the
pressure difference between vent node A1 (fire compartment) and ambient node T3 (see
fig. 8.1) is estimated below.
At ambient air has an approximate density of 1.2 kg/m3. At 300 degrees the density of
the hot smoke/air is estimated by use of the ideal gas law:
ρgas =
353.25
300 + 273 = 0.62 kg/m3
(8.2)
If the vents of floor 0 are placed 2 meters above the ground and the main exhaust is placed
at 10 meters above ground the ∆z is 2 m and 8 m respectively.
pA1 = 0.62 · 9.82 · 2 = 12 Pa
pT3 = 1.2 · 9.82 · 10 = 60 Pa
∆pbuoyancy = pT3 −pA1 = 48 Pa
If the vents of floor 1 are placed 5 meters above the ground and the main exhaust is placed
at 2 meters below ground the ∆z is 5 m and -2 m respectively.
pA1 = 0.62 · 9.82 · 5 = 30 Pa
pT3 = 1.2 · 9.82 · (−2) = −12 Pa
∆pbuoyancy = pT3 −pA1 = −42 Pa
The pressure difference should in fact be taken at floor 1 because the pressure difference
at the nodes of floor 1 is higher than at floor 0. For the FC270 fan the 42 Pa is a pressure
that must be overcome by the fan in addition to the pressure generated by the fire.
This is not the exact same difference that FDS would find as it accounts not only for the
two nodes considered but the entire system of nodes and also the temperature might differ
from the estimated 300 °C. The general theory behind the HVAC solution however, show
that a fan might have to overcome a relatively large pressure generated by the effects of
buoyancy. 42 Pa accounts for 15% of the capacity of the FC270 fan.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
93
==PAGE:104==
8.6.1
Smoke buoyancy test results
Table 8.12: Zone pressures of test FC270 with fan below ground.
Room
Zone
Pressure at pressure peak* [Pa]
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
Room01
ZONE_1
+470
+844
+1152
+1628
+2258
Room02
ZONE_2
+58
+50
+47
+42
+36
Room03
ZONE_3
+32
+30
+30
+28
+26
Room04
ZONE_4
+24
+24
+24
+24
+23
Room05
ZONE_5
+21
+22
+22
+23
+22
Room11
ZONE_6
+27
+29
+28
+29
+29
Room12
ZONE_7
+26
+29
+28
+29
+29
Room13
ZONE_8
+26
+29
+28
+29
+29
Room14
ZONE_9
+26
+29
+28
+29
+29
Room15
ZONE_10
+26
+29
+28
+29
+29
* Max pressure in fire compartment (ZONE_1)
The results of test FC270 show smoke spread in every room. It is immediately apparent
that the pressure generated by the fire results in a net over pressure in the other rooms.
Floor 1 (rooms 11-15) show slightly larger over pressures as a result of the buoyancy.
The pressure peak in the fire compartment is comparable to the other tests with a small
difference.
Table 8.13: Zone pressures of test FC400 with fan below ground.
Room
Zone
Pressure at pressure peak* [Pa]
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
Room01
ZONE_1
+387
+750
+1004
+1548
+2198
Room02
ZONE_2
-43
-95
-136
-181
-235
Room03
ZONE_3
-69
-116
-154
-195
-246
Room04
ZONE_4
-78
-124
-160
-200
-250
Room05
ZONE_5
-80
-126
-162
-201
-251
Room11
ZONE_6
-76
-121
-157
-195
-244
Room12
ZONE_7
-76
-121
-157
-195
-244
Room13
ZONE_8
-76
-121
-157
-195
-244
Room14
ZONE_9
-76
-121
-156
-195
-244
Room15
ZONE_10
-76
-121
-156
-195
-244
* Max pressure in fire compartment (ZONE_1)
The results of test FC400 also show smoke spread in every room. Despite the negative
pressure in all rooms as seen in table 8.13. The change in pressure peak is again very
little for all vent losses compared to the tests with the fan located above the vents.
94
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:105==
8.7
Case 3: Discussions
The heat release rate, time to pressure peak, and point of oxygen depletion are all similar
for all tests. The difference is almost negligible. The similar HRR are easily explained by
the fact that it is a pre-defined curve (fast growing fire) and the point of oxygen depletion
happens at similar times. It is believed that the POD is first of all dependant on the amount
of initial oxygen in the room, then later on the supplied amount. With a regular ventilation
rate, the volume of the room plays a larger role in the size of the fire in domestic housing
(0.05-0.1 m3/s). This has become apparent in all three cases, where similar HRR peaks
and POD’s have been observed. The reason for similar time to pressure peak is a bit
more obscure, one would think that a lower vent loss or an increase in fan capacity could
allow for a larger volume flow thus making the time to pressure peak longer. The results
show that the dimensions of the ducts probably play a larger role in pressure relief than
other parameters as the different fan curves did not have much effect on the pressure.
At the pressure peak where the smoke spread is assumed to be most severe, all of the
results showed no or very little smoke spread (observe appendix F). A designer might use
the results found at pressure peak to determine if smoke spread will occur.
The setup with dedicated smoke fan somewhat looks like a cross between ”case 2 test 2
- HVAC off” and ”case 2 test 3 - exhaust only”. With both networks working as exhausts
the loss over the vents are crucial in understanding the way the air is moving in the ducts.
The flow prioritises the path of least resistance as stated in case 2. The flow runs mostly
past the branch ducts connected to the compartments creating very small volume flows.
Smoke from the main duct flows instantly to the branching ducts into the connected com-
partment.
After the peak pressure all simulations showed smoke spread to some degree. The den-
sity of smoke/soot is larger for the weaker fan compared to the stronger. The same trend
is seen for the vent loss, where a larger loss leads to less smoke spread.
Smoke fan running from beginning of fire, in reality the fan would initiate as soon as a
temperature of 72 degrees is observed in the network. From earlier tests this was seen to
be around 80 seconds. The impact of including the fan from the start may have an effect
on the key numbers presented.
Using a setup where smoke is only exhausted and not also supplied, or without any pres-
sure relief in the envelope, the negative pressure can become quite large in some of the
tests. On the fan pressure figures fig. 8.5-fig. 8.14 it can be seen that the fan tries to keep
under pressure in all of the rooms. Because it is exhaust only the leaking is dominant
at times where the pressure is not increasing. on fig. 8.5 and fig. 8.8 the limit of the fan
is reached as the pressure builds. For the other tests the fan capacity is never reached
indicating that the fan can handle the over pressure created by the fire.
Because the vent soffit is placed 0.5 meters below the ceiling a smoke layer can form
below the ceiling. On many of the smoke renderings in the appendix F this layer can
clearly be seen showing soot density before the point of oxygen depletion. After the point
of oxygen depletion the smoke spreads further because of the large pressure drop and
the following oscillations.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
95
==PAGE:106==
At the point of oxygen depletion, smoke has spread to all rooms in all tests, even with the
pressure not being at its peak. The fluctuations created by the oxygen starved flame is
believed to cause small oscillations in the ducts of the connected rooms. These fluctua-
tions push and pull on air from the main duct which already has smoke present from the
pressure build up phase.
+Δp
-Δp
p1
p2
pFan
p1 = p2 = p3 > pFan
p2
p1
p3
p3
pFan
1.
Smoke spreads troughout
the entire main duct. The
pressure loss at the vents
is larger than the loss at the
fan. The smoke thus prefers
moving towards the fan.
2.
When the fire begins fluctuating
the pressure also fluctuates.
Changes in the pressure may
cause the flow to rapidly shift.
The vent loss is now indifferent,
and the smoke will spread to
the closest branch duct.
Figure 8.16: Possible explanation for smoke spread despite negative zone pressure.
The large over pressure can, as stated in the introduction, prevent occupants from opening
inwards facing doors. A pressure of 100 Pa is suggested in both danish regulations and
in [3] as max. This is because a pressure of 100 Pa on a door (roughly 2 m2) creates a
force of 200 Newtons or roughly 20 kg on the door handle. If the occupant is disabled or
elderly, 20 kg can be inhibiting. Pressures of 100 Pa and above are present in all of the
simulations.
96
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:107==
The HVAC solver cannot store mass [30]. The solution procedure thus instantly transfers
mass from one end to another. This instant transfer of mass is believed to increase the
fluctuating nature of the solution. A small indication of this can be observed by looking at
the flow in the branch ducts. See the figure below showing the volume flow in the branch
duct connecting the main supply to zone 2.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
DUCT_BC0_VOLFLOW
[m3/s]
Case3_FC270_PL10_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL30_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL50_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL100_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL200_devc.csv
Pressure peak
Point of Oxygen Depletion
Figure 8.17: Volume flow in duct BC0 of the FC_270 test.
The fluctuating nature is clearly seen after the pressure peak where the flow before the
peak is more steady. Between the pressure peak and the point of oxygen depletion the
fire becomes oxygen starved, resulting in more fluctuations. After oxygen depletion the
difference between the vent losses can be seen. A larger vent loss have a ”dampening”
effect on the flow (see FC270_PL200, green line).
The flow in the main duct is much larger than in the branch duct. The flow in fact chooses
the path of least resistance as observed on the following figure 8.18.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [s]
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
DUCT_DB0_VOLFLOW
[m3/s]
Case3_FC270_PL10_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL30_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL50_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL100_devc.csv
Case3_FC270_PL200_devc.csv
Pressure peak
Point of Oxygen Depletion
Figure 8.18: Volume flow in duct DB0 of the FC_270 test.
With the current setup the impact on the pressure in the fire compartment is more depen-
dant on the pressure loss in the system, compared to the fan. In the tables 8.3-8.9 it is
seen that the change in pressure in the fire room is basically constant. Raising the vent
loss by a factor of 2, roughly translates into a 30% increase in the pressure peak almost
independent of the fan curve.
Looking at comparing the fan curves with the same vent losses the following table 8.14
show that the HRR and times are again very similar. It also shows that with increasing
vent loss the change in pressure peak becomes less and less.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
97
==PAGE:108==
Table 8.14: Comparison between tests with equal vent losses
Test
Peak HRR
TPP
POD
Peak pressure
Relative change
[kW]
[s]
[s]
[Pa]
[%]
C3_FC150_PL10
1645
132
198
437
C3_FC270_PL10
1652
138
199
439
0.5%
C3_FC400_PL10
1627
138
198
377
-16.4%
C3_FC500_PL10
1691
133
198
226
-66.8%
Mean
1654
135
198
370
Standard deviation
27.0
3.2
0.5
100
% of mean
1.6%
2.4%
0.3%
27.1%
C3_FC150_PL30
1625
131
202
809
C3_FC270_PL30
1644
134
201
815
-0.7%
C3_FC400_PL30
1647
137
199
727
-12.5%
C3_FC500_PL30
1634
132
204
591
-23.0%
Mean
1638
135
202
736
Standard deviation
10.0
3.2
2.1
104
% of mean
0.6%
2.4%
1.0%
14.2%
C3_FC150_PL50
1659
137
197
1132
C3_FC270_PL50
1632
134
203
1114
-1.6%
C3_FC400_PL50
1620
138
198
948
-17.5%
C3_FC500_PL50
1725
139
200
937
-1.2%
Mean
1659
137
200
1033
Standard deviation
46.9
2.2
2.6
104.6
% of mean
2.8%
1.6%
1.3%
10.1%
C3_FC150_PL100
1655
135
197
1736
C3_FC270_PL100
1682
133
196
1682
-3.2%
C3_FC400_PL100
1654
136
202
1484
-13.3%
C3_FC500_PL100
1624
144
204
1457
-1.9%
Mean
1654
137
200
1590
Standard deviation
23.7
4.8
3.9
139.9
% of mean
1.4%
3.5%
1.9%
8.8%
C3_FC150_PL200
1623
137
201
2255
C3_FC270_PL200
1649
137
205
2260
-0.2%
C3_FC400_PL200
1620
139
203
2219
-1.8%
C3_FC500_PL200
1657
138
203
2147
-3.4%
Mean
1637
138
203
2220
Standard deviation
18.5
1.0
1.6
52.1
% of mean
1.1%
0.7%
0.8%
2.3%
98
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:109==
Continuing explanation of table 8.14: With the smallest vent loss (PL10) the standard
deviation is relatively significant showing that the fan curve has some influence on the
peak pressure. With increasing vent loss the fan curve has less impact on the peak
pressure.
One must remember that the loss is placed at the vent and the dynamics may change if
the loss was moved somewhere else in the system. The reason for applying the loss at
the vent was to find if it changed the way the fan curve interacted with the system.
Having the loss only at the vents is an easy way to dimension the flow correctly. Having
equal losses at every vent means that it is the dimension of the ducts that governs the
volume flow because the fan tries to balance its output with the largest loss in the system.
Assuming that the pressure is correctly predicted and that the smoke spread after the
pressure peak is caused by limitations of the HVAC solver the following could be said:
If a designer were to pick one of the tested fan curves the choice would be between FC270
and FC400. FC270 slightly under performs and allows for over pressure in zone 2. The
FC270 tests was right on the edge of keeping the rooms in negative pressure difference.
FC400 never reached the capacity of the fan with -64 Pa as max in zone 2, which is
acceptable. FC400 show that with dampers placed in the system the fan could be kept
at a pressure difference of max 100 Pa and still not reach its capacity. This means that
a damper must be installed because the fan else would create high under pressures that
could hinder opening of doors.
It has been shown that the vertical location of the fan does not have large influence on
the pressure peak. However, the impact on the fan is of relevance as seen in table 8.12
and table 8.13. Comparing the tests with the fan located above and below ground (see
appendix C), shows that the difference is roughly equal to the estimated value of 40 Pa
extra placed on the fan as a result of moving it 2 meters below ground. For the FC270 fan
curve the change in fan location causes massive smoke spread to both floors with smoke
starting at floor 1. The smoke spreading first to floor 1 is an indication of the fan not being
able to counteract the buoyant force of the smoke.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
99
==PAGE:110==
100
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:111==
9
Guidelines
A designer should always configure input to fit any given case as closely as possible.
However due to time constraints or other limitations a full study is rarely carried out. From
the investigations done in the literature study, application of FDS, and the parameter study
the following list of points, should be considered when doing simulations similar in nature
like the ones seen in the thesis.
- Not much data is available on the matter, but the available experiments and simula-
tions studies show that pressure peaks over 100 Pa are seen for most fires, even at
normal leakage rates. Validation studies of FDS [17] etc. show that the conditions
of the fire in low-ventilated, low-leakage type apartments can be well predicted by
FDS.
- Pressure differences over 100 Pa can result in difficulties of opening doors.
- Full scale studies studies on compartments of roughly 50 m2 or smaller.
- The fire growth rate has a large impact on the pressure peak.
- Consider the leakage class carefully, a change in envelope leakage has large impact
on the pressure peak. Almost exponential in nature acc. [21].
- The bulk leakage method better describes a leakage if the actual sources of leakage
is not known. If the leakage path is known the localised leakage will perform better.
- Know that FDS can model a dynamic leakage coefficient, but available data on
dynamic leakage coefficients is almost non-existent.
- Introducing all of the pressure losses in an HVAC system can quickly become an
exhaustive task.
- Begin by implementing the largest losses and losses at connections between ambi-
ent and FDS domain.
- Tee’s can be implemented without accounting for the losses but only if the diameters
of the connected ducts are correctly sized and the ratio between them is not to large
or small (ie. large difference in relative flow velocity.)
- The friction loss can beneficially be calculated by FDS, only a value of the duct
material roughness is needed.
- Know that the HVAC solver behaves better with larger pressure losses at the con-
nection between FDS and the HVAC nodes.
- Very small loss coefficients can lead to the HVAC solver using longer to find a stable
solution. The HVAC solver solves a set of differential equations that if no losses are
defined become unstable.
- The ventilator fans can be modelled by either a quadratic fan curve or a user defined
ramp. The former is simpler in terms of implementation, and can easily be fitted to
technical data.
- Know that when implementing the manufacturer fan curve, one cannot be sure that
this is the correct behaviour under fire.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
101
==PAGE:112==
- Three combustion behaviours are seen for under ventilated compartment fires.
1 Steady burning, seen with higher oxygen supply rates, open doors and win-
dows etc. may develop into flashover fire if enough oxygen is supplied
2 Low frequency oscillating behaviour, oscillations with periods of 50-100 sec-
onds. Behaviour found between steady burning and rapid extinction. Hard to
replicate in FDS with a simple combustion model.
3 Rapid extinction; fire extinguishes it self as all of the oxygen present in the room
is used (down to the limiting oxygen concentration).
- Implement the relaxation keywords HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE and HVAC_PRES_RELAX.
1 Set HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE to TRUE.
2 Set HVAC_PRES_RELAX to a value larger than 0.5, possibly closer to 1.0 than 0.5.
- Know that the resolution of the grid impacts the combustion model and slightly in-
creases oscillating behaviour.
- Literature and this thesis found that a grid of 0.1 meter cells resolves the HRR, and
pressure sufficiently.
- With the simple combustion model the high frequency oscillations seen in this study
is not validated.
- Try to either limit the ghosting flames or make sure that the combustion after oxygen
depletion is physically correct by looking at the temperature compared with the AIT.
- Know that the AIT (Auto Ignition Temperature) can not be predicted for the sim-
ple combustion model. The actual ignition temperature of the fuel depends on the
conditions of the individual cell, size, and fual to air mixture.
- Using FDS specifically, one should consider the code snippets seen throughout the
thesis. All of the snippets are collected in appendix A in typical FDS input file layout
order.
102
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:113==
10
Conclusion
The aim of this master thesis was to develop further understanding of the under ventilated
compartment fire scenario. Especially concerning the large pressure developments that
have been observed in literature. A literature study and a parameter study explores the
matter. The literature study summarises reports and articles ranging from 1980 to 2019.
The parameter study is carried out using three cases of increasing complexity.
The main hypothesis of the thesis was: ”Smoke spread is possible between rooms con-
nected with mechanical ventilation, because of large over-pressures in the beginning of
a compartment fire.”
The short conclusion to the hypothesis regarding the findings of this thesis is:
Using a simple combustion model, FDS allows for burning wherever the fuel to air ratio
allows it. This creates problems of continued burning where oxygen can enter. Burning
at vents create a fluctuating behaviour in the HRR and pressure of the compartment. The
validity of these oscillations are yet to be determined as physical phenomena or numerical
in nature. During the growth phase of the fire a significant pressure build-up can occur.
Configuring the HVAC with a dedicated smoke fan ensures that only slight smoke spread
is seen at the pressure peak. When the fire is starved of oxygen it begins to fluctuate,
the fluctuations result in smoke spread in all tested cases. A designer can thus not only
consider the peak pressure but should also consider the transient behaviour of the fire,
especially during the oxygen limited phase.
With the hypothesis some followup questions were asked and the findings of these are
summarised below:
When dimensioning an HVAC system in terms of fire and smoke spread the danish stan-
dard DS428 allows for use of prescribed- and performance-based solutions. The pre-
scribed solutions use predefined input to show appropriate applications. These predefined
systems are dimensioned after vent losses, stack effects, a compartment temperature of
400 °C, and a 200 Pa pressure in the fire compartment. The temperature correlates well
with the results found in the parameter study. The danish standard DS428 does describe
how pressures of 2000 Pa are seen in closed low-leakage compartments. In the param-
eter study it is shown that a system with a leakage rate of 1.5 h−1 and a fast fire growth,
shows pressure peaks ranging from 400 to 2000 Pa depending on the HVAC system loss.
The methods applied in standards considers mainly the steady state solution found for
worst case scenarios when the pressure is at its peak. This method omits the transient
behaviour of the fire during the under-ventilated phase. In all of the cases fluctuations
in the HRR is seen. The fluctuations start shortly after the pressure peak because of a
low oxygen concentration. During the pressure increase, smoke is only spreading for the
cases with low vent losses. But all cases show smoke spread after the peak pressure
because of the fluctuations.
The transient behaviour of the fire is of major significance to how the ventilation system
behaves. Three behaviours are seen in literature, steady burning, oscillatory burning, and
rapid extinction. These are transient characteristics of the fire and a simple design fire
cannot capture these behaviours.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
103
==PAGE:114==
From literature and video evidence the impact of large pressure in the early phases of
a compartment fire can be observed. Inwards opening doors should be considers as a
real danger to the safety occupants. Even small fire can result in pressure over 100 Pa.
Using a fast growing fire the smoke layer quickly envelops the entire compartment and
escape can be prevented for approximately 2 minutes during the pressure buildup. It is
very hard to quantify the frequency of incidents where occupants have been prevented
from opening doors or if smoke spread has spread though a ventilation network.
The simple t2 design fire is used to show how an engineer would deal with the simple
combustion model in FDS. The low-frequency oscillations seen in the parameter studies
show that the under-ventilated fire is difficult to model with the simple model. Certain
relaxation parameters and solver configurations can help alleviate the size of the fluctua-
tions but not completely mitigate them. The fluctuations are believed to be connected with
the instantaneous transfer of mass in the HVAC model. Larger pressure losses are seen
to ”dampen” the amplitude of the fluctuations. The validity of continued burning contrary
to rapid extinction should be investigated further.
10.1
Further studies
HRR seems to follow the designed curve up until the point of oxygen depletion. From
the investigations its seems that this point could be predicted by knowing only the growth
rate of the fire and the geometry of the compartment. A study could go into the prediction
of this point by monitoring the immediately available oxygen in the fire compartment. In
addition to monitoring the concentration of oxygen it could also prove beneficial look at if
the sharp drop in HRR caused by the lack of oxygen exists for smaller max HRR, as is
seen for the medium growth fire. A study like this could be used to develop design fires
specialised for low ventilated compartments.
Implementing large scale HVAC networks into FDS is a huge task, taking up much of
model setup time. Several software solutions exits that help HVAC engineers dimen-
sioning large networks. The node model in FDS is very simple and conversion from the
popular software should be doable. Not only should the geometry be easier to implement
but also the parameters of the duct system, dimensions, losses, etc.
Since it is seen that implementing tees is one of the harder part of modeling the HVAC net-
work an experimental or CFD study could be conducted into the validity of pressure losses
even at high temperatures. Investigating impact of reversing flows mainly in branching tee
fittings. Investigate impact of leakage and heat loss in HVAC ducts on the flow character-
istics.
This thesis only implements a very simple centralised HVAC unit, the development of the
construction industry seems to also move towards decentralised systems. These are also
covered in the danish DS428 standard. Decentralised systems are more complex, setup
wise, than centralised solutions. Their function is the same and the risk of smoke spread
should also be verified under the early high pressure phase.
104
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:115==
Moving the fire compartment, it is assumed on a basis of largest pressure loss that the
furthest room is the most critical room. It would be interesting to show if this is actually
the case.
The model in these simulations have the following issues which could be improved or
investigated in another study:
- Geometry issues, smoke rises to the ceiling because of buoyancy, the vents are
placed below the ceiling on the wall. The smoke would first be exhausted when it
has cooled and mixed.
- HVAC model issue results in mass smoke etc, to be spread ”instantly” between
nodes, with very low velocities oscillating very frequently the smoke is spread quickly
throughout the network.
The fluctuations or high frequency oscillations seen are believed to be caused by the
instantaneous mass transfer between HVAC nodes and the FDS domain. FDS version
6.5.3 added the HVAC_MASS_TRANSPORT keyword. Setting this keyword to TRUE allows
for the HVAC node model to include the transport and storage of species and energy.
The feature is still in beta testing but it could be interesting to investigate what impact this
would have on the combustion behaviour. The ability to store mass might mean that the
fluctuations could be ”dampened” as the flow would act delayed like a spring.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
105
==PAGE:116==
106
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1]
Fire protection of ventialtion systems (eng). dk. Dansk Standard DS 428:2019. June
2019.
[2]
Constantin Ionescu et al. “The historical evolution of the energy efficient buildings”.
eng. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 49 (2015), pp. 243–253. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.062.
[3]
Simo Hostikka and Rahul Kallada Janardhan. Pressure management in compart-
ment fires. eng. 2017. URL: http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-60-7239-5.
[4]
Sylvain Brohez and Pierrick Duhamel. “Inwards Doors Blocked by Fire Induced
Overpressure in Airtight Apartment”. eng. In: Chemical engineering transactions
67 (2018), pp. 25–30. DOI: 10.3303/CET1867005.
[5]
Fire-induced pressure and smoke spread in airtight buildings - Simo Hostikka. Youtube
video, 11th International Concgress Fire safety & Science. 2018. URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=MEgF6imFIvw.
[6]
Michelle J. Peatross and Craig L. Beyler. “Ventilation Effects on Compartment Fire
Characterization”. eng. In: Fire Safety Science 5 (1997), pp. 403–414.
[7]
Yunyoung Utiskul, James G. Quintiere, and Et. Al. “Compartment fire phenomena
under limited ventialtion”. eng. In: Fire Safety Journal 40 (2005), pp. 367–390.
[8]
H. Prétrel, W. Le Saux, and L. Audouin. “Pressure variations induced by a pool fire
in a well-confined and force-ventilated compartment”. eng. In: Fire Safety Journal
52 (2012), pp. 11–24. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2012.04.005.
[9]
Vytenis Babrauskas. “Glass breakage in fires”. eng. In: (1998).
[10]
Jens Nørhave Kastvig. A Numerical Investigation of the Dynamic Pressure in Smoke
Ventilation Systems for Low-Energy Buildings using FDS. eng. 2013.
[11]
Polina Gordonova. Spread of smoke and fire gases via the ventilation system. eng.
1997.
[12]
Bengt Hägglund, Kjell Nireus, and Per Werling. Pressure rise due to fire growth in
a closed room - Description of three full-scale tests. eng. 1996.
[13]
Bengt Hägglund, Kjell Nireus, and Per Werling. An experimental study of the smoke
spread via ventilation ducts. eng. 1998.
[14]
L. Audin et al. “OECD PRISME project: Fires in confined and ventilated nuclear-type
multi-compartments - Overview and main experimental results”. eng. In: Fire Safety
Journal 62 (2013), pp. 80–101. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2013.07.008.
[15]
Sylvain Brohez and Irene Caravita. “Overpressure induced by fires in airtight build-
ings”. eng. In: 3rd European Symposium on Fire Safety Science (2018). DOI: 10.
1088/1742-6596/1107/4/042031.
[16]
Simo Hostikkaa and Rahul Kallada Janardhana. “Experiments and Numerical Sim-
ulations of Pressure Effects in Apartment Fires”. eng. In: Fire Tecknology 53 (2016),
pp. 1353–1377. DOI: 10.1007/s10694-016-0641-z.
[17]
Rahul Kallada Janardhan. Fire Induced Flow in Building Ventilation Systems. eng.
2016.
[18]
Hugues Pretrel, Sylvain Suard, and Laurent Audouin. “Experimental and numerical
study of low frequency oscillatory behaviour of a large-scale hydrocarbon pool fire
in a mechanically ventilated compartment”. eng. In: Fire Safety Journal 83 (2016),
pp. 38–53.
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
107
==PAGE:118==
[19]
Daniel T. Gottuk, Richard J. Roby, and Craig L. Beyler. “The Role of Temperature on
Carbon Monoxide Production in Compartment Fires”. eng. In: Fire Safety Journal
24 (1995), pp. 315–331.
[20]
Topi Sikanena and Simo Hostikka. “Predicting the heat release rates of liquid pool
fires in mechanically ventilated compartments”. eng. In: Fire Safety Journal 91 (2017),
pp. 266–275. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2017.03.060.
[21]
M. Umar Riaz. Modeling and Management of Fire-Induced Pressures in a Model
Apartment, Master thesis. eng. 2017.
[22]
Jonathan Wahlqvist and Patrick van Hees. “Evaluating methods for preventing smoke
spread through ventilation systems using ﬁre dynamics simulator”. eng. In: Fire
Mater 41 (2016), pp. 625–645. DOI: 10.1002/fam.2404.
[23]
Yunyoung Utiskul and James G. Quintiere. “Generalizations on Compartment Fires
from Small-scale Experiments for Low Ventilation Conditions”. eng. In: Fire Safety
Science 8 (2005), pp. 1229–1240.
[24]
Bygningsreglementet (dk). Trafik- Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. 2018. URL: http://
bygningsreglementet.dk/.
[25]
Morgan J. Hurley. “SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering”. eng. In: 1
(2016). DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2565-0.
[26]
Dougal Drysdale. An Introduction to Fire Dynamics. eng. 3rd ed. 2011. ISBN: 978-
0-470-31903-1.
[27]
Björn Karlsson and James G. Quintiere. Enclosure Fire Dynamics. eng. 1st ed.
2000. ISBN: 0-8493-1300-7.
[28]
Kevin McGrattan et al. Fire Dynamics Simulator User’s Guide. eng. 2019.
[29]
Jonathan Wahlqvist and Patrick van Hees. “Influence of the built environment on
design fires”. eng. In: Case Studies in Fire Safety 5 (2015), pp. 20–33. DOI: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csfs.2015.12.001.
[30]
Kevin McGrattan et al. Fire Dynamics Simulator Technical Reference Guide. eng.
2019.
[31]
H.E. Hansen, P. Kjerulf-Jensen, and Ole B. Stampe. Varme og Klimateknik, Grund-
bog. dk. 2nd ed. 1997. ISBN: 87-982652-8-8.
[32]
Ole B. Stampe. Ventilationsteknik. dk. 2nd ed. 2000. ISBN: 87-987995-0-9.
[33]
Nils Johansson. “Variation in Results Due to User Effects in a Simulation with FDS”.
eng. In: Fire Technology 54 (2017), pp. 97–116. DOI: 10.1007/s10694-017-0674-y.
[34]
Craig Beyler. Flammability Limits of Premixed and Diffusion Flames, SFPE hand-
book 2016 chapter 17. eng. 2016. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2565-0_17.
108
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:119==
A
FDS input snippets
The code snipptes presented throughout the thesis are collected here with a good practise
order of relevance.
This is a snippet of FDS code defining simulation time
&TIME T_BEGIN=0, T_END=180 /
FDS definition of relaxation parameters and other instability relieving keywords
&MISC ...,
HVAC_PRES_RELAX=1.0,
HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE=.TRUE./
&PRES CHECK_POISSON=.TRUE.,
PRESSURE_TOLERANCE=2000,
MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS=20,
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE=0.001/
&DUMP NFRAMES=...,
VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE=.TRUE./
//Keep the number of dump frammes small enough
//
//to caputere any fluctuations, ex. 1 seconds intervalls: //
//NFRAMES = T_END - T_BEGIN,
//
FDS definition of bulk zone leakage
&ZONE XB=..., LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/
&SURF ID='LEAKY EXTERIOR WALL', LEAK_PATH=1,0/
FDS definition of localised leakage
&SURF ID='INTERNAL',DEFAULT=.TRUE./
&VENT XB=...,SURF_ID='INTERNAL',ID='LEAK_VENT',COLOR='BLUE'/
&HVAC ID='LEAK',TYPE_ID='LEAK',
VENT_ID='LEAK_VENT',VENT2_ID='AMBIENT',AREA=0.0055/
FDS definition of simple single fuel combustion.
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
FYI = 'Heptane, C_7 H_16, SFPE Fith ED. App. 3-4 TABLE A.39-40'
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
109
==PAGE:120==
FDS definition of a fire with growth phase and constant HRR
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE', HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-146/
FDS definition of fuel and fire with AIT implemented.
---FUEL
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
FYI = 'Heptane, C_7 H_16'
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 44600
AUTO_IGNITION_TEMPERATURE=223/
---OUTPUT
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE',
HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-293, TMP_FRONT=98.0/
---FIRE VENT
&VENT XB=..., SURF_ID='FIRE'/
FDS definition of fuel igniter configured for fast fire
---FUEL IGNITER
&OBST XB=..., DEVC_ID='TIMER',
SURF_IDS='HOT_SURF','HOT_SURF','HOT_SURF' /
&DEVC ID='TIMER', XYZ=..., QUANTITY='TIME',
SETPOINT= 80.0,INITIAL_STATE=.TRUE. /
&SURF ID='HOT_SURF', TMP_FRONT=900.0, TMP_INNER=900.0,
RAMP_T='HotRamp', COLOR='RED' /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T= 0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T= 1.0, F=1.0 /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T=80.0, F=1.0 /
&RAMP ID='HotRamp' T=81.0, F=0.0 /
FDS definition of a HRR RAMP
&SURF ID='FIRE',RAMP_Q='HRR_ramp', COLOR='ORANGE' HRRPUA=1000/
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 0
, F= 0.00 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 30
, F= 0.04 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 60
, F= 0.17 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 90
, F= 0.38 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 105 , F= 0.52 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 120 , F= 0.68 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 150 , F= 1.00 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 160 , F= 0.90 /
&RAMP ID='HRR_ramp', T= 180 , F= 0.00 /
110
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:121==
FDS definition of nodes and ducts
---NODES
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA',VENT_ID='VENT_A',LOSS=8,8/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA', AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=...,LOSS=1,1/
---DUCTS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_BA',
NODE_ID='NODE_B','NODE_A',
FAN_ID='SUPPLY_FAN',
DIAMETER=0.160, LENGTH=1,LOSS=1,1, ROUGHNESS=0.0015/
---VENT
&VENT ID='VENT_A',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=.../
FDS definition of a Tee node
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='TEE',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_1','DUCT_2','DUCT_3',XYZ=...,
LOSS(1,1)=0
,LOSS(1,2)=K12,LOSS(1,3)=K13,
LOSS(2,1)=K21,LOSS(2,2)=0
,LOSS(2,3)=K23,
LOSS(3,1)=K31,LOSS(3,2)=K32,LOSS(3,3)=0/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
111
==PAGE:122==
B
Case 2 and 3 duct dimensions
The duct dimensions of case 2 and 3 are summarised here. Floor 0 and floor 1 are
identical.
Diameter
Area
Volume Flow
Flow Speed
Length
[m]
[m2]
[m3/s]
[m/s]
[m]
BA/KL
0.160
0.020
0.05
2.49
6.1
BC/ML
0.160
0.020
0.05
2.49
1.0
DB/LN
0.200
0.031
0.10
3.18
5.1
DE/ON
0.160
0.020
0.05
2.49
1.0
FD/NP
0.250
0.049
0.15
3.06
5.1
FG/QP
0.160
0.020
0.05
2.49
1.0
HF/PR
0.315
0.078
0.20
2.57
5.1
HI/SR
0.160
0.020
0.05
2.49
1.0
JH/RT
0.315
0.078
0.25
3.21
5.1
Vent loss at 0.05 m3/s
10 Pa
30 Pa
50 Pa
70 Pa
100 Pa
200 Pa
[-]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[-]
[-]
2.7
8.1
13.5
18.9
27.0
53.9
Floor Ducts
112
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:123==
C
Case 3 Buoyancy effect
The effects of moving the fan below ground is here shown as zone pressures of the tests
FC270 and FC400. FL stands for Fan Low.
Zone pressure FC270
C3_FC270
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
ZONE_1
439
815
1114
1654
2260
ZONE_2
13
6
2
-4
-16
ZONE_3
-7
-10
-13
-17
-27
ZONE_4
-13
-16
-19
-23
-31
ZONE_5
-15
-19
-20
-24
-33
ZONE_6
-10
-12
-14
-16
-21
ZONE_7
-10
-12
-14
-16
-21
ZONE_8
-11
-12
-14
-16
-21
ZONE_9
-11
-13
-14
-16
-21
ZONE_10
-11
-13
-14
-16
-21
C3_FC270_FL
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
ZONE_1
470
844
1152
1628
2258
ZONE_2
58
50
47
42
36
ZONE_3
32
30
30
28
26
ZONE_4
24
24
24
24
23
ZONE_5
21
22
22
23
22
ZONE_6
27
29
28
29
29
ZONE_7
26
29
28
29
29
ZONE_8
26
29
28
29
29
ZONE_9
26
29
28
29
29
ZONE_10
26
29
28
29
29
Difference
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
ZONE_1
31
29
38
-26
-2
ZONE_2
45
44
45
46
52
ZONE_3
39
40
43
45
53
ZONE_4
37
40
43
47
54
ZONE_5
36
41
42
47
55
ZONE_6
37
41
42
45
50
ZONE_7
36
41
42
45
50
ZONE_8
37
41
42
45
50
ZONE_9
37
42
42
45
50
ZONE_10
37
42
42
45
50
Mean
38
41
43
46
52
STDEV
2.8
1.2
1.0
0.9
2.0
% of mean
7%
3%
2%
2%
4%
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
113
==PAGE:124==
Zone pressure FC400
C3_FC400
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
ZONE_1
381
731
948
1495
2228
ZONE_2
-64
-128
-173
-226
-274
ZONE_3
-89
-149
-191
-241
-285
ZONE_4
-97
-156
-197
-246
-289
ZONE_5
-100
-158
-199
-247
-290
ZONE_6
-91
-148
-189
-236
-278
ZONE_7
-91
-148
-189
-236
-278
ZONE_8
-91
-149
-189
-236
-278
ZONE_9
-91
-149
-189
-236
-278
ZONE_10
-91
-149
-189
-236
-278
C3_FC400_FL
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
ZONE_1
387
750
1004
1548
2198
ZONE_2
-43
-95
-136
-181
-235
ZONE_3
-69
-116
-154
-195
-246
ZONE_4
-78
-124
-160
-200
-250
ZONE_5
-80
-126
-162
-201
-251
ZONE_6
-76
-121
-157
-195
-244
ZONE_7
-76
-121
-157
-195
-244
ZONE_8
-76
-121
-157
-195
-244
ZONE_9
-76
-121
-156
-195
-244
ZONE_10
-76
-121
-156
-195
-244
Difference
PL10
PL30
PL50
PL100
PL200
ZONE_1
6
19
56
53
-30
ZONE_2
21
33
37
45
39
ZONE_3
20
33
37
46
39
ZONE_4
19
32
37
46
39
ZONE_5
20
32
37
46
39
ZONE_6
15
27
32
41
34
ZONE_7
15
27
32
41
34
ZONE_8
15
28
32
41
34
ZONE_9
15
28
33
41
34
ZONE_10
15
28
33
41
34
Mean
17
30
34
43
36
STDEV
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.6
% of mean
16%
9%
7%
6%
7%
114
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:125==
D
FDS files
Table D.1: List of important FDS input files
Application case
Filename
Case 1 simple design fire
C1_Fast.fds
Case 2 test 1 HVAC on
C2_T1.fds
Case 3 Fan curve and pressure loss test
C3_FC270_PL30.fds
C1_Fast.fds
The FDS input file used in case 1 to test the simple combustion model with a fast fire
growth. the geometry consits of the fire compartment connected with one other compart-
ment. The HVAC network is not fully implemented but connects the two rooms as it will
also connect the rest of the compartments in case 2 and 3.
&HEAD CHID = 'Case1_Fast', TITLE='Default fire cell connected to 1 room Fast
fire' /
---SIMULATION AND SOLVER PARAMETERS -------------------------
&TIME T_BEGIN=0, T_END=500/
&MISC TMPA=20,
P_INF=101325,
SIMULATION_MODE='VLES',
STRATIFICATION=.FALSE.,
HVAC_PRES_RELAX=1,
HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE=.TRUE./
&PRES CHECK_POISSON=.TRUE.,
PRESSURE_TOLERANCE=2000,
MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS=20,
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE=0.01/
&RADI RADIATION=.TRUE./
------------------------------------------------------------
---MESH-----------------------------------------------------
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room1', IJK=50,100,26, XB=0.0, 5.0,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room2', IJK=50,100,26, XB=5.1,10.1,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
0.1m cellsize gives 130000 cells in the fire room
0.1m cellsize gives 130000 cells in the connected rooms
------------------------------------------------------------
---ZONE AND LEKAGE------------------------------------------
&ZONE XB=0.0, 5.0,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/
&ZONE XB=5.1,10.1,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/
------------------------------------------------------------
---MATERIALS ------------------------------------------------
&MATL ID='CONCRETE',
FYI='An introduction to fire dynamics - table 2.1',
SPECIFIC_HEAT=1.0,
CONDUCTIVITY=1.75,
DENSITY=2200.0/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
115
==PAGE:126==
&SURF ID='ConcreteEX',
COLOR='GRAY 40',
BACKING='EXPOSED',
MATL_ID='CONCRETE',
THICKNESS=0.15, LEAK_PATH=1,0/
&SURF ID='ConcreteINT',
COLOR='GRAY 10',
BACKING='EXPOSED',
MATL_ID='CONCRETE',
THICKNESS=0.15/
------------------------------------------------------------
---FIRE-----------------------------------------------------
---FUEL
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
FYI = 'Heptane , C_7 H_16'
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03/
---OUTPUT
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE', HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-293, TMP_FRONT=98.0/
---FIRE BOX
&VENT XB=1.5,3.5,4.0,6.0,0,0.0, SURF_ID='FIRE'/
------------------------------------------------------------
---GEOMETRY -------------------------------------------------
---ROOM01
---EXTERNAL WALLS
&OBST XB=0.0,5.0,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N01
&OBST XB=0.0,5.0, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S01
&OBST XB=0.0,0.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall W01
---INTERNAL WALLS
&OBST XB=5.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E01
---CEILING and FLOOR
&OBST XB=0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling01
&OBST XB=0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor01
---ROOM02
---EXTERNAL WALLS
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S02
&OBST XB=10.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall E02
---INTERNAL WALLS
&OBST XB= 5.1, 5.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W02
---CEILING and FLOOR
&OBST XB=5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Ceiling02
&OBST XB=5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Floor02
------------------------------------------------------------
---HVAC-SUPPLY ----------------------------------------------
---NODES
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA',VENT_ID='VENT_A',LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB','DUCT_BC','DUCT_BA',XYZ=9,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_C',
116
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:127==
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC',VENT_ID='VENT_C',XYZ=9,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_D',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB', AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=14,11,2,LOSS=1,1/ Ambient
---DUCTS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_BA',
NODE_ID='NODE_B','NODE_A',
DIAMETER=0.160, LENGTH=6, LOSS=0.133,0.133, ROUGHNESS=0.0015 /
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_BC',
NODE_ID='NODE_B','NODE_C',
DIAMETER=0.160, LENGTH=1, LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.0015 /
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_DB',
NODE_ID='NODE_D','NODE_B',
DIAMETER=0.200, LENGTH=5, LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.0015 /
---VENTS
&VENT ID='VENT_A'
SURF_ID='HVAC'
COLOR='BLUE'
XB=3.8,4.2,10,10,1.8,2.2/
&VENT ID='VENT_C'
SURF_ID='HVAC'
COLOR='BLUE'
XB=8.8,9.2,10,10,1.8,2.2/
---FANS
No fan
------------------------------------------------------------
---HVAC-EXHAUST ---------------------------------------------
---NODES
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_E',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_EF',VENT_ID='VENT_E',LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_F',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_FH','DUCT_GF','DUCT_EF',XYZ=6,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_G',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_GF',VENT_ID='VENT_G',XYZ=6,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_H',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_FH', AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=14,11,2,LOSS=1,1/ Ambient
---DUCTS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_EF',
NODE_ID='NODE_E','NODE_F',
DIAMETER=0.160, LENGTH=7, LOSS=0.133,0.133, ROUGHNESS=0.0015 /
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_GF',
NODE_ID='NODE_G','NODE_F',
DIAMETER=0.160, LENGTH=2, LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.0015 /
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT', ID='DUCT_FH',
NODE_ID='NODE_F','NODE_H',
DIAMETER=0.200, LENGTH=5, LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.0015 /
---VENTS
&VENT ID='VENT_E'
SURF_ID='HVAC'
COLOR='RED'
XB=0.8,1.2,10,10,1.8,2.2/
&VENT ID='VENT_G'
SURF_ID='HVAC'
COLOR='RED'
XB=5.8,6.2,10,10,1.8,2.2/
---FANS
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
117
==PAGE:128==
No fan
------------------------------------------------------------
---OUTPUT---------------------------------------------------
---DUMP
&DUMP
NFRAMES=1000
VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE=.TRUE./
---SLICES
&SLCF QUANTITY='VELOCITY',PBZ=2/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=2.5/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBZ=2/
&SLCF QUANTITY='VISIBILITY', SPEC_ID='SOOT',PBZ=1.8/
---ROOM DEVICES
Temperaure profile
&DEVC XB=2.5,2.5,7.5,7.5,0,2.6, QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE', ID='Temp', POINTS=10,
TIME_HISTORY=.TRUE./
Gas species
&DEVC ID='O2vol', QUANTITY='VOLUME FRACTION', SPEC_ID='OXYGEN', XYZ=2.5,2.5,1
.3/
&DEVC ID='COvol', QUANTITY='VOLUME FRACTION', SPEC_ID='CARBON MONOXIDE', XYZ=2
.5,2.5,1.3/
---DUCT DEVICES
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_EF_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_EF' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_GF_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_GF' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FH_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FH' /
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC_SOOTvol', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FRACTION',SPEC_ID='SOOT',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_EF_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_EF' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_GF_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_GF' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FH_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FH' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_GF_SOOTvol', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FRACTION',SPEC_ID='SOOT',
DUCT_ID='DUCT_GF' /
---NODE DEVICES
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='A_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_A' /
&DEVC ID='B_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_B' /
&DEVC ID='C_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_C' /
&DEVC ID='D_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_D' /
&DEVC ID='A_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_A'/
&DEVC ID='C_SOOTvol', QUANTITY='NODE VOLUME FRACTION',SPEC_ID='SOOT',NODE_ID='
NODE_C' /
118
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:129==
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='E_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_E' /
&DEVC ID='F_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_F' /
&DEVC ID='G_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_G' /
&DEVC ID='H_PRESS', QUANTITY='NODE PRESSURE', NODE_ID='NODE_H' /
&DEVC ID='E_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_E'/
&DEVC ID='G_SOOTvol', QUANTITY='NODE VOLUME FRACTION',SPEC_ID='SOOT',NODE_ID='
NODE_G' /
------------------------------------------------------------
&TAIL/
Backmatter/Case1_Fast.fds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
119
==PAGE:130==
C2_T1.fds
The FDS input file used in case 2 test 1 to test the performance of the HVAC network
when the supply and exhaust fans runs with no changes in damper configuration. 10
rooms with 5 on each floor are connected with a simple network consisting of main and
branching ducts.
&HEAD CHID = 'Case2_T1', TITLE='Fast fire w default HVAC configuration' /
---SIMULATION AND SOLVER PARAMETERS -------------------------
&TIME T_BEGIN=0, T_END=400/
&MISC TMPA=20,
P_INF=101325,
SIMULATION_MODE='VLES',
STRATIFICATION=.TRUE.,
HVAC_PRES_RELAX=1,
HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE=.TRUE./
&PRES CHECK_POISSON=.TRUE.,
PRESSURE_TOLERANCE=2000,
MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS=20,
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE=0.01/
&RADI RADIATION=.TRUE./
------------------------------------------------------------
---MESH-----------------------------------------------------
---FIRST FLOOR
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room01', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 0.0, 5.0,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room02', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 5.1,10.1,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room03', IJK=50,100,26, XB=10.2,15.2,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room04', IJK=50,100,26, XB=15.3,20.3,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room05', IJK=50,100,26, XB=20.4,25.4,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
---SECOND FLOOR
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room11', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 0.0, 5.0,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room12', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 5.1,10.1,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room13', IJK=50,100,26, XB=10.2,15.2,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room14', IJK=50,100,26, XB=15.3,20.3,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room15', IJK=50,100,26, XB=20.4,25.4,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
0.1m cellsize gives 130000 cells in the fire room and connected rooms
------------------------------------------------------------
---ZONE AND LEKAGE------------------------------------------
---FIRST FLOOR
&ZONE XYZ= 2.5,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room01
&ZONE XYZ= 7.6,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room02
&ZONE XYZ=12.7,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room03
&ZONE XYZ=17.8,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room04
&ZONE XYZ=22.9,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room05
---SECOND FLOOR
&ZONE XYZ= 2.5,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room11
&ZONE XYZ= 7.6,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room12
&ZONE XYZ=12.7,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room13
&ZONE XYZ=17.8,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room14
&ZONE XYZ=22.9,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room15
------------------------------------------------------------
---FIRE-----------------------------------------------------
---FUEL
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
FYI = 'Heptane , C_7 H_16'
120
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:131==
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03/
---OUTPUT
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE', HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-293, TMP_FRONT=98.0/
---FIRE BOX
&VENT XB=1.5,3.5,4.0,6.0,0,0.0, SURF_ID='FIRE'/ ROOM01
------------------------------------------------------------
---MATERIALS ------------------------------------------------
&MATL ID='CONCRETE',
FYI='An introduction to fire dynamics - table 2.1',
SPECIFIC_HEAT=1.0,
CONDUCTIVITY=1.75,
DENSITY=2200.0/
&SURF ID='ConcreteEX',
COLOR='GRAY 40',
BACKING='EXPOSED',
MATL_ID='CONCRETE',
THICKNESS=0.15, LEAK_PATH=1,0/
&SURF ID='ConcreteINT',
COLOR='GRAY 10',
BACKING='EXPOSED',
MATL_ID='CONCRETE',
THICKNESS=0.15/
------------------------------------------------------------
---GEOMETRY -------------------------------------------------
---FIRST FLOOR
---ROOM01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall N01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall S01
&OBST XB= 0.0,0.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall W01
&OBST XB= 5.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Internal wall E01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Ceiling01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Floor01
---ROOM02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S02
&OBST XB=10.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E02
&OBST XB= 5.1, 5.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor02
---ROOM03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S03
&OBST XB=15.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E03
&OBST XB=10.2,10.2, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor03
---ROOM04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S04
&OBST XB=20.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E04
&OBST XB=15.3,15.3, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor04
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
121
==PAGE:132==
---ROOM05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S05
&OBST XB=25.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall E05
&OBST XB=20.4,20.4, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor05
---SECOND FLOOR
---ROOM11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall N11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall S11
&OBST XB= 0.0,0.0, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall W11
&OBST XB= 5.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Internal wall E11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Ceiling11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Floor11
---ROOM12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S12
&OBST XB=10.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E12
&OBST XB= 5.1, 5.1, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor12
---ROOM13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S13
&OBST XB=15.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E13
&OBST XB=10.2,10.2, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor13
---ROOM14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S14
&OBST XB=20.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E14
&OBST XB=15.3,15.3, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor14
---ROOM15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S15
&OBST XB=25.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall E15
&OBST XB=20.4,20.4, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor15
------------------------------------------------------------
---HVAC-SUPPLY ----------------------------------------------
---NODES - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA0',VENT_ID='VENT_A0',XYZ= 4
.0,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_C0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC0',VENT_ID='VENT_C0',XYZ= 9
.1,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_E0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE0',VENT_ID='VENT_E0',XYZ=14
.2,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_G0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG0',VENT_ID='VENT_G0',XYZ=19
.3,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_I0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI0',VENT_ID='VENT_I0',XYZ=24
.4,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0','DUCT_BC0','DUCT_BA0',XYZ
= 9.1,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_D0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0','DUCT_DE0','DUCT_FD0',XYZ
=14.2,11,2/ Tee
122
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:133==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_F0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD0','DUCT_FG0','DUCT_HF0',XYZ
=19.3,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_H0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF0','DUCT_HI0','DUCT_JH0',XYZ
=24.4,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_J0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_J1J0','DUCT_JH0',XYZ=29.5,11,2
/ Branch to Floor0 supply
---NODES - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA1',VENT_ID='VENT_A1',XYZ= 4
.0,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_C1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC1',VENT_ID='VENT_C1',XYZ= 9
.1,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_E1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE1',VENT_ID='VENT_E1',XYZ=14
.2,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_G1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG1',VENT_ID='VENT_G1',XYZ=19
.3,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_I1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI1',VENT_ID='VENT_I1',XYZ=24
.4,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1','DUCT_BC1','DUCT_BA1',XYZ
= 9.1,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_D1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1','DUCT_DE1','DUCT_FD1',XYZ
=14.2,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_F1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD1','DUCT_FG1','DUCT_HF1',XYZ
=19.3,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_H1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF1','DUCT_HI1','DUCT_JH1',XYZ
=24.4,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_J1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_J2J1','DUCT_JH1','DUCT_J1J0',
XYZ=29.5,11,5/ Branch to Floor1 supply
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_J2',DUCT_ID='DUCT_J3J2','DUCT_J2J1',XYZ=29.5,11,
9/ Distancing FAN
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_J3',DUCT_ID='DUCT_J3J2',AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=29.5,
11,10,LOSS=21,21/ Fan duct connected to Ambient
---DUCTS - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BA0',NODE_ID='NODE_B0','NODE_A0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=6.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BC0',NODE_ID='NODE_B0','NODE_C0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DB0',NODE_ID='NODE_D0','NODE_B0',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DE0',NODE_ID='NODE_D0','NODE_E0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FD0',NODE_ID='NODE_F0','NODE_D0',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FG0',NODE_ID='NODE_F0','NODE_G0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HF0',NODE_ID='NODE_H0','NODE_F0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HI0',NODE_ID='NODE_H0','NODE_I0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_JH0',NODE_ID='NODE_J0','NODE_H0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_J1J0',NODE_ID='NODE_J1','NODE_J0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=3.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---DUCTS - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BA1',NODE_ID='NODE_B1','NODE_A1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=6.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BC1',NODE_ID='NODE_B1','NODE_C1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DB1',NODE_ID='NODE_D1','NODE_B1',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
123
==PAGE:134==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DE1',NODE_ID='NODE_D1','NODE_E1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FD1',NODE_ID='NODE_F1','NODE_D1',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FG1',NODE_ID='NODE_F1','NODE_G1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HF1',NODE_ID='NODE_H1','NODE_F1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HI1',NODE_ID='NODE_H1','NODE_I1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_JH1',NODE_ID='NODE_J1','NODE_H1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_J2J1',NODE_ID='NODE_J2','NODE_J1',
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=4.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_J3J2',NODE_ID='NODE_J3','NODE_J2',FAN_ID='
SUPPLY_FAN',
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---FANS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='FAN', ID='SUPPLY_FAN', MAX_FLOW=1.0, MAX_PRESSURE=500/
---VENTS - FIRST FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_A0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 3.9, 4.1,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_C0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 9.0, 9.2,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_E0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=14.1,14.3,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_G0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=19.2,19.4,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_I0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=24.3,24.5,10,10,1.9,2.1/
---VENTS - SECOND FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_A1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 3.9, 4.1,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_C1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 9.0, 9.2,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_E1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=14.1,14.3,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_G1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=19.2,19.4,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_I1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=24.3,24.5,10,10,4.9,5.1/
------------------------------------------------------------
---HVAC-EXHAUST ---------------------------------------------
---NODES - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_K0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0',VENT_ID='VENT_K0',XYZ= 1
.0,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_M0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML0',VENT_ID='VENT_M0',XYZ= 6
.1,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_O0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON0',VENT_ID='VENT_O0',XYZ=11
.2,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_Q0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP0',VENT_ID='VENT_Q0',XYZ=16
.3,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_S0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR0',VENT_ID='VENT_S0',XYZ=21
.4,10,2,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_L0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0','DUCT_ML0','DUCT_LN0',XYZ
= 6.1,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_N0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN0','DUCT_ON0','DUCT_NP0',XYZ
=11.2,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_P0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP0','DUCT_QP0','DUCT_PR0',XYZ
=16.3,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_R0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR0','DUCT_SR0','DUCT_RT0',XYZ
=21.4,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT0','DUCT_T0T1',XYZ=29.5,11,2
/ Branch to Floor0 exhaust
---NODES - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_K1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1',VENT_ID='VENT_K1',XYZ= 1
.0,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
124
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:135==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_M1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML1',VENT_ID='VENT_M1',XYZ= 6
.1,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_O1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON1',VENT_ID='VENT_O1',XYZ=11
.2,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_Q1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP1',VENT_ID='VENT_Q1',XYZ=16
.3,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_S1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR1',VENT_ID='VENT_S1',XYZ=21
.4,10,5,LOSS=8,8/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_L1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1','DUCT_ML1','DUCT_LN1',XYZ
= 6.1,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_N1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN1','DUCT_ON1','DUCT_NP1',XYZ
=11.2,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_P1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP1','DUCT_QP1','DUCT_PR1',XYZ
=16.3,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_R1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR1','DUCT_SR1','DUCT_RT1',XYZ
=21.4,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_T0T1','DUCT_RT1','DUCT_T1T2',
XYZ=29.5,11,5/ Branch to Floor1 exhaust
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T2',DUCT_ID='DUCT_T1T2','DUCT_T2T3',XYZ=29.5,11,
9/ Distancing FAN
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T3',DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3',AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=29.5,
11,10,LOSS=21,21/ Fan duct connected to Ambient
---DUCTS - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_KL0',NODE_ID='NODE_K0','NODE_L0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=7.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ML0',NODE_ID='NODE_M0','NODE_L0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_LN0',NODE_ID='NODE_L0','NODE_N0',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ON0',NODE_ID='NODE_O0','NODE_N0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_NP0',NODE_ID='NODE_N0','NODE_P0',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_QP0',NODE_ID='NODE_Q0','NODE_P0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_PR0',NODE_ID='NODE_P0','NODE_R0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_SR0',NODE_ID='NODE_S0','NODE_R0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_RT0',NODE_ID='NODE_R0','NODE_T0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_T0T1',NODE_ID='NODE_T0','NODE_T1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=3.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---DUCTS - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_KL1',NODE_ID='NODE_K1','NODE_L1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=7.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ML1',NODE_ID='NODE_M1','NODE_L1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_LN1',NODE_ID='NODE_L1','NODE_N1',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ON1',NODE_ID='NODE_O1','NODE_N1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_NP1',NODE_ID='NODE_N1','NODE_P1',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_QP1',NODE_ID='NODE_Q1','NODE_P1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_PR1',NODE_ID='NODE_P1','NODE_R1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_SR1',NODE_ID='NODE_S1','NODE_R1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
125
==PAGE:136==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_RT1',NODE_ID='NODE_R1','NODE_T1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_T1T2',NODE_ID='NODE_T1','NODE_T2',
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=4.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_T2T3',NODE_ID='NODE_T2','NODE_T3',FAN_ID='
EXHAUST_FAN',
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---FANS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='FAN', ID='EXHAUST_FAN', MAX_FLOW=1.0, MAX_PRESSURE=500/
---VENTS - FIRST FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_K0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 0.9, 1.1,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_M0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 6.0, 6.2,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_O0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=11.1,11.3,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_Q0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=16.2,16.4,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_S0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=21.3,21.5,10,10,1.9,2.1/
---VENTS - SECOND FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_K1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 0.9, 1.1,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_M1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 6.0, 6.2,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_O1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=11.1,11.3,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_Q1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=16.2,16.4,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_S1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=21.3,21.5,10,10,4.9,5.1/
------------------------------------------------------------
---OUTPUT---------------------------------------------------
---DUMP
&DUMP
NFRAMES = 400,
DT_HRR = 1.0,
DT_DEVC = 1.0,
DT_SLCF = 1.0,
VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE=.TRUE./
---SLICES
&SLCF QUANTITY='VELOCITY',PBZ=2/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=2.5/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=7.6/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=12.7/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=17.8/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=22.9/
&SLCF QUANTITY='VISIBILITY',SPEC_ID='SOOT',PBY=5.0/
---ROOM DEVICES
Temperaure profile
&DEVC XB= 2.5, 2.5,7.5, 7.5,0.0,2.6, QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE', ID='Temp', POINTS
=10,TIME_HISTORY=.TRUE./
---NODE DEVICES
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='A0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_A0' /
&DEVC ID='B0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_B0' /
&DEVC ID='C0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_C0' /
&DEVC ID='D0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_D0' /
&DEVC ID='E0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_E0' /
&DEVC ID='F0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_F0' /
&DEVC ID='G0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_G0' /
&DEVC ID='H0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_H0' /
&DEVC ID='I0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_I0' /
&DEVC ID='J0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_J0' /
---EXHAUST
126
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:137==
&DEVC ID='K0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_K0' /
&DEVC ID='L0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_L0' /
&DEVC ID='M0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_M0' /
&DEVC ID='N0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_N0' /
&DEVC ID='O0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_O0' /
&DEVC ID='P0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_P0' /
&DEVC ID='Q0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_Q0' /
&DEVC ID='R0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_R0' /
&DEVC ID='S0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_S0' /
&DEVC ID='T0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T0' /
---DUCT DEVICES
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH0' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT0' /
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH0' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT0' /
---NODE DEVICES
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='A1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_A1' /
&DEVC ID='B1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_B1' /
&DEVC ID='C1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_C1' /
&DEVC ID='D1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_D1' /
&DEVC ID='E1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_E1' /
&DEVC ID='F1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_F1' /
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
127
==PAGE:138==
&DEVC ID='G1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_G1' /
&DEVC ID='H1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_H1' /
&DEVC ID='I1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_I1' /
&DEVC ID='J1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_J1' /
&DEVC ID='J2_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_J2' /
&DEVC ID='J3_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_J3' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='K1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_K1' /
&DEVC ID='L1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_L1' /
&DEVC ID='M1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_M1' /
&DEVC ID='N1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_N1' /
&DEVC ID='O1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_O1' /
&DEVC ID='P1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_P1' /
&DEVC ID='Q1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_Q1' /
&DEVC ID='R1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_R1' /
&DEVC ID='S1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_S1' /
&DEVC ID='T1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T1' /
&DEVC ID='T2_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T2' /
&DEVC ID='T3_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T3' /
---DUCT DEVICES
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J1J0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J1J0'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J2J1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J2J1'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J3J2_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J3J2'
/
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T0T1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T0T1'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T1T2_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T1T2'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T2T3_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3'
/
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF1' /
128
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:139==
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J1J0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J1J0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J2J1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J2J1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J3J2_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J3J2' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T0T1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T0T1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T1T2_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T1T2' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T2T3_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3' /
---FAN PRESSURE
&DEVC ID='SUPPLY_FAN_PRES', QUANTITY='FAN PRESSURE', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J3J2' /
&DEVC ID='EXHAUST_FAN_PRES', QUANTITY='FAN PRESSURE', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3' /
------------------------------------------------------------
&TAIL/
Backmatter/Case2_T1.fds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
129
==PAGE:140==
C3_FC270_PL30.fds
The FDS input file used in case 3 with fan curve FC270 and vent pressure loss of PL30.
The setup has no supply fan but a dedicated smoke fan is connected using a bypass
duct. The setup is otherwise equal to case 2 but the fan curve and vent loss parameters
changed thoughout the study, resulting in 35 simulations.
&HEAD CHID = 'Case3_FC270_PL30', TITLE='Case 3 Fan curve 270 Pressure loss 30
Pa' /
---SIMULATION AND SOLVER PARAMETERS -------------------------
&TIME T_BEGIN=0, T_END=400/
&MISC TMPA=20,
P_INF=101325,
SIMULATION_MODE='VLES',
STRATIFICATION=.TRUE.,
HVAC_PRES_RELAX=1,
HVAC_LOCAL_PRESSURE=.TRUE./
&PRES CHECK_POISSON=.TRUE.,
PRESSURE_TOLERANCE=2000,
MAX_PRESSURE_ITERATIONS=20,
VELOCITY_TOLERANCE=0.01/
&RADI RADIATION=.TRUE./
------------------------------------------------------------
---MESH-----------------------------------------------------
---FIRST FLOOR
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room01', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 0.0, 5.0,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room02', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 5.1,10.1,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room03', IJK=50,100,26, XB=10.2,15.2,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room04', IJK=50,100,26, XB=15.3,20.3,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room05', IJK=50,100,26, XB=20.4,25.4,0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6/
---SECOND FLOOR
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room11', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 0.0, 5.0,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room12', IJK=50,100,26, XB= 5.1,10.1,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room13', IJK=50,100,26, XB=10.2,15.2,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room14', IJK=50,100,26, XB=15.3,20.3,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
&MESH ID='Mesh_Room15', IJK=50,100,26, XB=20.4,25.4,0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6/
0.1m cellsize gives 130000 cells in the fire room and connected rooms
------------------------------------------------------------
---ZONE AND LEKAGE------------------------------------------
---FIRST FLOOR
&ZONE XYZ= 2.5,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room01
&ZONE XYZ= 7.6,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room02
&ZONE XYZ=12.7,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room03
&ZONE XYZ=17.8,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room04
&ZONE XYZ=22.9,5.0,1.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room05
---SECOND FLOOR
&ZONE XYZ= 2.5,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room11
&ZONE XYZ= 7.6,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room12
&ZONE XYZ=12.7,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room13
&ZONE XYZ=17.8,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room14
&ZONE XYZ=22.9,5.0,4.3, LEAK_AREA(0)=0.0055/ room15
------------------------------------------------------------
---FIRE-----------------------------------------------------
---FUEL
&REAC FUEL = 'N-HEPTANE'
130
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:141==
FYI = 'Heptane , C_7 H_16'
C = 7.0
H = 16.0
CO_YIELD = 0.01
SOOT_YIELD = 0.03
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 44600/
---OUTPUT
&SURF ID='FIRE', COLOR='ORANGE', HRRPUA=1000, TAU_Q=-293, TMP_FRONT=98.0/
---FIRE BOX
&VENT XB=1.5,3.5,4.0,6.0,0,0.0, SURF_ID='FIRE'/ ROOM01
------------------------------------------------------------
---MATERIALS ------------------------------------------------
&MATL ID='CONCRETE',
FYI='An introduction to fire dynamics - table 2.1',
SPECIFIC_HEAT=1.0,
CONDUCTIVITY=1.75,
DENSITY=2200.0/
&SURF ID='ConcreteEX',
COLOR='GRAY 40',
BACKING='EXPOSED',
MATL_ID='CONCRETE',
THICKNESS=0.15, LEAK_PATH=1,0/
&SURF ID='ConcreteINT',
COLOR='GRAY 10',
BACKING='EXPOSED',
MATL_ID='CONCRETE',
THICKNESS=0.15/
------------------------------------------------------------
---GEOMETRY -------------------------------------------------
---FIRST FLOOR
---ROOM01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall N01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall S01
&OBST XB= 0.0,0.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall W01
&OBST XB= 5.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Internal wall E01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Ceiling01
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Floor01
---ROOM02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S02
&OBST XB=10.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E02
&OBST XB= 5.1, 5.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling02
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor02
---ROOM03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S03
&OBST XB=15.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E03
&OBST XB=10.2,10.2, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling03
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor03
---ROOM04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S04
&OBST XB=20.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E04
&OBST XB=15.3,15.3, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W04
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
131
==PAGE:142==
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling04
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor04
---ROOM05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4,10.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0, 0.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S05
&OBST XB=25.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall E05
&OBST XB=20.4,20.4, 0.0,10.0,0.0,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,2.6,2.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling05
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,0.0,0.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor05
---SECOND FLOOR
---ROOM11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall N11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall S11
&OBST XB= 0.0,0.0, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/ External wall W11
&OBST XB= 5.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Internal wall E11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Ceiling11
&OBST XB= 0.0,5.0, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/
Floor11
---ROOM12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S12
&OBST XB=10.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E12
&OBST XB= 5.1, 5.1, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling12
&OBST XB= 5.1,10.1, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor12
---ROOM13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S13
&OBST XB=15.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E13
&OBST XB=10.2,10.2, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling13
&OBST XB=10.2,15.2, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor13
---ROOM14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S14
&OBST XB=20.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall E14
&OBST XB=15.3,15.3, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling14
&OBST XB=15.3,20.3, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor14
---ROOM15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4,10.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall N15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0, 0.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall S15
&OBST XB=25.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteEX'/
External wall E15
&OBST XB=20.4,20.4, 0.0,10.0,3.0,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Internal wall W15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,5.6,5.6,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Ceiling15
&OBST XB=20.4,25.4, 0.0,10.0,3.0,3.0,SURF_ID='ConcreteINT'/ Floor15
------------------------------------------------------------
---HVAC-SUPPLY ----------------------------------------------
---NODES - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA0',VENT_ID='VENT_A0',XYZ= 4
.0,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_C0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC0',VENT_ID='VENT_C0',XYZ= 9
.1,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_E0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE0',VENT_ID='VENT_E0',XYZ=14
.2,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_G0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG0',VENT_ID='VENT_G0',XYZ=19
.3,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_I0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI0',VENT_ID='VENT_I0',XYZ=24
.4,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0','DUCT_BC0','DUCT_BA0',XYZ
= 9.1,11,2/ Tee
132
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:143==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_D0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0','DUCT_DE0','DUCT_FD0',XYZ
=14.2,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_F0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD0','DUCT_FG0','DUCT_HF0',XYZ
=19.3,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_H0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF0','DUCT_HI0','DUCT_JH0',XYZ
=24.4,11,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_J0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_J0J1','DUCT_JH0',XYZ=29.5,11,2
/ Branch to Floor0 supply
---NODES - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_A1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA1',VENT_ID='VENT_A1',XYZ= 4
.0,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_C1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC1',VENT_ID='VENT_C1',XYZ= 9
.1,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_E1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE1',VENT_ID='VENT_E1',XYZ=14
.2,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_G1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG1',VENT_ID='VENT_G1',XYZ=19
.3,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_I1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI1',VENT_ID='VENT_I1',XYZ=24
.4,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_B1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1','DUCT_BC1','DUCT_BA1',XYZ
= 9.1,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_D1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1','DUCT_DE1','DUCT_FD1',XYZ
=14.2,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_F1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD1','DUCT_FG1','DUCT_HF1',XYZ
=19.3,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_H1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF1','DUCT_HI1','DUCT_JH1',XYZ
=24.4,11,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_J1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_J1T2','DUCT_JH1','DUCT_J0J1',
XYZ=29.5,11,5/ Branch to Floor1 supply
---DUCTS - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BA0',NODE_ID='NODE_B0','NODE_A0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=6.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.
TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BC0',NODE_ID='NODE_B0','NODE_C0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DB0',NODE_ID='NODE_D0','NODE_B0',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DE0',NODE_ID='NODE_D0','NODE_E0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FD0',NODE_ID='NODE_F0','NODE_D0',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FG0',NODE_ID='NODE_F0','NODE_G0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HF0',NODE_ID='NODE_H0','NODE_F0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HI0',NODE_ID='NODE_H0','NODE_I0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_JH0',NODE_ID='NODE_J0','NODE_H0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_J0J1',NODE_ID='NODE_J0','NODE_J1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=3.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---DUCTS - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BA1',NODE_ID='NODE_B1','NODE_A1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=6.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.
TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_BC1',NODE_ID='NODE_B1','NODE_C1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DB1',NODE_ID='NODE_D1','NODE_B1',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
133
==PAGE:144==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_DE1',NODE_ID='NODE_D1','NODE_E1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FD1',NODE_ID='NODE_F1','NODE_D1',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_FG1',NODE_ID='NODE_F1','NODE_G1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HF1',NODE_ID='NODE_H1','NODE_F1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_HI1',NODE_ID='NODE_H1','NODE_I1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015,DAMPER=.TRUE./
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_JH1',NODE_ID='NODE_J1','NODE_H1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_J1T2',NODE_ID='NODE_J1','NODE_T2',
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=4.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---VENTS - FIRST FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_A0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 3.9, 4.1,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_C0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 9.0, 9.2,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_E0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=14.1,14.3,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_G0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=19.2,19.4,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_I0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=24.3,24.5,10,10,1.9,2.1/
---VENTS - SECOND FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_A1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 3.9, 4.1,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_C1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB= 9.0, 9.2,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_E1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=14.1,14.3,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_G1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=19.2,19.4,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_I1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='BLUE',XB=24.3,24.5,10,10,4.9,5.1/
------------------------------------------------------------
---HVAC-EXHAUST ---------------------------------------------
---NODES - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_K0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0',VENT_ID='VENT_K0',XYZ= 1
.0,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_M0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML0',VENT_ID='VENT_M0',XYZ= 6
.1,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_O0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON0',VENT_ID='VENT_O0',XYZ=11
.2,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_Q0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP0',VENT_ID='VENT_Q0',XYZ=16
.3,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_S0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR0',VENT_ID='VENT_S0',XYZ=21
.4,10,2,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_L0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0','DUCT_ML0','DUCT_LN0',XYZ
= 6.1,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_N0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN0','DUCT_ON0','DUCT_NP0',XYZ
=11.2,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_P0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP0','DUCT_QP0','DUCT_PR0',XYZ
=16.3,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_R0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR0','DUCT_SR0','DUCT_RT0',XYZ
=21.4,12,2/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T0',DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT0','DUCT_T0T1',XYZ=29.5,12,2
/ Branch to Floor0 exhaust
---NODES - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_K1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1',VENT_ID='VENT_K1',XYZ= 1
.0,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_M1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML1',VENT_ID='VENT_M1',XYZ= 6
.1,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_O1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON1',VENT_ID='VENT_O1',XYZ=11
.2,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_Q1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP1',VENT_ID='VENT_Q1',XYZ=16
.3,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
134
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:145==
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_S1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR1',VENT_ID='VENT_S1',XYZ=21
.4,10,5,LOSS=8.1,8.1/ Vent
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_L1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1','DUCT_ML1','DUCT_LN1',XYZ
= 6.1,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_N1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN1','DUCT_ON1','DUCT_NP1',XYZ
=11.2,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_P1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP1','DUCT_QP1','DUCT_PR1',XYZ
=16.3,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_R1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR1','DUCT_SR1','DUCT_RT1',XYZ
=21.4,12,5/ Tee
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T1',DUCT_ID='DUCT_T0T1','DUCT_RT1','DUCT_T1T2',
XYZ=29.5,12,5/ Branch to Floor1 exhaust
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T2',DUCT_ID='DUCT_T1T2','DUCT_T2T3','DUCT_J1T2',
XYZ=29.5,11,9/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='NODE',ID='NODE_T3',DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3',AMBIENT=.TRUE.,XYZ=29.5,
11,10/
---DUCTS - FIRST FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_KL0',NODE_ID='NODE_K0','NODE_L0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=7.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ML0',NODE_ID='NODE_M0','NODE_L0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_LN0',NODE_ID='NODE_L0','NODE_N0',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ON0',NODE_ID='NODE_O0','NODE_N0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_NP0',NODE_ID='NODE_N0','NODE_P0',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_QP0',NODE_ID='NODE_Q0','NODE_P0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_PR0',NODE_ID='NODE_P0','NODE_R0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_SR0',NODE_ID='NODE_S0','NODE_R0',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_RT0',NODE_ID='NODE_R0','NODE_T0',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_T0T1',NODE_ID='NODE_T0','NODE_T1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=3.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---DUCTS - SECOND FLOOR
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_KL1',NODE_ID='NODE_K1','NODE_L1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=7.1,LOSS=0.133,0.133,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ML1',NODE_ID='NODE_M1','NODE_L1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0,ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_LN1',NODE_ID='NODE_L1','NODE_N1',
DIAMETER=0.200,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_ON1',NODE_ID='NODE_O1','NODE_N1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_NP1',NODE_ID='NODE_N1','NODE_P1',
DIAMETER=0.250,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_QP1',NODE_ID='NODE_Q1','NODE_P1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_PR1',NODE_ID='NODE_P1','NODE_R1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_SR1',NODE_ID='NODE_S1','NODE_R1',
DIAMETER=0.160,LENGTH=2.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_RT1',NODE_ID='NODE_R1','NODE_T1',
DIAMETER=0.315,LENGTH=5.1,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_T1T2',NODE_ID='NODE_T1','NODE_T2',
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=4.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
&HVAC TYPE_ID='DUCT',ID='DUCT_T2T3',NODE_ID='NODE_T2','NODE_T3',FAN_ID='
SMOKE_FAN',
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
135
==PAGE:146==
DIAMETER=0.400,LENGTH=1.0,LOSS=0,0, ROUGHNESS=0.00015/
---FANS
&HVAC TYPE_ID='FAN', ID='SMOKE_FAN', MAX_FLOW=0.400, MAX_PRESSURE=270/
---VENTS - FIRST FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_K0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 0.9, 1.1,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_M0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 6.0, 6.2,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_O0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=11.1,11.3,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_Q0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=16.2,16.4,10,10,1.9,2.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_S0',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=21.3,21.5,10,10,1.9,2.1/
---VENTS - SECOND FLOOR
&VENT ID='VENT_K1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 0.9, 1.1,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_M1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB= 6.0, 6.2,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_O1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=11.1,11.3,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_Q1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=16.2,16.4,10,10,4.9,5.1/
&VENT ID='VENT_S1',SURF_ID='HVAC',COLOR='RED',XB=21.3,21.5,10,10,4.9,5.1/
------------------------------------------------------------
---OUTPUT---------------------------------------------------
---DUMP
&DUMP
NFRAMES = 400,
DT_HRR = 1.0,
DT_DEVC = 1.0,
DT_SLCF = 1.0,
VELOCITY_ERROR_FILE=.TRUE./
---SLICES
&SLCF QUANTITY='VELOCITY',PBZ=2/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=2.5/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=7.6/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=12.7/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=17.8/
&SLCF QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE',PBX=22.9/
&SLCF QUANTITY='VISIBILITY',SPEC_ID='SOOT',PBY=5.0/
---ROOM01 DEVICES
Temperaure profile
&DEVC XB= 2.5, 2.5,7.5,7.5,0.0,2.6, QUANTITY='TEMPERATURE', ID='Temp', POINTS=
5,TIME_HISTORY=.TRUE./
Concentrations
&DEVC ID='O2vol', QUANTITY='VOLUME FRACTION', SPEC_ID='OXYGEN', XYZ=2.5,7.5,1
.3/
&DEVC ID='COvol', QUANTITY='VOLUME FRACTION', SPEC_ID='CARBON MONOXIDE', XYZ=2
.5,7.5,1.3/
---NODE DEVICES - FLOOR1
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='A0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_A0' /
&DEVC ID='B0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_B0' /
&DEVC ID='C0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_C0' /
&DEVC ID='D0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_D0' /
&DEVC ID='E0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_E0' /
&DEVC ID='F0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_F0' /
&DEVC ID='G0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_G0' /
&DEVC ID='H0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_H0' /
&DEVC ID='I0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_I0' /
&DEVC ID='J0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_J0' /
---EXHAUST
136
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:147==
&DEVC ID='K0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_K0' /
&DEVC ID='L0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_L0' /
&DEVC ID='M0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_M0' /
&DEVC ID='N0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_N0' /
&DEVC ID='O0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_O0' /
&DEVC ID='P0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_P0' /
&DEVC ID='Q0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_Q0' /
&DEVC ID='R0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_R0' /
&DEVC ID='S0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_S0' /
&DEVC ID='T0_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T0' /
---DUCT DEVICES - FLOOR1
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH0' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT0_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT0' /
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH0' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR0' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT0_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT0' /
---NODE DEVICES - FLOOR2
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='A1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_A1' /
&DEVC ID='B1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_B1' /
&DEVC ID='C1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_C1' /
&DEVC ID='D1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_D1' /
&DEVC ID='E1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_E1' /
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
137
==PAGE:148==
&DEVC ID='F1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_F1' /
&DEVC ID='G1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_G1' /
&DEVC ID='H1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_H1' /
&DEVC ID='I1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_I1' /
&DEVC ID='J1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_J1' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='K1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_K1' /
&DEVC ID='L1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_L1' /
&DEVC ID='M1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_M1' /
&DEVC ID='N1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_N1' /
&DEVC ID='O1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_O1' /
&DEVC ID='P1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_P1' /
&DEVC ID='Q1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_Q1' /
&DEVC ID='R1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_R1' /
&DEVC ID='S1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_S1' /
&DEVC ID='T1_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T1' /
&DEVC ID='T2_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T2' /
&DEVC ID='T3_TEMP', QUANTITY='NODE TEMPERATURE', NODE_ID='NODE_T3' /
---DUCT DEVICES - FLOOR2
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J0J1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J0J1'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J1T2_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J1T2'
/
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T0T1_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T0T1'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T1T2_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T1T2'
/
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T2T3_VOLFLOW', QUANTITY='DUCT VOLUME FLOW', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3'
/
---SUPPLY
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BA1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BA1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_BC1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_BC1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DB1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DB1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_DE1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_DE1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FD1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FD1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_FG1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_FG1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HF1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HF1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_HI1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_HI1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_JH1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_JH1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J0J1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J0J1' /
138
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:149==
&DEVC ID='DUCT_J1T2_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_J1T2' /
---EXHAUST
&DEVC ID='DUCT_KL1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_KL1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ML1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ML1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_LN1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_LN1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_ON1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_ON1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_NP1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_NP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_QP1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_QP1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_PR1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_PR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_SR1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_SR1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_RT1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_RT1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T0T1_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T0T1' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T1T2_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T1T2' /
&DEVC ID='DUCT_T2T3_VEL', QUANTITY='DUCT VELOCITY', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3' /
---FAN PRESSURE
&DEVC ID='SMOKE_FAN_PRES', QUANTITY='FAN PRESSURE', DUCT_ID='DUCT_T2T3' /
------------------------------------------------------------
&TAIL/
Backmatter/C3_FC270_PL30.fds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
139
==PAGE:150==
E
Matlab script
FDS_find_LOC.m
This is the script referenced in the design fire test in case 1. It read the HRR and DEVC
csv files in a FDS working directory. It then find the stable value of the limiting oxygen
concentration and determines a point of extinction (point of oxygen depletion). The script
plots the results and prints a ramp simulating the point of extinction to the console for easy
implementation in FDS.
clc
clear all
close all
warning('off')
%% USER INPUT
% Choose the "tightness" of finding the first LOC point
% 'proc' should be between 0.05 and 0.2 (5-20%)
% this is the minimum O2 concentration found + (5-20% of the concentration)
proc = 0.10;
%% Point to a directory to scan for .csv files
path = uigetdir('Select a FDS working folder');
fileList = dir(fullfile(path,'*.csv'));
%% Look for files with the extensions _hrr.csv and _devc.csv
N = {fileList.name};
P = {fileList(1).folder};
% Assign file names to variables and print to console
X1 = ~cellfun('isempty',strfind(N,'_devc.csv'));
X2 = ~cellfun('isempty',strfind(N,'_hrr.csv'));
disp(P);
disp(['The DEVC file found is named: ',N{X1}]);
disp(['The HRR file found is named: ',N{X2}]);
disp('');
DEVCstr = fullfile(P,N{X1});
HRRstr = fullfile(P,N{X2});
% Read the data in the .csv files
[~,~,DEVCdata]=xlsread(DEVCstr{1});
[~,~,HRRdata]=xlsread(HRRstr{1});
% Seperate csv into head and data matrices
DEVChead = string(DEVCdata(1:2,:));
DEVCdata = cell2mat(DEVCdata(3:end,:));
HRRhead = string(HRRdata(1:2,:));
HRRdata = cell2mat(HRRdata(3:end,:));
% Find a column with the string 'O2'
indx = ~cellfun('isempty',strfind(DEVChead ,'O2'));
indx(1,:)=[];
%% Create a moving average of data
prompt = {'How many points would you like to average over?'};
dlgtitle = 'Moving mean';
dims = [1];
140
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:151==
definput = {'9'};
MM = inputdlg(prompt,dlgtitle ,dims,definput);
O2Data = movmean(DEVCdata(1:end,indx),str2num(cell2mat(MM)));
%% Find LOC and extinction time
test = min(O2Data(:))+proc*min(O2Data(:));
timeLOC = DEVCdata(find((O2Data(:)<test), 1, 'first'),1)
time = find((O2Data(:)<test), 1, 'first');
LOC = O2Data(time:end);
meanLOC = mean(LOC);
%% Plot of O2vol
figure(1)
plot(DEVCdata(:,1),O2Data(:),'r','LineWidth',1.5,'HandleVisibility','off')
hold on
plot([timeLOC ,timeLOC],[0,LOC(1)],'--k','LineWidth',1.5,'HandleVisibility','
off')
plot([0,timeLOC],[LOC(1),LOC(1)],'--k','LineWidth',1.5)
plot([0,DEVCdata(end,1)],[meanLOC ,meanLOC],'-.g','LineWidth',1.5)
hold off
grid on
box on
ax = gca;
ax.XAxisLocation = 'origin';
ax.YRuler.Exponent = 0;
ytickformat('%.2f')
pbaspect([2 1 1])
xlim([0 400])
xlabel('Time [s]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
ylabel('O2vol [mol/mol]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
legend('Extinction point',['Mean of LOC = ',num2str(meanLOC),' [mol/mol]'],'
location','northeast','FontSize', 11,'Interpreter', 'none');
%% Plot of HRR and extinction time
figure(2)
plot(HRRdata(:,1),movmean(HRRdata(:,2),str2num(cell2mat(MM))),'r','LineWidth',
1.5)
hold on
plot([timeLOC ,timeLOC],[0,max(HRRdata(:,2))],'--k','LineWidth',1.5)
hold off
grid on
box on
ax = gca;
ax.XAxisLocation = 'origin';
ax.YRuler.Exponent = 0;
ytickformat('%.0f')
pbaspect([2 1 1])
xlabel('Time [s]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
ylabel('O2vol [mol/mol]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
legend('HRR','Extinction point','location','northeast','FontSize', 11,'
Interpreter', 'none');
%% Create RAMP t-squared HRR and time vectors
tmax = 293;
seconds = [1:10:tmax];
seconds = [seconds tmax];
seconds=seconds(seconds <timeLOC);
seconds=[seconds timeLOC];
Q=0.047.*seconds.^2;
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
141
==PAGE:152==
seconds=[seconds timeLOC+10];
Q=[Q 0];
%% Plot of RAMP
figure(3)
plot(seconds ,Q,'b','LineWidth',1.5)
grid on
box on
ax = gca;
ax.XAxisLocation = 'origin';
ax.YRuler.Exponent = 0;
ytickformat('%.0f')
pbaspect([2 1 1])
xlabel('Time [s]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
ylabel('HRR [kW]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
%% Plot of RAMP and simulated HRR
figure(4)
plot(HRRdata(:,1),movmean(HRRdata(:,2),str2num(cell2mat(MM))),'r','LineWidth',
1.5)
hold on
plot(seconds ,Q,':b','LineWidth',1.5)
plot([timeLOC ,timeLOC],[0,max(HRRdata(:,2))],'--k','LineWidth',1.5)
hold off
grid on
box on
ax = gca;
ax.XAxisLocation = 'origin';
ax.YRuler.Exponent = 0;
ytickformat('%.0f')
xlim([0 400])
pbaspect([2 1 1])
xlabel('Time [s]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
ylabel('HRR [kW]','FontSize', 12, 'Interpreter', 'none');
legend('Simulated HRR','RAMP HRR','Extinction point','location','northeast','
FontSize', 11,'Interpreter', 'none');
print(figure(1),'-depsc',sprintf('file%d.eps', 1))
print(figure(2),'-depsc',sprintf('file%d.eps', 2))
print(figure(3),'-depsc',sprintf('file%d.eps', 3))
print(figure(4),'-depsc',sprintf('file%d.eps', 4))
%% Create FDS input for the RAMP and print to console
disp('FDS RAMP INPUT:')
disp('&SURF ID=''FIRE'',RAMP_Q=''HRR_ramp'', COLOR=''ORANGE'' HRRPUA=1000,
TMP_FRONT=98.0/')
for i=1:length(Q)
disp(['&RAMP ID=''HRR_ramp'', T=',num2str(seconds(i)),', F=',num2str(Q(i)/4
000),'/'])
end
Backmatter/FDS_find_LOC.m
142
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:153==
F
Case 3 soot density renderings
C3_FC150 smoke spread at pressure peak
Figure F.1: C3_FC150_PL10 smoke spread at 132 seconds
Figure F.2: C3_FC150_PL30 smoke spread at 131 seconds
Figure F.3: C3_FC150_PL50 smoke spread at 137 seconds
Figure F.4: C3_FC150_PL100 smoke spread at 135 seconds
Figure F.5: C3_FC150_PL200 smoke spread at 137 seconds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
143
==PAGE:154==
C3_FC150 smoke spread at Point of Oxygen Depletion
Figure F.6: C3_FC150_PL10 smoke spread at 198 seconds
Figure F.7: C3_FC150_PL30 smoke spread at 202 seconds
Figure F.8: C3_FC150_PL50 smoke spread at 197 seconds
Figure F.9: C3_FC150_PL100 smoke spread at 197 seconds
Figure F.10: C3_FC150_PL200 smoke spread at 204 seconds
144
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:155==
C3_FC150 smoke spread at simulation end
Figure F.11: C3_FC150_PL10 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.12: C3_FC150_PL30 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.13: C3_FC150_PL50 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.14: C3_FC150_PL100 smoke spread at 197 seconds
Figure F.15: C3_FC150_PL200 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
145
==PAGE:156==
C3_FC270 smoke spread at pressure peak
Figure F.16: C3_FC270_PL10 smoke spread at 138 seconds
Figure F.17: C3_FC270_PL30 smoke spread at 134 seconds
Figure F.18: C3_FC270_PL50 smoke spread at 134 seconds
Figure F.19: C3_FC270_PL100 smoke spread at 133 seconds
Figure F.20: C3_FC270_PL200 smoke spread at 137 seconds
146
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:157==
C3_FC270 smoke spread at Point of Oxygen Depletion
Figure F.21: C3_FC270_PL10 smoke spread at 199 seconds
Figure F.22: C3_FC270_PL30 smoke spread at 201 seconds
Figure F.23: C3_FC270_PL50 smoke spread at 203 seconds
Figure F.24: C3_FC270_PL100 smoke spread at 196 seconds
Figure F.25: C3_FC270_PL200 smoke spread at 205 seconds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
147
==PAGE:158==
C3_FC270 smoke spread at simulation end
Figure F.26: C3_FC270_PL10 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.27: C3_FC270_PL30 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.28: C3_FC270_PL50 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.29: C3_FC270_PL100 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.30: C3_FC270_PL200 smoke spread at 400 seconds
148
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:159==
C3_FC400 smoke spread at pressure peak
Figure F.31: C3_FC400_PL10 smoke spread at 138 seconds
Figure F.32: C3_FC400_PL30 smoke spread at 137 seconds
Figure F.33: C3_FC400_PL50 smoke spread at 138 seconds
Figure F.34: C3_FC400_PL100 smoke spread at 136 seconds
Figure F.35: C3_FC400_PL200 smoke spread at 139 seconds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
149
==PAGE:160==
C3_FC400 smoke spread at Point of Oxygen Depletion
Figure F.36: C3_FC400_PL10 smoke spread at 198 seconds
Figure F.37: C3_FC400_PL30 smoke spread at 199 seconds
Figure F.38: C3_FC400_PL50 smoke spread at 198 seconds
Figure F.39: C3_FC400_PL100 smoke spread at 202 seconds
Figure F.40: C3_FC400_PL200 smoke spread at 203 seconds
150
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:161==
C3_FC400 smoke spread at simulation end
Figure F.41: C3_FC400_PL10 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.42: C3_FC400_PL30 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.43: C3_FC400_PL50 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.44: C3_FC400_PL100 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.45: C3_FC400_PL200 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
151
==PAGE:162==
C3_FC500 smoke spread at pressure peak
Figure F.46: C3_FC500_PL10 smoke spread at 133 seconds
Figure F.47: C3_FC500_PL30 smoke spread at 132 seconds
Figure F.48: C3_FC500_PL50 smoke spread at 139 seconds
Figure F.49: C3_FC500_PL100 smoke spread at 144 seconds
Figure F.50: C3_FC500_PL200 smoke spread at 138 seconds
152
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:163==
C3_FC500 smoke spread at Point of Oxygen Depletion
Figure F.51: C3_FC500_PL10 smoke spread at 198 seconds
Figure F.52: C3_FC500_PL30 smoke spread at 204 seconds
Figure F.53: C3_FC500_PL50 smoke spread at 200 seconds
Figure F.54: C3_FC500_PL100 smoke spread at 204 seconds
Figure F.55: C3_FC500_PL200 smoke spread at 203 seconds
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
153
==PAGE:164==
C3_FC500 smoke spread at simulation end
Figure F.56: C3_FC500_PL10 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.57: C3_FC500_PL30 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.58: C3_FC500_PL50 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.59: C3_FC500_PL100 smoke spread at 400 seconds
Figure F.60: C3_FC500_PL200 smoke spread at 400 seconds
154
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:165==
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
155
==PAGE:166==
G
HVAC network components
BESB315 box ventilator
Tekniske data, BESB315-4-3
BESB315-4-3 (3-faset motor)
MODEL   
 BESB315-4-3
Ventilatordata
Max. totalvirkningsgrad
55,0
ECO måleopstilling (A-D)
 D
Krav til effektivitetsgrad 
64, N(2015) 
ECO effektivitetsgrad i optimalt driftspunkt
76,7 
Motor
Motor 
3-faset motor, krav om frevenskomformer jf. Ecodesign 
Optimalt driftspunkt:
Optaget effekt
Luftmængde
Totaltryk
Omdrejningstal
 
365 W
1.950 m3/h
371 Pa
1.408 omdr./min
Nominelt omdrejningstal (N)
 1400 omdr./min. ved 50 Hz
Elforsyning (U)
3 x 400 / 3 x 230 V
Overbelastningsbeskyttelse    
Ingen, skal overbelastningsbeskyttes iht. gældende forskrifter
Maks. optaget strøm* (I)
1,1 / 1,9 A 
Maks. optaget effekt (P1)**
 0,39 kW
Motoreffekt (P2)**
37 kW
Andre data
Vægt
59 kg 
 Tilledning (strømkabel / styrekabel)
Ingen tilledning 
 
Forudsætninger:
* I er den maksimale optagne strøm i hele reguleringsområdet - eller fuldlaststrømmen hvis denne er størst
** P1 er den maksimalt optagne effekt fra el-nettet, hvor P2 er den effekt som motoren er mærket med.
Opgivne data er ved t = 20°C
Densitet = 1,2 kg/m3
Medietemperatur: min. -12°C, max. +80°C
Omgivelsestemperatur: max. +40°C
Trykforhold: < 1,11
Øvrige punkter ift. EC327/2011 - se vejledning for produktet
27.05.2020 | 03/09
156
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:167==
Kapacitetskurver
BESB315-4-1EC og BESB315-4-1FC
 
BESB315-4-1EC
 
 
BESB315-4-1FC
 
27.05.2020 | 04/09
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
157
==PAGE:168==
Målskitser
BESB315
 
 
27.05.2020 | 06/09
158
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:169==
Røggasmodstand
BESB315
BESB kan som standard klare en medietemperatur på op til 80°C.
RØGGASMODSTAND
 
27.05.2020 | 08/09
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
159
==PAGE:170==
Exhausto vent fitting
Dimensioned drawings
VTU/VTI
VTU 
  
Type
Nominal diameter
Ød, mm
ØD, mm
VTU100
100
130
VTU125
125
160
VTU160
160
190
VTU200
200
245
 
28.05.2020 | 03/05
160
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
==PAGE:171==
 
VTU125
 
VTU160
 
VTU200
28.05.2020 | 02/05
Practical issues with coupling ventilation simulations in case of fire induced pressure
161
==PAGE:172==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
