==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.
Master of Science in Engineering
Performance analytics and
ongoing commissioning of residen-
tial ventilation and heating systems
Online præstations analyse of løbende commissioning af
boligventilation og varmesystemer
Christoffer Haug Brinch
s145204
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Byg
Institut for byggeri og anlæg
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The current reality is that existing residential ventilation and heating systems are often
not working optimally either due to faults, wrong installation or the occupancy be-
haviour. This investigation has analyzed data from two renovated residential apartment
buildings with the aim to diagnose the HVAC system operation and create visualizations
that can locate apartments with faulty or inefficient operational behaviour. Buildings
connected to the district network should aim to deliver the lowest possible return temper-
atures in order to improve the overall system efficiency. Visualizations have been created
that can be used by building operators to identify apartments with inefficient operation
and those having the largest contribution to the total return temperature of the build-
ing. By combining apartment- and zone level data it was found that the apartments
with at least one zone unable to meet the heating demand were the same apartments
responsible for delivering high return temperatures. The other building was analyzed
for optimizing the decentralized ventilation systems with regards to imbalanced airflows.
Faulty operation of the bypass valve was noticed in a significant number of apartments
that were excluded from further analysis. It was possible to optimize the heat recov-
ery efficiency remotely by balancing the airflows. This method worked successfully and
was done by scaling down the extract fan voltage based on a calculated capacity ratio.
The findings and visualizations of this investigation can act as inspiration how to visu-
alize building operation performance and serve as a tool for facility managers aiming to
optimize building energy efficiency,
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters degree
in Building Energy and Installations. The project is credited to 30 ECTS points and is
partly within the RoomVent Solutions project financed by EUDP.
First of all I would like to thank my two supervisors Kevin Michael Smith and Jakub
Kolarik for the amount of time and effort they have put into this project. It has been
a pleasure working alongside them as they showed great interest in the project and we
were able to discuss methods and theories to get the best outcome from the information
we had available.
Secondly I would like to thank Per Dahlgaard Petersen and Pierre Vogler-Finck from
Neogrid Technologies for providing a clean, structured and comprehensive dataset that
has brought a great deal of insight into the operation of heating systems in the apart-
ment blocks. Furthermore I would like to thank Lars Lund Michaelsen from Airmaster
for providing help with the Airmaster API and for answering questions regarding the
operation behaviour in the ventilation units. Thanks to Christian for providing good
feedback on my thesis.
I would like to thank my friends and family for motivating me and encouraging me
to keep focus on the project although the majority of this thesis was written at home
during the Covid-19 lockdown period.
Kongens Lyngby, June 27, 2020
Christoffer Haug Brinch
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
viii
Glossary
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Internet of Things (IoT) and data analytics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Heating systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Mechanical ventilation systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Heating systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Ventilation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Data visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Case studies
21
4.1
Heating systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Findings of the data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Ventilation systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4.2.2
Locating ventilation units with irregular behaviour
. . . . . . . .
36
4.2.3
Balancing of airflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Conclusion
49
6
Future investigations
51
Bibliography
53
7
Appendix
55
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
3.1
The user interface of the Airlinq Online portal that allows for easy export of
historical values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Simplified sketch of a ventilation system with the temperature sensors on
each side of the unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Changing fan settings can easily be done remotely in Airlinq online . . . . .
16
3.4
Illustration of the fan signals as defined in Airlinq Online . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
User interface in the Power BI query editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
User interface in the Power BI relationships tab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
User interface in the Power BI data report tab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
The heat system schematics of the renovated apartments in Frederikshavn
.
23
4.2
Four typical examples of the flow in each apartment throughout a day during
the winter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Example of a tooltip containing information about the setpoint in the zone
(dotted line), average room temperature (column) and how often the heating
in the zone is active (colour) during the specified time period . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Visualization that can be used to point out apartments with an inefficient
heating performance. The bottom right corner shows the problematic apart-
ments that have a high heating demand and deliver the heat inefficiently . .
26
4.5
Visualization that can be used to point out apartments that are heating
excessively during the summer period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Visualization used for fault detection of heating systems showing time with
active heating vs. cooling. The bottom right corner shows the problematic
apartments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.7
Visualization used for fault detection and the tooltip reveals the uneven heat-
ing distribution within the problematic apartment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.8
The temperature compensation curve shows how the supply temperature
varies with the outdoor temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.9
Visualization used to show each apartments contribution to the total return
temperature for the building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.10 Diagram of the Aimaster CV200 Air Handling Unit (AHU) . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.11 Average bypass opening % for each apartment during the winter period . . .
36
4.12 Example of AHU controls that work as expected in apartment C8.
The
bypass activates when the inlet temperature reaches the threshold and adjust
accordingly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
4.13 Example of faulty bypass behaviour that is bypassing the heat recovery for
long time periods during the winter in apartment A3 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.14 Airmaster CV-200 installation guide showing that the inlet temperature sen-
sor (IT) should be placed inside the duct 1-1.5m from the optional heating
surface after the inlet nozzle (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.15 Visualization used to detect which apartments the scaling method can be
applied to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.16 Fan signal distribution for two apartments during the heating season. It is
noticed that both are heavily skewed towards the left meaning they operate
at the lower fan signals the majority of the time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.17 Median fan operation setting from 0-100%. The green apartments are the
ones investigated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.18 The capacity ratio before and after the balancing of airflows for apartment
E1. The capacity ratio increased from 0.79 to 0.95 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.19 The capacity ratio before and after the balancing of airflows for apartment
E4. The capacity ratio increased from 0.65 to 0.91 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.20 The heat recovery and extract fan signal before and after the balancing of
airflows for apartment E1. The heat recovery increased from 81.5% to 90.5%
44
4.21 The heat recovery and extract fan signal before and after the balancing of
airflows for apartment E4. The heat recovery increased from 71.5% to 90% .
44
4.22 The exhaust temperature decreased significantly at the time of the changing
the fan settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
List of Tables
3.1
Example of fan settings before and after the scaling method was applied
. .
18
4.1
List of measurement points in the heating and DHW system matching the
numbers in Figure 4.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Table showing different types of heat distribution in an apartment and the
resulting heating consumption and return temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Values from the ventilation unit logged in Airlinq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
The table summarizes the improvement of the capacity ratio before and after
the new fan settings were applied. It also includes the number of measure-
ments that the results are based on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
The fan settings and imbalance for one stairwell of apartments compared
relative to each other before the changes were applied to C1, C5 and C10 . .
46
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
AHU Air Handling Unit. vii, 1, 9, 11, 12, 14, 17, 34, 37, 43, 45, 46
API Application Programming Interface. 9
BMS Building Management System. 9
COP Coefficient of Performance. 5
CTS Central Tilstandskontrol og Styring. 9
HEX Heat Exchanger. 7, 11, 13, 34, 38, 45
HVAC Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning. 1–3, 5, 18, 24, 49, 50
IC Indoor Climate. 15, 35, 45
IoT Internet of Things. v, 5
VOC Volatile Organic Compound. 7
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The current global climate crisis is caused by a rapidly increasing economy that is gen-
erally based on meeting its energy demands using fossil fuels. Scientists have pointed
out the severity of this issue for decades, but not until 2015 specific targets were set
globally. The Paris agreement of 2015 set a binding target of reducing emissions by
at least 40% by 2030 compared to 1990 levels and the energy efficiency has to increase
by at least 32.5% [1]. In Denmark the goals are even more ambitious at 70% decrease
of emissions by 2030 and the country aims to be CO2 neutral by 2050 [2]. Globally,
building operation accounted for 30% of the final energy use and 28% of energy- and
process related emissions in 2018 [3] [4]. In industrialized countries such as Denmark
these numbers are close to 40% with nearly 2/3 used for building operation [5].
The majority of this share of energy is used in residential buildings which proves
the large potential for improving this field and it emphasizes the fact, that improving
building operation will play a central role in reaching the overall political goals. Building
regulations sets high requirements for energy performance in newly constructed build-
ings, but in Denmark, new buildings constructed after 2015 only account of 2.6% of the
total building mass [5]. Existing buildings need to be optimized with regards to heating
and ventilation so the energy is delivered as efficiently as possible while not compromis-
ing the indoor environment. This sets high requirements for Heating, Ventilation and
Air-Conditioning (HVAC) systems and making sure that they operate as intended. How-
ever the current reality is that residential ventilation and heating systems are often not
working optimally either due to faults, wrong installation or the occupancy behaviour.
Decentralized ventilation systems often serve as a good solution for renovation projects
because of the increased energy efficiency and because it is often easier to fit into ex-
isting buildings due to less space needed. However there is often a difference between
the theoretical performance and the actual performance when the AHU is in operation.
If a mistake is made in the installation or regulation phase of the systems it can be
a hard challenge to identify those faults afterwards as well as accounting for who was
responsible for creating it.
In Denmark an increasing amount of buildings are connected to the district heating
network. In order to reduce the total heat loss and improve the overall efficiency it is
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
desirable to operate at low supply temperatures. This allows sustainable energy sources
such as solar and wind energy to contribute directly to the network. This sets require-
ments for the buildings to act as an integrated part of the energy system and to be able
to efficiently utilize the heat at lower supply temperatures which leads to return lower
return temperatures. In Denmark each building is charged a penalty for delivering too
high return temperatures back to the district heating network, but this structure creates
incentives that are not beneficial to improve the overall performance. In an apartment
block the total penalty for the building is split among the occupants meaning that the
building administrator is not incentivized to spend resources on improving the perfor-
mance. The buildings are quite sensitive to faults within the system and even a single
stuck open valve can have a large negative impact on the total return temperature of
the building. It would be beneficial if the building operators were able to locate the
apartments that have the largest negative contribution to the total return temperature
since this is often due to a technical malfunction that can be investigated and improved.
Heating and ventilation systems are complex and require a certain amount knowl-
edge and tools to fully understand the operation behaviour. If these systems experience
a technical fault or a wrong control setting it is often unlikely to be noticed by the op-
eration managers. When occupants complain about malfunctioning ventilation or if the
heating demand can not be reached, the building operators are often limited to simple
tools such as increasing the supply temperature or turning up the ventilation airflow.
This will often lead to a poor energy performance since the underlying fault was never
understood, because the administrator often neither had the necessary tools nor the
time to do a more thorough investigation.
A solution to this problem is to make better use of the data collected by these
systems. HVAC systems installed in renovation projects are often equipped with sen-
sors that continuously log data and historical values can be extracted from a database.
Sensors measuring temperatures, flow, fan speeds etc.
often contain extremely valu-
able information about the operation of the systems. The challenge is that these large
datasets can often seem overwhelming to the building operators who are responsible for
maintaining good operation.
1.2
Aim and scope
This report aims to simplify the methods that are necessary to extract useful data from
existing HVAC systems. The findings of this investigation will be based on an analysis
of two case-studies with HVAC systems that have logged a comprehensive amount of
operational data for at least one year. The visualizations can act as inspiration of how
to visualize building operation behaviour in other buildings as well. The following series
of questions summarizes the focus of this investigation:
• Is it possible to extract useful data from existing HVAC installations in order to
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Report structure
3
gain a better understanding of the system operation and its energy performance
both in relative and absolute terms?
• What are the barriers to overcome in order to lower the supply temperature for
existing heating systems in apartment buildings, and can apartment- and zone
level operational data be used to solve these challenges?
• Is it possible to create dashboards that can visualize the performance of heating and
ventilation systems in a clear and simple way without compromising the amount
of details?
• Is it possible to locate and identify operational faults in decentralized ventilation
systems and floor heating systems using the existing data sources?
• Can decentralized ventilation units remotely be optimized with regards to energy
performance by applying theoretical knowledge to the measured data?
• Can these dashboards be created by a widely accessible software tool such as Power
BI and work as a tool for building administrators in order to improve the energy
performance of residential buildings?
1.3
Report structure
This report keeps a structure that is similar to the workflow of this investigation. The
background information emphasized why this topic is important to investigate and it
pointed out the large potential of reducing energy consumption in residential buildings
by using existing data sources. The aim and scope section explained the specific ques-
tions that will be investigated and answered within this report. The literature study will
bring the topic into the current situation of 2020, explaining some of the most recent
research within the field and how it is relevant to achieve the overall goal. The topic of
data driven facility management is rapidly expanding, so it is important to understand
the current situation at the time of writing this report.
Two renovated residential buildings have been analyzed in this report and Chapter 3
explains the practicalities for collecting, analyzing and visualizing the information about
the HVAC systems using Power BI. It also explains the relevant theoretical background
of the building physics used in the analysis. Understanding the assumptions made in the
analysis is crucial to interpret the end results and the limitations this method might have.
Chapter 4 explains the details of the two investigated case-studies and it includes the
findings of the analysis. The results are discussed and interpreted which leads to specific
recommendations to the building administrators. Lastly the conclusion summarizes the
main findings of the investigation and finally suggestions are made for future work that
would bring further insights into this topic but were beyond the time frame for this
thesis.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
2.1
IoT and data analytics
The building sector has experienced a rapid increase of installed IoT sensors and smart
building integration that is meant to optimize the energy efficiency and have different
HVAC components work optimally together. However the focus tends to lie on com-
mercial buildings that have the budgets and incentives to optimize the long terms costs
and live up to sustainability certifications. Less focus has been on residential apartment
buildings that are more dependant on the occupant behaviour. Smart home technology
has increased dramatically, but the fields of decentralized ventilation systems and floor
heating systems generally needs more attention. Data driven methods and algorithms
have been developed and tested on simulations. An example is a least-squares-based al-
gorithm using only data from indoor and outdoor temperatures in residential buildings
[6]. During normal operation the model parameters should converge to stable values,
and faults can be detected when the values deviate from these. Another study has in-
vestigated the use of virtual sensors to estimate the heating or cooling capacity [7]. The
benefit of using this method for fault detection is that it doesn’t require any outdoor unit
sensors. This method was successfully implemented on a field operating heat pump on a
residential system and were able to capture the system performance. However the study
also found that the method was quite sensitive for example to humid air and changes of
the airflow rate .
2.2
Heating systems
District heating is an energy efficient way of distributing heat to the consumer because
it is based on waste heat from electricity production. During the heating season the
heat loss from the district heating network itself accounts for 20% of the total energy
use in Denmark [8]. There is a large potential to decrease the heat loss by lowering the
supply water temperature. First of all, lower return temperatures will maximize biomass
boiler efficiencies due the the higher output from the condensing flue gas. Secondly the
lower supply temperature will improve the Coefficient of Performance (COP) of heat
pumps supplying heat in electrified systems.
The benefits of this combined with a
lowering of peak demand and lowering of the general energy consumption will have a
very large impact on the investment costs in the district heating network. However the
temperature can only be lowered when the buildings are adapted to work as efficiently
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Literature review
as possible. Low temperature heating is especially relevant in floor heating systems,
which can deliver the same amount of heat to the room at a more consistent flow with
lower temperatures. In the future, buildings will act as an integrated part of the district
heating system and be able to return lower temperatures back to the network. Radiator
systems are normally designed for high temperature operation (60°C/45°C) and the heat
transfer is calculated for outdoor temperatures of -12 °C which is rarely the case. Due to
the added safety margins the systems are often oversized and do not perform optimally
during the majority of the heating season with higher outdoor temperatures. Although
these systems are oversized they can still be optimized to return the lowest possible
return temperature back to the district heating network while still reaching the necessary
heat transfer to the room. By varying the circulation flow and the supply temperature
it is possible to maximize the cooling. Such a control algorithm was developed and
tested in practice on four apartment building blocks located in southern Sweden [9]. By
applying the control algorithm, the water temperature decreased by 2.5 °C while the flow
decreased with 4%. The algorithm also proved to be stable and able to work satisfactory
only needing a functional data collection and a controllable pump speed. The optimal
pump speed was often found to be the lowest level, and in one case it turned out to
be a limiting factor. This indicated that pumps may need a wider control range at the
lower pump speeds in order to apply this control algorithm to existing oversized radiator
systems. Generally more focus should be on optimizing existing heating systems since
there is a large potential of improvement as long as the necessary measurements points
are installed in the system.
2.3
Mechanical ventilation systems
Mechanical ventilation systems are used in both commercial and residential buildings.
Commercial buildings often use a centralized ventilation unit that distributes the nec-
essary airflow throughout the building. More and more new residential buildings are
equipped with mechanical ventilation systems to meet the increasing requirements for
energy consumption. Throughout Europe most countries with colder climates have build-
ing regulation moving towards mechanical ventilation with heat recovery because it has
proven to be an efficient way of lowering the heat demand while still delivering the nec-
essary air volumes. Buildings also have to be increasingly airtight, which is necessary in
order to install a balanced mechanical ventilation system. There are generally two types
of mechanical ventilation systems used in residential buildings. The simplest of which
is an ’exhaust only’ system that typically extracts air from the kitchen and bathrooms
to remove the high humidity content caused by showering and cooking. However the
supply air is not controlled mechanically and will therefore take place as infiltration
through cracks and openings in the building envelope. Some rooms can be more airtight
than others which results in a uneven distribution of air throughout the apartment. This
method might be the simplest one to use in older buildings but it is not energy efficient
since it doesn’t recover any heat.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Mechanical ventilation systems
7
Balanced mechanical ventilation is a more energy efficient solution since the Heat
Exchanger (HEX) will recover the majority of the heat in the ventilation air. These
systems also has the benefit of using filters to remove particles from the supply air. This
is especially important in urban areas near large roads or other sources of pollution.
Another benefit is the reduction of pollen entering the homes of people with allergies. A
study investigated the difference of particle concentrations in fifteen apartments in urban
and suburban areas of Seoul [10]. Three different ventilation strategies were compared:
Natural ventilation, unbalanced mechanical ventilation and balanced mechanical venti-
lation. The results showed that, compared to natural ventilation, mechanical ventilation
systems improved the ratio of indoor/outdoor particle count with 26% for submicron
particles and 65% for fine particles. These results were consistent with previous studies
on this topic. Another study compared balanced ventilation system (with extract from
kitchen and bathroom) with single-spot extract-only system (continuous extract from
master bedroom) [11].
The balanced ventilation system was a superior whole-house
ventilation strategy on all the measured parameters. The air change rate was 6-34%
higher and also had more uniform air flows between zones. Furthermore the concentra-
tion of formaldehyde and Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) also drastically decreased.
Finally the whole-house energy consumption for ventilation and heating/cooling was
lowered by 8.5%. The most important factor for using balanced mechanical ventilation
is the effect on energy consumption by recovering heat in the HEX. A simulation study
has found that the heating demand in a single family house can be reduced by up to 84%
if ventilation with heat recovery is used in stead of natural ventilation [12]. Especially
in low energy houses the ventilation air is increasingly important since it makes up a
larger share of the total energy consumption when other heat losses has been reduced.
Furthermore, known ventilation rates means that the necessary supply temperature can
be reduced to ensure an adequate supply of heating. The benefits of using balanced me-
chanical ventilation systems shows that this ventilation strategy has a great potential
in the future, which further states the importance of being able to optimize these systems.
A study from Lund University investigated how under-balanced airflows impacted
the energy use in a residential house in Sweden [13]. The under-balanced airflow affects
the pressure differences between inside and outside, which has a direct influence on the
infiltration and exfiltration. Generally a low leakage results in a low energy use, but only
to a certain extent. The optimal under-balance for colder climates was found to be 80%
for leaky houses with a moderate heat recovery unit while the ratio is higher for more air
tight houses. The study found that the air tightness was of far more importance than the
slight under-balance of the ventilation system with regards to the energy use. The danish
building regulations require a supply minimum airflow of 0.3 l/s · m2 of the gross floor
area [14]. Furthermore it specifies minimum extract airflows of 10 l/s from bathrooms,
15 l/s from bathrooms with a shower and 20 l/s from kitchens. The fan settings in
a ventilation would typically have a minimum supply fan setting corresponding to 0.3
l/s · m2 and a maximum exctract fan setting corresponding to 15+20=35 l/s.
==PAGE:20==
8
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
The methods used in this project can be divided into three main categories: Data
collection, data analysis and data visualization. The section on data analysis is a more
general methodology showing how work can be carried out in other cases as well. The
sections on data collection and visualization are more specific to these case-studies and
specifically for using Power BI as a tool for data analytics.
3.1
Data collection
A large and consistent dataset is the foundation of a proper data analysis. Often the
data quality can vary a lot depending on the resources put into it and the maintenance
performed on the system. Larger commercial buildings more often have the resources to
install and maintain a Building Management System (BMS) (Central Tilstandskontrol og
Styring (CTS) in danish) that will log values into a central database, whereas residential
buildings are often more limited when it comes to budgets and resources for operation
maintenance. Recently renovated residential buildings are more commonly equipped
with sensors that can monitor the operation of the systems, but the resources are still
limited to do a proper data analysis. This leads to large amounts of valuable information
that is not yet being used for its intended purpose.
The ventilation case-study building is equipped with Airmaster decentralized ventila-
tion units, which can access current and historical values from the Airlinq Online portal.
Each stairwell is equipped with an Ethernet box collecting data from the ventilation
units and uploading them to Airlinq Online. The portal provides a simple overview of
the current operation in all apartments, so it is easy to see which AHUs are turned off
or need a filter change for example. Historical values can easily be accessed for each
apartment for a user-defined time period as seen on Figure 3.1. For this investigation
the data was manually exported as .csv files from the Airlinq Online portal. Recently
Airmaster has introduced an Application Programming Interface (API) that allows the
values to be extracted automatically, however it was not done in this investigation. The
data from the heating case is similarly stored on Neogrid Technologies IceBear platform
and can also be exported in a specified time period. Information regarding the heat-
ing system and the types of zones that correspond to the anonymized data is provided
manually. In the future the IceBear platform will also be able access data from the
ventilation system, but this feature was not available at the time of this investigation.
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Methodology
Figure 3.1: The user interface of the Airlinq Online portal that allows for easy export
of historical values.
3.2
Data analysis
3.2.1
Heating systems
The general heat transfer equation is given in (3.1) which is used to calculate the heating
effect delivered to the room through a heating system. The water density and capacity
ratio are considered to be constants although these will vary slightly depending on the
water temperature.
Q = q · ρ · cp · ∆T
(3.1)
Where Q is the delivered energy [W], q is the water flow [l/s], cp is the specific heat
capacity [J/kgK], ρ is the density [kg/m3] and ∆T is the temperature difference between
supply and return water [◦C]
The return water temperatures must be weighted according to their flow in order to be
added together for the total return temperature. The flow weighted return temperature
is given by the following equation
Treturn,fw =
∑(q · Treturn)
∑q
(3.2)
Where Treturn,fw is the flow weighted return temperature [◦C], Treturn is the return
temperature and q is the flow [l/s]
The penalty for delivering too high return temperatures back to the district heating
network is defined differently for each power plant and two examples of these will shortly
be explained. The first example is, that for each average supply temperature is listed
a requirement for the corresponding return temperature. For example at a supply tem-
perature of 70 °C it is required to return the water at 35.1 °C at and 65 °C is is required
to return the water at 37.7 °C [15]. The bonus or penalty is calculated on a monthly
basis by the difference between the actual return temperature and the requirement and
multiplied by a set price as shown in (3.3)
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Data analysis
11
Penalty[kr] = Treturn −Treturn,requirement · Q · 11.75kr
(3.3)
Where Q is the heating consumption (MWh)
Another example is districts who require a minimum cooling of 25 °C which is ex-
pected to increase to 30 °C in the future [16]. The penalty is then added as 1% of the
variable price of heating for each °C above the requirement.
3.2.2
Ventilation systems
The AHUs are first investigated manually to get an understanding of the control signals
and how the bypass damper is regulated. The bypass damper generally has two main
purposes. First of all it can be used to avoid overheating in the apartment during the
summer. If the indoor air is above the required setpoint there is no need to recover heat
from the HEX so the inlet air can be bypassed. The second purpose is to avoid freezing
in the exhaust duct when the humid indoor air is extracted at outdoor temperatures
below 0◦C. Before an airflow balancing assessment can be made it is necessary to ensure
that the AHU controls are understood and that they are working as intended. If an
AHU is not operating as intended it will be left out of the airflow balancing analysis.
The operation of an AHU is most energy efficient when the airflows are balanced. The
term balanced airflows simply means that the inlet air volume is equal to the extract
air volume.
But often the airflows are not directly measured in ventilation systems
during operation. Instead the ratio between them can be estimated by investigating the
temperatures on each side of the heat exchanger. If the temperature increase on the inlet
air is equal to the temperature decrease on the extract air the airflows are considered
equal. If the temperature decrease on the extract air is smaller, that means the system is
extracting a larger air volume since it can not transfer the heat as efficiently. If a leakage
occurs somewhere in the ventilation unit one of the air volumes would be decreased which
leads to unbalanced ventilation. Figure 3.2 shows a sketch of a ventilation system and
the infiltration and exfiltration from a room.
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Methodology
Figure 3.2: Simplified sketch of a ventilation system with the temperature sensors on
each side of the unit.
The equation of heat transfer in fluids shown in (3.1) also applies for ventilation
airflows. The heat transfer can be calculated for both the inlet and extract airflows and
are set to be equal as following
Qinlet = Qextract
(3.4)
(q · ρ · cp · ∆T)inlet = (q · ρ · cp · ∆T)extract
(3.5)
At such small temperature differences it is assumed that the two airflows have the
same air density ρair = 1.2kg/m3 and the same specific heat capacity (cp = 1006J/kgK.
Rearranging the equation then leads to the following expression stating that the mass
balance is proportional to the differences in temperature
mextract
minlet
= ∆Textract
∆Tinlet
(3.6)
Where m = ρ · V The airflow balance can generally be expressed by the capacity ratio
which is defined by the supply air volume divided by extract air volume as seen in (3.7).
Cr = Vextract
Vsupply
(3.7)
The temperature efficiencies of the supply and exhaust air are expressed in (3.8) and
(3.9) which ultimately leads to the expression for the capacity ratio in (3.10) using the
four air temperature measurements from the AHU.
ηexhaust = Textract −Texhaust
Textract −Toutdoor
(3.8)
ηsupply = Tsupply −Toutdoor
Textract −Toutdoor
(3.9)
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Data analysis
13
Cr = ηexhaust
ηsupply
= Textract −Texhaust
Tsupply −Toutdoor
(3.10)
The capacity ratio indicates whether the airflows are balanced or not as following:
• Cr < 1 the system is underbalanced with Vsupply < Vextract
• Cr = 1 the system is balanced with Vsupply = Vextract
• Cr > 1 the system is overbalanced with Vsupply > Vextract
In the case of Cr=1 there would theoretically be no infiltration or exfiltration through
cracks and leakages in the building.
If the system is underbalanced with Cr < 1
there would be no exfiltration, but the infiltration would be increased by Vinfiltration =
Vextract −Vsupply. The opposite would be the case for an overbalanced system with Cr
> 1 which would not have any infiltration but the exfiltration would be Vexfiltration =
Vsupply −Vextract.
A capacity ratio of 1 is not necessarily the desired target. Ventilation systems are
often slightly underbalanced in order to avoid moisture exfiltrating through the building
envelope. This is especially important in colder climates where the temperature rapidly
decreases out through the envelope, so a small hole in the vapour barrier could cause a
large problem. Warm humid air exfiltrating through the envelope will quickly reach the
dew point temperature which causes the water to condensate in the insulation. Usually
a capacity ratio of 0.9-0.95 is the target to maximize heat recovery while not creating
issues with condensation.
The capacity ratio calculation is based on the HEX efficiency and has to be evaluated
under certain conditions in order to be accurate:
• No bypass
• Low outdoor temperature
• Boost mode is not activated
• Ventilation unit is turned on
• No condensation in the exhaust duct
Using these five criteria will provide more accurate results of the temperature effi-
ciencies and capacity ratio because it filters away some disturbances in the calculations.
First of all the bypass damper needs to be closed entirely to make sure that all the air
goes through the heat exchanger which makes the calculation assumptions valid. Sec-
ondly the outdoor temperature has to be relatively low, so all the small temperature
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Methodology
fluctuations at higher outdoor temperatures are filtered away. These small temperature
differences could be caused by other heat gains throughout the system and would there-
fore reduce the accuracy of the method. The criteria is set to be Toutdoor −Tinlet > 10◦C
but can be slackened in cases with little available data. Thirdly the periods with boost
mode activated are filtered away since this purposely creates unbalanced airflows. Mea-
surements are only used when the AHU is turned on and have both fans operating.
Lastly time periods with the potential of condensation in the exhaust duct is filtered
away since this could cause extra heat gain added by the moist air. This criteria is
fulfilled if the exhaust air temperature is above the dew point temperature which is
approximated using the Magnus-Tetens approximation:
Td =
8
√
HRext
100
· (112 + (0.9 · Text)) + (0.1 · Text) −112
(3.11)
The increased pressure on a facade caused by the wind will cause more infiltration
on that wall and more exfiltration out of the other facades. By making the ventilation
systems underbalanced the infiltration will increase slightly due to the higher pressure
difference, but the exfiltration will be minimized since all of the extract air will go
through the heat recovery. If the system is too underbalanced this extract air is essen-
tially wasted since it can not transfer its heat to the inlet air sufficiently
There are two ways to balance out the airflows. Either the smallest airflow can be
scaled up or the largest airflow can be scaled down. Each method has its own advantages
and disadvantages as explained below for an underbalanced system.
The first method is to increase the minimum supply fan signal. This method will
ensure that the apartment is likely to receive a larger airflow than specified in the build-
ing regulations.
This excessive airflow would however also result in a higher energy
consumption of the AHU. Additionally it would also cause more noise from the supply
fan which might be a disturbance for the occupants. This could be tolerated since the
AHU would usually operate at the higher fan signals when some kind of activity takes
place, such as showering or cooking. In some countries, mainly USA, this would not be
an issue, because the general perception is that some level of fan noise indicates that
the ventilation system is working, whereas in Denmark a silent system is desired.
The other approach is to lower the minimum extract fan signal. The justification
for using this method is if the AHU has already been recommissioned which means that
the supply air volume is known to be sufficient to comply with the building regulations.
Then the minimum extract fan setting can be reduced down to match the same airflow.
This would generally decrease the noise from the extract fan. However the downside of
using this method is the risk of rising levels of pollutants such as CO2.
The chosen method for this investigation is to scale down the minimum extract
airflow with the same ratio as calculated for the capacity ratio. The maximum supply
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Data analysis
15
fan setting will be scaled up, so the max/min ratio will be the same for the supply and
extract fan, which means the supply flow will also increase slightly. This method can
be applied since the air volume is linear proportional with the fan voltage. Some of
the apartments subject to balancing of airflows are equipped with Indoor Climate (IC)-
meters which provides the opportunity to check whether the indoor environment was
negatively effected by the changes. The comparison before and after the changes were
made will focus on the CO2 concentration. Since the extraction air volume is lowered
using this method, it is necessary to make sure that the amount of extracted air is still
sufficient. Theoretically this should not be a problem since the maximum extraction
setting is left untouched and the imbalance indicated an unnecessarily large amount of
extraction compared to the supply fan settings. Furthermore this method is suitable for
systems that have the following conditions:
• Are underbalanced with Cr = 0.60 −0.85. Lower values of Cr would result in a
scaling ratio becoming too large with new fan settings outside the 0-10V limits.
• Are mainly operating at the lower fan signals most of the time.
• Do not already have a very low minimum fan setting for the extract fan. This
would prevent it from being lowered any further without reaching close to 0V.
The airflow imbalance can vary depending on the fan signal. If the fans are operat-
ing at the lowest level they might have a different imbalance than on the highest level.
Ultimately this is unavoidable unless the fan settings are close to identical for the supply
and extract. Before applying the scaling method it is necessary to check which signals
the fans are mostly operating at.
It is important to note, that the capacity ratio only calculates the ratio between the
inlet and extract airflows, meaning the absolute air volumes are still not known. This
complicates the calculations for energy savings since it would be necessary to know the
actual air volumes in order to determine the energy transfer. The minimum air volume
required by building regulations could be assumed, however the systems were found to
operate above this level, which resulted in calculating energy savings was not in focus
for this investigation.
There are four fan settings that can be changed remotely as seen on Figure 3.3: The
supply fan min and max setting and the extraction fan min and max. Below is listed
how these fan settings should be determined during the installation and regulation of
the ventilation systems:
• The minimum extract fan setting is determined at installation at a setting that
overcomes the resistance of the kitchen hoods, ducts etc. and reaching the same
air flow as the corresponding minimum supply setting
• The maximum extract fan setting is determined by building regulations that re-
quires 15 l/s per bathroom and 20 l/s for the kitchen hood.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Methodology
• The minimum supply fan setting is determined by building regulations requirement
of minimum 0.3l/(s · m2)
• The maximum supply fan setting is determined at installation to keep the max/min
ratio the same as the extract fan.
Figure 3.3: Changing fan settings can easily be done remotely in Airlinq online.
As explained above, two of the fan settings are determined by building regulations
so these will be left untouched. The ventilation units have been recommissioned and
therefore it is assumed that these two fan settings provided the necessary air flow to
comply with the building regulations requirements. If an airflow imbalance is detected
it must be due to a high extract fan setting which will be scaled down with a scaling
factor C accordingly as shown in (3.12). In this investigation the target value will be
Crtarget = 0.95. Lastly the maximum fan setting will be scaled up to compensate, so
the max/min ratio will be equal for both the supply and extract fan as shown in (3.13)
C = Crtarget
Cr
(3.12)
Vsupply,max
Vsupply,min
= Vextract,max
Vextract,min
(3.13)
The ventilation units covered in this investigation are controlled by a 0V-10V signal
as seen in Figure 3.4. These ventilation units are set to be operating at at least 30%
above the defined minimum fan signal as defined in Airlinq Online. The 30% fan setting
represents the airflow that will be scaled down.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Data analysis
17
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the fan signals as defined in Airlinq Online.
The 30% extract fan setting is calculated in (3.14) and should correspond to the
actual fan voltage measured in the AHU. The new Voperating extract fan setting is cal-
culated as seen in (3.15). By rearranging the expression the resulting minimum extract
fan setting can finally be calculated using (3.16). This is the fan setting that is defined
as the minimum signal in the system and will be changed.
Voperating = Vmin + (Vmax −Vmin) · 0.3
(3.14)
Voperating,new = Vmin,new + (Vmax −Vmin,new) · 0.3
(3.15)
→Vmin,new = Voperating,new −0.3 · Vmax
0.7
(3.16)
A numerical example of this scaling method will be explained in the following para-
graph: First of all the time series data is filtered to only include data subject to the five
evaluation criteria. The capacity ratio is calculated for each timestamp using (3.10) and
the average value of capacity ratio is found to be Cr = 0.78. The fan settings before and
after are shown in Section 3.2.2. By investigating the fan signal distribution it is found
that the fans are mostly operating at the 30% fan level which is found to be 6.2V using
(3.14). This is the fan setting that will be scaled down with a ratio of C = 0.95
0.79 = 1.203.
The resulting operating fan voltage is then 6.2V
1.203 = 5.16V which is rounded up to 5.2V to
avoid overbalancing the airflows. The resulting minimum fan voltage is then calculated
using (3.16) and found to be 4.6V. Finally, to make sure that the max/min ratio remains
the same for the supply and extract fan, the max supply voltage will be scaled up to
reach the same ratio of 1.41. In Airlinq the minimum extract and maximum supply fan
settings will be changed while the maximum extract and minimum supply fan settings
remain the same as before.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methodology
Extract fan
Supply fan
min V
30% V
max V
max/min
min V
max V
max/min
Old fan settings
6.0
6.2
6.5
1.08
3.3
3.7
1.12
New fan settings
4.6
5.2
6.5
1.41
3.3
4.7
1.42
Table 3.1: Example of fan settings before and after the scaling method was applied.
3.3
Data visualization
This section will explain the workflow of working with Microsoft Power BI as a tool
to analyze and visualize the data. Screenshots from the three main tabs in Power BI
will help illustrate the steps that are necessary to prepare the data for further analysis.
These figures show the example of working with heating data from the heating case.
When working with large datasets it is important to check the quality of the data
and pay attention to irregularities such as time periods with missing data, different
frequencies of measurements, systematic outliers etc. This quality check will remove a
number of errors that could occur later in the analysis and it is necessary to consider if
the time interval between measurements is precise enough for the proposed analysis.
Data analysis can be done using many different types of software and often businesses
have their own online portal for this purpose. One of the goals of this investigation is
to prove that a relatively simple and user-friendly analytics tool can bring great insights
into the operation of HVAC systems.
This can be considered to be a step towards
making building operation data more accessible to the building administrators.
The first step is to import the data from a data source.
In this case the entire
dataset was exported as .csv files from the company’s portal. The files were imported
from folders into the query editor
This method is useful for working with large datasets since it allows the user to make
changes in the query editor for one file and apply the changes to all files and finally merge
it all together into one table. This was useful for this heating case that collected data
from 48 apartments with a total of 255 zones. Data was logged in each zone every 5
minutes for 22 months of operation results in a table with more than 50 million lines of
data measurements. The query editor applies a number of steps to the original data file
as seen on Figure 3.5. The red rectangle shows an overview of the steps and in which
order they were performed, so it can easily be modified. Finally the query editor can
apply its changes and it will send the modified dataset into the actual data model.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Data visualization
19
Figure 3.5: User interface in the Power BI query editor.
In Power BI different tables are linked together via the relationships tab to the
left.
From this page it is possible to draw links between matching columns in each
table. In most cases this would be a relationship between the timestamps since these
are all identical in the different tables. The submeter table and the indoor climate table
are linked together using a column with the apartment number. This relationship is
important for the further analysis because it tells Power BI which zones are located in
which apartments. Tables can only have one relationship between them, so in this case
the timestamp will have to be adjusted for each table since the timestamps do not have
a relationship between them.
Figure 3.6: User interface in the Power BI relationships tab.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methodology
When the data is imported correctly and the relationships between tables are estab-
lished, visualizations can be created in the data report tab. The interface of the data
report tab can be seen in Figure 3.7 with one of the examples of a visualization from
this project. The red rectangle shows how the different values are assigned to the x-axis,
y-axis, legend and size. The black rectangle shows the filter pane, which is one of the
major advantages of using Power BI. Any variable can be chosen to filter the data used
in the visualization. For example it can easily be used to only investigate time periods
with low outdoor temperatures or times when a ventilation system is operating at a
certain control mode.
Figure 3.7: User interface in the Power BI data report tab.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Case studies
This project has investigated two existing apartment buildings that underwent deep
renovation projects. An apartment building in Frederikshavn has been investigated for
its heating system performance and an apartment building in Copenhagen has been
investigated for its decentralized ventilation system performance. These will each be
investigated in the following section
4.1
Heating systems
4.1.1
Introduction
The apartment buildings were originally built in 1954 and they were recently renovated
in the time period of 2017-2018 living up to 2020 building energy regulations. This
included a new facade, new 3-layer low energy windows and decentralized mechanical
ventilation systems. However, it was not possible to access the decentralized mechanical
ventilation systems for this project. The apartments are equipped with radiators in all
rooms except the bathrooms that are installed with floor heating.
Data was accessed for 48 apartments. All the data is logged in 5 minute intervals
since 1/4-2018. Table 4.1 and Figure 4.1 provides an overview of the values measured
throughout the system. The data includes measurements from each apartment submeter
as well as the room temperature and setpoint temperature in all zones. The submeter
measurements consists of the power [kW], flow [l/min], supply temperature [◦C] and
return temperature [◦C]. The power and flow values are an average of a number of
instant readings during the 5 minute period, but they are not necessarily averaged for
the whole time period, so there is a small uncertainty for these values. The volume and
energy are accumulated values at the end of the time period, however the exact time
of the reading can fluctuate slightly as it is scanned every minute. The zone tempera-
ture measurements are instant values at the end of the time period. The dataset also
includes weather data for the specified location collected from www.yr.no for the given
GPS coordinate location at hourly intervals. Data was also logged from the main meters
at the central level of the building. Measurements for the space heating are made for
both the primary and secondary side of the mixing loop. DHW is measured on both
primary and secondary side of the heat exchanger and at the cold water intake. Finally
the main meter registers the energy consumption of the entire building.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Case studies
Both the radiators and floor heating are controlled by on/off sensors that activate
on as soon as the room temperature drops below the setpoint and it turns off when it
reaches a certain threshold above the setpoint.
Table 4.1: List of measurement points in the heating and DHW system matching the
numbers in Figure 4.1.
Location
Sensor
Unit
Central level
0
Supply temperature
°C
0
Return temperature
°C
0
Flow
m3/h
0
Power
kW
0
Energy
kWh
Space heating system
1
Primary supply temperature
°C
2
Primary return temperature
°C
6
Secondary supply temperature
°C
5
Secondary return temperature
°C
DHW system
3
Primary supply temperature
°C
4
Primary return temperature
°C
7
Cold water intake flow
m3/h
8
Secondary supply temperature
°C
Apartment level
-
Supply temperature
°C
-
Return temperature
°C
-
Flow
l/min
-
Power
kW
Zone level
-
Setpoint temperature
°C
-
Room temperature
°C
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Heating systems
23
Figure 4.1: The heat system schematics of the renovated apartments in Frederikshavn.
4.1.2
Findings of the data analysis
The data analysis has provided insights into how the heating system functions both on
central level, apartment level and zone level. First of all the controls are investigated to
find out how the heating system operates. Typical examples of the water flows for space
heating are shown in Figure 4.2
It is noticed that the flow pattern is quite systematic throughout the day for all the
shown examples. Apartment 123 clearly shows the behavior of a floor heating system
that has a long response time. The flow starts as soon as the temperature in the zone
drops below the setpoint and it will remain active until it reaches a certain threshold
above the setpoint. Each peak have a slightly different height which is due to the time
period between measurements. Every 5 minutes the average flow during that time pe-
riod is logged, but if the flow lasted a shorter period of time it will be logged with a
smaller value. Apartment 75, 78 and 85 show how multiple zones are activated at the
same. The flow reaches different steps and the flows are fairly constant in some of the
zones. This shows that the radiators are also equipped with on/off sensors since the
flows are not continuously varying. When investigating the flows during longer periods
of time it was noticed that these steps tended to vary which indicates that the central
pump controlling the flow is also varying. On/off controllers are generally considered to
be more robust and have a longer life span than regular thermostatic radiator valves, so
this system is likely designed for that specific purpose. The further analysis can be used
for systems with on/off controls, which is especially used in floor heating systems.
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Case studies
(a) Apartment 75
(b) Apartment 78
(c) Apartment 85
(d) Apartment 123
Figure 4.2: Four typical examples of the flow in each apartment throughout a day
during the winter.
The heating system has logged a large amount of data throughout the system and it
can be a challenging task to visualize the performance in simple graphs without compro-
mising the amount of information shown. Generally this study has found that ”bubble
charts” is a simple and yet effective way of visualizing HVAC system performance with
each apartment. In addition to the values shown on the vertical and horizontal axis,
bubble charts also show information based on the size and colour of the bubble. Fur-
thermore Power BI dashboards can be made interactive which has proven to be a very
powerful feature for visualizing HVAC system performance. An interactive feature is
to add ”tooltips” to the visualizations which is a popup square that will show when
the cursor is held above one of the apartments. These tooltips can be customized to
show any additional information that could be relevant. In this investigation they have
mainly been used to show the distribution of temperature setpoints together with the
actual room temperatures throughout the apartment.
An example of this is shown
on Figure 4.3, which uses the dotted lines as the average setpoint temperature and the
coloured columns as the actual room temperature. Another interactive tool is the ability
to change the timeline which is featured at the bottom of each visual. This will auto-
matically rearrange the information to be shown for the chosen time interval. These
features are difficult to fully show in a report on paper format, since they are designed
to be used in the Power BI interface, but the main purpose will be explained by showing
some screenshots.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Heating systems
25
Figure 4.3: Example of a tooltip containing information about the setpoint in the
zone (dotted line), average room temperature (column) and how often the
heating in the zone is active (colour) during the specified time period.
The colours of the columns in the tooltip are defined as the following amounts of
time where the room temperature is below the setpoint temperature and resulting in an
active heating within that zone
• Green 0-20%
• Yellow 20-50%
• Orange 50-80%
• Red 80-100%
The first visualization is shown in Figure 4.4 and it provides an overview of the heat-
ing demand in each apartment and how efficiently the heat is delivered. The plot shows
values for the heating season during the time period of 1/11/2019 - 1/2/2020. This type
of visualization is meant to give a building administrator an overall overview of how the
apartments compare relative to each other. The horizontal axis shows the energy de-
mand during the given time period and the vertical axis shows the flow weighted cooling
of the water supplied and returned from the apartment.
Generally heating systems are designed for a 5K cooling, so all apartments above the
dotted line are considered efficient at transferring the heat. This ultimately leads to a
low return temperature since the heat is transferred more efficiently to the room. The
apartments located below the 5K line deliver the heat inefficiently with a cooling of only
1-2 °C in some cases. This is not a significant concern for the apartments towards the
left side of the plot since these have such a low heating demand. On the contrary, the
apartments located in the bottom right corner have a large heating demand and they
deliver the heat inefficiently. The larger bubbles in this area has the largest flow volume
meaning they provide the largest negative contribution to the overall return temperature.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Case studies
A building administrator would locate these large bubbles in the bottom right corner
as the worst performing apartments in the building when it comes to heating efficiency
and too high return temperatures.
Figure 4.4: Visualization that can be used to point out apartments with an ineffi-
cient heating performance. The bottom right corner shows the problem-
atic apartments that have a high heating demand and deliver the heat
inefficiently.
The same plot can be used to notice irregular behaviour outside the heating season
as shown in Figure 4.5. The timeline at the bottom is changed to the summer period
1/6/2019 - 1/9/2020. It is noticed that all apartments have a cooling of less than 5K
which is expected for the summer season when the supply temperature is also low. Some
apartments have a heating demand of 0 kWh during the summer while the majority
use 40-60 kWh during the 3 month period. The plot clearly shows an outlier that is
operating differently from the rest. Apartment 121 has a high heating demand and a
large water volume (975m3) flowing through during the entire summer. The tooltip
reveals that apartment 121 has two rooms that are unable to reach their setpoints. Zone
2 (bathroom) has a setpoint of 24 °C and Zone 5 (bedroom) has a setpoint of 25 °C but
the average room temperature in both zones only reaches 23.8 °C. This shows that the
heating capacity is not sufficient to reach the demands of the occupants. One solution
might be to inform the occupants that the heating system is not designed to reach such
high setpoints in the summer which could lead to a lowering of the setpoint.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Heating systems
27
Figure 4.5: Visualization that can be used to point out apartments that are heating
excessively during the summer period.
Figure 4.6: Visualization used for fault detection of heating systems showing time with
active heating vs. cooling. The bottom right corner shows the problematic
apartments.
A way of making the energy distribtion from the district heating network more ef-
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Case studies
ficient is to lower the supply temperature. There are however some barriers within a
building that might keep this from becoming a reality. If some of the apartments expe-
rience some type of technical fault it can prevent the entire building from adapting to
become a lower temperature heating system. Figure 4.6 can work as a tool to identify
those apartments that might experience an operational fault.These apartments can be
identified by investigating the time with active heating during the heating season as
shown on Figure 4.6. If an apartment is located at a 100% time with active heating it
could either indicate that a valve may be stuck open or that a the room temperature
can never reach the temperature setpoint.
Similar to the first visualization the vertical axis shows the flow weighted cooling of
the water. The horizontal axis shows the share of time with active heating meaning the
amount of time the apartment submeter has logged an active water flow used for heating.
The size of the circle indicates the total heat delivered (kWh) during the specified time
period. The red color is assigned to apartments that have at least one zone with a set-
point higher than 23.5 °C. It is immediately noticed that all the problematic apartments
are red, which means they have at least one room with a high setpoint temperature.
This indicates that the heating capacity is generally not sufficient to reach the demands
of the occupants and the resulting consequence is a low cooling efficiency. For example
it is noticed that apartment 102 have active heating 100% of the time but it can deliver
the heat much more efficiently than the other red apartments. This bathroom setpoint
can not be reached but the flow in the floor heating is small enough to provide a very
efficient cooling.
Apartment 121 also has active heating 100% of the time, but this
delivers the heat much less efficiently. This one actually have two zones with setpoints
of 24 and 25 °C which seems to be above the capacity of the heating system. Other
apartments are able to reach these temperature which indicates that there could be a
problem with poor hydraulic balancing of the zones.
This visualization is highly relevant because it can locate apartments that act as bar-
riers for lowering the supply temperature of the building. If all apartments were below
a certain threshold, for example 80% of time with active heating, that would make a
compelling argument that the supply temperature building could be lowered since the
heating system is not performing at its maximum capacity. On the other hand if some
apartments are close to 100% time with active heating those would be the examples
restricting the entire building. Therefore it is important to locate those critical apart-
ments and find out what the explanation might be to this behaviour.
The interactive tooltips can help explain some of the behaviour of the red apartments.
One of these are shown as an example on Figure 4.7. For example apartment 575 which
has a high energy demand. By investigating the temperatures on zone level it becomes
clear that the entire apartment is heated by zone 7. This zone has a setpoint of 24 °C but
is only able to reach 23.5 °C on average. All the other zones are above their setpoints all
the time without having active heating. Especially zone 1 and 2 are interesting because
they are heated up relatively high above their setpoints. These zones reach the same
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Heating systems
29
temperature as zone 7 which indicates that there is mixing of air between the rooms.
Figure 4.7: Visualization used for fault detection and the tooltip reveals the uneven
heating distribution within the problematic apartment.
Occupants are often not aware of the consequences resulting from their own be-
haviour.
They might keep track of their own heating consumption, but the return
temperature is also important for the building as a whole to operate as efficiently as
possible. User behaviour is mainly their choice for the temperature setpoints for the
different rooms. But user behaviour such as opening and closing of doors can also have
a large impact on the return temperature.
Bathrooms represent a small share of the total apartment area, but it can heavily
influence both the energy consumption and the return temperature of the apartment as a
whole. Occupants often choose a higher temperature setpoint in the bathroom in order to
have a warm floor, but many bathrooms are installed with air temperature sensors which
results in a slow response time. If the occupants often leave the bathroom door open
this zone will end up heating the other zones as well. This is important to understand
because in some cases the bathroom then will not be able to reach its own setpoint,
meaning that it will actively be heating up a large part of the apartment. This would
turn off the heating in the zones located near the bathroom, which is not an effective
way of heating. Section 4.1.2 shows various combinations of user behaviour as well as
the resulting consequence on their heating consumption and the return temperature.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Case studies
Table 4.2: Table showing different types of heat distribution in an apartment and the
resulting heating consumption and return temperature.
Case
Result
Setpoint
Setpoint
Bathroom
Heating
Return
bathroom
other rooms
door
consumption
temperature
1A
High
Low
Closed
Medium
High
1B
High
High
Closed
High
Low
1C
High
Low
Open
High
High
2A
Low
Low
Open/closed
Low
Irrelevant
2B
Medium
Medium
Open/closed
Medium
Low
Case 1 show the apartments that have a high setpoint in the bathroom (>23.5 °C).
The setpoints in the other rooms then play a significant role in the energy performance of
the apartment. The ventilation extracts warm air from the bathroom, so in case 1A the
cooler air from the other rooms enters the bathroom and is heated up and immediately
extracted. This is not energy efficient but the occupants might not be aware since the
heating consumption is normal. However the return temperature will be relatively high
since the small bathroom is heating excessively. Case 1B would result in a higher heating
consumption but actually a low return temperature. In this case there is not much air
mixing between the rooms which would result in more active heating zones.
The worst performing case is type 1C. The open bathroom door would result in the
warm bathroom air mixing out through the apartment, and in some cases it would be the
only active heating zone. This was the case in the majority of the critical apartments
as illustrated on Figure 4.6. A simple solution is to inform the specific occupants of
this consequence of their behaviour and recommend them to close the bathroom door.
This would turn case 1C into 1A and thereby lowering the heating consumption. If
the occupants just wanted a warm bathroom floor, these installations could be better
off using floor surface temperature controllers instead of the slow reacting air tempera-
ture sensors. This could reduce the risk of experiencing this inefficient heating behaviour.
Apartments that can be categorized as case 2A are not of concern. These have rel-
atively low setpoints throughout the apartment meaning the heating consumption will
be low/medium and the return temperature is either low or irrelevant since the water
volumes will be relatively small and not contributing much to the overall return tempera-
ture. Case 2B have the ideal performance since it is able to reach a setpoint temperature
of 20-23.5 °C while avoiding excessive heating and also be able to provide low return
temperatures.
Generally it can be said that choosing more similar setpoints throughout the apart-
ment results in the most energy efficient heating performance. Occupants should be
able to freely choose their preferred temperature, so if they want a warm bathroom they
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Heating systems
31
should also increase the setpoints in the other rooms or leave the bathroom door closed
to avoid mixing of air.
The temperature compensation curve can be extracted from the data by using the
average supply temperature values at different outdoor temperatures. A decrease of the
supply temperature could either shift the entire curve downwards or it could change
the slope to become less steep. This figure is simplified by using average values, but the
algorithm controlling the supply temperature also accounts for wind and solar radiation.
Figure 4.8: The temperature compensation curve shows how the supply temperature
varies with the outdoor temperature.
Figure 4.9 shows how much each apartment contribute to the total return tempera-
ture. Some apartments have a positive impact by returning temperatures below 35 °C
while other apartments deliver higher temperatures that lead to a penalty for the build-
ing overall. In this specific case it appears that the positive and negative contributions
cancel each other out, resulting in a total return temperature of close to 35 °C.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Case studies
Figure 4.9: Visualization used to show each apartments contribution to the total return
temperature for the building.
4.1.3
Discussion
These visualizations can be used as inspiration to simplify building operation data in a
clear an simple way. Some of these tools can be used to identify faults that were not
present in this specific case building. This could be stuck open valves or floor heating
zones that are switched around which would lead to zones heated far above their set-
points while others are unable to reach their own.
The results were not completely capable of locating the faults, because often it could
also be due to a poor hydraulic balance. The hydraulic balance for each heating zone is
set by the installer of the heating system. The goal is to set the flow at a rate which can
deliver the heat efficiently through the whole zone. Some of the apartments investigated
could be subject to poor hydraulic balancing. In order to accurately conclude this it
would be necessary to further divide how much flow goes into which zone. Since the
flow is only measured on apartment level it has been a challenge to further divide it
into each zones. Theoretically the flow could be further divided by investigating those
time periods when only one heating zone is active. However it appears that the flow
is controlled by a central pump with a varied flow volume, but the pump data has not
been accessible, so it has not been possible to accurately determine the flow to each zone.
Generally there are two types of faulty behaviour. One is the result of a technical fault
and the other is the result of the behaviour of the occupants. It can be discussed where
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Heating systems
33
to draw the line of ”normal” occupancy behavior. For example if an occupant wishes to
have a setpoint of 25 °C in the bathroom they should be able to do so. But if the heating
system is not designed to reach this high temperature level the heating will constantly
be activated which has a large negative impact on the total return temperature. One
solution might be to inform the occupants to close the door to the bathroom so it is more
likely to reach the setpoint temperature and will not try to heat up the entire apart-
ment. A more general solution for future renovation projects is to equip bathrooms
with floor surface temperature sensors instead. Often the occupants will be satisfied
with having a warm floor and not necessarily 25 degree air temperature, especially in
the bathroom that directly extracts much of the heat out through the ventilation system.
By breaking down each apartment’s contribution to the overall return temperature
as in Figure 4.9 it is possible get an overview of how many apartments have a positive
and negative impact. In some buildings there might be an even larger difference with
only a few apartments bringing the building average significantly down if it would be
older systems that might experience stuck open valves. Even though the total penalty
is divided equally among the residents, it should be prioritized to fix these issues. The
occupants are most likely not aware of the high return temperatures, but the facility
manager can make them aware of the problem if it is due to occupant behavior. If it is
due to a technical fault the facility manager knows which apartments to investigate.
The zone level data revealed insights about how important the heating distribution
within the apartment was. This turned out to to explain some of the behavior that
caused the high return temperatures. These apartments with at least one zone with a
high temperature setpoint were also the barrier that kept the supply temperature from
being lowered for the entire building as it was seen on Figure 4.6. If these red apartments
could get below the 80% time with active heating it would show that the building would
generally be able to operate with lower supply temperatures. These numbers are based
on a period of several months but the heating system would be more challenged during
shorter time periods with very cold weather. The lowest temperatures measured during
the investigated time period was only -3 °C so it is not known how the system performs
at the lower temperatures, since it is designed for -12 °C. It would be very relevant for
future work to make an experiment of lowering the supply temperature and measuring
the effect it had on the existing heating systems.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Case studies
4.2
Ventilation systems
4.2.1
Introduction
The apartment building is located in Copenhagen and consists of 42 apartments that
were deeply renovated in 2013. The apartments have decentralized ventilation units
located in the bathroom ceiling. These ventilation units are model Airmaster CV200
with a countercurrent HEX as seen on Figure 4.10. These units are not equipped with
a heating coil, so there is a separate heating system in the apartments that were not
accessed in this investigation.
Figure 4.10: Diagram of the Aimaster CV200 AHU.
The ventilation systems were originally commissioned but afterwards they were not
operating as well as anticipated.
In 2018 they were recommissioned but the report
concluded that the proper air flows were delivered at the inspection. This lead to a chal-
lenging situation for the building operators since the ventilation units were not working
as intended and they were unable to locate the issues. Airmaster claimed that the faults
must have taken place during the installation.
A DTU project from 2019 investigated the ventilation systems and noticed strange
behaviour of the bypass control as well as unbalanced airflows. The building operators
were recommended to increase the setpoints to 21 °C in order to avoid excessive by-
passing, however this was only done in a few apartments. This investigation aims to
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Ventilation systems
35
bring additional insights into the behaviour of the ventilation controls and also testing
whether the unbalanced airflows can be balanced remotely.
Another DTU project is testing a distribution box placement based on CO2 measure-
ments. This box is placed in eight apartments that are then equipped with IC meters.
This data is also available, which will be used to check whether the apartments will
experience any differences by the changed fan settings.
The ventilation units can be configured using Airmaster’s web portal Airlinq Online.
From this platform it is possible to get an overview of all the apartments and download
.csv files for any given period. The ventilation units has been logging data since May
2018. A list of the logged variables is seen in Table 4.3. One year worth of data (1/4/2019-
1/4/2020) has been downloaded as a .csv file for each ventilation unit. The files have
been merged in the Power BI query editor so everything is contained within one model.
The data stream is different for each apartment. They generally log values at 2-15 min.
intervals. The relevant logged values for this investigation is listed in Figure 3.3
Table 4.3: Values from the ventilation unit logged in Airlinq.
Sensor
Unit
System mode
-
Started by
-
Temperature inlet
◦C
Temperature room
◦C
Temperature exhaust
◦C
Temperature outside
◦C
Temperature requested
◦C
Bypass damper percent
%
Relative humidity supply air
%
Relative humidity extract air
%
Supply fan voltage
V
Extraction fan voltage
V
Supply fan RPM
RPM
Extraction fan RPM
RPM
Requested flow
%
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Case studies
4.2.2
Locating ventilation units with irregular behaviour
Before the balancing of airflows can take place some apartments with irregular behaviour
must be excluded from the analysis. Appendix 1 provides an overview of all the apart-
ments in the investigation. First of all four apartments had ventilation units that were
turned off for longer periods of time. This should never be the case since the apartments
will not be provided enough airflows and could risk condensation and mold as a result of
the humid air. It is not known whether this is a technical fault or if the occupants were
able to turn off the ventilation units. The ventilation units have an energy saving va-
cation mode that should be activated if the occupants are away for longer periods of time.
Secondly it is relevant to investigate the bypass controls. As it can be seen on Fig-
ure 4.11 some apartments have been bypassing the heat exchanger during the entire
winter which is extremely inefficient and ruins the purpose of using a mechanical venti-
lation system. The figure shows the winter months from 1/12/2019 - 1/3/2020 and it is
clear that the difference is large between the apartments.
Figure 4.11: Average bypass opening % for each apartment during the winter period.
The bypass valve should be opened when there is no need to recover heat, which
would normally take place during the summer. The ventilation units are controlled by
an inlet temperature controller which should make sure that the inlet air temperature
is close to the setpoint temperature. By a continuous opening and closing of the bypass
valve it can adjust the inlet temperature accordingly. Figure 4.12 shows an example of
correct operation of the bypass valve in apartment C8 during a week in December. The
inlet temperature (green line) is kept close to the inlet temperature setpoint (grey line)
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Ventilation systems
37
by adjusting the bypass valve (red line). It is noticed that the bypass valve opens as
soon as the room temperature reaches the threshold of 2 °C above the setpoint.
Figure 4.12: Example of AHU controls that work as expected in apartment C8. The
bypass activates when the inlet temperature reaches the threshold and
adjust accordingly.
Figure 4.13 shows an example of faulty bypass behaviour for apartment A3 during
the same week in December. First of all it is noticed that the bypass valve is 100% open
during the first days, so there is no heat recovery. Every day at 10:00 o clock the bypass
valve is shortly reset to 0% but quickly rises to 100% again since the inlet temperature
seems to be above the two degree threshold (grey dashed line).
Figure 4.13: Example of faulty bypass behaviour that is bypassing the heat recovery
for long time periods during the winter in apartment A3.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Case studies
The fault seems to be that the inlet temperature is much higher than the setpoint and
seemingly unaffected by the fact that it should be bypassed around the HEX. At first
glance this could be the case if the bypass valve was simply not working mechanically.
However the exhaust air temperature (yellow line) shows that there actually was an ef-
fect of the bypass changing from 100% to 0%, so it appears that the valve is working after
all. The most likely reason of this behaviour is that the inlet air temperature is placed
in the wrong location. As seen on the sketch of the Airmaster CV-200 in Figure 4.10
the inlet temperature sensor is the only sensor placed outside the unit, which means
that the installers are supposed to place this in the duct during the installation as seen
on Figure 4.14. This gives the option of including an optional external comfort heater,
which is not the case for the units installed in this building. In stead it seems that the
installers have mistakenly placed the sensor in the room measuring room temperature
instead. This would explain why the inlet temperature tracks the room temperature so
closely. These figures were shown to Airmaster support who agreed with that theory.
Figure 4.14: Airmaster CV-200 installation guide showing that the inlet temperature
sensor (IT) should be placed inside the duct 1-1.5m from the optional
heating surface after the inlet nozzle (3).
This bypass behaviour was noticed in 12 of the 42 apartments investigated as shown
in Appendix 1. One entire stairwell of apartments experienced this behaviour which
is likely installed by the same workers. The wrong installation of the inlet sensor has
an extremely large negative impact on the energy efficiency since it has bypassed the
heat recovery for long periods of time during the winter. The fact that the bypass valve
dropped to 0% on Figure 4.13 was simply a coincidence because the room temperature
was right below the two degree temperature threshold. Furthermore two apartments
were located where the bypass signal itself was 0% and unable to change.
Another reason for experiencing longer time periods with bypass is if the setpoint
is too low. A significant number of apartments had an inlet temperature setpoint of
19 °C which would require a significant amount of bypass to maintain during months
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Ventilation systems
39
of spring and autumn. These low setpoints could potentially be counter working the
heating system, if this has a higher setpoint.
4.2.3
Balancing of airflows
The scaling method used is described in Chapter 3.
This method works well when
the minimum extract fan setting is significantly higher than the minimum supply fan
setting. On Figure 4.15 all the relevant apartments are shown with its extract/supply
voltage ratio as well as the capacity ratio indicating if the airflows are balanced or not.
The apartments between the green dotted lines have a capacity ratio of 0.9-1.0 and are
considered to be balanced. However the majority of the apartments are underbalanced.
If the voltage ratio is close to 1 this method will not work well since the extract fan
setting can not be scaled down more before reaching close to 0V. The apartments with
a high voltage ratio (1.7-2.0) are more suitable for this method since the extract fan
setting can be scaled down without getting near 0V. Using the method of scaling up the
supply air flows for these apartments could be relevant to investigate, but that was not
tested in this investigation. The figure shows that a group of apartments in the lower
right corner are suitable to perform this scaling method on. After the scaling method
is applied these apartments will move up between Cr=0.9-1.0 and to the left due to the
changed fan signals.
Figure 4.15: Visualization used to detect which apartments the scaling method can be
applied to.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Case studies
4.2.3.1
Fan signal distribution
The fan signal will vary throughout the day and season depending on a number of
factors. These values are shown using the same filters as those applied to the capacity
ratio calculations.
Figure 4.16 shows how the fan signal distribution typically looks
throughout the heating season. It is noticed that the fan signal is operating at a lower
level during the heating season. This is when balancing of the airflows have the largest
effect on the energy consumption due to the increased amount of heat recovery. This
justifies the assumption that the fans are mostly operating at their lowest fan setting.
(a) Fan signal distribution during the heating
season for apartment C1
(b) Fan signal distribution during the heating
season for apartment E1
Figure 4.16: Fan signal distribution for two apartments during the heating season. It
is noticed that both are heavily skewed towards the left meaning they
operate at the lower fan signals the majority of the time.
One way to show the fan distribution for all apartments in one plot is to calculate the
median fan setting. The median fan operation signal is calculated as a percentage value
0-100% and it will indicate whether the fan signal distribution is skewed towards the
higher or lower fan signal. The values are shown in Figure 4.17 with the seven modified
apartments coloured green. The median values covers a range between 25% and 55%
with the majority of the modified apartments being around 40% which is still considered
to be skewed towards the lower fan signal. By investigating the fan signal distribution
it is noticed that the fans are operating at the minimum fan signal most of the time
during the heating season in 5/7 seven apartments.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Ventilation systems
41
Figure 4.17: Median fan operation setting from 0-100%. The green apartments are
the ones investigated.
Table 4.4: The table summarizes the improvement of the capacity ratio before and
after the new fan settings were applied.
It also includes the number of
measurements that the results are based on.
Capacity ratio before
Capacity ratio after
Number of measurements
C1
0.72
1.00
27
C5
0.79
0.95
45
C10
0.78
0.93
10
E0
0.78
0.97
300
E1
0.81
0.95
400
E2
0.70
1.00
530
E4
0.65
0.95
870
The balancing of airflows was done in seven apartments with successful results. Unfor-
tunately the outdoor temperature increased shortly after applying the settings, meaning
that the assessment of the airflow balance could not be quantified in large detail for
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Case studies
some of the apartments. On May 11th the first changes were done for apartment E1 and
E4 and after the promising results were observed the next round of changes were per-
formed on May 16th. During mid May the outdoor temperature increased significantly
which lead to fewer measurements to base the results on. In order to calculate the ca-
pacity ratio there must be no bypass and the outdoor temperature has to be relatively
low, preferably less that 12 °C. The results from apartment E1 and E4 have more data
measurements, while the other apartments have relatively few measurements to draw
conclusions from. Table 4.4 summarizes the improvements of the capacity ratio for each
of the changed apartments and it lists how many measurements the results are based
on.
The effects on apartment E1 and E4 will be further investigated since these are
based on the most measurements and can bring insights into the performance before
and after the new fan settings were applied. Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19 shows how the
capacity ratio improved. The measurement number on the horizontal axis shows how
many measurements were made with the applied filters activated. In other words, all
the data included in these figures are at time periods with low outdoor temperatures
and no bypass on the heat recovery as explained in Section 3.2.2
Figure 4.18: The capacity ratio before and after the balancing of airflows for apartment
E1. The capacity ratio increased from 0.79 to 0.95.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Ventilation systems
43
Figure 4.19: The capacity ratio before and after the balancing of airflows for apartment
E4. The capacity ratio increased from 0.65 to 0.91.
AHU manufacturers usually only state one specific value for the heat recovery effi-
ciency because it assumes that the airflows are balanced. Since the resulting airflows
in this investigation are still slightly underbalanced the resulting heat recovery will be
expressed as the extract efficiency as shown with a blue line on Figure 4.20 and Fig-
ure 4.21. It is seen that both apartments improved to an average heat recovery of 90%
which matches the theoretical value as stated in the AHU specifications. Before the
changes were applied they had 71.5% and 81.5% heat recovery which is not satisfactory
for relatively new ventilation units. The figures also show the extraction fan voltage
which clearly illustrates the effect of lowering the fan settings. Both apartments experi-
ences some fluctuations of the heat recovery after the changes were applied. Most of the
time it varies between 87% and 92% which could be caused by a difference in requested
inlet temperature or if the heat recovery is more efficient at lower outdoor temperatures.
The capacity ratio for apartment E1 generally fluctuated between 0.90 - 0.98 which is
ideal since it remains slightly underbalanced at all times without exceeding the value of
1. It is also seen that the low spikes of heat recovery performing at down to 75% and
80% takes place during short periods of higher fan voltage operation. This was expected
because the method of balancing the airflows assumes that the ventilation units were
operating at the lower fan signals the majority of the time. The key takeaway is that
those time periods with high fan operation voltages are relatively short and does not
have a large negative impact on the overall heat recovery.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Case studies
Figure 4.20: The heat recovery and extract fan signal before and after the balancing
of airflows for apartment E1. The heat recovery increased from 81.5% to
90.5%.
Figure 4.21: The heat recovery and extract fan signal before and after the balancing
of airflows for apartment E4. The heat recovery increased from 71.5% to
90%.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Ventilation systems
45
4.2.4
Discussion
There can be several explanations why airflows in reality might be more underbalanced
than Cr = 0.9. The hypothesis at the early stages of this investigation was that the
ventilation units experienced unintended leakages somewhere within the AHU. Since the
ventilation systems had already been commissioned and recommissioned this seemed the
most likely explanation. However after investigating the data, fan settings and access-
ing the recommissioning report it seems that the more realistic explanation is that the
installation and recommissioning were not properly executed. The data showed that the
installers had mistakenly placed the inlet sensor in the wrong location which resulted in
extremely inefficient operation of the heat recovery. These mistakes were not observed
during the recommissioning since this only performed spot check measurements at max-
imum airflows without looking more into details with the normal operation conditions.
Another reason is if there is an unintended leakage somewhere in the AHU. During
a commissioning the measured supply airflows should be equal to the measured extract
airflows, but if there is a leakage on the primary side it will not be detected. It would be
inconvenient if the leakage is located inside the AHU between the temperature sensor
and the HEX since this would invalidate the assumptions made in the calculations. The
AHU is normally placed in the bathroom so it is worth noting that a potential leakage
would be short-circuiting the bathroom air.
One of the concerns of using this scaling method was how it would perform at differ-
ent fan operation voltages. The airflow imbalance is different at different fan operation
voltages, but the scaling method was only applied to the airflow at the lowest setting,
which in this case was the 30% signal. The results showed that the heat recovery per-
formed at 90% the majority of the time, only having some downward spikes in short
time periods when the fan signals were higher. Often the time periods with fans oper-
ating at higher voltages are times when there is also some bypass around the HEX or
moisture activated control at times during the day when the outdoor temperatures are
typically higher. This means that the ventilation units are often operating at the lower
fan speeds at the times when a high heat recovery is the most important. This was
a positive result because it showed that the scaling method overcame the challenge of
different imbalances at different fan settings.
Another concern would be if the indoor climate was negatively influenced by these
changes. IC-meter data was available for 5/7 of the apartments changed in this investi-
gation. The CO2 levels in these apartments were checked during one month before and
after the changes were applied and they were all below the recommended 1000ppm and
the difference could not be noticed. This indicated that the extract airflows were indeed
too large and that they were designed with some margin of error. This had previously
been suspected since the extract fan had a minimum operational voltage of 30% even
though the design value from the building regulations was at the 0% signal. If the CO2
levels had risen up to 1000ppm it would have indicated that the extract fan signal might
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Case studies
have been set too low. The reason why these 5/7 apartments were equipped by IC-meters
was that they are part of another test experiment made by DTU. The experiment aims
to test a smart ventilation strategy that can distribute the air within the apartment to
the zones that need it. With a CO2 sensor in each zone it is possible to redirect the inlet
air using a distribution box placed after the inlet duct. The existing CO2 sensors were of
great value for this thesis, however there could also be a concern that these distribution
boxes added extra pressure losses to the system, which would interfere with the original
fan settings and possible create more unbalanced airflows. This theory seems unlikely
since the original fan settings already indicated that the airflows were unbalanced as
seen in the following table
Apartment
30% extract/30% supply
Cr
Min supply V
Max extract V
C5
1.80
0.79
2.2
6.5
C1
1.77
0.72
2.2
6.2
C7
1.71
0.86
2.4
6.6
C8
1.58
0.89
3.0
6.5
C4
1.55
0.86
3.3
6.9
C0
1.50
0.94
2.6
7.3
C9
1.22
0.95
3.0
6.3
C10
1.04
0.78
4.3
5.3
Table 4.5: The fan settings and imbalance for one stairwell of apartments compared
relative to each other before the changes were applied to C1, C5 and C10.
The table shows the apartments in stairwell C that were included in the analysis.
Comparing the apartments relative to the other apartments in the same stairwell is rel-
evant since these apartments are likely of similar design and area. The apartments are
sorted by the extract/supply ratio at the 30% fan signals that they are mainly operating
at. This shows apartment C1 and C5 have the highest extract/supply ratio and they are
also the most underbalanced apartments. Even without calculating the capacity ratio
these two apartments would be expected to be quite underbalanced just by observing
the fan settings. The general trend is that apartments with lower extract/supply ratios
also have more unbalanced airflows. Apartment C10 is an outlier with the lowest fan
signal ratio but also has a low capacity ratio of 0.78. This is the penthouse apartment
that is larger than the rest and it has a higher minimum supply fan setting (4.3V) due
to the larger floor area. However it also has the lowest max extract fan setting, but it
would be expected to be highest. This seems to be a mistake during the commissioning
of the AHU.
Table 4.4 showed that the results of the balancing are based on very few measure-
ments in three apartments.
The changes were made during May when the outdoor
temperatures increased significantly. Ideally the investigation should be performed dur-
ing the winter which would make it much easier to analyze the results. The few number
of measurements are a result of a ventilation unit with a high share of time with active
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Ventilation systems
47
bypass due to a low setpoint. These three apartments all have an inlet temperature
setpoint of 19 °C. To keep the inlet temperature at this level it is necessary to bypass for
long periods of time during the spring, but not necessarily at 100%. Figure 4.22 shows
the temperatures and bypass levels in apartment C5 during the time period when the
settings were changed.
Figure 4.22: The exhaust temperature decreased significantly at the time of the chang-
ing the fan settings.
The figure shows an immediate decrease of the exhaust temperature (marked with a
circle) when the changes were made, which is the result of a higher efficiency of the heat
recovery. This improvement can be observed on the figure, but it is not included in the
calculations since the bypass was active at 5-10%. This means that although the bypass
is opened to a smaller extent it will still recover heat. This seems counter working but
it results in a high heat recovery at lower fan signals. The heat recovery is very efficient
so when it dropped to 0% the inlet air quickly rose above the setpoint.
For the majority of the changed apartments the target of Cr=0.95 was reached quite
precisely by using this method. In apartment E2 that airflows actually became slightly
overbalanced at Cr=1.05. After observing this overbalance the fan signals were rounded
down another decimal to compensate which brought the capcacity ratio down to Cr=1.00.
This indicates that the scaling method can be quite sensitive to the rounding of numbers
since the fan signals are defined in 0.1V increments.
The difference of observing a
capacity ratio of 0.79 and 0.80 would often change the fan settings by another decimal.
Since the capacity ratio varies slightly over time, this small difference can not accurately
be determined. The best method to avoid overbalancing is to round up the minimum
extract fan signal and notice the resulting capacity ratio for a longer period of time to
make sure it does not exceed Cr=1.00.
==PAGE:60==
48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The two residential apartment buildings that have been investigated in this study were
suitable to carry out an analysis of the performance of the HVAC installations. These
existing HVAC systems provided valuable information about the operation and energy
performance. The data was especially useful to compare apartments relative to each
other to identify those with different operational behaviour. Adding sensors to residen-
tial HVAC systems bring valuable insights to the system performance, and it should be
prioritized since it can locate critical operational faults.
The renovated residential apartment building in Frederikshavn provided valuable
information about the heating performance of the apartments and each apartment con-
tribution to the total building return temperature back to the district heating network.
A number of visualizations have been developed to identify different types of faults in the
heating systems that could act as barriers for lowering the building supply temperature.
Zone level data provided great insights into how each apartment behaved with return
temperatures, because it could be used to identify the zones that were not able to meet
the heating demand, these were the same zones responsible for delivering high return
temperatures. Having an uneven distribution of temperature setpoints throughout the
apartment would lead to poor energy performance since one zone would try to heat up
the entire apartment. This would most often be the case in for the bathroom and it
could be improved by closing the bathroom door to avoid mixing of air.
The analysis of the ventilation systems showed faulty operation of the bypass valve,
which is most likely due to the inlet temperature sensor being installed in the wrong
location and measuring room temperature instead. This behaviour was noticed in 14
out of 42 apartments and it resulted in a very inefficient use of the heat recovery since
it was bypassed unnecessarily for long periods of time during the winter. Furthermore 4
apartments had ventilation units turned off for long periods of time. These apartments
were left out of the further analysis.
A scaling method has been used to improve the energy performance on seven apart-
ments that experienced underbalanced airflows. This method was applied to apartments
that had a relatively high extract fan signal compared to the supply fan signal. The
imbalance could be the result of a leakage within the system, but in this case it was more
likely due to an error during installation or commissioning of the systems. The method
of remotely scaling down the extract fan setting worked well and it didn’t compromise
the air quality in the apartments. The results came very close to the calculated values.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Conclusion
Power BI has proven to be a simple and powerful tool to perform data analytics for
building HVAC systems. Especially the interactive features such as adding tooltips to
charts adds an extra layer of information to the charts that can be very useful to provide
the full overview.
These dashboards can be developed to be updated automatically
directly in Power BI which could then work as a tool for building operators to locate
apartments with operational faults.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Future investigations
Airmaster’s web portal Airlinq Online is useful for getting a quick overview of the oper-
ation of the ventilation units. However the files must me manually downloaded as .csv
files and afterwards imported into Power BI. With the newly added API it is possible
to access the data automatically. The downside is that the API can only access instan-
taneous values (meaning it can’t access historical data). Future work with this dataset
should be to set up a seperate SQL database that can store the values extracted from
the API, and set up an automatic refresh in Power BI. This would make the process of
importing data much faster and easier since it will continuously add the data to Power
BI.
The balancing of airflows was successful for a number of apartments, but it took
some manual work to check the results after the changes were made, and in one case
the extract airflow had to be scaled up a little, after the system was observed to be
slightly overbalanced. In the future it could be relevant to incorporate this method
into a machine learning algorithm that could automatically optimize the balance of air-
flows in the AHUs. Having a system that can perform optimization of heat recovery
could be of great value especially if it could be integrated with existing ventilation units.
The dashboards created for the Frederikshavn building can also retrieve the values
from an API. Then it would be possible to have real-time updating dashboards that
could be used by building operation managers. That would allow for a more detailed
level of insights since it would be easier to observe the results of any changes. A build-
ing operation manager could use the real-time dashboards to locate faults and notive
irregular behaviour relatively quickly.
Further analysis of the Frederikshavn building can be performed. Data from ventila-
tion units and central heating pumps is collected and stored, but this was not available
for this thesis. The apartments are equipped with decentralized ventilation units, and
it would be very relevant to hold the ventilation and heating data up against each other
to see if these could be working against each other in some cases. The flow is varying
to each zone and controlled by a central pump. If this data was obtained it would be
possible to further divide the flow to the apartment into the individual zones. This could
provide greater insight into what the specific fault might be.
Similarly it could be beneficial to get access to heating data from the residential
==PAGE:64==
52
6 Future investigations
building in Copenhagen. If either case had access to both ventilation and heating data
it could provide insights into how these work together and how they can be optimized
as a whole. This should preferable be done during the heating season so the changes
and resulting consequences can be observed.
A challenge has been, that the ventilation systems couldn’t be accessed during the
investigation because they are placed in residential apartments. It has been difficult to
work with the data without knowing being able to see the ventilation unit or the way it
is installed. This would have been easier with a test unit of the CV200 in a laboratory
setting where different settings could be tested. This might bring further understanding
into those controls and settings that were not fully understood by investigating them
remotely.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. 2030 climate energy framework. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/clima/policies/strategies/2030.
[2]
Klima- Energi og Forsyningsministeriet. Klimaindsatsen i Danmark. url: https:
//kefm.dk/klima-og-vejr/klimaindsatsen-i-danmark/.
[3]
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2019 Global Status Report for Buildings and
Construction.
[4]
International Energy Agency (IEA). Energy Efficiency Indicators 2020.
[5]
Dansk Byggeri. Byggeriets Energianalyse 2019.
[6]
W. J.N. Turner, A. Staino, and B. Basu. “Residential HVAC fault detection using
a system identification approach”. In: Energy and Buildings 151 (2017), pages 1–
17.
[7]
A Rogers, G Fangzhou, and B Rasmussen. “Uncertainty analysis and field imple-
mentation of a fault detection method for residential HVAC systems”. In: Science
and Technology for the Built Environment 3 (2020), pages 320–333.
[8]
Dansk fjernvarme. Dansk Fjernvarmes Årsstatistik 2012-2013.
[9]
P Lauenburg and J Wollerstand. “Adaptive control of radiator systems for a lowest
possible district heating return temperature”. In: Energy and Buildings 73 (2013),
pages 132–140.
[10]
S Park J, -Y Jee N, and -W Jeong J. “Effects of types of ventilation system on
indoor particle concentrations in residential buildings”. In: Indoor Air 24 (2014),
pages 629–638.
[11]
B et al Ouazia. “Residential balanced ventilation and its impacts on indoor pres-
sure, ventilation and IAQ”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering (2019).
[12]
J Zemitis and A Borodinecs. “Energy saving potential of ventilation systems with
exhaust air heat recovery ”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering (2019).
[13]
D Johansson. “Under-balancing mechanical supply and exhaust ventilation sys-
tems with heat recovery – effects on energy use”. In: (2008).
[14]
Bygningsreglementet. url: https://bygningsreglementet.dk/.
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
[15]
EON. url: https://www.eon.dk/privat/varme-til-dit-hjem/varmepris.
html.
[16]
Forsyningen Frederikshavn. Fokus på fjernvarme.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Appendix
==PAGE:68==
Apartment Operation status
Notes
A1
Turned off every night, Holidaymode during the day
A2
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A3
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A4
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A5
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A6
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A7
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A8
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
A9
Bypass signal not working (signal is always 0%)
A10
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
B1
B2
B3
B4
Bypass signal not working (signal is always 0%)
B5
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
C0
C1
C2
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
C3
Turned off for long time periods
C4
C5
C6
Turned off for long time periods
C7
C8
C9
C10
D0
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
D7
D8
D9
Bypass valve doesn't affect inlet temperature
E0
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
Turned off for long time periods
Color code
Good operation
Unit is turned off
Bypass malfunction
56
7 Appendix
==PAGE:69==
==PAGE:70==
