==PAGE:1==
Experimental study of the
damage mechanisms resulting in
salt frost scaling of concrete
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Authors:
Thomas Ingstrup
Maxime A. A. Ranger
Supervisors:
Marianne Tange Hasholt
Kristian Mølhave
Technical University of Denmark
June, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Experimental study of the damage mechanisms resulting in salt frost scaling of concrete
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By Thomas Ingstrup and Maxime A. A. Ranger
Project number:
26903 1140-001
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibli-
ographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Thomas Ingstrup and Maxime Ranger, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Materials and Durability of the Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment for the degree
of Master of Science in Engineering. In addition, part of this thesis has been made in collaboration with
the National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in concrete technology, thermodynamics and finite
element modelling.
Thomas Ingstrup - s102261
Date
Signature
Maxime A. A. Ranger - s182171
Date
Signature
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Salt frost scaling is a major durability issue for concrete structures in cold climates. Several theories
have been proposed to explain the damage mechanisms for the same. Two of these theories remain
widely accepted today namely microscopic ice lens growth and glue-spall theories. In this project, an
experimental set-up has been developed with a view to determining the driving damage mechanism, if
any, by varying when concrete is exposed to brine in a freeze-thaw cycle.
In parallel, a thermo-mechanical finite element model has been created to study the experiment from
the glue-spalling point of view. Experimental results have shown that letting the brine later in the cycle
resulted in no surface scaling, meaning that none of the damage mechanisms were efficient enough. This
outcome was predicted for the glue-spall theory by means of the finite element model. Consequently, it
was not possible to conclude on the driving damage mechanism, but several experiments are proposed
to explore the question further.
A refined thermal model focusing on temperature development of specimens subjected to freeze-thaw
tests has also been implemented. The model shows an overall agreement with experimental results, ex-
cept in the vicinity of the supercooling peak occurring in the liquid covering the specimens. Improvements
on this specific detail could shed light on how microscopic ice lens growth develops during a freeze-thaw
test.
Furthermore, a typical way of mitigating salt frost scaling is to use air-entraining agents. With the ultimate
objective to document ice nucleation and crystal growth in a model of a concrete pore network, preliminary
investigations have been made to make ice detectable during freezing. A fluorescein sodium solution
has been used and tested as a bulk solution as well as in confined spaces. Experiments have revealed
the potential of fluorescent agents for making the ice stand out, as the fluorescent molecules are expelled
from the ice lattice if the cooling rate is sufficiently low. However, tests with more elaborated setups and
at a smaller scale are needed in order to have a better control on the experimental parameters, and
therefore a better understanding of the results. In addition, since no model of a concrete pore network
has been produced, several practical options have been suggested.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, we would like to express our most sincere appreciation and deepest gratitude to our
supervisor, Associate Professor Marianne Tange Hasholt, who with great enthusiasm and always in a
helpful and diplomatic manner, guided us through to our greatest educational accomplishment yet. Even
when external factors made it difficult to accomplish what we had originally set out to do, she assisted
with finding new ways through the project. The result is what we can today proudly refer to as our Master
Thesis.
We also owe a big thank you to our two co-supervisors, Associate Professor Kristian Mølhave and PhD
student Abdul Faheem.
Although we only had the pleasure of working with Kristian for a short time, his curiosity and numerous
challenging questions forced us to think in new ways, broadening our understanding even with regards
to some of the concepts and ideas we were originally confident in.
In addition to offering his support in every possible way, Faheem who also part took in our weekly guid-
ance sessions, helped us become familiar with all the laboratory equipment. Furthermore, and for which
we are immensely grateful, he introduced us to his own research project on the basis of which he kindly
shared both his results, numerical model and pictures.
Furthermore, we are hugely indebted to the lab-technicians who played an integral role in our experi-
mental set-ups.
We would like to thank Ian Rasmussen and Klaus Myndal for assisting on the production of the see-saw
hoist system. Although we have not had the opportunity to use the system in real test conditions, we
sincerely appreciate their involvement and the numerous improvements they proposed and implemented
on the set-up. We hope it can serve furture engineers with their endeavours.
Furthermore, we extend our thanks to Klaus Bræmer for his limitless availability at the concrete lab,
despite our very tight schedule.
Agnieszka Maria Rzepkiewicz-Hansen and Jacob Friis-Grigoncza, were key player without whom we
would most probably still be looking for Petri dishes, filtering paper and sodium in the cupboards.
Last but definitely not least, we owe a huge thank you to all the friends, family and significant others who
have supported us unconditionally on this journey by helping with everything from input on the report to
taking on extra house duties, so that we instead could focus on our Master Thesis.
THANK YOU EVERYONE!
iv
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
4
2.1
Basic thermodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Freezing of bulk water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Freezing of water in a porous medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Equilibrium between water and ice in a pore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Ice spreading in the pore system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Part 1
Ice formation in a porous network
15
3
Theory
16
4
Materials and methods
19
4.1
Simplified model of a pore system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Properties of fluorescein sodium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Experimental protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results and discussion
25
6
Conclusion
31
7
Possibilities for continuation
32
7.1
Anodic Aluminium Oxide (AAO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Nano channel chip from NanoDTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.3
Custom chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Part 2
Investigation on the damage mechanisms inducing
salt frost scaling
35
8
Theory
36
8.1
Microscopic ice lens growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8.2
Glue-spalling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
vi
==PAGE:9==
9
Experimental work
52
9.1
Choice of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9.2
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.3
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
10 Finite element approach
61
10.1 Update on Valenza and Scherer’s stress calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
10.2 Basics of finite elements for calculating the stresses in the ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
11 Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
67
11.1 Thermal properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
11.2 Mechanical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
11.3 Thermal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
11.4 Thermo-mechanical model - Stresses in the ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
11.5 Thermo-mechanical model - Stresses in concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
11.6 Refined thermal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
12 Validation of the models and discussion
93
12.1 Solt frost scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
12.2 Temperature development in the specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
13 Conclusion
102
14 Possibilities for continuation
103
Bibliography
107
Appendices
113
A
LabVIEW interface - Freezer control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
B
Calibration of thermocouples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
C
Paper filter weight and weight loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
D
Freeze-thaw experiment - Sample 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
E
Freeze-thaw experiment - Sample 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
F
Manual for see-saw hoist
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
G
Description of the experimental setup for the refined thermal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
H
Calculation of the freezable water and the volume fractions in mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
I
Data sheet of Peltier elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
J
Microscope specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Salt frost scaling of concrete is a major durability issue for concrete structures in cold climates. When
repetitively exposing a concrete surface to a saline solution and negative temperatures, small scales of
cement paste may break off from the surface of the concrete (Figure 1.1). This is typically the case when
de-icing salts are used on roadways during winter. Over time, this results in disintegration of the cement
paste, exposing the coarse aggregates and facilitating chloride ingress and water uptake.
Figure 1.1: Example of a scaled concrete surface [59].
It has been reported that a pessimum concentration of salt, between 2-4% for different types of de-icers
(including NaCl), causes the largest amount of scaling [52] [61]. Several theories have been proposed
over the last 75 years to explain the mechanism that result in salt frost scaling. The two most widely
accepted theories are [50]:
• The microscopic ice lens growth, first proposed by Powers and Helmuth and then completed by
other researchers.
This theory puts forward a thermodynamic explanation for the mechanism
(1953, [46])
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
• The glue-spall theory proposed by Valenza and Scherer, which provides a mechanical explanation
(2006, [59]).
Some parameters influencing the amount of scaling have been investigated. It has been found that the
thicker the ice layer, the larger the amount of scaling [9]. In addition, it has been shown that a low cooling
rate as well as a longer time at the minimum temperature during freeze-thaw cycles leads to more scaling
[27]. These findings are only valid for non air-entrained concrete.
Indeed, it is known that Air Entraining Agents (AEA) are beneficial in preventing salt frost scaling [42], and
AEA are today widely used as a mitigation measure (Figure 1.2). One could argue that it is not important
to find the actual cause of the damage since a solution to avoid it has already been found. Unfortunately,
using AEA in concrete comes at a cost: the loss of strength. With lower strength of concrete there is
a need for larger amounts of material, leading to additional economical costs. If the actual cause of
the damage can be identified and fully understood, the preventive measures could be optimised to target
only that damage mechanism, so the disadvantages associated with the use of AEA could be minimised.
(a) Without AEA
(b) With AEA
Figure 1.2: Concrete surface semi-immersed in a salt solution and subjected to freeze-thaw cycles. Damage at the
waterline is prevented by using AEA [50].
Performing experiments is a useful way of highlighting dependencies of a phenomenon on some pa-
rameters. However, it can take a long time to perform an experiment. As an example, frost damage in
Denmark is assessed by performing 56 standardised freeze-thaw cycles, lasting 12 to 24 hours each
[14]. Although they cannot completely replace experimental processes, numerical models can be used
as tools for predicting some tendencies or outcomes much faster. When studying salt frost scaling, the
design of a numerical model is significantly influenced by the mechanism that is considered. From the
glue-spall theory point of view, a thermo-mechanical model is needed in order to study the stresses that
build up with the temperature change. This has for instance been done by using lattice type models,
where the elements of the mesh are removed if the stress they are subjected to exceeds their strength
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
[9]. Considering microscopic ice lens growth, understanding the temperature distribution in the concrete
close to the surface and in the outer solution, is essential for modelling the process. This is a current
research topic at DTU Byg [16].
The first part of this report consists of a general introduction, which presents some basic concepts about
ice development in a porous medium. These notions will then be used in the two main parts:
In Part 1, the basic concepts about ice development in concrete will be investigated. Two questions will
be examined: where does ice nucleate in a concrete pore network, and where do the ice crystals grow?
The ultimate goal is to be able to create a simplified model of a porous network, where the nucleation
and the growth of ice crystals can be observed while it happens. The motivation for this is that although
the efficiency of AEA against frost damage has been extensively acknowledged, there is no complete
experimental study on ice formation in a concrete pore network that could precisely explain its role.
In Part 2, the theory behind both glue-spalling and microscopic ice lens growth will be unfolded. The
overall objective is to address the following question: what is the driving mechanism responsible for salt
frost scaling? To determine this, an experiment will be set up to test the two theories against each other.
This will be done by varying an experimental parameter that should affect the outcome according to only
one of the two theories, and therefore shed light on the dominating mechanism. Furthermore, a finite
element model will be developed and validated. This model will be used both as a tool for designing
the experiment, but also investigating some parameters and phenomena that could influence salt frost
scaling.
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Theoretical background -
Ice development in a porous medium
Concrete is a wet porous medium, in which thermodynamic equations for bulk liquids are not applicable
and have to be modified. In this theoretical introduction, basic thermodynamics relative to ice develop-
ment in a porous medium and applicable to concrete will be summarised, following the review made by
Lindmark [33].
2.1
Basic thermodynamics
The basic principles of thermodynamics, such as the first and second laws, are still applicable in a porous
medium. However, some expressions have to be modified to take into account surface energies that are
no longer negligible. The equations and notations presented in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 are taken from
[40].
2.1.1
Evolution of a closed system
Consider a closed system and its surroundings (together forming a ”combination”), insulated from the
rest of the universe and therefore forming an adiabatic system. The change in entropy of the combination
dScom can be expressed as the sum of the change in entropy in the system dS (no subscript refers to
the system) and in the surroundings dSsurr:
dScom = dS + dSsurr
(2.1)
According to the second law of thermodynamics for an adiabatic system, dScom ≥0. Hence:
dS + dSsurr ≥0
(2.2)
Besides, assuming that all processes in the surroundings are reversible, the change in entropy of the
surroundings can be expressed as:
dSsurr = dqsurr
Tsurr
(2.3)
4
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
where dqsurr is the heat transfer from the system to the surroundings and Tsurr the temperature of the
boundary. Inserting (2.3) into (2.2) leads to another expression of the second law:
dS + dqsurr
Tsurr
≥0
(2.4)
2.1.2
Gibbs free energy and chemical potential
Considering the same closed system, at a constant pressure, and with only work from pressure forces,
the first law of thermodynamics is:
dU = dq −PdV
(2.5)
where dU is the change in internal energy of the system, dq the heat transfer from the surroundings to
the system and −PdV the work due to pressure forces.
The change in enthalpy dH is introduced as:
dH = dq
(2.6)
Given that dq = −dqsurr for obvious reasons, it becomes:
dqsurr = −dH
(2.7)
Then, by multiplying (2.4) by Tsurr and using (2.7):
dH −Tsurr dS ≤0
(2.8)
One can identify the left-hand side with the Gibbs free energy (G = H −TS). Therefore, the system
must fulfil:
dG ≤0
(2.9)
Note that dG < 0 corresponds to a spontaneous process while dG = 0 describes a situation of equilib-
rium. The Gibbs free energy is an extensive quantity. Considering a mix of N substances, the partial
molar Gibbs free energy of the substance i is defined as:
µi = ¯
Gi =
( ∂G
∂ni
)
T,P,nj̸=i
(2.10)
which is also known as the chemical potential of the substance i. Applying Euler’s theorem for homo-
geneous functions to G(T, P, ni), the Gibbs free energy can be expressed as the sum of the chemical
potentials:
G =
N
∑
i=1
ni µi
(2.11)
In the case of a two-phase mixture with ice and water (i.e. two phases of the same pure substances,
respectively denoted as i and w), applying the differential form of (2.11) and the inequality obtained in
(2.9) lead to:
dG = µw dnw + µi dni ≤0
(2.12)
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
If the system is closed:
dnw + dni = 0
(2.13)
And therefore the change in free energy is:
dG = (µw −µi) dnw ≤0
(2.14)
Thus, the sign of (µw −µi) drives that of dnw, and therefore the transport of matter. Assuming that the
chemical potential of water is larger than that of ice, the amount of water has to decrease, meaning that
water will turn into ice until the equilibrium is reached. This is the case when µw = µi, leading to dG = 0.
Hence, the equilibrium state corresponds to a minimum for the Gibbs free energy.
The chemical potential can be influenced by many different factors. Some basic dependencies, partic-
ularly relevant in this report are summarised below. Note that all the equations express the deviation of
the chemical potential µ from its standard value µ0.
2.1.3
Chemical potential of water in bulk
For a pure substance, the chemical potential is expressed as a function of temperature and pressure:
µ = µ0 + VmdP −SmdT
(2.15)
where Vm the molar volume of water and Sm its molar entropy.
2.1.4
Chemical potential of water with dissolved substances
When dissolving components into water, the chemical potential of water is modified according to:
µ = µ0 + RT ln (x)
(2.16)
where x is the molar fraction of water in the solution.
2.1.5
Chemical potential of water when placed in a pore
When placed in a pore, water is subjected to surface tension, which creates a curved interface between
water and air. The chemical potential of water becomes:
µ = µ0 + ∆σ dA
dnl
(2.17)
where ∆σ is the interface energy change (difference between the interface energy of the fianl interface
and that of the initial one), dA the change of interface area and dnl the change of water content. In case
of a cylindrical pore, the surface term can be expressed as a function of the radius:
µ = µ0 + ∆σ 2 Vm,l
r
(2.18)
where Vm,l is the molar volume of water and r the radius of the pore.
6
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
2.2
Freezing of bulk water
The melting point of pure water is 0°C at the atmospheric pressure. When liquid water is cooled down
and reaches this temperature, the first crystal of ice appears. The temperature of the mix stabilises at
0°C until the last droplet of water freezes, which creates a plateau on the cooling curve. Moreover, the
phase change of water is an exothermic process as latent heat is released during the solidification.
However, this solidification process can be slightly modified. Two situations are presented below: the
melting point depression due to the presence of salt and the phenomenon of supercooling.
2.2.1
Freezing of a brine solution
Melting point
It is well-known that the melting point of water in a brine solution is depressed due to the presence of
ions. Considering a solution of water mixed with NaCl in a small quantity, the equilibrium constant can
be written as [17]:
K0 = 1 −xNa+ −xCl−
(2.19)
where xNa+ and xCl−are the molar fractions of Na+ and Cl– respectively.
Applying the Van’t Hoff equation between the melting point of bulk water Tm,0 and that of brine solution
Tm,s (s refers to the salinity):
∫K0
1
d ln (K) = −∆fH
R
∫Tm,s
Tm,0
dT
T 2
(2.20)
where ∆fH is the latent heat and R the gas constant. After simplification, it leads to:
Tm,s =
(
1
Tm,0
+ R ln (1 −xNa+ −xCl−)
∆fH
)−1
(2.21)
Lever rule
NaCl brine has an eutectic temperature of -21.1°C and an eutectic composition of 23.3% NaCl by weight
[8]. Below this temperature, it freezes into a solid at any given concentration of NaCl. Above the eutectic
point, the composition is a mix of liquid and ice. The volume fraction of each phase can be calculated by
the lever rule [44].
In order to derive the lever rule for a binary system, first the total mass of one component, NaCl, is
expressed as the sum of the its liquid and solid parts (see Figure 2.1):
mNaCl,tot = mNaCl,l + mNaCl,s
(2.22)
where mNaCl,tot is the total mass of NaCl, and subscripts l and s refer to the liquid and solid phase
respectively. The expression can be expanded to:
mNaCl,tot = ml Cl + ms Cs
(2.23)
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
Cs
C0
Cl
Composition [% b.w. of NaCl]
-21.1
T
0
Temperature [°C]
NaCl.2H20 + Brine
Brine + Ice
Brine
A
B
Figure 2.1: Partial eutectic phase diagram of a NaCl-H2O mix.
where mi is the total mass of the ith phase, and Ci is the ith phase composition, that by convention is
expressed in percent by weight relative to the component on the right hand side, NaCl.
When dividing by the total mass of the system mtot:
C0 = wl Cl + ws Cs
(2.24)
where
C0 = mNaCl,tot
mtot
and
wi = mi
mtot
C0 is the overall composition of NaCl and wi is the mass fraction for the ith phase. If summing up the
weight fractions of both phases of NaCl, they sum up to unity:
wl + ws = 1
(2.25)
Depending on what mass fraction is solved for in (2.25) and inserted into (2.24), two different expressions
for the lever rule can be derived:
wl = Cs −C0
Cs −Cl
= B
C
and
ws = C0 −Cl
Cs −Cl
= A
C
where
C = A + B
(2.26)
This can be applied directly to the situation where one wants to determine the composition of the mix
(amount of ice and brine respectively) at a given temperature, based on the initial weight fraction of NaCl
C0 together with the resulting weight fraction C.
2.2.2
Supercooling
Taking an energetic approach, two simultaneous phenomena occur during ice nucleation:
• Latent energy E1 is released when water goes from liquid to solid
8
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
• Some energy E2 is required and utilised to create the solid/liquid interface, between the ice crystal
and the remaining water.
For an ice nucleus to be stable, the two energies must balance each other out. Thus, if E1 is lower than
E2, there is not enough energy for the ice crystal to be stable and it will immediately melt away.
When liquid water is cooled down, supercooling might occur if no disturbances (e.g. impurities or vibra-
tions) trigger ice nucleation, by offering a spot on which ice can nucleate for instance. If so, the water/ice
equilibrium is not created, therefore the temperature of the water drops under its bulk melting point: this
unstable state is called supercooling (or undercooling [11]). When some stable ice crystals are eventually
created, the temperature immediately rises up to the bulk melting point, and the regular phase change
proceeds with the remaining water.
2.3
Freezing of water in a porous medium
The melting point of water is depressed when placed in a pore. Using the energies defined previously,
one can notice that E2 is proportional to the inverse of the pore radius for spherical cavities, as shown in
(2.18). Thus, as E2 is increased for small pores, E1 should increase accordingly: a lower temperature is
therefore needed. Some general formulas depicting this behaviour will be introduced, before examining
how it applies to concrete.
2.3.1
General theory in a porous medium
The relation between the temperature Tm at which an ice nucleus is stable and its radius r is usually
described by means of the Gibbs-Thomson equation [29]. When the ice crystal has almost the same
size as the cavity in which it is located (typically in a porous medium), a thin unfrozen water film exists
between the ice body and the matrix surface, where the freezing point is even more depressed compared
to that of water in the pore [62]. The thickness of the water film was investigated by several authors, and
all results converge to a thickness between 3 and 4 adsorbed mono-layers, i.e. between 8 and 11 Å [6].
In the following, the value tw = 1 nm will be used for the sake of simplicity [33]. The Gibbs-Thomson
equation can easily be modified accordingly, by adding the thickness of the water film tw to obtain the
radius of the pore rp:
rp = −2 ∆σs−l Vm,s Tm
0
(Tm −Tm,0) ∆fH + tw
(2.27)
where Vm,s is the molar volume of ice, Tm,0 the bulk melting point of water and ∆fH the latent heat.
Semi-analytical expressions of this equation have been proposed by Brun et al. [6] and Setzer [53].
Lindmark, using chemical potentials, derived a slightly different relation. Indeed, he included the surface
free energy changes (see (2.18)) for each phase, as well as the temperature dependence of the entropy
[33]:
rp =
2 (Vm,s ∆σs−m −Vm,l ∆σl−m)
0.0997 Tm
2 −76.4532 Tm + 13444.483 + tw
(2.28)
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
In addition, he suggested two expressions for the surface energy change when ice (∆σs−m) and water
(∆σl−m) spread over the matrix walls [33]:
∆σs−m = 0.3484 T −137.86
1000
∆σl−m = 0.1484 T −116.23
1000
T is in K and the surface energies are in J/m2. Equations (2.27) and (2.28) are plotted on Figure 2.2.
The numerical values used in the calculations are shown in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2.
Table 2.1: Numerical values of thermodynamic quantities [12].
Symbol
Quantity
Value
Tm,0
Bulk melting point of water
273.15 K
Vm,s
Molar volume of ice
19.73 mL/mol
Vm,l
Molar volume of water
18.07 mL/mol
Strictly speaking, Vm,s and Vm,l are functions of temperature, as they depend on the density that varies
[32]. However, the change in density is relatively small (less than 1.6% for liquid water between 0 and
-30°C, and less than 0.6% for solid ice over the same interval [32]). Thus, constant values are considered
in this report.
Table 2.2: Molar enthalpy of fusion of ice ∆fH and interface energy between ice and water σs−l as a function of
temperature [12].
Temperature [°C]
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70
∆fH [J/mol]
6012
5816
5608
5382
5129
4839
4540
4240
σs−l [cm3/mol]
23.8
22.8
21.8
20.8
19.7
18.7
-
-
250
255
260
265
270
275
Temperature [K]
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Pore radius [nm]
Gibbs-Thomson
Lindmark
Figure 2.2: Relation between the pore radius and the melting point of water.
One can notice that the two curves are actually very close to each other. Thus, although the Gibbs-
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
Thomson equation is derived for an ice crystal in bulk water, it is also applicable in the case of an ice
crystal in a capillary.
2.3.2
Application to concrete
According to IUPAC classification [20], pores in a porous medium can be divided into three categories:
• Micropore: width smaller than 2 nm
• Mesopore: width between 2 and 50 nm
• Macropore: width larger than 50 nm.
Metha and Monteiro [38] (also Wang and Monteiro [63]) proposed a classification for the characteristic
sizes of concrete pores:
• Gel pores: also called interlayer spaces (distance between the C-S-H layers), ranging between 1.5
and 2 nm
• Capillary voids: representing the space not filled by the solid phase of the hardened cement paste,
range between 10 and 50 nm for well-hydrated cement pastes and low water-to-cement ratio (w/c).
This can go up to 3-5 µm for high w/c
• Entrained air voids: from 50 to 200 µm
• Entrapped air voids: up to 3 mm.
Note that the entrained air voids are usually quite spherical compared to capillary voids, which shape is
more irregular. By considering the second classification mentioned above together with Figure 2.2 and
assuming pure water in all pores, one can see that capillary voids can freeze from -7°C (for 10 nm wide
pores), while air voids freeze from -2°C. However, gel pores cannot freeze unless the temperature is
decreased even more, typically to -78°C [38]. This has been confirmed by experimental measurements
on cement paste during thawing, more reliable than freezing as supercooling can be avoided. The results
show that water in a pore of 160 µm starts to freeze at -3°C, at -23°C for 7.5 nm and around -73°C for
gel pores of 1 nm [28]. This means that when freezing concrete at temperatures around -20°C, some
liquid water is still present in these very narrow channels.
2.4
Equilibrium between water and ice in a pore
A simplified pore network, used by Lindmark [33], is considered and shown in Figure 2.3.
A spherical pore is filled up by an ice body, which radius is denoted as rs. The unfrozen water layer is also
represented, and one can explain its presence by considering its thickness. Indeed, the space between
the pore wall and the ice body can be seen as a very thin capillary, in which freezing point of water is
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
Ice
rs
rl
Water
Water film
Figure 2.3: Pore filled with an ice body. After [33].
depressed as described in Section 2.3, preventing it from freezing. Hoekstra and Miller suggested that
the freezing point depression is balanced with a driving pressure force, responsible for water diffusion in
the vicinity of the ice body [24]. Finally, this unfrozen layer is involved in surface diffusion, as described
by Powers and Helmuth [46].
The pore is connected to a smaller conical channel, filled up with water up to a certain radius rl. As
explained previously, the equilibrium between the ice body and the water corresponds to the equality
between the chemical potential of the solid face and that of the liquid phase, which can be written as:
−Sm,l dTl + Vm,l dPl + R Tl ln (Xl) + ∆σl−m
2 Vm,l
rl
= −Sm,s dTs + Vm,s dPs + ∆σs−m
2 Vm,s
rs
(2.29)
Therefore, (2.29) shows that the pressure difference between the ice body and the water Ps −Pl is a
function of the radii rs and rl, and the temperatures Ts and Tl. By solving (2.29), Lindmark calculated that
the pressure inside the solid phase could easily reach the tensile strength of the matrix [33]. Therefore,
if the situation described in Figure 2.3 occurs, low temperatures could definitely lead to a failure of the
matrix.
2.5
Ice spreading in the pore system
After having established the conditions for equilibrium, the next step consists in studying the evolution of
the system when the temperature is lowered. For this purpose, the pore system shown in Figure 2.4 is
now considered.
The initial situation is that of equilibrium between the ice body and water. Hence, the chemical potentials
of the two phases are equal. When lowering the temperature, both of them will rise. However, the
increase will be faster for water than for ice: indeed, the derivative of µ with respect to the temperature
is:
( ∂µ
∂T
)
p
= −Sm
(2.30)
12
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
Ice (s)
Air
Air
(a) Not connected to a moisture source
Ice (s)
Water (l)
Air
(b) Connected to a moisture source
Figure 2.4: Ice body partially filling a pore, in equilibrium with water. The shape of the water-ice meniscus depends
on the conditions (dashed line). After [33].
The molar entropy of the solid phase is lower than that of the liquid phase, Sm,s < Sm,l, as the liquid
water represents a more disordered state than ice. Thus, starting from an equilibrium at T1 and assuming
the same drop in temperature (until T2, < T1) in both phases, the chemical potential of ice will eventually
be the lowest:
At T1 :
µl(T1) = µs(T1)
At T2 :
µl(T2) > µs(T2)
(2.31)
Consequently, the system is now unstable. However, there are several possible ways in which one may
get back to an equilibrium. This will now be explored.
2.5.1
Pore not connected to a moisture source
Figure 2.4a - As explained in Section 2.3, the freezing point of water is lowered in the capillary. There-
fore, the assumption of ice nucleation in situ is not an option. Instead, because of the gradient in chemical
potential, water moves from the capillary to the ice body and contributes to its growth.
Drainage of the capillary lowers the chemical potential of the water [46], which gets closer to that of the
ice crystal, meaning that the system converges towards an equilibrium. Indeed, lowering the degree
of saturation inside the capillary has two effects: first, the concentration of alkali in the remaining liquid
rises, which decreases the molar fraction of water and lowers the chemical potential according to (2.16).
Second, it has been shown that the chemical potential in a porous medium drops when the water content
is reduced [4], due to capillary forces.
The final situation depends on several parameters, including the rate and magnitude of cooling, as well as
the size of the pore, the initial degree of saturation and the degree of supercooling. However, assuming
that the volume of the largest pore is larger than the volume of ice formed from the water contained in
the capillary, and that the temperature remains above the freezing point in the capillary, the latter may
eventually be completely drained and the ice crystal will be located in the largest pore, without exerting
any pressure on the walls.
2.5.2
Pore connected to a moisture source
Figure 2.4b - If the capillary is connected to a water source, for instance a puddle at the surface of
the concrete, the sequence of events described above is modified. The water is still moving from the
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Theoretical background - Ice development in a porous medium
capillary towards the ice body. However, the water is also continuously replaced in the capillary by liquid
from the outer source. Therefore, the chemical potential of the capillary water is kept constant and the
ice crystal grows until reaching the pore walls. From this moment, the pressure in the ice is no longer
equal to that in the liquid, but becomes higher. This situation was described by Everett [15], and leads
to the formation of an ice cap at the mouth of the capillary, as shown in Figure 2.4b. The equilibrium is
reached when the following equality becomes true:
Ps −Pl = 2 ∆σ
r
(2.32)
where Ps and Pl are respectively the pressures in the solid and the liquid phase, ∆σ is the interfacial
free energy between solid and liquid and r the curvature of the ice cap. One can notice that in the case
of Figure 2.4a, there is no pressure difference between the two phases, therefore r = ∞(flat meniscus).
Note that (2.32) is similar to the Young-Laplace equation, driving the pressure difference across the
interface between two fluids. It implies that a mechanical equilibrium is created by an increase in pressure
between the two phases and a curvature of the ice cap.
Consequently, an increase in pressure difference results in a smaller curvature. As moisture transport
is still ongoing, the ice body keeps expanding. Therefore, the pressure in the solid phase increases
and can go up to a point where it reaches the tensile strength of the matrix and crack the walls (situation
described in Section 2.4). Alternatively or simultaneously, if the pressure difference is too large, the radius
of curvature becomes smaller than the capillary radius and the ice penetrates into the capillary. Once
again, the pressure in the solid phase (in the ice cap) can increase and eventually crack the capillary.
The mechanism described above is the main explanation for microscopic ice lens growth in concrete, at
least during freezing.
2.6
Summary
Considering the last case, namely a cavity enclosing an ice crystal and connected to a moisture source,
the situation of equilibrium and consequently the evolution of the system can be described by two main
equations:
• A thermodynamic equilibrium (2.31), emphasising the driving role of the chemical potential regard-
ing moisture transport
• A mechanical equilibrium (2.32), governing the behaviour of ice at the mouth of the capillary and
potentially its penetration into it, but also the pressures in the solid and liquid phases.
The principles presented in this theoretical introduction are the starting points for the two main parts of
this study, and will be applied throughout the report.
14
==PAGE:25==
Part 1
Ice formation in a porous network
==PAGE:26==
3
Theory
Air voids created by Air Entraining Agents (AEA) have been proven to be beneficial in terms of concrete
resistance to frost attack [39] and surface scaling [42]. Irrespective of the surface damage mechanism,
one assumption is systematically made [34] [46] [54]: ice crystals grow in the largest pores, i.e. the air
voids, if the concrete is air-entrained. Everett [15] explained that if ice nucleates in two pores of different
sizes, the crystal in the smallest reaches the pore walls faster. Its chemical potential eventually increases
more than the other, which creates moisture transport from the small pore to the large one. Therefore, the
crystal in the small pore melts and feeds the other one, hence ice grows in the largest cavity. However,
there have been very few experimental studies to confirm this assumption. The following summarises
some research work that has been done so far and could be used as leads for further investigation.
Review of previous studies
Vignes and Dijkema [62] constructed an experimental setup according to the ”pore-capillary-pore” model
described by Everett [15]. Ice nucleation was initiated in one of the two pores, creating a moving ice
front eventually stopped by the geometry and the thermal conditions. They highlighted two main results
regarding moisture transport: first, the rate of ice growth is a function of the ice-water meniscus tempera-
ture, while the thermal gradient between the two pores (i.e. the temperature difference between ice and
water) has no significant influence. Secondly, and directly related to the first point, the driving force is
instead linked to the properties of the water film between the ice body and the pore walls. In a capillary,
an anisotropy in pressure develops due to forces perpendicular to the walls: while the normal pressure
is kept constant - or increased when water is attracted (keeping the ice crystal away from the walls), the
tangential component is depressed, creating a pressure gradient able to transport water.
Although this study is undoubtedly a relevant complement to Everett’s work [15], attention was drawn on
ice growth rather than on ice formation, which was manually forced. Therefore, there is still uncertainty
about where ice would form first, if the whole system would have been evenly cooled down.
Wang and Monteiro [63] studied frost action in concrete. In particular, they underlined the two-fold aspect
of solidification (also described by Lindmark [33]):
16
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Theory
• The first stage is nucleation, which consists of the creation of stable ice nuclei in the liquid phase
• The second stage is crystal growth. Ice nuclei are privileged spots for crystal expansion, on which
water molecules can bind and turn into ice.
This process is known as heterogeneous nucleation, in contrast to homogeneous nucleation which oc-
curs randomly in the liquid. The authors used the principle of ”directional solidification” to study ice
formation in concrete. The samples cured in a fog room for 10 days, before being cut into slices, ap-
proximately 100 µm thick. They were finally saturated by suction for 8 hours. For the experiment, the
slices lied between two copper blocks at different temperatures (+10°C and -35°C), creating a thermal
gradient in the sample. Each slice was then moved laterally at roughly the same speed as that of the ice
front motion during observation to ensure a continuous visualisation of the interface. It has to be noted
that before cooling the sample, 3 drops of an ionic solution (Ca2+,Cl–,Na+,K+ or OH–) were placed on the
sample, in order to control the composition of the pore solution and study the influence of alkalis.
They observed that around -11°C, ice crystals were located in the large pores and not in the small ones.
They suggested three explanations:
• A high surface tension in the capillaries, preventing water from freezing as described in Section 2.3
• A difference in alkali concentration in the pore solution
• A random nucleation of ice. Since the large pores contain the largest amount of pore solution, ice
is statistically more likely to form here.
They also established a sequence of ice propagation in air voids. However, it seems that the observa-
tions were distorted by the presence of liquid in the voids, coming from the droplets placed on the slice
prior to freezing. In reality, air voids can only be filled up with liquid if the sample is vacuum saturated,
and remain air-filled otherwise. Thus, unfortunately it seems difficult to speculate about what happens
in air voids during freezing from this experiment.
Corr et al. [10] carried out a series of experiments where concrete samples were analysed with a low-
temperature scanning electron microscope (LTSEM). Before the test, the specimens were placed in a
fog room for 4 days, but were not vacuum saturated. According to the authors, the degree of saturation
was not precisely known. The concrete specimens were then frozen at -7°C for 24 h, and then quenched
into liquid nitrogen at -190°C without allowing them to thaw in between. The samples were then cut open
and observed under a microscope, while kept at -190°C.
They noticed that ice crystals in the air voids grew from the walls, starting at a discontinuity in the void
shell. The authors suggested that this discontinuity was probably the outlet of a capillary or a gel pore.
Their assumption is that because water is in a supercooled state in the small pores, it freezes as soon as
it reaches an air void where the capillary forces become negligible. However, although they mentioned
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. Theory
that the use of liquid nitrogen did not affect the original ice morphology, it is still questionable if flash-
freezing could have been induced in the samples. If this is the case, water that should have stayed liquid
could have been frozen, or the ice formation process could have been disturbed.
Conclusion
The above mentioned experiments show that several attempts have been made to establish a sequence
of events of ice formation in air-entrained concrete. However, none of them seem appropriate to de-
scribe what exactly happens inside air voids and in their vicinity when concrete is cooled. In particular,
the assumption that ice crystals are first formed in the air voids has not been verified, as the previous
experiments somehow distorted the reality by forcing ice formation in the air voids (Vignes and Dijkema),
filling the air voids with liquid (Wang and Monteiro) or observing them once everything was frozen (Corr
et al.).
18
==PAGE:29==
4
Materials and methods
4.1
Simplified model of a pore system
This part of the project was initially intended to result in the creation of a simplified physical model of a
concrete pore system. This was to consist of an air-void connected to a water source by a capillary pore,
as shown in Figure 4.1.
Air void
50 µm
50 nm
Water
Figure 4.1: Simplified model of a pore network.
Unfortunately, this model has not been produced because of limitations due to lab access owing to the
COVID-19 situation. Since this was not finalised, suggestions as to the creation of the same are set out
in the conclusion of this part.
The general idea behind the model is to create it in such a way that it allows to visually monitor what hap-
pens inside both the capillary pore and the air void when freezing it, in order to find out where nucleation
of ice and crystal growth occur.
From the literature, it is known that ice only accepts very few other ions in its lattice structure. If the rate
of freezing is sufficiently low, the ions will be pushed away by the ice front, instead of surrounding them
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4. Materials and methods
in small inclusions [45]. The idea is to use this fact to highlight the presence of ice: colouring the solution
that is being frozen with a fluorescent agent would make the ice crystals stand out. The frozen areas
would not emit any light when being excited with UV-light, contrary to the surrounding liquid solution.
4.2
Properties of fluorescein sodium
Fluorescein has been chosen for its UV-sensitivity, making it easily visible when looking at it under a
microscope with UV light. Its salt form, fluorescein sodium, is soluble in water and is widely used in
medicine, especially in ophthalmology.
The molecule size is around 14 Å in the largest direction [47]. The optical properties of fluorescein,
especially its fluorescence spectrum are influenced by different parameters. Two relevant ones with
respect to the present experiments are presented in the below.
4.2.1
Temperature
The light intensity peak becomes wider and its intensity decreases as the temperature drops. It seems
that the wavelength of the peak is not affected [21].
4.2.2
pH
The intensity of the peak increases when the pH is increased before reaching a plateau around pH=9
[35] [67]. This should not have any influence in the following experiments. However, if one were to use
it directly in a concrete matrix, the above could be different due to the high alkalinity of the pore solution.
However, the change occurs in the right direction as fluorescein would become even brighter under UV
light.
4.2.3
Fluorescein solution
In the following, a 0.21 mM fluorescein sodium solution is used (S1). Note that because the concentration
is very low, no depression of the water freezing point is expected.
In parallel, a solution with salt is also made (S2). This is done by using the 0.21 mM fluorescein solution
and mixing it with salt (approximately 3.5% NaCl by mass).
4.3
Materials
Peltier elements
In order to cool down and freeze a small amount of liquid while observing under the microscope, Peltier
elements are used. Briefly, a temperature difference between the two sides of an element is established
when current crosses through it, which creates a ”cold” and a ”hot” side. To make the ”cold” side cold
20
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4. Materials and methods
enough to freeze water, heat from the ”hot” side is released by means of an aluminium heat sink. The
heat sink is placed in a container with water and ice, which keeps the temperature of the bath around
0°C (new ice cubes are added if they have melted).
Figure 4.2: Setup with two Peltier elements stacked and connected to an aluminium heat sink with thermal paste.
To make the temperature difference even larger, and therefore reach lower temperatures, several Peltier
elements can be stacked (the ”cold” side of the element n being used to cool down the hot side of the
element n −1). The setup used in the following, with two elements, is shown in Figure 4.2. The data
sheet of one element is given in Appendix I.
Microscope
The stereo microscope that is used in this project is a Nikon SMZ25. It has a motorised zoom ratio of
25:1, zoom range of 0.63x-15.75x and a total magnification of 315x. It is equipped with a with a DS-
Fi3 microscope camera and a motorised epi-fluorescense set (Figure 4.3). This together with the NIS-
elements software package makes it possible to create photo documentation of fluorescent materials.
For the full specification, see Appendix J.
Figure 4.3: Microscope used for observations.
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4. Materials and methods
4.4
Experimental protocol
The experiments presented below have been designed to asses whether fluorescein is suitable for mak-
ing the ice formation visible. The objective is primarily to investigate how fluorescein behaves when the
solution is frozen, i.e. if the ice front pushes the fluorescein molecules away like it does for NaCl in a
brine solution.
4.4.1
Freezing of bulk solution
Vessels of different sizes and shapes are filled with solution S1 (without NaCl). The vessels are sunk
into a block of polystyrene with only the top side exposed to the cold air, in order to expose the solution
to a one-dimensional freezing.
The vessels are exposed to two different temperature cycles. In the first test, the specimens are exposed
to -20°C for the full duration of time. Some vessels that were used in this experiment can be seen on
Figure 4.4.
(a) Vessels in the polystyrene block
(b) Vessel with S1, before inserting it into the polystyrene
block
Figure 4.4: Different vessels used for freezing S1.
In the second test the samples are cooled down from 20°C to 2°C in 4 h, and from 2°C to -20°C in 10 h
in order to explore the effect of the cooling rate.
4.4.2
Freezing of solution in a capillary tube
Some of the S1 solution is also frozen inside a capillary tube in order to study the effect of capillary forces.
The tube with the solution can be seen on Figure 4.5. The capillary tube is frozen on top of the Peltier
element, which allows to visually follow the process of ice formation. A liberal amount of thermal paste
is used to ensure good thermal contact between the flat Peltier element and the round tube.
22
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4. Materials and methods
Figure 4.5: Capillary tube containing the solution, before freezing.
4.4.3
Freezing of a droplet on a glass plate
An approximately 0.15 mm thick microscope cover slip is positioned on top of two stacked Peltier ele-
ments. To ensure good thermal contact, thermal paste is applied between the Peltier element and the
cover slip. The reason for not using a microscope slide as a base is because of its much larger size, and
hence it would add more thermal capacity to the setup. A droplet of fluorescein is placed on top of the
cover slip and is then frozen by adjusting the current through the Peltier elements (Figure 4.6). This test
is equivalent to the bulk freezing test. Since the setup with the Peltier elements that are used to lower
the temperature is very small, it is possible to fit everything underneath a microscope and thereby follow
the process as it happens.
Figure 4.6: Freezing a droplet of the solution on top of the Peltier element.
Both solutions S1 and S2 are tested. The experiment is filmed from the top through the microscope
and from the side by a regular camera. Several tests are carried out with both solutions to confirm
the observations. The glass slide is changed every time in order to avoid any contamination from the
previous experiment.
4.4.4
Freezing of a droplet between two glass
plates
The same setup as in the previous experiment is prepared except that an extra cover slip is placed on
top of the droplet (Figure 4.7). The two cover slips are not forced together but are pulled towards each
other solely by the surface tension of the liquid, as it is done for a traditional wet mount.
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4. Materials and methods
Figure 4.7: Preparation of the solution between the two slides of glass.
Typically the smallest dimension for a confined liquid is the governing one in relation to how the liquid
reacts to its boundaries. Therefore this setup is thought of as being equivalent to the experiment with the
liquid in a capillary tube. Here the major difference is that the surface through which one can observe
the solution is flat. As for the other experiments where cooling happens by the Peltier elements, it is
possible to follow the process as it occurs.
24
==PAGE:35==
5
Results and discussion
Freezing of bulk solution
The results from the initial experiment where the S1 solution is exposed to -20°C from the beginning can
be seen on Figure 5.1. The high rate of freezing results in fluorescein inclusions uniformly distributed
throughout the volume of the ice.
1mm
Figure 5.1: Frozen S1 solution, exposed to a high rate of cooling - with UV-light.
Bottom
(a) Directly from freezing cabinet at
-20°C
Bottom
(b) After being exposed to ambient
temperature of 20°C
Bottom
(c) With UV-light
Figure 5.2: Frozen S1 solution, exposed to a low rate of cooling.
This phenomenon was not seen in the second experiment, where the rate of cooling was much lower.
From Figure 5.2 it can be seen that the ice started forming at the top of the solution. As the front of the
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5. Results and discussion
ice moved downwards through the vessel, almost all the fluorescein was pushed in front of it, ending up
in the bottom of the vessel.
Figure 5.2a reveals potential problems with using fluorescein, since it becomes less fluorescent when
the temperature is low enough. Here the samples have just been taken out of the freezer. As seen on
Figure 5.2b, after having been out of the freezer for approximately a minute, the fluorescein becomes
brighter again.
Freezing a solution in a capillary tube
Figure 5.3 shows a capillary tube, right after the freezing process has stopped with solution S1 inside.
After having carried out this one experiment with the capillary tube, it was decided not to do it with S2,
since it was not possible to see what was going on inside the tube. This is partly caused by the fact that
the glass tube shades the light that is emitted from the fluorescein, but also because of ice formation due
to condensation on the outside of the capillary tube. Especially the latter turned out to be a problem for
later experiments as well.
1000 µm
(a) Without UV-light
500µm
(b) With UV-light
Figure 5.3: A capillary tube containing solution S1, after the freezing had stopped.
Freezing of a droplet on a glass plate
When freezing a droplet of solution on a thin glass plate at a constant temperature, with the Peltier
elements placed underneath it, different observations are made depending on the solution:
• S1: Ice nucleates at a random point along the perimeter of the liquid that is in contact with the
glass. The bottom layer of the liquid freezes instantaneously (flash-freezing) after 305 seconds,
propagating away from the point of nucleation. This is followed by an ice ”ring”, which is the ice front
moving from the bottom the towards the top in the ice/liquid sphere. This ring is shown at different
points in time on Figure 5.4. On the left hand side is a photo taken by a normal camera. The picture
on the right hand side is taken thorough the microscope with UV-light. The light-sensitivity of the
photos from the microscope has been kept constant. A video of the entire process with S1 can be
watched from [25].
26
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5. Results and discussion
(a) Right before flash freezing
(b) When the ring moves upwards
(c) Before the ring reaches the top
(d) The droplet is completely frozen
Figure 5.4: Different stages of freezing of a droplet on top of a glass plate with S1. The left hand side is photographed
with a normal camera, and the right hand side it photographed through the microscope with UV-light. The diameter
of the droplet is approximately 10 mm.
27
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5. Results and discussion
• S2: Flash-freezing is also observed, but this time after only 107 seconds. Besides occurring earlier,
the propagation seems much slower than with S1. Also, no ice front ring forms, although the droplet
seems frozen solid when tapping on it. Furthermore, as seen on Figure 5.5, the perimeter of the
liquid tends to spread over the surface of the glass plate as the freezing proceeds. A video of the
entire process with S2 can be watched from [26].
(a) At the moment of flash freezing, starting from the lower right
(b) Fully frozen stage
Figure 5.5: Different stages of freezing of a droplet on top of a glass plate with S2. The diameter of the droplet is
approximately 10 mm.
The flash-freezing seen in both cases is interpreted as the freezing of the bottom of the droplet. The fact
that the ice front sweeps the droplet instead of occurring instantaneously could be to be due to a small
difference of the thickness of the thermal paste that triggers ice nucleation on one side of the droplet.
The ring is believed to be the ice front moving up through the liquid.
In addition, to the naked eye the fluorescein migration towards the centre of the droplet during freezing
seems much more pronounced with S1 relative to S2. With S2 the droplet looks almost homogeneous
even after freezing. Finally, the droplet with S1 stops emitting light as soon as the ring reaches its top,
contrary to S2 where the light intensity remains the same, even after the droplet is completely frozen.
See Figures 5.4d and 5.5b. Although highly speculative, an explanation for the latter could be that in the
case of S1 the ice ”locks” the fluorescein from moving inside the ice. In the case of S2, sodium chloride
prevents the ice from freezing 100% so the fluorescein can still move, and allows for it to emit light.
Freezing solution between two pieces of glass
When performing the same test with another glass plate on top of the droplet, the same inconveniences
as with the capillary tube occurred. The first experiment with a droplet between two pieces of glass was
28
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5. Results and discussion
carried out with a very low rate of cooling, which led to a massive build-up of ice on the outside of the
glass, as depicted in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Frozen condensation at low rate of freezing.
500µm
(a) Start of freezing - t0
500µm
(b) t1
500µm
(c) t2
500µm
(d) End of freezing - t3
Figure 5.7: Freezing of solution S1 between two pieces of glass. The pictures are taken in chronological order
where (a) is start of freezing and (d) is at the end of freezing.
A second experiment was carried out with the same setup, but this time with a much higher cooling
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5. Results and discussion
rate. This made it possible to follow the process of formation of ice between the pieces of glass before
ice formed on the outside. The outcome can be seen in Figure 5.7. The pictures are taken through
the microscope and are presented in the chronological order (a) to (d). They show that the fluorescein
is pushed around by the ice in spite of the high cooling rate. Furthermore, a tendency towards the
fluorescein concentrating in small areas or along the perimeter of the ice was noticed. With that being
said, a lot of the movement of the blurry areas (assumed to be ice) seemed very random. An explanation
could be that the Peltier element is not able to deliver a constant and uniform temperature through the
contact surface.
30
==PAGE:41==
6
Conclusion
It has not been possible to document the place of ice nucleation and ice formation in a concrete pore
network. However, and as a first step for this purpose, the use of a fluorescent agent to highlight the
presence of ice crystals has been tested and has revealed its potential.
In order to be able to use fluorescein as an indicator of how much of a solution is frozen, it is important
that the rate of cooling is sufficiently low in order to avoid inclusions.
When trying to model a confined space (with the capillary tube or the two glass plates), ice rapidly forms
on the surface, which makes it difficult to observe the solution. Since it is necessary to create a confined
space when studying ice formation in a pore system, this issue needs to be tackled. One way to avoid it
is to create a controlled atmosphere around the setup, where the humidity is kept low.
The experiment that has provided the most observations is the one with a droplet of solution on a thin
glass plate, although this has more to do with bulk freezing. However, it is still unclear why the droplet with
S2 systematically spreads on the glass plate after flash freezing and why fluorescein does not migrate
as much as it does with S1.
In addition, based on Figure 5.2 and the observations made live when freezing the solution, it seems
that fluorescein behaves as expected, and is pushed away from the ice lattice. However, the experiment
with the glass plate has revealed two things:
• First, the complete extinction when freezing S1 makes it impossible to distinguish between ice and
insensitive fluorescein
• Second, the difference in UV-sensitivity between S1 and S2 when the droplet is apparently frozen
is not explained
Some experimental work is still needed to fully understand the behaviour of fluorescein and its use in
nano-scale models. In particular, a first improvement would consist in calibrating the temperature of the
Peltier element as a function of the power supply, to be able to control the freezing better.
31
==PAGE:42==
7
Possibilities for continuation
As mentioned previously, the experiments with fluorescein are only a first step in investigating ice forma-
tion in a model of a concrete pore network. For this purpose, several setups have been considered (but
not realised) and are presented in the following.
7.1
Anodic Aluminium Oxide (AAO)
One possible way to realise the model presented in Figure 4.1 is to use Anodic Aluminium Oxide (AAO).
This consists of a perforated tinfoil, where thickness and perforation diameter can be adjusted. The
perforations are then used as capillary pores, and a water reservoir can be placed on the bottom side of
the sheet to model a pore network (see Figure 7.1).
50 nm
AAO
Water
Figure 7.1: Sketch of the model with AAO
The major drawback of this method is the difficulty to visualise what happens inside the capillary pores.
One would only be able to observe the edges of the perforations, which might be too limited to get an
accurate and overall picture of ice formation.
7.2
Nano channel chip from NanoDTU
Existing chips for NanoDTU (4 x 4 mm) could also be an option for making the model. Such chips are
sketched in Figure 7.2. Two main channels on either side of the chip are connected by smaller channels
of 50 nm. The model could therefore be realised by filling one main channel with water. Contrary to AAO,
it is possible to visualise the inside of the capillaries by placing a glass plate of top of them.
32
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 7. Possibilities for continuation
(a) Picture under the microscope
Air
Water
(b) Schematic layout
Figure 7.2: NanoDTU’s chip.
Based on previous uses of the chip, it seems that when water is injected in a main channel, it is sucked
by the capillaries and transported in the opposite channel. Thus, it would be first necessary to make sure
that this second channel remains mostly dry. If not, it is possible to blow air in the channel, but the effect
of this air flow would also have to be analysed.
7.3
Custom chip
If the issue raised previously cannot be solved with the existing chips, it is possible to make custom
ones by etching silicone. The etching depth can controlled precisely and set to 50 nm, i.e. the size of
the capillary pore. Two outlets can be placed on either side of the channel, one being used as a water
reservoir.
33
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Part 2
Investigation on the
damage mechanisms inducing
salt frost scaling
==PAGE:46==
8
Theory
Two mechanisms claim to be responsible for salt frost scaling will be introduced: microscopic ice lens
growth and glue-spalling. Besides describing the theory behind each of them, some typical features of
salt frost scaling will be analysed from each point of view.
8.1
Microscopic ice lens growth
The theory of microscopic ice lens growth for concrete surfaces covered with water was initially introduced
by Powers and Helmuth in 1953 [46]. The mechanism relies on thermodynamic considerations: because
of differences in chemical potential between the different phases, moisture transport occurs towards the
existing ice crystals, which are fed by the remaining pore liquid and the outer solution. This part aims at
linking the theory with some key characteristics of salt frost scaling, namely the pessimum concentration
and the influence of air voids.
8.1.1
Microscopic ice lens growth mechanism
The overall phenomenon explaining microscopic ice lens growth has already been described in detail
in Section 2.5. In essence, moisture transport is driven towards the place of lowest chemical potential.
Here, a stable and unconstrained ice crystal forms. This ice crystal attracts water, which makes it grow.
A continuous water supply is ensured by the outer solution, which partially replaces the pore solution
little by little. Once the ice body has reached the pore walls, a pressure resulting in tensile stresses in
the pore walls is created, eventually leading to the failure of the matrix if the stresses are large enough.
8.1.2
Influence of the outer solution
A typical feature of salt frost scaling is that it is most pronounced for a moderately concentrated outer
solution. It has been reported that this pessimum concentration was between 2-4% for four different
types of de-icers (calcium chloride, sodium chloride, urea and ethyl alcohol) [52] [61]. According to the
microscopic ice lens growth theory, this can be explained by means of the chemical potentials [33] [34].
The following presents four configurations of a concrete block containing a pore connected to the surface
36
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 8. Theory
by a capillary. The concrete surface is exposed to air (Figure 8.1), pure water (Figure 8.2), a moderately
concentrated salt solution (Figure 8.3) and a highly concentrated solution (Figure 8.4). In each figure,
two situations are represented: on the left, the freezing has started and is ongoing whereas on the right,
the final stage of equilibrium has been reached.
Air
Ice
Air
Ice
Figure 8.1: Ice development for an uncovered concrete surface.
In the case where the concrete is exposed to air (Figure 8.1), the evolution is the one described in
Section 2.5 where the pore is not connected to a moisture source. If an ice crystal is formed in a pore,
it will attract water from the nearest capillaries. If the concrete is not fully saturated, it is not possible for
the ice crystal to keep growing once the capillaries have been drained. Thus, it will be impossible for the
ice to exert pressure on the cavity walls.
Ice
Ice
Ice
Figure 8.2: Ice development for a concrete surface covered with pure water.
If liquid covers the concrete surface (Figure 8.2), this corresponds to the mechanism described in Sec-
tion 2.5 for a pore connected to a moisture source. If the solution is pure water, it freezes first on the
outside and a meniscus is formed between the ice body and the pore solution. Therefore, the outer ice
becomes the place of the lowest chemical potential and attracts water from the concrete: the uppermost
part of the concrete is drained. Thus, even if an ice crystal forms in a pore, it will not be able to grow:
pressure on the pore walls is prevented, and the concrete is protected against surface scaling.
For a moderately concentrated brine solution (Figure 8.3), several things differ. First, the freezing point
of the outer solution is lowered, due to the presence of ions. When the temperature is low enough, a
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 8. Theory
Ice
Brine
Ice
Brine
Figure 8.3: Ice development for a concrete surface covered with a moderately concentrated salt solution.
mix between ice and brine solution (of increased concentration) forms at the surface. In parallel, ice
formation starts in the largest concrete pores and these crystals first attract the water from the nearest
capillaries (including gel water). However, no meniscus is formed between the outer solution and the
capillary liquid. Instead, there is a zone inside the concrete pore network in which both solutions mix.
The concentration of salt in this mix increases as the ice crystal is consuming water. This also means
that the capillaries are continuously fed by the outer solution. Therefore, water is constantly available for
the ice crystals which keep growing until exerting pressure on the cavity walls and over-exceeding the
tensile strength of concrete. Thus, this is the worst case regarding salt frost scaling, which explains the
pessimum concentration. The process stops when the concentration of the capillary solution becomes
large enough to lower its chemical potential to the same level as that of the ice crystals.
Ice
Brine
Ice
Brine
Figure 8.4: Ice development for a concrete surface covered with a highly concentrated salt solution.
Finally, if the outer solution is highly concentrated (Figure 8.4), the mechanism described in the previous
case still applies, but occurs over a much shorter period. Thus, the ice body is growing at the same
rate, but the capillary solution becomes highly saturated quite fast. Therefore, the chemical potentials
become equal and the size of the ice crystal is limited: the amount of scaling is strongly reduced.
Water uptake for a moderate salt concentration
Considering Figure 8.3 and assuming that the temperature is the same everywhere, there are actually
two places of lowest potentials: the outer solution and the ice crystal inside the concrete. As long as the
38
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 8. Theory
temperature of the brine solution is above its eutectic temperature, its chemical potential is equal to that
of bulk ice. On the other hand, if the ice crystal has not reached the pore walls yet, its chemical potential
is also the same as bulk ice. Therefore, there is a competition between the two: in theory the outer
solution should drain the capillaries as much as the ice crystal does, and the two effects would cancel
out. However, as noticed by Lindmark [33], the moisture suction is driven by the gradient in chemical
potential:
• Between the pore solution and the ice crystal: the gradient is extremely large, as it occurs across
the meniscus
• Between the pore solution and the outer solution: the gradient is much smaller, as it is created by
a difference in ion concentration occurring over a wider distance.
Thus, this results in a net moisture uptake.
8.1.3
Influence of air voids
Powers assumed that ice grows in the air voids as they are the largest pores in concrete [46]. Thus, in
air entrained concrete, ice crystals will have plenty of space in the air voids to grow. As a consequence,
the chemical potential of the ice body remains constant, since no pressure is exerted on it. The evolution
of the system with respect to chemical potentials, once the temperature has been lowered and is held
constant, is depicted in Figure 8.5.
t0
t1
t2
Time
Chemical potential
Gel water
Capillary ice
Ice in the air void
Figure 8.5: Evolution of chemical potentials over time, after the temperature has dropped and is held constant. After
[46].
Between t0 and t1, the highest potential is that of gel water. Therefore, gel water moves towards ice in
the capillaries and ice in the air voids. While the latter keeps a constant potential as explained above, the
former experiences a gain in potential. Indeed, as the space in a capillary is much more restrained than
in an air void, pressure is exerted on the ice body and its potential increases. Moreover, the potential of
gel water decreases due to drainage of the gel pores, as explained in Section 2.5.
At t1, the potential of capillary ice equals that of gel water. From this moment, gel water stops diffusing
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 8. Theory
towards the capillary ice, and feeds only the ice in the air voids. Additionally, the potential of ice in the
capillaries is now the highest. Therefore, this ice melts and moves towards the place of lowest potential,
i.e. the air voids. Because the capillary ice melts, pressure is released and its potential drops. When
reaching t2, all potentials are equal and all moisture transport stops.
In essence, the role of air voids can be summarised in two points:
• Provide a preferable place for ice formation
• Act as a damper: it allows ice to keep forming while lowering the chemical potential of the gel water
and the capillary water, giving time for the system to reach equilibrium before any damage occurs.
8.2
Glue-spalling
Glue-spalling (glass chipping) is an old technique used for decorating glass, where a combination of
glass, epoxy and low temperatures would lead to small flakes of glass chipping off.
This technique inspired the glue-spall theory proposed in 2006 by Valenza and Scherer [59]. The authors
claim that this was the first theory able to explain all of the characteristics of salt frost scaling of concrete.
In comparison to the thermodynamic explanation behind the microscopic ice lens growth mechanism,
the glue-spall theory offers a purely mechanical explanation of the surface damage mechanism.
The following part reports the theory presented by Valenza and Scherer in [59]. Most of the references
mentioned throughout the present text are taken from this paper.
8.2.1
Glue-spall mechanism
According to the glue-spall theory, it is a mismatch in thermal expansion between two bounded mate-
rials, namely freezing water and concrete, that drives the deterioration process (i.e. chipping off). Low
temperature results in the ice being in tension and the concrete in compression. If NaCl is added to the
water, the salt will create small imperfections in the ice, allowing the ice to crack more easily. If the ice
should crack, the relieved tensile stresses from the ice are then transferred to the concrete instead. If the
strength of the concrete is exceeded, a crack in the ice will penetrate the concrete surface and bifurcate
parallel to it, resulting in small chips of concrete scaling off. The summary of this theory is explored in
detail below.
In order to calculate the arising stresses between two bonding surfaces (the core and the seal, i.e the
concrete and the ice respectively), a symmetrical three-layer sandwich seal shown in Figure 8.6 must be
considered.
40
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 8. Theory
z
x
tc
a
ts
ts
Core
Seal
Figure 8.6: Geometry of the the seal-core-seal sandwich bond [19].
In case the seal length and width are much longer than its thickness, the in-plane stresses σx and σy are
equal. Therefore, a biaxial stress state arises and the Young’s moduli of the core (Ec) and the seal (Es)
are modified according to [41]:
Bc =
Ec
1 −νc
Bs =
Es
1 −νs
(8.1)
where νc and νs are the Poisson’s ratios for the core and the seal respectively. B is often called the
biaxial modulus [58] or effective modulus [18].
Oel and Fréchette [41] derived elastic expressions for the strains and stresses in the core and the seal for
a multi-layer component. Applying their derivation to the system described in Figure 8.6, the mechanical
equilibrium requires that:
2 Bs ts εs + Bc tc εc = 0
(8.2)
where ε is the horizontal strain and t the thickness, the subscripts c and s respectively referring to the
core and the seal. Using (8.1), the stress in the seal σs can be expressed as:
σs = Bs
Bs ts (εs −εc)
2 Bs + Bc
(8.3)
As the strain is caused by a thermal deformation, it can be expressed by means of the linear expansion
coefficient α and the change in temperature ∆T:
εc = αc ∆T
εs = αs ∆T
(8.4)
The difference between the two previous equations lead to:
εs −εc = ∆α ∆T
(8.5)
where ∆α = αs −αs is the thermal expansion mismatch. Finally, the latter equation can be put into (8.3),
which becomes:
σs =
tc Bc ∆α ∆T
tc
(Bc
Bs
)
+ 2 ts
(8.6)
The stress in the core σc can be derived in the same way. However, Hook’s law applied to (8.2) gives a
relation between the stresses:
2 σs ts + σc tc = 0
(8.7)
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 8. Theory
which leads to:
σc = −2 σs
(ts
tc
)
(8.8)
The glue-spall strain εgs can then simply be expressed as the difference between the thermal mismatch
strain and the strain in the seal [19]:
εgs = ∆α ∆T −εs
(8.9)
The glue-spall stress in the core is finally obtained by using Hook’s law:
σgs = Bc
[
∆α ∆T −
( σs
Bs
)]
(8.10)
One can notice that σs vanishes at the edge of the seal, locally resulting in an extremely high stress [19]:
σgs,edge = Bc ∆α ∆T
(8.11)
8.2.2
Properties of brine ice
From (8.10) it can be seen that the glue-spall stress depends on the stress in the ice, and therefore
also the strength of the ice. The temperature where a brine solution freezes heavily depends on the
concentration of NaCl. The effect of this is investigated below.
Strength and stiffness of brine ice
The Young’s modulus and the strength of frozen brine depend on the volume fractions of the solid and
liquid phases. The composition by mass can be calculated from the phase diagram. However, the
conversion from the mass fractions to the volume fractions is somewhat complex. Indeed, they are linked
to each other by the densities, but the density depends on both the concentration and the temperature.
Valenza and Scherer [59] used an empirical expression for the liquidus, where the melting point Tm is
given as a function of the volume fraction of NaCl vs:
Tm = −0.59484 ws −0.00058275 w2
s −0.0005436 w3
s
(8.12)
The volume fractions of ice and brine are then obtained by applying the lever rule presented above.
Valenza and Scherer [59] used an empirical relation for the tensile strength of ice, as a function of the
volume fraction of ice vi:
σt = 2.47 −5.15
√
1 −vi
[MPa]
(8.13)
This equation specifically shows that brine ice has no strength if vi < 77 %. Regarding the Young’s
modulus and the Poisson’s ratio, they were calculated based on the Hashin-Shtrikman bound presented
in [60]:
Esol = 9 K G
3K + G
and
νsol = 3K −2G
2(3K + G)
(8.14)
42
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 8. Theory
where:
K = vb Kb + vi Ki −
vb vi (Ki −Kb)2
vb Ki + vi Kb + 2(d −1)Gi/d
G = vb Gb + vi Gi −
vb vi (Gi −Gb)2
vb Gi + vi Gb + H
H = Gi
(d Ki/2 + (d + 1)(d −2) Gi/d
Ki + 2Gi
)
The subscripts i and b refer to ice and brine respectively. d is the dimension of the model, and is taken
equal to 3. This corresponds to a solid 3D matrix of ice containing spherical inclusions of brine. The
values are taken as Ki = 10 GPa, Gi = 3.75 GPa, Kb = 2.18 GPa and Gb = 0 GPa.
However, Sun and Scherer highlighted a mistake in the expression of the strength [54]. Instead, they
used the study of Timco and O’Brien, who collected the results from 19 other research projects testing
the strength and stiffness of ice [57]. All experiments were conducted on sea ice from all around the
world, with temperatures varying between -4.5°C and the eutectic temperature. The tests were not
standardised and thus subject to many variables. As such, the data from these 19 research projects
was widely scattered. In any event, an empirical expression for both of the strength and stiffness of ice
was created based on these results. As others also have shown [64], Timco and O’Brien found that the
volume of the unfrozen brine had a large impact on both the flexural strength σf and the Young’s modulus
Esol:
σf ≈1.76 exp (−5.88√vb)
[MPa]
(8.15)
Esol ≈10 exp (−7.7√vb)
[GPa]
(8.16)
Figure 8.7 shows a comparison between the formulas used by Valenza and Scherer [59] and those
proposed by Sun and Scherer [54]. A significant difference is noticed for the Young’s modulus, the latter
experiencing a sharp drop due to the exponential function in (8.16).
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Volume fraction of brine [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Strength [MPa]
Valenza & Scherer
Sun & Scherer
(a) Strength, (8.13) vs. (8.15)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Volume fraction of brine [-]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Young's modulus [GPa]
Valenza & Scherer
Sun & Scherer
(b) Young’s modulus, (8.14) vs. (8.16)
Figure 8.7: Mechanical properties as a function of the volume fraction of brine.
A problem with the new expressions for strength and elasticity is that they do not have a cut-off value
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 8. Theory
for when the volume fraction of frozen liquid goes towards zero. Ice can only add strength if it takes the
form of a porous skeleton around the liquid inclusions. This is why it cannot have any strength when the
volume fraction of ice becomes too low. This is akin to a situation when an ice cube in a glass of water
does not contribute to the strength or stiffness of the water.
Ice is a viscoelastic material because it is subjected to creep. The rate of creep can be expressed as a
function of stress [3] together with the temperature dependency of the rate of strain JCr [59]:
˙ε = JCr σn
(8.17)
JCr = exp
(
−21.183 −
211.71
T −28.338
)
(8.18)
where n = 3 and T is the temperature in °C.
8.2.3
Stress in the ice layer
Assuming that the ice layer is much thinner than the concrete (ti << tc), (8.6) can be reduced to:
σx = Bsol εsol
(8.19)
If creep is considered by means of (8.17), the horizontal stress in the ice σx is given by:
σx =
∫Tm
T
Bsol
(
∆α + JCr σx3
dT/dt
)
dT
(8.20)
In order to solve this equation, it has to be discretized and solved iteratively. This is done with the
following expression:
σ(n)
x
= v(n−1)
i
σ(n−1)
x
v(n)
i
−B(n)
sol dT


∆α +
JCr
(
σ(n−1)
x
)3
dT/dt



(8.21)
This equation will be referred to as the recursive equation in the rest of the report.
8.2.4
Fracture mechanics
In order to explain the path of crack propagation through ice and concrete, Valenza and Scherer [59]
and also Sun and Scherer [54] utilised the theory behind Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM). If
a material is linear elastic, isotropic and brittle, LEFM can be used to predict the path of a crack and the
stress field surrounding it.
Concrete is quasi brittle and it is homogeneous. Micro cracking, plastic deformation and crack wake
bridging can therefore result in a long fracture process zone and introduce non-linear behaviour [43].
As such, it is difficult to predict whether this will lead to an over-estimation or under-estimation of the forces
that are needed to drive the cracking. On the one hand, this will result in a relaxation of the constraints
of the crack, leading to the crack becoming wider and hence increase the driving force [65]. On the other
44
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 8. Theory
hand, the yielding will dissipate energy. However, as the authors state, ”qualitatively the conclusions
drawn from LEFM analyses are applicable, and account for both the occurrence and morphology of
scaling when the ice layer is expected to crack” [59, p.1167].
Concrete
Ice
(a) Crack arrests at the interface
Ice
Concrete
(b) Crack bifurcates along the interface
Ice
Concrete
(c) Crack penetrates the concrete and bi-
furcates below the interface
Figure 8.8: Cracking configurations. After [65].
Considering a layer of frozen brine on top of concrete, three main cases of cracking should be considered,
see Figure 8.8. In case (a) the crack stops at the interface between the ice and the concrete. In case (b)
the crack stops at the interface and then bifurcate along it. In case (c) the crack penetrates the interface
and continues until it reaches a certain depth in the concrete - from this depth it will bifurcate parallel to
the interface [5] [13] [56] [65].
In order to calculate how deep the crack will penetrate, in the event there is any penetration at all, the
thin film theory is applied. This demands that the top layer (film) has a larger linear expansion coefficient
compared to the bottom layer (substrate). Furthermore, it is assumed that the film layer is thin relative to
the substrate, meaning that the bottom side of the substrate is unaffected by the residual stress caused
by the mismatch in thermal expansion.
(a) Mode I - Opening
(b) Mode II - Shearing
(c) Mode III - Tearing
Figure 8.9: The three mechanical fracture modes.
All types of cracking failure can be created from a superposition of one or all modes in Figure 8.9.
Fracture modes I, II and III are caused by in-plane stress, in-plane shear and out-of-plane shear stress
respectively. Mode I is by far the most common, and is the only mode in case (a). In case (b) the failure
mode is a combination of mode I through the ice to the interface, and mode II from where the crack
starts to bifurcate along the interface. In case (c) mode I is responsible for the vertical part of the crack,
from the top of the ice and into the concrete. Mode II takes place from where the crack bifurcates in the
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 8. Theory
concrete [13] [65].
These cracks will occur where the least energy is needed in order to relieve the materials from residual
stresses. Typically this will be where the materials are weakest, e.g. brine inclusions in the ice at the
Interfacial Transition Zone (ITZ) around the aggregates in the concrete or where the atomic bonds in the
materials are the weakest.
Interface bond
Studies carried out on different types of metals have shown that when freezing water on a hydrophilic
material, the bond between the material and the ice becomes stronger than the cohesive forces in the
ice [49].
The roughness of concrete makes it a good surface to bond to. This together with the concrete’s ability to
become completely wet, would most likely result in an equally strong ice to concrete bond, if not stronger.
Based on this it is assumed that all glues-spall stresses are transferred from the ice to the concrete, until
the maximum strength of the ice has been reached.
Crack penetration depth
It is explored below in which circumstances a crack will occur, and if it does so, how deep it will propagate.
Thermal misfit strain ϵ0 for substrate and film is defined in the same way as in (8.5), and as such the
misfit stress in the film can be written as:
σ0 = B ϵ0
(8.22)
where B is the biaxial modulus. The potential energy per unit length U, that can be released by a plane
strain crack, can be calculated by integrating the energy release rate g(a) along the entire length of the
crack a:
U =
∫
g(a) da
(8.23)
This can also be expressed in terms of the energy that would be released if the crack was allowed to
extend a unit length, by the steady state growth rate gss and the thickness of the film h:
U = h gss = σ2
0 h2
¯Ef
Σ
where
¯
Ef =
Ef
1 −ν2
f
(8.24)
where Σ is dimensionless and depends on elastic mismatch between the two bonded materials. The
Dundurs’ coefficients αD and βD are exactly that, only dependent on non dimensional material properties
[5][65]:
αD =(1 −νs)/Gs −(1 −νf)/Gf
(1 −νs)/Gs + (1 −νf)/Gf
βD =1
2
(1 −2 νs)/Gs −(1 −2 νf)/Gf
(1 −νs)/Gs + (1 −νf)/Gf
(8.25)
If both of the materials possess the exact same properties, αD = βD = 0. It should be noted that the
more compliant the film is towards the substrate, the more it attracts cracks. The mode I strain energy
46
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 8. Theory
release rate is given by:
g = σ2
0 h
¯
Ef
ω
(8.26)
where ω is a dimensionless number, depending on the depth of the crack tip. ω can be calculated by
approximate formulas in [65], based on values for αD, h and a, for fixed values of νs and νc.
The fracture toughness (also referred to as critical stress intensity factor) KIc is a material parameter
that can be measured by testing. This parameter together with elasticity governs the fracture energy Γ
by:
Γ = K2
Ic
¯E
(8.27)
With the fracture energy known, the non-dimensional cracking number Ωc is defined as:
Ωc = σ2
0h
¯EfΓf
(8.28)
As the residual strain increases, the energy release rate goes towards the fracture energy gss = Γf. In
this situation the crack will start to grow, and the potential energy release per unit length in (8.23) can be
expressed as:
U = h Γf + (as −h) Γs
(8.29)
where the energy release rate at the bottom of the crack is equal to the fracture energy of the substrate:
g = Γs
(8.30)
The critical film thickness hc, above which the film cracks, is defined from (8.28):
hc = Ωc
¯
Ef Γf
σ2
0
(8.31)
Combining (8.26), (8.28), (8.29) and (8.30) leads to:
ωsΩc = Γs
Γf
(8.32)
and:
Ωc =
[
1 +
(a
h −1
) ( Γs
Γf
)] 1
Σ
(8.33)
(8.32) and (8.33) give the crack depth into the substrate as/h and the cracking number Ωc as a function of
Γs/Γf and αD. The crack depth into the substrate as/h becomes larger as the relative substrate fracture
energy Γs/Γf decreases, or as αD increases [65].
LEFM makes it possible to predict the critical thickness of the ice layer hc. Below this thickness there is
not enough potential energy available to start the crack propagation. By choosing the thickness of the
ice h to be exactly as thick as the critical height hc, the theoretical length of the entire crack as can be
calculated. Figure 8.10 shows the total length of the crack as a function of the critical depth of the ice
layer. It is seen that a thicker ice layer results in a deeper crack length.
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 8. Theory
0
2
4
6
8
10
hc [mm]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
as [mm]
Figure 8.10: Total length of a crack as as a function of critical thickness of the ice layer hc.
As previously stated, these results should only be considered as an indication of the energy stored in the
ice layer and the effect of the combination of material parameters. Furthermore, this simplified model
only considers a crack perpendicular to the concrete, even though it is known that it bifurcates parallel
to the interface at a certain depth.
8.2.5
Effect of air-voids and internal freezing
A study carried out by Sun and Scherer [54] offers an explanation to the effect of the air void on salt frost
scaling from a glue-spall theory point of view. In their study they have shown that concrete which has
not been air-entrained expands when frozen, while air-entrained concrete contracts more than can be
attributed to the linear expansion coefficient alone.
In the case of fully saturated or non air-entrained concrete, ice has only a limited possibility of grow-
ing freely inside the concrete. Therefore, a decrease in temperature to below the melting point will
instantaneously result in a large crystallisation pressure. This pressure is so great that it overcomes
the contraction of the linear expansion coefficient and instead of contracting, the overall volume of the
concrete starts to expand.
In order to account for the contraction, Sun and Scherer adopted an already existing theory proposed by
Powers [46]. Assuming a constant temperature below the melting point and nucleation of ice in air-voids,
the ice will continue to grow until it is limited either by crystallisation pressure or an insufficient supply of
pore liquid. The temperature dictates how much the ice front will bulge or penetrate into the pores. Here
the ice grows by feeding on the pore liquid, where draining of the pores results in a contraction of the
overall concrete volume. By lowering the temperature further the ice bulges deeper into the pores, and
thus results in a larger contraction of the overall concrete volume.
By relating pore-mechanics to measured contractions of concrete exposed to cooling, Sun and Scherer
created an approximate formula to predict thermal strains in air-entrained concrete. They simplified the
48
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 8. Theory
exact formula in order to reduce the variables to the temperature T and the frozen volume fraction of the
pore volume ϕc.
Instead of applying a linear expansion coefficient for the mortar alone in order to describe the property
of concrete, they suggested to use a three phase composite linear expansion coefficient [51], consisting
of mortar, pore liquid and ice. Here the crystallisation pressure of ice and the offset of pore pressure due
to flow of pore liquid is disregarded, because of the air voids. Thus, it has no influence on the expansion
coefficient.
The composite coefficient of linear expansion is given by:
αcomp = ⟨Kα⟩
⟨K⟩±
√
1
Kp
−
1
⟨K⟩
√
⟨Kα2⟩−⟨Kα⟩2
⟨K⟩
(8.34)
where Kp is the bulk modulus of the porous concrete and
⟨Knαm
n ⟩=
N
∑
n=1
Kn αm
n vn
The lowest upper bound solution for the bulk modulus Kp is found by applying Hashin-Shtrikman bounds
[22]. Sun and Scherer approximated the solution by [54]:
Kp ≈Ks
1 −ϕ
1 + ϕ
(8.35)
where Ks is the bulk modulus of concrete and ϕ is the porosity of the concrete.
Table 8.1: Material properties for calculation of the composite coefficient of linear expansion, according to measured
and calculated data in [54].
Parameter
Water
Ice
Mortar
E [GPa]
0
10
16
ν [-]
-
0.33
0.2
K [GPa]
0
8.3
8.9
Air content [% by vol.]
-
-
1.5
ρbulk [kg/m3]
-
-
1681
ρskeletal [kg/m3]
-
-
2318
Based on several tests for different types of concrete, Sun and Scherer measured the relation between
the temperature and the volume fraction of frozen pore volume, see Figure 8.11. When using this relation
together with the parameters given in Table 8.1 for saturated mortar with 1.5 vol% air, the composite linear
expansion coefficient αcom can be calculated. From Figure 8.11 it is seen that αcom is larger than the
coefficient of linear expansion for bulk concrete, αbulk = 10.9 × 10−6 K−1 at T = 0°C.
Therefore, it results in a smaller thermal miss match strain between concrete and ice and hence lower
glue-spall stress.
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 8. Theory
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Frozen volume fraction of the pores [-]
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Coefficient of linear expansion [1/K]
10-5
c
com
Figure 8.11: Volume fraction of frozen pore volume ϕc and composite coefficient of linear expansion αcom as a
function of temperature for saturated mortar with 1.5 vol% air.
8.2.6
Effect of concentration of brine
Valenza and Scherer [59] showed that concentrations of brine between 2-4% would lead to the stress
in the ice calculated by (8.21) to be larger than the capacity of the ice. Furthermore, they showed that
the opposite was the case for small concentrations below 1%. This is illustrated in Figure 8.12, that
reproduces the calculations made by Valenza and Scherer [59] to determine the stresses in the ice layer
when considering a sandwich model. In all graphs, the initial slope of the stress curve corresponds to
the elastic solution (meaning that creep is not taken into consideration). This flattens out after some time
due to creep. The strength is calculated from (8.13) and implies that no stress can build up below a
volume fraction of ice of 77%.
For pure water, the strength is well above the stress so the ice does not crack. With a 1% salt solution,
the still conclusion can be drawn although the stress becomes much closer to the strength at -20°C. With
a 2% salt solution, the stress exceeds the strength as soon as it starts to build up. This is even more
pronounced with 3% of salt, where the final stress at -20°C is twice the strength.
They also proposed an explanation as to why high concentrations of brine (above 6%) were not able to
build up stresses high enough to damage the concrete, if only freezing to temperatures above -20°C.
Indeed, as mentioned above, (8.13) indicates that ice has no strength for a volume fraction of frozen brine
below 77%. Besides, the phase diagram gives the composition of brine at -20°C. Thereafter, based on
the lever rule they were able to calculate the initial concentration of the brine to be approximately 6%.
Both of these calculations were based on the strength parameter that Sun and Scherer [54] found to be
erroneous. For a plot of the same four concentrations of brine, but instead based on the revised strength
parameter (8.15), see Section 10.1.
50
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 8. Theory
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(a) Pure water. The stress stays well below the strength.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(b) 1% salt solution. Creep prevents the stress from exceeding
the strength.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(c) 2% salt solution. Despite creep, the stress now rises above
the strength.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(d) 3% salt solution.
The stress is approximately twice the
strength at -20°C.
Figure 8.12: Stress in the ice layer, after [59].
51
==PAGE:62==
9
Experimental work
The overall goal for the experiment is to make it possible to detect whether microscopic ice lens growth
or glue-spall stress is the driving damage mechanism. It is the intention of this chapter to introduce a
modified freeze-thaw experiment that can be used to investigate this question.
9.1
Choice of experiments
The experiment takes offset in both the slab-test and CDF test described in CEN/TS 12390-9 [14], which
are standardised concrete tests for measuring freeze-thaw resistance with de-icing salts.
A critical aspect of any test procedure is the design of the temperature cycle that the samples are sub-
jected to. In this study, it is expected that the concrete temperature reaches (or becomes close enough
to) the extreme temperatures of the controlled cycle. Therefore, the design of the cycle is of great im-
portance. This includes:
• Maximum and minimum temperatures
• Total duration of temperature cycle
• Definition of temperature intervals.
In the present experiment, air is used as the cooling medium, contrary to glycol in the CDF test. Since
air is not as efficient as a liquid for cooling, compensation for this may be needed. A numerical study will
therefore be carried out to find an optimum total duration of the temperature cycle for this experiment.
Two cycles will be tested: the 12 h cycle from the CDF test, and a 24 h cycle obtained by doubling all
time intervals. This is presented in Section 11.3.4.
Experiments are carried out with a 3% salt concentration, corresponding to the pessimum concentration.
Pursuant to the glue-spall theory, glue-spall stress arises in the concrete only if the ice cracks. By varying
at what temperature, and thus at what point in time, the brine is let into the system, both the rate and
the duration of freezing are changed. Changing this variable will lead to a change in thermal stress
52
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
mismatch. Hence, several experiments are designed and shown in Figure 9.1. The temperature curve
has the profile of the CDF cycle, and could be applied for any duration. The red circles mark the inlet
temperature, which is reported in the test ID. If several tests have the same temperature of inlet, a letter
is added, starting from the inlet occurring the earliest.
Test I+20 is used as a reference (exp I). Moreover, a finite element simulation of each experiment will be
performed. This is detailed in Section 11.4.4. The results will then be used to select one more experiment
to carry out (exp II).
Time [h]
-20
-15
-10
0
20
Temperature [°C]
I+20
I-10
I-15
I-20a I-20b I-20c
Temperature
Inlet of brine
Figure 9.1: Chosen temperature profile with unknown duration. The red marks indicate the temperature of the cycle
where the brine solution is pumped into the system.
Besides the quantification of scaling made in exp I and II, a visual qualitative assessment of the brine
just after its inlet is carried out. This is made by running an extra cycle of exp II. Counting from the time
of inlet, specimens will be taken out of the setup and inspected after 3, 20, 40 and 60 minutes.
9.2
Test setup
In the following, components of the test setup will be described. The components are connected as given
on the simplified schematic in Figure 9.2.
Computer
A computer is used to store logged data and control the different processes - pumps, drain valve and
temperature cycle, see Appendix A.
Freeze thaw cabinet
The freeze-thaw cabinet is controlled by the computer and is able to both cool down and heat up. The
temperature inside the cabinet is set to follow the predefined temperature cycle shown in Figure 9.1.
The cabinet is almost 2 m high, so a small temperature gradient inside the cabinet is inevitable. The
temperature that governs when the freeze-thaw cabinet is actively heating or cooling is based on an
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
Computer
Data logger
Vessel - Thermal mass
Overﬂow drain
Refrigirator
Test tub
Liquid overﬂow
Liquid + scales
Drain valve
Freeze thaw cabinet
Thermocouples
Thermocouple
Vessel - Test liquid
Thermocouple
Pumps
Figure 9.2: Schematic for components in the test setup and how they are connected.
average between the temperature measured in both the top and the bottom. The test tub is placed in
the top of the cabinet, and two vessels are placed in the bottom for disposal of brine (Figure 9.3).
Figure 9.3: Freeze thaw cabinet with the test tub on the upper shelf and two different vessels on the bottom shelf.
Refrigerator
As seen on Figure 9.4, the refrigerator contains two vessels with a capacity of 25 L each. Only the
vessel on the right hand side contains the test solution that is being used in the experiments. Since the
refrigerator is not controlled by a thermostat, the sole purpose of the other vessel is to add stabilising
thermal mass. This way the magnitude of the fluctuations in the temperature inside the refrigerator
becomes smaller and can be kept at a relatively steady temperature close to 0°C.
54
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
Two pumps are installed in the bottom of the vessel containing the test solution. The first pump is
controlled by the computer, used for pumping brine into the test tub. The other pump is a manually
controlled circulation pump. It is used to ensure an even temperature and concentration in the 25 L
vessel. The pump generates a significant amount of heat when running, so this pump is only switched
on a couple of hours daily.
Figure 9.4: Refrigerator with room for two vessels with a capacity of 25 L each. One contains the test liquid, and
the other is only contributing with thermal inertia.
Test tub
The test tub is placed in the top of the freeze thaw cabinet as can be seen on Figure 9.5. The test tub
has room for four test specimens at a time. Every test specimen is resting on four spacers, with the test
surface facing downwards. This ensures a precise distance of 5 mm between the bottom of the tub and
the concrete.
Overﬂow
Inlet
outlet 
valve
Figure 9.5: Test tub with space for four different concrete samples. Every sample is resting on four spacers, ensuring
a correct distance between the bottom of the tub and the bottom of the concrete specimen.
At a specific point in time, test liquid is pumped into the test tub. A precise water column height of 15
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
mm is obtained by pumping test liquid into the tub, until it starts running out of the overflow drain.
To reduce the amount of test liquid in the experiment, excess volume in the test tub is replaced with
extruded polystyrene. The polystyrene is wrapped in plastic to prevent water uptake and taped into
place.
At a specific point in time, the brine flows out of the tub again. This is done through a computer controlled
outlet valve in the bottom of the test tub.
Data logger and thermocouples
A data logger is connected to the computer and monitors temperatures over time via thermocouples.
Temperatures are registered in the following places:
• Ambient air in the laboratory
• Test liquid in the refrigerator
• Air in the freeze-thaw cabinet
• Test liquid/ice underneath each concrete specimen
• Test liquid/ice in the middle of the test tub
Prior to the experiment, all the thermocouples have been calibrated. See Appendix B.
9.3
Procedure
9.3.1
Preparation of the specimens
Three square concrete beams (150 mm x 150 mm x 1100 mm) with w/c = 0.45 were cast in August 2018.
After having hardened in a climate chamber at 23°C and RH = 65% for 1 day, they were taken out of the
casting mold and sealed in plastic bags. 28 days after casting, the beams were cut into smaller cubes of
150 mm x 150 mm x 200 mm. The samples were then re-sealed in plastic bags and placed in a climate
chamber again.
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
Sample 2
Sample 4
Figure 9.6: Numbering of samples with the test surface marked by a red dashed line.
56
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
10 days before starting the test, the steps described in CEN/TS 12390-9 [14] for the slab test were
followed, although their execution was different due to the setup. First, the cubes were cut in four 50
mm slices. All test surfaces are chosen to be a cut surface, marked with red and numbered according
to Figure 9.6. Thereafter, they were washed in tap water and wiped off with paper towels before being
placed in the climate chamber again. The specimens were positioned minimum 5 cm apart with the test
surface being vertical. The thickness is given as an averaged value of measurements made on the four
sides.
Table 9.1: Averaged dimensions of the test specimens, in mm.
Specimen
Thickness
Width 1
Width 2
2.1
49.2
150.6
150.0
2.2
49.2
150.5
150.3
2.3
49.7
150.6
150.3
2.4
51.0
150.5
150.3
4.1
50.0
150.0
150.0
4.2
48.7
150.0
150.0
4.3
49.5
150.0
150.0
4.4
52.6
150.0
150.0
6 days before the test, the specimens were sealed on all sides perpendicular to the test surface. This was
done in three steps by first applying DOWSIL 1200 OS Primer, then Geocel Marine Silicone GCK0180
and lastly a sheet of butyl rubber.
(a) Before sealing. Test surface is facing upwards.
(b) After sealing.
The side opposite to test surface is
marked with number.
Figure 9.7: Sealing of the specimens.
When applying the primer with a brush, the test surface was placed face up. This was done to prevent
it from becoming contaminated by the very thin primer running down the sides of the specimens. After
57
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
having let the primer dry, the specimens were turned upside down, so that the test surface faced down-
wards, resting on a paper towel. With the test surface protected, the silicone was applied on the sides of
the concrete with a caulking gun. Hereafter it was massaged into the surface of the concrete to ensure
a good bond. After scraping off the excess silicone so that only a thin even layer remained, a sheet of
butyl rubber was again massaged into place on top of the silicone to ensure a watertight bond between
the two (Figure 9.7).
Hereafter the samples were returned to the climate chamber, placed with the same orientation and dis-
tance as stated above.
3 days before testing, the specimens were moved to a plastic tub. Here they were placed with the test
surface facing downwards, resting on 6 mm high spacers. The box was filled with DI-water to a total water
column height of approximately 11 mm, kept at a constant level during the whole saturation process. The
box was stored in the climate chamber until starting the experiment.
9.3.2
Protocol
Before the start of the experiment, a sufficient amount of test liquid is to be prepared and cooled together
with the thermal mass to a temperature close to 0°C.
Before the concrete specimens can be placed in the test tub as per Figure 9.8, the tub is cleaned thor-
oughly. A check is carried out to ensure all the tape is placed correctly.
Figure 9.8: Concrete specimens placed in the tub, ready for testing.
The last step of the temperature cycle consists of temperature plateau at 20°C. The ambient temperature
in the laboratory is also approximately 20°C. This part of the temperature cycle therefore allows for
opening the cabinet and collecting scaling.
At the beginning of this plateau the samples are taken out of the tub and are rinsed very gentle with a wash
squeeze bottle containing DI-water. While it is being rinsed, the specimen is held with the test surface
vertical, one corner pointing downwards, and is only sprayed from the middle down. This way most of
the water and scales will drip off at the bottom corner, directly into the small vessel (see Figure 9.9a).
58
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
The scale and DI-water is collected in a small vessel, placed on top of a plastic sheet. When that part
of the test surface has been rinsed, the specimen is rotated 90° and the process is repeated for all four
corners. After having rinsed the entire test surface, the sides are rinsed as well. The top surface is the
only surface not being rinsed.
Having rinsed the concrete specimens they are placed on a grill, resting on the side with the test surface
vertical for approximately one hour and a half. This way excess water will run off of the test surface.
Before placing the specimens back in the tub and starting the next cycle, they are photographed.
(a) Procedure for rinsing and collecting scales from concrete
specimens
(b) Collecting scales from the test tub
Figure 9.9: Collection of scaling.
When all concrete specimens are taken out of the test tub, the tub is washed thoroughly with a soft brush
and DI-water. If encountering large pieces of scaled off concrete, these are removed from the tub with
a spatula and a brush. The smaller scales are brushed and flushed towards and throughout the drain
valve and the bottom of the tub, see Figure 9.9b. Having collected all scales, the tub is dried with paper
towels. The reason for drying the test tub is to make sure that no capillary suction can occur until brine
is let into the tub again during the next temperature cycle.
Figure 9.10: Filtering process.
59
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 9. Experimental work
If all scales are collected after each temperature cycle, the liquid collected from the overflow can be
considered free from scales, and can be discarded. The rest of the liquid is filtered with the setup in
Figure 9.10.
Before starting the filtering process, a Petri dish and a paper filter are weighed and marked with both
sample and cycle number. Hereafter all liquid is filtered through a funnel with the paper filter in it. After
the filtering process, the Petri dish and the wet filter with the scales are weighed again. Both Petri dish
and wet filter are placed in an oven at 110°C. Here the weight is measured daily, until a steady mass has
been obtained. It has been defined as 2 consecutive measurements being within ± 0.1 g.
When a constant mass has been obtained for the total amount of cycles, quantification of scaling is
carried out according to CEN/TS 12390-9 [14]. Since the test is carried out for 7 cycles, only very little
scaling is expected. The less scale that is collected, the more sensitive the quantification is towards
inaccuracies. Therefore all weights are corrected for the mass loss of the paper filter as well.
60
==PAGE:71==
10
Finite element approach
Although the calculation presented by Valenza and Scherer is quite convenient regarding computation,
several limits are rapidly reached when investigating the factors that influence the stresses. In particular,
the cooling is made by applying a uniform temperature drop to the system, whereas in reality this is
done by cooling down the surrounding medium. Thermal exchanges with the surrounding medium are
therefore completely disregarded. In addition, the phase change of the outer solution is not considered,
which does not allow for simulating an entire freeze/thaw cycle.
It is the objective to perform stress calculation by implementing a finite element model, widening the field
of possibilities for refining the model. As the stresses directly depend on the temperature distribution,
the model should couple both thermal and mechanical approaches.
The finite element modelling is made with COMSOL Multiphysics. The present chapter sets the founda-
tions of the finite element approach by studying the concordance with Valenza and Scherer’s calculations
when applying the same conditions. Prior to this, an update on their calculation based on the corrections
proposed by Sun and Scherer is introduced.
10.1
Update on Valenza and Scherer’s stress
calculations
Valenza and Scherer performed simulations of the stresses in the ice by using the recursive equation
(8.21), which results are shown in Figure 8.12 [59]. However, Sun and Scherer later found out that
erroneous values for the ice strength had been used. In addition, they proposed a new expression for
the Young’s modulus (see Figure 8.7).
Therefore, a first numerical calculation is performed with MATLAB to see the effects of these modifications
on the stresses in the ice, by solving (8.21) with corrected parameters. All the parameters, including
the modifications, are listed in Table 10.1. The temperature cycle is the same in both cases (uniform
temperature drop from 0 to -20°C in 3h). The volume fractions are calculated from (8.12).
61
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 10. Finite element approach
Table 10.1: Expressions or values of the parameters for solving (8.21).
Material
Parameter
Valenza and Scherer [59]
Present report
Concrete
Ec
16.2 GPa
νc
0.2
αc
1 × 10−5 K−1
Outer solution
Esol
Hashin-Shtrikman in [60]
Equation (8.16)
νsol
Hashin-Shtrikman in [60]
Equation (10.6)
αice
5.1 × 10−5 K−1
σt,ice
Equation (8.13)
Equation (8.15)
Model
JCr
Equation (8.18)
The updated version of the graphs presented in Figure 8.12 with the corrections on the Young’s modulus
and the strength is shown in Figure 10.1.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(a) Pure water. Stress stays below the strength.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(b) 1% salt solution. Stress exceeds the strength from -8.5°C.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(c) 2% salt solution. Stress exceeds the strength from -10.5°C.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Volume fraction of ice [-]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Stress [MPa]
Volume fraction of ice
Stress
Strength
(d) 3% salt solution. Stress exceeds the strength from -11.5°C.
Figure 10.1: Stress in the ice layer, updated solving of the recursive equation (8.21).
62
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 10. Finite element approach
For pure water, the same conclusion can be drawn: the ice is strong enough to withstand the stresses it
is subjected to, and therefore does not crack (Figure 10.1a).
The curves differ when salt is added. For a concentration of 1% (Figure 10.1b), the maximum stress the
same as in Figure 8.12. However, the strength is here strongly depressed and is over-exceeded by the
stresses from -8.5°C. Thus, this indicates that ice should crack, contrary to what Valenza and Scherer
predicted [59]. Besides, the stress development also looks different. In Figure 8.12 it was assumed that
the stresses could only build up from a volume fraction of ice of 77%, as the strength below that was
zero. This resulted in a sudden increase corresponding to the elastic stress, followed by a reduction of
the slope due to creep. In this update, this assumption is no longer used. Thus, stresses start building
up as soon as ice is present, resulting in a much smoother curve.
The same outcome can be deduced from the curves for 2% and 3% salt, (Figures 10.1c and 10.1d). The
final value of the stresses is approximately twice the strength in all cases, which induces ice cracking.
From these curves, it is therefore difficult to justify that the pessimum concentration is approximately 3%.
However, because this approach completely disregards thermal gradients, it does not give a realistic
picture of stress development in the ice. A more comprehensive model is therefore a necessity.
10.2
Basics of finite elements for calculating the
stresses in the ice
A major difference between the finite element model and the recursive expression (8.21) is the integration
scheme for calculating the stress. Since the volume fraction of ice varies as freezing proceeds, the
stresses in the ice need to be weighted by the proportion of ice in the solution. Therefore, a model
where the stress is directly proportional to the strain via the Young’s modulus cannot be used. In order
to take the influence of the volume fraction of ice into account, a modification in the finite element code
has to be implemented. This chapter proposes a modified form of the Young’s modulus to address
this inconsistency. Thereafter, the results from each approach are compared in order to validate this
modification.
10.2.1
Integration scheme
COMSOL’s algorithm first calculates the displacements and then the strains. The stress σ(n)
x
is obtained
by multiplying the current strain ε(n)
x
with the current biaxial modulus B(n)
sol :
σ(n)
x
= B(n)
sol ε(n)
x
(10.1)
This is not consistent with (8.21), where the current stress depends on the previous one. The current
biaxial modulus is only used to calculate the stress increment between steps (n−1) and (n). Disregarding
63
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 10. Finite element approach
creep, (8.21) can be written as:
σ(n)
x
= v(n−1)
i
σ(n−1)
x
v(n)
i
−dε(n)
x
(10.2)
where dε(n)
x
= B(n)
sol dT (i).
The recurrence relation above can be developed and expressed as:
σ(n)
x
= v(0)
i
v(n)
i
σ(0)
x
+ ∆α
v(n)
i
n
∑
i=0
v(i)
i B(i)
soldT (i)
(10.3)
This can be reduced to:
σ(n)
x
= B(n)
sol,appε(n)
x
(10.4)
where the apparent biaxial modulus Bsol,app is:
B(n)
sol,app =
1
v(n)
i
(T (n) −T (0))
n
∑
i=0
v(i)
i B(i)
soldT (i)
and
ε(n)
x
= ∆α
(
T (n) −T (0))
(10.2.1) has the same form as (10.1). Because the biaxial modulus is proportional to the Young’s modu-
lus, it is possible to define an apparent Young’s modulus Esol,app in the same way as the apparent biaxial
modulus Bsol,app. Moreover, a continuous form as a function of the temperature can be obtained by
changing the sum into an integral:
Esol,app(T) =
1
vi(T)(T −T0)
∫T
T0
vi( eT)Esol( eT) d eT
(10.5)
The apparent Young’s modulus is lower than the actual one, since it is weighted with the volume fraction
of ice. Therefore, using the actual value in the finite element model would lead to an overestimation of
the stresses.
10.2.2
Validation of the integration scheme
The apparent Young’s modulus Esol,app, defined in (10.5) is used as the Young’s modulus of the outer
solution in COMSOL, and Esol is taken from (8.16), including when vi = 0 (i.e. water). Note that strictly
speaking, the Young’s modulus for water cannot be defined; one option could be to set it to 0, which
would lead to no stress. However, since the computed value when vi = 0 is so small (Esol,app = 2 MPa),
the error on the stress is negligible.
The Poisson’s ratio νsol is calculated as a weighted average:
νsol = vi(T) νi + vb(T) νb
(10.6)
where νi = 0.33 and νb = 0.50 are the Poisson’s ratios for ice and brine respectively. In order to avoid
dividing by 0 in the finite element solver (when applying Hooke’s law), the value for water in COMSOL is
set to 0.499.
In order to validate the integration scheme, especially the apparent Young’s modulus, a simulation is
run with the same assumptions as those used by Valenza and Scherer [59]. In particular, the geometry
64
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 10. Finite element approach
is that of a sandwich element, where a concrete block is covered on either side by a layer of ice. It is
presented in Figure 10.2, where two symmetry lines are used.
The parameters are detailed in Table 10.2; the system is subjected to a uniform linear temperature drop
from 0 to -20°C in 3 h. Note that because the temperature is imposed inside the materials and assumed
to be linear, the thermal conductivities as well as the specific heat capacities are disregarded here. The
model calculates the horizontal stresses at 0.1 mm above the interface, and the strength is calculated
from (8.15).
Pt I
75
50
5
Figure 10.2: Geometry of the finite element model for validating the calculation scheme (concrete in grey, outer
solution in blue). Symmetry lines are drawn in green; Pt I is where the stresses are calculated. The distances are
given in mm.
Table 10.2: Parameters for validating the integration scheme.
Material
Parameter
Value/Expression
Concrete
Ec
16.2 GPa
νc
0.2
αc
1 × 10−5 K−1
tc
100 mm
Outer solution
Esol,app
Equation (10.5)
νsol
Equation (10.6)
αice
5.1 × 10−5 K−1
tsol
5 mm
Model
JCr
Equation (8.18)
Equation (8.21) does not take the thicknesses into account, contrary to the finite element model. In order
to compare the results, the result σx from (8.21) is corrected into σx,cor according to (8.6):
σx,cor =
0.5 tsol Bsol Bc
0.5 tsol Bsol + tc Bc
σx
(10.7)
65
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 10. Finite element approach
The stresses obtained from the updated recursive approach are plotted together with the results of the
finite element simulations in Figure 10.3. In order to highlight the effect of the apparent Young’s modulus,
a simulation with the actual Young’s modulus is also shown. Both graphs indicate a very good match
between the two methods (solid black and dotted blue lines). A slight difference is barely noticeable
when the temperature is kept constant, and can be due to the fact that the recursive method assumes
uniform stresses in the whole ice body, while slight differences arise in the finite element model.
0
2
4
6
8
Time [h]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Stress [MPa]
Temperature
Recursive equation
FEM with Esol
FEM with Esol,app
(a) Pure water
0
2
4
6
8
Time [h]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Temperature [°C]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Stress [MPa]
Temperature
Recursive equation
FEM with Esol
FEM with Esol,app
(b) 3% salt solution
Figure 10.3: Validation of the integration scheme.
The effect of the apparent Young’s modulus is clearly visible on Figure 10.3b. As predicted, the stresses
are overestimated when using the actual Young’s modulus, since the volume fraction of ice is not taken
into account. Note that in the case of Figure 10.3a, the volume fraction of ice jumps almost instanta-
neously from 0 to 1 at 0°C, resulting in no difference between Esol and Esol,app.
As a consequence, the use of Esol,app in the finite element model to obtain stresses in the ice in agreement
with the definition given by Valenza and Scherer (recursive equation (8.21)) is validated, and implemented
in the following models.
66
==PAGE:77==
11
Finite element models of a freeze-thaw ex-
periment
The results presented in the previous chapter show that using the apparent Young’s modulus in the finite
element model leads to the same results as the recursive calculation proposed by Valenza and Scherer,
everything else being equal or equivalent.
In light of this, several more elaborated finite element models can now be implemented. This includes
three main improvements:
• Take the temperature dependence of the parameters into account
• Set thermal properties and boundary conditions consistent with freeze-thaw experiments
• Implement supercooling of the outer solution.
Therefore, the objective is to establish a thermal model, to which the mechanical model presented in the
previous chapter can be coupled in order to study the stresses.
The chapter is organised as follows: first, the thermal and mechanical parameters for the outer solution
and the concrete are introduced (Sections 11.1 and 11.2). Second, a thermal model of a freeze-thaw
experiment where the temperature cycle is applied to the surrounding air is established (Section 11.3).
Third, a mechanical model is coupled to the existing thermal model, to examine the stresses in the ice and
at the surface of the concrete (Sections 11.4 and 11.5). Finally, a refined thermal model for implementing
supercooling is introduced (Section 11.6).
11.1
Thermal properties
The following details the thermal properties of water (subscript w), ice (i) and concrete (c). The subscript
b is used for brine, which in most cases designates indifferently water or saltwater. If a distinction is
needed, it is made by another subscript indicating the concentration in salt.
67
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
11.1.1
Outer solution
The outer solution is made of either pure water or saltwater. When it freezes, part of it turns into ice,
therefore the thermal properties are changed. General physical properties, taken as constant, are shown
in Table 11.1. The thermal conductivity of water is given in Table 11.2. The specific heat capacities are
listed in Table 11.3. Finally, the properties for ice are given in Table 11.4.
Given the salt concentration, it is assumed that the thermal conductivity of brine kb is equal to that of
water (0.42% of difference for a 3% NaCl solution according to [31]). Similarly, the density of brine ρb is
also taken equal to ρw.
Table 11.1: Constant material properties of water and ice (molar mass Mw and density ρw of pure water and density
of ice ρi from [32], melting point of a 3% salt solution Tm,3 from (2.21)).
Parameter
Value
Tm,3
-1.94°C
Mw
18.02 g/mol
ρw
998 kg/m3
ρi
917 kg/m3
Table 11.2: Thermal conductivity of water, kw [48].
T [K]
275
280
285
290
295
kw [W/m/K]
0.5606
0.5715
0.5818
0.5917
0.6009
Table 11.3: Specific heat capacity for pure water, cp,0 and saltwater cp,3 [1].
T [K]
250
255
260
265
270
275
280
285
cp,0 [J/g/K]
4.430
4.330
4.277
4.249
4.222
4.208
4.200
4.193
cp,3 [J/g/K]
4.372
4.298
4.251
4.223
4.202
4.189
4.181
4.175
Table 11.4: Temperature-dependent properties for ice (thermal conductivity ki and specific heat capacity cp,i from
[32], latent heat ∆fH from [12]).
T [°C]
-30°C
-20°C
-10°C
0°C
ki [W/m/K]
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.14
cp,i [J/g/K]
1.88
1.96
2.03
2.11
∆fH [J/mol]
5381.9
5608.2
5815.7
6011.8
68
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
11.1.2
Phase change
The phase change between water and ice is modelled by modifying the specific heat capacity of the
solution. COMSOL offers a pre-defined feature for this purpose, which can only be used in the case
of pure water as it requires that the phase change from one material to another should occur within a
precise temperature range. However, it is possible to define it manually and therefore implement any
salt concentration.
Thus, the specific heat capacity of the outer solution is expressed as follows:
cp,sol(T) = ρi vi(T) cp,i(T) + ρc vb(T) cp,b(T)
ρi vi(T) + ρc vb(T)
+ cp,pc(T)
(11.1)
where:
cp,pc(T) = ∆fH(T) dαm
dT
with
αm = 1
2
vb(T) ρb −vi(T) ρi
vb(T) ρb + vi(T) ρi
Figure 11.1 shows the plot of cp,sol for a 3% salt solution. For computation, the curve obtained from (11.1)
is smoothened with a moving average to avoid steep gradients of the material properties. As a result,
the top of the peak is cut off and the base is slightly widen just above the melting point.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
0
50
100
150
cp,sol [J/g/K]
Original
Smoothened
Figure 11.1: Specific heat capacity for the outer solution as a function of the temperature. ”Original” corresponds
to (11.1), and ”smoothened” is obtained by applying a moving average.
If the temperature is below the melting point defined in (2.21), and in the case of salt water, the volume
fraction of brine vb,3 is calculated from (8.12) and the lever rule. If the temperature is above, vb,3 = 1.
For pure water, the volume fraction of liquid is a step function, taking the value 1 above 0°C and 0 below.
However, this causes computational issues due to the infinitely steep gradient. Thus, it is proposed to
use a logistic function:
vb,0(T) =
1
1 + eβT
where
β = −20
(11.2)
The density of the outer solution is expressed as a weighted average of the values for brine and ice:
ρsol(T) = vi(T) ρi + vb(T) ρb
(11.3)
69
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Finally, the thermal conductivity is calculated based on a modified Maxwell-Eucken model [30] [31]:
ksol(T) = (2Λ + 1) −2(Λ −1) Fb
(2Λ + 1) + (Λ + 1)Fb
(11.4)
where:
Fb = 1
2


( 2
σ −1 + 2 vb
)
−
√( 2
σ −1 + 2 vb
)2
−
( 8
σ
)
vb


σ =
(Λ −1)2
(Λ + 1)2 + 0.5Λ
Λ = ki(T)
kb(T)
11.1.3
Concrete
The properties are taken from a BSc project made at DTU Byg, where measurements were made after
28 days on concrete samples with w/c = 0.45 with Isomet model 2104. Three different conditions were
investigated:
• Normal curing regime for freeze-thaw cycles (the measurements were made before capillary suc-
tion)
• Drying at 105°C until constant mass was reached
• Vacuum saturation.
The density was calculated from the concrete mix. The results are listed in Table 11.5.
Table 11.5: Material properties for concrete.
Quantity
Dry
Normal
Saturated
ρc [kg/m3]
2358
cp,c [J/kg/K]
670
662
712
kc [W/m/K]
1.56
1.93
2.19
In the following, the properties corresponding to the normal curing regime are applied. The ”dry” proper-
ties are only used in Section 11.6.
11.2
Mechanical properties
In addition to the thermal properties, some models presented in the report use mechanical parameters:
the coefficient of linear expansion, the Young’s modulus and the Poisson’s ratio.
11.2.1
Outer solution
The linear expansion coefficient of ice is temperature dependent. The values are listed in Table 11.6.
70
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Table 11.6: Coefficient of linear expansion of ice αi as a function of the temperature [7].
T [°C]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
αi × 10−6 [K−1]
50.4
50.9
51.3
51.8
52.8
However, water does not have such a coefficient. If one wants to perform mechanical calculations during
a complete freeze/thaw cycle without changing the geometry of the model, it is possible to set this co-
efficient equal to that of concrete. In this way, both concrete and water would move accordingly without
any mismatch. This gives the following expression:
αsol = vi(T) αi(T) + vb(T) αc(T)
(11.5)
where the composite linear expansion coefficient of concrete αc is taken from Figure 8.11.
The Young’s modulus for the outer solution Esol is the one defined in (8.16). However, for all the simu-
lations performed with COMSOL, the apparent value Esol,app is used.
11.2.2
Concrete
The linear expansion coefficient of concrete αc has been recreated from [54], by extracting the volume
fraction of pore space filled with ice during thawing and applying the procedure in [51]. The curve has
been plotted in Figure 8.11.
The Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio for concrete are respectively taken as Ec = 16.2 GPa and
νc = 0.2, according to [59].
11.3
Thermal model
This section focuses on the thermal modelling of the freeze-thaw experiment introduced in Chapter 9,
where the temperature cycle is applied to the ambient air. In the following, after a description of the
boundary conditions and their validation, the model is used to simulate two different cycle duration (12
h and 24 h) and select the most appropriate one for conducting the experiment described in Chapter 9,
with respect to the temperature distribution in the concrete.
11.3.1
Boundary conditions
Since the cooling is made by the ambient air in the experimental setup, it has been decided to use
convective boundary conditions. The convective flux through a boundary is given by:
q = h (Tair −T)
(11.6)
where q is the flux, h the convection coefficient, Tair the temperature of the air in the fridge and T the
temperature inside either the concrete or the water, which is being calculated during the simulation.
71
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Tair is known as it corresponds to the temperature cycle. On the contrary, the convection factor h is
unknown. One has to consider five different cases: convection between concrete and air (hc−a), between
water and air (hw−a), between ice and air (hi−a), between water and air through the box (hb−w−a) and
between ice and air through the box (hb−i−a). From the literature, some values around 5-10 W/m2/K are
found for natural convection [37]. However, the convection is forced in the freezer due to the fan. Thus,
one can expect a higher value for hw−a, the others being much more difficult to evaluate.
11.3.2
Convection coefficients
The five convection coefficients mentioned above have to be determined experimentally. In this purpose,
three small experiments are set up.
Water-air and ice-air convection
In order to isolate the water-air interface, a plastic container (approximately 57 cm x 37 cm x 30 cm) is
insulated with polystyrene on all sides except the top one and filled with 3 L of DI-water. The container
is then placed in a freezer, where the temperature is set to -20°C. The temperature is measured in the
water, close to the bottom of the box. The differential equation governing the temperature of the water
inside the container is:
cp,w mw dT = (hins Ains + hw−a Aw−a) (Tair −T(t)) dt
(11.7)
where cp,w is the heat capacity per unit weight of water, mw the mass of water, hins the convection factor
through the insulation (equal to the U-value), Ains the surface area of the sides covered with insulation,
dT the temperature change, Aw−a the surface area of the water-air interface, Tair the temperature of the
air, T(t) the temperature of the water and dt the time interval. By integrating the relation between the
initial temperature Ti at t = ti and Tf at t = tf, it becomes:
hw−a = mw I1 −hins Ains I2
Aw−a I2
(11.8)
where
I1 =
∫Tf
Ti
cp,w(T) dT
and
I2 =
∫tf
ti
(Tair −T(t)) dt
The exact same calculation applies for hi−a. The only difference relies in the integration bounds: as
shown on the freezing curve in Figure 11.2, hw−a is calculated between 20°C and 1°C (red circles) while
hi−a is taken between -5°C and -15°C (green circles).
The calculations lead to:
hw−a = 14.6 W/m2/K
hi−a = 6.1 W/m2/K
(11.9)
As expected, hw−a is slightly larger than the tabulated values for natural convection, due to the fan
blowing air from time to time. Convection is strongly depressed between water and ice which could be
due to the phase change from liquid to solid, the latter acting as a barrier to slow down convection.
72
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time [h]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Temperature [°C]
Air in the fridge
Water
Figure 11.2: Temperature of the water during cooling. The red circles mark the integral bounds for hw−a while the
green ones apply to hi−a.
Water-air convection through plastic
Second, the exact same procedure is applied to a plastic box filled with 3 L of DI-water. The only dif-
ference is that the box is no longer insulated on the sides. The water-air convection factor through the
plastic can be expressed as:
hb−w−a = mw I1 −hw−a Aw−a I2
Ab−a I2
(11.10)
where Ab−a is the surface area of the water-air interface through the box. By using a similar freezing
curve as the one showed previously and the same method with ice, the coefficients are equal to:
hb−w−a = 12.0 W/m2/K
hb−i−a = 13.9 W/m2/K
(11.11)
Since the results are relatively close to each other, it has been decided to keep only one value, the lowest
being conservative. Therefore:
hb−a = hb−w−a = 12.0 W/m2/K
(11.12)
Concrete-air convection
Finally, to measure hc−a, a cylindrical concrete block (15 cm in diameter, 5 cm thick) is placed in a freezer
at -20°C. Insulation is placed between the tray and the bottom side of the specimen, to make sure that
the measurement is not influenced by the tray. Thermocouples are placed inside the concrete block,
one in the middle and another at 10 mm form the exposed surface. For the calculation, only the cooling
above 1°C is considered in the integration. Moreover, it is assumed that the temperature is continuous
at the concrete/water interface (Tconcrete = Twater at the interface):
hc−a = cp,c mc (Tf −Ti) −hins Ains I2
Ac−a I2
(11.13)
where Ac−a is the surface area of the concrete-air interface. The calculations lead to:
hc−a = 8.9 W/m2/K
(11.14)
73
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
11.3.3
Validation of convective approach
The final step regarding the boundary conditions is to validate the convective choice when the convective
coefficient are implemented in a model. For this purpose, a final experiment is conducted with a concrete
sample placed in water. In parallel, a 3D finite element model of this setup is created in COMSOL.
(a) Setup after the water had frozen
(b) Finite element geometry
Figure 11.3: Setup for validating convection.
The concrete cylinder from the last experiment (concrete-air convection) is placed in the setup of the
second one (box-air convection), as shown in Figure 11.3a. This is again placed in a freezer where
the temperature is kept constant at -20°C. The temperature is logged inside the concrete, in the water
between the concrete and the box, and in the air.
In parallel the setup is modelled in 3D in COMSOL, see Figure 11.3b. The thermal properties are the
ones defined in Section 11.1. The boundary conditions are sketched in Figure 11.4.
hw−a / hi−a
hc−a
hb−a
Figure 11.4: Boundary conditions for validating convection.
Note that for pure water, when the temperature of the water drops below 0°C, hi−a is applied instead of
hw−a. The results of the test and the simulation are plotted together in Figure 11.5.
It can be seen that the results from the simulation for the water and the concrete are in fairly good
agreement with the experiment. In particular, the plateau starts at the same time in both cases, and the
curves match very well from -10°C. However, one can highlight four differences:
• The temperature of the water from the simulation lags behind the experimental curve during the first
stage of cooling, above 0°C. This could be explained by the fact that the temperature monitoring
74
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
0
2
4
6
8
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Temperature [°C]
Exp. - Air
Exp. - Water
Exp. - Concrete 10 mm
Exp. - Concrete 25 mm
Comsol - Water
Comsol - Concrete 10 mm
Comsol - Concrete 25 mm
Figure 11.5: Comparison between the experiment and the simulation.
was not started right after the water was poured, but a few minutes later. Therefore, the water had
already initiated its cooling contrary to the simulation. However, both curves eventually reach the
phase change plateau at 0°C approximately at the same time
• The phase change plateau for water stabilises at -0.3°C in the experiment, while 0°C was expected
since DI-water was used
• The end of the phase change plateau is much sharper in the simulation than in the experiment,
which results in a small difference until -10°C. This can be due to the phase change modelling,
where the latent heat release only occurs within a precise temperature interval around the melting
point, but also to the change in convection coefficient. Since the plateau of phase change lasts for
approximately 2 h, it does make a difference if convection is slowed down from the beginning or
from the end
• A discrepancy is seen for the probe located at 10 mm from the surface during the plateau of phase
change. Here the simulation overestimates the temperature by approximately 1.3°C. The experi-
mental data shows that the temperature is relatively close to that of water, which could indicate that
permeability and porosity of concrete play an important role with respect to the internal tempera-
ture development. Since the distance between the middle of the concrete and the surface is larger,
water from the external solution is not likely no reach it, and the simulation matches much better
with the experiment at that location. Thus, the assumption of constant thermal conductivity and
heat capacity for concrete seem questionable, at least close to the exposed surface, and require
further investigation.
Nevertheless, given that the overall trend of the simulation reflects well the experimental results, the
convective model is validated and can be used for simulating other test conditions.
11.3.4
Determination of the temperature cycle duration
In light of the previous result, it is now possible to simulate different cycles and get an estimation of the
temperature development, both in the concrete and in the outer solution. Because of convection, it is
75
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
likely that these temperatures will lag behind that of air. Therefore, it is necessary to estimate this delay.
In particular, the objective is to choose between two cycle duration: 12 h and 24 h. From an experimental
point of view, using a 12 h cycle enables for performing more cycles than a 24 h one within the same
test period. However, one needs to be sure that the thermal response of the materials is quick enough
in such a cycle.
The experimental setup shown in Chapter 9 is modelled in a 3D finite element model. The concrete
specimens and the water volume were drawn to scale, and the mesh was especially refined at the inter-
face between water and the concrete specimen. The model, limited to a quarter of the setup by means
of symmetry lines, as well as the mesh can be seen in Figure 11.6.
(a) Geometry of the model
(b) Meshing
Figure 11.6: Modelling of the experimental setup.
The temperature cycle to be tested corresponds to the 12 h cycle from the CF/CDF test in CEN/TS
12390-9 [14] shown in Figure 11.7.
Figure 11.7: Temperature cycle used in the CDF test.
In addition, a 24 h cycle obtained by doubling all the time intervals of the previous one is also input in the
model.
76
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
12h cycle
The results with the 12 h cycle shown in Figure 11.7 are plotted in Figure 11.8. The initial temperature
of concrete was defined as 20°C, and water as 3°C.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Air
Water
Concrete 25 mm
Figure 11.8: Temperature curve for a 12 h cycle with pure water.
The plot clearly shows that the concrete is not able to follow the temperature variations. The result would
be even worse for the following cycles, as the initial temperature of the cycle has now an offset. Moreover,
the water can barely thaw at the end of the cycle. This seems to be caused by the large thermal inertia of
the setup, that does not allow for a quick thermal response. Therefore, no matter how the cycle intervals
are set, it seems that the total duration is too short to reach the objective.
24h cycle
With a 24 h cycle the results change, as shown in Figure 11.9 for pure water and 3% brine. Note that
for brine, the change of convection coefficient from hw−a to hi−a occurs when the volume fraction of ice
exceeds 50%.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Air
Water
Concrete 25 mm
(a) Pure water
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Air
Water
Concrete 25 mm
(b) 3% salt solution
Figure 11.9: Temperature curves for a 24 h ”standard” cycle.
77
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Contrary to the 12 h cycle, the temperature in the concrete does reach -20°C during freezing, and rises
up to approximately 18°C at the end of the cycle. This ensures that ice will freeze every cycle, and that
each cycle should start with the same thermal initial conditions, for both water and concrete. The 24 h
cycle is therefore the one selected for conducting the freeze-thaw tests described in Chapter 9.
11.4
Thermo-mechanical model - Stresses in the ice
As a further study of stresses in the ice, a 2D finite element model is created as shown in Figure 11.10.
The geometry is similar to the model used in Section 10.2, with the only exception that ice is only present
on one side of the concrete. Moreover, the displacement in the vertical direction is restrained at point S
in order to model the spacers.
The thermal properties as well as the density and the mechanical properties are implemented according
to the values defined in Sections 11.1 and 11.2.
Two types of boundary conditions are tested:
• BCconv: convection on all sides using the coefficients found in Section 11.3
• BCdirect: the surface of the solution is set to the temperature cycle Tcycle, and the concrete is
insulated.
Pt I
75
50
ti
Pt S
Figure 11.10: Geometry of the finite element model for investigating the stresses in the ice. Pt I is placed 0.1 mm
above the interface; Pt S is a support in the vertical direction and models the effect of the spacers.
While BCconv aims to model the freeze-thaw experiment introduced in Chapter 9, BCdirect is closer to
the standard CDF test. Both models are shown in Figure 11.11.
Before examining the stresses, an appropriate mesh that ensures both convergence of the results and
reasonable computation times is needed. Then, in order to get a better understanding of the stresses in
the model, simulations are performed to study the influence of some parameters (thickness of brine, cool-
ing rate and time at minimum temperature). The results are compared with experimental data. Finally,
78
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
hb−a
hc−a
(a) BCconv
Tcycle
h = 0
(b) BCdirect
Figure 11.11: Sets of boundary conditions.
the six experiments presented in Figure 9.1 in Chapter 9 are simulated.
11.4.1
Convergence of the model
The geometry shown in Figure 11.12 is therefore implemented with different meshes, and the stresses
are checked at point A and B, placed in the middle of the brine layer.
Pt A
Pt B
25
5
Figure 11.12: Location of points A and B.
The results of the convergence analysis are shown in Figure 11.13.
The value at point A (centre of the ice, just above the concrete/ice interface) does not vary with the
number of elements. On the contrary, values at point B (25 mm from the centre) fluctuate more. However,
it seems that the stresses start to converge from 3000 elements. As a conservative choice, a mesh with
4000 elements is chosen and shown in Figure 11.14.
79
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
102
103
104
Number of elements
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Point A
Point B
Figure 11.13: Stresses at points A and B as a function of the number of elements.
Figure 11.14: Selected mesh for studying the stresses, with approximately 4000 elements.
11.4.2
Influence of the cooling rate and the time at minimum
temperature
Different temperature cycles are used to study the influence of the cooling rate and the time at minimum
temperature. In all cases, the simulations are made with a 3% brine solution with an initial temperature
of 5°C, being that of concrete as well. Besides, the heating phase is always 3 h, and the minimum
temperature is -20°C. Table 11.7 details the duration of each test. The test ID refers to the duration of
cooling and the time at minimum temperature. For instance, C8M2 corresponds to cooling in 8 h followed
by a plateau at -20°C for 2 h, and finally heating in 3 h.
Table 11.7: Characteristic time intervals of the temperature cycles, in h.
Test ID
C4M0
C6M0
C8M0
C10M0
C8M2
C8M4
C8M6
Cooling
4
6
8
10
8
8
8
Minimum temperature
0
0
0
0
2
4
6
Heating
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
80
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
The simulations are performed with the two sets of boundary conditions (BCconv and BCdirect). The
stresses in the ice as well as the ice temperature depending on the cooling rate are plotted on Fig-
ure 11.15. When only considering the stresses, it is quite obvious that the lower the cooling rate, the
higher the stresses. Assuming that higher stresses in the ice would result in larger stresses in concrete,
one could expect to see more scaling with lower cooling rates. The same trend can be seen when vary-
ing the time at minimum temperature, the highest stresses are obtained with the longest duration. These
two effects were reported experimentally by Jacobsen et al. [27].
0
5
10
15
Time [min]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
C4M0
C6M0
C8M0
C10M0
(a) Stresses in the ice
0
5
10
15
Time [min]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
C4M0
C6M0
C8M0
C10M0
(b) Temperature in the ice
Figure 11.15: Influence of the cooling rate with BCconv.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
C8M0
C8M2
C8M4
C8M6
(a) Stresses in the ice
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
C8M0
C8M2
C8M4
C8M6
(b) Temperature in the ice
Figure 11.16: Influence of the time at minimum temperature with BCconv.
However, a major difference has to be highlighted: in the present simulation, the temperature cycle is
applied to the surrounding air while in the experiment presented in [27], the heat is directly transferred to
the salt solution by a glycol bath located underneath (CDF test). This results in a much quicker thermal
response of the salt solution, which follows almost instantaneously the temperature cycle. On the con-
trary, when examining Figure 11.15b, it is clearly visible that this is not the case in the simulation. Thus,
the increase in stress in Figure 11.15a is likely to be due to lower temperatures. The same explanation
81
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
goes for the influence of the time at minimum temperature shown in Figure 11.16. Because of the longer
plateau at -20°C the temperature of the solution keeps dropping, which makes the volume fraction of ice
and the stresses increase.
0
5
10
15
Time [min]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
C4M0
C6M0
C8M0
C10M0
(a) Stresses in the ice
0
5
10
15
Time [min]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
C4M0
C6M0
C8M0
C10M0
(b) Temperature in the ice
Figure 11.17: Influence of the cooling rate with BCdirect.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
C8M0
C8M2
C8M4
C8M6
(a) Stresses in the ice
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
C8M0
C8M2
C8M4
C8M6
(b) Temperature in the ice
Figure 11.18: Influence of the time at minimum temperature with BCdirect.
In Figures 11.17 and 11.18, the temperature cycle is directly applied to the surface of the salt solution in
order to get a much quicker thermal response in the solution. When varying the cooling rate and the time
at -20°C, the maximum value for the stress appears to be unchanged. Nonetheless, one can notice that
the lower the cooling rate and the longer the time at -20°C, the longer the stresses exceed the strength.
Assuming that this interval corresponds to the damaging period, it seems reasonable to expect more
scaling with a longer damaging interval from the glue-spalling point of view, which is consistent with the
observations in [27].
However, one must remain cautious about the previous analysis. Here, stress release in the ice because
of cracking is completely disregarded, since ice is assumed to remain intact for the entire simulation.
From the moment the ice cracks, a new stress state is established, and tensile stresses start building up
82
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
at the surface of the concrete.
Therefore, predicting concrete scaling solely based on the stresses in the ice relies on one assumption:
the stresses at the surface of the concrete are somehow correlated with the stresses in the ice, when
they exceed the strength. From the previous graphs showing the stresses, this is illustrated by the fact
that a longer time above the strength is believed to induce more scaling.
11.4.3
Influence of the ice thickness
The cycle C8M0 is applied for different thicknesses of ice (1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 mm). The simulation
are performed with a 3% brine solution, and both boundary conditions (BCconv and BCdirect) are also
tested.
The maximum tensile stress obtained for different ice thicknesses is shown in Table 11.8 for the boundary
condition BCconv and in Table 11.9 for BCdirect.
Table 11.8: Maximum stresses and corresponding temperatures as a function of the ice thickness with BCconv.
Thickness [mm]
1
2
4
6
8
10
Maximum tensile stress [MPa]
0.205
0.200
0.185
0.164
0.130
0.102
Corresponding temperature [°C]
-16.60
-16.38
-15.88
-15.05
-13.66
-12.36
Table 11.9: Maximum stresses and corresponding temperatures as a function of the ice thickness with BCdirect.
Thickness [mm]
1
2
4
6
8
10
Maximum tensile stress [MPa]
0.305
0.298
0.305
0.296
0.290
0.290
Corresponding temperature [°C]
-19.97
-19.76
-20.06
-19.85
-19.75
-19.84
Similar to the previous results with the cooling rate and the time at minimum temperature, the results for
BCconv show that a thicker layer slows down cooling, resulting in lower tensile stresses. When applying
BCdirect, the maximum stresses appear to be almost constant with some fluctuations probably owing to
small differences in temperature.
Experimental results presented by Çopuroğlu and Schlangen [9] showed that the amount of scaling
was larger the thicker the ice after only three freeze-thaw cycles. Since the simulation showed above
does not seem able to predict it from the stresses in the ice, this could indicate that in this case, stress
development at the concrete surface is strongly linked to the cracking process. This is supported by the
fact that Çopuroğlu and Schlangen reported that the typical size of the scaled off flakes was larger for
thicker ice layers. Indeed, according to the fracture paths detailed in Section 8.2.4, the size of a flake is
expected to be of the same order of magnitude as the distance between two cracks.
However, the results presented by Çopuroğlu and Schlangen only consider a very limited amount of
83
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
freeze-thaw cycles. The tests were stopped because of seriously damaged concrete surfaces. Besides,
the cycles consisted of 17 h at -20°C followed by 7°C at +20°C, but it was unclear which type of test
was used. Since these conditions are quite different from those used in this report, the results cannot be
compared on the same basis.
Nevertheless, focusing only on the stresses in the ice is likely not to provide enough information to predict
glue-spalling in any case. Instead, it is necessary to look at the stresses in the concrete before drawing
any conclusion. This is the topic presented in Section 11.5.
11.4.4
Simulation of the experimental cycles
With a similar thermo-mechanical finite element model, it is possible to simulate the experimental freeze-
thaw cycles shown in Figure 9.1.
In order to be consistent with the experimental setup shown in Chapter 9, the geometry is slightly modified
to include the rubber sheet (ρr = 900 kg/m3, kr = 0.088 W/m/K and cp,r = 1966 J/g/K [55]) covering the
sides of the concrete and the water level being a bit higher on the sides. This is show on Figure 11.19.
The six experiments shown in Chapter 9 are simulated, and the boundary conditions correspond to
BCconv (it is assumed that the convection at the surface of the rubber is the same as with concrete).
15
7
1
Figure 11.19: Geometry of the model for simulating entire cycles.
Since it is not possible to modify the geometry, the simulation is carried out in two steps when brine is
not added from the beginning:
• Step 1: the model only contains the concrete block (without the outer solution) until the time of
brine inlet (hc−a is applied on all sides)
• Step 2: the outer solution is added with an initial temperature of 3°C. The initial temperature of
concrete in this step is taken as the final temperature of the surface of the concrete in step 1.
Although the temperature in the concrete is likely not to be uniform, it is the surface temperature
that is critical regarding stress mismatch.
84
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Air
Solution
Concrete
Stress
Strength
(a) I+20
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Air
Solution
Concrete
Stress
Strength
(b) I-10
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Air
Solution
Concrete
Stress
Strength
(c) I-15
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Air
Solution
Concrete
Stress
Strength
(d) I-20a
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Air
Solution
Concrete
Stress
Strength
(e) I-20b
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Stress [MPa]
Air
Solution
Concrete
Stress
Strength
(f) I-20c
Figure 11.20: Simulations of the experiments. The solid lines represent the temperatures while the dashed lines
are stresses/strength in the ice.
The results of the simulations are shown in Figure 11.20. The figures show that for the first three ex-
periments, I+20, I-10 and I-15 (a, b and c), no significant difference in stress is found. The increase in
temperature in the concrete due to the brine inlet is eventually compensated by the plateau at -20°C,
which cools down both concrete and brine and allows for stresses to build up. For I-20a (d), the same
85
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
overall trend is observed, except that the duration for which the stresses exceed the strength is slightly
reduced.
For I-20b (e), the time interval where the stresses are larger than the strength is greatly shortened, and
the maximum stress is also slightly reduced. Nevertheless, it is still enough to crack the ice layer and
potentially damage the concrete, although one could expect less scaling based on the conclusion given
in Section 11.4.2. This is not the case with I-20c (f), where the stresses remain below the strength. This
means that the ice should not crack, hence no scaling at all is expected.
It should be noticed that these figures only show the stresses in the ice. As mentioned previously, this is
not enough to predict with certainty the amount of scaling that can be expected in each experiment. Thus,
there may be differences between I+20, I-10, I-15 and I-20 when carrying out the experiments. However,
since cracking of the ice is a necessary condition for getting damaging stresses in the concrete, one can
affirm that I-20c should lead to no scaling at all according to the glue spall theory.
As a consequence, I-20c is chosen for being the temperature cycle used in the experiment (exp II)
described in Chapter 9.
11.5
Thermo-mechanical model - Stresses in concrete
Focusing only on the stresses in the ice is not sufficient to conclude on the damage created by the freezing
of the outer solution, as shown in the previous simulations. Indeed, the actual failure criterion is that the
stresses in the concrete exceed its tensile strength. What happens when considering an uncracked ice
body should only be seen as a preliminary stage to that process.
Pt C
(a) Overview
0.5 cw
r
(b) Close-up on the interface
Figure 11.21: Geometry of the finite element model for investigating the stresses in the concrete.
Tensile stresses in concrete start developing only once the ice layer cracks. Since it is not possible to
change the geometry during a simulation in COMSOL, the crack has to be artificially introduced from the
beginning. The corresponding geometry is shown in Figure 11.21. A hole is drawn just below the corner
86
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
where the ice touches the concrete, in order to avoid infinite stresses at that point. The stresses at the
centre of the crack at the concrete surface (point C) are calculated for different crack widths cw. Note the
radius of the hole r is defined as r = cw/8. The same boundary conditions (BCconv), material properties
and temperature cycle (C4M0) as in the study of the stresses in the ice (Section 11.4) are used.
The maximum tensile stresses at the surface of the concrete is shown in Figure 11.22. The curve depicts
a clear trend: the stresses become larger when reducing the crack width, and seem to go towards infinity
when the distance is shortened.
10-2
10-1
100
Crack width (mm)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Stress in the concrete (MPa)
Figure 11.22: Maximum tensile stress at the concrete surface as a function of the crack width.
One could therefore ask what a realistic crack width is, but this is not likely to be the main obstacle for
using this model. Indeed, the crack is introduced from the beginning which means that from a mechanical
point of view, stresses are building up around the crack, simply as if it was a given geometry. This
probably does not give a true picture of the stress release occurring when the ice cracks. Thus, it does
not seem appropriate to use this type of modelling for investigating the stresses in the concrete.
One solution has been proposed by Çopuroğlu and Schlangen [9]. They set up a lattice-based model in
which if an element is subjected to stresses larger than its strength, it is removed from the mesh from
the next time step, which enables for creating cracks. Therefore, the geometry is variable and remains
realistic during the entire simulation. In addition, the concrete lattice is made with different elements
simulating the aggregates, the cement matrix, the ITZ and the ice.
However, the model assumes constant mechanical parameters for the brine ice and a very low tensile
strength of the ITZ, set to 0.1 MPa, which could influence the crack path through the concrete. Besides,
the boundary conditions and the duration of the simulations are not clearly mentioned, although they
have a strong effect on the final results as shown previously in the present report. It would for instance
be very interesting to simulate a freeze-thaw experiment and see how the lattice-based model behaves,
especially if it is able to predict the experimental observations.
87
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
11.6
Refined thermal model
The previous models assume constant thermal properties for concrete and no supercooling in the outer
solution. However, recent research on the temperature distribution in concrete during freeze-thaw cycles
has shown that this is likely not to be the case [16]. Therefore, a refined thermal model based on ongoing
experiments has been implemented. The tests are carried out with mortar and also polyoxymethylene
(POM), a polymer being much less permeable than mortar and therefore not subjected to changes in
moisture state.
11.6.1
Experimental study
The experimental study is not part of this project, and is currently conducted as part of a PhD project at
DTU Byg. However, some results already available but not yet published are used in this report in order
to compare with the simulation results.
The specimens (both mortar and POM) are covered on all sides except the top one with a soft PVC
sheet and insulation (Armaflex). The top surface is covered with a solution, either pure water or 3% salt
solution. The freezing is done by Peltier elements in contact with the surface of the liquid. A thermocouple
is placed in the solution and used as feedback in the control loop of the Peltier elements. The temperature
cycle used is that of the slab test in CEN/TS 12390-9 [14].
The temperature is monitored at the surface of the concrete as well as at 5, 10, 15, 20 and 50 mm inwards,
by means of thermocouples cast in the samples. A more detailed description is given in Appendix G.
11.6.2
Finite element model
Although the specimens are not cylinders, a 2D-axisymmetric model is used in COMSOL. This is done
by defining the radius so that the area of upper surface is equal to the surface area of the test specimens.
The model is described in detail in the following.
Note that the geometry and the COMSOL feature allowing for defining the start and the end of the peak
supercooling peak were provided by PhD student Abdul Faheem (DTU Byg).
Boundary conditions
Since the cooling element is directly in contact with the outer solution, convection is not needed in this
model. The geometry and the boundary conditions are shown in Figure 11.23.
Both the PVC sheet and the insulation are drawn and defined with their thermal properties, listed in
Table 11.10. The outermost boundary temperature is set to 20°C. The temperature cycle Tcycle is applied
to the top surface of the solution as well as the vertical part of the PVC that exceeds the height of the
specimen.
88
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Tcycle
20°C
50
2
20
20
2
43
tsol
Figure 11.23: Geometry and boundary conditions for the refined thermal model. Blue: brine, dark grey: POM/mortar,
light grey: PVC, black: insulation.
Thermal properties of the materials
Standard thermal properties are used for POM [23]. The density is calculated by weighing a given
volume.
For mortar, since it is a porous medium, the properties depend on the water content. It is therefore
necessary to calculate the amount of freezable water inside the mortar, as the heat capacity and the
thermal conductivity are defined as weighted averages between the properties of the solid part and that
of the freezable water. The detailed calculation is shown in Appendix H, and leads to:
wfw = 0.04
vfw = 0.09
whcem = 0.28
vhcem = 0.31
ws = 0.68
vs = 0.60
(11.15)
where v is the volume fraction and w the mass fraction, and the subscripts fw, hcem and s respectively
stand for freezable water, hydrated cement and sand.
The heat capacity is thus expressed as:
cp,mor(T) = (whcem + ws) cp,sol + wfw
(Sl(T) ρb cp,3(T) + Si(T) ρi cp,i(T)
Si(T) ρb + Si(T) ρi
+ cp,pc(T)
)
(11.16)
cp,pc(T) corresponds to the latent heat and is defined in (11.1). Sl and Si are the volume fractions of
water and ice in the pores respectively, based on the pore size distribution and the depression of the
89
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
melting point. This is given by [66]:
Sl(T) = Sr + (1 −Sr)
[
1 +
(−Sf (T −Tm,ps)
N
)
1
1−m ]−m
Si(T) = 1 −Sl(T)
(11.17)
where Sf = 1.2227 MPa/K is the melting entropy of ice, Sr = 0.085 is the pore saturation of the liquid
like layer between the ice crystal and the pore wall, and N = 0.45 MPa and m = 0.41 are constants [66].
Tm,ps is the bulk melting point of the pore solution, and it is assumed that Tm,ps = 0°C. cp,pc is plotted on
Figure 11.24.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
0
2
4
6
8
cp,mor [J/g/K]
Figure 11.24: Specific heat capacity of the mortar as a function of the temperature, calculated from (11.16).
The thermal conductivity is given by:
kmor(T) = (vhcem + vs) ksol + vfw Sl(T) kb(T) + vfw Si(T) ki(T)
(11.18)
cp,sol and ksol are taken from Table 11.5 as the ”dry” parameters. Strictly speaking, these are properties
of concrete. However, since all the evaporable water has been removed before the measurement, it is
reasonable to assume them as being the properties of the solid matrix (which includes gel water).
Summary of the properties
Table 11.10: Thermal properties of soft PVC [36], Armaflex [2] [55], POM [23] and mortar (calculated) used in the
refined thermal model.
Material
ρ [kg/m3]
k [W/m/K]
cp [J/kg/K]
Soft PVC
1400
0.170
1400
Armaflex
100
0.033
2000
POM
1384
0.35
1950
Mortar
2637
Eq. (11.18)
Eq. (11.16)
The properties for all the materials are summarised in Table 11.10. The properties for the outer solution
are similar to the previous models, except that supercooling is now implemented.
90
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Supercooling in the outer solution
When considering supercooling in the outer solution, the approach for modelling the phase change pre-
sented in Section 11.1 has to be adapted. The supercooling temperature, Tsc, represents the temperature
at which the phase change takes place and is used as an input of the model. The method can be divided
into four steps (see Figure 11.25):
• (S1): Before the temperature reached Tsc, the specific heat capacity of the solution is that of its
liquid phase
• (S2) When the average temperature of the bottom half of the solution hits Tsc, a power heat source
artificially delivers energy to the whole volume to heat it up
• (S3) Once the temperature reaches Tm, the heat source is stopped
• (S4) From Tm, the specific heat capacity for a mix of water and ice (and considering supercooling)
is applied, according to (11.1)
Tsc
Tm
Figure 11.25: Sketch of the supercooling peak. (S1) in red, (S2) at Tsc, (S3) at Tm and (S4) in blue.
Regarding the second step, the power heat source is pseudo infinite. Indeed, to get a vertical peak corre-
sponding to an instantaneous energy release, the power supply should in theory be infinite. However, in
order for the solver to catch Tm and not exceed it too much, the value is adjusted with respect to the time
step to reach a temperature close to Tm as fast as possible. The reason for measuring the temperature
only in the bottom half of the solution will be discussed in Section 12.2.
Supercooling in mortar
Supercooling in mortar is synchronised with what happens in the outer solution: before the outer reaches
S3, the thermal properties of mortar correspond to a weighted average between the solid matrix and
supercooled water. After (S3), part of the water turns into ice, therefore the properties are calculated as
an average between the solid matrix, water and ice.
Note that the heat release (S2) triggered at Tsc is not implemented in the mortar. Although it does exist,
it is not possible to define a stop condition based on the temperature, since supercooling only occurs in
the pores. Using the average temperature of the mortar is not an option, as it would take the thermal
effect from the solid matrix into account.
91
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 11. Finite element models of a freeze-thaw experiment
Simulations
Four simulations are performed and the details for each of them are presented in Table 11.11. The test
ID indicates the type of specimen, the concentration of the outer solution in % and its thickness in mm.
As the supercooling temperature Tsc has not been studied in detail in this report, it is taken as an input
from the experimental data.
Table 11.11: Parameters used in the simulations of the refined model. Tsc is the supercooling temperature, taken
from the experimental results.
Test ID
POM3t3
POM0t3
POM3t9
MORTAR3t3
Specimen
POM
POM
POM
Mortar
Type of solution
3% brine
Pure water
3% brine
3% brine
Thickness of solution [mm]
3
3
9
3
Tsc [°C]
-3.35
-2.63
-4.98
-5.18
In addition, a sensitivity analysis is performed in order to emphasise the effect of each parameter. The
different simulations are listed in Table 11.12. The thermal conductivity and heat capacity of POM are
increased by 20% in Test 1, and decrease by 20% in Test 2 compared to the reference values given in
Table 11.10. This is made with POM3t3 as a reference. For the thermal conductivity of the outer solution,
a single additional simulation is performed where the value after supercooling is that of water (kw from
Table 11.2), instead of being that of a mix of ice and water (ksol from (11.4)). The latter is based on
MORTAR3t3 and not on POM3t3, only because the supercooling peak with POM occurs in the region of
the change in slope of the temperature cycle and makes it difficult to interpret the differences.
Table 11.12: Details of the sensitivity analysis. (∗): after supercooling. Before, the thermal conductivity of water is
used in all tests.
Parameter
Reference test
Reference value
Test 1
Test 2
kP OM [W/m/K]
POM3t3
0.35
0.28
0.42
cp,P OM [J/kg/K]
POM3t3
1950
1560
2340
ksol
(∗) [W/m/K]
MORTAR3t3
ksol
kw
-
92
==PAGE:103==
12
Validation of the models and discussion
In order to evaluate the accuracy of the finite element models when simulating complete freeze-thaw
cycles, results from the simulations are compared with experimental data. First, results from the exper-
iment described in Chapter 9 and modelled in Section 11.4.4 are analysed. While the temperatures in
the solution can be easily compared, the stresses from the simulations are put into perspective with the
amount of scaling collected in the experiment. Second, the results from the refined thermal modelled
are plotted together with the experimental temperature curves.
12.1
Solt frost scaling
Temperature
The comparison of the temperature curves in Figure 12.1 shows that there is a good overall agreement
between the simulated and the measured temperatures, except during freezing of brine.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Air - Comsol
Air - Exp.
Solution - Comsol
Solution - Exp.
(a) I+20
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Air - Comsol
Air - Exp.
Solution - Comsol
Solution - Exp.
(b) I-20c
Figure 12.1: Comparison between the simulation and the experiment for the temperature of the solution, in between
the bottom of the box and the test surface of the concrete specimen. The experimental data correspond to cycle n°1
underneath sample n°1 for both graphs.
93
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
The experimental temperature curves do not show any significant variation between every cycle, nor
between the samples. Raw temperature curves are shown in Appendices D and E.
Note that the large deviation in the temperature after 22 h is owed to the brine being drained from the test
tub and the freeze-thaw cabinet being shut off and the door being open to collect scaling. This means
that the temperatures between 22 and 24 h should be disregarded.
For both experiments there seems to be a significant discrepancy between measured and modelled
temperature during freezing of brine. The difference seems to disappear during thawing. This could
partly be explained by the fact that the air temperature does not reach -20°C but only -18.5°C, probably
due to the calibration of the thermocouples that control the freeze-thaw cabinet. However, in Figure 12.1b
around 15.5 h, a significant difference of 3.5°C is observed (-8.5°C in the experiment versus -12°C in
the simulation) while the air temperature almost matches with its set point. Another reason could be that
the initial temperature of the concrete specimens in the experiment was that 20°C, around 23°C at least.
Since the concrete temperature also influences that of brine, it could explain why the brine temperature
was higher than expected.
The discrepancy at subzero temperatures indicates that some adjustments are needed when modelling
the freezing of brine. This is likely to involve the thermal parameters of brine and the modelling of the
phase change. In all cases, the volume fraction of brine is used in the calculations. As the volume fraction
of brine depends on the temperature, one needs to make sure that the thermal exchanges between the
air and the brine/ice are properly modelled for this precise setup.
Therefore, it could clear out these uncertainties to run the same experiment with pure water, since the
volume fraction of water is obvious: 1 above 0°C and 0 below. Since the properties of pure water are well
defined, less parameters of the model are influenced by uncertainties, which makes it easier to interpret
the differences. This could give some indications on how to refine the model and explain the differences.
Amount of scaling
The mass of the scales that have been collected during every cycle of the experiments is reported in
Tables 12.1 and 12.2. For I-20c, there were technical difficulties leading to two cycles where no brine
was pumped into the the test tub, and a cycle without cooling. Most of the challenges could have been
avoided by conducting a full scale trial run of the two different experiments, but with very limited access
to the lab facilities that was not a possibility. Raw data and logbooks of the experiments are given in
Appendices C to E.
For the three cycles lacking either brine or cooling, no scaling was registered at all. For both glue-spall
theory and microscopic ice lens growth, a lack of either sufficient liquid or cooling should result in no
damage. To compensate for this, three extra cycles were added to to the I-20c experiment.
From Table 12.2 it can be seen that a significant amount of scaling was found for I+20 where S ≈100
g/m2, whereas little to none was seen for I-20c. Most of the very little amount of ”scaling” that was
94
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
Table 12.1: Amount of scaling collected after each cycle, in g. All reported weights have been corrected for the
average weight loss of the paper filter.
Cycle No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
I+20
0.20
0.19
0.51
0.69
1.34
2.31
4.56
-
-
-
I-20c
-*
-*
0.15
-**
0.15
0.00
0.18
0.13
0.05
0.04
(*) Pump error led to no inlet of brine
(**) Cooling error led to no cooling
Table 12.2: Cumulative mass of scales during the 7 cycles.
Test ID
I+20
I-20c
Total weight - ms [g]
9.8
0.7
Effective area - A [mm2]
90500
90000
Mass of scale per area - S [kg/m2]
0.1083
0.0078
measured in the I-20c experiment consisted of small debris of silicone and paint from the butyl rubber.
For photo documentation of the test surface after saturation and at the end of test, please see Appen-
dices D.3 and E.3 for sample 2 and 4 respectively.
This means that neither of the two damage mechanisms is acting sufficiently to damage the surface,
which makes it impossible to identify the dominant one. Although the absence of scaling was predicted for
glue-spalling as shown in the simulation plotted on Figure 11.20f, this was not expected for microscopic
ice lens growth.
In order for the microscopic ice lens growth to result in any damage, there is a necessity for a constant
water transport from the surface of the concrete to the pores. As a minimum, water supply should last
for how long it takes for the ice to grow to a size that can damage the concrete. Based on the theory
presented in in this report, it is difficult to say anything about how long time that would take.
Water supply from the outside mainly depends on how brine and ice coexist in the outer solution. Basi-
cally, two extremes can be defined:
• Many small ice crystals are suspended in brine. The slush allows liquid to flow freely through it and
has no mechanical strength
• A solid matrix of ice containing inclusions of brine. It only allows very limited transport of water, but
has some mechanical strength.
Since the surface of the concrete specimen is approximately -20°C and the brine is around 2°C when let
into the system, there is a possibility that some of the liquid freezes immediately on the concrete surface,
at the very moment of contact. Due to the thermal inertia of concrete, it is likely that this ice layer will
95
==PAGE:106==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
remain frozen, creating an ice cap that hinders transport of liquid from the outer solution to the concrete
pores.
The simulation does predict a temperature gradient in the brine right after inlet, the temperature being
the coldest near the concrete surface (approximately 2.5°C of a difference after 3 min, -4.5°C at the
concrete surface and -2°C at the bottom of the box.). However, the gradient vanishes after 20 min and
the temperature becomes homogeneous.
To get some qualitative insights about this, the evolution of ice formation was inspected during an extra
cycle. When removing the first specimen after 3 minutes, ice was only found on the bottom of the
concrete specimen, while there was still unfrozen brine in the tub. The layer of ice on the specimen was
very hard nearest the concrete surface, gradually turning to slush further away from the surface. The
ice was difficult to remove with a finger, but if scraping it with a nail or a plastic tool, some of it could be
scratched off. This was the hardest layer of ice observed during the entire inspection.
All inspections at 20, 40 and 60 minutes after brine inlet resembled each other, only with small variations.
When removing the specimen from the tub, all brine had transformed into ice. The longer time after inlet
of brine, the bigger the part of ice that was stuck to the bottom of the test tub when removing the specimen.
The last concrete specimen was completely free of ice, leaving all the ice at the bottom of the test tub.
Since the specimens were removed by hand, the handling could have had an effect on this. It was also
noticed that the ice layer closest to the concrete specimen became less hard over time, up to a point
where it resembled the rest of the ice in the final inspection.
The observations made above suggest the state of ice does change during freezing, although this is only
qualitative. Based these findings, it cannot be ruled out that the ice forms a solid cap on the concrete
surface, thus hindering the microscopic ice lens growth from feeding on the surface liquid and evolving
into a damaging mechanism.
The described observations suggest that the thermal gradient may exist for a longer time than in the
simulation. However, after some time, it is difficult to say if the coldest place has moved from the surface
of the concrete to the ice. This could definitely have an influence on ice formation and water transport
inside the concrete.
Although the experiment did not allow to shed light on the driving mechanism, the observations have
brought a new insight to the question. Indeed, the idea behind the setup presented in this report was
to challenge the glue-spall theory, by choosing the inlet time of brine that would hinder glue-spalling.
However, if the assumption that microscopic ice lens growth is hindered by the ice cap at the surface of the
concrete is correct, one could consider an experiment where microscopic ice lens growth is challenged.
This could be done by choosing a time of brine inlet that allows the formation of an ice cap as early as
possible in the cycle. In this way, glue-spall stress would have more time to develop, and should be less
affected by the change of brine inlet.
96
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
12.2
Temperature development in the specimens
The results from the simulations and from the experiments are plotted on Figures 12.2 to 12.5. Note that
the experimental data correspond to the first freeze-thaw cycle of each test.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(a) Complete cycle
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Time [h]
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(b) Close-up on the supercooling peak
Figure 12.2: Results for POM3t3 (3% brine, 3 mm).
When looking at the overall trend for POM, Figures 12.2 to 12.4, one can notice a good agreement
between the simulation and the experiment close to the surface. However, the difference between the
two becomes larger the further away from the specimen surface. This will be discussed with the results
from the sensitivity analysis. Moreover, the phase change during thawing is more pronounced in the
simulation, the experimental curves being almost straight all the way up from -20°C to +20°C.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(a) Complete cycle
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Time [h]
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(b) Close-up on the supercooling peak
Figure 12.3: Results for POM0t3 (pure water, 3 mm).
If looking closer at the supercooling peak, it can be seen that the height of the peak from the simulation
is close to that obtained in the experiment. This is due to the fact that the peak is triggered and stopped
97
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
by the average temperature only in the bottom half of the solution. The reason for this choice is that
in the simulation, the upper boundary of the solution is set to the temperature cycle. Thus, when the
temperature rises, a step gradient appears between the top and the bottom of the solution. Since the
top is colder, taking the average temperature of the whole volume would give a smaller value and lead
to a higher peak, that would exceed the melting point.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(a) Complete cycle
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
Time [h]
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(b) Close-up on the supercooling peak
Figure 12.4: Results for POM3t9 (3% brine, 9 mm).
For POM3t3 and POM3t9 the simulation lags behind the experimental values, where the supercooling
peak occurs earlier. This could be due to the thermal conductivity of brine not being modelled accurately.
For instance, a higher thermal conductivity would imply a quicker thermal response, and therefore the
temperature would become closer to the set point.
The same observations can be made with mortar, as shown in Figure 12.5. One common feature to all
curves, except for POM3t3, is that the peak from the simulation is narrower than the experimental one.
Moreover, it seems that a temperature offset appears after the peak, the curve being lowered (this is
especially visible on Figure 12.5b).
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(a) Complete cycle
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Time [h]
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Sim.
Surface
5 mm
10 mm
15 mm
20 mm
50 mm
(b) Close-up on the supercooling peak
Figure 12.5: Results for MORTAR3t3 (3% brine, 3 mm).
98
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
To explain the width of the peak, one needs to consider the way the temperature is controlled. As ex-
plained previously, a thermocouple placed approximately in the middle of the solution is used in the
feedback loop for controlling the power delivered to the Peltier element, by comparing the brine temper-
ature with the set temperature for the cycle. The difference between the two is largest at the top of the
supercooling peak. In order to compensate for the difference, an increased amount of power has to be
delivered. However, experimental data has shown that the power supply caps during the supercooling
peak, meaning that not enough power is delivered to the Peltier element. Since less heat (cooling) than
needed is supplied, the temperature drops slower, resulting in a wider peak.
This also gives an explanation for the discrepancies observed for the phase change during thawing.
When the temperature goes towards the melting point, it tends to flatten out in the simulation. In the
experiment, since the difference between the brine temperature and the set point increases, the Peltier
element delivers more energy to the solution to heat it up. As a consequence, no flattening can be seen
and the curves keep following the temperature cycle.
In the case of mortar, Figure 12.5b shows that the distance between the experimental curves is uneven,
probably due to the placing of the sensors. However, this could also be influenced by the moisture
state inside the mortar, since the part closer to the test surface is likely to be more saturated than the
bottom one. This has not been taken into consideration, but the model could be refined by making the
parameters dependent on the degree of saturation (varying along the depth).
In addition, it can be observed that the peak at 50 mm from the surface is much more pronounced in the
experiment compared to the simulation. This might be due to the modelling of supercooling in mortar.
Contrary to the outer solution, no sudden heat release is implemented. Indeed, the phase change in
mortar is driven by the outer solution: the top of the peak in the solution marks the change of properties
for the pore solution, from 100% liquid to a mix of liquid and ice. This means that the latent energy is
released, but it is done continuously and not instantaneously. However, since the temperature peak in
mortar is lower than the freezing point of the pore solution, the change of properties does not occur at the
peak of the heat capacity, but somewhere on the backside of it (see Figure 12.6). Altogether, a significant
amount of latent energy from the pore solution is not taken into account.
Adding a heat source in the mortar would therefore create a steeper temperature change, more similar
to the experimental curve. Moreover, it would make it possible to uncouple supercooling in the outer
solution and in the mortar to some extent, which could for instance be used to study where nucleation
occurs first. The current model is based on the assumption that supercooling occurs first in the outer
solution, but this would need to be verified. However, this is a challenging modification to implement
in the current model since it would require knowledge of the exact amount of energy released during
the temperature rise. Furthermore, the choice of the melting point of the pore solution could also be
questioned. It was set to 0°C, but it seems more realistic that this temperature depends on the ion
content of the pore solution, but also on how the sample is saturated before the test, as well as the type
of outer solution (pure water or salt water) and the number of cycles. There is also a possibility for this
99
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Temperature [°C]
0
2
4
6
8
cp,mor [J/g/K]
Theory
Simulation
Figure 12.6: Change of heat capacity. In theory, the temperature increases up to the melting point that matches
with the top of the heat capacity peak. In the model, the change occurs after the heat capacity peak, meaning that
some latent heat of the pore solution is lost.
temperature not to be constant along the depth of the mortar.
Another important point to highlight is the modelling of the boundary conditions. In the finite element
model, the boundary condition is set to the temperature cycle. Considering the real setup, this would
mean that the temperature of the surface of the Peltier element in contact with the solution is exactly equal
to the temperature cycle. In order to verify this assumption, the temperature at the surface of the Peltier
element should be investigated during the experiment, and especially during the supercooling peak.
This could for instance be done by placing a conductive material at the surface of the Peltier element
and measure its conductivity. If the relation between the conductivity and the temperature is known, it is
possible to measure the latter. In this way, the liquid will not directly influence the measurement.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Ref.
+20%
-20%
Surface
20 mm
50 mm
(a) Thermal conductivity of POM
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Ref.
+20%
-20%
Surface
20 mm
50 mm
(b) Heat capacity of POM
Figure 12.7: Results of the sensitivity analysis. For the sake of clarity, only three curves are plotted (surface of the
concrete, 20 mm and 50 mm inwards).
The results of the sensitivity analysis on the POM properties are shown in Figure 12.7. It can be seen that
these properties mainly have an impact away from the test surface, and could explain the discrepancies
noticed previously. The simulations were performed with standard values, but measuring them directly
100
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 12. Validation of the models and discussion
on the sample used for the experiment would definitely raise some uncertainties. This may be more
difficult for mortar since the properties depend on the moisture state, as seen in Table 11.5.
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Time [h]
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
Temperature [°C]
Exp.
Ref.
100% water
Surface
20 mm
50 mm
Figure 12.8: Sensitivity analysis for the thermal conductivity of the outer solution.
Figure 12.8 shows the sensitivity analysis for the thermal conductivity of the outer solution. Implementing
the conductivity of water, which is lower than that of a mix of water and ice, has two effects: it widens the
peak and suppresses the temperature offset that appears after it. These observations raise the question
of the thermal properties at the vicinity of the peak. In particular, one may consider the validity of the
composite model (modified Maxwell-Eucken formula in (11.4)) right after the top of the peak.
Nevertheless, this is a bit contradictory with Figure 12.2, where the two peaks look very similar. In this
case, it is likely that the Peltier element was able to supply enough heat to follow the set point. Applying
the thermal conductivity of water everywhere would widen the peak and create a discrepancy with the
experiment.
Experimental validations of some parts of the model are therefore needed in order to have a better
understanding of the possible discrepancies and the ability to correct them, if necessary. However,
obtaining an accurate model of the temperature development in the vicinity of the brine/concrete interface
could be useful with respect to the identification of the driving mechanism of salt frost scaling. Indeed,
by applying the model to the experimental setup, one could simulate different times of water inlet and
design a test that would allow for the formation of an ice cap as early as possible.
Furthermore, the model would also be useful for studying the impact of supercooling on ice nucleation.
Since the heat release of the phase change makes the temperature rise in both the concrete and the
outer solution, there is a possibility for ice crystals already formed in the concrete to melt during the peak.
Depending on where this happens and therefore where ice is still present after the temperature rise, the
subsequent cooling could result in these existing crystals growing instead of forming new ones, allowing
for microscopic ice lens growth in specific places.
101
==PAGE:112==
13
Conclusion
The two experiments carried out in this study, where the time of brine inlet during a freeze-thaw test was
varied, have not allowed for identifying the driving mechanism responsible for salt frost scaling. Since no
scaling was observed when the brine solution was added at a later stage of the cycle, it can be concluded
that both damage mechanisms were hindered.
The experiment was quantitatively analysed from the glue-spalling point of view by looking at the stresses
in the ice layer by means of a finite element model. Cracking of the ice layer is a necessary but not a
sufficient condition to induce damaging stresses on the surface of the concrete. The model can therefore
only predict the absence of scaling in the case where the ice does not crack. It is not possible to predict
with certainty what will happen when the ice cracks.
Based on the qualitative observations of the brine when it was let in, it is likely that an ice cap forms at
the surface of the concrete, if the concrete is cold enough. This ice cap prevents microscopic ice lens
growth occurring. Thus, it is possible to address the question of the driving mechanism from another
angle: instead of challenging the glue-spall theory by choosing a time of brine inlet that prevents the
ice from cracking, one could challenge microscopic ice lens growth by choosing this time as early as
possible, on condition that an ice cap is formed right after brine inlet. In this way, microscopic ice lens
growth would be hindered and only glue-spalling could act.
The finite elements models are also leads for further investigation. Although it seems difficult to make
more use of the thermo-mechanical model, at least as it is due to the reasons mentioned previously, the
refined thermal model could bring new perspectives to the discussion. Indeed, it makes is possible to
study ice nucleation in the vicinity of the supercooling peak, both in the outer solution and in the surface
layer on concrete. This could give some indications on the place where ice is likely to form after the
peak.
102
==PAGE:113==
14
Possibilities for continuation
Based on the knowledge and experience that have been collected throughout this project, several ideas
of how to develop the same have been considered. In the following, four experiments will be presented.
Except for the experiment where the inlet time of brine is varied, the starting condition for the others are
same as for the I+20 experiment. This means that the brine and the concrete both are inside the test
tub from the very beginning of the cycle. This way any unforeseen rapid changes of temperature in the
brine are avoided. Hence no risk of shutting down the microscopic ice lens growth.
Glass test
The first experiment aims to limit the glue-spall stress. Here the glue-spall stress in the concrete is
relieved by limiting the contraction of the ice.
A pane of borosilicate glass is placed in the bottom of the test tub. The one side of the glass is sandblasted
and in the first experiment facing upwards towards the concrete specimens. The rough surface ensures
a good grip for the ice.
Borosilicate glass, relative to other types of glass, has a very low linear expansion coefficient of approx-
imately α = 3 × 10−6 K−1, which falls in between the ones for concrete and ice.
If the ice to glass ratio is dimensioned correctly, the very stiff glass should limit the contraction of the ice,
without adding to the glue-spall stress in the concrete, and hence reduce the overall amount of observed
scaling.
This should not lead to any changes in relation to microscopic ice lens growth, other than for the conse-
quences of having added extra thermal mass in the brine.
To determine the consequence to microscopic ice lens growth if adding the thermal mass, the same
experiment could be repeated with the glass pane having the smooth side facing up. In order to make it
even more difficult for the ice to attach to this side, a layer of wax (or equivalent) could be applied to the
surface.
103
==PAGE:114==
Chapter 14. Possibilities for continuation
Sponge test
This experiment also aims to limit the glue-spall stress, but with a different approach. The general idea
behind it is that the ice becomes ”pre-cracked” into small islands akin to mud-cracks, the critical diameter
of which is too short to build up sufficiently high glue-spall stress to damage the concrete.
This is done by replacing the spacers in the bottom of the test tub with a sponge, and placing the concrete
specimen on top of it.
The sponge wall consists of a material with a closed cell structure, with no ability to take up water.
Furthermore, the average pores’ diameter in the sponge should be significantly smaller, relative to the
critical diameter.
While this should eliminate glue-spall stress, the porosity of the sponge allows for liquid transport to the
surface of the concrete and thus not affect the microscopic ice lens growth.
Varying spacer height
In the third experiment, it is suggested to let the thickness of the ice layer be the variable, although some
uncertainties are tied to this experiment. This is effectively done by replacing the spacers in the bottom
of the test tub that the concrete specimens are resting on.
As explained in Section 11.4.3, the numerical model indicates that the thicker the ice layer, the longer it
takes to lower the temperature and hence to build up stresses in the ice layer. Although the direct effect
on the glue spall stresses is unknown, a lower stress in the ice should lead to less cracks in the ice and
therefore also less scaling.
Even though it is known that linear elastic fracture mechanics does not directly apply to the materials
being tested in this experiment, Figure 8.10 shows that if LEFM is applied in any event, a thicker ice layer
should lead to deeper cracks.
There is a slight risk that varying the thickness of the ice layer also could have an effect on the microscopic
ice lens growth. Since a thicker layer of ice will take longer to freeze to a given temperature, this prolongs
the time that the liquid transport to the inside of the concrete is active. Therefore, an increase of scaling
with a thicker ice layer is also a possibility.
Varying inlet time of brine
In Section 12.2, it became clear that when waiting with the inlet of brine into the test tub until the concrete
became very cold, a hard layer of ice forms on the concrete surface. A preliminary test indicated that
this ice layer may be cold enough to hinder the transport of liquid through it.
If so, then this could be used to test for the opposite of what was initially considered, namely to verify
glue-spall stress by knowing that it is the only damage mechanism that should lead to scaling.
It should be mentioned that a number of uncertainties may be connected to this experiment, e.g. the liquid
104
==PAGE:115==
Chapter 14. Possibilities for continuation
transport through the ice cap. In addition, the earlier in the temperature cycle the brine is let into the test
tub, the likelihood that microscopic ice lens growth becomes active again increases. Since this will result
in a higher equilibrium temperature between the brine and the concrete, it will lower the possibility of
creating an ice cap on the concrete surface.
For the experiments that have been conducted in this report, it was originally planned to use a see-saw
hoist that automates the process of lifting the specimen up from the bottom of the test tub at predefined
time intervals.
Such a hoist is a benefit to have, if not collecting potential scales everyday, and still want to control the
saturation process. If not collecting the scales every day, it is a risk that the scales pile up between the
concrete specimen and the bottom of the test tub, and in the case of a lot of scaling, eventually will close
the space between the two.
The scales will hold on to the brine by capillary suction, even if the test tub is drained. This facilitates a
moisture transport directly to the surface of the concrete that is present during the entire cycle, indepen-
dent of the time of inlet of brine.
Because of the Covid-19 situation, the production of the see-saw hoist became delayed, and was only
finalised after the last of the experiments was carried out. For a presentation of the finalised hoist and a
manual for how to operate it, see Appendix F.
105
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1] D. G. Archer and R. W. Carter. Thermodynamic properties of the NaCl + H2O system. 4. Heat ca-
pacities of H2O and NaCl(aq) in cold-stable and supercooled states. Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, 104(35):8563–8584, 2000.
[2] Armacell.
ArmaFlex Datasheet.
https://local.armacell.com/fileadmin/cms/uk/products/en/
AFArmaFlexClassORangeUKROI.pdf, 2020. Accessed on June 10th, 2020.
[3] P. Barnes, D. Tabor, and J. C. F. Walker. The Friction and Creep of Polycrystalline Ice. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 324(1557):127–155,
1971.
[4] J.-C. Benet, A. Ramirez-Martinez, F. Ouedraogo, F. Cherblanc, J.-C. Bénet, A. Ramirez-Martinez,
F. Ouedraogo, and F. Cherblanc. Measurement of the chemical potential of a liquid in porous media.
Journal of Porous Media, 15(11):1019–1029, 2012.
[5] J. L. Beuth. Cracking of thin bonded films in residual tension. International Journal of Solids and
Structures, 29(13):1657–1675, 1992.
[6] M. Brun, A. Lallemand, J.-F. Quinson, and C. Eyraud. A new method for the simultaneous deter-
mination of the size and shape of pores: the thermoporometry. Thermochimica Acta, 21(1):59–88,
1977.
[7] T. R. Butkovich. Thermal expansion of ice. Journal of Applied Physics, 30(3):350–353, 1959.
[8] M. M. Conde, M. Rovere, and P. Gallo. Molecular dynamics simulations of freezing-point depression
of TIP4P/2005 water in solution with NaCl. Journal of Molecular Liquids, 261:513–519, jul 2018.
[9] O. Çopuroğlu and E. Schlangen. Modeling of frost salt scaling. Cement and Concrete Research,
38(1):27–39, 2008.
[10] D. J. Corr, P. J. M. Monteiro, and J. Bastacky. Microscopic Characterization of Ice Morphology in
Entrained Air Voids. Materials Journal, 99(2):190–195, 2002.
[11] M. S. Darwish.
Nucleation and Growth.
https://feaweb.aub.edu.lb/research/cfd/documents/04%
Nucleation.pdf, 2020. Accessed on June 8th, 2020.
[12] R. Defay, I. Prigogine, A. Bellemans, and D. H. Everett. Surface Tension and Adsorption. Longmans,
London, 1966.
[13] M. D. Drory and A. G. Evans. Experimental Observations of Substrate Fracture Caused by Resid-
ually Stressed Films. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 73(3):634–638, 1990.
[14] DS/CEN/TS 12390-9. Testing hardened concrete-Part 9: Freeze-thaw resistance with de-icing salts
- Scaling. Danish Standards Association, 2016.
107
==PAGE:118==
[15] D. H. Everett. The thermodynamics of frost damage to porous solids. Transactions of the Faraday
Society, 57:1541–1551, 1961.
[16] A. Faheem and M. T. Hasholt. Temperature Distribution in Concrete during freeze-thaw Test. In
Abstract from 73rd RILEM Annual Week & International Conference on Innovative materials for
Sustainable Civil Engineering (IMSCE), Nanjing, China, 2019. APA.
[17] J. Fink. Theory of action. In Johannes Fink, editor, Petroleum Engineer’s Guide to Oil Field Chem-
icals and Fluids, chapter Antifreeze, page 854. Elsevier, 2015.
[18] S. T. Gulati and H. E. Hagy. Theory of the Narrow Sandwich Seal. Journal of the American Ceramic
Society, 61(5-6):260–263, 1978.
[19] S. T. Gulati and H. E. Hagy. Analysis and Measurement of Glue-Spall Stresses in Glass-Epoxy
Bonds. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 65(1):1–5, 1982.
[20] J. Haber. IUPAC ”Manual on Catalyst Characterization”. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 63(9):1227–
1246, 1991.
[21] M. F. Hadi. Fluorescence spectrum analysis using Fourier series modeling for Fluorescein solution
in Ethanol. Atti Della ”Fondazione Giorgio Ronchi”, 2, 2011.
[22] Z. Hashin and S. Shtrikman. A variational approach to the theory of the elastic behaviour of multi-
phase materials. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 11:127–140, 1963.
[23] J. He, L. Zhang, and C. Li. Thermal conductivity and tribological properties of POM-Cu composites.
Polymer Engineering and Science, 50(11):2153–2159, 2010.
[24] P. Hoekstra and R. D. Miller. On the mobility of water molecules in the transition layer between ice
and a solid surface. Journal of Colloid And Interface Science, 25(2):166–173, 1967.
[25] T. Ingstrup. Freezing of a fluorescein sodium solution. https://youtu.be/Ray8aVOiRwc, 2020.
[26] T. Ingstrup. Freezing of a fluorescein sodium solution with NaCl. https://youtu.be/2w8QdtHXlBE,
2020.
[27] S. Jacobsen, D. H. Sœther, and E. J. Sellevold. Frost testing of high strength concrete: frost/salt
scaling at different cooling rates. Materials and Structures/materiaux Et Constructions, 30(1):33–42,
1997.
[28] J.-Y. Jehng, D. T. Sprague, and W. P. Halperin. Pore structure of hydrating cement paste by magnetic
resonance relaxation analysis and freezing. Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 14(7-8):785–791, 1996.
[29] G. Kaptay. The gibbs equation versus the kelvin and the gibbs-thomson equations to describe nucle-
ation and equilibrium of nano-materials. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 12(3):2625–
2633, 2012.
108
==PAGE:119==
[30] F. L. Levy. A modified MaxwelI-Eucken equation for calculating the thermal conductivity of two-
component solutions or mixtures. International Journal of Refrigeration, 4(4):223–225, 1981.
[31] F. L. Levy.
The thermal conductivity of commercial brines and seawater in the freezing range.
International Journal of Refrigeration, 5(5):155–159, 1981.
[32] D. R. Lide. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 90th Edition. CRC Press/Taylor and Francis,
Boca Raton, Florida, USA, 2010.
[33] S. Lindmark. Mechanisms of Salt Frost Scaling of Portland Cement-bound Materials: Studies and
Hypothesis. PhD thesis, Lund University, Sweden, 1998.
[34] S. Lindmark. Recapitulation of an old hypothesis on the mechanism(s) of salt frost scaling. In
S. Jacobsen, K. T. Fosså, G. Shamsutdinova, and A. Shpak, editors, Workshop Proceedings No. 16:
Concrete in Arctic Conditions, pages 45–49, Trondheim, Norway, 2019. Nordic Concrete Federation.
[35] M. Liu, M. Jia, H. Pan, L. Li, M. Chang, H. Ren, F. Argoul, S. Zhang, and J. Xu. Instrument response
standard in time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy at visible wavelength: quenched fluorescein
sodium. Applied spectroscopy, 68(5):577–583, 2014.
[36] MakeItFrom.com. Plasticized (Flexible) Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC-P). https://www.makeitfrom.com/
material-properties/Plasticized-Flexible-Polyvinyl-Chloride-PVC-P, 2020.
Accessed on June 10th,
2020.
[37] N. Maréchal, E. Guérin, E. Galin, S. Mérillou, and N. Mérillou. Heat Transfer Simulation for Modeling
Realistic Winter Sceneries. Computer Graphics Forum, 29(2):449–458, 2010.
[38] P. K. Metha and P. J. M. Monteiro. Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and Materials (3rd edition).
McGraw-Hill, New-York, 2006.
[39] O. A. Mohamed, K. L. Rens, and J. J. Stalnaker. Factors affecting resistance of concrete to freezing
and thawing damage. Journal of Materials in Civil Engineering, 12(1):26–32, 2000.
[40] R. G. Mortimer. Physical Chemistry, 3rd Edition. Elsevier Inc., 2008.
[41] H. J. Oel and V. D. Fréchette. Stress Distribution in Multiphase Systems: I, Composites with Planar
Interfaces. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 50(10):542–549, 1967.
[42] M. Pigeon, J. Marchand, and R. Pleau. Frost resistant concrete. Construction and Building Materi-
als, 10(5):339–348, 1996.
[43] R. Pippan, S. Wurster, and D. Kiener. Fracture mechanics of micro samples: Fundamental consid-
erations. Materials and Design, 159:252–267, dec 2018.
[44] D. Porter and K. Easterling. Phase transformations in metals and alloys. Chapman and Hall, 1981.
109
==PAGE:120==
[45] E. R. Pounder. The Physics of Ice. Pergamon, 1965.
[46] T. C. Powers and R. A. Helmut. Theory of Volume Changes in Hardened Portland Cement Paste
During Freezing. Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, 32:285–297, 1953.
[47] Y. Pu, W. Wang, R. B. Dorshow, and R. R. Alfano. Picosecond polarization spectroscopy of fluores-
cein attached to different molecular volume polymer influenced by rotational motion. In Proceedings
of Spie - the International Society for Optical Engineering, volume 8258, page 825818. SPIE, feb
2012.
[48] M. L. V. Ramires, C. A. Nieto de Castro, Y. Nagasaka, A. Nagashima, M. J. Assael, and W. A.
Wakeham. Standard Reference Data for the Thermal Conductivity of Water. Journal of Physical
and Chemical Reference Data, 24(3):1377–1381, 1995.
[49] L. E. Raraty and D. Tabor. The Adhesion and Strength Properties of Ice. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 245(1241):184–201, 1958.
[50] M. Rosenqvist, M. Oxfall, K. Fridh, and M. Hassanzadeh. A test method to assess the frost resis-
tance of concrete at the waterline of hydraulic structures. Materials and Structures/Materiaux et
Constructions, 48(8):2403–2415, 2015.
[51] R. A. Schapery. Thermal Expansion Coefficients of Composite Materials Based on Energy Princi-
ples. Journal of Composite Materials, 2(3):380–404, 1968.
[52] E. J. Sellevold and T. Farstad. Frost/salt-testing of concrete. Effect of test parameters and concrete
moisture history. Nordic Concrete Research, 10:121–138, 1991.
[53] M. J. Setzer. Mechanical stability criterion, triple-phase condition, and pressure differences of matter
condensed in a porous matrix. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 235(1):170–182, 2001.
[54] Z. Sun and G. W. Scherer. Effect of air voids on salt scaling and internal freezing. Cement and
Concrete Research, 40(2):260–270, 2010.
[55] Thermtest Instruments. Materials Thermal Properties Database. https://thermtest.com/materials-
database#rubber, 2019. Accessed on June 5th, 2020.
[56] M. D. Thouless, A. G. Evans, M. F. Ashby, and J. W. Hutchinson. The Edge Cracking and Spalling
of Brittle Plates. Acro mefall, 35(6):1333–1341, 1987.
[57] G. W. Timco and S. O’brien. Flexural strength equation for sea ice. Cold Regions Science and
Technology, 22(3):285–298, 1994.
[58] University of Cambridge.
The biaxial modulus.
https://www.doitpoms.ac.uk/tlplib/coating_
mechanics/biaxial.php, 2020. Accessed on March 24th, 2020.
110
==PAGE:121==
[59] J. J. Valenza and G. W. Scherer. Mechanism for salt scaling. Journal of the American Ceramic
Society, 89(4):1161–1179, 2006.
[60] J. J. Valenza and G. W. Scherer. Mechanism for salt scaling of a cementitious surface. Materials
and Structures/Materiaux et Constructions, 40(3):259–268, apr 2007.
[61] G. J. Verbeck and P. Klieger. Studies of ”Salt” Scaling of Concrete. Highway Research Board
Bulletin, (150):1–17, 1957.
[62] M. Vignes and K. M. Dijkema. A model for the freezing of water in a dispersed medium. Journal of
Colloid And Interface Science, 49(2):165–172, 1974.
[63] K. Wang and P. J. M. Monteiro. Optical microscopy analysis of ice formation and propagation in
concrete. L’industria Italiana del Cemento, 69(1):64–81, 1999.
[64] W. F. Weeks. Tensile strength of NaCl ice. Journal of Glaciology, 4(31):25–52, 1962.
[65] T. Ye, Z. Suo, and A. G. Evans. Thin film cracking and the roles of substrate and interface. Interna-
tional Journal of Solids and Structures, 29(21):2639–2648, 1992.
[66] Q. Zeng, T. Fen-Chong, P. Dangla, and K. Li. A study of freezing behavior of cementitious materials
by poromechanical approach. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 48(22-23):3267–3273,
2011.
[67] H. Zhu, R. C. Derksen, C. R. Krause, R. D. Fox, R. D. Brazee, and H. E. Ozkan. Fluorescent Intensity
of Dye Solutions under Different pH Conditions. Journal of ASTM International, 2(6):447–453, 2005.
111
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
Appendices
==PAGE:124==
A
LabVIEW interface - Freezer control
The freeze-thaw cabinet is controlled with a LabVIEW interface shown in Figure A.1.
Figure A.1: LabVIEW interface - Display.
The temperature cycle that the air should follow has to be entered in the ”Ramps” table on the right hand
side. Each line corresponds to a stage of the cycle where can be defined: the start temperature, the end
temperature, the duration, the activation of the pump or the drain (0 for none, 1 for pump, 2 for drain), the
corresponding starting time (0 corresponds to the start of the current time interval) and the ending time.
A line is activated simply by clicking on it, and deactivated by right-click > Data operation > Delete row.
The two graphs on Figure A.1 correspond to the entire test (up) and the past n h, n being the duration
of one cycle (down).
The pump and the drain have to be connected to the two corresponding electrical outlets in order to be
controlled.
The selection of the activated thermocouples and the sampling time is done in the ”Setup” tab, on the
upper left hand corner. Then, each thermocouple is activated by clicking on the corresponding arrow
(which becomes green).
When clicking on ”Run” (arrow on the upper left hand corner), the cycle and the logging start. The data
are saved in a text file.
114
==PAGE:125==
B
Calibration of thermocouples
Prior to the experiment, all the thermocouples are calibrated by performing two measurements in which
the sensors are placed in:
• A mix of water and ice cubes, approximately at 0°C (subscript cold)
• Water that has been brought to a boil (at 100°C), therefore around 90°C when the sensors are
plunged into the water (subscript hot)
In either case, the measurements of the thermocouples are logged (subscript mes) and the temperature of
the mix is measured with a reference thermometer (subscript ref). It is assumed that the thermocouples
have a linear behaviour between the two measurements, therefore the corrected temperature Tcor can
be calculated from the temperature measured Tmes:
Tcor = a Tcor + b
(B.1)
where
a = Tref,cold −Tref,hot
Tmes,cold −Tmes,hot
and
b = Tref,cold −a Tmes,cold
The coefficients a and b are given in Table B.1.
Table B.1: Correction factors for the thermocouples.
Thermocouple
Temp101 Temp103 Temp111 Temp112 Temp113 Temp114 Temp115 Temp116 Temp117 Temp118 Temp119 Temp120
Reference temperature
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Measured temperature
-0.8
-0.65
-0.31
-0.38
-0.38
-0.39
-0.43
-0.38
-0.3
-0.32
-0.4
-0.39
Reference temperature
90
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
88.5
Measured temperature
89.87
87.51
87.98
87.97
87.96
87.93
87.93
87.87
87.99
88.01
87.93
87.94
Correction: aT+b
a
0.993
1.004
1.002
1.002
1.002
1.002
1.002
1.003
1.002
1.002
1.002
1.002
b
0.794
0.648
0.315
0.381
0.379
0.386
0.427
0.38
0.304
0.317
0.401
0.395
115
==PAGE:126==
Average filter weight
Filter number
Weight
(xi-xmean)2
Date
Weight
[g]
[g2]
[g]
1
3.36
0.0009
08-06-20
16.72
2
3.35
0.0004
09-06-20
15.71
3
3.33
7.89E-31
10-06-20
15.67
4
3.33
7.89E-31
11-06-20
15.67
5
3.3
0.0009
mf,ave
0.21
6
3.29
0.0016
7
3.29
0.0016
8
3.32
1E-04
Date
Weight
9
3.29
0.0016
[g]
10
3.27
0.0036
18-06-20
7.71
11
3.35
0.0004
19-06-20
7.15
12
3.34
0.0001
20-06-20
7.15
13
3.33
7.89E-31
21-06-20
7.15
14
3.32
1E-04
mf,ave
0.11
15
3.28
0.0025
16
3.35
0.0004
17
3.31
0.0004
18
3.32
1E-04
19
3.31
0.0004
20
3.33
7.89E-31
21
3.38
0.0025
22
3.35
0.0004
23
3.32
1E-04
24
3.4
0.0049
25
3.35
0.0004
26
3.32
1E-04
27
3.41
0.0064
28
3.38
0.0025
29
3.34
0.0001
30
3.28
0.0025
Sum
99.9
0.035
Population number
n
30 -
xmean
3.33 g
Population - SD
σ
0.034157 g
Standar error of mean - SEM
0.006236 g
Weight of petri dish used for sample 2 cycle 4
mdish
101.11 g
mdish+xmean
104.44
Measurement of weightdrop of 5 filters (old type)
Measurement of weightdrop of 5 filters (new type)
C
Paper filter weight and weight loss
116
==PAGE:127==
D
Freeze-thaw experiment - Sample 2
D.1
Quantification of scaling
Sample 2
H
W1
W2
W1 is the dimension perpendicular to the side marked with number and test-surface
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
2.1
49.2
150.6
150
2.2
49.2
150.5
150.3
2.3
49.7
150.6
150.3
2.4
51.0
150.5
150.3
Experiment I - inlet of brine at t=0h
Dry weight
Wet weight + wight from oven
Dish + paper
Dish + paper
All weigths are to be measured to a persision of minimum 0,1 gram
[g]
29-05-20
30-05-20
31-05-20
01-06-20
02-06-20
03-06-20
04-06-20
05-06-20
06-06-20
07-06-20
08-06-20
2C1
106.43
113.16
106.44
106.43
106.42
106.45
106.44
106.44
106.42
106.42
106.44
106.42
2C2
117.05
124.05
117.05
117.05
117.07
117.06
117.05
117.04
117.04
117.04
117.03
2C3
110.73
118.33
111.05
111.09
111.09
111.06
111.03
111.04
111.05
111.04
2C4
104.44
112.08
104.98
104.96
104.96
104.92
104.93
104.92
104.92
2C5
110.38
120.73
111.58
111.57
111.51
111.53
111.56
111.52
2C6
106.12
118.54
108.26
108.22
108.23
108.22
108.22
2C7
104.28
119.75
108.63
108.65
108.64
108.63
per cycle per cycle corr.
Cumulative
[g]
[g]
[g]
2C1
-0.01
0.2
0.2
Quantification of result
2C2
-0.02
0.19
0.39
Effective area A rounded to nearest 100 mm2
90500 mm^2
2C3
0.3
0.51
0.9
Cumulative mass of dried scale ms,n
9.8 g
2C4
0.48
0.69
1.59
Normalised scaling Sn
0.1083 kg/m2
2C5
1.13
1.34
2.93
2C6
2.1
2.31
5.24
2C7
4.35
4.56
9.8
Dimensions
Weight 
117
==PAGE:128==
D.2
Log book
Inlet of brine at start of cycle (I+20).
18.05.2020
08:41 - Samples are picked up in climate chamber for cutting
09:15 - Washed after cutting
09:19 - Samples are back in climate chamber
22.05.2020
10:54 - Picked up in climate chamber for sealing
12:07 - Placed back in climate chamber
25.05.2020
09:47 - Start of saturation
The samples are resting in a tub on 6 mm spacers with a total water column
height of 11.2 mm.
27.05.2020
07:23 - Check of water level for saturation
The water level was measured in to 11.25 in the middle
of the saturation tub.
28.05.2020
10:20 - End of saturation
10:30 - Start of freeze thaw test
118
==PAGE:129==
29.05.2020
08:30 - End of cycle 1
There is a minimal amount of scale, and white silicone make up for approxi-
mately half of the debris.
30.05.2020
08:30 - End of cycle 2
Still some silicone in the filter, but less than for cycle 1.
31.05.2020
08:30 - End of cycle 3
Almost no silicone, and more scaling than the previous days.
01.06.2020
08:30 - Changing the temperature setting in the small refrigerator
The temperature of the brine
was high and increasing. Setting of the fridge was on 5 and is changed to max. This may be reduced to
6 in 1-2 days.
02.06.2020
08:30 - End of cycle 5
We forgot to measure the initial dry weight of the dish + filter paper. We will
instead measure the weight of the dish after the experiment and add an average paper weight based
on 5 paper filters. The temperature in the small refrigerator kept rising overnight. We suspect that
the excitation pump is the cause, since the temperature in the other vessel is approximately 3-4°C lower
(measured to 4.5°C with thermometer). The pump setting for the pump have been changed from medium
to minimum effect. Furthermore the door of the refrigerator have been taped firmly shut. Small flakes
of green paint was noticed amongst the collected scale. By inspection of the butyl rubber on the test
specimens, it is seen that a lot of paint is missing at especially the side turning downwards, while placed
on the grill for drying.
03.06.2020
09:0 - End of cycle 6
The holders for the temperature sensors in both top and bottom of the freeze thaw
cabinet have been taken out, since they were needed by other students in the lab. Instead they have
been taped into position. The door to the oven where the drying samples are placed was not properly
closed the day before. Because it was only a small air gap between the door frame and oven, the oven
119
==PAGE:130==
had no problem keeping a stable temperature. This would have resulted in a larger air change and most
probably led to a faster drying.
08.06.2020
Registration of drying weights stopped
120
==PAGE:131==
D.3
Photo documentation of test surface
In this section all the photo documentation if found for concrete specimens cut from samples 2. On the
left hand side is shown the specimen after saturation, and the right hand side is after the 7th cycle.
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure D.1: Sample 2.1.
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure D.2: Sample 2.2.
121
==PAGE:132==
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test.
Figure D.3: Sample 2.3
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure D.4: Sample 2.4.
122
==PAGE:133==
D.4
Raw data for temperature curves
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.5: Brine underneath sample 2.1.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.6: Brine underneath sample 2.2.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.7: Brine underneath sample 2.3.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.8: Brine underneath sample 2.4.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.9: Brine in the middle of the box.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.10: Air in the freeze-thaw cabinet.
123
==PAGE:134==
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure D.11: Air in the room
Table D.1: Temperature in the brine at time of inlet.
Cycle nb.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
T [°C]
5.2
7.4
7.6
8.5
9.0
8.8
8.6
124
==PAGE:135==
E
Freeze-thaw experiment - Sample 4
E.1
Quantification of scaling
Sample 4
H
W1
W2
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
4.1
50.0
150.0
150.0
4.2
48.7
150.0
150.0
4.3
49.5
150.0
150.0
4.4
52.6
150.0
150.0
Experiment II - Inlet of brine at t=14h
Dry weight
Wet weight + wight from oven
Dish + paper
Dish + paper
All weigths are to be measured to a persision of minimum 0,1 gram
[g]
07-06-20
08-06-20
09-06-20
10-06-20
11-06-20
12-06-20
13-06-20
14-06-20
15-06-20
16-06-20
17-06-20
18-06-20
4C1
4C2
4C3
71.35
78.06
71.31
71.32
71.31
71.31
71.29
71.34
71.34
71.30
71.29
71.3
71.3
4C4
4C5
110.76
119
110.71
110.71
110.7
110.78
110.78
110.70
110.70
110.7
110.7
4C6
106.08
112.28
105.88
105.87
105.95
105.95
105.89
105.88
105.88
105.88
4C7
104.48
113.33
104.48
104.51
104.52
104.45
104.46
104.46
104.46
4C8
95.43
102.7
95.42
95.41
95.36
95.36
95.36
95.35
4C9
117.08
123.69
116.98
116.93
116.92
116.93
116.92
4C10
106.49
112.92
106.35
106.32
106.33
106.32
per cycle
per cycle cor.
Cumulative
[g]
[g]
[g]
4C1
0
Quantification of result
4C2
0
Effective area A rounded to nearest 100 mm2
90000 mm^2
4C3
-0.06
0.15
0.15
Cumulative mass of dried scale ms,n
0.7 g
4C4
0.15
Normalised scaling Sn
0.0078 kg/m2
4C5
-0.06
0.15
0.3
4C6
-0.21
0.00
0.3
4C7
-0.03
0.18
0.48
4C8
-0.08
0.13
0.61
4C9
-0.16
0.05
0.66
4C10
-0.17
0.04
0.7
Dimensions
Weight 
125
==PAGE:136==
E.2
Log book
Inlet of brine at the end of plateau at -20°C (I-20c). Circulation pump is only turned on when in the
laboratory between 08:00 and 10:30.
25.05.2020
07:57 - Picked up in climate chamber for cutting
The plastic bag that was used for sealing the
sample had 2 holes in the bottom corners. It seems as if this was due to the samples had been moved
around over time.
08:33 - Washed after cutting
09:47 - Placed back in climate chamber
29.05.2020
08:19 - Picked up in climate chamber for sealing
Sample 4.3 was dropped with the test surface
facing down, landing on paper towels with silicone on them. Parts of the surface became contaminated
with silicone. Excess silicone was scraped off, but a thin film was still left on the concrete surface.
09:41 - Placed back in climate chamber
01.06.2020
Saturation started
04.06.2020
07:49 - End of saturation
10:30 - Cycle 1 started
In order to avoid heat accumulation in the brine, the excitation pump is turned
off whenever we are not in the lab. Every day it is turned on for a couple of hours, to ensure a uniform
concentration and temperature in the brine. The start temperature of the brine is approximately 3.5°C.
126
==PAGE:137==
05.06.2020
08:30 - End of cycle 1
The temperature in the brine have dropped to 2.4 overnight. It seems as if it
drops 1°C per day. Whether this is due to turning of the circulation pump or the general weather situation
is not known. Yesterday and today have been cloudy, windy and much lower temperature relative to last
week. We agree to continue with the same setup until tomorrow. Here we will reevaluate whether we
need to make some changes. We need to keep the temperature above 0°C in order to avoid ice and
hereby potential change in concentration of the brine.
It was discovered that no brine had been pumped into the test tub during the first cycle. The tube between
the refrigerator and freeze thaw cabinet was inspected for kinks that could block the flow of water, but no
kink was to be found. The pump was taken out of the vessel containing the brine, in order to inspect it for
visible damage. Noting was found. The effect of the pump was set to ”medium”. A possible explanation
to the lack of pumped water, could be that the setting originally had been higher, but accidentally had
been lowered when handling the pump. This could have happened by scraping it against the very narrow
access hole that had been cut in the vessel. A larger hole was cut to prevent the same from happening
again. The effect of the pump was adjusted to ”maximum”. Several tests were carried out, to verify that
the pump had the capacity to pump the brine to the needed height. Confident that the problem had been
solved, the setup was put back together again.
The specimens had been exposed to a temperature cycle, but with no water present. No scaling at all
was detected, so it was decided to continue the experiment, as if this cycle had not existed.
06.06.2020
08:30 - End of cycle 2
Again it was discovered that no water had been pumped into the test tub. After
several tests, we came to the conclusion that error was due to a water lock in the tube. The tube had
a small sag inside the freeze thaw cabinet. In the cold part of the cycle the leftover of brine in the tube
would freezes and block the tube. This was cause by a failure of the tape holding the tube in place,
cause by moving around the test tub when cleaning it.
Just to omit the possibility of a ”bug” in the programming in the operating system, the time of brine inlet
was changed from start of ramp 3 (start of heating phase from -20°C) into the end of ramp 2 instead (end
of cold plateau).
Because we now think that the error was due water lock in the tube, we will need to check whether we
have enough brine in the vessel for the entire test.
127
==PAGE:138==
07.06.2020
08:00 - End of cycle 3
It seems as if there is more liquid in the overflow bucket than previously, ap-
proximately 1.5 L in all. This indicates that the pump should be adjusted.
The vessel with the liquid from the drain valve was frozen. It had a large ice floe in the top of the brine.
The only reasonable explanation for this phenomena is that the vessel had not been emptied after the
testing yesterday.
08.06.2020
08:00 - End of cycle 4
It was discovered that the freeze-thaw cabinet had not been turned on through-
out the the last cycle.
A new procedure for collecting scale in the test tub was introduced yesterday. This consisted of shutting
off the freeze thaw cabinet on the main switch, while the door to the cabinet is open. Because this was
a sudden change that had not been incorporated in the checklist to the procedure yet, it was simply
forgotten. To avoid this from happening again, a new revised checklist is created and taped to the door
of the cabinet.
12.06.2020
08:00 - End of cycle 7
The scale that is used for weighing the drying samples was behaving a bit
different today. It had to be calibrated between every measurement, since it showed a weigh loss of
0.03 g after removal of the dish. Normally the scale only needs to be calibrated before the very first
measurement.
A lot of debris are seen in the test liquid, but by visual inspection it looks as if almost all of it is green
paint from the butyl rubber.
15.06.2020
09:00 - Weighing drying scale
The timer of the oven had run out, resulting in the oven shutting down.
Because the weights had been recorded a couple of hours earlier, the oven could maximum have been
turned off for that amount of time.
128
==PAGE:139==
E.3
Photo documentation of test surface
In this section all the photo documentation if found for concrete specimens cut from sample 4. On the
left hand side is shown the specimen after saturation, and the right hand side is after the 10th cycle.
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure E.1: Sample 4.1.
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure E.2: Sample 4.2.
129
==PAGE:140==
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure E.3: Sample 4.3.
(a) After saturation
(b) End of test
Figure E.4: Sample 4.4.
130
==PAGE:141==
E.4
Raw data for temperature curves
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.5: Brine underneath sample 4.1.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.6: Brine underneath sample 4.2.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.7: Brine underneath sample 4.3.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.8: Brine underneath sample 4.4.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.9: Brine in the middle of the box.
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
-20
-10
0
10
20
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.10: Air in the freeze-thaw cabinet.
131
==PAGE:142==
0
5
10
15
20
Time [h]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Temperature [°C]
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4
Cycle 5
Cycle 6
Cycle 7
Figure E.11: Air in the room
Table E.1: Temperature in the brine at time of inlet.
Cycle no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
T [°C]
3.8
5.4
5.2
5.0
5.1
4.8
4.8
132
==PAGE:143==
F
Manual for see-saw hoist
In order to facilitate manipulations during experiments where the time of water inlet varies, an automatised
see-saw hoist has been produced. It is made of a plastic box that contains a stainless-steel see-saw
system (see Figure F.1). Baskets are bolted on the outer bars while counterweights are placed on the
inner ones. The bars are connected to a servomotor placed on the outside of the box, which is controlled
by an Arduino micro-controller (see Figure F.2a).
The plastic box is of the same type as the one described in Chapter 9, therefore this additional equipment
can be easily stacked on top of the existing setup without any adjustment.
(a) Overview
(b) Inside of the box
Figure F.1: Pictures of the mechanical part.
The baskets are made with a folded stainless steel plate, and are made in such a way that the concrete
specimens can wrest on the bottom edge of the baskets. The space between the two sides of the baskets
is approximately 16 cm, and the width of the folded edge is 1 cm (see Figure F.2b).
The setup allows for 2 positions of the baskets: dipped or lifted. The settings are made with a small
control board that can be placed outside of the freeze-thaw cabinet. Four magnetic sensors are also
connected to the micro-controller. By gluing or taping a magnet somewhere on the original box (it can
be on the outside of it), and placing the sensor accordingly on the basket or the concrete sample, the
system can detect if the samples are properly dipped. An error is detected whenever the sample is not
where it is supposed to be (dipped instead of being lifted or vice versa).
133
==PAGE:144==
(a) Servo activating the see-saw system
(b) Baskets holding the samples
Figure F.2: Details of the setup.
The control panel has 6 keys: 4 arrows (”up”,”down”,”left”,”right), ”select” and ”reset”. When plugging on
the system to the 220V wall socket, the user first needs to press ”select” and choose the dipped time.
The ”up” and ”down” arrows can be used for a full speed display of numbers, while ”left” and ”right” are
useful for adjustment. Then press ”select”, and choose the lifted time in minutes as well, with the same
principles for the arrows. Press ”select” again, and choose the number of dips. Press ”select” to display
the number of errors of the previous use. Press ”select” for the last time, and the first cycle starts after a
few seconds (see Figure F.3).
(a) Initial screen
(b) During cycles
Figure F.3: Display of the control board.
The digital screen displays all the settings: number of dips, time dipped and time lifted. In addition, in
the bottom right hand corner, four counters display the number of errors for each magnetic sensor. In
this way, it is possible to detect any error during use.
There are two possibilities for stopping the system when the cycles are running: either press ”select”
twice, or press ”reset” once. Note that at any stage of the process, including when defining the settings,
pressing ”reset” would cancel all previous choices and reset the error counters.
134
==PAGE:145==
Finally, the setup has not been properly tested. Since it is quite heavy, there is a possibility that the
supports on which the tray is resting in the freeze-thaw cabinet need some reinforcement, to withstand
the weight of the complete setup. In addition, the mass of the counterweights has not been calibrated
yet.
Contact person: Ian Rasmussen (DTU Byg)
135
==PAGE:146==
G
Description of the experimental setup for
the refined thermal model
A PhD project focusing on the temperature development inside the concrete during freeze-thaw cycles
is ongoing at DTU Byg. As part of it, experiments with instrumented samples have been carried out.
Specimens made of two different materials are used: POM and mortar. The advantage of POM is that it
is non-porous, meaning that it is not subjected to water uptake during the experiment. As a consequence,
its thermal properties are easier to estimate and its behaviour easier to predict compared to mortar.
Mortar is cast with w/c = 0.45 and a cement-to-aggregate ratio of 0.33.
Several thermocouples are placed inside specimens with a stadium shape: one close to the test surface,
and others at 5, 10, 15, 20 and 50 mm inwards (the latter being close to the bottom surface). A soft
PVC sheet is glued on the sides and the bottom surface of the specimens with silicone, and insulation
(Armaflex) is placed over it. The covering exceeds the height of the specimens to confine the outer
solution. Pictures of the specimens are shown in Figure G.1.
(a) POM
(b) Mortar
Figure G.1: Samples with the insulation coating.
The temperature cycle is imposed to the outer solution by a Peltier element, in contact with the surface
of the liquid. A heat sink and a fan ensure heat dissipation on the hot side (Figure G.2). The entire setup
is placed in a freeze-thaw cabinet, switched off, to maintain steady conditions.
The power delivered to the Peltier element is controlled with a basic control loop. The temperature of the
outer solution is measured with another thermocouple, and the current intensity is adjusted accordingly.
The temperature cycle to follow corresponds to the slab test in CEN/TS 12390-9, and is shown on Fig-
ure G.3. Several cycles are performed in a row, but only the first one is used in this report for comparing
with the results of the simulations.
136
==PAGE:147==
(a) Side view
(b) Top view
Figure G.2: Mini-freezer setup. The Peltier element is hidden underneath the heat sink and the fan. Credits: Abdul
Faheem.
Figure G.3: Temperature cycle used in the slab test. The temperature curve used as set point is drawn in red.
137
==PAGE:148==
H
Calculation of the freezable water and the
volume fractions in mortar
The mortar was cast with w/c=0.45 and a cement-to-aggregate ratio equal to 0.33. The calculation
assumes the following densities: ρw = 998 kg/m3, ρcem = 3140 kg/m3 and ρs = 2640 kg/m3 for water,
cement and sand respectively.
The mass fractions of water, cement and sand are respectively denoted as ww, wcem and ws. Thus, the
following relations apply:
ww = 0.45 wcem
wcem = 0.33 ws
ww + wcem + ws = 1











ww = 0.10
wcem = 0.22
ws = 0.68
(H.1)
However, ww and wcem only make sense before hydration. Therefore, to calculate the freezable water,
one need to consider values after hydration, whw and whcem. To do so, a Powers diagram (shown in
Figure H.1) is used first to determine the volume fractions of freezable water and hydrated cement in the
paste, vfw,p and vhcem,p.
Figure H.1: Powers diagram with w/c = 0.45.
Here, water refers to freezable water, and is taken as the sum of pore water and capillary water. A degree
of hydration of 0.75 is chosen, and leads to:
vfw,p = 0.24
vhcem,p = 0.76
(H.2)
138
==PAGE:149==
These numbers have to be converted into mass fractions, wfw,p and whcem,p. This is done via the
densities:
wfw,p = vfw,p
ρp
ρw
= 0.13
whcem,p = vhcem,p
ρp
ρhcem
= 0.87
(H.3)
where ρp is the density of the paste and ρhcem the density of hydrated cement (including gel water). ρp
can be calculated from the Powers diagram at α = 0, i.e. before hydration:
vw,p = 0.586
vc,p = 0.414
ρp = vw,p ρw + vcem,p ρcem











ρp = 1884 kg/m3
(H.4)
ρhcem is calculated as a weighted average between cement and water in hydrated cement:
vw,hcem =
vw,p −vfw,p
(vw,p −vfw,p) + vc,p
vcem,hcem =
vc,p
(vw,p −vfw,p) + vc,p
ρhcem = vw,hcem ρw + vcem,hcem ρcem













ρhcem = 2161 kg/m3
(H.5)
Finally, the values have to be expressed with respect to the mass of mortar:
wfw = (1 −ws) wfw,p = 0.04
whcem = (1 −ws) whcem,p = 0.28
ws = 0.68
(H.6)
The corresponding volume fractions are calculating as:
vfw = wfw
ρw
ρ = 0.09
vhcem = whcem
ρhcem
ρ
= 0.31
vs = ws
ρs
ρ = 0.60
(H.7)
where
ρ =
(ww
ρw
+ whcem
ρhcem
+ ws
ρs
)−1
= 2336 kg/m3
(H.8)
139
==PAGE:150==
Peltier cooler module
ET-031-10-13 
Data sheet
Adaptive is a registered trademark of European Thermodynamics Limited.
Web: www.etdyn.com  
Tel: +44(0)116 279 6899      E-mail: info@etdyn.com 
Imax
[A]
3.9
Vmax
[Vdc]
3.8
Pc max
[W]
8.6
¨7PD[
[°C]
74
A
[mm]
15
A1
[mm]
15
B
[mm]
15
H
[mm]
3.6
L
[mm]
100
Wire
AWG
n/a
• (At hot side temperature Th = 25°C / 298K, under dry N2 )
• 3FPD[ &RROLQJSRZHUDW¨7 DQG, ,PD[
• ¨7PD[ 7HPSHUDWXUHGLIIHUHQFHDW, ,PD[DQG3F 
• Max hot side temperature Th = 90°C for best long term performance
• Max mounting pressure: 1.5MPa
• Wires: UL-style 1569, 105°C (Unstripped)
I
Data sheet of Peltier elements
140
==PAGE:151==
Peltier cooler module
ET-031-10-13 
Data sheet  - At hot side temperature 25°C
Adaptive is a registered trademark of European Thermodynamics Limited.
Web: www.etdyn.com  
Tel: +44(0)116 279 6899      E-mail: info@etdyn.com 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
20
40
60
80
Heat removed (W)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
Max COP
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
20
40
60
80
Waste heat (W)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0
20
40
60
80
Input Voltage (V)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
1
2
3
4
COP
Current (A)
Delta T = 0 C
Delta T = 10 C
Delta T = 20 C
Delta T = 30 C
Delta T = 40 C
Delta T = 50 C
Delta T = 60 C
*Note - Waste heat = Heat out of hot side
141
==PAGE:152==
Peltier cooler module
ET-031-10-13 
Data sheet  - At hot side temperature 50°C
Adaptive is a registered trademark of European Thermodynamics Limited.
Web: www.etdyn.com  
Tel: +44(0)116 279 6899      E-mail: info@etdyn.com 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
20
40
60
80
Heat removed (W)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
Max COP
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
20
40
60
80
Waste heat (W)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
20
40
60
80
Input Voltage (V)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
1
2
3
4
COP
Current (A)
Delta T = 0 C
Delta T = 10 C
Delta T = 20 C
Delta T = 30 C
Delta T = 40 C
Delta T = 50 C
Delta T = 60 C
*Note - Waste heat = Heat out of hot side
142
==PAGE:153==
Peltier cooler module
ET-031-10-13 
Data sheet  - At hot side temperature 75°C
Adaptive is a registered trademark of European Thermodynamics Limited.
Web: www.etdyn.com  
Tel: +44(0)116 279 6899      E-mail: info@etdyn.com 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
Heat removed (W)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
Max COP
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
20
40
60
80
100
Waste heat (W)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
Input Voltage (V)
Temperature difference (oC)
I = 3.90 A
I = 3.00 A
I = 2.50 A
I = 2.00 A
I = 1.50 A
I = 1.00 A
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
0
1
2
3
4
COP
Current (A)
Delta T = 0 C
Delta T = 10 C
Delta T = 20 C
Delta T = 30 C
Delta T = 40 C
Delta T = 50 C
Delta T = 60 C
*Note - Waste heat = Heat out of hot side
143
==PAGE:154==
J
Microscope specification
144
==PAGE:155==
==PAGE:156==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
