==PAGE:1==
Device Pairing with Multi-modal
Gestures: from Theory to
Practice
Mohammad Moneer Mosleh Elhariry
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Short-range wireless communication is becoming more prevalent as mobile de-
vices are vastly integrated into our daily lives. An extremely important option
to protect these communication links is given by secure pairing, namely the
process of authenticating two previously unassociated devices to establish a se-
cure communication channel. Nevertheless, designing a pairing mechanism that
ensures both security against malicious attacks and a smooth user experience is
challenging. Besides, developing a single pairing scheme that addresses all pair-
ing scenarios is unfeasible due to the huge variation between the communicating
devices.
The goal of this thesis is to study the practicality of pairing a smartwatch and
a device equipped with a touch screen (i.e., a smartphone) using multi-modal
gestures. These gestures entail drawing on the touch screen while wearing a
smartwatch. This process is supported by data collected from several sensors
on the smartwatch.
Consequently, a pairing protocol is implemented on both classes of devices, a
sensor fusion system is designed and diﬀerent drawing patterns are studied.
Moreover, several experiments are performed to verify the accuracy of the pro-
posed solution in detecting a correlation between the drawings and the wrist
movement.
The results show that drawing 3x3 unlock patterns on the touch screen sup-
ported by the fusion of accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer data on
the smartwatch is a practical solution for pairing using multi-modal gestures
while ensuring both security and user-friendliness.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Aalto University, School of Science, Finland in
partial fulﬁllment of requirements for the M.Sc. double degree in Security and
Cloud Computing (SECCLO) in Aalto University, School of Science, Finland as
the ﬁrst-year university and Technical University of Denmark, DTU Compute,
Denmark as the exit university.
The thesis deals with a practicality study of secure Bluetooth pairing a smart-
watch and a smartphone using multi-modal gestures, i.e., through drawing on a
smartphone’s screen and comparing it with the wrist movement from a smart-
watch using a fusion of accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer data.
Lyngby, 27-June-2020
Mohammad Moneer Mosleh Elhariry
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my thanks and gratitude to my supervisor at Aalto
University, Professor Mario Di Francesco, for his indispensable guidance, his
support, and meticulous feedback.
I am also grateful to my advisor, Professor Stephan Sigg, for sharing his vast
knowledge and expertise throughout the whole thesis.
I would also like to thank my supervisor at DTU, Professor Christian D. Jensen,
for his availability and advice.
Moreover, special thanks to Mohit Sethi, Markku Antikainen, and Dario Bernardi
for giving helpful insights.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family and wonderful friends, for
being there for me throughout my whole master’s program.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research topic and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Gesture recognition with smartwatches
5
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
ViBand: Bio-Acoustic sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Serendipity: Finger gesture recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Finger-writing with Shimmer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Secure Device pairing
15
3.1
Bluetooth Pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Standard pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Simple pairing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Fuzzy pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
RF-based pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Movement-based pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Drawing-based pairing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
29
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Security Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.3
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.2
Smartwatch: Sensor fusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.1
Noise Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.2
Data Synchronization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.3
Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.4
Encoding and Comparison Metric
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Evaluation
43
5.1
Key components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Smartphone application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.2
Smartwatch application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.3
Oﬄine testing script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.1
Experimental test-bed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.2
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.3
Preliminary analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.1
Oﬄine testing results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.2
Online testing results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3.3
Sliding window vs. resampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.4
Drawing patterns analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The usage of mobile devices – smartphones, tablets, and wearables – has tremen-
dously increased in recent years, due to both their ﬂexibility and convenience.
According to the Statista Research Department, the number of smartphone
users has exceeded a total of 3 billion users in 2020 [Sta19b], whereas the num-
ber of connected wearable devices is projected to reach over 1 billion devices
by 2022 [Sta19a]. These wearables range from ﬁtness trackers to smart-glasses
and smartwatches. They can run numerous applications and collect user data
to provide a personalized user experience, including messaging notiﬁcations and
location-based services, mobile payments and ﬁtness-tracking, i.e., step count
or heart rate [JCZ+15]. To provide these services, communication with other
mobile devices, such as smartphones over a wireless link (e.g., Bluetooth) is re-
quired. Since the collected data could be sensitive, securing this communication
is fundamental. Furthermore, despite the convenience of wireless communica-
tions, various vulnerabilities have been detected enabling diﬀerent Man-in-the-
middle (MiTM) attacks, which allow the attacker to either passively eavesdrop
or impersonate one of the communicating parties [ATR20, CCH17, HT10]. As
a consequence, signiﬁcant research eﬀorts have targeted secure pairing, namely,
the process of establishing a pairwise symmetric key between any two devices
to secure their communication [CS07].
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
1.1
Research topic and goals
Several schemes have been proposed to achieve secure pairing at an acceptable
level of usability. The most widely-used schemes rely on the usage of 4, or 6,
or even 8-digit PIN codes and have a few diﬀerent variants. One example is
the Copy-and-Conﬁrm method which shows a PIN code on one of the devices
and asks the user to copy it to the other device. However, these schemes are
considered both slow and error-prone [UKA07]. Another scheme relies on en-
coding the data into a barcode shown on one of the devices and then capturing
it using the camera of the other device [KSTU09]. Other schemes involve re-
lying on the surrounding environment by detecting audio [NSHJ12] or radio
signals [MMV+11]. Finally, some proposals require the user to perform more
complex gestures, such as shaking both devices together [MG09], drawing on
touch screens of both devices simultaneously [SAA15] or the usage of multi-
modal gestures, i.e., drawing on the screen of the smartphone assisted by wrist
motion detection from the smartwatch [Ber19]. This thesis focuses on the lat-
ter scheme and aims to extend it. Therefore, the main goal of the thesis is to
implement, enhance, and evaluate the multi-modal gestures Bluetooth pairing
scheme, previously proposed in [Ber19]. In particular, the goals of the thesis are
the following:
• Implementation of the full protocol pipeline on the two classes of devices.
• Enhancing the performance of the proposed solution, then deciding on
acceptance/rejection criteria. The optimal situation is to eliminate both
false positives and negatives to achieve both security and usability.
• Deciding if and how the user should be guided throughout the drawing,
i.e., check if the drawing needs to follow a speciﬁc pattern or the drawing
has to comprise a few properties, like a predeﬁned number of edges, and
if the drawing time needs to be limited.
1.2
Contributions
The contribution of the work can be summarized as follows.
• Implementing a pairing protocol that initiates a secure connection between
a smartphone and a smartwatch while satisfying its security requirements
and time constraints.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Structure
3
• Utilizing multiple sensors to accurately detect the linear acceleration on
the smartwatch, including the gravity sensor, the gyroscope, the magne-
tometer, and the accelerometer. The data collected from these sensors is
then fused to eliminate the eﬀect of external factors, such as the force of
gravity and rotation.
• Modifying the noise ﬁltering and synchronization mechanisms and setting
the pairing parameters.
• Studying diﬀerent drawing patterns, i.e., 3x3 phone unlock patterns against
connecting random points on the screen similar to the Fruit Ninja mobile
game [Stu10] – and comparing them to decide which is more suitable.
1.3
Structure
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows.
Chapter 2 introduces some
background on the topic of gesture recognition with smartwatches.
Chapter
3 presents some of the existing schemes to achieve secure pairing, with a focus
on Bluetooth pairing. Chapter 4 describes the proposed pairing scheme using
multi-modal gestures, including the enhancements to the prior work in [Ber19]
and the implemented secure pairing protocol. Chapter 5 evaluates the proposed
solution and discusses the experimental results. Finally, Chapter 6 presents the
conclusion to the thesis and possible future work.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Gesture recognition with
smartwatches
Smartphones and wearables (i.e., smartwatches) are both equipped with several
sensors that can read data from the physical world, such as accelerometers, gyro-
scopes, light sensors, GPS, and microphones [KXAA13]. However, smartwatches
have a unique advantage over smartphones: while smartphones can remain in
pockets, purses, or on surfaces for extended periods of time, smartwatches are
constantly worn and attached to the human body. As a result, smartwatches
enable continuous user input by tracking the motion of the user’s wrist. This
gives them a remarkable advantage over smartphones to detect diﬀerent kinds of
movements and gestures. This chapter presents some of the research work done
in gesture recognition, with a primary focus on using smartwatches to detect
diverse wrist movements and gestures.
2.1
Overview
Smartwatches oﬀer researchers the opportunity to sample and combine inputs
from diﬀerent sensors for applications that require gesture recognition. For ex-
ample, Tap’n’Shake [MCM16] – a gesture-based messaging service – aims to
minimize the need for using both hands to interact with a smartwatch. Specif-
==PAGE:16==
6
Gesture recognition with smartwatches
ically, Tap’n’Shake allows the user to send audio and text messages between a
smartphone and a smartwatch by recording audio with a microphone, then ﬂick
their wrist to send the message. Thus, the user no longer needs to type on the
smartwatch’s tiny screen to send a message. Moreover, SmartWriting [ZBC+19]
– a pen-holding gesture detection scheme – detects writing in both English and
Chinese by sampling the angular rate provided by a smartwatch’s gyroscope,
then extracts the features from this input to detect the written letter(s). Fur-
thermore, a gait recognition system [JW15] that relies on both accelerometer
and gyroscope readings is proposed to perform biometric authentication. Other
approaches involve combining readings from the smartwatch’s sensors with read-
ings from other devices, for instance, by fusing smartwatch and smartphone in-
puts to detect complex gestures such as walking, biking, smoking, eating, and
sitting [SBS+15]. Another example is combining input from an external cam-
era and smartwatch sensors (e.g., accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetome-
ter) to detect and even predict gestures performed while playing table tennis
[VMR+18].
Other research work in this area focuses on the detection of wrist movement and
hand gestures. These solutions are extremely relevant to pairing using multi-
modal gestures since they present solutions to accurately detect such motion,
which is crucial to this study. ViBand [LXH16] is a solution that uses a custom
kernel to increase the sampling rate of a smartwatch’s accelerometer to 4000 Hz
to convert it into a bio-acoustic sensor, then use it for hand-gestures recognition
and object detection. Besides, Serendipity [WRRD16] combines accelerometer
and gyroscope readings to detect and classify a limited set of hand gestures.
Finally, Xu et. al [XPM15] present a ﬁnger-writing recognition system using a
wearable device – known as Shimmer [BGM+10] –. The ﬁnger-writing solution
is particularly interesting due to its similarity to performing a drawing on the
smartphone screen. The next sections detail these three solutions above.
2.2
ViBand: Bio-Acoustic sensing
Laput et. al [LXH16] aim to complement previous work done in gesture recog-
nition by using bio-acoustic sensing, namely Hambone [DPPS07] and Skinput
[HTM10]. Both Hambone and Skinput rely on the use of additional on-body
sensors which makes them rather invasive. The approach presented by Laput
et. al – known as ViBand – mitigates this issue by running a custom ker-
nel on a smartwatch device, magnifying the sampling rate of its accelerometer
to 4 kHz compared to the sampling rate supported by smartwatch Application
Programming Interfaces (APIs) (=100 Hz) [Doc19a]. This allows the accelerom-
eter to detect vibrations that are transmitted through the human body, hence
==PAGE:17==
2.2 ViBand: Bio-Acoustic sensing
7
Figure 2.1: Comparison of accelerometer signals at 100 Hz and 4 KHz in a
stationary position (A) and while performing diﬀerent gestures
(B,C,D) [LXH16].
allowing wrist and hand movement to be detected at a higher accuracy com-
pared to sampling at 100 Hz, as shown in Figure 2.1. This enables a variety
of bio-acoustic sensing application domains, including gesture recognition and
object detection. Using a high-frequency accelerometer has an advantage even
over microphones, which operate at a higher sampling rate (44 kHz) since mi-
crophones are designed to detect airborne vibrations only.
The custom kernel is deployed on several smartwatches, including Samsung
Gear 2, LG Water Urbane, and Moto 360. The acceleration readings are both
processed in real-time on the watch and gathered then transmitted to a laptop
for oﬄine processing and analysis. After collecting the readings, each sample
is transformed to the frequency domain and its power spectrum is computed.
The DC component is then removed and only the maximum value across the
x-y-z axes is taken into consideration, while the rest is discarded. Finally, a
moving average over 20 samples is calculated and several statistical features are
computed from its output, such as mean, sum, ﬁrst derivative, standard devi-
ation, and n-highest peaks. This scheme aims to identify three diﬀerent sets
of gestures: two-handed gestures such as clapping, one-handed gestures such
as pinching, and on-body touches, as presented in Figure 2.2. The proposed
solution is also capable of detecting objects and structured vibrations when a
user operates a mechanical device or plays a musical instrument.
The proposed solution has been evaluated by conducting a user study with
17 participants, where diﬀerent machine learning models have been trained for
each participant separately. Each participant was asked to perform all gestures
from each gesture set shown in Figure 2.2 ﬁfteen times to train the model,
then the participant was asked to perform each gesture again after training the
model. Afterward, the participant was asked to repeat the same experiment
after removing and re-wearing the smartwatch to perform a second round of
==PAGE:18==
8
Gesture recognition with smartwatches
Figure 2.2: Examples of the gesture detected by ViBand [LXH16].
experiments.
This approach results in an accuracy of 94.3% across all participants and only
six false positives, which shows that such a solution can be used in several use-
cases, including gesture-based remote controlling and object-aware applications.
Additionally, the success of ViBand has inspired two of its creators to apply the
same concept to detect even more complex and ﬁne-grained hand activities
using the accelerometer. The related solution [LH19] by Laput and Harrison
can detect 25 diﬀerent hand activities with an accuracy of 95.2%.
2.3
Serendipity: Finger gesture recognition
Similar to ViBand, Serendipity [WRRD16] relies on smartwatch sensors for ﬁn-
ger gesture recognition without the need for any additional hardware or on-body
sensors. However, Serendipity collects data at the smartwatch from multiple
sensors instead of using a custom kernel. Moreover, this solution aims to de-
tect a smaller gesture set involving only the ﬁve ﬁne-motor gestures shown in
Figure 2.3: pinching, tapping, rubbing ﬁngers, squeezing, and waving.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Serendipity: Finger gesture recognition
9
Figure 2.3: The gesture set detected by Serendipity [WRRD16].
The solution has been developed on a Samsung Galaxy Gear smartwatch where
data is collected from the accelerometer and the gyroscope through the Android
API [Doc19a]. For each gesture, the signals are collected continuously for 10
seconds at a sampling frequency of 50 Hz, to ensure that any gestures performed
in the range 0-25 Hz is detected according to the Nyquist theorem [Nyq28].
Accordingly, the readings sampled from the accelerometer and the gyroscope
are processed by calculating the magnitude across diﬀerent axes, resulting in
four magnitude calculations:
m =
p
x2 + y2 + z2
xy =
p
x2 + y2
yz =
p
y2 + z2
xz =
p
x2 + z2
This results in seven time-series values for each gesture, the three axes (x, y,
and z) and the four magnitude calculations, which are used to extract seven
distinct statistical features. Besides, the power bands for each of the seven axes
are calculated by applying Fast Fourier Transform. The lower 10 bands are kept
while the rest are discarded since the gestures detecting by Serendipity mainly
fall within the range 0-10 Hz. This results in ten other features in the frequency
domain and by computing the power bands for all seven axes (x, y, z, xy, yz,
and xz), a total of 119 features is captured from each sensor. To classify the
gestures, several machine learning models have been used, including a Support
Vector Machine (SVM) [MT06] and Logistic Regression [DOM02].
Similar to ViBand, this solution is also evaluated by conducting a user study
==PAGE:20==
10
Gesture recognition with smartwatches
Figure 2.4: The three smartwatch orientations used in Serendipity’s evaluation
[WRRD16].
over two rounds involving 10 participants. In the ﬁrst round, the participants
were asked to perform each gesture repeatedly at their own speed. The collected
data was used for training the models for each user, then the second round was
performed for testing and validation.
Additionally, the users were asked to
perform the hand gestures in three diﬀerent positions to vary the orientation
of the smartwatch, as shown in Figure 2.4, to ensure the system is rotation-
insensitive.
This methodology results in an average f1-score of 87% with a minimum of 83%
across all participants as depicted in Figure 2.5, however, it yields a very high
percentage (25%) of false positives – where a non-gesture is recognized as one
of the gesture set. As a result, an activation gesture is introduced to activate
Serendipity, which signiﬁes the beginning of a hand gesture. The chosen gesture
is rubbing ﬁngers three consecutive times, as it has the highest classiﬁcation
rate among the gesture set. Moreover, a noise detection mechanism is added, by
asking the participants to wear the smartwatch while doing activities that do not
involve any of the hand gestures deﬁned in the gesture set, such as typing on the
keyboard and classiﬁed this data as noise. The above-mentioned modiﬁcations
of Serendipity have a major eﬀect on its false positives rate, reducing it to less
than 1%.
Despite the accuracy of Serendipity, the gesture set it can classify is very limited.
Furthermore, the gesture classiﬁcation system is running oﬄine only and has not
been tested in real-time.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Finger-writing with Shimmer
11
Figure 2.5: The confusion matrix for Serendipity’s gesture set [WRRD16].
2.4
Finger-writing with Shimmer
Xu et. al [XPM15] propose a gesture recognition system that distinguishes be-
tween 37 diﬀerent gestures – namely, 13 ﬁnger gestures, 14 hand gestures, and
10 arm gestures using both accelerometer and gyroscope data. Furthermore,
Xu et. al extend this solution to identify the English alphabet characters while
the user writes with their index ﬁnger in the air or on a surface. However, the
solution collects this data using Shimmer [BGM+10], a wearable device that in-
cludes both an accelerometer and a gyroscope and samples the data at a slightly
higher sampling frequency (128 Hz) than a Wear-OS smartwatch that supports
a maximum of (100 Hz).
First, to distinguish ﬁnger, hand and arm gestures from one another, the motion
energy (E) is calculated for each gesture based on the Shimmer’s accelerometer
and gyroscope readings according to Equation (2.1), where m represents the
Fourier coeﬃcients calculated over the time window l that deﬁnes the duration
to complete a single gesture. The energy is calculated only for half the window
length, due to the symmetric nature of the Fourier transform.
E =
l/2
X
i=1
m2
i
(2.1)
==PAGE:22==
12
Gesture recognition with smartwatches
Figure 2.6: Motion energy calculated from accelerometer and gyroscope read-
ings for hand, ﬁnger and arm gestures [XPM15].
The sensor readings are collected in all 3-axes, however only the maximum value
among these is taken into consideration. Figure 2.6 shows that using the motion
energy generated from the accelerometer and gyroscope oﬀers a diﬀerentiation
between the three types of gestures included in this study. As a result, diﬀerent
machine learning classiﬁers are trained to classify input gestures as one of three
types – namely, ﬁnger, hand, or arm gestures – and are evaluated by collecting 10
samples for each gesture and cross-correlating all samples against one another.
These classiﬁers include Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes [Ris01] and Decision
Tree [SL91]. The results show that Logistic Regression outperformed the two
other classiﬁers, detecting true positives with an average accuracy of 98.76%
across all gestures at a low rate of false positives (<2%). After showing the
feasibility of detecting and diﬀerentiating diﬀerent types of gestures, Xu et. al
extend the solution to identify each of the 37 gestures chosen for their study as
detailed next.
Motion energy is a suﬃcient feature to identify the type of the gesture, never-
theless, more features are required to identify the gesture itself. Consequently,
the proposed solution combines posture and shape features with motion energy
and applies the same testing methodology used for training the classiﬁers to
identify the type of gesture. The results show that Naive Bayes has an overall
accuracy of 98% and approximately 94% accuracy in detecting ﬁnger gestures,
outperforming the other classiﬁers. According to these results, the ﬁnger writ-
ing solution is proposed due to the high accuracy achieved in detecting ﬁnger
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Finger-writing with Shimmer
13
Figure 2.7: Example of ﬁnger-writing on a surface [XPM15].
gestures. As shown in Figure 2.7, the data is collected by writing on a surface,
with each letter enclosed within a 2.5"x2.5" rectangular area. Writing on a sur-
face has been chosen over air-writing to allow for easier writing since the surface
gives touch-based feedback which aids the user. The same testing methodology
is applied a third and ﬁnal time, where 10 samples are collected for each of the
26 letters of the alphabet and the same three classiﬁers are compared. As shown
in Figure 2.8, Logistic Regression outperforms the two other classiﬁers with a
mean accuracy of approximately 95%. It also shows the three most misclassi-
ﬁed letters, where the letters “D” and “U” are usually misclassiﬁed as “B” and
“V” regardless of the used classiﬁer. However, it is worth noting that all the
conducted experiments are performed by a single user, which is not suﬃcient
to infer the accuracy of the solution in practice.
Figure 2.8: Classiﬁcation accuracy of the ﬁnger-writing solution using the En-
glish alphabet [XPM15].
Finally, according to these results, wrist and ﬁnger motion can be detected and
classiﬁed using diﬀerent smartwatch sensors, such as the accelerometer and the
gyroscope. However, since most Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)
limit the frequency of the accelerometer to 100 Hz, it is diﬃcult to accurately
sample wrist motion using an accelerometer only. As a result, combining read-
ings from more than one sensor or designing a fusion system [ABH12] signiﬁ-
cantly enhances the input data.
==PAGE:24==
14
Gesture recognition with smartwatches
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Secure Device pairing
Secure pairing is the process of authenticating two previously unassociated
devices to establish a secure communication channel [KSTU09].
Due to the
large variation between the communicating devices (e.g., laptops, smartphones,
smartwatches, and headphones), many pairing protocols have been proposed.
However, this diversity makes it diﬃcult to unify them under a single or even a
few standards. In general, all pairing protocols share two main characteristics.
First, these protocols require some level of user involvement due to the lack of
a common trust infrastructure. Furthermore, pairing protocols must perform
mutual identiﬁcation and authentication to protect against both passive and
active attacks, such as eavesdropping and Man-in-The-Middle (MitM) attacks
[Gan15]. This chapter presents several pairing schemes – with a focus on Blue-
tooth pairing – and discusses fuzzy pairing, namely the process of pairing two
devices based on secrets that are known only approximately to the communi-
cating parties. Additionally, it details some of the pairing solutions that rely on
fuzzy data.
3.1
Bluetooth Pairing
Wireless communication technologies (e.g. Bluetooth, WiFi) are becoming ubiq-
uitous in mobile devices to enable short-range connections between such de-
==PAGE:26==
16
Secure Device pairing
vices.
Bluetooth connections support diﬀerent applications, including multi-
media transfer and connecting to peripheral devices, such as speakers, printers,
and keyboards. Devices communicating over Bluetooth are paired to secure their
communication, which involves authentication of both devices and generating
an initialization and a link key. For this purpose, the Bluetooth speciﬁcation
initially deﬁned a Bluetooth pairing protocol, namely, standard pairing. Nev-
ertheless, it has been shown that such protocol is vulnerable to impersonation
attacks since the initial shared secret has very low-entropy and can be easily
guessed [CS07]. As a result, Bluetooth simple pairing [HT10] was introduced to
address the issues of standard pairing.
3.1.1
Standard pairing
Standard pairing aims to generate two keys, namely a link key and an initial-
ization key (Kinit) between two devices – for example, Device A and Device
B – and mutually authenticate them. To generate the link key, both devices
generate a random number which then share it with each other after encrypting
it with Kinit. Then, each device uses both random numbers to generate the link
key.
Figure 3.1 shows the sequence diagram of the standard pairing protocol. Ini-
tially, both devices are aware of 4-digit share secret PIN and their Bluetooth
addresses BD_ADDRA and BD_ADDRB. Let us assume that Device A acts
as the master, and Device B acts as the slave. Device A initiates the connec-
tion by generating a nonce (na) and sending it to Device B. Then both devices
generate Kinit as a function of BD_ADDRA, PIN and na. Afterwards, Device
B authenticates Device A by generating a random number AU_RANDB and
sending it to Device A. After that, Device A calculates its response using the
values of Kinit, BD_ADDRA, and AU_RANDB which is sent to Device B to
verify this response. Finally, Device A authenticates Device B by applying the
same steps in reverse order.
However, this protocol is vulnerable to an oﬄine guessing attack, since a 4-digit
shared secret (PIN) is used to generate Kinit. An attacker can guess the value
of PIN by passively listening to a successful pairing attempt between Device A
and Device B and acquiring the values of na, AU_RANDB, and the response
SRES1. Since the Bluetooth address of any device is public, it is reasonable to
assume that the attacker also knows BD_ADDRA. The attacker can then use
these messages to guess the value of PIN oﬄine by computing SRES1 for each
PIN guess and comparing it to the intercepted value of SRES1. Hence, this
protocol is prone to impersonation attacks [JW01].
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Bluetooth Pairing
17
Figure 3.1: Sequence diagram of Bluetooth standard pairing [CS07].
3.1.2
Simple pairing
Simple pairing was introduced in the Bluetooth v2.1 speciﬁcation to address
the issues in the original standard pairing protocol. Simple pairing partially
shares the goals of standard pairing, namely allowing two devices to generate
an initialization key (Kinit) and authenticate one another. Nevertheless, simple
pairing comprises diﬀerent pairing schemes based on the type of the device and
most of these models eliminate the usage of any shared secrets.
Figure 3.2 shows the sequence diagram of simple pairing using a Numeric com-
parison scheme, which is targeted to devices that have a display. This scheme
relies on the user to compare the generated 6-digit values on both displays and
conﬁrm their equality. Initially, Device A acts as the master and Device B acts
as the slave (similar to standard pairing). The protocol starts with performing
an Elliptic curve Diﬃe-Hellman exchange [HL15] to transfer the public values
PKA and PKB. Then, each device generates a random value, namely na and
nb, then Device B calculates the hash of PKA, PKB and nb and sends to De-
vice A. This hash is calculated using a collision-resistant function and is called
a commitment value (cb). Afterwards, both devices exchange their previously
generated random values na and nb. Device A proceeds to verify the commit-
==PAGE:28==
18
Secure Device pairing
Figure 3.2: Sequence diagram of Bluetooth simple pairing [CS07].
ment by recomputing the hash and comparing it to the value of cb and the
protocol is terminated if the veriﬁcation fails. Finally, each device calculates
the hash of PKA, PKB, nb and nb, truncates it to a 6-digit decimal value and
displays it to the user. If the user conﬁrms the equality of both values, Kinit is
computed based on the Diﬃe-Hellman parameters and the exchanged random
numbers.
Even though the simple pairing protocol protects against the oﬄine-guessing
attack, it is still vulnerable to other attacks.
For instance, if the same de-
vice is involved in multiple pairing concurrently, the 6-digit value shown might
have been calculated in a diﬀerent session than the one currently authenticated
[CS07].
3.2
Fuzzy pairing
As previously mentioned, the Bluetooth simple pairing protocol protects against
oﬄine-guessing attacks, however, studies show that simple pairing is still vul-
nerable to other Man-in-The-Middle (MitM) attacks [Lin08, HT10, AHT16,
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Fuzzy pairing
19
Figure 3.3: Validating an already-established session key using fuzzy data
[MG09].
SMS18]. Also, most of the association models used in Bluetooth pairing rely
on the user either copying or comparing some value (e.g., a PIN or passphrase)
between the two communicating devices, which is considered slow and error-
prone [UKA07].
As a result, signiﬁcant research eﬀort has been devoted to
developing innovative pairing schemes1 that achieve both security and user-
friendliness. One category of these schemes utilize contextual information from
the surrounding environment to extract the shared secret, where both devices
are paired based on fuzzy data that each device collects separately. Fuzzy data
implies that the information used in the pairing process is approximately known
to these devices. This fuzzy data can be extracted from the physical environment
using diﬀerent sensors, such as the camera [MPR05, SEKA11], the accelerometer
[MG09], or the touch screen [SAA15]. A diﬀerent option is to rely on the sur-
rounding ambient audio [NSHJ12, SS13] or radio signals [VSLDL07, MMV+11].
Figures 3.3 and 3.4 present the two main strategies employed in fuzzy pair-
ing. The ﬁrst option is validating an already-established session key through
the collected fuzzy input, which requires both devices to carry out a few steps.
First, both devices have to perform a key exchange (e.g., a Diﬃe-Hellman key
exchange).
Second, the communicating devices collect the fuzzy input sepa-
rately and exchange it depending on the fuzzy pairing protocol speciﬁcation.
Finally, both devices apply a comparison metric to calculate the correlation
ratio between the local and remote data, then compare this ratio against an
approximate threshold. Ideally, the value of this threshold should prevent both
false positives and minimize false negatives. Therefore, the key challenge for
1These pairing schemes are not exclusive to Bluetooth pairing.
==PAGE:30==
20
Secure Device pairing
Figure 3.4: Extracting the session key directly from the fuzzy data [MG09].
this strategy lies in selecting an appropriate comparison metric and a value for
the threshold. Sethi et. al [SAA15] apply this strategy to pair two devices with
a touch-sensitive display based on synchronized drawing. A diﬀerent option is
fuzzy cryptography, which skips the key exchange step and directly extracts
the session key from the collected fuzzy input. However, the key challenge in
fuzzy cryptography lies in the entropy of the extracted key, which could be dif-
ﬁcult to calculate. Mayrhofer and Gellersen present one pairing scheme that
utilizes fuzzy cryptography, known as ShaCK [MG09]. ShaCK allows two de-
vices to agree on a symmetric key using accelerometer data for interactive key
construction.
The rest of this chapter details a few recent fuzzy pairing schemes.
These
schemes rely on ambient radio signals [MMV+11], accelerometer data [MG09]
and synchronized drawing [SAA15].
3.2.1
RF-based pairing
Mathur et. al [MMV+11] propose a proximity-based pairing scheme, known as
ProxiMate, that utilizes ambient radio signals to extract secret data. The idea
behind ProxiMate is that wireless Radio Frequency (RF) signals detected from
devices that are within a distance λ/2, where λ is the wavelength of the RF
signal, exhibit enough correlation to extract an identical symmetric key. Such a
correlation signiﬁcantly reduces if the distance between both devices is greater
than λ/2. Speciﬁcally, the correlation is high if the signal is sampled by both
devices at times t1 and t2, such that t1−t2 is smaller than the channel coherence
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Fuzzy pairing
21
Figure 3.5: A 30 second trace of a signal detected from two receivers tuned to
the same frequency, when 8 cm apart [MMV+11].
time Tc [Mol12]. An example of this correlation is shown in Figure 3.5.
To generate the session key, both communicating devices start by sampling the
signal from the surrounding radio signals at a ﬁxed time (T) where T < T c, then
storing the amplitude and phase of the signal into an array. Furthermore, the
signals are demodulated to be used for synchronization Then, each device either
uses the amplitude or the diﬀerential phase values of the signal to generate a
bit-sequence that represents the symmetric key. To achieve this, each device
performs a quantization step and sets a threshold (Qa) to compute one bit per
Tc. The value of the bit is computed by comparing each element in the signal
array with Qa and a quantizer sets the current bit value to 1 if the current
element is smaller than Qa and 0 otherwise. As a result, the devices generate
two separate bit sequences Ka and Kb. Afterward, both signals are synchronized
and an error correction code is applied to ﬁx any mismatches between Ka and
Kb. First, one device applies a mapping function (fc) to ﬁnd the closest code-
word (C) to Ka and computes an oﬀset (P), where P = Ka −f c(Ka) and P
is sent to the other device. The other device accordingly calculates the same
code-word (C), where C = P + f c(Kb −P)2. Finally, a privacy-enhancing step
is performed to compensate for sending the oﬀset (P) in plain-text. Therefore,
both devices compute a pre-image of C with length k to eliminate any possible
vulnerabilities resulting from sharing the value of P.
ProxiMate has been evaluated using both scalar quantization and another en-
coding scheme, known as list encoding. The experimental results show that the
probability of bit error is directly proportional to the distance between both
devices. Furthermore, the results show that list encoding outperforms scalar
2Applying this equation should yield the correct value of C with a very high probability.
==PAGE:32==
22
Secure Device pairing
Figure 3.6: The bit-error rate as a function of the distance between both de-
vices [MMV+11].
quantization when such distance is smaller than 0.3λ as shown in Figure 3.6.
3.2.2
Movement-based pairing
Mayrhofer and Gellersen present two solutions that rely on shaking devices to-
gether, namely ShaVe and ShaCK [MG09]. Both methods use accelerometer
readings, however, ShaVe veriﬁes an already established key whereas ShaCk
generates a cryptographic key directly from the noisy input (with fuzzy cryp-
tography).
These solutions are characterized by their user-friendliness since
the shaking gesture is straightforward and intuitive. Besides, the motion pro-
duced from shaking varies signiﬁcantly over time which makes it easy to identify
whether both devices are shaken separately or together. Moreover, most mod-
ern personal devices include an accelerometer that can detect and sample the
shaking gesture.
First, the raw acceleration values are sampled from the accelerometer in all three
dimensions at a sampling frequency at 512 Hz. Then, the data is synchronized
by detecting the onset of the shaking motion independently on each device.
The onset of motion is determined by comparing the variance of acceleration
values to a predeﬁned threshold, and the authentication process is triggered
if such variance exceeds such a threshold. Afterwards, the magnitude of the
acceleration is calculated to reduce the number of axes from three to one and
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Fuzzy pairing
23
Figure 3.7: False positive and false negative rate of ShaVe as a function of the
coherence threshold [MG09].
the value of the magnitude is normalized over a range centered around zero.
In ShaVe, both signals a and b are split into n averaged slices an and bn and
transformed to the frequency domain. Their correlation is then computed using
a coherence function Cxy(f), which is a function of their power spectra. Both
signals must be collected over a constant time frame of three seconds. To authen-
ticate both devices, ShaVe starts by performing a Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange
to generate a session key Ksess and an authentication key Kauth to ensure for-
ward secrecy. Fuzzy signals are transferred and veriﬁed by using a variant of the
Interlock protocol [RS84], which was originally designed for exchanging shared
secrets over an encrypted channel. Each device sends an encrypted zero-padded
message including the device’s Bluetooth address and the processed acceleration
values. Finally, each device compares both signals and the pairing is successful
if the correlation between both signals exceeds a certain threshold.
In ShaCK, the Candidate Key Protocol [May07] is used, where feature vectors
(namely, quantized Fourier coeﬃcients) are extracted from acceleration data.
The feature vectors are used to generated candidate key parts, which are the
hash values of these vectors.
The master device communicates to the slave
these candidate key parts so it can check its history for equal hashes. Once
both devices have agreed on the same candidate key part, this key part is stored
in a list. Once enough entropy is achieved, the slave hashes the concatenation
of all feature vectors after appending a constant (C) and sends a candidate key
(K) to the master. The master should be able to generate a key that results in
the same hash, hence, both devices agree on the same key.
==PAGE:34==
24
Secure Device pairing
Figure 3.8: False positive and false negative rate of ShaCK as a function of
the feature vector matching rate threshold [MG09].
The performance of both ShaVe and ShaCK is evaluated by conducting a user
study with 51 participants over two rounds. The test-bed consists of two ac-
celerometers attached to two table-tennis balls. In the ﬁrst round, 1530 match-
ing samples are collected whereas, in the second round, only a fraction of the
users participate in collecting 177 non-matching samples. Figures 3.7 and 3.8
show the rate of false positives and false negatives of both ShaVe and ShaCK,
as a function of their respective thresholds. For ShaVe, a coherence threshold
of 0.72 prevents false positives, with a false negative rate of 10.24%. Whereas
for ShaCK, preventing false positives required a threshold of 0.88 with a false
negative rate of 11.96%.
3.2.3
Drawing-based pairing
Sethi et. al [SAA15] propose a solution to pair two devices equipped with a
touch screen by drawing with the same hand on both surfaces, as depicted in
Figure 3.9. One of the key advantages of this scheme lies in the simplicity of
collecting the noisy input since the APIs of touch-screen devices can track the
ﬁnger motion by reporting the x and y coordinates of the drawing at predeﬁned
time intervals. The drawings are then centered, normalized, and interpolated to
one-millisecond frequency to remove the impact of factors such as pixel density
or sampling rate. However, an accurate characterization of the entropy of the
drawings is rather complicated so fuzzy cryptography is discarded, and this
pairing scheme aims to validate an already established symmetric key using
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Fuzzy pairing
25
Figure 3.9: Device pairing using synchronized drawing [SAA15].
fuzzy data instead of using fuzzy cryptography.
This solution applies a family of protocols known as commitment-based proto-
cols, which are particularly useful for authentication with a one-time secret. In
general, these protocols start by performing a key exchange phase (e.g., Diﬃe-
Hellman), resulting in an authenticated shared session key (Ksess). Then, this
key is authenticated to prevent spooﬁng and active Man-in-The-Middle (MitM)
attacks. A commitment is usually computed as a cryptographic hash of Ksess,
a shared secret, and a fresh random nonce. The commitments are then opened
by both parties and the correctness of the hash is veriﬁed. However, the secu-
rity of commitment protocols relies on the strength of the shared secret, since
a MitM attack could occur if the shared secret can be calculated with a brute
force attack. Finally, the security strongly depends on the timing of the mes-
sages, since both commitments must be received before either device opens the
commitment.
Sethi et. al address both issues by replacing the shared secret with fuzzy data
and by proposing two variants of the commitment protocol. The ﬁrst variant
displays a message (Commitment received) on both devices after collecting the
noisy input and generating the commitments. The protocol then waits for user
input on both devices before proceeding to the commitment opening phase.
However, the security of the protocol could be compromised if the user does
not accurately follow the instructions (i.e., the user provides input quickly to
one device before both commitments are received). Consequently, the authors
introduce the second variant of the protocol, which relies on implicit time-based
synchronization3.
3This version will be presented in the next chapter thoroughly since it is adopted by our
solution for pairing with multi-model gestures.
==PAGE:36==
26
Secure Device pairing
Figure 3.10: LURD string metric (left) and Angle string metric with 16 de-
grees of freedom [SAA15].
As mentioned previously in this section, ﬁnding an appropriate comparison met-
ric is crucial for validating an already established session key. As a result, several
metrics are compared in [SAA15] to ﬁnd the metric that eliminates false positives
and minimizes false negatives. The ﬁrst metric is the distance metric, namely
the normalized Euclidean distance between the x and y coordinate values. The
second metric is the LURD string metric, which maps the ﬁnger movement to
a string of letters where (L=left, U=up, R=right, D=down). Finally, the angle
string metric which is a generalized form of the LURD metric, but oﬀers M
degrees of freedom instead of four. Figure 3.10 shows an example of both string
metrics.
Finally, the solution is evaluated by conducting a user study with six diﬀer-
ent users, each performing 12-17 pairing attempts, where both matching and
non-matching drawings are compared. Figure 3.11 shows that the string met-
rics outperform the distance metric. However, the enhancement oﬀered by the
angle metric over the LURD metric is not worth the additional computational
resources since a suitable threshold can be chosen for the LURD metric to pre-
vent both false positives and false negatives. Moreover, encoding the x and y
movements separately using the LURD metric does not perform well (Figure
3.11c).
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Fuzzy pairing
27
Figure 3.11: Number of pairing attempts as a function of correlation ratio
of matching drawings (green) and non-matching drawings (red)
using diﬀerent comparison metrics [SAA15].
==PAGE:38==
28
Secure Device pairing
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Secure pairing with
multi-modal gestures
This chapter details the proposed secure pairing scheme using multi-modal ges-
tures with special attention to the improvements over [Ber19]. It starts with
discussing the limitations of the previous solution, then provides a step-by-step
explanation of the building blocks, including how the data is collected and pro-
cessed. Last but not least, it describes the security protocol implemented in this
pairing scheme.
4.1
Overview
The secure pairing protocol using multi-modal gestures scheme integrates solu-
tions based on synchronized movements in diﬀerent dimensions, including both
accelerometer readings [MG09] and drawing on the screen [SAA15]. The main
goal is to pair a wearable device – such as a smartwatch or a ﬁtness tracker –
and a device equipped with a touch screen – such as a smartphone or a tablet
while ensuring both security and usability. As shown in Figure 4.1, the proposed
solution allows the user to pair a smartwatch and smartphone in a simple and
user-friendly manner, by drawing a pattern on the touch screen while wearing
the smartwatch.
==PAGE:40==
30
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
Figure 4.1: Pairing through multi-modal gestures [Ber19].
However, two main challenges need to be taken into consideration. First, de-
tecting a correlation between the signals from the two paired devices is more
straight-forward when only a single dimension, (e.g., drawing only), is consid-
ered. In contrast, multi-modal gestures [Ber19] requires detecting a correlation
between signals of diﬀerent nature. In particular, it is quite diﬃcult to reliably
quantify the correlation between the drawing at the smartphone and the wrist
motion represented by acceleration values detected from the smartwatch. Sec-
ond, the previous work in [Ber19] still has several limitations that need to be
addressed before the solution can be considered practical. In fact, the acceler-
ation values collected in that solution include both linear acceleration and the
eﬀect of gravity [Doc19a], and it lacks a mechanism for neutralizing the eﬀect of
gravity. Besides, the drawings were assumed to be performed with the smart-
phone lying on a table, parallel to the ground, to make the impact of rotation
components’, (i.e., yaw, pitch, and roll), negligible. Moreover, the study does
not address whether the user should be guided to draw speciﬁed patterns or
should be allowed to draw freely. Furthermore, the diﬀerentiation between dis-
tinct movements is not accurate enough for some drawing patterns and requires
enhancement. Finally and most importantly, the prior study only suggests the
use of the security protocol implemented in the synchronized drawing scheme
[SAA15]. However, it relies on an oﬄine processing pipeline and lacks and ac-
tual implementation of the proposed pairing protocol. As a result, the feasibility
of the solution has been shown, but various open issues must be addressed to
assess its practicality. The rest of this chapter speciﬁcally addresses each of the
issues pointed out above.
The main phases of the system’s pipeline are shown in Figure 4.2 and can be
divided into two main groups. The fuzzy data collection, which is responsible for
sampling the data from the touch screen on the smartphone, or from diﬀerent
sensors, (e.g., accelerometer and gyroscope), on the smartwatch. This phase is
also responsible for fusing the data collected on the smartwatch to accurately
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Security Protocol
31
Data Sampling
Sensor Fusion
Noise Filtering
Synchronization
Transformation
Fuzzy data collection
Fuzzy data validation
Encoding
Validation
Smartphone
Smartwatch
Figure 4.2: Break-down of the steps performed by the proposed system.
calculate the linear acceleration in the wrist movement. Whereas the second
group is the fuzzy data validation. In this phase, as shown in Figure 4.2, ﬁve
main steps of data processing are executed to compute a quantitative correlation
between the noisy input collected from both devices. First, several ﬁlters are
used to remove the noise. Second, the data is synchronized since both devices
are relying on their local clocks, and the onset and the ending of the drawing
need to be detected on the smartwatch. Third, the data is transformed; namely,
the integral of the linear acceleration is calculated, resulting in signals of similar
nature.
Fourth, the signals from both sources are encoded to reach a state
where both signals are mutually comparable. Finally, the system evaluates the
correlation between the signals by applying a comparison metric F and only
accepting the output if the matching result is above a speciﬁc threshold t.
4.2
Security Protocol
Implementing a valid security protocol is the key objective of studying the prac-
ticality of the multi-modal gestures pairing. The protocol has been adapted
from the synchronized drawing pairing protocol [SAA15] because it is simple
to implement and since this protocol requires minimal user involvement besides
the noisy input collection, (i.e., drawing on the smartphone screen while wearing
the smartwatch).
As shown in Figure 4.3, the protocol comprises four main phases. The protocol
starts with performing a Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange [Nan10], where each device
sends their key component x and y respectively, and agree on a symmetric
session key Ksess.
After the key is computed, the user is required to start
drawing on the screen of the smartphone, and both devices collect the noisy
input in this phase. The smartphone collects the drawing data as soon as the
==PAGE:42==
32
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
Device A (Smartphone)
Device B (Smartwatch)
In-band channel
a. Send gx
b. Send gy
c. Compute session key
Ksess = gxy
c. Compute session key 
Ksess = gxy
Difﬁe-Hellman
Key exchange
a. Generate noisy input vA
i.e. Drawing
Fuzzy input
collection
a. Generate noisy input vB
i.e. Wrist movement
b. Set start timer TA,0
b. Set start timer TB,0
a. Generate random value rA 
and compute commitment
CA = h(IdA, vA, rA, Ksess)
b. send CA
a. Generate random value rB 
and compute commitment
CB = h(IdB, vB, rB, Ksess)
d. send CB
c. Receive CA 
Abort if received at time > TB,0+Δ1
e. Receive CB , Abort if:
Received at time > TA,0+Δ1
Generating
commitments
a.  Wait till time 
TA,0 + Δ1 + Δ2
a.  Wait till time 
TB,0 + Δ1 + Δ2
b. Send EKsess(IdA, vA, rA)
d. Send EKsess(IdB, vB, rB)
f. Accept Ksess if:
1. IdA ≠ IdB
2. CB = h(IdB, vB, rB, Ksess)
3. F(vA, vB) ≥ t
c. Decrypt message with Ksess
e. Decrypt message with Ksess
Opening
commitments
f. Accept Ksess if:
1. IdA ≠ IdB
2. CA = h(IdA, vA, rA, Ksess)
3. F(vA, vB) ≥ t
Figure 4.3: Pairing commitment protocol with implicit time-based synchro-
nization (follows loosely [SAA15]).
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Security Protocol
33
user starts drawing up until they lift their ﬁnger from the screen. On the other
hand, the smartwatch records data continuously from the moment the fuzzy
input collection phase of the protocol is initiated.
As a result, the need for
synchronization on the smartwatch arises. Moreover, the smartwatch needs to
be notiﬁed at the end of the drawing, either by user input, e.g., clicking a
button on the smartwatch or through the in-band channel. In the next phase,
each device generates its commitment and sends it to the other party.
The
commitment is formed of the hash of the following: the identity of the sender,
the noisy input (generated in the prior phase), a long random number, and the
computed session key. The commitments are sent from one device to the other
and have to be received within a predeﬁned time frame ∆1 to proceed to the
ﬁnal phase: opening the commitments. Otherwise, the protocol aborts and the
pairing is terminated. Finally, both devices wait for another pre-speciﬁed time
frame ∆2.
This is done to ensure that neither devices attempt to open the
commitments before both Device A has received the commitment from Device
B and Device B has received the commitment from Device A, which is crucial
in protecting against possible Man-in-The-Middle (MitM) attacks. Each device
encrypts their own commitment and opens the commitment of the other device
using Ksess and veriﬁes the following conditions:
1. The identity included in the commitment sent by Device A is diﬀerent
from the one sent by Device B.
2. The opened commitment in the 4th phase is identical to the commitment
sent in the 3rd phase.
3. The correlation between the noisy input generated by each device exceeds
a predeﬁned acceptance threshold t, after applying the comparison metric
F.
The protocol succeeds only if all the conditions above are satisﬁed. The def-
inition of the comparison metric F and the choice of the acceptance thresh-
old t will be discussed shortly. It is also worth mentioning that the usage of
Diﬃe-Hellman in the key exchange phase is not entirely sound from a security
perspective and is done for demonstration purposes only.
The usage of
Elliptic Curve Diﬃe-Hellman (ECDH) should be considered in the real-world
implementation of the protocol for better performance [GSKS16]. Furthermore,
the implementation assumes the smartphone (Device A) to be the master that
initiates the connection and the data transfer, while the smartwatch (Device B)
is the slave.
Fuzzy cryptography (see Section 3.2) is another viable alternative. In that case,
the secret key can be directly extracted from the noisy input. However, Sethi
==PAGE:44==
34
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
et al. [SAA15] have shown that there is no deﬁnitive method of calculating the
entropy of the drawings. This can also be argued for the entropy of the wrist
movement. As a result, validating an already established session key is more
straightforward.
4.3
Data Collection
During the fuzzy input collection phase, both the drawing and acceleration sig-
nals are gathered. Nevertheless, gathering the drawing signal is simpler, since it
is directly provided in the Android Application Programming Interface (API)
[Doc19b]. The Android velocity tracker provides the ability to track ﬁnger move-
ment on touch screens as well as the velocity in x and y axes. Unfortunately, the
Android motion sensors API lacks the functionality of collecting accurate linear
acceleration measurements irrespective of external factors, such as the rotation
force and the orientation of the device. According to the Android developer
documentation [Doc19a], this feature is more suitable for applications where
the motion is more steady, such as calculating the acceleration of a moving ve-
hicle. Indeed, the collection of noisy input collection beneﬁts from employing
multiple sensors to accurately sample the wrist movement, in addition to the
accelerometer.
4.3.1
Sampling
The velocity in x and y axes is sampled from the smartphone, in addition to
the linear acceleration in the same axes from the smartwatch. The sampling
rate applied on both devices is 50 Hz, which is the maximum frequency that is
supported by the smartphone. Even though the sensors of the smartwatch can
operate at a higher frequency, the readings have been down-sampled to 50 Hz
during the data collection phase. The reason is that experimental results have
shown that the magnetometer operates at a lower frequency than the gyroscope
and the accelerometer, while the sensor fusion system requires current readings
of all three sensors to accurately calculate the linear acceleration. Therefore,
the linear acceleration readings are collected at a lower frequency to ensure fresh
data is available from these sensors. Moreover, the frequencies that describe the
motion of human limbs fall between the values 0-20 Hz [MPY10]. As a result,
according to the Nyquist-Shannon theorem [Nyq28, Sha48], sampling at 40 Hz
is suﬃcient to capture all the necessary motion. Hence, operating at a frequency
below the maximum supported sampling rate does not cause any issues [TS18].
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Data Collection
35
Gravity sensor
Magnetometer
Magnetic orientation
Low-pass
ﬁlter
Fused orientation
Gyroscope
Time interval
×
+
Σ
Gyroscope orientation
High-pass
ﬁlter
Figure 4.4: Block diagram of the proposed sensor fusion.
4.3.2
Smartwatch: Sensor fusion
The main motivation behind implementing the sensor fusion system is to over-
come the impact of rotation components and the force of gravity on the accelera-
tion readings. To accomplish this, the Android API [Doc19a] provides functions
to calculate the three orientation angles of the device, using the magnetometer
(or the digital compass) and the gravity sensor. However, the magnetometer
readings can suﬀer from inaccuracies due to tilt errors and surrounding mag-
netic disturbances. Furthermore, the gravity sensor usually provides a reading
that deviates from the average value of gravity at Earth’s surface, namely stan-
dard gravity (≈9.81 m/s2). On the other hand, the gyroscope has a faster and
more accurate response, but it suﬀers from integration drift [KHS17]. This drift
occurs because the gyroscope calculates the orientation angle through detect-
ing angular velocity values and integrating these values over time. The integral
is calculated by multiplying these speeds with the time interval between the
current and previous velocity readings, yielding a rotation increment, and the
total sum of all increments results in the orientation of the device. However, a
minor error is introduced in each iteration, which adds up over time causing the
integration drift (also known as the gyroscope drift).
To avoid both the noisy orientation of the compass and the gyroscope drift,
the readings from these sensors are fused. This is achieved by calculating the
orientation from the gyroscope over short periods and correcting this orientation
with the readings from the magnetometer over longer periods [ABH12].
==PAGE:46==
36
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
This fusion is equivalent to applying a low-pass ﬁlter on the magnetometer
output and a high-pass ﬁlter on the gyroscope output, as shown in Figure 4.4.
The fused orientation angles are then combined with the reading from the gravity
sensor to decompose the force of gravity into x, y and z components, according
to Equation (4.1), where g is the acceleration due to gravity, θ is the pitch and
ψ is the roll.
gx = g.(−cos θ. sin ψ)
gy = g.(−sin θ)
gz = g.(cos θ ∗cos ψ)
(4.1)
The eﬀect of gravity is then subtracted from the readings of the accelerometer
in all three axes to retrieve the linear acceleration, regardless of the orientation
of the device. As a result, both the eﬀect of the rotation components and the
force of gravity is eliminated.
Finally, it is worth noting that the fusion system requires a few seconds to
stabilize because the gyroscope suﬀers from an initial reading bias. This bias
is corrected within 3 to 5 seconds when enough samples are collected and fused
from the gyroscope and the magnetometer. Thus, the system is initialized into
a calibration mode until the bias is corrected.
4.4
Data Processing
After the noisy input is collected and the commitments are veriﬁed, both devices
attempt to validate the fuzzy data. To this purpose, the data requires some
degree of processing before applying the comparison metric and calculating the
correlation.
4.4.1
Noise Filtering
The input collected from both devices is not noise-free and needs to be ﬁltered.
To achieve this, the range of noise for the velocity and acceleration signals needs
to be detected to prevent any skews in the next steps. The readings from each
device in a stationary position is considered one common source of noise, and
eliminating this eﬀect is known as mechanical ﬁltering [SC07]. By applying this
ﬁlter, any value that falls within that its window size is set to zero. However,
relying solely on a mechanical ﬁlter is not suﬃcient on the smartwatch, even after
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Data Processing
37
Figure 4.5: Oﬀset removal after calibration [SC07].
eliminating the eﬀect of gravity and rotation forces due to two main reasons. A
calibration scheme is needed to remove any oﬀset that can cause errors in the
transformation phase, as shown in Figure 4.5.
In addition, applying a low pass ﬁlter (LPF) enhances the noise removal step.
The easiest way to implement this ﬁlter is by calculating a moving average.
Nevertheless, the choice of the window size is crucial, since increasing it could
cause loss of data while decreasing it can cause major errors in the transforma-
tion phase [SC07]. As a result, both oﬀset removal based on calibration values
and a rolling average ﬁlter have been incorporated in the noise removal phase
on the smartwatch.
4.4.2
Data Synchronization
Data synchronization plays a key role in input processing since the correlation
between the inputs might not be detected if these inputs are not properly aligned
on a temporal scale. Thus, detecting a common event on both devices that iden-
tiﬁes the start and end of the data is required. On the smartphone, this event
is identiﬁed by the duration the user’s ﬁnger touches the screen. Nevertheless,
on the smartwatch, the accelerometer collects data continuously, including be-
fore and after the user draws on the touch screen. Hence, the synchronization
mechanism needs to be applied for the input collected from the smartwatch
only. The synchronization helps remove all unnecessary data collected by the
accelerometer and discards the need for a global clock.
In the previous work in [Ber19], the data is synchronized by placing the smart-
phone on a ﬂat surface and the user is required to ﬁrst hold their wrist in a
still position.
Then, the user is asked to perform a long tap on the smart-
phone screen, resulting in a sudden peak in the magnitude of the acceleration.
The synchronization scheme then utilizes the Smoothed z-score algorithm
==PAGE:48==
38
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
[Gle13, Van17] to detect this peak, and its timestamp is considered the onset
of drawing. Even though this solution can detect the onset of drawing, it as-
sumes that the device has to be parallel to the ground, which might not always
be the case. Moreover, it requires collecting and transferring the z-component
of the acceleration solely for synchronizing the data, since it is discarded be-
fore the similarity calculation. It is also worth noting that such a scheme does
not provide any mechanism to detect the termination of the drawing on the
smartwatch.
Due to these reasons, a simpler data synchronization is proposed here, which
does not require either constraint. After the noise removal phase, the signiﬁcant
motion will be represented by non-zero values, whereas any unneeded data will
be equal to zero. Therefore, the ﬁrst non-zero value is considered the onset
of drawing, and the last non-zero value is considered the end of the drawing.
The data is synchronized accordingly and the rest of the signal is discarded.
However, the user should refrain from any unnecessary movement during the
pairing process – other than drawing on the screen of the smartphone – for this
synchronization scheme to work.
4.4.3
Transformation
Data transformation manipulates the signal from one source and converts it to
the nature of the other signal, as a preliminary step of making the inputs from
both devices comparable. Since the acceleration is the rate of change of the
velocity, (i.e., its ﬁrst derivative), two possible options exist: either calculate
the ﬁrst derivative of the velocity readings from the smartphone, or the integral
of the acceleration readings from the smartwatch, which results in signals of the
same nature. However, related work has demonstrated through [TS18, SC07]
that integrating the acceleration values is a better option. Thus, the integral
of the linear acceleration is calculated on both x and y axes to determine the
velocity. This integral can be calculated as the area below the curve, which is
reduced to the sum of the area of all samples. However, this results in integra-
tion errors that keep accumulating in every step of the integration [SC07]. To
avoid this error, a ﬁrst-order approximation is done by using the cumulative
trapezoidal rule, described by:
Z b
a
f(x)dx ≈
N−1
X
n=0
1
2(∆x)n(fn + fn+1) ≈
N−1
X
n=0
1
2(fn + fn+1)(xn+1 −xn).
Applying this equation breaks down the area into two smaller areas, that of the
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Data Processing
39
Figure 4.6: Integration errors generated without (left) vs. with the cumulative
trapezoidal rule (right) [SC07].
previous sample in addition to a triangle formed between the current and pre-
vious samples, as shown in Figure 4.6. This causes a signiﬁcant decrease in the
aforementioned integration error and prepares the data for the last processing
phase, encoding the signals and applying the comparison metric.
4.4.4
Encoding and Comparison Metric
The ﬁnal step of data processing is encoding both signals and calculating the
match ratio between these encoded signals asynchronously, then validating this
ratio against the acceptance threshold t. Both the encoding method and the
comparison metric have been directly adopted from the previous multi-modal
gestures pairing scheme [Ber19] since they have a few advantages which will be
explained shortly.
Encoding aims to transform the processed signals to a binary representation that
captures their features, without loss of information. The proposed encoding uses
Gray-codes, where each bit sequence diﬀers from its neighboring sequences with
1-bit only [BER76]. It starts with plotting the x and y components of each
signal distinctively on the same graph, as demonstrated in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:50==
40
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
Figure 4.7: Plotting sample of x and y velocity components [Ber19].
The Cartesian coordinate system is then divided into 2n partitions, where n
is the number of bits of each generated code. The encoding scheme has been
implemented with two diﬀerent variants, 2-bit and 3-bit codes, as presented in
Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: 2-bit gray encoding (left) vs. 3-bit gray encoding (right) [Ber19].
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Data Processing
41
Afterwards, the ﬁrst point of the plot is translated to the origin and a vector
is drawn to the third point, by applying a jump vector of length 2. The code
is then extracted based on the partition in which the vector lands, resulting in
a 2-bit gray code of “10” or a 3-bit code of “100”, for the example present in
Figure 4.9. The whole process is repeated for all points in the plot, i.e., second
and fourth points, and so on, for both signals, until the end of the drawing is
reached. The example shown below ﬁnally yields the 2-bit code: "10 00 00 01
10 10 01 11" or the 3-bit code "100 000 001 010 101 100 010 111", depending
on the gray-code used.
Figure 4.9: Encoding example from 1st to 3rd data point with a jump of 2
[Ber19].
The signals are now in a comparable state that allows for a simple comparison
metric F to be directly applied.
First, a bit-wise Exclusive-NOR operation
[Tut14] is performed on both signals, so the matching bits would output a bit of
value 1. Second, the number of ones is then counted and divided by the length
of the output. Therefore, the match ratio calculation between the two encoded
signals sA and sB is governed by Equation (4.2), where N is the length of arrays
representing the signals. Finally, the match ratio is then compared against an
acceptance threshold t and the fuzzy signals are considered matching only if
the ratio exceeds this threshold.
F(sA, sB) =
N−1
X
i=0
(¬(sA ⊕sB)i = 1)
N
(4.2)
==PAGE:52==
42
Secure pairing with multi-modal gestures
As previously mentioned, both signals are sampled at the same frequency.
Hence, it is safe to assume that the length of both arrays is identical, how-
ever, that is not true in practice. This happens because sampling rates in
the Android operating system always suﬀer from delays while collecting data
from any sensor [EN15]. As a result, the value of N is set to the length of the
shorter signal between sA and sB and a sliding window is used while calculating
the match ratio. The shorter signal is shifted across the other to calculate the
highest possible match between these signals. This could still result in some
inaccuracies in the calculation, thus, if the diﬀerence between the lengths of sA
and sB exceeds the size of the sliding window, the pairing terminates.
Finally, the main advantages of this encoding scheme are:
• The approach is simple, computationally-inexpensive, easy to implement,
and allows the usage of a straightforward comparison metric.
• The scheme is amplitude-insensitive, so no extra processing is needed
to match the amplitude of both signals, i.e., the integral of the acceleration
from the smartwatch and the velocity from the smartphone.
• The scheme is lossless and can be extended to a larger number of bits by
dividing the coordinate system into more portions.
• The solution is independent of the sensors’ sensitivity since it relies only
on the change in the direction of the jump vector connecting any two
points.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This chapter presents the full implementation of the proposed solution’s main
components. It also presents the experimental test-bed and evaluation method-
ology. Furthermore, it discusses the experimental results of the proposed solu-
tion with a focus on its accuracy in distinguishing between distinct movements
using diﬀerent encoding schemes and drawing patterns.
5.1
Key components
To demonstrate the pairing protocol (see Figure 4.3) and assess the proposed
solution, two main components are implemented – namely, an Android smart-
phone application and a Wear OS [Doc20b] smartwatch application –. Android
is chosen due to its popularity and since it provides APIs to sample data from
both the touch screen and hardware sensors. Furthermore, Wear OS is a ver-
sion of Android that runs on wearable devices, hence Android APIs can be used
when developing the smartwatch application.
In addition to these components, an additional script is developed for further
oﬄine processing.
This script compares data collected from several distinct
pairings and calculates the correlation ratio between the collected signals. The
purpose of this script is to check matching samples – those corresponding to
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation
real pairings – and non-matching samples – those whose wrist movements do
not correspond to the drawings – since testing non-matching samples directly
on the smartphone and the smartwatch is cumbersome.
5.1.1
Smartphone application
The smartphone application [Elh20] initiates an unencrypted Bluetooth connec-
tion – using the BluetoothAdapter and BluetoothSocket classes from the
Android API – acting as the master in the pairing protocol shown in Figure 4.3.
After opening the Bluetooth communication channel, it starts an Elliptic curve
Diﬃe-Hellman (ECDH) key agreement and calculates the session key.
The
implementation applies a 521-bit elliptic curve [Qu99] and then trims the sym-
metric key to a length of 256 bits.
Subsequently, the fuzzy data collection
starts, allowing the user to draw on the smartphone’s screen. The application
derives the velocity of the user’s ﬁnger while drawing – in both x and y axes –
using the Android velocity tracker [Doc19b]. Then, it divides the collected ve-
locity values by the pixel density of the device to normalize the drawings across
diﬀerent screen sizes and applies the moving average ﬁlter (see Section 4.4.1).
Afterwards, the application generates a random number of size 1024 bits us-
ing the Java SecureRandom class and computes the commitment using the
SHA-512 hashing algorithm [GJW11]. Then, the application pauses for a pe-
riod of inactivity equal to ∆2 to ensure both the smartphone and the smartwatch
have received the commitments from each other (see Section 4.2). After that,
it encrypts the generated commitment using the AES-256 algorithm [MVM09]
and sends it to the smartwatch. Afterward, the application opens and veriﬁes
the commitment received from the smartwatch. If the veriﬁcation succeeds, it
performs the data processing steps detailed in Section 4.4. Finally, it compares
the calculated correlation ratio against the acceptance threshold t to decide the
outcome of the matching, which is shown on the smartphone’s screen.
It is worth noting that the cryptographic operations – namely, the key exchange,
nonce generation, hashing, AES encryption, and decryption – are implemented
using the Java Cryptography Architecture (JCA) [Ora20]. Furthermore, the
collected x and y velocity values are exported to the internal storage of the
phone for further (oﬄine) processing.
5.1.2
Smartwatch application
The smartwatch application [Elh20] is almost identical to the smartphone, hence
the implementation of the key exchange, commitment generation, commitment
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Key components
45
Figure 5.1: The sequence of instructions shown by the smartwatch application
from start (left) to end (right).
opening, and fuzzy data validation has been reused. However, this application
has three main diﬀerences. First, the smartwatch waits for the smartphone
to initiate the Bluetooth connection, acting as the slave in the pairing proto-
col.
Second, the noisy input collection is more complex than in the smart-
phone application, since the smartwatch employs the fusion system described
in Section 4.3.2. Speciﬁcally, the smartwatch listens to several sensors using
the Android sensor manager [Doc19a], including SENSOR.TYPE_ACCELEROMETER,
SENSOR.TYPE_GYROSCOPE and SENSOR.TYPE_MAGNETIC_FIELD [Doc20a].
The
smartwatch waits until samples are collected from all sensors, then starts the
fusion algorithm (adapted from [Bor18]). Initially, the application retrieves the
3x3 rotation matrix (R) based on readings from the gravity sensor and the mag-
netometer by calling the getRotationMatrix method from the sensor manager
API. The matrix (R) resembles the rotation of the device’s coordinate system
with respect to the real world’s coordinate system.
(R) is used to calculate
the orientation angles of the device by passing it as a parameter to the next
call from the sensor manager API, namely, getOrientation which computes
the yaw, pitch, and roll angles.
Similarly, these steps are repeated, namely
retrieving the 3x3 rotation matrix (R) and the orientation angles, based on
readings from the gyroscope. At this point, the application has two values for
each orientation angle. These values are then fused by applying a low-pass ﬁlter
on the magnetometer output and a high-pass ﬁlter on the gyroscope output,
as described in Section 4.3.2 and are used to eliminate the impact of gravity
according to Equation 4.1.
Finally, since the fusion system requires a few seconds to stabilize (see Section
4.3.2), the application instructs the user to keep his wrist still and wait till the
calibration phase is over, then it notiﬁes the user to start drawing in 3 seconds
as shown in Figure 5.1.
Similar to the velocity readings, the collected x and y linear acceleration values
are also exported for oﬄine testing.
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
5.1.3
Oﬄine testing script
The oﬄine testing script includes an identical implementation of the fuzzy data
validation phase present in the smartphone and smartwatch applications. How-
ever, oﬄine processing allows for cross-correlating the samples collected during
diﬀerent pairings, hence non-matching movements can be analyzed as well. This
provides more insights into the accuracy of the fuzzy validation phase and helps
with the choice of the acceptance threshold (t) and the comparison of diﬀerent
drawing patterns and encoding schemes.
The script is developed using Python 3 since it oﬀers several libraries for sig-
nal processing and manipulation. The data is manipulated using the following
libraries:
• Pandas [McK] version 0.25.3 for loading the exported values from (.csv)
format into data structures oﬀered by the library, such as DataFrame.
• SciPy [JOP] version 1.4.1 for mathematical computations, including the
cumulative trapezoidal integration and resampling signals.
• Matplotlib [Hun] version 3.1.2 for plotting the experimental results.
5.2
Experimental setup
After implementing the needed components, several experiments are conducted
– both online and oﬄine – to evaluate the proposed solution. To this purpose,
two devices are chosen for online experiments. Besides, an evaluation methodol-
ogy is presented to explain the conditions that govern the experiments. Also, a
preliminary study is performed to set the system parameters that were discussed
in Chapter 4.1.
5.2.1
Experimental test-bed
The experimental setup requires a device with a touch-sensitive screen (e.g.,
smartphone or tablet) and a smartwatch equipped with an accelerometer, a
gyroscope, and a magnetometer (or digital compass). The devices used in our
experiments are a Huawei Mate 9 smartphone and a Mobvoi Ticwatch Pro
smartwatch. This smartwatch has been chosen since it includes all the required
sensors and it also runs the latest version of Wear OS. Fortunately, using most
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Experimental setup
47
modern Android smartphones or tablets would work, since the implementation
uses APIs that are supported by older versions of Android (till to version 4.0),
and it is also independent of the smartphone’s screen size.
Processing
CPU
RAM
Octa-core (4x2.4 GHz Cortex-A73
+ 4x1.8 GHz Cortex-A53)
6GB RAM
Display
Resolution
Size
PPI
1440 x 2560 pixels
5.5 inches
∼534
Connectivity
Bluetooth
4.2, A2DP, EDR, LE
Operating System
Android 9.0 (Pie), EMUI 9.1
Table 5.1: Technical speciﬁcations of the Huawei Mate 9 Pro smartphone
[Are17].
Processing
CPU
RAM
Qualcomm R⃝Snapdragon WearTM 2100
512 MB
Connectivity
Bluetooth
4.2
Sensors
Accelerometer
Gyroscope
E-compass
Operating System
Wear OS 2.18
Table 5.2: Technical speciﬁcations of the Mobvoi Ticwatch Pro smartwatch
[Mob19].
The full speciﬁcations of both the smartphone and the smartwatch can be found
in Table 5.1 and Table 5.2 respectively.
5.2.2
Methodology
The methodology follows the approach of the previous work [Ber19], however,
more pairings are performed – namely 32 distinct attempts – and their corre-
sponding samples are exported on both devices. This results in a total of 1024
hypothetical pairings, where 32 samples are matching and the remaining are not.
The 32 matching samples have been tested both online – on the smartphone and
the smartwatch, while performing the pairing – and oﬄine through the testing
script, on the other hand, the remaining non-matching samples have been tested
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
Figure 5.2: 3x3 unlock pattern on Android phones.
oﬄine only. Subsequently, each sample collected from the smartwatch is com-
pared against each sample collected from the smartphone by performing the
fuzzy data validation steps and calculating the correlation ratio. Both 2-bit and
3-bit gray encoding are used with a jump vector of length 2 and a sliding
window of length equal to 15% of the length of the shorter signal (see Section
4.4.4).
The patterns used in all the pairings are similar to the 3x3 device unlock pattern
used by Android phones, as depicted in Figure 5.2. To ensure the impact of
rotation components of the smartwatch on the pairing process is negligible, half
of the drawings have been performed while the smartphone is held by hand
while the remaining drawings are done while it is lying on the table.
However, a few conditions – which have been observed while conducting the
experiments – need to be satisﬁed to ensure the smartwatch detects the motion
reliably. First, the drawings have to be performed by moving the whole wrist
and not a single ﬁnger. Otherwise, the smartwatch will not detect any motion
and the pairing will fail. Second, if the speed of drawing is not fast enough, the
related motion might be undetected. However, it is diﬃcult to quantify the exact
required speed. In addition, the speed is highly dependent on the sensitivity
of the smartwatch’s accelerometer. Finally, the user needs to keep his wrist
as steady as possible while drawing, since any sudden movements (e.g. hand
twitching) could result in random spikes in the acceleration readings. Moreover,
the user should not perform any wrist movements – other than drawing on
the smartphone – when instructed to start drawing, since the synchronization
scheme relies on associating the onset of drawing with the beginning of the wrist
movement.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Experimental setup
49
5.2.3
Preliminary analysis
Several parameters have been set in the implementation, including the ranges
of the noise ﬁlters which have been chosen based on calibration results.
In
addition, the time frames deﬁned in the pairing protocol – namely, ∆1 and ∆2 –
have been adapted from the synchronized drawing scheme [SAA15]. Moreover,
the acceptance threshold t has been decided based on the experimental results
and will be discussed thoroughly in Section 5.3.
5.2.3.1
Noise ﬁltering parameters
On the smartphone, the stationary noise (see Section 4.4.1) has been charac-
terized by performing a long press on the screen for a few seconds, followed by
detecting the maximum reading during that press. Whereas on the smartwatch,
the device has been placed on a ﬂat surface in a stationary position for a few
seconds, followed by detecting the maximum reading. The range of the me-
chanical noise ﬁlter has been set accordingly to 0.02 m/s and 0.2 m/s2 on the
smartphone and smartwatch respectively.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Timestamp (milliseconds)
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Velocity (m/s)
Unfiltered velocity
Filtered velocity
Figure 5.3: Sample velocity data before and after applying the moving average
ﬁlter.
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
In addition, a moving average ﬁlter has been implemented to enhance the noise
removal step (see Section 4.4.1), such ﬁlter smooths the signal as shown in
Figure 5.3. The window size of the ﬁlter has been set to 10 based on experimental
trials.
5.2.3.2
Timing constraints
As discussed in Section 4.2, both devices need to receive the commitment gener-
ated by the other party within the time frame ∆1. Moreover, the devices must
wait for another pre-speciﬁed time frame ∆2 to ensure neither devices attempt
to open the received commitment before both devices have received the other
device’s commitment. As a result, the security of the protocol strongly relies on
these timing constraints. Sethi et al. [SAA15] have chosen the event of lifting
the user’s ﬁnger from the touch screen as a reference to signify the end of the
noisy input collection. However, the smartphone has to notify the smartwatch
of such an event to apply the same reasoning in our scheme. Consequently,
the time frame ∆1 can be set to the same value suggested in the synchronized
drawing solution (=200ms) plus the time it takes to send the notiﬁcation which
signiﬁes the end of the noisy input collection phase from the smartphone to the
smartwatch. According to the conducting experiments, the time to send such
a notiﬁcation – and ensure it has been received – is approximately equal to
300ms. Therefore, the value of ∆1 is set to 500ms. Similarly, the time frame ∆2
can be directly adapted from that scheme (=500ms). According to Sethi et al.
[SAA15], these values should be suﬃcient to protect against Man-in-The-Middle
(MitM) attacks.
However, the values of ∆1 and ∆2 have been set based on the assumption that
sending a notiﬁcation from the smartphone to the smartwatch after the fuzzy
input collection (see Section 4.2) has no security implications. However, Sethi
et al. [SAA15] do not recommend sending any further data in the in-band
channel to limit the possible Man-in-The-Middle (MitM) attacks. For example,
the attacker could send such notiﬁcation to the smartwatch immediately after
initiating the fuzzy data collection, leading to the comparison of extremely short
– or even null – signals. To counter this, the fuzzy data validation checks the
length of both fuzzy signals after removing the noise.
If one of the signals
did not include any signiﬁcant motion, the pairing is terminated. One other
improvement is introducing another threshold on the length of both signals and
rejecting the pairing if the length of either signal falls below that threshold.
To avoid any possible attacks, this notiﬁcation can be substituted with some
input from the user (e.g., a long press) on the smartphone screen once they
ﬁnish drawing. Both devices can detect such action with the same approach
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Experimental results
51
used for detecting stationary noise (see Section 5.2.3.1), since the user’s wrist
will be in a stationary position to perform the long press.
In this case, the
time frame ∆1 can be directly adapted from the synchronized drawing scheme
(=200ms).
5.3
Experimental results
Introducing an appropriate acceptance threshold is necessary to fulﬁll the ﬁ-
nal condition of the fuzzy data validation (see Section 4.2). In particular, the
correlation between the noisy input generated by each device must exceed a
predeﬁned acceptance threshold t, after applying the comparison metric F. Ide-
ally, this threshold should eliminate both false positives to ensure security
and false negatives to provide a ﬂawless user experience. Even though the
absence of false positives is suﬃcient to consider a pairing scheme secure, a high
number of false negatives would force the user to repeat the pairing process,
which reduces usability.
Since the comparison metric F deﬁned in Equation 4.2 counts the number of
matching bits between the encoded signals, the acceptance threshold is repre-
sented as an adequate percentage of these matching bits that minimizes those
false positives and negatives. To deduce an appropriate value for this threshold,
various experiments have been conducted and are discussed in this section.
5.3.1
Oﬄine testing results
Figures 5.4 and 5.5 show the histograms of the calculated correlation ratios using
3-bit and 2-bit gray encoding respectively. Ideally, the correlation ratio should
be set to a value where the histograms of matching and non-matching samples
should not intersect.
Unfortunately, this is not feasible according to the
results, yet by choosing a threshold (t=0.7), both false positives and negatives
are minimized. Applying this threshold results in a total of 13 false positives
out 992 non-matching pairing attempts (≈1.3%) and 3 false negatives out of
32 actual pairings (<10%) when the 3-bit gray encoding is used. This result
also shows that 3-bit encoding surpasses its 2-bit alternative, which included 19
false positives (≈2%) and 17 false negatives (>50%). The ratio of false negatives
is extremely high when the 2-bit encoding is utilized, which shows that 2-bit
encoding is not usable, as the user will have to repeat a correct pairing once
every two trials.
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Correlation ratio
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of pairing attempts
Non-matching samples
Matching samples
Figure 5.4: Number of pairing attempts as a function of the correlation ratio
of 3x3 unlock pattern drawings using 3-bit gray encoding.
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Correlation ratio
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Number of pairing attempts
Non-matching samples
Matching samples
Figure 5.5: Number of pairing attempts as a function of 3x3 unlock pattern
drawings using 2-bit gray encoding.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Experimental results
53
As mentioned in Section 4.4.4, the lengths of both the acceleration and velocity
signals are compared and the pairing is terminated if their diﬀerence exceeds the
size of the sliding window. This results in rejecting the majority of non-matching
samples without the need for calculating their correlation ratio. Consequently,
the sliding window length has been set to the value of the maximum diﬀerence
between acceleration and velocity signals across all matching samples.
The
conducted experiments show that this maximum value is equal to 0.15 as shown
in Figure 5.6.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Absolute difference of signals' length : Length of shorter signal
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of samples
Matching samples
Figure 5.6: Number of samples as a function of the diﬀerence between the
signals’ length divided by the length of the shorter signal.
5.3.2
Online testing results
While collecting the data for oﬄine processing, the correlation ratio is also
calculated online and exported to the internal storage of both the smartphone
and the smartwatch. The online tests ensure the proposed solution meets the
time constraints while achieving the same level of accuracy in detecting matching
samples in real-time. Therefore, the online tests are performed with identical
parameters as the oﬄine processing script, including the acceptance threshold
and the sliding window size. As mentioned in Section 5.1, only the matching
samples are tested online.
==PAGE:64==
54
Evaluation
0.700
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
Correlation ratio
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of pairing attempts
Matching samples
Figure 5.7: Number of pairing attempts as a function of the correlation ratio of
3x3 unlock pattern drawings using 3-bit gray encoding (generated
in real-time).
As shown in Figure 5.7, the correlation ratios calculated online – using 3-bit
encoding – are identical1 to the ones computed by the oﬄine processing script.
In addition, these real-time tests yield the same number of false negatives. Fi-
nally, no time violations have been detected in these tests (i.e., the commitment
is always sent within ∆1=500ms).
5.3.3
Sliding window vs. resampling
Using a sliding window has proven to be eﬀective based on the experimental
results discussed in the previous subsections. Yet, another intuitive approach is
resampling one of the fuzzy signals to equalize the number of samples of both
signals, eliminating the need for the sliding window. However, the implemen-
tation of the sliding window is simpler and more time-eﬃcient in comparison
to resampling2. To ensure the performance is not hugely aﬀected by using the
sliding window, the same experiments have been executed against a modiﬁed
1The result has been approximated to two decimal places.
2Applying this approach to the Fruit ninja-like patterns has no signiﬁcant eﬀect.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Experimental results
55
version of the oﬄine testing script. This modiﬁcation replaces the sliding win-
dow with a function call from the SciPy library that downsamples the linear
acceleration signal from the smartwatch to the same length as the velocity sig-
nal from the smartphone. This results in 12 false positives (≈1.2%) and 2 false
negatives (<7%) when 3-bit gray encoding is used, which is almost identical
to the results using the sliding window technique. The full result is shown in
Figure 5.8.
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Correlation ratio
0
50
100
150
200
Number of pairing attempts
Non-matching samples
Matching samples
Figure 5.8: Number of pairing attempts as a function of the correlation ratio
of 3x3 unlock pattern drawings after resampling.
Therefore, a trade-oﬀlies between this minor improvement and implementing
a resampling technique on the communicating devices that mimics the SciPy
resample function, since the Android API lacks an identical substitute.
5.3.4
Drawing patterns analysis
One of the goals of this thesis is to compare diﬀerent drawing patterns and decide
which is more suitable for the proposed solution. Consequently, 20 pairing at-
tempts are performed to assess the behavior of patterns that involve connecting
random points, similar to the Fruit Ninja mobile game [Stu10]. These patterns
are assessed with identical parameters as the 3x3 unlock patterns. As evident in
==PAGE:66==
56
Evaluation
Figure 5.9, the results include 10 false positives out of 380 non-matching pairing
attempts, yet it includes 14 false negatives out of 20 actual pairings (=70%)
which makes this kind of patterns fail from a usability perspective. As a result,
the 3x3 device unlock patterns are more suitable compared to the patterns that
involve connecting random points.
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Correlation ratio
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Number of pairing attempts
Non-matching samples
Matching samples
Figure 5.9: Number of pairing attempts as a function of the correlation ratio
of Fruit Ninja-like drawings using 3-bit gray encoding.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis work is to study the practicality of pairing a smart-
watch and a smartphone using multi-modal gestures, namely, by drawing on the
screen of the smartphone while wearing a smartwatch. This work builds on and
extends the previous feasibility study on pairing using multi-modal gestures in
[Ber19]. Furthermore, this thesis discusses previous work done in related areas,
including motion estimation and gesture detection using smartwatches equipped
with several sensors and secure Bluetooth pairing protocols.
Accordingly, a commitment protocol with implicit time synchronization has been
implemented on both classes of devices. The noisy input has been collected
from both devices at a sampling frequency of 50 Hz to capture human limb
motion with enough accuracy. Moreover, a processing pipeline has been designed
to perform noise ﬁltering, data synchronization, transformation, encoding, and
data validation. Moreover, a sensor fusion system has been implemented on the
smartwatch to accurately sample the linear acceleration corresponding to the
wrist motion and reduce the impact of gravity and rotation components on the
acceleration readings.
After performing a preliminary analysis, the system parameters have been set to
improve its performance. These parameters include the noise ﬁltering windows
and the protocol’s time thresholds. Then, several experiments were conducted
both online (on actual devices in real-time) and oﬄine (through an oﬄine test-
==PAGE:68==
58
Conclusion
ing script) to ensure that the implementation achieves the security and timing
requirements of the protocol while attaining adequate accuracy in distinguishing
between diﬀerent movements. In particular, these experiments aimed to guar-
antee a separation between the correlation ratios calculated between matching
movements (those performed in real pairings) and non-matching movements
(those whose wrist movements do not correspond to the drawing). Finding this
separation implies the absence of false positives, which ensures security and the
absence of false negatives, which ensures usability.
The experiments were conducted by drawing 32 distinct 3x3 unlock patterns,
where half of these attempts were done with the device lying on a table (i.e.,
parallel to the ground) and the others were done with the device held by hand.
To establish the reliability of the readings, the drawings were performed while
the whole wrist moving instead of a single ﬁnger at an adequate speed. Further-
more, the wrist was kept as still as possible to avoid the impact of any sudden
movements. Comparing each sample collected from the smartphone with each
one sample from the smartwatch results in 1024 hypothetical pairings.
First, the tests were run in an oﬄine processing script, which reﬂects the imple-
mentation of the data validation phase at both the smartphone and the smart-
watch.
Oﬄine testing aimed to compare both matching and non-matching
samples to decide on a value of the acceptance threshold t and the sliding win-
dow size. Besides, it compared the performance of 2-bit and 3-bit gray encoding.
The experimental results have shown that setting t to the value 0.7 minimized
both false positives (≈1.3%) and false negatives (<10%) when a 3-bit encoding
is used. This shows that the 3-bit encoding outperforms its 2-bit alternative,
which resulted in (≈2%) false positives and (>50%) false negatives for the same
value of t. Furthermore, the sliding window size was set to the maximum dif-
ference between these lengths, equal to 0.15 of the length of the shorter signal
by comparing the lengths of velocity and acceleration samples collected from
actual pairings.
Second, online tests were performed on the actual test-bed, consisting of a smart-
watch and a smartphone to ensure the real-time performance is identical to that
of the oﬄine testing. Moreover, it aims to ensure the timing constraints are met.
This yielded the same result when 3-bit gray encoding is used, at the same value
of t. Besides, no timing violations were detected, namely, the time to send to
generate and send the commitments by both devices never exceeded the value
of the predeﬁned time frame to complete the commitment generation phase ∆1.
Third, the oﬄine processing script has been slightly modiﬁed to resample both
the velocity and acceleration signals to the same length instead of relying on a
sliding window to ﬁx synchronization issues. This step was done to ensure the
usage of a sliding window does not impact the accuracy of the data validation
==PAGE:69==
59
step. The same experiments were then conducted on the modiﬁed version of the
script. The outcome was an almost identical result to the variant of the script
that applies a sliding window, with just a single less false positive and another
false negative.
This proves that implementing the sliding window technique
has no major impact on the result while providing a simpler and more robust
implementation.
Finally, more experiments were conducted by drawing 20 distinct patterns by
connecting random points, similar to the Fruit ninja game, aiming to decide
which kind of patterns is more suitable for the proposed solution. This trial
resulted in (≈2.6%) false positives and (=70%) false negatives, which shows
that these patterns are not usable and that 3x3 device unlock patterns are more
appropriate for the proposed solution.
As a result, the main goals of the thesis work have been met and the solution
can be considered practical. However, future work can help address the limita-
tions and enhance the proposed solution. First and most importantly, further
investigation is required to prevent false positives and minimize false negatives.
One possible area for future investigation is the encoding scheme. For instance,
the study has shown that 3-bit encoding outperforms its 2-bit variant, however,
it does not conclude whether increasing the number of bits for each gray code
(i.e., to a 4-bit encoding) can further enhance the results. Moreover, another
comparison metric can be explored, such as the (LURD) metric used in the syn-
chronized drawing scheme. Furthermore, the proposed solution does not require
the user to perform any cumbersome steps, but still poses a few limitations on
the drawing method. Therefore, further work can investigate the required draw-
ing speed and possible ways to reduce the impact of sudden wrist movements,
such as twitching or trembling. It can also determine whether the drawing can
be done with a single ﬁnger instead of moving the whole wrist and study possible
eﬀects of the data collection on the outcome of the pairing.
It is also worth noting that the samples collected from the experiments have
been drawn by the same person, which is not suﬃcient to conclude the general
applicability of the solution. Therefore, an extensive user study with a signiﬁ-
cantly larger pool of users is needed since people might behave in ways that have
not been covered by the conducted experiments. Also, this study could analyze
the impact of anatomical features among diﬀerent people, such as stiﬀness of
their wrist or their hand size on the proposed solution. Besides, it could help
assess the usability of the suggested drawing pattern, namely, the 3x3 unlock
pattern.
Additionally, the possibility of using fuzzy cryptography – extracting the secret
key directly from the noisy input – needs to be studied to deduce whether it
could replace the current approach of validating an already-established secret
==PAGE:70==
60
Conclusion
through the Diﬃe-Hellman key exchange, for instance, by using error-correcting
codes.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[ABH12]
Shahid Ayub, Alireza Bahraminasab, and Bahram Honary. A sensor
fusion method for smart phone orientation estimation. In Annual
Symposium on the Convergence of Telecommunications, Networking
and Broadcasting, 2012.
[AHT16]
Marwan Ali Albahar, Keijo Haataja, and Pekka Toivanen. Blue-
tooth mitm vulnerabilities: a literature review, novel attack sce-
narios, novel countermeasures, and lessons learned. International
Journal on Information Technologies & Security, 8(4), 2016.
[Are17]
GSM Arena. Huawei mate 9 pro - full phone speciﬁcations, 2017. Ac-
cessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.gsmarena.
com/huawei_mate_9_pro-8396.php.
[ATR20]
Daniele Antonioli, Nils Ole Tippenhauer, and Kasper Rasmussen.
Bias: Bluetooth impersonation attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P), May 2020.
[BER76]
James R Bitner, Gideon Ehrlich, and Edward M Reingold. Eﬃcient
generation of the binary reﬂected gray code and its applications.
Communications of the ACM, 19(9):517–521, 1976.
[Ber19]
Dario Bernandi. A feasibility study on pairing a smartwatch and a
mobile device through multi-modal gestures. Master’s thesis, Aalto
University, School of Science, 2019.
[BGM+10] A. Burns, B. R. Greene, M. J. McGrath, T. J. O’Shea, B. Kuris,
S. M. Ayer, F. Stroiescu, and V. Cionca. ShimmerTM – a wireless
==PAGE:72==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
sensor platform for noninvasive biomedical research. IEEE Sensors
Journal, 10(9):1527–1534, 2010.
[Bor18]
Sam Borick. Fused linear acceleration code base., 2018. Accessed:
June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mibzman/
FusedLinearAcceleration.
[CCH17]
P. Cope, J. Campbell, and T. Hayajneh. An investigation of blue-
tooth security vulnerabilities. In 2017 IEEE 7th Annual Computing
and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), pages 1–
7, 2017.
[CS07]
Richard Chang and Vitaly Shmatikov. Formal analysis of authenti-
cation in bluetooth device pairing. FCS-ARSPA07, page 45, 2007.
[Doc19a]
Android API Documentation.
Motion sensors | android de-
velopers,
2019.
Accessed:
May 28,
2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/sensors/
sensors_motion.
[Doc19b]
Android API Documentation.
Velocity tracker | android de-
velopers, 2019.
Accessed:
May 28, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/
VelocityTracker.
[Doc20a]
Android API Documentation. Sensor | android developers, 2020.
Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://developer.
android.com/reference/android/hardware/Sensor.
[Doc20b]
Android API Documentation.
Wear os by google | android de-
velopers, 2020.
Accessed:
June 15, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://developer.android.com/wear/index.html.
[DOM02]
Stephan Dreiseitl and Lucila Ohno-Machado.
Logistic regression
and artiﬁcial neural network classiﬁcation models: A methodology
review. Journal of biomedical informatics, 35:352–9, 10 2002.
[DPPS07]
Travis Deyle, Szabolcs Palinko, Erika Shehan Poole, and Thad
Starner. Hambone: A bio-acoustic gesture interface. In Proceed-
ings of the 2007 11th IEEE International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, ISWC ’07, page 1–8, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Soci-
ety.
[Elh20]
Mohammad Elhariry.
Source code of device pairing with multi-
modal gestures, 2020. Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://version.aalto.fi/gitlab/elharim1/dp-mmg.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[EN15]
Harold Esmonde and M.A. Nugent. Android application to assess
smartphone accelerometers and bluetooth for real-time control. In-
ternational Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applica-
tions, 6, 03 2015.
[Gan15]
Subodh Gangan. A review of man-in-the-middle attacks, 2015.
[GJW11]
S. Gueron, S. Johnson, and J. Walker. Sha-512/256. In 2011 Eighth
International Conference on Information Technology: New Gener-
ations, pages 354–358, 2011.
[Gle13]
Stephanie Glen.
Z-score:
Deﬁnition, formula and calculation,
2013.
Accessed:
May 29, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.statisticshowto.com/probability-and-statistics/
z-score/.
[GSKS16]
S. Gajbhiye, M. Sharma, S. Karmkar, and S. Sharma. Design, im-
plementation and security analysis of bluetooth pairing protocol
in ns2. In 2016 International Conference on Advances in Comput-
ing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), pages 1711–1717,
2016.
[HL15]
Rakel
Haakegaard
and
Joanna
Lang.
The
elliptic
curve
diﬃe-hellman
(ecdh).
Online
at
https://koclab.
cs.
ucsb.
edu/teaching/ecc/project/2015Projects/Haakegaard+
Lang.
pdf,
2015.
[HT10]
K. Haataja and P. Toivanen.
Two practical man-in-the-middle
attacks on bluetooth secure simple pairing and countermeasures.
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 9(1):384–392,
2010.
[HTM10]
Chris Harrison, Desney Tan, and Dan Morris. Skinput: Appropriat-
ing the body as an input surface. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’10, page
453–462, New York, NY, USA, 2010. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[Hun]
C. Hunter. Matplotlib: Python plotting. Accessed: June 8, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://matplotlib.org/.
[JCZ+15]
H. Jiang, X. Chen, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Kong, and T. Zhang.
Software for wearable devices: Challenges and opportunities.
In
2015 IEEE 39th Annual Computer Software and Applications Con-
ference, volume 3, pages 592–597, 2015.
==PAGE:74==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[JOP]
E. Jones, T. Oliphant, and Peterson P. Scipy: Open source scien-
tiﬁc tools for python. Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.scipy.org/.
[JW01]
Markus Jakobsson and Susanne Wetzel.
Security weaknesses in
bluetooth. In Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference, pages
176–191. Springer, 2001.
[JW15]
A. H. Johnston and G. M. Weiss. Smartwatch-based biometric gait
recognition. In 2015 IEEE 7th International Conference on Biomet-
rics Theory, Applications and Systems (BTAS), pages 1–6, 2015.
[KHS17]
Manon Kok, Jeroen D. Hol, and Thomas B. Schön. Using inertial
sensors for position and orientation estimation. Foundations and
Trends R⃝in Signal Processing, 11(1-2):1–153, 2017.
[KSTU09]
A. Kumar, N. Saxena, G. Tsudik, and E. Uzun. A comparative
study of secure device pairing methods. In 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications, pages 1–
10, 2009.
[KXAA13] W. Z. Khan, Y. Xiang, M. Y. Aalsalem, and Q. Arshad. Mobile
phone sensing systems: A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, 15(1):402–427, 2013.
[LH19]
Gierad Laput and Chris Harrison. Sensing ﬁne-grained hand activ-
ity with smartwatches. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’19, page 1–13, New
York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Lin08]
Andrew Y Lindell. Attacks on the pairing protocol of bluetooth v2.
1. Black Hat USA, Las Vegas, Nevada, 2008.
[LXH16]
Gierad Laput, Robert Xiao, and Chris Harrison. Viband: High-
ﬁdelity bio-acoustic sensing using commodity smartwatch ac-
celerometers. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’16, page 321–333, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery.
[May07]
Rene Mayrhofer. The candidate key protocol for generating secret
shared keys from similar sensor data streams. In European Workshop
on Security in Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, pages 1–15. Springer,
2007.
[McK]
C. McKinney. Python data analysis library. Accessed: June 8, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://pandas.pydata.org/.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[MCM16]
Steven McGuckin, Soumyadeb Chowdhury, and Lewis Mackenzie.
Tap "n" shake: Gesture-based smartwatch-smartphone communi-
cations system. In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference
on Computer-Human Interaction, OzCHI ’16, page 442–446, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery.
[MG09]
R. Mayrhofer and H. Gellersen. Shake well before use: Intuitive
and secure pairing of mobile devices. IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, 8(6):792–806, 2009.
[MMV+11] Suhas Mathur, Robert Miller, Alexander Varshavsky, Wade Trappe,
and Narayan Mandayam. Proximate: Proximity-based secure pair-
ing using ambient wireless signals. In Proceedings of the 9th Inter-
national Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services,
MobiSys ’11, page 211–224, New York, NY, USA, 2011. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[Mob19]
Mobvoi.
Ticwatch pro - a premium smartwatch with 2-30 days
of battery life, 2019. Accessed: June 8, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mobvoi.com/us/products/ticwatchpro.
[Mol12]
Andreas F Molisch.
Wireless communications, volume 34.
John
Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[MPR05]
J. M. McCune, A. Perrig, and M. K. Reiter. Seeing-is-believing:
using camera phones for human-veriﬁable authentication. In 2005
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S P’05), pages 110–124,
2005.
[MPY10]
D. McIlwraith, J. Pansiot, and G. Yang. Wearable and ambient
sensor fusion for the characterisation of human motion. In 2010
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems, pages 5505–5510, 2010.
[MT06]
M. E. Mavroforakis and S. Theodoridis. A geometric approach to
support vector machine (svm) classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, 17(3):671–682, 2006.
[MVM09]
Frederic P. Miller, Agnes F. Vandome, and John McBrewster. Ad-
vanced Encryption Standard. Alpha Press, 2009.
[Nan10]
Nan Li. Research on diﬃe-hellman key exchange protocol. In 2010
2nd International Conference on Computer Engineering and Tech-
nology, volume 4, pages V4–634–V4–637, 2010.
[NSHJ12]
N. Nguyen, S. Sigg, A. Huynh, and Y. Ji. Using ambient audio in
secure mobile phone communication. In 2012 IEEE International
==PAGE:76==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Work-
shops, pages 431–434, 2012.
[Nyq28]
H. Nyquist. Certain topics in telegraph transmission theory. Trans-
actions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 47(2):617–
644, 1928.
[Ora20]
Oracle.
Java
cryptography
architecture
(jca)
reference
guide,
2020.
Accessed:
June 15,
2020. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/guides/
security/crypto/CryptoSpec.html.
[Qu99]
Minghua Qu. Sec 2: Recommended elliptic curve domain parame-
ters. Certicom Res., Mississauga, ON, Canada, Tech. Rep. SEC2-
Ver-0.6, 1999.
[Ris01]
Irina Rish.
An empirical study of the naive bayes classiﬁer.
In
IJCAI 2001 workshop on empirical methods in artiﬁcial intelligence,
volume 3, pages 41–46, 2001.
[RS84]
Ronald L Rivest and Adi Shamir. How to expose an eavesdropper.
Communications of the ACM, 27(4):393–394, 1984.
[SAA15]
M. Sethi, M. Antikainen, and T. Aura. Commitment-based device
pairing with synchronized drawing. In Pervasive and Mobile Com-
puting, volume 16, pages 205–219, 2015.
[SBS+15]
M. Shoaib, S. Bosch, H. Scholten, P. J. M. Havinga, and O. D. Incel.
Towards detection of bad habits by fusing smartphone and smart-
watch sensors. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communication Workshops (PerCom Workshops),
pages 591–596, 2015.
[SC07]
Kurt Seifert and Oscar Camacho. Implementing positioning algo-
rithms using accelerometers. Freescale Semiconductor, 2007.
[SEKA11]
N. Saxena, J. Ekberg, K. Kostiainen, and N. Asokan. Secure device
pairing based on a visual channel: Design and usability study. IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 6(1):28–38,
2011.
[Sha48]
C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell
System Technical Journal, 27(3):379–423, 1948.
[SL91]
S Rasoul Safavian and David Landgrebe. A survey of decision tree
classiﬁer methodology. IEEE transactions on systems, man, and
cybernetics, 21:660–674, 1991.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[SMS18]
Da-Zhi Sun, Yi Mu, and Willy Susilo. Man-in-the-middle attacks on
secure simple pairing in bluetooth standard v5. 0 and its counter-
measure. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 22(1):55–67, 2018.
[SS13]
D. Schürmann and S. Sigg. Secure communication based on ambient
audio.
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 12(2):358–370,
2013.
[Sta19a]
Statista.
Number of connected wearable devices worldwide
from
2016
to
2022,
2019.
Accessed:
May
27,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/
487291/global-connected-wearable-devices/.
[Sta19b]
Statista.
Number of smartphone users worldwide from 2016
to 2021,
2019.
Accessed:
May 27,
2020. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/330695/
number-of-smartphone-users-worldwide/.
[Stu10]
Halfbrick Studios. Fruit ninja - the greatest fruit-slicing game in the
world., 2010. Accessed: May 28, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//fruitninja.com/.
[TS18]
Panagiotis Tsinganos and Athanassios Skodras. On the comparison
of wearable sensor data fusion to a single sensor machine learning
technique in fall detection. MDPI Sensors, 18:592, 02 2018.
[Tut14]
Electronics Tutorials.
Exclusive-nor gate tutorial., 2014.
Ac-
cessed:
June
2,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.
electronics-tutorials.ws/logic/logic_8.html.
[UKA07]
Ersin Uzun, Kristiina Karvonen, and N. Asokan. Usability analysis
of secure pairing methods. In Financial Cryptography, 2007.
[Van17]
J.P. Van Brakel.
Python implementation of the smoothed
z-score algorithm., 2017.
Accessed:
May 29, 2020. [Online].
Available:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22583391/
peak-signal-detection-in-realtime-timeseries-data/
43512887#43512887.
[VMR+18] Tran Huy Vu, Archan Misra, Quentin Roy, Kenny Choo Tsu Wei,
and Youngki Lee. Smartwatch-based early gesture detection 8 tra-
jectory tracking for interactive gesture-driven applications. Proc.
ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 2(1), March
2018.
[VSLDL07] Alex Varshavsky, Adin Scannell, Anthony LaMarca, and Eyal
De Lara.
Amigo: Proximity-based authentication of mobile de-
vices. In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, pages
253–270. Springer, 2007.
==PAGE:78==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[WRRD16] Hongyi Wen, Julian Ramos Rojas, and Anind K. Dey. Serendip-
ity: Finger gesture recognition using an oﬀ-the-shelf smartwatch.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’16, page 3847–3851, New York, NY, USA,
2016. Association for Computing Machinery.
[XPM15]
Chao Xu, Parth H. Pathak, and Prasant Mohapatra. Finger-writing
with smartwatch: A case for ﬁnger and hand gesture recognition
using smartwatch. In Proceedings of the 16th International Work-
shop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, HotMobile
’15, page 9–14, New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
[ZBC+19]
J. Zhang, H. Bi, Y. Chen, J. Chen, and Z. Wei. Smartwriting: Pen-
holding gesture recognition with smartwatch. In ICC 2019 - 2019
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pages
1–6, 2019.
