==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Technical University of Munich
DTU Management Department of Technology, Management and
Economics
TUM Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Model-based techno-economical analysis of
decentralized Energy-Water-Food systems in
rural Ghana
Francesco Locatelli
June 29, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Food, water and electricity security are still a main issue in many developing countries, especially
in remote rural areas lacking most basic services. Electriﬁcation of these communities with
renewable mini grids has been identiﬁed as a promising solution. Anyway, in arid and semi-
arid areas of sub-Saharan Africa resources are scarce and the inhabitants need to deal with an
hostile climate for the majority of the year. Therefore the wise management of land, water
and natural resources is a key point for a sustainable and long term development.
In this
perspective the concept of an Energy-Water-Food system takes shape: when designing the
generation system, water usage and agriculture sector should be taken into account in order to
exploit synergies and avoid internal competition for resources. In this way electricity has great
social repercussions from enhancing the whole agri-food chain, to creating new local jobs and
reducing gender inequalities. In this work, the OSDRIA model for the least-cost optimization
of an EFWS design was improved. Then, a real case study for the community of Kurubang Yily
in northern Ghana was developed and analyzed both technically and ﬁnancially. The results
show that such project is incredibly proﬁtable and would repay the investment within 2-3 years
despite the high WACC. Biogas production with the almost cost-free crop residues and cow
manure achieves the lowest LCOE of 11.86 $cent/kWh, while a pure diesel-fueled generation
presents an LCOE of 38.42 $cent/kWh. Water and cow manure are found to be the limiting
commodities to the potential of the system. Last, several scenarios tested the model in diﬀerent
conditions, ﬁnding in rainfall patterns a major factor for the ﬁnal proﬁtability of the system.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Energy-Water-Food Systems
3
2.1
Decentralized EWFS in rural areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Rural development conditions and challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Electriﬁcation and EWFS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Decentralized energy sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Economical Challenges and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Economical Challenge and cost-minimization Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Economical Analysis of Decentralized Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
OSDRIA
18
3.1
General structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Modelling of processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Case Study
26
4.1
Site assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Weather data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Demand data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.3
Agriculture data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.4
Economic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
41
5.1
Technical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Economical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Conclusions
56
7
Appendix
65
7.1
User interface and tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Modelling of processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2.1
Energy sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2.2
Water sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.2.3
Food sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
7.2.4
Business Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
==PAGE:4==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
1 Introduction
1
Introduction
While the western world is embracing the energy transition challenge in order to ﬁght global
warming, worldwide electricity access is not yet a reality. Approximately 15% of the world’s
population lives without any modern illumination or electrical appliances [1] [2]. Of this 1.06
billion people, around 80% lives in rural areas of just 20 countries [3]. Rural electriﬁcation
is in fact still a major challenge in many developing countries, in particular in southern Asia
and Sub-Saharan Africa, which together include 89% of the global electricity access deﬁcit [1].
Moreover, rural regions host over 70% [4] of the planet’s poorest population, living with less
than 1.25 USD per day. This two aspects are strictly bonded, as these rural communities rely
on subsistence agriculture, performed with ineﬃcient techniques and without any modern tech-
nology. This is at the same time cause and eﬀect of a dramatic humanitarian picture. The lack
of a stable and clean water source, low sanitation level, improper food conservation and cooking
and, last, inadequate education. Many studies document this strong correlation between the
electricity consumption per capita and the human development index [5].
Sub-Saharan Africa in particular is the region with the highest share worldwide of inhabitants
without electricity access (57%) [1]. Most regions around the globe are achieving visible re-
sults, as for example Southern Asia where electriﬁcation share rose from 57.2% to 80% in the
2000-2014 period. Despite the eﬀorts, in Sub-Saharan Africa the electriﬁcation of new commu-
nities doesn’t even cover the population growth in remote areas, leading to an actual increase
of people lacking access to electricity [1]. Besides electriﬁcation, the access to a clean water
supply and the enhancement of the agri-food chain are fundamental factors for a sustainable
socio-economic development of these regions. From the primary crop production to the food
processing and transport the lack of proper technologies and knowledge reduces the ﬁnal income
and increases the labour hours per cultivated acre. This leads into a vicious cycle where the
farmers are not able to invest in better technologies due to the lack of money, while women
need to spend most of the day collecting water and wood for cooking, making no one able to
learn new and more proﬁtable jobs. At the actual state of things, only 1% of the available land
is permanently cultivated [6] and the lack of proper food handling causes perish losses ranging
from 30% for cereals to 45% for fruit and vegetables [7]. Obvious consequences of this facts are
low food security, poor nutrition and high health risks.
In order to reach the ﬁnal goal of sustainable development of these regions, all the previously
mentioned issues have to be faced. Supplying a stable amount of electricity can provide wa-
ter pumping for domestic use and irrigation of ﬁelds, as well as illumination for schools and
hospitals, phone charging and eventually food refrigeration and processing. Irrigation can then
improve and ensure agricultural yield, especially if coupled with crop rotation and proper fer-
tilizers usage. On the social side, all this translates into local jobs creation in more proﬁtable
Page 1 of 57
==PAGE:5==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
1 Introduction
sectors, higher incomes and more available time to spend in education. Last, the described
system can become a closed cycle if the harvest residues and the cattle manure are turned
into biogas through the installation of a biomass digester and then burned to supply additional
electricity.
When tackling all this diﬀerent aspect at once with a cross-sectorial approach, the nexus concept
of an Energy-Water-Food-System (EWFS) takes shape. The interest of Academia, governments
and NGOs in this topic is growing, driven by the concern of competition for increasingly scarce
resources [8]. The EWFS approach introduces the complex questions of priorities and trade-oﬀs
in rural areas development projects, within a time scale where climate change will have a major
impact on the locally available resources [8] [9]. Given the site speciﬁcities such as metheo-
rolgical, demographical and economical data, an optimized least cost design can be obtained
with the development of a suited model. Based on the work done by S. Oberleitner [10], S.
Bazan [11], F. Schroll [12] and C. Fernandez [13], this thesis work proposes to further develop
the modelling tool OSDRIA. OSDRIA is a least-cost modelling software for the optimized de-
sign of an EFWS, intended to be utilized in the feasibility study phase of the project.
This thesis report is articulated in 6 chapters. Chapter 2 gives a deeper insight on decentralized
EWFS, explaining why decentralized grids can be competitive with the national grid extension,
comparing renewables with conventional generation within the frame of these systems, and in-
troducing the economical framework to evaluate a decentralized system. Chapter 3 introduces
OSDRIA and undergoes an exhaustive description of the modelling, with relative data and
assumptions, from the already modelled processes, to the modiﬁed and simpliﬁed ones, to the
newly introduced ones. Chapter 4 presents a case study relative to a community located in
northern rural Ghana with all its peculiarities, and introduces several scenarios which will test
the model. Chapter 5 performs a detailed analyses of the results, reporting them into tables
and with graphical comparison between scenarios. Last, Chapter 6 summarizes the outcome of
this study.
Page 2 of 57
==PAGE:6==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
2
Energy-Water-Food Systems
The ﬁrst section of this chapter further develops the reasons why an EWFS is a valid solution
to the multi-issue challenge of poor rural areas development. In the following section, diﬀerent
tools used to tackle the design optimization phase are presented with pros and cons.
2.1
Decentralized EWFS in rural areas
2.1.1
Rural development conditions and challenges
As brieﬂy mentioned in the Introduction chapter, rural areas in developing countries present
several issues that prevent their economical and wealth growth. Poverty, lack of sanitation,
hunger, scarce clean water access and low education level compromises irreparably the chances
for a local and sustainable development.
The Human Development Index (HDI) is an indicator ranging from 0 to 1, developed by the
United Nation Development Programme [14], that grades the level of development of every
country on the planet. One of the main ideas of the HDI is to replace the long time used Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) as a more accurate evaluation of a state’s wealth. It is calculated
based on three diﬀerent dimensions: health, knowledge and standard of living 1. For the health
dimension, the life expectancy at birth is the considered index. Needless to be said, In sub-
Saharan Africa it is very low compared to the rest of the globe, precisely 61.2 years against
74.2 of Europe and Central Asia [15](78 if only western Europe is considered [16]). For the ed-
ucation the mean and expected years of schooling for adults are examined. Again, sub-Saharan
Africa stand in last position of the ranking, with 10 expected years of schooling and 5.7 as a
mean value, when Europe and Central Asia show 14.6 and 10.2 [15]. Last indicator taken into
account is the Gross National Income (GNI), which is equal to the GDP adjusted with the
money ﬂowing from and to other countries. The GNI per capita of sub-Saharan Africa is 3443
$(2011), almost one ﬁfth of the 15498 $(2011) [15].
This macro-indicators still do not give a full representation of the poverty situation that many
African countries still live in. The UN Development program developed therefore the Global
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) in order to further break-down the social components
that lead to this situation [17]. Keeping the same three areas as the GDI, it further decomposes
its indicators, especially focusing on the standard of living. Cooking fuel, sanitation, drinking
water, electricity access, housing situation and assets allow to better investigate whether the
individual lives above or below the poverty threshold. For sub-Saharan Africa, the astonishing
Page 3 of 57
==PAGE:7==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
number of 42% (560 million people) of the population does not meet the 1.90$ a day considered
as the poverty line [17].
Figure 1: The Human Development Index is a combination three main indicators, namely life
expectancy index, education level index and the gross national income [15].
In 2018, around 60% of the sub-Saharan population resides in rural areas [18]. Despite this
percentage decreasing due to immigration to urban areas (65% to 60% in the 2008-2018 period),
the actual rural population keeps on increasing at almost a 2% rate, having gained more than
a 100 million units in the same time period [18]. Putting this numbers together with the HDI
and MPI indicators, it is clear that the major challenge for poverty eradication in Africa will
take place in rural areas.
2.1.2
Electriﬁcation and EWFS
Table 1 depicts the overall, urban and rural electriﬁcation for the major developing regions of
the globe [19].Electriﬁcation of this areas through the implementation of decentralized mini-
grids is proposed as a fundamental contribution in the development process [20] [21]. Figure 2
depicts an approximately logarithmic correlation between annual electricity consumption and
HDI index. This suggests the importance of this utility especially in the early stages of a coun-
try development. Electricity access can in fact unlock many possibilities for food and water
security, with direct consequences on sanitation and health as well as lowering possible social
tensions. It also enables growth all along the agricultural sector [22] and in the agri-food chain,
Page 4 of 57
==PAGE:8==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
with several consequences such as development of new jobs and an increase of years and quality
of education [23].
Table 1: Access to electricity in developing countries in 2014 [19].
Region
Population
without
electricity
[millions]
National
electriﬁcation
rate [%]
Urban
electriﬁcation
rate [%]
Rural
electriﬁcation
rate [%]
Africa
634
45%
71%
28%
- North Africa
1
99%
100%
99%
- Sub-Saharan Africa
632
35%
63%
19%
Developing Asia
512
86%
96%
79%
- China
0
100%
100%
100%
- India
244
81%
96%
74%
- SE Asia
102
84%
94%
74%
- The rest
166%
66%
84%
56%
Latin America
22
95%
98%
Middle East
18
92%
98%
78%
Total Developing
Countries
1185
79%
92%
67%
Figure 2: Correlation of some countries between annual electricity consumption and HDI and
extrapolated curve [24].
There exist mainly three possibilities for electriﬁcation of new areas, as shown in Figure 3:
Grid Expansion, Mini-grid and Stand Alone Systems. Mini-grids present the lowest cost and are
therefore the most attractive solution for small communities located far away from major urban
settlements [25] [26] [27]. For relatively low load demand it is in fact unreasonable to invest in
Page 5 of 57
==PAGE:9==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
large infrastructures that will never be repaid with the electricity revenues, with case studies
showing that the grid expansion can cost up to 4 times a decentralized generation [28] [29].
Figure 3: Diﬀerent electriﬁcation methods comparison in relation to population density and
retail costs of electricity. National grid expansion is cheaper solution in highly populated areas
close to existing infrastructure, while for remote areas mini-grid and solar home systems are
proven to be more competitive. [25].
The choice between grid expansion or mini-grid, or between diﬀerent sizes of mini-grid, is also
related to the expected development and electrical load expected within the chosen time hori-
zon. Table 2 shows diﬀerent solutions, ranging from nano/micro/mini-grids to grid expansion,
depending on the load peak and duration, deﬁned by the customers necessities like lighting and
power appliances [25].
Besides electricity, it should be kept in mind that rural areas often lack of other resources as for
example water and fertile soil for agriculture. Putting too much stress on these resources with
incautious intensive farming could end up in the drying of the aquifer, the desertiﬁcation of the
land and ultimately the migration of the inhabitants [30]. Thus, the sustainable development
highly depends on the wise management of all the available resources, without over-exploiting
one commodity and compromising the entire system.
Page 6 of 57
==PAGE:10==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Table 2: Comparison between diﬀerent level of electriﬁcation, based on services, load size an
duration with respective technology [25].
Energy Access
According to Global
Tracking for SE4ALL
No
Basic
Advanced
Attributes
Tier 0
Tier 1
Tier 2
Tier 3
Tier 4
Tier 5
Services
Taks light
AND phone
charging
General
lighting
AND TV
AND fan
Tier 2
AND any
low-power
appliance
Tier 3
AND any
medium-
power
appliance
Tier 4
AND any
higher-
power
appliance
Peak Available
Capacity (Watts)
>1W
>20W/50W >200W/500W
>2000W
>2000W
Duration (hours)
>4h
>4h
>8h
>16h
>22h
Evening Supply
(hours)
>2h
>2h
>2h
>4h
>4h
Aﬀordability
yes
yes
yes
yes
Formality
yes
yes
yes
Quality (Voltage)
yes
yes
yes
Indicated Minimun
Technology
Nano-grids/
Micro-grids,
Pico-PV/
Solar Lantern
Micro-grids/
Mini-grids,
Rechargable
batteries,
Solar Home
systems
Micro-grids,
Mini-grids,
Home
systems
Mini-grids
AND grid
Mini-grids
AND grid
2.1.3
Decentralized energy sources
At the current state of things, the most common way to produce electricity in remote rural
communities is through a diesel generator. Despite the convenience of operating such genera-
tion unit (easy switch on and oﬀ, stable power output), the fuel cost often constraints these
communities to make use of it only for few hours a day, due to an exiguous purchase power.
To the already relevant fuel price, the extra costs of transportation from the urban area to
the rural location must be added [31], making this power generation absolutely unsuitable and
unsustainable. Moreover, it exposes the already fragile economical and social system to the
ﬂuctuations and market manipulations of much bigger players. Because of this, local business
can happen to be proﬁtable and sustain the village inhabitants a day and to be economically
infeasible the next one.
Page 7 of 57
==PAGE:11==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Table 3: Recommended renewable energy technologies per energy service, with relative social
and economical improvements [1].
Energy Services
Income-Generating Value
Energy Technologies
Irrigation
Better crop yields, higher value crops,
greater reliability of irrigation systems,
enabling of crop growth during periods
when market prices are higher
.
Wind, solar PV, biomass,
micro-hydro
Illumination
Reading, extending operating hours
.
Wind, solar PV, biomass,
mycro-hydro, geothermal
Grinding, milling
husking
Creation of value-added products from raw
agricultural commodities
.
Wind, solar PV, biomass
mycro-hydro
Drying, smoking
Creation of value-added products,
preservation of products that enables
sale in higher-value markets
.
Biomass, solar heat,
geothermal
Expelling
Production of reﬁned oil from seeds
.
Biomass, solar heat
Transport
Reaching new markets
.
Biomass(biodiesel)
TV, radio, computer,
internet, telephone
Support of entertainment businesses,
education, access to market news,
co-ordination with suppliers and distributors
.
Wind, solar PV, biomass,
micro-hydro, geothermal
Battery charging
Wide range of services for end-users
(e.g phone charging business)
.
Wind, solar PV, biomass,
micro-hydro, geothermal
Refrigeration
Selling cooled products, increasing the
durability of products
Wind, solar PV, biomass,
mycro-hydro
The solution to this issue is renewable power generation. Wind, solar irradiation, water streams
and biomass do not depend on the global economy and have no fees. Table 3 shows which
renewable energy source is suitable for multiple technologies and services. Depending on the
site characteristics, one source might be more attractive than another due to availability of the
energy source over the year, lower investment or operation and maintenance costs. Moreover,
it is relevant to mention the importance of a technological leapfrog opportunity in developing
countries. On one hand, a more eﬃcient productive chain can address poverty, education and
inequality conditions faster than a locally induced development. This is anyway possible only
by overcoming the possible social, economic and political limitations [32]. On the other hand,
Page 8 of 57
==PAGE:12==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
to skip ineﬃcient stages of production and minimize CO2 emissions is a progress of global in-
terest, having a good example in using renewable energy to power already energy eﬃcient light
bulbs [33].
Micro-hydro power appears to be the cheapest way to deliver electricity to isolated communities,
but it fully relies on morphological and climate conditions [31]. Coming speciﬁcally to such a
vast region as sub-Saharan Africa, the majority of communities do not have a stream available
and suitable for it, unlike for example it happens in in Nepal [34] [35]. Excluding in fact the
Congo basin and some mountain areas in south-eastern Africa, there are few few large rivers,
but small scale hydro has quite limited potential in western Africa and the Sahel ( Figure 4).
Figure 4: Sub-Saharan Africa river network and mean annual streamﬂow, in order to estimate
hydropower potentialfor decentralized energy production [31].
Wind for power generation is mostly exploited with large scale wind turbines, and the trends
show bigger and bigger turbines and more sophisticated control techniques [36], leaving the
micro wind turbines to be a relatively undeveloped sector. Wind has an attractive potential
mainly on coastal areas, in proximity of the Sahara desert and in some mountainous regions
in eastern Africa 5 [37]. With wind availability being the most inﬂuential component of the
LCOE [38], most locations in Africa cannot rely on this source. Besides this, wind turbines
often require frequent maintenance [39], which is another issue when they are placed in remote
areas. Nevertheless, if the design of the turbine is basic and uses recycled materials, it could
still be considered as a valid possibility [40].
Page 9 of 57
==PAGE:13==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Figure 5: Wind power density potential [W/m2] at 100 m height for sub-Saharan Africa, with
relative color scale where light blue means low potential and orange high potential [37].
In the equatorial regions of the globe solar power is an extremely available resource. For the
speciﬁc case of sub-Saharan Africa, the solar atlas [41] shows that many regions present an
incredible potential for photovoltaic production (ﬁgure 6). Between the tropics in fact, the
climate presents a dry and a rainy season, diﬀerently from the four seasons of the temperate
zones. Especially during the dry season, sunlight hours occupy a signiﬁcant portion of the day
with high irradiance level, which is an ideal condition for an optimal sizing of a PV system.
PV seems then to be the most cost eﬀective solution for sub-Saharan Africa decentralized gen-
eration and mini-grids [31]. Photovoltaic systems have the great advantage of being modular,
which allows great ﬂexibility when sizing the system and keeps the investment costs almost
linear to the scale of the project. Moreover, they require very low maintenance [39], which
mainly consists of simply cleaning the surface from dust and dirt.
Page 10 of 57
==PAGE:14==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Figure 6: Solar photovoltaic long term potential production in kWh/kWp per day and per year
in sub-Saharan Africa, with relative scale where light blue is low production and red is high
production [41].
In [31], all the possible electriﬁcation solution among grid extension, PV, diesel generator and
micro hydro are investigated and ﬁgure 7 depicts the cheapest solution. Grid expansion (in
red) is economically feasible in densely populated area adjacent to the already existing grid.
Micro-hydro is the most attractive in the Congo basin and south-eastern Africa, while PV is
the cheapest in remote areas and in countries that are not oil producers. It is notable the
substantial change that takes places in only two year, from 2010 to 2012. The drop in solar
panel prices makes in 2012 PV the most attractive solution both considering land extension
and population served. With the PV price decreasing steadily also in the following years [42],
it is be reasonable to think that the PV leading position has got even stronger.
Page 11 of 57
==PAGE:15==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Figure 7: Cheapest electriﬁcation solution for Africa between grid extension (red) and decen-
tralized systems, respectively based on diesel (orange), PV (yellow) and mini hydro (blue). The
same model is issued for 2010 and 2012 and the two result maps are compared in order to show
how solar became more convenient in only two years [31].
Last, biomass, directly used as wood or ﬁrst processed into charcoal, is already a major en-
ergy source in sub-Saharan Africa, covering up to 60% of the ﬁnal energy use [43]. Biomass
for biogas production through anaerobic digestion has to be evaluated depending on the local
agricultural activities. Considering all the fruit and crop residues, the theoretical potential for
biofuels is enormous, estimated in the order of TJ [43]. Anyway, when it comes down to small
decentralized systems, the small-scale production of biogas is the most realistic solution [44].
Most rural communities in Africa rely on agriculture and livestock farming, in majority goats,
cows and chickens. Among the crops, maize straw is the major residual that can be turned
into a valuable side product. With the right digester type and proper knowledge on the right
biomass mix to feed it, biogas can deﬁnitely boost the electricity production and increase the
system ﬂexibility and reliability [44].
Page 12 of 57
==PAGE:16==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
2.2
Economical Challenges and Evaluation
In this subsection, the economical and design reasons why decentralized mini-grids and EWF
systems are not yet a widespread reality are presented. Later, the approach for an economical
analysis of a EWF system, later used in this thesis project, is proposed.
2.2.1
Economical Challenge and cost-minimization Tools
In developing countries local governments struggle to retrieve funds for rural development, while
focusing on other challenges in more densely populated areas. Moreover, very often high levels
of corruption [45] and mismanagement of funds worsen the situation. Besides that, the greatest
obstacle for the implementation of a mini-grid is its high initial investment cost. Renewable
energy technologies like solar PV and hydro power present in fact high investment cost and very
low operation and maintenance cost, resulting more eﬃcient on the long run, but diﬃcult to
implement for low purchasing power entities. Examples from literature case studies depict this
feature pretty well. A PV-biogas mini grid supplying a 1000-inhabitants community in rural
India [46] has an average (over seven developed scenarios) investment cost of over 100’000$,
facing a yearly OM cost of about 1’000$. In reference [47] PV-Battery-Hydro-Diesel mini grids
are studied for diﬀerent locations in Cameroon, and the OM costs of the PV arrays and inverter
as well those of the battery are estimated at 0.05% of their capital costs.
Rural communities have almost no purchasing power, as the market revenue from the selling of
agriculture products, if any, is just enough to cover the next farming season investments and
the basic community needs. The last player in this challenge, NGOs, also operates on very
limited budget. Thus, trying to minimize the overall costs of these decentralized systems is key
in order to achieve a relevant number of deployments in a shorter time horizon.This brings up
the necessity for a least-cost optimization tool, which takes into account both the investment
and the operational costs of such a system.
At the moment, there exist not many tools that enable the design and optimization of decen-
tralized systems. In this sub section, the commercial tool HOMER [48] and the open source
urbs are brieﬂy presented with pros and cons.
HOMER (acronym for Hybrid Optimization Model for Electric Renewables) [48] is a commer-
cial software developed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). As the name
suggests, it focuses only on the electricity side of a system, with generation, storage and de-
mand interacting on an hourly time resolution for an entire year.
On top of the technical
simulation, HOMER calculates also the operational and annualized investment costs, showing
the Net Present Value (NPV) among the results. The tool oﬀers three diﬀerent modalities:
simulation, optimization and sensitivity. The ﬁrst one allows to analyze the performance over
Page 13 of 57
==PAGE:17==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
a year of a manually input conﬁguration. In the second, HOMER runs multiple simulations
and compares them in order to ﬁnd the optimal one that allows to always match the demand
while having the minimum cost. In the latter modality, the tool performs a sensitivity analysis
by running several simulations while varying diﬀerent parameters. HOMER presents a user
friendly interface which makes it easy to build and simulate multiple systems. It is in fact the
most widely used tool for the design and pre-feasibility study of decentralized energy solutions,
as acknowledged also in [49]. On the other side, the cost of the license and the impossibility of
implementing new technologies and commodities make it unsuitable for the design of an EFW
system.
urbs [50] is an open source modelling tool developed by the Chair of Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Systems at the Technical University of Munich (TUM). It is coded in Python as a least-
cost optimization model based on the Pyomo package. It is structured in commodities and
processes. The ﬁrst represents ﬂows between diﬀerent components of the system, as for example
fuels, electricity and emissions. The ﬂows are restricted to be non-negative and to always fulﬁll
the balance between input and output to processes. Processes on the other hand represents
components that generate, convert and utilize commodities, such as PV panels, storage and ﬁnal
demand. An end user can operate urbs just by changing parameters in a input spreadsheet with
no need to look into the python code, and retrieve the results in the same format output. Even
though urbs solves the drawbacks of HOMER, it presents its own cons. urbs restricts in fact
the optimization to linear models, not allowing to represent accurately several processes and
their cost. Moreover, when it comes to EFW systems, the user needs to perform modiﬁcations
in the source code, a task that might not be easy when not acquainted with the model and
programming.
Page 14 of 57
==PAGE:18==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
2.2.2
Economical Analysis of Decentralized Systems
Feasibility studies are an essential procedure in order to actually deploy a technology like a mini-
grid. A business evaluation sees the project as an investment and calculates if the monetary
beneﬁts exceed the expenses [51]. Costs and prices are seen like a private investor and cash-ﬂows
are calculated. If the project is eligible for support schemes, these must be included, as well as
taxes should be deducted. For energy generating projects, the most common indicator in order
to compare diﬀerent projects and/or technologies is the Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE).
The LCOE is expressed in
$
kWh and represents the average lifetime cost of producing one unit
of energy [52]. In its most common calculation, only the direct costs of the projects are taken
into account leaving outside taxes, environmental and social factors. There equation 1 shows
the formula in order to calculate this important indicator. The numerator is the sum of the
annaulized investment CAPEXannualized,i, the ﬁxed CostFixed,i and variable costs CostV ariable,i,
over the actually consumed energy produced by such technology.
LCOE
=
P
i CAPEXAnnualized,i + CostFixed,i + CostV ariable,i
P
i Ei
(1)
A socio-economic evaluation focuses instead on maximizing the total welfare in the country [51].
All cash ﬂows are evaluated to ﬂow into or out of the society, that can be set at local, regional or
national level. Many values taken into account are less tangible and often include eﬀects diﬃcult
to measure in monetary terms. In this category fall aspects such as job creation, environmental
and social beneﬁts. In the IRENA report [2], the job creation potential from deployment of mini
grids and other technologies, and many social aspects like women empowerment and education
are presented.
As already mentioned, feasibility studies of decentralized technologies for energy production
use as main indicator the LCOE, as it is an mostly technical calculation where assumptions
are minimized. This can be veriﬁed in several papers, both for comparing the unit produced
by individual technologies [53], but most often to compare diﬀerent scenarios, where system
designs with several component conﬁgurations are tested. For example [54] uses the LCOE in-
dicator to compare single house solar systems with mini-grid pv-battery systems over diﬀerent
load scenarios for a remote village in Nepal. [55] compares diﬀerent scenarios for a decentralized
biomass gasiﬁcation plant in rural Indonesia. Using HOMER, [56] studies the implementation
of a biogas technology to an already existing biomass (wood) generating unit for a farm in
northern India.
Page 15 of 57
==PAGE:19==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Figure 8: Example of LCOE against energy production by source, used as comparison among
diﬀerent technology scenarios for a mini-grid in sub-Saharan Africa [58].
When studying an energy project it is also important to consider the willingness to pay of the
users. [53] studies the LCOE of each generating technology for rural locations in Liberia and
compares it to the stated price that local inhabitants would be willing to pay. One of the main
ﬁndings of their study is that, even if diesel technology has the lowest investment cost and
appears more appealing for low purchasing power, its LCOE doubles the stated willingness to
pay, while renewables prove to be more competitive. Two studies that face many of the same
issues of this thesis project are works [57] and [58]. In [57] the best design of a mini-grid for
rural areas in Nigeria is issued with HOMER, starting from the estimation of the electrical
and water demand, which is fulﬁlled using an electrically drive water pump. After sizing the
components, the system undergoes an economical analysis where cash ﬂows, only made up by
costs, are used to calculated the LCOE. For the estimated loads and the climate characteristics
in Nigeria, it appears that the combination PV plus diesel generator allows the lowest LCOE. In
reference [58], after assuming a certain electrical load for an ideal community, diﬀerent system
conﬁgurations are built using urbs. In this study the focus is put on LCOE and on Job creation,
with the combination diesel+PV ensuring the lowest LCOE, but low job creation with respect
to systems with higher prevalence of PV and/or wind generation. The sources that provides
the most framework for this project are references [11] and [58], where the latter applies the
model from the former on a community in Zimbabwe as case study and focuses on the econom-
ical analysis. Again, LCOE is compared across several scenarios, where diﬀerent technologies,
additional demand and the opportunity of selling the overproduction on the market are allowed.
Page 16 of 57
==PAGE:20==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
Energy-Water-Food Systems
Figure 9 presents the results of IRENA’s costs analysis for diﬀerent energy sources and diﬀerent
regions of the world [59]. It can be immediately seen how distributed diesel-ﬁred generation has
a much higher price with respect to most technologies. Hydro and geothermal have the lowest
one, while biomass shows a quite wide range. PV seems to be the most expensive renewable
generation technology. Taking a closer look to Africa, it is expected that biomass will play a
big role in the electricity generation development.
Figure 9: LCOE range by generation type, compared for diﬀerent geographical area and against
centralized fossil-fueled and decentralized diesel-fueled energy production [59].
Within this project, the business project evaluation is preferred, as a detailed study of the
several social impacts and their monetization overshoots the purpose of this thesis. Besides
that, the calculations for the avoided CO2 emissions with respect to diesel generation will be
also carried out, as a simple environmental indicator. Social eﬀect on employment, gender
equality and education are anyway interesting analysis that can be lately performed on top of
this work, in order to give a more global view of such project.
Page 17 of 57
==PAGE:21==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
3
OSDRIA
OSDRIA stands for Optimization Software for Developing Rural Infrastructure in Africa and
is a new mixed-integer model in the making, begun to be developed in 2019 by S. Oberleitner
as his master thesis project [10]. The idea is to build an open source and user friendly software
for the modelling of rural decentralized systems. It is coded in Python language on the Pyomo
package, but thanks to the developed interface, it is not necessary to have a programming and
modelling background in order to design a system and to perform several diﬀerent simulations.
This in particular suits the idea that this software can be used by NGOs and African universi-
ties to study the feasibility of decentralized systems and help to deploy multiple ones without
in a relatively short time span. This thesis report is meant to be an OSDRIA manual for people
to use it and develop it in the future, and therefore in Appendix both the previous state of the
software and the additions made during this thesis are presented. In this section, OSDRIA is
introduced with its general mathematical formulation of the objective function. After that the
user interface with its diﬀerent modalities is described. Last, the most relevant change in the
modelling of a process and a fundamental new process addition are described in detail, with
respective input data, constraints and assumptions.
3.1
General structure
As already mentioned in the previous chapter, OSDRIA components are divided into processes
and commodities. Commodities are the ﬂows of goods such as diesel, water or electricity and
establish connections between diﬀerent processes. These ﬂows have only two restrictions: be
non-negative and fulﬁll the commodity balance equation 2. It means that for every time step
the production processes outputs (have to meet the consumption processes inputs.
In this
perspective, a storage unit is seen as a demand when charged and as a supplying unit when
discharged.
X
(c,p)∈Cout
p
ϵout =
X
(c,p)∈Cin
p
ϵin
∀ϵ, t
(2)
Processes represent the diﬀerent physical components of the EFW system, namely the generat-
ing units, transformation processes, storage units and also the ﬁnal demands. Each process has
inputs and output in the format of commodity ﬂows and/or external data input, ranging from
operational costs to rainfall precipitation. Individual constraints regulate the process activity
and deﬁne the commodity ﬂows for each time step of the simulation. Each process presents an
individual objective function, which is summed up with all the others in order to obtain the
overall model objective function. The standard objective for a process can be seen in equation
Page 18 of 57
==PAGE:22==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
3 and consists of the sum of all its costs. The number of units n is multiplied by the annualized
investment cost cinv, where WACC is the weighted average cost of capital due to loan the money
and T is the lifetime of the speciﬁc component, and also by the ﬁxed OM costs cfix. In addition
to that, variable costs cvar is multiplied by the produced commodity ϵ.
Obj = n · (cinv
(1 + WACC)T · WACC
(1 + WACC)T −1
+ cfix · (1 + WACC)) + (1 + WACC) ·
8760
X
t=1
cvar · ϵt (3)
Important is to be mentioned how storage processes are modelled. Content balance equation is
always one of the process constraints, and the peculiarity of this constraint is that relates the
content variable through successive time steps. As OSDRIA simulates one single year of a sys-
tem that is planned to last much longer, the issue of setting the initial and ﬁnal content arises,
as it would be unrealistic to set it to zero and not consider the coming year in the last time steps
of the simulation. Therefore, the initial content is left to be decided to the solver, with the only
condition that the storage content at the beginning and at the end of the simulation must match.
3.2
Modelling of processes
In this section three processes will be presented in detail. The Generator as it was object of a
major simpliﬁcation and the crop ﬁelds as they were introduced within this thesis work. All the
previously modelled processes and those who were object of minor modiﬁcations can be found
in Appendix, which will serve as a user guide for the modelled processes. Every modelled pro-
cess is described with its mathematical constraints and parameters, such as inputs and outputs,
data and properties. A key element always kept in mind is the compromise between accuracy
of the model and simplicity for the computational time, as this software is thought to be used
without the aid of high performance computers. Multiple simulations were run with diﬀerent
conﬁgurations to ﬁnd this balance.
In the energy sector the Battery, the Biogas Digester and the two Generators were mod-
iﬁed. In the previous OSDRIA version, the battery was only sized according to the capacity,
without constraining the charging and discharging power. The constraints for regulating the
power were introduced and the relative cost for sizing the charging and discharging technology
were implemented. In the water sector the Water Pump was modiﬁed with simpler lineariza-
tion of the eﬃciency curve, while the Fallow and Forest Land were subject to a minor change
always due to computational time reduction. For a more detailed description, see Appendix.
Page 19 of 57
==PAGE:23==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
Diesel Generator
The Diesel Generator (DG) is the most common generator for remote applications. As in [10]
and [11], a linear relation between fuel consumption and electricity output can be assumed.
Consumption to output data from a generator seller [64] can help depict ﬁgure 42, where a
linear regression ﬁts very well to the operational points for diﬀerent sizes of the engine. For
what concerns the DG eﬃciency at diﬀerent loads, the same approach used by HOMER is
applied [63]. Here the electrical eﬃciency is deﬁned as the electrical output divided by the
chemical energy of the input fuel, as shown in equation 4, where LHVfuel is the lower heating
value of the fuel. With the consumption in litres for each electric output [64] and knowing
the LHV value for diesel is 36 [65], is it possible to calculate the diﬀerent eﬃciency depending
on the operational point and to ﬁt a curve to it, showing its non-linear behaviour (ﬁgure 43).
Since the implementation of a piecewise linear function to represent as accurately as possible
the process would introduce binary variables and therefore increase the computational time, it
was decided to assume an average eﬃciency for the entire load spectrum of 31%.
ηGen
=
3.6 · PGen[kW]
fuel[l/h] · LHVfuel[MJ/l]
(4)
Figure 10: Correlation lines Fuel Consumption
- Load for diﬀerent engine sizes.
Figure 11: Correlation curves Diesel Eﬃciency
- Load for diﬀerent engine sizes.
A unit commitment model was at ﬁrst implemented [10], constraining the n-1 active units to
operate at full load while keeping the last at partial load. This could also be argued to be
unrealistic as it could be convenient to operate multiple generators at almost full-load than
operating one with very low eﬃciency, or even worse, with multiple switch on and oﬀ. How-
ever, the necessity of 2 additional integer variables with hourly resolution is judged to heavily
increase the computational time without the necessity of having such an accurate simulation of
operations. Flexibility of demand in particular can beneﬁt the situation when a DG operates
close to its minimum capacity. The process is therefore simpliﬁed to two equations constraining
the electricity production Elt. Equation 5 relates the fuel consumption with the electricity pro-
Page 20 of 57
==PAGE:24==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
duction through the parameters eﬃciency ηDiesel and energy density ρDiesel. Equation 6 on the
other hand limits the production by the total installed generation capacity, namely the amount
of generators multiplied by the single unit capacity CapDiesel.
Elt
=
Diesel · ρDiesel · ηDiesel
(5)
Elt
≤
Amount · CapDiesel
(6)
Table 4: Diesel Generator parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Eﬃciency
Diesel
Electricity
Diesel energy density
Rated power
Investment cost
Fixed cost
Variable cost
Lifetime
As previously mentioned, the food sector is the one that was lacking of processes and there-
fore was developed the most in this thesis. The Land Distribution process was updated with
the new types of land. The Crop Field was re-modelled and split into two diﬀerent processes
depending on the installation or not of an irrigation system. One of the major addition with
respect to the previous status of the model is the implementations of more crops, as before the
only cultivation considered was maize.
Irrigated Field
Subsistence agriculture is the major activity in sub-Saharan rural areas. During the rainy sea-
son, almost the entire community is employed in the ﬁelds all day long, from the ploughing
to the harvest time. During the dry season, while women take care of the children and of the
house, men usually do little tasks like taking care of the animals, but basically do nothing
waiting for the next rain to come. With an irrigation system coupled with the electrical water
pump, it could be possible to have more than one harvest a year, employing the community
also during the dry season and increasing food security.
Irrigated Field (IF) is the process that takes as input land and water, and outputs groundwa-
ter, crop and eventual crop residues. Starting from the Fallow Land and Forest Land processes,
with some additional data and constraints it is possible to obtain a decent representation of
crop cultivation. In fact, the canopy and top soil evaporation (eq. 7 and 8) and the runoﬀ(eq.
9-12) follow the same structure already seen for the aforementioned processes. For the evapora-
Page 21 of 57
==PAGE:25==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
tion process, the upper limit of the potential evapotranspiration Et0 has now to be multiplied
by a coeﬃcient Kc. The Kc coeﬃcient incorporates crop characteristics and averaged eﬀects of
evaporation from the soil [72].
Evcanopy,t
=
min(Waterprecipitation,t,
LAIt
LAImax
· Canopymax,
ET0,t ∗Kc,t)
(7)
Evtopsoil,t
=
(Et0,t ∗Kc,t −Evcanopy,t) · e−5·10−5·Biomass
(8)
CN1
=
CN2 −20 ·
100 −CN2
100 −CN2 + e2.533−0.0636·(100−CN2)
(9)
CN3
=
CN2 · e0.00673·(100−CN2)
(10)
CN
=
CN3
if
(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t > Capsoil)
(11)
else
(CN1if(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t < 0.001)
.
else
CN2
Waterrunoff,t
=
min(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t,
(12)
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−0.2·25.4·( 1000
CN −10)2
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t+0.5·25.4·( 1000
CN2 −10) )
Figure 12: Cropwat interfaces for reference evapotranspiration Et0 and crop Kc [73]
The factor Kc,t varies with the growth stage of the plant in the same way that the LAI pa-
rameter does, thus for OSDRIA it is implemented as a time series. Both Et0,t and Kc,t time
series can be retrieved from CROPWAT [73], a software developed by FAO, the Food and
Agricultural Organization branch of the UN. As it can be seen in ﬁgure 46, on the left side it
is possible to retrieve the reference evapotranspiration Et0 by setting the climate data. These
can be obtained from CLIMWAT [74], a database from FAO that provides data in the same
Page 22 of 57
==PAGE:26==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
format as CROPWAT. The interface on the right side is used to calculate the Kc time series
for each crop, depending on its speciﬁc stage of development.
As water is now a input commodity, equation 13 depicts the water balance for each time
step. Irrigation water, accounting for the irrigation losses, is summed up with what is left of
the precipitation after the evaporation and the runoﬀ. On the right side of the equation the
adjusted evapotranspiration demand has to be matched every hour in order for the crop not
to perish. Equation 14 represent the water content balance in the topsoil, deﬁning the amount
that percolates to the aquifer Overflowt and inﬂuencing the amount of irrigation water needed
in the next time steps. In fact, if the topsoil contains enough water from the previous hours
for the adjusted evapotranspiration to be matched, no irrigation is needed. Last, equation 15
deﬁned the crop output of the IF. The Harvest Series is a binary time series with a weekly
resolution, indicating with 1 the weeks where the crop is harvested and with 0 all the others.
Waterirr,t · ηirr + (Evcanopy,t + Evtopsoil,t) · Landcrop
=
(Et0,t · Kc,t) · Landcrop
(13)
Contenttopsoil,t
=
Contenttopsoil,t−1 + Waterirr,t · ηirr +
(14)
+(Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−Waterrunoff,t−Evtopsoil,t)·Landcrop−Wateroverflow,t
Commodityt = Landcrop · Y ieldcrop · Harvestseries,t
(15)
The IF process can represent several crop types by only changing the properties and data in-
put. Depending on the region and on the soil suitability to diﬀerent crops, three main irrigated
plantations can be identiﬁed: cereals, legumes and vegetables. Cereals include crops like maize,
rice, sorghum and millet. Maize is the most important cereal crop in most African regions,
both considering agricultural surface and ﬁnal consumption. Rice, diﬀerently from the other
cereals, needs a soil that retains the water for long time and is therefore very dependant on
the soil characteristics. Legumes include groundnuts, soya beans and bambara beans and are a
very important both from a dietary point of view as well as for crop rotation. Legumes in fact
naturally ﬁx nitrogen into the soil, with nitrogen being the most important fertilizer for cereal
crops. Last, vegetables like onions, tomatoes, peppers and okro play a very important role
in the sub-Saharan diet. They are usually cultivated in smaller land plots and require great
amount of water. They can be cultivated for commercial purposes only where dams, water
pumps or rivers provide a stable irrigation.
Page 23 of 57
==PAGE:27==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
The objective function is slightly diﬀerent from the standard one.
Besides the discounted
annualized investment and ﬁxed costs for the irrigation system, multiple diﬀerent other costs
have to be taken into account. These costs depend on the crop type and on the amount of land
allocated to such crop, and it can be seen in equation 16.
Obj
=
Landcrop ·(CAPEXirr ·((1 + WACC)L · WACC
(1 + WACC)L −1
+Fixedirr ·(1+WACC))+ (16)
+(Labor · CostLabor + Ploughing · CostPloughing + Fertilizer · CostFertilizer+
.
+TopDressing · CostTopDressing + Pesticide · CostPesticide) · Landcrop
Fertilizer, top dressing (a covering fertilizer that gets spread above the ground or plants) and
pesticides are required in diﬀerent amount depending on the crop. Moreover, they can have
diﬀerent prices depending on the regional market and on possible subsidies form local author-
ities. For what concern the labor parameter, each crop requires diﬀerent amount of working
hours and with diﬀerent distribution over the year. Instead of deﬁning several time series and a
labor capacity determined by the amount of workers in the community, an economical approach
was preferred. In fact, it is common practice that communities near water sources and with
irrigation systems or water pumps employ some workers form other communities during the
dry season. According to this fact, it makes no sense to limit the labor hours but to price them.
In table 40 it is possible to see all the parameters necessary to model this process. The Data
parameters need to be set only once depending on the crop requirements, while the Properties
can vary for each location as the costs depend on several diﬀerent factors.
Table 5: Irrigated Field parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Evaporation Canopy
Wacc
Precipitation
Crop Land
Crop Output
Evaporation Topsoil
LAImax
Evapotranspiration
Water
Groundwater
Runoﬀ
Canopymax
LAI
CN
CN2
Kc
CN1
Topsoil Thickness
Harvest Series
CN3
Wilting Point
Lifetime
Topsoil Content
Field Capacity
Irrigation Investment
Capacity Topsoil
Crop Yield
Irrigation Fixed costs
Overﬂow
Residue Yield
Irrigation Eﬃciency
Labor
Labor cost
Ploughing
Ploughing cost
Fertilizers
Fertilizers cost
Pest&Herbicides
Pest&Herbicide cost
Page 24 of 57
==PAGE:28==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
3 OSDRIA
Simple Field
At the actual state of things, almost the entirety of the available land is farmed as not irrigated
or Simple Field (SF). With the elevated population growth witnessed in the last years both
in urban and rural areas, multiple communities already struggle to sustain with the land they
own. Only a minority of settlements, usually in more remote areas, can aﬀord to practice fallow
land agriculture, meaning that not all the available land is cultivated so it can naturally regain
its fertility.
The IF is a process that greatly increases the food production and provide food security to com-
munities with limited available land. Despite this, there are two main reasons why it cannot be
the only process producing food. First, the Irrigated Field implies a great water consumption,
that needs to be extracted from the aquifer. Besides the excessive drilling of boreholes and
installation of water pumps, water tanks as well as generating units to supply the pumps, such
intensive water usage violates the principle of a sustainable exploitation of the aquifer. The
Aquifer process is in fact the bottleneck that limits the amount of land that can be irrigated,
with its constraint to have the same water level at the beginning and at the end of the simula-
tion year. This means that irrigating during the dry season can be done only over a very limited
surface. The second reason why another process is necessary is that, during the rainy season,
it would be naive not to grow on the rest of the land, having all the resources available,namely
land, rain and labor.
The SF process emulates the IF but without the water input and with one single crop cycle.
As for the IF, the parameters change depending on the selected crop and location of the com-
munity. Cereals and legumes are implemented the same way as for the IF. Vegetables instead
cannot be grown without a stable feed of water and cannot be represented by the SF. Addi-
tionally, tubers can be represented and implemented in the system. Tubers like yam and sweet
potato can in fact grow in large quantities with very little water, and are therefore suitable for
more arid regions with vast arable land.
Process equations and parameters table, since they almost resemble the IF process, are reported
in Appendix.
Page 25 of 57
==PAGE:29==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
4
Case Study
This chapter is divided in 3 sections. First, the case site will be presented, contextualized with
its motivations and speciﬁc characteristic. Following to it the all input data such as weather
features, community electricity and water demand, agriculture details and economic parame-
ters are retrieved and presented. Last, scenarios to test the model in diﬀerent conditions are
selected and introduced.
4.1
Site assessment
As mentioned in the Introduction chapter, sub-Saharan Africa is the world’s region with the
lowest electriﬁcation rate, with more than 600 million people without electricity access [1]. This
is especially in rural areas, where the share of population without this commodity is 81% [19].
Moreover, while in the other continents the issue will be almost completely phased out in the
following years, in SSA the actual number of people lacking electricity is expected to increase
from now to 2030 [75]. Rural areas host the majority of the poorest population, which here
relies completely on subsistence agriculture with very low productivity [11]. This situation is
very vulnerable to external changes, such as droughts and pests. The living conditions are
exacerbated by a lack of sanitation and hygiene, low education and little help from central
authorities. Thus, the focus on this speciﬁc region aims to tackle the issue at the core and show
the possible beneﬁts within the shortest time horizon.
Figure 13: On the left: electriﬁcation rate historical data and futures projections, for diﬀerent
regions of the world. On the right: nominal number of people lacking electricity access [75].
Page 26 of 57
==PAGE:30==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
The choice of Ghana is due to the partnership between the Technical University of Munich and
the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), which already resulted
in previous projects like [11] and 2019-2020 course project "Interdisciplinary Project Internship
Concept Development of a Renewable Energy System in a Developing Country" [76].
Up to 2019, Ghana was organized in 10 administrative regions, now reformed into a total of
16. The climate diﬀers between the north, more hot and dry, and the south, with tropical
humid weather. In the southern part of the country, the rainy season goes from March to mid
November, sustaining a rich vegetation over the entire year and ensuring a consistent water
ﬂow in the rivers. As regards the norther part of the country, the inﬂuence of the Sahara desert
and the distance from the coast results in a shorter rainy season, ranging from April to mid
October. In the remaining 5 months the landscape turns for lush green to an arid plain where
is impossible to grow anything. The main city Tamale and major market are supplied by few
hectares that grow year-round thanks to damns and irrigation systems, but rural areas often
cannot aﬀord the rising prices and need to rely on their own yields. Moreover, most of the
industrial production is located in the Greater Accra region and in the city of Kumasi. Thus, a
big contrast is evident, in both the natural and economical landscape, between the poor, vast
and rural north and a more densely populated, greener and developed south.
Figure 14: Ghanaian electriﬁcation
rate per administrative region, pink
means tlow rates (<50%), blue high
rates (>70%) [78].
Figure 15: Ghanaian generation mix development
2006-2016: the installation of new gas ﬁred plants
reduced the hydro share, while other renewables are
still marginal [79].
Page 27 of 57
==PAGE:31==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Despite Ghana’s ambitious political agenda and having already reached an electriﬁcation rate of
about 80% [77], it clearly did not manage to meet the global electriﬁcation goal that was set for
2020 [11]. Grid expansions in the past years targeted mainly urban and industrial areas that,
as mentioned in the previous paragraph, are concentrated in the southern part of the country.
In Figure 14 the electriﬁcation rate by region (using the past year administrative regions) is
depicted: it can be easily noticed that the north is very behind the south in this statistic.
The country’s power generation in 2016 relied for 41.6% on hydro and for 57.8% on thermal [79],
coming from few large power plants [77]. As shown in ﬁgure 15 this trend is also moving towards
a greater dependency on thermal power, as it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd new hydro power suitable
sites as demand keep rising.
This lack of diversity exposes the national system to risks of
shortages and price increases due to droughts or rising fuel costs. This would turn into a large
share of population not being able to aﬀord electricity anymore and socio-economical tensions.
Besides that, the transmission and distribution grid present continuous voltage drops and faults,
with poor maintenance and management, resulting in very low quality of the supplied power.
Therefore islanded systems could beneﬁt both the electriﬁed community, by providing stable
and aﬀordable energy, as well as the rest of the country, by not increasing the pressure on an
already stressed electrical system.
Figure 16: Kurubang Yily location in Ghana, Savannah Region, Central Gongja District [80].
Page 28 of 57
==PAGE:32==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
The selected community for the case study object of this thesis is called Kurubang Yily. Located
in the Central Gongja district of the Savannah district, is about 8 kilometers east of Sankpala,
the closest town with a market, and 20 kilometers south-west of Tamale (coordinates 9.2853,
-0.9502). It is a very small community of about 90 inhabitants visited by the author in February
2020. In this district the dominant ethnic group is the Dagbamba and the most spoken language
is Dagbani. In the north of Ghana, muslim and cristian communities coexist without tensions.
The dominant religion can vary from village to village, without regional patterns and also
depending on the past operations of foreign religious association. In Kurubang Yily, despite
not having a building designed for cult, the population is muslim. This explains why all the 90
inhabitants live in only 7 households, with an average of 13 people per household. According
to the muslim tradition, polygamy here is a prevalent practice. In rural areas a man is used
to have up to 5 wives and up to 20 children. Therefore, a household is usually structure in
multiple small round buildings connected by a wall, delimiting a circular area in the middle
that concentrates most of the daily life in the house (ﬁgure 17). Depending on the size of the
family, a household can have up to 7-8 huts to accomodate the residents and store at least a
share of the yield.
Figure 17: Typical household, with multiple round huts connected by a wall into a circular
shape.
The fact that Kurubang Yily is such a small community suggests that the government will take
many years to eventually electrify the village. This is because the Ghanaian government, inde-
pendently form which party is ruling, pursuits the most immediate and vast consent possible.
Thus, every fund invested in electriﬁcation projects is focused on the largest communities and
the ones closest to the existing lines, so that the costs are minimized and the largest population
is reached. To bring power to the community, 2.5 kilometers of lines should be build to reach
the closest electriﬁed community, making it a very unattractive investment.
Page 29 of 57
==PAGE:33==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Besides the marginal interest that the government could have towards Kurubang Yily, the vil-
lage presents a serious issue with the water supply. In fact, there is no borehole with hand pump
installed in the community. There is also no river or lake in the nearby. Women and children
need to walk north-east for almost 7 kilometers, about 2 hours walking on way, to reach a small
lake that captures water during the rainy season and supplies to several communities over the
dry season. This pond is located right next to the road, and animals drink from it as well.
Nothing guarantees the purity and the hygiene of the water for the local people. Some years
ago a western NGO tried to dig a borehole in the community, but when they did not reach the
aquifer within some meters, the abandoned the project and left.
Figure 18: Kurubang Yily area, with key facilities such as school, market and water source,
and distances in walking hours [80].
As there is no groundwater access or stream nearby, agriculture relies entirely on rainfall water.
In the last years, climate change aﬀected rainfall patterns and therefore the yields on which
the entire community sustain. In particular, the beginning of the rainy season got delayed by
several weeks. The ﬁrst rain, which for many communities is the signal to prepare the ﬁelds for
the agriculture season, is now arriving in late April if not May, while in the past it was used to
happen in late March. Moreover, the rainfall pattern changed. Rainy events are much more
Page 30 of 57
==PAGE:34==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
violent and short, releasing great amount of water that the soil cannot absorb in a very limited
time. These intense rains are also alternating to longer dry periods. In 2018 some consecutive
dry weeks occurred in June-July, in the middle of the rainy season, and water demanding crops
like Maize perished, jeopardizing the entire community.
The entire population is involved in agriculture during the rainy season. The Kurubang Yily
community can count on about 100 acres of cultivable land, which quite a lot for a village of
its size. This allows them to practice fallow land agriculture, which means that after two or
three years that one ﬁeld is cultivated, it is left to fallow for one or two years for the soil to
naturally get fertile again. There is no knowledge about crop rotation schemes, but if a crop
yield decreases, the crop is substituted with another one the following year. As there are no
water sources available for irrigation, only one harvest a year is achievable and needs to provide
for the community until the next rainy season. The main crops are maize, groundnut, rice and
soya beans. They are stored either into the single households or into straw huts built just close
to the community, where insects and mold can cause up to 25% losses. In the village sheeps,
fowls and chicken roam freely, and they are mainly sold during the dry season when economical
resources start to run low. Also, there is a herd of about 30 cows from an external owner that
pays a little fee to the community to let them take care of the animals, that also roam around
in the fallow areas. This fact introduces the possibility of collecting their manure and use it as
feedstock for biogas production.
At the moment the most important crops are maize, groundnuts and soya beans, and few acres
dedicated to rice. Anyway, the yield of these ﬁelds is very low due to low availability of fertil-
izers, pesticides and herbicides. In fact, from an acre of maize the yield can vary from 600 kg
with a little fertilizer to 200 kg without. Other communities of the region with better usage
of fertilizers and top dressing achieved a yield of 1200-1400 kg per acre, which means 3.5 tons
per hectare. Similar situation also for the other crops. Since each farmer can aﬀord diﬀerent
amount of chemicals for the ﬁelds, and since the yields can vary considerably from year to year
and from crop to crop, it is impossible to deﬁne a "Status Quo" condition of the agriculture
that represents a base year. A scenario where all agriculture is conducted without irrigation
will be inspected in the following chapter, in order to compare the potential of the status quo
with the irrigation improvements.
Last, no school facility is present in the community, and children need to walk about half hour
to reach the closest village with a school. Overall, when interviewed about the priorities of the
community, the family leaders and the chief pointed out 3 priorities that they consider of major
importance: water supply, electricity access and a school facility. All the key information are
reported in table 6.
Page 31 of 57
==PAGE:35==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Table 6: Kurubang Yily key facts.
Name
Kurubang Yily
Grid distance
2.5 km
Latitude
9.2853
School
None
2 km walk
to closest one
Longitude
-0.9502
Farming land
40 ha
Region
Savannah
Type of agriculture
Subsistence
District
Central Gonja
Irrigation
None
Population
90
Livestock
Goats, Sheeps,
Fowls, Cows
Households
7
Crops
Maize, Soya beans,
Rice, Groundnuts
Closest town
Sankpala
Water source
None locally
Distance from
closest town
8 km
Distance from
water source
7 km
Religion
Muslim
Road
Small dirt paths
4.2
Input data
Input data are categorized by type: meteorological, community needs, agriculture and econom-
ical.
4.2.1
Weather data
Precipitation and PV production were retrieved from [60].
The PV production is already
normalized per kW installed and with an hourly resolution, while precipitation was aggregated
on a daily basis in order to feed OSDRIA with a 365 cells time series. As it can be seen in ﬁgure
19, rain concentrates during the period from May to September. In contrast with the drought
of the winter months, spring precipitation are present but very irregular and with high peaks,
meaning that storms release large amount of rain in a short time, which is an unfavourable
situation for agriculture. As regards the PV production, the situation is very promising. The
low latitude ensures a stable amount of light hours over the entire year and high output. In
ﬁgure 20 the ﬁrst week of January is compared with the ﬁrst week of July. The eﬀects of the
rainy seasons on the July week are obvious, but the electrical production is still relevant and
quite stable. In fact, the overall capacity factor over the year is 16.3% [60], 3-4 percentage
points better than central Europe.
Page 32 of 57
==PAGE:36==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Figure 19: Daily precipitation in millimeters over year 2014 [60].
Figure 20: Comparison between normalized PV production during a dry week (orange) and
rainy season one (blue) [60].
4.2.2
Demand data
According to the UN, to satisfy basic needs such as drinking, personal and house hygiene,
washing of clothes and food preparation, 50 litres of water per day should be guaranteed to
each individual [81]. A proﬁle for the village was built in ﬁgure 21 accordingly to the habits
of the inhabitants. Low consumption during the working day, necessary only for drinking, and
a higher share of the 50 litres used in the late afternoon for food preparation, showering and
washing the clothes. By normalizing the curve in such way that the sum over a day is one and
multiplying it by the total water consumption in a day (50 litres for 90 inhabitants) the actual
values are obtained. With the implementation of a little water demand ﬂexibility, the shape of
this proﬁle could result ﬂattened.
Page 33 of 57
==PAGE:37==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Figure 21: Normalized estimated daily water demand proﬁle.
As the there is obviously no electricity consumption in the community at the moment, the load
proﬁle has to be evaluated from scratch. First, the appliances of interest to be installed in an
household must be listed with their power consumption [82] and the amount per household
(Table 7). After that, the probability of usage of such appliances has to be supposed hour by
hour. Last, with a Monte Carlo simulation the actual load proﬁle for each household can be
obtained [83]. A Monte Carlo simulation creates a random binary variable for each appliance
and for each hour, with an overall distribution that follows the given probabilities. Summing
up the proﬁles of all the households the community electrical load proﬁle can be estimated.
Since in Ghana there are no major changes in temperature over the year, no seasonal trend are
included in the load proﬁle calculation. For simplicity, no distinction is made either between
weekdays and weekend. As can be seen in ﬁgure 22, the resulting household proﬁle presents
the highest consumption during the evening hours, when lighting is necessary and the whole
family is home, requiring the usage of fans and the tv. A peak is also present in the ﬁrst hour
of the morning, while during the day most tenants are out working in the ﬁelds or at school,
determining a low and stable consumption. In Figure 23 the diﬀerent proﬁles of each of the 7
households are summed up. It can be seen how this smooths the proﬁle and makes the peaks
more clear.
Page 34 of 57
==PAGE:38==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Table 7: Estimated appliances per household.
Appliance
Power [W]
Number per household
Tv
150
1
Fan
60
4
Radio
8
1
Light bulb
10
5
Fridge
200
1
Phone charger
6
2
Figure 22: Monte Carlo load proﬁle for a
single household in kW, with the
aforementioned appliances.
Figure 23: Sum of 7 Monte Carlo proﬁles in
kW, shaving minor peaks and giving the
community demand.
4.2.3
Agriculture data
As regard the agriculture processes, reference evapotranspiration Et0 was retrieved from the
CROPWAT [73] software using the CLIMWAT database [74]. The reference evapotranspiration
has a montly resolution and is depicted in table 8.
Table 8: Reference evapotranspiration for the Kurubang Yily location.
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Et_0
4.07
4.1
4.66
4.94
4.79
4.55
Month
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Et_0
3.56
3.6
3.49
3.82
3.95
3.72
Page 35 of 57
==PAGE:39==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
In table 9 the main crops for some sub-Saharan countries, Ghana included, are reported [84].
Cereals are by far the most important crop, with Maize leading in most cases, and sorghum and
millet completing the share. Legumes inlcude beans, cow peas, bambara beans and soya beans.
Tubers mainly represent yam, cassava and sweet potato. Vegetables, which mainly represent
tomatoes, onions, peppers and okro are a relatively small share because they cannot be grown
on large scale due to high water consumption and are usually cultivated only close to rivers or
dams.
Table 9: Crop shares (in ﬁnal product weight) for some sub-Saharan countries [84].
Country
Cereal(Maize)[%]
Legumes[%]
Tubers[%]
Vegetables[%]
Ghana
22(12)
3
22
2
Mozambico
38(30)
15
21
1
Malawi
51(47)
18
10
2
Nigeria
42(8)
10
19
4
Burkina Faso
61(8)
17
1
1
Kenya
45(36)
29
5
3
Zambia
53(45)
3
15
3
Tanzania
43(23)
13
15
2
After selecting the four categories with the respective representative crop, the Kc was retrieved
from [12]. As it can be seen in table 10 maize and soya beans have a four months cycle, while
yam and vegetables cycles last 5 months.
Table 10: Kc parameter development for the selected crops.
Crop
Maize
Tomatoes and Peppers
Soya Beans
Yam
Kc ﬁrst month
0.532
0.2
0.4785
0.45
Kc second month
0.9155
0.875
0.858
0.75
Kc third month
1.15
1.15
1.1
1.15
Kc fourth month
0.7
1.025
0.759
0.9405
Kc ﬁfth month
-
0.45
-
0.2805
Using the ﬁrst-hand information retrieved on site in February 2020 and completing with few
data from the work of [12], the technical parameters in order to obtain the highest yield from
the crops are depicted in table 11. Yam is the only crop that needs a double ploughing, as
it requires a very soft soil. Maize and Soya beans are very similar crops in terms of fertiliz-
ers, labor hours and pesticides. The vegetables instead require a lot more work and fertilizers
amount, this because after the plant grows to its adult stage the harvest is continuous for over
5 months. Herbicides are often applied equally over the entire available land before some days
Page 36 of 57
==PAGE:40==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
before the ploughing and sowing. Yields vary depending if the ﬁeld does have or not an irrigation
system, assuming a decrease of 20% (shown in brackets) when the crop relies only on rain as
water source. Last, only maize straw is considered as residue of interest for the production of
biogas.
Table 11: Crop parameters values.
Crop
Maize
Tomatoes and Peppers
Soya Beans
Yam
Ploghing [times]
1
1
1
2
Fertilizer [kg]
200
1200
250
-
Top Dressing [kg]
200
150
100
-
Labour [h]
814
1620
944
641
Pesticide [can/ha]
1
2
1
0
Herbicide [bottles/ha]
2
2
2
2
Yield [kg/ha]
5000(4000)
22000
1800(1440)
9000
Residue [kg/ha]
5000
-
-
-
4.2.4
Economic data
The economical parameters shown in table 12 were retrieved on site in February 2020 and
compared with Ghana guidelines from the Ministry of food and agriculture [85]. Prices were
collected in GHS and per acre of land or bag of product, then converted in $/ha and $/kg.
Labor cost is assumed to be equivalent to 14 GHS/day, equivalent to 3.08$/day. Assuming a
working day of 8 hours, each hour has a retribution of 0.385$.
Table 12: Economical parameters for agriculture.
Labor
Plough
Herbicide
Pesticide
Fertilizer
Top Dressing
Cost
0.385 $/h
34$/ha
8.52 $/bottle
17.04 $/bottle
0.31 $/kg
0.31 $/kg
The market prices for selling the agriculture products were partially collected on site and com-
pleted with the estimated ones from [12]. For what concerns electricity and water consumption
in the community itself, no revenue and therefore price is associated to them. In fact, despite
the high willingness to pay stated from the inhabitants of Kurubang Yily and many other com-
munities, this project is seen from the perspective of an NGO and therefore proﬁts will cover
the maintenance of the system and surplus will stay within the community.
Table 13: Selling market prices for the selected crops.
Maize
Soya beans
Yam
Vegetables
Market price [$/kg]
0.54
1.08
0.74
0.52
Page 37 of 57
==PAGE:41==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Diesel gross price was retrieved from [86], adjusted with an additional 20% due to retailer price
and transport from the city to the remote location, for a ﬁnal cost of 0.9 $/liter. For the other
components of the systems, such as generators, BD, PV and WP the costs are depicted in table
14, and were retrieved from components retailers [87] and previous works [10] and [11].
Table 14: Main component parameters’ value.
PV
Generators
Battery
Digester
Pump
Irrigation
Invest. [$/kW]
1200
300
350
$
kWh
300
$
kW
900
$
m3/h
1000
$
m3/h
2000
$
ha
Fixed [$/kW/y]
20
10
30
70
$
m3/h
400
40
$
ha
Variable [$/ϵ]
0
0.01
0
0.01 $
m3
0.1
-
Lifetime [years]
25
15
10
20
25
50
Unit Size
0.25 kW
5 kW
5 kWh
1 kW
0.2m3
h
5 m3
h
-
Eﬃciency
-
0.31
0.9
-
0.5
0.9
4.3
Scenarios
In order to compare diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the system and to test the model performance
in diﬀerent conditions, several scenarios have been generated. These are reported in Table 15.
One more assumption was trasversaly made on the land distribution process over all the sce-
narios. Since the goal of an EFWS is to ensure food security to the community and not to
transform it into a business, a minimum amount of hectares has to be dedicated to each crop.
Monocultures, despite low costs and high proﬁt potential, are very exposed to pests and fragile
to irregular rainfall patterns. Diversiﬁcation ensure that even if a crop underperforms, the
others will supply enough food to the community. In the Kurubang Yily case cereals, legumes
and tubers land have the lower bound set to 5 hectares, which can be either irrigated or not.
A particular assumption has to be made for vegetables.
These crops can be commercially
cultivated only near rivers or dams and are in fact are extremely proﬁtable to be sold on the
market. Therefore the model will invest a lot of resources into this production, which would
absorb most of the available water and reduce the yields of the other crops. But such injection
of these products on the local market would make the price drop and put the community in a
paradox situation. Thus, a maximum area of 2 hectares can be dedicated to this culture.
Page 38 of 57
==PAGE:42==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Table 15: Scenarios.
Scenario
Description
1. DSL
All the electricity for the utilities and the water pump
is generated by the Diesel unit.
2. DSL+PV
5 kW PV are forced into the system to reduce fuel dependency.
Batteries are enabled.
3. BIO
Biowaste digestion supplies Biogas for power generation.
4. BIO+PV
5 kW PV are forced into the Biogas scenario.
5. FEP
Land distribution restriction are removed.
The model is left free to invest everything in the most proﬁtable crop.
6. NO_IRR
All agriculture relies on rain only.
Electricity generation only for appliances and village water demand.
7. 2POP
Electrical and water demand are doubled.
8. LOW_RAIN
Precipitation from a dry year
9. HIGH_RAIN
Precipitation from a rainy year
The ﬁrst 4 scenarios investigates the diﬀerent generation combinations. Diesel and Biogas are
ﬂexible generation technologies, able to regulate depending on the load, while PV is intermit-
tent. As one of the main point of a EWFS is energy security and low dependence on external
commodities such as diesel, scenario 4 Biogas+PV is selected as base scenario and also referred
to as "Basic Concept".
Scenario 5 and 6 simulates the two opposite situations regarding the agriculture sector. In the
ﬁrst (FEP stands for Full Economic Potential), no constraints on land distribution are present
and therefore the model can focus on the pure proﬁt maximization. The latter present on the
other side the opportunity loss in the case where irrigation is not practiced and yields are not
ensured.
The following scenario explores the eﬀects of an increase of the population living in the commu-
nity. Population in Ghana grew with a yearly rate above 2% for the past 50 years [88], reaching
a population of 31 million inhabitants and being expected to reach 38 millions in 2030. In many
communities overpopulation has become an issue due to the lack of arable land and consequent
inability to provide enough food. Thousands women and young men move every year from rural
areas to big cities in search of better opportunities, often ending up living in big slums. Luckily
for Kurubang Yily, due to the relatively vast land and small population this perspective is still
far, but population will likely grow quickly after the EFWS is deployed.
Page 39 of 57
==PAGE:43==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
4 Case Study
Figure 24: Mid-February to mid-April precipitations for base case (blue), low (orange) and high
(grey) rain scenarios [60].
Last, water is surely the key element in the system. Precipitations have become more and more
irregular over the past years and are vital for a good crop yield. Scenarios 8 and 9 simulates
a year with low rain and one with abundant rain. A location at the border with Burkina Faso
provided the dry year data, with approximately 20% less rain than the base scenario. The rainy
season starts later in the year and end earlier, with most of the precipitations concentrated in
fewer event. Similarly a location closer just north of Kumasi was selected for the rainy year,
with a total of +30% in additional rain. Here the early rains start already in February and can
last until December, for a very short dry season. The period from mid-Febraury to mid-April
is depicted in ﬁgure 24.
Page 40 of 57
==PAGE:44==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
5
Results
For the analysis of the results, this chapter will be divided into 2 sections: one for the economical
results and the other regarding the technical aspects, namely energy, land and water use.
5.1
Technical Analysis
Land use is for sure a key point if not the most important for the optimal conﬁguration of the
system. First, each land and crop type has diﬀerent water demand and determines a diﬀerent
amount of rainwater to percolate to the aquifer. The total percolation over the year deﬁnes
the upper limit that the water pump is allowed to extract from the aquifer itself. Secondary
aspect is, obviously, the crop yield and the proﬁtability of each crop, facing the speciﬁc costs
that consist of speciﬁc quantities of fertilizers, labor, pesticides and so on.
Figure 25: Land distribution shares over the diﬀerent scenarios.
Graph 25 shows in a visual way how the 40 hectares allocated among the diﬀerent crops for each
of the 9 scenarios, as also reported in table 16. The four "Generation" scenarios behave quite
similarly. All of them in fact reach the 2 ha limit for vegetables land allocation, as it is the most
proﬁtable crop. After that they allocate the same amount of land to yam and maize without
irrigation, respectively about 9 ha and 17 ha. The main diﬀerence in the allocation of land
over these scenarios is that when biogas substitutes diesel, 2.7 ha are removed from irrigated
soya and reparted between irrigated maize and simple soya. This is due to two reasons. First,
since the biogas digester requires a certain amount of water for a correct digestion, the available
Page 41 of 57
==PAGE:45==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
water for irrigation is slightly reduced. Second, it has to do with the temporal availability of
maize straw for the biogas digester, as two temporally spaced harvests from the irrigated ﬁeld
require less storage capacity.
Table 16: Land distruibution in hectares per scenario.
Fallow
Irrigated
Maize
Maize
Irrigated
Soya
Soya
Yam
Vegetables
1. Diesel
0
0
17.14
4.42
7.49
8.94
2
2. Diesel+PV
0
0
17.14
4.42
7.49
8.94
2
3. Biogas
0
1.72
17.14
1.71
8.48
8.94
2
4. Biogas+PV
0
1.72
17.14
2.10
8.34
8.94
2
5. FEP
13.70
0
8.41
0
0
8.94
8.95
6. No Irr
3.56
0
17.14
0
10.35
8.94
0
7. Pop2
0
2.45
17.14
0.02
9.44
8.94
2
8. Low Rain
1.00
1.46
16.37
0
10.28
8.89
2
9. High Rain
0
2.21
20.66
5.87
0
9.26
2
In ﬁgure 26 the commodity ﬂows of water during the agriculture season of scenario 4 Bio+PV
are illustrated. Above, the technologies delivering water are the water pump and the water
tank. The water tank (orange on the demand side, light green on the supply) is fundamental
to store water in low-demand hours and when the water pump is powered from solar energy.
The main factors in the demand are the three irrigated crops, with a little baseload where blue
represents the village demand and the green the biogas digester needs.
Figure 26: Water commodity ﬂow diagram during intensive irrigation days, scenario 4.
Page 42 of 57
==PAGE:46==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Very interesting are the results from scenario 5 and 6, which represent the two extremes of
commercial and rural agriculture. In the FEP scenario, all the water that is not consumed by
the villagers or injected into the biogas digester is diverted to the vegetables ﬁelds. In fact 8.45
hectares are allocated to this very proﬁtable crop that has an extreme demand of water, more
than those used for yam and for maize. In order to let large quantities of water percolate to the
aquifer and therefore have more availability through the pump, almost 14 ha are left to fallow.
In this conﬁguration, soya results the least proﬁtable and therefore is not cultivated at all.
Scenario 6 on the other side represents the ideal potential of the status quo, if the community
had enough ﬁnalcial liquidity to invest in the right amount of fertilizers, pesticides and to hire
workers from the neighbouring villages.
Figure 27: Water commodity ﬂow diagram during intensive irrigation days, scenario 5. Almost
all the water is consumed by the vegetables ﬁelds.
Figure 28: Water commodity ﬂow diagram, scenario 6. Without irrigation demand, the main
consumer is the digester.
Page 43 of 57
==PAGE:47==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
In ﬁgure 27 it can be seen the intensive irrigation needed to sustain scenario 5 vegetables cul-
tures. The water pump is operated most of the year at its full capacity, and backed up from
the water tank during dry days. Vegetables ﬁeld demand accounts for almost the entire water
consumption, making the village water demand and the biogas digestion almost negligible. In
comparison, the No Irrigation scenario has a very diﬀerent water usage (ﬁgure 28). The com-
modity is in fact extracted only for the village water demand and the biogas digester. Here
the water tank has the role of smoothing the daily up and downs instead of storing water for
longer times, like in scenario 5. The bulk is very diﬀerent as well: while in scenario 5 the water
consumption is almost 15m3 per hour, here the peaks are below the 4m3.
The Pop2 scenario present minor changes compared to the Biogas one. Having less water avail-
able for crop irrigation, the model decides not to invest into irrigated soya and distributes those
hectares between irrigated maize and not irrigated soya. As expected, diﬀerent precipitation
patterns in scenario 8 and 9 have larger eﬀects on the optimal conﬁguration of the system. In
the Low Rain scenario, most of the irrigated land is now used for non-irrigated crops, with an
hectare left to fallow. In the High Rain scenario the extended rainy season allows to cultivate
up to almost 6 ha of irrigated soya and over 2 ha of irrigated maize, without leaving any land
to fallow.
Figure 29: Water consumption in scenario NoIrr, BIO+PV and FEP, divided by ﬁnal use.
As regards the overall water consumption, there are considerable diﬀerences between scenarios,
according to the allocation of irrigated land. All results for each scenario are reported in table
17. With respect to the No Irrigation scenario, where the total pumped water is 4270 m3 over
the year, in the other scenarios this amount increases from 5 to almost 10 times in the FEP
scenario. For the base case scenario BIO+PV, the total water consumption is 24270 m3, for a
Page 44 of 57
==PAGE:48==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
net increase of +468%. This can be visualized in graph 29, where the water used for irrigation
is subdivided into the 3 irrigated crops. In the reference scenario 4 maize, soya and vegetables
require comparable amounts of water, but each one of them counts up for at least 3 times the
inhabitants water consumption. The severity of intensive commercial farming is reported in
the extreme scenario FEP. Here, almost 90% of all the water pumped is diverted to vegetables
irrigation, with a total consumption of 43755 m3, a +924% from the No Irrigation case.
In the ﬁrst 7 scenarios the yearly precipitations are ﬁxed to the same amount of 44790 m3.
This means that the bulk that can be extracted only depends on the percolation of the diﬀerent
land types. In the last two scenarios the rainfall pattern and quantity is varied to investigate
the eﬀects on the system. If in the Low Rain scenario the system loses 16% of available water
facing a decrease in precipitations of 20%, in the High Rain scenario it performs much better.
In fact the EFWS is able to extract 48% more water than in the reference scenario having 30%
higher rainfall. This results highlights a decent resilience of the system to adverse conditions
and a good capability to exploit favourable ones.
Table 17: Water usage for each scenario, in thousands of m3 and percentage.
Scenario
Pumped
Water
Village
Demand
Biogas
Digester
Irrigation
Vegetables
Field
Irrigated
Maize
Irrigated
Soya
1.DSL
24.1
1.6 (7%)
0 (0%)
22.4 (93%)
8.6 (35%)
0 (0%)
13.9 (57%)
2.DSLPV
24.1
1.6 (7%)
0 (0%)
22.4 (93%)
8.6 (35%)
0 (0%)
13.9 (57%)
3.BIO
24.3
1.6 (7%)
2.6 (11%)
20.0 (82%)
8.6 (35%)
6.1 (25%)
5.4 (22%)
4.BIOPV
24.3
1.6 (7%)
2.3 (9%)
20.4 (84%)
8.6 (35%)
5.2 (21%)
6.6 (27%)
5.FEP
43.8
1.6 (4%)
3.8 (9%)
38.3 (87%)
38.3 (87%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
6.NOIRR
4.3
1.6 (39%)
2.6 (61%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
7.2POP
24.4
3.2 (14%)
3.8 (15%)
17.3 (71%)
8.6 (35%)
8.7 (36%)
0.1 (0%)
8.LOW
20.2
1.6 (8%)
2.5 (12%)
16.1 (80%)
10.1 (50%)
6.0 (30%)
0 (0%)
9.HIGH
35.9
1.6 (5%)
3.4 (9%)
30.9 (86%)
7.4 (21%)
7.2 (20%)
16.3 (45%)
In ﬁgure 30 it is possible to see the aquifer recharge of scenario 3 over some weeks, alternating
rainy and dry periods. It can be seen how the not irrigated ﬁelds, having larger surfaces and
lower waters needs, make up for the majority of the percolating water. Notable is the fact
that in order to percolate to the aquifer, a large quantity of water needs to reach the soil in
a relatively short amount of time. Therefore the aquifer recharge alternates few days of high
percolation to many days of no percolation at all, since small precipitations are fully captured
by the vegetation or the upper soil.
Page 45 of 57
==PAGE:49==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Figure 30: Groundwater commodity ﬂows over few weeks in scenario 3.
Last main commodity is electricity. In order to pump large quantities of water over long periods
of dry weather, a reliable and constant generation is needed. In every simulation (excluding
scenarios 1 and 2 where it is not available) biogas is always selected as the cheapest solution.
Even if the initial investment is much higher than a diesel generator, the large availability of
biowaste and the high cost of diesel fuel compensate for the higher initial loan and its interests.
Table 18 reports the installation size of the main components for each scenario. A major out-
come of scenario 2POP is that the system keeps almost the same conﬁguration and just increase
the biogas production and consumption. This means that if in the future a community grows
considerably and the EWFS doesn’t meet the demand anymore, it can be easy to implement a
second biogas unit and not alter the rest of the system.
Table 18: Installed capacities of main components of the EFWS.
Scenario
Diesel Gen
Capacity
PV
Capacity
Digester
Capacity
Biogas Gen
Capacity
Water Pump
Capacity
1.DSL
5 kW
0 kW
0 m3/h
0 kW
5 m3/s
2.DSL+PV
5 kW
18.75 kW
0 m3/h
0 kW
10 m3/s
3.BIO
0 kW
0 kW
2.8 m3/h
5 kW
5 m3/s
4.BIO+PV
0 kW
5 kW
2.4 m3/h
5 kW
5 m3/s
5.FEP
0 kW
0 kW
4 m3/h
10 kW
10 m3/s
6.NO IRR
0 kW
0 kW
1.6 m3/h
5 kW
5 m3/s
7.2POP
0 kW
0 kW
4 m3/h
10 kW
5 m3/s
8.LOW
0 kW
0 kW
2.6 m3/h
5 kW
5 m3/s
9.HIGH
0 kW
0 kW
3.6 m3/h
5 kW
5 m3/s
Page 46 of 57
==PAGE:50==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
For what concerns PV, the extremely high cost of batteries makes it a non reliable source of
electricity, and due to the very high WACC of 15% the high investment of both is not eco-
nomically appealing. Therefore when coupled with the cheaper biogas techonologies (scenario
4), the model keeps the PV installations to the minimum value of 5kW. The forced 5 kW
of installed PV in scenario 4, despite not being the cheapest solution, contribute anyway for
21% of the yearly ﬁnal consumption. This proves how favourable the conditions are for this
technology, especially considering the decreasing trend in module prices. But when coupled
with the diesel engine only (scenario 2), the model decides to invest in 18.75 kW of installed
capacity to avoid the diesel fuel expenses. This large sizing of PV makes it proﬁtable to in-
stall a second water pump and to use the water tanks intensively, in order to rely as much as
possible on solar power. In fact the percentage of load covered by solar power grows to 71%,
thanks to PV entirely supplying the water pumping. Figure 31 shows the peaks of produc-
tion being matched by the water pumps demand in order to store water for irrigation. Diesel
fueled generation is used only in the evening and at night to cover the village electricity demand.
Figure 31: Electricity commodity ﬂows over six days in scenario 2.
As the water pump makes up for the most consumption in all the scenarios (with exception of
the No Irrigation one, where it accounts only for 18%), those with the most intensive irrigation
have also the highest generation. Scenarios FEP and High Rain have an electricity generation
which is +44% compared to the reference scenario 4. Exception is the scenario 2POP, where
despite a similar generation, land use and irrigation with the FEP scenario, the water pump
only accounts for 38.8% of the ﬁnal consumption. Again, the No Irrigation scenario shows
the basic needs of the community, decreasing the electricity consumption by -46% with respect
to scenario 4. In table 19 the generation and consumption for each scenario in MWh is reported.
Page 47 of 57
==PAGE:51==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Table 19: Electricity production and consumption in MWh for each scenario.
Scenario
Total
Diesel
PV
Biogas
Village Dem
Water Pump
1.DSL
34.0
34.0 (100%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
15.1 (44%)
18.9 (56%)
2.DSL+PV
34.0
9.9 (29%)
24.1 (71%)
0 (0%)
15.1 (44%)
18.9 (56%)
3.BIO
34.1
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
34.1 (100%)
15.1 (44%)
19.0 (56%)
4.BIO+PV
34.1
0 (0%)
7.06 (21%)
27.0 (79%)
15.1 (44%)
19.0 (56%)
5.FEP
49.4
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
49.4 (100%)
15.1 (31%)
34.3 (69%)
6.NO IRR
18.4
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
18.4 (100%)
15.1 (72%)
3.3 (18%)
7.2POP
49.2
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
49.2 (100%)
30.1 (61%)
19.1 (39%)
8.LOW
30.9
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
30.9 (100%)
15.1 (49%)
15.8 (51%)
9. HIGH
43.2
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
43.2 (100%)
15.1 (35%)
28.1 (65%)
For the circularity of an EFWS, its energy security and its economical convenience, biogas plays
a crucial role. Having a reliable and stable production of it is fundamental for the whole system
to sustain itself. In table 20 each scenario biogas production is reported. This is directly pro-
portional to the water pump load, as the village demand does not change a part form scenario
2POP, which has the highest production together with the FEP and the High Rain scenarios.
Interesting result is that both biowaste are not even close to the potential limit. Maize ﬁelds in
fact ensure a maize straw availability that ranges from twice the consumption in FEP to almost
ten times in the No Irrigatoin scenario. As regards the cow manure, the amount that can be
realistically collected was calculated. According to [89], a grazing cow can produce around 26
kg of manure. Assuming that a cow in Ghana can produce about half of this amount, and
assuming only 5 kg a day of it can be collected since most of the day the cows are left to
roam, the yearly availability of manure is around 55 tons. The 30 cows are therefore basically
suﬃcient to provide enough manure even for the FEP and 2POP scenarios, where the demand
is equal to 56.5 tons yearly, about 6.4 kg per hour.
Table 20: Biogas production and biowaste used for each scenario.
Scenario
Biogas
[m3]
Cow Manure
[ton]
Maize Straw
[ton]
Straw Production
[ton]
3.BIO
11006
39.6
16.5
102.8
4.BIO+PV
10999
33.9
14.2
100.4
5.FEP
15932
56.5
24.6
42.0
6.NO IRR
5936
21.1
9.2
85.7
7.2POP
15881
56.5
23.6
110.2
8.LOW
9980
36.7
14.7
96.4
9.HIGH
13946
50.9
21.3
125.4
Page 48 of 57
==PAGE:52==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Being biogas digestion a fundamental process in this EFWS, also its secondary product diges-
tate has a relevant impact on the system. Having a residue of approximately 70% depending
on the substrate composition, in the reference scenario 36.9 tons of equivalent fertilizer were
produced, for an economic value of over 11000$. This reduces considerably the liquidity needed
for investing in fertilizer at the beginning of the farming season. In fact, the amount of fertilizer
used in each scenario according to the land use was calculated. In reference scenario the fertilizer
demand of all crops adds up for 8.7 tons, while in the FEP scenario presents the highest usage of
12.4 tons. This means that basically no fertilizer has to be bought by making a loan, and there-
fore liquidity can be redirected to other costs. Moreover, this organic fertilizer could be sold
to neighbouring communities to a lower price than the market one, beneﬁting the whole district.
One of the main simpliﬁcations done was removing the unit commitment model from the
generator units. These units cannot work below a certain threshold, usually ranging from 20%
to 40% if the nominal load, and that is the reason why the unit commitment is important in
their representation. In graph 32 a boxplot representing the hourly load over the year of each
scenario’s generators is depicted. For scenarios FEP and 2POP, those with two generators, it
is realistic to say that by regulating the load of one generator, the other can be kept above
the minimum without turning it oﬀ. For scenarios DSL, BIO, LOWRAIN and HIGHRAIN the
amount of hours over the year where the generator operates below 1.5 MW (30%) is almost
negligible, and just slightly higher for scenario BIOPV. The only scenarios which would have
real problems operating the generators are DSLPV and NOIRR. First, both these scenarios are
unrealistic to be implemented, the ﬁrst due to its lower economical proﬁtability and the second
because irrigation is a fundamental element of an EFWS. Second, this problem could be solved
by simply substituting the 5 MW generator with one or two smaller ones, to be operated at
need.
Figure 32: Box plot of load of generators over the entire year for each scenario.
Page 49 of 57
==PAGE:53==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
5.2
Economical analysis
After analyzing the optimal conﬁgurations of the system and having assessed its technical as-
pects and commodity ﬂows, an economical analysis is fundamental to assess the feasibility of
the project.
The main obstacle to the deployment of such system is the upfront investment. In fact the
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) in Ghana for such projects is around 15%, which
require a project to be extremely proﬁtable to repay the interests. Figure 33 depict the invest-
ments and costs to be faced the ﬁrst year, and therefore the initial capital needed. These costs
are also reported in Table 21. In the data "BIO INV" are included the investments not only
of the Biogas Digester, but also of the Biogas Generator, Biogas Tank and the Maize Straw
Silo, as in the "PUMP INV" the costs of the Water Tanks. Excluding agriculture variable costs,
which are in the range 22-27 thousand dollars for all scenarios (excluding the NoIrr scenario,
where they are logically lower), there are some interesting takeaways to be analyzed.
Figure 33: First year costs for each scenario, in $.
Scenario DSL has an extremely limited investment cost compared to the others, 6750$ against
20’000-35’000 $, making it an appealing investment at ﬁrst glance. As expected though, the
variable costs related to fuel purchase make the ﬁrst year costs rise to levels comparable to
the other scenarios. In scenario 2 this variable cost is greatly reduced by the PV installation
that now represents the biggest share of the investment. Water Pump investment is a relevant
component in every scenario, especially in DSL+PV and FEP where the installed pumps are 2.
Interesting is to notice that the modularity of Biogas technologies allows the system to avoid
Page 50 of 57
==PAGE:54==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
oversizing as it can be seen in scenario 3-9, where its costs results adjusted case by case. Being
the unique source of power, it naturally consists of the major investment to be made. Last, it
should be mentioned that even if the ﬁrst year cost is to be found in the range 45-60 thousand
$ in most scenarios, the increase of the population in scenario POP2 did not aﬀect to much the
investment. In fact, if the indicator investmentpercapita is calculated, POP2 presents the low-
est cost together with NoIrr scenario. This means that for bigger communities it might be easier
to fund the project, as more individuals can beneﬁt from a similar investment in absolute terms.
Table 21: First year upfront costs divided by investment, ﬁxed and variable costs in $.
Scenario
DSL
DSL+PV
BIO
BIO+PV
FEP
NO IRR
2POP
LOW
HIGH
Investment
6750
34500
20900
25100
33700
15000
28300
20000
25000
Fix Costs
450
1225
1430
1350
2220
970
1820
1320
1670
Var Costs
15151
6093
3168
3047
5451
828
3511
2711
4546
Agr Costs
24962
24962
24307
24400
27388
17223
23742
22760
26595
Looking closer at the power generation sector, LCOE is the main indicator used to analyze the
proﬁtability of an energy production project. To compute it, only the costs related to energy
technologies are considered, leaving out water pump and agriculture expenses. Graph 34 shows
the LCOE against the annual generating costs for each scenario, divided in annualized invest-
ment, ﬁxed and variable costs. The ﬁrst clear outtake is the high impact that the use of diesel
has on the LCOE. In fact scenario DSL, despite the almost negligible annualized investment,
presents an LCOE equal to 38.42$cent/kWh, which is three times the scenarios based on biogas.
Halfway between these two level is found scenario DSL+PV, which mitigate the diesel usage
and lowers the LCOE to 23.10$cent/kWh.
Among the scenarios 3-9 the diﬀerences are less consistent, but still present. Between scenario
BIO and BIO+PV, the higher investment of the PV panels increases the LCOE by 11% or 1.3
cents/kWh. This might not seem much but accounting for 34.1 MWh a year it equals more
than 440 $. From a broader comparison among all the scenario, it appears that economy of
scale, so a larger system size, facilitates a lower LCOE. Scenarios FEP, 2POP and HighRain
all present a cost per kWh lower than 12 cents, while the NoIrr scenario’s LCOE is almost 13
cents/kWh.
Page 51 of 57
==PAGE:55==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Figure 34: Energy sector annual costs divided in annualized investment, ﬁxed and variable costs
against LCOE per scenario.
After the issue of the ﬁrst year investment and the evaluation of the LCOE, the overall eco-
nomical performance of the system can be analyzed. Graph 35 shows the annualized expenses
cash ﬂows on the right against the revenue (in yellow) on the left. Naturally, since the gross
revenue is calculated as the overall value of all the crops yield, the food self-consumption of
the community was included as a cost. This self consumption was calculated starting from the
fact that an individual needs about 2400 calories a day. These calories have been distributed
among the 4 crops and converted into a food amount using the calories content from [90]. Mul-
tiplying this value for 90 inhabitants and 365 days, the self consumption has a market value of
56 thousand dollars a year.
Starting with the NoIrr scenario, which represents the ideal case of the status quo, it can be
seen that the system is already proﬁtable. In fact, facing a yearly cost of 22.7 thousand dollars
and considering the self consumption, the EFWS is still able to achieve a net proﬁt of 34.9
thousand dollars. The ﬁrst four scenarios represent the impact of irrigation in a basic concept
perspective. The achieved revenue thanks to irrigation grows from 112 to 271 thousand dollars,
for a net increase of 52%. Costs only increase by few thousand dollars, mostly depending on the
diesel usage, and therefore the net proﬁts range from 70 to 81 thousand dollars (+130%). The
extreme eﬀect of commercial agriculture are visible in the extremely high revenue generated by
the FEP scenario. The increased costs are almost negligible compared to the enormous rev-
enues generated. Over 280 thousand dollars represent two times and half the revenues without
irrigation systems, and the proﬁts of 182 thousand dollars are over ﬁve times higher than the
same scenario.
Page 52 of 57
==PAGE:56==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Figure 35: Yearly monetary cash ﬂows, positive on the left (yellow), expenses on the right.
Last, the three scenarios simulating diﬀerent external conditions are inspected. Scenario 2POP
highlights how much the self consumption covers a big share of the production. In fact a popu-
lation of 180 individuals, starting from a total revenue similar to scenarios 1-4, reduces the net
proﬁt from 70-80 to only 22 thousand dollars. It has to be stressed again that Kurubang Yily
community manages a quite vast land for such few inhabitants. For most rural communities a
much smaller increase in the population might turn the project economically infeasible. Sce-
narios 8 and 9 put weight on the precipitation factor. With about 20% less rainfall the model
slightly downsized but reduced the revenue as well by 7 thousand dollars (-4%) and the proﬁts
by 4 thousand dollars (-5%). With 30% more rain on the other side, costs grew very close to
the FEP scenario and revenue reached 186 thousand dollars (+9%) and proﬁts 90 thousand
dollars (+11%). Overall it can be said that the EFWS proves to be resilient to rainfall pattern
changes, as even relevant alterations result in relatively small proﬁt changes. All the results
can be seen in Table 22.
Table 22: Yearly cash ﬂows in thousand dollars.
Scenario
DSL
DSL+PV
BIO
BIO+PV
FEP
NOIRR
2POP
LOW
HIGH
Ann. Inv
3.0
7.3
4.9
7.6
10.7
3.7
8.5
6.2
9.7
Fix. Costs
0.7
1.5
1.6
1.6
2.6
1.0
2.0
1.4
2.1
Var. Costs
40.1
31.1
27.5
27.4
32.8
18.0
27.2
25.5
31.1
Self Cons.
56.4
56.4
56.4
56.4
56.4
56.4
112.9
56.4
56.4
Revenue
171.2
171.5
171.5
171.4
282.4
112.7
170.4
164.2
186.8
Net Proﬁt
70.9
75.2
81.0
80.3
182.5
34.9
22.4
76.6
90.2
Page 53 of 57
==PAGE:57==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Avoided Emissions
From an environmental point of view, the calculation of avoided emissions is a simple but
signiﬁcant indicator of a project. Since biofuels are generally considered carbon neutral, on a
global scale scenarios 3 to 9 would all have zero emissions. In any case, emissions from biogas
were calculated as well in order to give a more truthful perspective of the emissions needed to
supply the community. A standard square meter of biogas on average emits 1.20 kg of CO2 [91].
The combustion of one liter of diesel produces on average 2.64 kg of CO2 [92]. Multiplied for
10956 litres used in scenario DSL, it results in about 29 tons of carbon dioxide. Better situation
in scenario 2, where the intensive use of solar energy reduces emissions down to only 8.4 tons of
CO2. As regard the biogas scenarios, the "true" emissions are around 13 tons in the reference
cases, -54% with respect to scenario DSL. Around 7 tons are emitted in the NoIrr scenario
(-75%) and up to 19 tons in the intensive agriculture scenario FEP (-34%). This demonstrates
that even for a such small community is important the implementation of renewables, as they
have a relevant environmental impact.
Table 23: CO2 Emissions in tons for each scenario.
Scenario
DSL
DSLPV
BIO
BIOPV
FEP
NOIRR
2POP
LOW
HIGH
CO2 Emissions [ton]
29.0
8.4
13.3
13.2
19.2
7.1
19.1
12.0
16.8
About 29 tons of CO2 might not seem so much on a global scale, but is a lot compared to
other generation technologies and compared to much larger communities. If distributed over
the generation, it translates into 851 g of CO2 per kWh. For a comparison with developed
countries, France emits on average 40-70 g/kWh, Germany 250-350 g/kWh, Poland (whose en-
ergy production largely relies on coal) 600-700 g/kWh [93]. It is clear that this result is not a
goal to aim to in large scale perspective and neither in a long term perspective.
Page 54 of 57
==PAGE:58==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
5 Results
Computational Time
OSDRIA main goal is to deliver multiple simulations of diﬀerent conﬁgurations and scenarios in
a pre-feasiblity of an EFWS project. As the main users of OSDRIA will be NGOs and African
Universities, simulations can mostly rely on regular laptops without high computetional po-
tential. Therefore through the entire modelling process of this thesis particular attention was
given to represent with a decent accuracy but without introducing too many integer and binary
variables. Simulating the same case with diﬀerent process representations allowed to simplify
some of them and keeping a model that behaves the same. Generators and aquifer were in-
vestigated in order to reduce computation without compromising the model. Looking at table
24 the computational time needed for the simulation on the personal laptop of the author are
reported. It can be seen that diesel scenarios require much less time than the ones were all
generation components are left free to be sized. In fact the operation of such generation tech-
nology requires much less processes and components than the biogas production and usage.
Also scenario NoIrr, having less land uses and lower water demand, required sensibly less time
than the irrigated scenarios. Overall, it can be said that this timespan required for a single
simulation is acceptable for the intended users, as with a couple laptops several scenarios can
be run and analyzed within a couple days.
Table 24: Computational time in hours for simulation.
Scenario
DSL
DSL+PV
BIO
BIO+PV
FEP
NOIRR
2POP
LOW
HIGH
Time [h]
0.6
0.4
3.3
2.2
2.1
1.4
2.9
2.7
2.2
Page 55 of 57
==PAGE:59==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
7 Conclusions
6
Conclusions
This work focused on improving the OSDRIA model and developing a real case study analysis
for the deployment of an EWF system in a rural community. First, the criticalities of sub-
Saharian Africa development and its precarious conditions in terms of food and water secutirty
were addressed. After that, the potential advantages of an Energy-Water-Food concept applied
to the deployment of a mini-grid were analyzed as motivation for this study.
OSDRIA optimizes Energy-Food-Water systems for rural communities in sub-Saharan Africa,
but was lacking a proper representation of the agriculture sector. This thesis developed this
sector and brought adjustments to several other processes in order to establish more linkages
between sectors, such as biowaste production for the digester or the digestate output for fer-
tilization of ﬁelds. Last, a realistic and detailed case study for the ghanaian community of
Kurubang Yily, with data retrieved personally on site, was developed and the results analyzed.
The major outcome is that with a proper irrigation and ﬁnancial liquidity to buy fertilizers and
pesticides, the agriculture potential abundantly overshoots the community needs, producing 3
to 4 times the village food demand. This surplus, by being sold on the market, could theo-
retically repay the investment cost within a couple years. Certainly negative casualties should
be considered when estimating the payback time, such as lower harvests due to pests and bad
weather, or a price drop in the market. Despite these uncertainty factors, the proﬁtability of
such system is undeniable and the investment should not discourage the investor.
Thanks to the availability of cow manure and maize straw, biogas production by anaerobic
digestion is found to be extremely proﬁtable and ensuring energy security and independency
from an external fuel input. The LCOE obtained in the optimized mini-grid ﬂuctuates around
the 12 dollar cent per kWh, increasing a little when PV is forced into the system and decreasing
for larger systems with a more distributed load. Diesel generation, despite being appealing at
ﬁrst due to a low investment, presents extremely high variable costs due to fuel price and there-
fore produces electricity at the price of 38 dollar cent7kWh, over three times the biogas solution.
Water was found to be the key commodity together with the biomass infeed for the anaerobic
digester. For a sustainable water pumping, only the same amount that percolates over the year
can be extracted. The scenarios simulating diﬀerent rainfall patterns tested the model ﬂexibil-
ity on this aspect. Since, according to local inhabitants, rainfall patterns are highly variable in
the last years, a user should evaluated the system using a conservative rainfall timeseries and
accept a small opportunity loss to avoid an oversized system and overexploit the aquifer. In
fact, an excessive water usage during dry season could potentially lead to the emptying of the
underground reservoir with dramatic consequences for the crops and the community itself.
Page 56 of 57
==PAGE:60==
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems
7 Conclusions
It should be mentioned that the circularity of the system not only ensured a secure food, water
and electricity access to the community, but also proved to be economically convenient. Also
environmentally, the implementation of biogas in the system highly reduces the emissions and
takes them to zero in a policy perspective. In this study, food processing machines were not
implemented according to the skeptisism of the interviewed communities. In fact, despite being
an initial goal of the study, the inhabitants of several communities said that a milling machine
for commercial use would have very little success as almost every community has a mill nearby
and the fees are little. Sure, with the revenues from the ﬁrst years the pilot purchase could be
made in following years without increasing the already high initial investment.
For further development of the OSDRIA tool, some recommendations can be made:
• Fixing the user interface and debugging some errors that occur when handling ﬁles. Delet-
ing icons on the interface can cause the software to crash, and saving a ﬁle with some
errors in the modelling of processes could create problems when opening the ﬁle again.
• Food processing technologies could be modelled for projects in larger communities, which
may use better such processes. Machines such as maize milling and dryers are easy to
model with few inputs and outputs, which basically leaves to be retrieved technical and
economical data of such plants.
Last, for a more global analysis of the impact of an EWFS, other aspects could be addressed.
First, from an environmental point of view, the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of the diﬀerent
components would improve the knowledge about the actual impact of diﬀerent conﬁgurations.
LCA in fact analyses the emissions a costs of each component from the production stage to its
decommissioning and recycling. PV panels in particular could loose some attractiveness, while
diesel might gain some. Second, a proper analysis of the social impact such system would have
on the community should be investigated: the creation of jobs in the operation and maintenance
of the system, the possibility to hire workers from nearby communities during dry season, the
available time women would gain for not having to collect water far away, the possibility to
teach and study also in the evening hours, the possible tensions with neighboring communities.
Page 57 of 57
==PAGE:61==
References
[1] THE WORLD BANK State of Electricity Access Report, International Bank for Recon-
struction and Development, (2017)
[2] IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency Renewable Energy Beneﬁts, Decentralised
Solutions in the AgriFoodChain, IRENA, (2016)
[3] United Nation Sustainable Energy for All, Global Tracking Framework 2015, UN, (2017)
[4] International Fund for Agricultural Development Rural Poverty Report, IFAD, (2011)
[5] P. Alstone, D. Gershenson, D. Kammen Decentralized Energy Systems for Clean Electricity
Access, Nature Climate Change, (2015)
[6] OECD and FAO OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2016-2025, FAO-OECD, (2016)
[7] Fridgehub A tank of cold: cleantech leapfrog to a more food secure world, Institution of
mechanical engineers, (2014)
[8] D.L. Keairns, R.C. Darton, A Irabien The Energy-Water-Food Nexus, Annual Review of
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, (2016)
[9] J. Liu, G. Mao, A. Hoekstra, H. Wang, J.Wang, C. Zheng, M. van Vliet, M. Wu, B. Rud-
del, J. Yan Managing the Energy-Water-Food Nexus for Sustainable Development, Elsevier,
(2018)
[10] S. Oberleitner Optimization Software for Decentralized Energy-Water-Food Systems in De-
veloping Countries, MA Thesis, Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems, Tech-
nical University of Munich, (2019)
[11] S. Bazan Least-Cost Modeling of Decentralized Energy-Water-Food Systems in Developing
Countries: Case Study Rural Ghana, MA Thesis, Chair of Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Systems, Technical University of Munich, (2018)
[12] F. Schroll Modeling Small-Scale Agri-Business in the Energy-Water-Food Nexus in Sub-
Saharan Africa, MA Thesis, Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems, Technical
University of Munich, (2019)
[13] C. Corral Linear Modeling of Water Potential and Supply for Decentralized Energy-Water-
Food Systems in Rural Sub-Sahara Africa, MA Thesis, Chair of Hydrology and River Basin
Management, Technical University of Munich, (2019)
[14] United Nations Development Program https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home.html
==PAGE:62==
[15] United Nations Development Program Human Development Report 2019, Beyond income,
beyond averages, beyond today: Inequalities in human development in the 21st century,
UNDP, (2019)
[16] M. Roser, E. Ospina, H. Ritchie https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy, Our World in
Data, (Revised 2019)
[17] United Nations Development Program http://hdr.undp.org/en/2018-MPI, UNDP, (2018)
[18] The World Bank https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?locations=ZG,
The World Bank Group, (Revised 2018)
[19] International Energy Agency International Energy Agency World Energy Outlook 2016,
IEA, (2016)
[20] Thiam D.R. An energy pricing scheme for the diﬀusion of decentralized renewable technol-
ogy investment in developing countries, Energy Policy, (2011)
[21] Cook P. Infrastructure, rural electriﬁcation and development, Energy Sustain Dev, (2011)
[22] A.Raeeni, S. Hosseini, R. Moghaddasi How energy consumption is related to agricultural
growth and export: An econometric analysis on Iranian data, Elsevier, (2019)
[23] J. Holmes The Smart Villages Initiative: Findings 2014-2017, Trinity College Cambridge,
(2017)
[24] Johannes Winklmaier Tu eMpower Africa e.V. - Introduction, TU eMpower Africa, (2019)
[25] European Union Energy Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility (EUEI PDF) Mini-grid
Policy Toolkit - Policy and Business Framework for Successful Mini-grid Roll-outs, M.
Franz, N. Peterschmidt, M. Rohrer, B. Kondev (2014)
[26] Kaundinya D.P. , Balachandra P., Ravindranath N.H. Grid-connected versus stand-alone
energy systems for decentralized power—a review of literature, Renew Sustain Energy Rev,
(2009)
[27] Palit D, Chaurey A. Oﬀ-grid rural electriﬁcation experiences from South Asia: status and
best practices, Renew Sustain Energy Rev, (2011)
[28] Narula K.,Nagai Y., Pachauri S. The role of Decentralized Distributed Gen- eration in
achieving universal rural electriﬁcation in South Asia by 2030, Energy Policy, (2012)
[29] Chaurey A., Ranganathan M., Mohanty P. Electricity access for geographically disadvan-
taged rural communities — technology and policy insights, Energy Policy, (2004)
[30] A. Picardi, W. Seifert Tragedy of the commons in the Sahel, Technol Rev, (1976)
==PAGE:63==
[31] S. Szabò, K. Bòdis, T. Huld, M. Moner-Girona Sustainable energy planning: Leapfrogging
the energy poverty gap in Africa, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, (2013)
[32] J. Murphy Making the energy transition in rural East Africa: Is leapfrogging an alternative,
Technological Forecasting Social Change, (2001)
[33] J. Goldemberg Technological leapfrogging the global energy crysis: how can changing the
role of science in developing countries help with an oncoming climate catastrophe?, Physical
Sciences, (2018)
[34] R.K. Maskey, V. Bhandari, B. Adhikary, R. Dahal, N. Shrestha Prospects for Small Hydro
Power Plants Based Mini-Grid Power Systems in Nepal, (2012)
[35] A. Picardi, W. Seifert Sustainability of micro hydro projects in Lalitpur district, Nepal,
journal of Advanced College of Engineering and Management, (2016)
[36] H. Polinder, J. Ferreira, B. Jensen, A. Abrahamsen, K. Atallah, R. McMahon Trends in
Wind Turbine Generator Systems, IEE journal of emergin and selected topics in power
electronics, (2013)
[37] The Global Wind Atlas https://globalwindatlas.info/
[38] K. Sunderland, M. Narayana, G. Putrus, M. COnlon, S. McDonald The cost of energy
associated with micro wind generation: International case studies of rural and urban instal-
lations, Elsevier, (2016)
[39] Barbieri J., Simonet E. Technologies for Power Generation in Rural Contexts, In: Colombo
E., Bologna S., Masera D. (eds) Renewable Energy for Unleashing Sustainable Development.
Springer, (2013)
[40] S. Sharma, K. Pradeepkumar, N. Dhinesh, Y. Anbarasu, S. Vignesh, V. Kirubakaran De-
velopment of micro wind turbine for rural livelihood improvement, International conference
on advances in electrical technology for green energy, (2017)
[41] The Global Solar Atlas https://globalsolaratlas.info/map
[42] PV Magazine Module Price Index, https://www.pv-magazine.com/features/investors/module-
price-index/, (Updated 2019)
[43] Y.S. Mohammed, R. Sharma An overview of agricultural biomass for decentralized rural
energy in Ghana, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 20 15-22, (2013)
[44] S. Goel, A.S. Mokhtar, N. Bashir, R. Saidur Optimal sizing of a biomass–biogas hybrid
system for sustainable power supply to a commercial agricultural farm in northern Odisha,
India, Springher Nature, (2018)
==PAGE:64==
[45] Corruption Perceptions Index CPI2019, https://www.transparency.org/cpi2019, (2019)
[46] J.G. Castellanos, M. Walker, D. Poggio, M. Pourkashanian, W. Nimmo Modelling an oﬀ-
grid integrated renewable energy system for rural electriﬁcation in India using photovoltaics
and anaerobic digestion, Renewable Energy 74 390-398, (2015)
[47] E.M. Nfah, J.M. Ngundam, M. Vandenbergh, J. Schmid Simulation of oﬀ-grid generation
options for remote vollages in Cameroon, Renewable Energy 33 1064-1072, (2008)
[48] HOMER
ENERGY
Hybrid
Optimization
Model
for
Electric
Renewables,
https://www.homerenergy.com/
[49] S. Mandelli, J. Barbieri, R. Mereu, E. Colombo Oﬀ-grid systems for rural electriﬁcation in
developing countries: Deﬁnitions, classiﬁcation and a complete literature review, Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 58 1621-1646, (2016)
[50] urbs:
a
linear
optimization
model
for
distributed
energy
systems
Chair
of
Renewable
and
Sustainable
Energy
Systems,
Technical
University
of
Munich,
https://urbs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
[51] Feasibility studies of energy projects course 42004 Lecture Note 5: Socio-economic analysis:
impact assessment, and diﬀerences to private (business) economic evaluation, Denmark
Technical University, (2018)
[52] Feasibility studies of energy projects course 42004 Lecture Note 4: Levelised cost of energy,
Denmark Technical University, (2018)
[53] J. Alfaro, S. Miller Satisfying the rural residential demand in Libera with decentralized
renewable energy schemes, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 30 903-911, (2014)
[54] B. Mainali, R. Dhital Isolated and Mini-Grid Solar PV Systems: An Alternative Solution
for Providing Electricity Access in Remote Areas (Case Study from Nepal), Solar Energy
Storage, Elsevier, (2015)
[55] S. You, H. Tong, J. Armin-Hoiland, Y. Tong, C. Wang Techno-economic and greenhouse
gas savings assessment of decentralized biomass gasifgication for electrifying the rural areas
of Indonesia, Applied Energy 208 495-510, (2017)
[56] S. Goel, R. Sharma Optimal sizing of a biomass-biogas hybrid system for sustainable power
supply to a commercial agricultural farm in northern Odisha, India, Environ Dev Sustain,
(2019)
[57] S. Oyedepo, T. Uwoghiren, P. Babalola, S. Nwanya, O. Kilanko, R. Leramo, A. Aworinde,
T. Adekeye, J. Oyebanji, O. Abidakun Assessment of Decentralized Electricity Production
==PAGE:65==
from Hybrid Renewable Energy Sources for Sustainable Energy Development in Nigeria,
Open Eng 72-89, (2019)
[58] A. Okunlola, O. Evbuomwan, H. Zaheer, J. Winklmaier Assessment of Decentralized Hybrid
Mini-grids in Sub-Saharan Africa: Market Analysis, Least-Cost Modelling, and Job Creation
Analysis, Springer Proceedings in Energy, (2018)
[59] International Renewable Energy Agency Global Renewable Energy Cost Analysis Program,
IRENA, (2013)
[60] Renewables Ninja https://www.renewables.ninja/
[61] GIZ Guide to Biogas, from prodcution to use, Technology Cooperation in the Energy Sector
Project, (2012)
[62] S. Oberleitner Methodical extension of the Energy-Water-Food model with focus on the
biogas system, TUM Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems, (2018)
[63] HOMER
How
HOMER
Creates
the
Generator
Eﬃciency
Curve,
https://www.homerenergy.com/products/pro/docs/3.11/
how_homer_creates_the_generator_eﬃciency_curve.html
[64] ABLE Sales, Diesel Generators
Other Machinery at Warehouse Direct Prices Diesel
Generator Fuel Consumption Chart in Litres, https://www.ablesales.com.au/blog/diesel-
generator-fuel-consumption-chart-in-litres.html
[65] Engineering
Toolbox
Fuels
-
Higher
and
lower
caloriﬁc
values,
https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/fuels-higher-caloriﬁc-values-d169.html
[66] T. Al Seadi, D. Rutz, H. Prassl, M. Kottner, T. Finsterwalder, S. Volk, Rainer Janssen
Biogas Handbook, University of Southern Denmark Esbjerg, (2008)
[67] N. Scharfenberg Anaerobic co-digestion in rural Africa - Case Study St. Rupert, TUM
Chair of Renewable and Sustainable Energy Systems, (2018)
[68] TX. Wang, G. Yang, Y. Feng, G. Ren, X. Han Optimizing feeding composition and carbon-
nitrogen ratios for improved methane yield during anaerobic co-digestion of dairy, chicken
manure and wheat straw, Bioresource Technology 120 78-83, (2012)
[69] Grundfos Grundfos solar surface pump, renewable energy-based supply systems, Grundfos
A/S Denmark
[70] United Nations Development Program SOLAR-POWERED PUMPING IN LEBANON,
A Comprehensive Guide on Solar Water Pumping Solutions, UNDP, (2015)
==PAGE:66==
[71] USGS
Regional
and
Global
Climate
RegCM3
and
BATS
Description,
http://regclim.coas.oregonstate.edu/dynamical-downscaling/model-description/index.html
[72] R. Allen, L. Pereira, D. Raes, M. Smith Crop evapotranspiration - Guidelines for com-
puting crop water requirements - FAO Irrigation and drainage papaer 56, FAO Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, (1998)
[73] CROPWAT http://www.fao.org/land-water/databases-and-software/cropwat/en/,
FAO,
(1998)
[74] CLIMWAT
http://www.fao.org/land-water/databases-and-software/climwat-for-
cropwat/en/, FAO, (1998)
[75] International Energy Agency World Energy Outlook 2017, IEA, (2017)
[76] Technical
University
of
Munich
Interdisciplinary
Project
Internship
Con-
cept
Development
of
a
Renewable
Energy
System
in
a
Developing
Country,
http://www.mspe.ei.tum.de/index.php?id=177
[77] E. N. Kumi The Electricity Situation in Ghana: Challenges and Opportunities, University
of Energy and Natural Resources, (2017)
[78] N. Sackeyﬁo Energy Politics and Rural Development in Sub Saharan Africa, Energy Politics
and Rural Development in Sub-saharan Africa: the Case of Ghana — 2017, pp. 1-193, (2018)
[79] Energy Commission of Ghana Historic electricity generation mix form 2006 to 1026, En-
ergy Commission of Ghana, (2017)
[80] Google Maps https://www.google.it/maps, Google, (2020)
[81] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs Human right to water, UN-
DESA, (2014)
[82] DaftLogic
List
of
the
Power
Consumption
of
Typical
Household
Appliances,
https://www.daftlogic.com/information-appliance-power-consumption.html, DaftLogic
[83] D. McQueen, P. Hyland, S. Watson Monte Carlo Simulation of Residential Electricity
Demand for Forecasting Maximum Demand on Distribution Networks, IEE Transactions on
Power Systems, (2004)
[84] Data Africa https://dataafrica.io/, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)
and Datawheel, (2017)
==PAGE:67==
[85] NATIONAL
FERTILIZER
SUBSIDY
PROGRAMME
FOR
2017
IN-
FORMATION
TO
STAKEHOLDERS
http://agricinghana.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/05/PFJ-Fertilizer-Subsidy-Programme−Information
−
for
−
StakeholdersAgricinghana.pdf, MinistryofFoodandAgriculture, (2017)
[86] Diesel prices around the world https://www.globalpetrolprices.com/dieselprices/, GlobalPetrolPrices, (M
[87] Diesel generator prices in Nigeria May 2020 https://nigerianprice.com/diesel-generator-
prices-in-nigeria/PricesofDieselGeneratorsinNigeria, NigerianPrice, (May2020)
[88] Ghana
Population
https://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/ghana-population/,
World Population Review, (May 2020)
[89] Animal Manure Management https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/null/?cid=nrcs1430142
[90] Your Calories https://your-calories.com/tomatoes, Visited June 2020, (2017)
[91] Emission Factors for Greenhouse Gas Inventories https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/ﬁles/2015-
07/documents/emission-factors2014.pdf, IPCC, (2014)
[92] Ecoscore https://ecoscore.be/en/info/ecoscore/co2, Visited June 2020, (2020)
[93] Electricity Map https://www.electricitymap.org/map, Visited 19 June 2020, (2020)
==PAGE:68==
7
Appendix
This Appendix has a double purpose. First is to present the OSDRIA detailed framework for
this thesis project; second is to serve as a guide for future users of the model.
7.1
User interface and tools
OSDRIA presents 3 diﬀerent modalities, namely Developer Mode, Designer Mode and User
Mode. In the ﬁrst one, the user is able to implement new commodities time series and tech-
nologies into the software. By clicking on the dropdown menu "Model" on the top left of the
software window, the user can take actions on the 3 features. Commodities are grouped by
type with similar characteristics, and can simply added by typing the name and clicking on the
plus icon 36.
Figure 36: Commodity window, the user can add and remove commodities.
The second action in this mode is the addition of time series. Name, unit and time resolution
have to be speciﬁed for each time series, and can be copy-pasted from external ﬁles. Available
time resolutions are monthly, weekly, daily and hourly. A line plot is displayed next to the
time series 37, helping visualize eventual outliers. When two diﬀerent time resolution are both
present in the same equation, the lower resolution value is applied to every time step of the
higher resolution.
==PAGE:69==
Figure 37: Time series window, the user can add and visualize a time series with hourly, daily,
weekly or monthly resolution.
Last, new processes can be implemented and modiﬁed. When implementing a new technology
the ﬁrst step is to name it and assign it to a sector and a category (Supply, Process, Storage,
Demand) in the upper part of the Process window 38. This is relevant for the process to appear
in the right sector in the designer mode.
After that each modelling aspect of the process
must be classiﬁed into ﬁve categories, namely variables, data, properties, inputs and outputs.
Optimization variables, which are the parameters that the model will optimize, can be deﬁned
in the "Variables" box. For each variable the Pyomo type, the unit and the time resolution
should be speciﬁed. In the "Data" box ﬁxed parameters that are unlikely to change or physical
constants. For the "Properties" box, the input data will be visible in the User Mode, making
them easy to be modiﬁed in between diﬀerent runs. Moreover, both ﬁxed numbers and time
series can be inserted here. Last, in the "Inputs" and "Outputs" boxes the commodities ﬂowing
in and out of the process need to be speciﬁed, for the model to be able to optimize them. Below
this, objective function and constraints are listed, describing the relation between the diﬀerent
variables, commodities and previously speciﬁed parameters.
==PAGE:70==
Figure 38: Process window, the user can model a process by writing deﬁning variables, data,
properties, inputs and outputs and then write the objective function and constraints.
After selecting one sector the designer icon can be clicked on the top left of the window. In the
Designer Mode, the user is able to select the technologies that will be part of the simulation
and connect them in the desired manner 39. Processes icon are dragged from the left menu into
the white section of the window. After selecting on the linkage icon on the top bar, processes
can be connected with the respective commodity ﬂows. Commodities can also be directed and
be received from other sectors, simply using a right click onto an empty area.
Figure 39: Designer Mode window. The processes are dragged from the menu on the left to
the blank space, then connected with the commodity ﬂows.
==PAGE:71==
Last, the User Mode is the one that allows to prepare, run and analyze the simulation 40. By
clicking on each process, the user is able to input the value of each process property and select
the desired time series. From the main view page, the simulation can then be started. The
run status can be followed on the Anaconda prompt. Once the simulation is over, results can
be checked. The value of variables is displayed with the properties when selecting the speciﬁc
process. When clicking on a commodity group (vertical lines) a pop-up window will show a
graph depicting commodity ﬂows hour after hour 41. Each commodity is split over the diﬀerent
processes, and outputs are seen as positive while consumption are negative.
Figure 40: User Mode window
Figure 41: Commodity ﬂow graph
==PAGE:72==
7.2
Modelling of processes
7.2.1
Energy sector
For the energy sector the technologies kept unchanged from the ﬁrst OSDRIA version are: PV,
Biogas Tank and Electricity Demand. The Generators were simpliﬁed with respect to the ﬁrst
OSDRIA version in order to reduce computational demand, while the Biogas Digester was up-
dated with the digestate production and output.
Photovoltaics
Photovoltaics is a very promising technology for decentralized grids in Africa, due to falling
components prices and high year-round solar irradiation. As many geographical tools such
PV Atlas [41] or renewablesNinja [60] provide hourly capacity factor time series for a unitary
installed capacity, the technology modelling is very straight forward. A single constraint deﬁnes
the available electricity output from the PV system as depicted in equation 17. The Amount
variable is the value of installed panels, which gets multiplied by the rated panel power and
by the hourly solar irradiation. The Shunt variable is an hourly variable which simulates the
inverter ability to curtail if necessary a share of the PV production. Last, costs and lifetime
can be also speciﬁed by the user.
Amount · RatedPower · Irradiationt
=
Electricityt + Shuntt
(17)
Table 25: PV parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Irradiation
-
Electricity
Shunt
Rated power
Investment cost
Fixed cost
Variable cost
Lifetime
Diesel Generator
The Diesel Generator (DG) is the most common generator for remote applications. As in [10]
and [11], a linear relation between fuel consumption and electricity output can be assumed.
Consumption to output data from a generator seller [64] can help depict ﬁgure 42, where a
linear regression ﬁts very well to the operational points for diﬀerent sizes of the engine. For
what concerns the DG eﬃciency at diﬀerent loads, the same approach used by HOMER is
applied [63]. Here the electrical eﬃciency is deﬁned as the electrical output divided by the
==PAGE:73==
chemical energy of the input fuel, as shown in equation 18, where LHVfuel is the lower heating
value of the fuel. With the consumption in litres for each electric output [64] and knowing
the LHV value for diesel is 36 [65], is it possible to calculate the diﬀerent eﬃciency depending
on the operational point and to ﬁt a curve to it, showing its non-linear behaviour (ﬁgure 43).
Since the implementation of a piecewise linear function to represent as accurately as possible
the process would introduce binary variables and therefore increase the computational time, it
was decided to assume an average eﬃciency for the entire load spectrum of 31%.
ηGen
=
3.6 · PGen[kW]
fuel[l/h] · LHVfuel[MJ/l]
(18)
Figure 42: Correlation lines Fuel Consumption
- Load for diﬀerent engine sizes.
Figure 43: Correlation curves Diesel Eﬃciency
- Load for diﬀerent engine sizes.
A unit commitment model was at ﬁrst implemented [10], constraining the n-1 active units to
operate at full load while keeping the last at partial load. This could also be argued to be
unrealistic as it could be convenient to operate multiple generators at almost full-load than
operating one with very low eﬃciency, or even worse, with multiple switch on and oﬀ. How-
ever, the necessity of 2 additional integer variables with hourly resolution is judged to heavily
increase the computational time without the necessity of having such an accurate simulation of
operations. Flexibility of demand in particular can beneﬁt the situation when a DG operates
close to its minimum capacity. The process is therefore simpliﬁed to two equations constraining
the electricity production Elt. Equation 19 relates the fuel consumption with the electricity
production through the parameters eﬃciency ηDiesel and energy density ρDiesel. Equation 20
on the other hand limits the production by the total installed generation capacity, namely the
amount of generators multiplied by the single unit capacity CapDiesel.
Elt
=
Diesel · ρDiesel · ηDiesel
(19)
Elt
≤
Amount · CapDiesel
(20)
==PAGE:74==
Table 26: Diesel Generator parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Eﬃciency
Diesel
Electricity
Diesel energy density
Rated power
Investment cost
Fixed cost
Variable cost
Lifetime
Battery
The Battery process is the electricity storage process, increasing the hybrid system ﬂexibility.
In the previous OSDRIA version, only the content was capped, but the power input and output
was not regulated or taken into account in the costs. Thus, besides the two equations that
constrain the energy content variable, other two regulating the input and output ﬂows are
added. The balance constraint 21 states that the energy content in the battery unit is equal
to the content of the previous hour, plus the energy input ElIn and minus the discharge ElOut,
both aﬀected by the charging and discharging eﬃciency ηBattery. Equation 22 restrains the total
amount stored into the battery to the total capacity, which is again equal to the number of
units multiplied by the capacity CapBattery of the single component.Equation 23 represents the
two equations regulating the ﬂow to and from the battery, according to the Rated Power of the
battery.
Contentt
=
Contentt−1 + ElIn,t · ηBattery −ElOut,t
ηBattery
(21)
Contentt
≤
Amount · CapBattery
(22)
Electricityin/out
≤
Amount · PowerBattery
(23)
Table 27: Battery parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Eﬃciency
Electricity
Electricity
Content
Power Investment Cost
Rated capacity
Rated Power
Lifetime
Capacity Investment cost
Fixed cost
Variable cost
==PAGE:75==
Biogas Generator
The Biogas Generator (BGG) process turns the gaseous products of the digester into electric-
ity by combustion. The process is modelled in the same exact way of the DG, considering that
operational expedients and demand ﬂexibility can avoid the need of additional integer variables.
The electricity output is constrained by the total available installed capacity (equation 25). As
fuel, the BGG burns the biogas mix with all its four components. Despite the fact that all
four gases are injected into the generator, only methane is relevant for electricity production,
therefore the energy density data is relative to this gas.
Elt
=
CH4 · ρCH4 · ηBiogas
(24)
Elt
≤
Amount · CapBiogas
(25)
Table 28: Biogas Generator parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Eﬃciency
CH4
Electricity
CH4 energy density
Rated power
CO2
Investment cost
NH3
Fixed cost
H2S
Variable cost
Lifetime
Biogas Digester
The Biogas Digester (BGD) is the process that turns biomass commodities such as animal
manure and cereals straw into the commodities biogas and digestate. This happens inside a
digester reactor in anaerobic conditions. The whole process can be split down into 3 main steps:
biomass pre-treatment, anaerobic digestion and post-treatment. The pre-treatment phase con-
sists in the crushing the biomass in order to increase the reaction surface and in its sanitation
by raising the temperature to kill most pathogens and inactivate weed seeds [66]. Anyway,
elaborate treatments are not economically feasible for very small scale plants [62]. Therefore
basic pre-treatment is assumed to be made cost-free and not considered in the model.
In the second phase the substrate is fed to the reactor, where four diﬀerent biochemical pro-
cesses digest the organic components of the substrate. The outputs are a gaseous mix of CH4,
CO2, H2S and NH3, and the digestate as side-product. Being anaerobic digestion a complex
process, the correct mathematical representation implies multiple diﬀerential equations and
several variable. In OSDRIA, the linearization made in [62] and [10] is considered a proper
==PAGE:76==
compromise between accuracy and computational requirements. Anaerobic digestion is there-
fore modelled using Boyle’s equation, showed in equation26. Each biomass type is split down
to its fundamental components carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur, and for each
one there is a balance equation as constraint. Each feedstock requires also a certain amount of
water in the reactor for the full chemical reaction to occur. These coeﬃcients are represented
in the brackets that multiply the water amount H2O. The equations balances the output of the
four products, namely methane CH4, carbon dioxide CO2, ammonia NH3 and hydrogen sulﬁde
H2S. This formula is particularly suitable for a model with several biomass type, as allow to
describe each kind of feedstock separately and therefore allows both mono- and co-digestion. To
ensure the homogeneity of the substrate, the solid matter to water ratio in the reactor should be
maximum 30%-70% [67]. This means that if the water amount already present into the biomass
is not suﬃcient, water must be input from an external source. This is ensure with equation 27,
where H20biomass is the water content of each biomass type, and H2OIn and H2OOut are the
water ﬂows that are needed to balance the constraint.
CaHbOcNdSe + (a −b
4 −c
2 + 3d
4 + e
2)H2O −→
(26)
−→(a
2 + b
8 −c
4 −3d
8 −e
4)CH4 + (a
2 −b
8 + c
4 + 3d
8 + e
4)CO2 + dNH3 + eH2S
X
biomass
H2Obiomass + H2OIn −H2OOut
≥
X
biomass
biomass · 7
3
(27)
The product of interest for the production of electricity is methane only, and its share in the
mix usually varies between 50% and 75% depending on the biomass type and the digestion
eﬃciency [61]. In order to improve the methane yield, an additional constraint is implemented
imposing a carbon to nitrogen ration between 20 and 30 [68]. Last, in equation 30 the rated
power expressed in m3/h, is multiplied by the amount of units in such way the total capacity
of the system is deﬁned and the investment and ﬁxed costs can be calculated. As a result of
the modelling decision, the BGD is a process with constant input and output.
For what concerns the post-processing phase, desulphurization is fundamental as H2S is a cor-
rosive gas and can damage pipes and components of the biogas generator. This is done in two
diﬀerent ways: either adding chemicals to the substrate in order to prevent the formation of
hydrogen sulﬁde by binding the sulphur, or by adding a small quantity of air to the output
biogas so that H2S oxidation occurs [66]. In both cases this can be modelled as any variable
cost associated with the biogas output.
The BGD process yields also the by-product digestate. This product can be used as fertilizer
due to its high nitrogen-phosphorus-potassium (NPK) content providing the farmers with cost
free fertilizer. Obviously, the NPK content is already present in raw manure, but the use of
digestate presents several advantages with respect to raw manure. A lower C/N ratio means
==PAGE:77==
a better N-fertilisation eﬀect, and decreases the proliferation of micro-organisms that compete
with the plants for the available nitrogen [66]. Moreover, the anaerobic digestion process is
able to inactivate viruses, bacteria and parasites. This results in higher hygiene standars and
odours reduction [66].
The estimation of the digestate output depends on the characteristics of the input feedstock.
Equation 28 shows how to evaluate the approximate digestate output, where TS is the total
solid percentage of the substrate input and VS is its volatile share [11]. For each biomass type,
TS and VS are taken from [61] and depicted in table 29. The digestate has then to be compared
with commercial fertilizers according a mineral fertilizer equivalent (MFE). Depending on the
input biomass, the MFE can very between 20 and 70% [11]. An conservative 40% is assumed
to be a realistic MFE to be used in equation 29, where the equivalent amount of fertilizer is
estimated. Introducing the fertilizer commodity and relative ﬂow from the digester to the ﬁelds
would generate more variables and increase the computational time. A short-cut that avoids
this is to sell this equivalent fertilizer for the same price that it is bought and consider it as an
oﬀset of the objective function.
Digestate
=
Biomassi,In · (1 −TS · V S)
(28)
Fertilizereq
=
Digestate · MFE
(29)
Table 29: Biomass parameters for digestate calculation [61].
Biomass
TS[%]
VS[%]
Ratio digestate/biomass
Cow dung
25
80
0.8
Pig dung
6
80
0.52
Poultry dung
40
75
0.7
Maize straw
33
95
0.69
Coming to the parameters table 30 the optimization variables are therefore all the ﬁve elements
plus the amount of units to be installed. The Data category requires some pre-processing of the
data, as it is necessary to split down each feedstock to the amount of each chemical component
and the amount of water. As mentioned, water balances the reaction and therefore is both an
input and an output commodity, while the diﬀerent biomass types supply the digester and are
turned into the 4 outputs CH4, CO2, H2S, NH3.
CH4 + CO2 + NH3 + H2S
≤
amount · Capdigester
(30)
==PAGE:78==
Table 30: Biogas Digester parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Rated Power
Water
Water
C
C biomass i
Lifetime
Biomass i
CH4
N
N biomass i
Investment cost
CO2
O
O biomass i
Fixed cost
H2S
H
H biomass i
Variable cost
NH3
S
S biomass i
Water biomass i
Biogas Tank
As the Biogas Digester (BGD) (presented in the next section) produces biomas in a constant
output, the Biogas Tank (BGT) is the storage technology that provides ﬂexibility to its usage
by the Biogas Generator. Since the system does not consider the reﬁnement of the biogas to
pure methane, the BGT needs to store all the diﬀerent components of the gaseous mix. To
regulate all the inﬂow and outﬂow of each gas CH4 is used as pivotal gas. This means that
for every ﬂow of methane, there will be a ﬂow of each other gas in the same direction, as
shown in equation 32 and 33. Since the biogas mix varies in composition depending on the
biomass input to the digester and might therefore vary over time, ﬁxed ratios where assumed to
calculate the ﬂow and the volume of each component and to dimension the BGT. In particular,
CH4 is assumed to represent 60% of the volume, CO2 30%, NH3 9.5% and H2S 0.5% which is
the hydrogen sulphide tolerable limit [61] [62]. In equation 31 the content balance equation is
depicted, using the methane over biogas share to calculate the total gas volume. To dimension
the total storage capacity of the tank, equation 34 sets the content to be always smaller or
equal to the amount of BGTs multiplied by the single unit size.
Biogascontent
t
=
Biogascontent
t−1
+ CH4inflow
t
0.6
−CH4outflow
t
0.6
(31)
Componentinflow
t
=
CH4inflow
t
· coefficientComponent
(32)
Componentoutflow
t
=
CH4outflow
t
· coefficientComponent
(33)
Biogascontent
t
≤
Amount · Size
(34)
==PAGE:79==
Table 31: Biogas Tank parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Size
CH4
CH4
Content
Lifetime
CO2
CO2
Investment cost
NH3
NH3
Fixed cost
H2S
H2S
Variable cost
Village Electrical Demand
Last, the Village Demand is the process that represents the ﬁnal electricity consumption.
Demand processes are modelled as a simple equation constraint, where the input electricity Elt
has to match the hourly demand Dt, which is input by the user as an time series.
Elt
=
Dt
(35)
Table 32: Village Demand parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Demand
Electricity
7.2.2
Water sector
The water sector, as the energy one, did not see additions in new processes. Nevertheless, the
Water Pump and the Fallow and Forest Land processes were subject to changes in the model
representation. The Aquifer, the Water Tank and the Village Water Demand were kept as
before.
Aquifer
The Aquifer process simulates the underground water basin which can be accessed through a
well. It consists of the water amount trapped into a layer of permeable rock above or within
a layer(s) of impermeable rock, that act(s) as a container. From a modelling point of view it
can be represented as a storage unit, with a ﬁnite volume and inﬂow and outﬂows of water.
Equation 36 is the content balance equation, where groundwater inﬂow is determined by the
rainwater percolation through the soil above the aquifer and the outﬂow is the water pumped
to the surface. The Inﬂux and Shunt variables are dummies with hourly resolution that allow
the model to be always feasible. The Inﬂux is set to have a very high cost in the objective
function, while the Shunt allows water to freely overﬂow out of the aquifer when precipitations
==PAGE:80==
are high and for many consecutive days. Equation 37 caps instead the physical capacity of the
aquifer in cubic meters, which can be set by the user. The way that the process is modelled
ensures that over the year the amount of pumped water is equal to the natural recharge of the
aquifer, following the principle of sustainable exploitation of natural resources.
Contentt
=
Contentt−1 + GroundwaterIn,t −GroundwaterOut,t + Influxt −Shuntt (36)
Contentt
≤
Height · Area
(37)
Table 33: Aquifer parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Content
Height
Groundwater
Groundwater
Shunt
Area
Inﬂux
Water Tank
The Water Tank (WT) stores the water pumped from the aquifer and provides ﬂexibility
in the water pump usage. In particular, it enables the water pump to operate when there is
availability of cheap energy, i.e. when the demand is low and the PV production peaks. As the
other storage processes, two equations are suﬃcient to constraint the balance and the maximum
capacity. No losses occur in the charging and discharging as those are considered in the Water
Pump and Irrigation processes.
Contentt
=
Contentt−1 + WaterIn,t −WaterOut,t
(38)
Contentt
≤
Amount · CapWaterTank
(39)
Table 34: Water Tank parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Size
Water
Water
Content
Investment cost
Fixed cost
Lifetime
==PAGE:81==
Village Water Demand
Again, the Village Water Demand is modelled the same way of the electrical demand.
The process represents the ﬁnal water consumption for drinking, cooking and cleaning of the
community. The water inﬂow Watert has to match the hourly demand Dt, which is input by
the user as an time series.
Watert
=
Dt
(40)
Table 35: Village Water Demand parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Demand
Water
Forest and Fallow Land
The processes Forest Land and Fallow Land represent areas that are not involved in agricul-
ture, diﬀerentiated by the vegetation coverage. Their main purpose is to retain larger amount
of rainwater than cultivated ﬁelds, and let that water percolate into the aquifer for a natural
recharge of this basin. Thus, this processes do not generate any revenue directly, but a balanced
utilization of the available land is necessary for a sustainable usage of the groundwater resources.
The modelling of these processes is based on the work of C. Corral [13]. The interaction be-
tween precipitations and the soil is a very complex and delicate process to model with suﬃcient
accuracy and simplicity. There are multiple factor that could be taken into account, such as
vegetation coverage, air humidity and temperature, ground slope and soil composition. In ﬁg-
ure 44 a simpliﬁed view of the water stream from the precipitation to the aquifer is depicted.
At ﬁrst, rain water encounters the vegetation, that catches a share of it depending on the Leaf
Area Index (LAI), equal to the ratio of the leaf area over the projected area on the ground [13].
After the vegetation captures a share that depends on its LAI, the rest of the rainfall reaches
the ground surface. Here, depending on the intensity of the precipitation, the slope of the soil
and on the amount of water already present in the soil a percentage of water ﬂows away with-
out penetrating the ground surface. This process is called water runoﬀ. The remaining water
permeates into the soil, that holds the moisture and slows down the percolation process. From
here the water can return back into the atmosphere in two ways, either by simple evaporation
due to heat or through plant transpiration. Finally, if the water into the ground reaches a cer-
tain concentration, usually due to prolonged rains periods, gravity acts so the excess percolates
down to the aquifer.
==PAGE:82==
Figure 44: Schematic water interactions between precipitation-vegetation-ground, with evapo-
rations, transpiration of plants, runoﬀand percolation (adapted from [71]).
The evaporation from surfaces and the plant transpiration are basically impossible to distinguish
when it comes to measure them. Therefore, the evapotranspiration concept is introduced, as the
sum of the two. "The potential evapotranspiration (PE) is deﬁned as the maximum amount of
water that can be transferred into the atmosphere under given climatic conditions if the water
supply was unlimited" [13]. This means that if there is available water on the surfaces or in the
soil within the reach of th plant roots, it will evaporate up to the PE, which is determined for
each time step depending on climate conditions such as temperature, wind, humidity etc. The
ﬁrst amount of water to evaporate is the one captured by the canopy, that depends on the leaf
coverage of the vegetation. If this amount is not enough to satisfy the PE, water evaporates
from the soil or is emitted by the plant transpiration. In both cases, it is extracted from the
soil and therefore the soil content decreases to meet the PE. If, the soil does not contain enough
water to reach the PE, and therefore the upper layer of the ground is completely dry, the total
evaporation will not match the PE.
In the ﬁrst OSDRIA version, ad additional layer was modelled as "Middlesoil". It was acting
exactly as the Topsoil, a water storage which moisture was evaporating to the atmosphere when
==PAGE:83==
the topsoil is completely dry and the PE is not yet reached. The main reason it was introduced
for was to simulate a time delay in the percolation of the water to the aquifer. After running
several simulations with a basic system design (no biogas, no battery, complete water sector
only Maize Field in the food sector), this layer was removed. This was done for consistency
with the crop ﬁelds, which are modelled only with one soil layer, and for computational issues.
In fact storage units, not having an initialized value and having a balance constraint that corre-
lates the variable value over all the time steps, could aﬀect the simulation time. The reduction
on the computational time for the basic system design ranged from 18% up to 42%, while the
repercussion on the overall objective value was in the range of only +0.12%.
The equations representing the Fallow Land and Forest Land processes are reported as Eq.
41-47. Equation 41 deﬁnes the evaporation from the vegetation canopy as the minimum value
among the precipitation, the water amount that can be capture by the canopy depending on the
LAI in that speciﬁc period of time and the maximum PE. The LAI is deﬁned as a time series
with a monthly resolution, representing the development of the leaf coverage over the year.
The evaporation form the soil is reported in equation 42. It is proportional to the remaining
potential evaporation, multiplied by a factor that varies depending on the vegetation coverage of
the soil. The runoﬀprocess is the most complex one. One ﬁrst coeﬃcient CN2 is set depending
on the land type, from it, the other coeﬃcients CN1 and CN3 can be calculated as in equations
43 and 44. Depending on the intensity of the precipitation and the capacity of the soil, the
appropriate curve is selected in equation 45 and inserted in equation 46, which determines the
amount of water Waterrunoff,t the ﬂows away on the surface without penetrating the ground.
Last, equation 47 deﬁnes the water that percolates down to the aquifer as what is left of the
initial precipitation.
Evcanopy,t
=
min(Waterprecipitation,t,
LAIt
LAImax
· Canopymax,
PEt)
(41)
Evtopsoil,t
=
(PEt −Evcanopy,t) · e−5·10−5·Biomass
(42)
CN1
=
CN2 −20 ·
100 −CN2
100 −CN2 + e2.533−0.0636·(100−CN2)
(43)
CN3
=
CN2 · e0.00673·(100−CN2)
(44)
CN
=
CN3
if
(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t > Capsoil)
(45)
else
(CN1if(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t < 0.001)
.
else
CN2
==PAGE:84==
Waterrunoff,t
=
min(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t,
(46)
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−0.2·25.4·( 1000
CN −10)2
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t+0.5·25.4·( 1000
CN2 −10) )
Groundwatert
=
Land·10
24·max(0,
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−Waterrunoff,t−Evsoil,t)
(47)
Even if Table 36 report many variables, most of them are just intermediate calculations that
are multiplied by the total area allocated to that land type.
"Capacity Topsoil" is deﬁned
as Thicknesstopsoil · (CapField −WiltingPoint), which are all Data set once by the modeller.
The user needs to insert the 3 time series of Precipitation, LAI and Evapotranspiration, that
can have daily, weekly or monthly resolution depending on the data source or on the level of
accuracy desired.
Table 36: Fallow Land and Forest Land parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Evaporation Canopy
Curve Number 2
Precipitation
Land
Groundwater
Evaporation Soil
Biomass
LAI
Curve Number
LAI Max
Evapotranspiration
Curve Number 1
Canopy Max
Curve Number 3
Field Capacity
Runoﬀ
Wilting Point
Capacity Topsoil
Topsoil Thickness
Water Pump
The Water Pump (WP) consumes electricity in order to extract water from the aquifer. Fig-
ure 45 depicts the diﬀerent conversion curves depending on the basin depth for a solar water
pump [69].
As it can be seen, the conversion is closer to a logarithmic function for water
close to the surface and gets more and more linear for deeper aquifers. In the ﬁrst OSDRIA
version [10], an attempt to model the non linearity of the electricity to water curve was done
by approximating one selected curve with a piecewise linear approach. Since the depth of the
aquifer can vary largely depending on the site location, the curve should be re-shaped for every
site. If this is not done, the a priori selection of the curve could lead to errors of the same
or even greater magnitude of a linear approximation of the curve. Moreover, the modelling of
a piecewise linear function requires the introduction of several binary variables, one for each
segment of the curve, resulting again in much higher computational requirements. Besides that,
==PAGE:85==
some operational precautions, added to the water tanks and some demand ﬂexibility, could
reduce the time the pump works at limited load and concentrate a more eﬃcient production
in less hours. Therefore in this thesis it was decided to reduce the modelling to more basic
equations, beneﬁting the computational time and the ﬂexibility for the user.
Figure 45: Water ﬂow to electricity input curves for a solar water pump, depending on the
depth of the aquifer, according to the water pump retailer [69].
Equation 48 depicts the relation between electricity consumption Electricityt and pumped
water ﬂow Watert. The Total Dynamic Head (TDH) [m] is the length of the pipe going from
the lower to the upper basin, multiplied for a friction factor that takes place in the pipes [70];
etapump the WP eﬃciency, ρwater is the water density and g the gravitation coeﬃcient. While
the latter two are constant set as Data, the ﬁrst two must be evaluated by the user depending
on the selected pump and the depht of the well (Table 37). Two trivial constraints complete the
process modelling, one ensuring that the volume of groundwater extracted matches the water
output (Eq. 49), and one limiting the water output to the maximum capacity of the installed
units (Eq. 50).
Electricityt · ηpump
=
ρwater · g · Watert · TDH
(48)
Watert
=
Groundwatert
(49)
Watert
≤
Amount · Cappump
(50)
==PAGE:86==
Table 37: Water Pump parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Rated power
Groundwater
Water
Water density
Eﬃciency
Electricity
Gravitation
Total Dynamic Head
Investment cost
Fixed cost
Variable cost
Lifetime
7.2.3
Food sector
The food sector is the one that needed the most development. In the ﬁrst version, only 3
processes are modelled: Land Distribution, Maize Field and Maize Straw Silo. As new type
of land were introduced in the work of this thesis, the Land Distribution process had to be
updated. On the other hand the Maize Field process was found to have inconsistencies and
was troubling the simulation, and was therefore re-modeled.
Maize Straw Silo
The Maize Straw Silo (MSS) is simply the process that stores maize straw that will be used
as input for the Biogas Digester. It is an important process since the Maize Field outputs high
quantities of Maize Straw only during the harvest weeks, while the BGD needs a constant input
over the entire year to keep the anaerobic digestion running. The MSS is modelled as any other
storage process, with a shunt variable that allows to dump excess straw.
Contentt
=
Contentt−1 + StrawIn,t −StrawOut,t −Shuntt
(51)
Contentt
≤
Amount · SizeStrawSilo
(52)
Table 38: Maize Straw Silo parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Amount
WACC
Size
Straw
Straw
Content
Investment cost
Shunt
Fixed cost
Lifetime
==PAGE:87==
Land Distribution
Land Distribution is a process that takes as external input the total available land and
divides it among the potential end usages.
Even though each land could theoretically be
used for agriculture and proﬁt generation, depending on the land application and its vegetation
coverage diﬀerent amount of water percolates down to the aquifer. This results in a compromise
between revenues and a sustainable usage of the aquifer. Moreover, diﬀerentiation of the crops
cultivated within a community is important for several reasons.
Diversity of plants allows
proﬁtable rotations over the years, increases resilience against meteorological events such as
droughts or too intense rains and also against pests. Last, huge harvests of a single crop would
result in a drop of the market price and thus revenue loss. Therefore the constraint for limiting
the total surface of a crop is modiﬁed by adding as well a lower limit to the sum of irrigated
and not irrigated ﬁeld, for each crop (equation 53).
LandTypei,min
≤LandTypei,Irr,Amount + LandTypei,Simple,Amount
≤LandTypei,min
(53)
X
i
LandTypei
=
TotalLand
(54)
Table 39: Land Distribution parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Total available land
Land Type Amount
Minimum of Land Type i
Maximum of Land Type i
Irrigated Field
Subsistence agriculture is the major activity in sub-Saharan rural areas. During the rainy sea-
son, almost the entire community is employed in the ﬁelds all day long, from the ploughing
to the harvest time. During the dry season, while women take care of the children and of the
house, men usually do little tasks like taking care of the animals, but basically do nothing
waiting for the next rain to come. With an irrigation system coupled with the electrical water
pump, it could be possible to have more than one harvest a year, employing the community
also during the dry season and increasing food security.
Irrigated Field (IF) is the process that takes as input land and water, and outputs groundwa-
ter, crop and eventual crop residues. Starting from the Fallow Land and Forest Land processes,
with some additional data and constraints it is possible to obtain a decent representation of
==PAGE:88==
crop cultivation. In fact, the canopy and top soil evaporation (eq. 55 and 56) and the runoﬀ
(eq. 57-60) follow the same structure already seen for the aforementioned processes. For the
evaporation process, the upper limit of the potential evapotranspiration Et0 has now to be mul-
tiplied by a coeﬃcient Kc. The Kc coeﬃcient incorporates crop characteristics and averaged
eﬀects of evaporation from the soil [72].
Evcanopy,t
=
min(Waterprecipitation,t,
LAIt
LAImax
· Canopymax,
ET0,t ∗Kc,t)
(55)
Evtopsoil,t
=
(Et0,t ∗Kc,t −Evcanopy,t) · e−5·10−5·Biomass
(56)
CN1
=
CN2 −20 ·
100 −CN2
100 −CN2 + e2.533−0.0636·(100−CN2)
(57)
CN3
=
CN2 · e0.00673·(100−CN2)
(58)
CN
=
CN3
if
(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t > Capsoil)
(59)
else
(CN1if(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t < 0.001)
.
else
CN2
Waterrunoff,t
=
min(Waterprecipitation,t −Evcanopy,t,
(60)
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−0.2·25.4·( 1000
CN −10)2
Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t+0.5·25.4·( 1000
CN2 −10) )
Figure 46: Cropwat interfaces for reference evapotranspiration Et0 and crop Kc [73]
The factor Kc,t varies with the growth stage of the plant in the same way that the LAI pa-
rameter does, thus for OSDRIA it is implemented as a time series. Both Et0,t and Kc,t time
series can be retrieved from CROPWAT [73], a software developed by FAO, the Food and
Agricultural Organization branch of the UN. As it can be seen in ﬁgure 46, on the left side it
is possible to retrieve the reference evapotranspiration Et0 by setting the climate data. These
==PAGE:89==
can be obtained from CLIMWAT [74], a database from FAO that provides data in the same
format as CROPWAT. The interface on the right side is used to calculate the Kc time series
for each crop, depending on its speciﬁc stage of development.
As water is now a input commodity, equation 61 depicts the water balance for each time step.
Irrigation water, accounting for the irrigation losses, is summed up with what is left of the
precipitation after the evaporation and the runoﬀ. On the right side of the equation the ad-
justed evapotranspiration demand has to be matched every hour in order for the crop not to
perish. Equation 62 represent the water content balance in the topsoil, deﬁning the amount
that percolates to the aquifer Overflowt and inﬂuencing the amount of irrigation water needed
in the next time steps. In fact, if the topsoil contains enough water from the previous hours
for the adjusted evapotranspiration to be matched, no irrigation is needed. Last, equation 63
deﬁned the crop output of the IF. The Harvest Series is a binary time series with a weekly
resolution, indicating with 1 the weeks where the crop is harvested and with 0 all the others.
Waterirr,t · ηirr + (Evcanopy,t + Evtopsoil,t) · Landcrop
=
(Et0,t · Kc,t) · Landcrop
(61)
Contenttopsoil,t
=
Contenttopsoil,t−1 + Waterirr,t · ηirr +
(62)
+(Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−Waterrunoff,t−Evtopsoil,t)·Landcrop−Wateroverflow,t
Commodityt = Landcrop · Y ieldcrop · Harvestseries,t
(63)
The IF process can represent several crop types by only changing the properties and data in-
put. Depending on the region and on the soil suitability to diﬀerent crops, three main irrigated
plantations can be identiﬁed: cereals, legumes and vegetables. Cereals include crops like maize,
rice, sorghum and millet. Maize is the most important cereal crop in most African regions,
both considering agricultural surface and ﬁnal consumption. Rice, diﬀerently from the other
cereals, needs a soil that retains the water for long time and is therefore very dependant on
the soil characteristics. Legumes include groundnuts, soya beans and bambara beans and are a
very important both from a dietary point of view as well as for crop rotation. Legumes in fact
naturally ﬁx nitrogen into the soil, with nitrogen being the most important fertilizer for cereal
crops. Last, vegetables like onions, tomatoes, peppers and okro play a very important role
in the sub-Saharan diet. They are usually cultivated in smaller land plots and require great
amount of water. They can be cultivated for commercial purposes only where dams, water
pumps or rivers provide a stable irrigation.
==PAGE:90==
The objective function is slightly diﬀerent from the standard one.
Besides the discounted
annualized investment and ﬁxed costs for the irrigation system, multiple diﬀerent other costs
have to be taken into account. These costs depend on the crop type and on the amount of land
allocated to such crop, and it can be seen in equation 64.
Obj
=
Landcrop ·(CAPEXirr ·((1 + WACC)L · WACC
(1 + WACC)L −1
+Fixedirr ·(1+WACC))+ (64)
+(Labor · CostLabor + Ploughing · CostPloughing + Fertilizer · CostFertilizer+
.
+TopDressing · CostTopDressing + Pesticide · CostPesticide) · Landcrop
Fertilizer, top dressing (a covering fertilizer that gets spread above the ground or plants) and
pesticides are required in diﬀerent amount depending on the crop. Moreover, they can have
diﬀerent prices depending on the regional market and on possible subsidies form local author-
ities. For what concern the labor parameter, each crop requires diﬀerent amount of working
hours and with diﬀerent distribution over the year. Instead of deﬁning several time series and a
labor capacity determined by the amount of workers in the community, an economical approach
was preferred. In fact, it is common practice that communities near water sources and with
irrigation systems or water pumps employ some workers form other communities during the
dry season. According to this fact, it makes no sense to limit the labor hours but to price them.
In table 40 it is possible to see all the parameters necessary to model this process. The Data
parameters need to be set only once depending on the crop requirements, while the Properties
can vary for each location as the costs depend on several diﬀerent factors.
Table 40: Irrigated Field parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Evaporation Canopy
Wacc
Precipitation
Crop Land
Crop Output
Evaporation Topsoil
LAImax
Evapotranspiration
Water
Groundwater
Runoﬀ
Canopymax
LAI
CN
CN2
Kc
CN1
Topsoil Thickness
Harvest Series
CN3
Wilting Point
Lifetime
Topsoil Content
Field Capacity
Irrigation Investment
Capacity Topsoil
Crop Yield
Irrigation Fixed costs
Overﬂow
Residue Yield
Irrigation Eﬃciency
Labor
Labor cost
Ploughing
Ploughing cost
Fertilizer
Fertilizer cost
Top Dressing
Top Dressing cost
Pesticides
Pesticide cost
Herbicides
Herbicide cost
==PAGE:91==
Simple Field
At the actual state of things, almost the entirety of the available land is farmed as not irrigated
or Simple Field (SF). With the elevated population growth witnessed in the last years both
in urban and rural areas, multiple communities already struggle to sustain with the land they
own. Only a minority of settlements, usually in more remote areas, can aﬀord to practice fallow
land agriculture, meaning that not all the available land is cultivated so it can naturally regain
its fertility.
The IF is a process that greatly increases the food production and provide food security to com-
munities with limited available land. Despite this, there are two main reasons why it cannot be
the only process producing food. First, the Irrigated Field implies a great water consumption,
that needs to be extracted from the aquifer. Besides the excessive drilling of boreholes and
installation of water pumps, water tanks as well as generating units to supply the pumps, such
intensive water usage violates the principle of a sustainable exploitation of the aquifer. The
Aquifer process is in fact the bottleneck that limits the amount of land that can be irrigated,
with its constraint to have the same water level at the beginning and at the end of the simula-
tion year. This means that irrigating during the dry season can be done only over a very limited
surface. The second reason why another process is necessary is that, during the rainy season,
it would be naive not to grow on the rest of the land, having all the resources available,namely
land, rain and labor.
The SF process emulates the IF but without the water input and with one single crop cycle.
As for the IF, the parameters change depending on the selected crop and location of the com-
munity. Cereals and legumes are implemented the same way as for the IF. Vegetables instead
cannot be grown without a stable feed of water and cannot be represented by the SF. Addi-
tionally, tubers can be represented and implemented in the system. Tubers like yam and sweet
potato can in fact grow in large quantities with very little water, and are therefore suitable for
more arid regions with vast arable land.
Process equations and parameters table, since they almost resemble the IF process, are reported
in Appendix.
As regards the process equations, water evaporation and runoﬀ, harvest as well as the objective
function follow those of the IF process (equations 55-60). As regards the balance equation 65,
the irrigation water input is simply taken out. The speciﬁc yield of a SF is assumed to be lower
that the one of the IF, since a regular water input will secure a fast and full growth of the plant,
while dry periods will slow it down or damage it. All the data can be retrieved the same way
as for the IF, and the parameter table 41 consists of a simpliﬁed version of table 40.
==PAGE:92==
Contenttopsoil,t
=
Contenttopsoil,t−1
(65)
+(Waterprecipitation,t−Evcanopy,t−Waterrunoff,t−Evtopsoil,t)·Landcrop−Wateroverflow,t
Table 41: Simple Field parameters.
Variables
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Evaporation Canopy
Wacc
Precipitation
Crop Land
Crop Output
Evaporation Topsoil
LAImax
Evapotranspiration
Groundwater
Runoﬀ
Canopymax
LAI
CN
CN2
Kc
CN1
Topsoil Thickness
Harvest Series
CN3
Wilting Point
Lifetime
Topsoil Content
Field Capacity
Capacity Topsoil
Crop Yield
Overﬂow
Residue Yield
Labor
Labor cost
Ploughing
Ploughing cost
Fertilizer
Fertilizer cost
Top Dressing
Top Dressing cost
Pesticides
Pesticide cost
Herbicides
Herbicide cost
7.2.4
Business Sector
The business sector is the one that provides commodities that cannot be produced inside the
community, or converts commodity produced inside the community into money, which adds up
to the ﬁnal objective value. All these processes have one cost and one commodity ﬂow, which
are multipled in the objective function. The sign + or - depends on the ﬂow direction.
Commodity Market
Diesel Market, Biomass Market are processes that allow commodities to ﬂow into the sys-
tem. The Food Market instead, translates the agricultural yield into monetary value, with a
commodity ﬂow out of the system.
It was decided not to include the self consumption of food and the relative food demand. In
fact, for the objective of the optimization, avoided costs have the same impact of direct proﬁt.
Therefore the direct conversion of all the food production into monetary value allows to better
understand the performance of the system, leaving to the villagers the freedom to sell the de-
==PAGE:93==
sired amount on the market and buy other food varieties if wanted.
Obj
= ±
Commodityt · Pricecommodity
(66)
Table 42: Commodity Markets parameters.
Market
Variable
Data
Properties
Inputs
Outputs
Diesel Market
Price
Diesel
Biomass Market
Price
Maize Straw
Manure
Food Market
Price
Maize
Vegetables
Soya beans
Yam
