==PAGE:1==
Fatigue Assessment of an Offshore Structure with
OMA-based Estimation of the Structural Response
Master thesis in Civil Engineering
Sirwan Ali - S153376
Maria Weien Lippert - S154449
Technical University of Denmark |
27-06-2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Fatigue Assessment of an Offshore Structure with
OMA-based Estimation of the Structural
Response
Project type:
Master thesis, 30 ECTS points
Project period:
27.01.20 - 27.06.20
Authors:
Sirwan Ali, s153376
Maria Weien Lippert, s154449
Education:
Civil Engineering (MSc)
Place of Education:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Civil Engineering
Supervisors:
Bruna Nabuco,
Ph.d, DTU Civil Engineering
Evangelos Katsanos,
Assistant Professor,
DTU Civil Engineering
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador,
Postdoc, DTU Civil Engineering
Rune Brincker,
Professor, Structural Dynamics
DTU Civil Engineering
Sirwan Ali - s153376
Date
Maria Weien Lippert - s154449
Date
==PAGE:4==
Preface
Present thesis is submitted as a final assignment as part of the education of Master
of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project
theme was originally suggested by the group of supervisors, though some adjustments
has been made during the process in collaboration between the authors and the
supervisors. The project is credited to 30 ECTS points.
We would like to express our great appreciation to the main supervisors of the project
Ph.d. student Bruna Nabuco, Assistant Professor Evangelos Katsanos and Postdoc
Sandro D. R. Amador. Our weekly discussions has been of immeasurable value to us,
especially in the unsual circumstance of the Covid-19 lock-down. We would also like
to thank Rune Brincker for his helpful assistance in the OMA part of the project, and
Henning Brüske from Aalborg University for his guidance in the statistical aspects.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project investigates how Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) can be imple-
mented to asses the fatigue life of an already existing offshore platform. The main
purpose is to illustrate the increased accuracy of basing the fatigue analysis on mea-
sured responses rather than the simulated fatigue loading used in the conventional
design method.
This is done by comparing equivalent stress ranges estimated by
OMA as well as equivalent stress ranges estimated by the standard practice against
real strain gauge measurements.
The measurement data used for this project has been provided from an already under-
taken monitoring campaign. The data includes recorded acceleration, SG measure-
ments and statistical sea state parameters, all obtained simultaneously. An FE-model
of the structure was supplied by Bruna Nabuco, and is used to estimate the response
in both methods. For the OMA-approach the model is updated manually to bet-
ter match the modal properties identified from recorded acceleration by OMA. The
modal identification is performed using Frequency Domain Decomposition developed
by Brincker [1] and Time Domain Poly-Reference by Vold et al. [2]. The design
estimation will be performed according to the DNV GL standard for Fatigue design
of offshore steel structures [3].
Finally, the Coefficient of Variation (CoV) is determined for the OMA-obtained re-
sults, in the interest of seeing whether inspection planning can be reduced based on
this parameter of uncertainty.
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
A
Cross-section area
m2
a
Interception coefficient on the S-N curve
Ac
Companion Matrix
AR
Auto Regressive
B(s)
Interpolation Matrix
-
C
Correlation Matrix
CF
Correlation Function
CoV
Coefficient of Variation
-
D
Accumulated fatigue damage
DFF
Design Fatigue Factor
DOF
Degree of Freedom
∆t
Time increment
s
E
Youngs Modulus
Pa
EFDD Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition
η(t)
Sea surface elevation at time t
m
EVD
Eigenvalue Decomposition
FDD
Frequency Domain Decomposition
FD
Frequency Domain
FEM
Finite Element Method
f
Frequency
Hz
fs
Sample frequency
Hz
fv
Nyquist frequency
Hz
g
Acceleration of gravity
m/s2
γ
Peakedness factor
-
H
Wave height
m
h
Water depth
m
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
v
Hs
Significant Wave Height
m
I
Bending stiffness
m4
k
Wave number
-
λ
Time pole
M
Decimation factor
-
m
Slope coefficient of S-N curve
MAC
Modal Assurance Criterion
MAC
Modal Assurance Criterion
-
MWL Mean Water Level (z =0 m)
Mx
Bending in direction x
Nm
My
Bending in driection y
Nm
N
Number of cycles
Nz
Normal force in direction z
N
OMA
Operational Modal Analysis
ω
Angular frequency
rad/s
q
Dimensionless ratio
-
RBI
Risk Based Inspection
rms
Root Mean Square
Rx(τ) Auto Correlation Function
S
Stress Range
Pa
Seq
Equivalent stress Range
Pa
SCF
Stress Concentration Factor
Gx(ω) Auto spectral density function
SD
Spectral density
SG
Strain gauge
σ(ω)
Step function of ω
-
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
==PAGE:8==
Abstract
vi
T
Total time duratiom
s
τ
Time lag
s
TDPR Time Domain Poly Reference
TD
Time Domain
Tp
Peak Period
s
TRAC Time Assurance Criterion Response
-
Tw
The wave period
Hz
VBA
Valdemar BA (offshore platform)
z
Actual vertical coordinate
m
z′
Computational vertical coordinate
m
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Nomenclature
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Offshore Platform Valdemar BA
5
2.1
Structure and model description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Measurement setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Project outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical Background
11
3.1
Fatigue Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Equivalent stress range
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Rainflow counting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Wave simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.4
Strain Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Random data and correlation functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Spectral density functions and Fourier Transform . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.4
Modal parameters identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.4.1
Frequency Domain Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.4.2
Time Domain Polyreference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Modal Expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Assurance Criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
Modal Assurance Criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.2
Time Response Assurance Criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Design estimation
27
4.1
Design waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Model response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Design Fatigue Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Equivalent Stress Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
OMA estimation
37
5.1
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD) . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:10==
Contents
viii
5.1.2
Time-Domain Polyreference (TDPR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.3
Model updating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.4
Modal Expansion and model response . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Equivalent stress range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Quality of strain prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Comparison of methods
49
6.1
Comparison of equivalent stress ranges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Deviation from actual equivalent stress ranges . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Estimation of Coefficient of Variation for OMA . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Discussion
54
8
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
58
Appendix
60
A Results for all datasets
61
B List of scripts and content description
72
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Fatigue is one of the main failure mechanisms in offshore structures due to the fluc-
tuating loads of primarily wind and waves. As these environmental loads cannot be
precisely predicted, the load history is typically modelled as a stochastic process based
on statistics. In practice, this entails that the estimated stress history is assigned with
an amount of uncertainty resulting in an underestimation of the design fatigue life.
Offshore platforms are expensive structures and there is a considerable profit to be
made in determining the integrity of an asset more accurately and thus optimize the
planning of integrity management. This can be accomplished by utilizing monitor-
ing results as a mean to reduce the uncertainties related to the fatigue assessment.
Unfortunately, conventional methods of measuring strains, such as the use of strain
gauges, are not easily carried out on offshore structures as critical fatigue locations
are often either inaccessible or in an environment where sensors are easily corrupted.
An alternative solution is to update the fatigue model of a real offshore structure by
the use of vibration based measurements and the exploitation of Operational Modal
Analysis (OMA).
The main objective of this project is to investigate the benefit of updating the fi-
nite element model of a real offshore structure by using OMA to identify the modal
properties from operational responses. This approach will be applied to the tripod
jacket platform Valdemar in the North Sea, from which various measurements from
an already undertaken monitoring campaign have been provided. An estimation will
initially be conducted of the strains at different locations of the structure using the
design fatigue model, and then be compared with strains obtained by performing
an OMA-based fatigue assessment based on the acceleration data. The accuracy of
both methods will further be investigated by comparing the results to existing strain
measurements obtained by strain gauges. Determining the deviation of the results in
both methods with the measured strains will provide a measure of improvement in
the OMA-based fatigue assessment.
1.2
Literature Review
Today, identification of modal parameters based on input and output data is well
developed and widely used within the field of engineering. However, applying those
methods to large engineering structures is not an easy task as it is not possible to
control the various environmental loading conditions.
A large number of offshore
platforms in the North Sea are nearing the end of their design lifetime, and there
is a growing interest and support for research into techniques of assessing their ac-
tual state. Operational Modal Analysis, also known as Ambient Modal Identification,
is a technique based on output data only. The vibration test used for the identifi-
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Literature Review
2
cation process rely on ambient excitation, meaning that no additional excitation or
measurement of input forces are required. In recent years, several algorithms for iden-
tifying modal parameters has been presented in the literature. One of the more well
known is the peak-picking method by Bendat and Piersol [4]. In this method, natu-
ral frequencies are simply estimated by the peaks in the frequency spectrum. This
approach depend heavily on the frequency resolution and has difficulty identifying
closely spaced modes. This issue is overcome in the Frequency Domain Decompo-
sition method (FDD) by Brincker [5], where singular value decomposition is used
to detect mode-multiplicity. Another algorithm is the Time Domain Poly-Reference
(TDPR) by Vold et al. [2] performed on free decays. The implementation of OMA
in relation to fatigue assessment is an area that still needs to be investigated. First
steps has been taken to apply the procedure onto scaled models.
Such an experiment was conducted by Húsgard et al. [6]. In this study, the tested
structure was a polycarbonate monopile with a height of 0.9 m that supported a steel
deck. The monopile was fixed at the bottom and placed in a wave flume that subjected
the structure to irregular waves. The wave-induced vibrations were measured along
the wave elevation with wave gauges. These measurements were used to apply OMA,
where TDPR identification was used to extrapolate the modal properties.
A FE-
model of the structure was generated in ANSYS and then further updated in order to
have modal parameters nearly identical to those obtained experimentally by TDPR.
The Morison wave forces were applied to the updated FE-model, and as a result the
displacements were 2.2 - 3 times larger than what was measured. This significant
difference indicates the amount of conservatism in the code which in this case was
introduced in the hydrodynamic forces by the drag and inertia coefficients.
This
was further validated by estimating the displacements with a conventional design
approach using DNV GL Digital Solution tool with the non-updated model. The
second simulation yielded results highly similar to the displacements simulated with
the updated model. Overall, Húsgard concludes that there is a strong indication of
conservatism in the code, and further investigation should be made in order to lower
the discrepancy between the simulated and measured responses.
In the conference paper by Nabuco et al. [7] the OMA analysis is investigated in order
to asses the value and precision of the procedure. This is done by an experimental
set-up of 1:50 scaled tripod structures, where accelerations and strains are recorded
from random vibrations. The maximum initial difference between the measurements
and estimations using OMA was 6.71%.
After a calibration based on one of the
strain gauges, the difference went down to a maximum of 2.40%. This resulted in
an extension of 33% of the structure’s service life. A brief analysis of the Value of
Information served to illustrate the cost reduction of the fatigue life extension. This
analysis was based on the prior and pre-posterior information gathered from OMA,
and was a way to quantify the economic benefits of OMA.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Literature Review
3
The estimation of dynamic strains for a fatigue assessment was conducted in [8]
by Maes et al.
for an offshore structure.
In this paper three different response
estimation techniques were used to estimate the strains at any location based on a
limited set of measurements. The techniques used are Kalman filtering algorithm,
a joint input-state estimation algorithm, and modal expansion. In the study, the
proposed methods were verified using data from a monitoring campaign originating
from an offshore Vestas V90 3 MW wind turbine on a monopile foundation. All of the
methods yielded satisfactory results, and found to be competitive and interchangeable
for application purposes. The paper concludes that these techniques can potentially
replace and outperform the regular strain sensor in offshore structures. In the near
future, the assessment of dynamic strains in offshore wind turbine foundation gets
more convenient with the techniques.
The article [9] by Fernández et al. estimated the stress-strain history for a 1.875 m
steel S275 cantilever beam. An initial FE-model was created considering 16 linear el-
ements with two DOFs per node. A physical experiment was also conducted inducing
the cantilever to random vibration with a small saw blade, where the responses were
measured through 8 accelerometers. The modal properties were estimated through
the Enhanced Frequency Domain Decomposition, and were used to perform a model
updating to make the frequencies in the FE-model match the ones obtained from
EFDD. The model update was done by locating a rotational spring at the clamped
beam. The MAC values were improved from the initial FE-model to the updated one,
and the stress-time history for both FE-models were compared with strain gauge
measurements. The results indicated that the OMA estimated stress-time prediction
were correlating well with the measured. It was concluded that the method has much
potential in the fatigue design application and remaining life estimation of operational
structures.
In the paper by Graugaard-Jensen et al. [10] two experiments were performed; one
on a laboratory structure and one on a lattice pylon.
The purpose of these two
experiments were to calculate the stress history at any point with sufficient accuracy.
The accuracy were validated by simultaneous measuring the strain with strain gauges.
The laboratory structure was a 2 m high cantilever beam with a mounted beam and
weight on top.
The acceleration was measured at four sections, and a FE-model
of the structure was created in ANSYS using 20-node isoparametric elements. The
acceleration measurements were used to identify the modal parameters using the
FDD technique, and the FE-model was updated to match the modal parameters.
The updated model showed high MAC values, which indicate that the model was well
calibrated. For the other experiment, a lattice pylon was installed near the Structural
Research Labroratory of Aalborg University in the spring 2004. This structure is a
20 m high welded structure with a constant width of 0.9 m. The vibration monitoring
system consists of six Shaevitz accelerometers. A finite element model was created in
StaadPro using beam elements with 6 DOFs. The FDD technique was performed on
different measurement series of 20 minutes. It was seen that first two mode shapes
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Literature Review
4
were not stable through low MAC values, why the modal expansion was performed on
the numerical mode shapes. Overall it was concluded that it is possible to calculate
the stress history with high accuracy by combining natural input modal analysis with
finite element modeling. Graugaard-Jenses et al. also investigated the uncertainty
of the stress history for the traditional fatigue estimation. This was done on the
lattice pylon with a Monte Carlo simulation based on the turbulence spectrum. The
uncertainty was determined by normal distribution with a confidence interval of 95%.
The results shows that the Coefficient of Variation (CoV) was 0.15 for the Monte
Carlo simulation, and for the calculated OMA-based stresses the CoV was reduced
to 0.03.
The article [11] by Hjelm et al. introduces a Risk Based Inspection analysis which
was based on the results for a lattice pylon obtained by Graugaard-Jensen et al. [10].
Hjelm et al. implement the CoV respectively for the conventional method and the
OMA-based approach determined in [10] by Graugaard-Jensen et al. in order to es-
timate the number of inspection required based on the RBI. The uncertainty used,
with respect to the loads, are 0.15 and 0.05, and the design fatigue factor considered
was 3 or 5. The inspection-planning is based on pre-defined generic inspection-plans
collected in iPlan. The results were that for CoV = 0.15 the total number of inspec-
tions were 17, and for CoV = 0.05 the total number of instections were 3. This shows
that the implementation of modal based fatigue monitoring reduces the number of
inspections by 82%. Hjelm et al. concludes that the number of inspection can be
reduced more than 50% through experimental verification of the reduction in the
uncertainty related to loads.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Offshore Platform Valdemar BA
2.1
Structure and model description
In this project the fatigue assessment is applied to the existing offshore platform
Valdemar BA (VBA) shown in figure 2.1. VBA is part of the Tyra field located in
the Danish sector of the North Sea. Today, the platform is operated by Total A/S
(formerly Maersk Oil and Gas A/S) and is used to distribute untreated well fluids
to other platforms for further processing. The structure consists of a Normally-Not-
Manned wellhead platform supported by a tripod-jacket foundation in a water depth
of 41.2 m.
Figure 2.1: Photo and model of Valdemar BA, with indication of sensor positions.
The topology, dimensions and material properties of the various platform elements
are provided in the form of a structural model. This finite element model, henceforth
referred to as FE-model, is shown to the right in figure 2.1 and has previously been
developed by Bruna Nabuco1 for a similar study using ANSYS software. In order to
obtain results from the same locations as the recorded data, additional nodes have
been added to the model at the strain measurement locations. Further, the mesh
was refined around the aforementioned nodes in order to have the response converge
towards a constant value. The mesh size around the nodes were defined as 0.5 meters.
The first five natural frequencies has been extracted from the FE-model and is listed
in table 2.1. The corresponding mode shapes are shown in figure 2.2.
1Ph.d, DTU, Civil Engineering
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Measurement setup
6
Table 2.1: Natural frequencies obtained from the FE-model.
Mode no.
1
2
3
4
5
Design frequency fFE [Hz]
0.5607
0.5634
1.3311
3.2244
3.5487
(a) Modeshape 1
(b) Modeshape 2
(c) Modeshape 3
(d) Modeshape 4
(e) Modeshape 5
Figure 2.2: First five modeshapes of VBA obtained from the FE-model.
The first mode shape is deflection in the x-direction, and the second mode shape is
deflection in the y-direction. The third mode shape is rotation around the z-axis.
The fourth and fifth mode shape is mainly bending in the direction of the x-axis and
y-axis, respectively.
2.2
Measurement setup
The measured data used for this project consist of 36 sets of recorded strain histories
and 36 sets of operational acceleration responses all obtained during an already un-
dertaken monitoring campaign. The strains are measured using strain gauges (SGs)
placed on the center column at an elevation of 12.2 meters and 11.5 meters with
respect to the mean water level (MWL). At each of those levels, two strain gauges
are placed on the steel surface at position c and d with and angle of 53◦to the axes
as indicated on figure 2.3. For simplicity the SGs at 12.2 m is also referred to as SG1c
and SG1d, while the SGs at 11.5 m is SG2c and SG2d.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Project outline
7
Figure 2.3: Sketch showing the location of strain gauges.
The operational response is captured as accelerations in the axis-directions by 4 sen-
sors placed on the steel deck of the TriPod as shown on figure 2.1. This gives a total
of 4 · 3 = 12 degrees of freedom for each set of data. The recorded acceleration is the
basis of the OMA from which the modal parameters of the structure are estimated.
The data from the 4 accelerometers and the 2 strain gauges are obtained simultane-
ously over an 1 hour duration in a period of 9 months. Along with each 36 time series
measurements, the significant wave height and wave period during testing has also
been reported and can be seen in table 2.2.
2.3
Project outline
The aim of this project is to look into how OMA can be used to perform a more
accurate fatigue assessment of the real offshore structure VBA. In practice, the fa-
tigue life is based on accumulated damage which is dependent on the equivalent stress
ranges estimated from the simulated responses of a design model. However, it is also
possible to estimate an equivalent stress range from measured operational responses
by updating a design model to the modal properties identified by OMA.
For this study, the two different approaches will be evaluated by comparing the es-
timated equivalent stress ranges of both methods to the ones obtained directly from
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Project outline
8
Table 2.2: Date and statistical wave data for measured time histories.
Dataset
Date
Hs [m]
Tp [s]
Dataset
Date
Hs [m]
Tp [s]
1
2013-03-18
6.4155
10.76478
19
2013-12-30
1.8159
6.395424
2
2013-11-01
1.9929
6.525042
20
2013-12-30
1.9351
6.395424
3
2013-11-01
2.0745
6.622899
21
2013-12-30
2.0575
6.307725
4
2013-11-01
2.1142
6.730915
22
2013-12-30
2.1535
6.496238
5
2013-11-01
2.284
6.972664
23
2013-10-10
5.2108
10.17417
6
2013-11-03
6.2315
10.58296
24
2013-10-10
5.5776
10.51429
7
2013-11-15
2.6769
7.808113
25
2013-10-10
5.4531
10.55325
8
2013-11-15
2.6731
7.695597
26
2013-10-10
5.0739
10.45308
9
2013-11-15
2.8468
7.99264
27
2013-10-10
4.839
10.16633
10
2013-11-15
2.866
8.129074
28
2013-04-17
1.2523
5.602281
11
2013-12-06
9.6388
13.87589
29
2013-04-17
1.1893
5.271933
12
2013-12-06
9.4845
14.25022
30
2013-04-17
1.2646
5.263703
13
2013-12-06
9.1245
13.78819
31
2013-04-17
1.3933
5.231556
14
2013-12-06
8.5617
13.48073
32
2013-04-17
1.5435
5.563575
15
2013-12-24
5.5307
10.15257
33
2013-04-17
1.7633
5.714025
16
2013-12-24
5.6992
10.50053
34
2013-04-17
1.7669
5.736528
17
2013-12-24
5.6298
9.949265
35
2013-04-17
2.3411
6.512312
18
2013-12-24
5.9524
9.986299
36
2013-04-17
2.5454
6.813598
SG measurements. Thus, an essential part of this project is to first determine the
equivalent stress range by the conventional design method as well as by the OMA-
approach. The diagram shown in figure 2.4 outlines the main phases of the project,
starting from the top and ending with a triple comparison between the estimated
stresses and the measured stresses.
As earlier mentioned, the starting point of the two methods are very different. For the
design method, a load history is simulated using a model wave spectra constructed
from statistical data of the environmental conditions of the site. This load is then
applied to the FE-model of the structure, from which the structural response is com-
puted. From the response, the equivalent stress range can be determined as an con-
stant stress range by using a rainflow counting algorithm to identify the individual
cycles in the strain histories.
In the OMA-based estimation, the starting point is recorded accelerations from which
signals of displacement are derived. For this analysis, two different identification meth-
ods are used to find the first few modes of the structure. The Frequency Domain De-
composition (FDD) and Time Domain Polyreference (TDPR). Next, the FE-model
is updated by distribution of mass in order to better match the frequencies obtained
by modal identification. The improved consistency between the mode shapes of the
updated model will be verified as well by the Modal Assurance Criterion. With the
updated model, the operational response can be extended to all selected degrees of
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Project outline
9
Figure 2.4: Graphical overview of the project.
freedom using modal expansion, by which point the equivalent stress range can be
calculated in the same manner as for the design method.
In order to distinguish between the equivalent stress ranges of the different methods
onward, the ones obtained by the design method will in the following be denoted the
design equivalent stress ranges, whereas the ones obtained by OMA will be denoted
the OMA equivalent stress ranges. Lastly, the SG measured equivalent stress ranges
might also be addressed as the actual strains.
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Project outline
10
The method comparison in the end is performed by comparing the two respective
approaches with results obtained from the strain gauge measurements. The accuracy
of each method is represented by the calculated deviation. A short investigation is
also performed in order to determine the Coefficient of Variation on the OMA-based
results, and then compared to the ones given in the DNV GL design standards.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Background
Several engineering disciplines are employed in the fatigue assessment. Besides the
theory of structural dynamic systems, the conventional analysis includes the concept
of irregular waves as well as hydrodynamic forces on an offshore structure for the
simulation of design wave loads. For the OMA-approach, an understanding of random
data, correlation functions and the principle of complex Fourier Transform is essential.
Lastly, the topic of cumulative damage by Miner’s summation and equivalent stress
range represent a key element of this project.
The purpose of this chapter is to
review the most relevant parts of the basic theory. Also, the contents of this chapter
is structured so to be used as a theoretical reference for the later analysis.
3.1
Fatigue Assessment
Fatigue is defined as a mechanism of failure due to the formation and propagation of
cracks under cyclic loading. This phenomenon is the cause of failure in the majority
of structures, and is especially common is those subjected to varying forces of wind,
waves and current. The aim of fatigue design is to ensure that a structure has an
adequate fatigue and operational life, and also forms the basis of efficient inspection
programs. The fatigue assessment is typically performed using S-N curves based on
experimental data, where a stress range S have N number of cycles to failure. For
response histories with varying stress ranges, the accumulated fatigue damage can be
expressed by the Palmgren-Miner rule, assuming linear cumulative damage:
D =
X
i
ni
Ni
= 1
a
X
i
niSm
i
(3.1)
where ni is the number of cycles and Ni is the total number of cycles to failure in
relation to the stress range Si. The parameters of a and m denotes the interception
and slope coefficients of the S-N curve, respectively. For welded structures m is typi-
cally equal to 3.
The Design Fatigue Factor (DFF) is a partial factor of safety used in the code-based
design [3]. The factor is applied to reduce the probability of fatigue failure, and is
related to uncertainties of inspection planning. The value of DFF is determined from
the level of consequence is case of component failure as well as the accessibility of
inspection.
3.1.1
Equivalent stress range
The fatigue life estimation may be based on an equivalent stress range as described
by Almar-Næss [12]. The concept of an equivalent stress range is to conveniently
convey data of varying stress ranges to a stress range with a constant amplitude.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Fatigue Assessment
12
This implies that fatigue damage from the constant stress range over a total number
of cycles Ntot = P
i ni must be equal to the accumulated damage from varying loads
cf. equation (3.1):
D = 1
aNtot Sm
eq
(3.2)
By combing (3.1) and (3.2) an expression for the equivalent stress range is obtained:
Seq =
P
i niSm
i
Ntot
1/m
(3.3)
From the stress history, the number of cycles ni with stress range Si shall be assessed
using the rainflow counting algorithm which is briefly summarized in the following.
3.1.2
Rainflow counting
The purpose of this section is to give an overall description of the rainflow counting
algorithm. For a more detailed explanation of its use and implementation, the reader
is referred to other literature such as Almar-Næss [12]. Rainflow counting is a proce-
dure used to identify and count individual cycles in a stress history. The principle
of the method is to count cycles as closed loops in the stress-strain path commonly
termed hysteresis. This is done by considering the reversal points (local extrema) of
a strain history as shown in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Principle of rainflow counting. Left: strain record represented by its
reversal points. Right: corresponding hysteresis [12].
From figure 3.1 it can be seen that point 2-3-2’ forms a closed loop in the hysteresis,
which is then counted as one cycle in the rainflow algorithm. This is the case when a
valley (where the sign of the derivative changes from positive to negative) is followed
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Fatigue Assessment
13
by an equal or even lower valley. Similarly, a closed hysteresis loop is formed, when a
peak (where the sign of the derivative changes from negative to positive) is followed
by a peak that is equal or higher.
The strain range of a cycle or half cycle ∆εi is calculated from the initiation to end
point of a counted cycle or half cycle. Assuming that the response is within the elastic
range, the strain-stress relation can simply be expressed by ∆σi = E · ∆εi. Thus the
stress range distribution of a strain history can be presented in a histogram as shown
figure 3.2, where the ith cycle counted by the rainflow algorithm are sorted into bins
by their stress range. The accumulated fatigue damage or equivalent stress range can
hereby be determined from the number of cycles ni within each stress range interval
∆σi using equation (3.1) or (3.3).
Figure 3.2: Stress range distribution histogram [12].
3.1.3
Wave simulation
The following theory on offshore hydrodynamics is obtained from [13]. In the design
approach, the fatigue loading is simulated using a model wave spectra to define the
stochastic wave load. These spectra are defined as analytical expressions, where the
statistical parameters of significant wave height Hs and peak period Tp are used to
describe the spectral shape. In the North Sea it is recommended to use the JONSWAP
spectrum (Joint North Sea Wave Observation Project) to describe the wave conditions.
This spectra is defined by:
S(ω) = γA · 320H2
s
T 4p
· ω−5 · e
−1950
T 4
p
·ω−4
,
A = e
−

ω
ωp −1
σ
√
2
2
(3.4)
Where ω is the angular frequency, γ is the peakedness factor equal to 3.3 for the
JONSWAP spectrum, and σ is a step function of ω defined by:
if ω < ωp
then: σ = 0.07
if ω > ωp
then: σ = 0.09
(3.5)
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Fatigue Assessment
14
Linear wave theory is used to estimate the kinematics of the waves. The horizontal
velocity and acceleration of the water particles at a distance z from the still water
level are given by equation (3.6).
u(z, t) = H
2 · gTw
L
· cosh(k (z + h))
sinh(kh)
· cos(ωt)
˙u(z, t) = −H
2 · gTw
L
· cosh(k (z + h))
sinh(kh)
· sin(ωt)
(3.6)
Where H is the wave height, k is the wave number, L is the wave length, g is the
acceleration of gravity and Tw is the wave period. Linear wave theory has a limita-
tion since it only considers the velocity below the still water level. Thus, Wheeler
stretching will be implemented in order to extend the kinematics from the linear wave
theory to the computed surface elevation at time t. The principle of Wheeler stretch-
ing is simply to stretch the velocity profile estimated from linear wave theory, to the
parts above still water level. This is also illustrated in figure 3.3, and can done by
substituting z in equation (3.7) into the right hand side of (3.6).
z′ = qz + h(q −1)
,
q =
h
h + η
(3.7)
Where z′ is the computational vertical coordinate, z is the actual vertical coordinate,
q is a dimensionless ratio, η is the elevation of the actual water surface and h is the
water depth.
Figure 3.3: Comparison of horizontal wave velocity before and after application of
Wheeler stretching [13].
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Fatigue Assessment
15
The kinematics can now be applied to the Morison equation in (3.8) in order to calcu-
late the total force applied on a cylinder. The total force consists of two contributions
from the inertia force, FI, and the drag force, FD.
F = ρ CmD ˙u
|
{z
}
FI
+ 1
2ρ CdAu|u|
|
{z
}
FD
(3.8)
Where ρ is the water density, D is the structural diameter and A is the cross-sectional
area. Cm and Cd are the inertia and drag force coefficients determined in accordance
with the DNV GL standards [14]. For the VBA platform the values Cm = 2 and
Cd = 1 have been chosen.
3.1.4
Strain Estimation
The strain histories are determined from the model response. The response is obtained
as displacement in the DOFs, from which the sectional forces can be calculated.
Mx(s) = EIx
L
· B(s) · qx,
My(s) = EIy
L
· B(s) · qy,
N = EA
L · ∆L
(3.9)
Where E is the Young’s Modulus, A is the cross section area and I is the bending
stiffness in the respective directions of x and y. The bending moment is denoted Mx
and My in the direction of x and y, respectively.
The strain interpolation matrix, denoted B(s), is defined by (3.10) where s ranges
from 0 to 1 over the length of the element as illustrated in figure 3.4. The vector q
contains the translational and rotational element displacements in the direction of x
and y as defined in (3.11).
Figure 3.4: Example of FE-element with local nodes 1 and 2.
B(s) =
−6 + 12s
L(−4 + 6s)
6 −12s
L(−2 + 6s)
(3.10)
qx =
vx1
θx1
vx2
θx2
T ,
qy =
vy1
θy1
vy2
θy2
T
(3.11)
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
16
Equation (3.9) gives the moment and normal force distribution over the element.
However, as the strain is sought estimated at the SG location, i.e. at defined nodes,
the moments are evaluated in either s = 0 or s = 1, depending on whether the element
is above or underneath the node of interest [15]. The strain εz at location (x, y) can
be calculated by Navier’s formula:
εz = N
EA −Mx
EIx
· x + My
EIy
· y
(3.12)
3.2
Operational Modal Analysis
Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) is the identification of structural modal proper-
ties on basis of recorded vibration measurements from ambient excitation only. The
ambient responses are generated from normal operational conditions such as wind,
waves, passing traffic or running equipment which are assumed to have nearly white-
noise characteristics. As accelerations induced by ambient loading are usually in the
order tens to a hundred milli-g, the recording equipment required for OMA has to be
quite sensitive. Moreover, the identification algorithms used in the analysis must also
be capable of separating the physical modes from the noise modes. In recent years,
the enhancement of measuring technology as well as advancement of computational
data processing has helped promote the use of OMA considerably. In this section,
the key elements of OMA will be presented. The theory is primarily obtained from
Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis [1] and Random vibration and spectral
analysis [16] unless otherwise stated.
3.2.1
Random data and correlation functions
Physical phenomenons are defined as random when they produce an unpredictable
and unique time history record for each conducted experiment. This implies that
data recorded from a single experiment is just one outcome of an infinite number
of possible physical realizations. A random process can therefore theoretically be de-
scribed by an unlimited collection of time history records xi(t), i = 1, 2, 3, ... produced
from separate experiments. As it is impossible to obtain an infinite number of time
history records, it is for practical purposes assumed that a large number of samples
can be a suitable approximation of the infinite ensemble describing a phenomenon
of interest. It follows that a random process can only be estimated and never be
simulated exactly. In the further data processing, samples are implicitly assumed to
exhibit stationary and ergodic properties.
A basic part of OMA is the correlation functions. For most people with some degree
of statistical knowledge, correlation is a well known concept. Correlation refers to
the dependency between a set of variables that might be described by a mathemat-
ical relation. The dependency between two variables is indicated by a correlation
coefficient, where the value ±1 means perfect correlation and a value of 0 means no
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
17
Figure 3.5: Ensemble of time history records.
correlation. A variable can also be correlated with a delayed version of itself. This is
called autocorrelation and is usually used in signal processing to discover repeating
patterns in noisy data. The concept is illustrated in figure 3.6, where the value x(t)
is correlated with the value x(t + τ), τ denoting the shift in time.
Figure 3.6: Example of autocorrelation of a time series with time shift τ.
It should be noted that in OMA the mean of a time series is meaningless and is
therefore removed from the data at the beginning of the analysis. With a mean equal
to 0, the covariance and correlation of two quantities becomes indistinguishable.
The autocorrelation function Rx(τ) is defined as:
Rx(τ) = E [x(t)x(t + τ)] = 1
T
Z T
0
x(t)x(t + τ) dt
(3.13)
Where the operator E denotes the expectation or average value over time. As the
random process is assumed ergodic, stationary as earlier discussed, the autocorrelation
function is unchangeable with the time t and only depends on the time lag τ. From
the definition in (3.13) it can be seen that for τ = 0 the autocorrelation corresponds
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
18
to the variance E[x2] = σ2
x.
Naturally, it would also be expected that for small
time shifts the values does not change much resulting in a reasonable amount of
correlation, while greatly shifted values, e.g.
τ →∞the function is assumed to
approach zero correlation. A typical autocorrelation function is plotted in figure 3.7.
Note that another property of this function is its symmetry as it satisfies the relation
Rx(τ) = Rx(−τ).
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the properties in a typical autocorrelation function.
Cross-correlation functions are similar to autocorrelation functions, and is a measure
of similarity between two different signals x(t) and y(t), where the time shift is applied
to one of them. This is shown in figure 3.8, where the correlation of the two time
histories changes as x(t) is shifted τ with respect to y(t).
Figure 3.8: Cross-correlation of two processes x(t) and y(t) with time shift τ.
The cross-correlation functions are defined by extending the autocorrelation function
given by equation (3.13) to two individual processes:
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
19
Rxy(τ) = E [x(t)y(t + τ)] = E [x(t −τ)y(t)] = Ryx(−τ)
(3.14)
Ryx(τ) = E [y(t)x(t + τ)] = E [y(t −τ)x(t)] = Rxy(−τ)
(3.15)
The two functions Rxy and Ryx are generally not the same, as the shift occurs in two
different directions of t resulting in different correlations.
In OMA all information of interest is contained in the correlation functions. Typically,
the analysis is based on N number of measurements which can be arranged in a
vector x = [x1(t), x2(t), ..., xN(t)]T . The previously described correlation functions
can thereby conveniently be presented in the matrix R(τ):
R(τ) = E[x(t)xT (t + τ)] = 1
T
Z T
0
x(t)xT (t + τ) dt
(3.16)
In this correlation function matrix (CF) the autocorrelation functions of x(t) is stored
in the diagonal while the all the non-diagonal elements constitute the cross-correlation
functions. In continuation of this representation, the correlation matrix C can also
be introduced, which for the collection of time series x(t) is simply given as R(0).
3.2.2
Spectral density functions and Fourier Transform
The spectral density functions describe the energy distribution as a function of fre-
quency, and are defined as the Fourier Transform of the correlation functions. The
mathematical details of Fourier series and Fourier Transforms can be found in stan-
dard literature on signal processing, and only the more essential aspects will therefore
be addressed in the following. Using the complex Fourier Transform, the spectral den-
sity functions for the autocorrelation function Rx(t) is expressed by:
Gx(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Rx(τ)e−iωτ dτ
(3.17)
This function is often referred to as the auto-spectral function. The inverse relation
of (3.17) is given by:
Rx(τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
Gx(ω)eiωτ dω
(3.18)
The complex representation of the Fourier Transform utilizes the Euler-relation eiωt =
cos(ωt) + i sin(ωt), whereby the function is evaluated in the form of Gx(ω) = A(ω) −
iB(ω). This compact notation introduces negative frequencies which can simply be
considered a mathematical artifice. The magnitude and phase spectra is given by
|Gx(ω)| and Arg(Gx(ω)). The Complex Transform of a continuous function in the
time domain to a discrete function in the frequency domain is illustrated in figure 3.9.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
20
(a) Continuous periodic time series
(b) Discrete function of frequency
Figure 3.9: Complex Fourier Transform.
Unlike the time series in figure 3.9(a), the samples obtained for the OMA are discrete.
This entails that the frequency resolution and range of the spectral density functions
are governed by the time-increment ∆t and total duration T of the recorded time-
series. In this regard, the Nyquist frequency fv may also conveniently be introduced.
This frequency is defined as half of the sample frequency and mark the frequency limit
from which point the transform becomes unable to distinguish between oscillations of
different frequencies going through the same data points. This produces a mirrored
signal around the Nyquist frequency, a phenomenon also known as aliasing.
∆f = 1
T
Frequency resolution
(3.19)
fs = 1
∆t
Sample frequency
(3.20)
fv =
1
2∆t
Nyquist frequency
(3.21)
Where the frequency in the above definitions are given in the unit Hz. Thus, for
a data sequence of xn = x(n∆t) for n = 1, 2, 3, ..., N a discrete Fourier Transform
sequence of Gx = Gx(k∆f) for k = 1, 2, 3, ..., N is obtained.
Figure 3.10: Resolution, range and Nyquist frequency in the frequency domain.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
21
3.2.3
Signal processing
Signal processing is required in OMA to minimize the noise and errors created by the
measured signal. This will make the following identification process more straightfor-
ward and provide clearer results. The signal processing includes detrending, decima-
tion, and the application of some sort of bandpass filter, which is explained in the
following.
Detrending is the process of removing the DC offset in the data and thereby obtaining
a signal with a mean value of zero. This is partly due to equipment induced noise
in the lower frequency range, but also because that in dynamic analysis, frequencies
below the fundamental frequency of a structure is simply of no interest. This can
generally be done by applying a high pass filter onto the signal. However, when the
cut-off value is close to DC, that is f = 0, the filter becomes unstable.
Decimation is a term used when downsampling a signal x(n) by an integer M. This is
done in order to reduce the sampling rate of the signal to ensure that the data will be
in a frequency range of interest. For example will the decimation by a factor 4 mean
keeping every 4th sample and removing the rest from the signal. Thus, a signal of 12
samples will be downsampled to 3 samples. The Nyquist frequency are also effected
by decimation and changes to fv = fs/M for the downsampled signal.
3.2.4
Modal parameters identification
The modal identification can either be performed in the time domain (TD) or in the
frequency domain (FD). In the FD each mode has a small band where the mode
dominates making it easy to identify. A drawback of the frequency domain is that
the spectral density estimates suffer from bias compared to the TD methods.
In
this project two identification methods are implemented.
The Frequency Domain
Decomposition and Time Domain Poly-Reference.
3.2.4.1
Frequency Domain Decomposition
Frequency Domain Decomposition, also referred to as FDD, is a identification tech-
nique that is widely used in Civil Engineering. The purpose of FDD is to extract
the physical information regarding natural frequency and damping using the spectral
density functions. The idea of this procedure is to express the response in normal
modes and modal coordinates as following:
y(t) = a1q1(t) + a2q2(t) + . . . = Aq(t)
(3.22)
A being the mode shape matrix and q(t) a vector of modal coordinates.
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
22
Using the definition of the CF matrix in equation (3.16), the response can be ex-
pressed:
Ry(τ) = ARq(τ)AT
(3.23)
with its corresponding Fourier Transform:
Gy(f) = AGq(f)AT
(3.24)
It is assumed that the modal coordinates are uncorrelated, whereby the non-diagonal
values in the CF matrix becomes equal to zero. Thus, the spectral density matrix,
Gq(τ), is diagonal and positive valued. Because the spectral density matrix is Her-
mitian and the mode shapes might contain complex values, the transpose in (3.24) is
replaced by the Hermitian, resulting in:
Gy(f) = A[g2
n(f)]AH
(3.25)
Where the diagonal elements [g2
n] are the auto spectral densities of Gy(τ). The rep-
resentation in (3.25) can be obtained by Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of the
SD matrix. For a complex Hermitian and positive definite matrix this results in:
Gy(f) = USUH
= U[s2
n]UH
(3.26)
Where [s2
n] are singular values corresponding to the auto spectral densities, and the
singular vectors in U are interpreted as individual mode shapes. It should also be
noted that the decomposition in (3.26) is not completely consistent with the theoret-
ical SVD of the SD matrix, whereby a bias is introduced. Consequently, the solution
of FDD is always approximate.
The spectral plot in figure 3.11 is obtained by plotting the singular values [s2
n] as
a function of the frequency f, where the peaks indicate the natural frequencies.
An important aspect of the FDD is that by performing SVD, the singular vectors
[u1, u2, ...un] are forced to become geometrically orthogonal, whereas eigenvectors in
structural dynamics are only necessarily orthogonal with respect to the mass matrix.
As a rule of FDD, the mode shapes should therefore be estimated where the forced
orthogonality has the least possible effect on the result. As illustrated on figure 3.11,
this is the case for the first singular vector at frequencies where the corresponding
singular value is dominating.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
23
Figure 3.11: Illustration of mode shape estimation in FDD with a case of two closely
spaced modes.
3.2.4.2
Time Domain Polyreference
An advantage of using TD identification is that the results are typically less biased
compared to FD techniques. The Time Domain Poly-Reference, or TDPR for short,
by Vold et al. [2] is essentially bias-free for data with vanishing noise. Though Vold
originally developed the technique for impulse response functions, the same princi-
ples applies for the correlation functions used in OMA. In fact, this is the case for
all classical modal analysis techniques based on impulse response functions, which in
OMA makes TD identification techniques to be among one of the more well covered
topics in literature.
The main idea of TD techniques is to extract the modal characteristics of a structure
from free decays. In OMA, it is typically the correlation functions that are considered
as the source of information, but for the purpose of general application, these are just
referred to as free decays in the following. In the Poly-Reference method (TDPR) the
free decays are represented using the auto regressive format (AR) shown in equation
(3.27).
y(n) −A1y(n −1) −A2y(n −2) −... −Anay(n −na) = 0
(3.27)
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
24
Where y(n) is the free decay with the discrete time samples n = 1, 2, ..., np. The
AR matrices A1, A2, ..., Ana contains the physical properties of the system. In order
to estimate these, two Hankel matrices are formed. The first one is defined with na
blocks:
H1 =


y(1)
y(2)
· · ·
y(np −na)
y(2)
y(3)
· · ·
y(np −(na −1))
...
...
...
...
y(na)
y(na + 1)
· · ·
y(np −1)


(3.28)
while the other Hankel matrix is defined with only a single block row:
H2 =
y(na + 1)
y(na + 2)
· · ·
y(np)
(3.29)
Here na is the chosen number of AR coefficient matrices. By now collecting the AR
matrices side by side in A = [Ana, Ana−1, · · · , A1], equation (3.27) can be formulated
for all possible np −na values of n as such:
H2 −AH1 = 0
⇔
AH1 = H2
(3.30)
Equation (3.30) is transposed to form an overdetermined problem for estimating the
AR matrices and then solved by SVD.
HT
1 AT = HT
2
⇕
Â = (HT +
1
HT
2 )T = H2H+
1
(3.31)
Due to the presence of noise in the data, the system must be overdetermined in order
to deem the results satisfactory. This requires following condition to be true:
np −na ≫na × nc
(3.32)
Where nc is the number of channels in the free decays. The procedure is still valid
for multiple responses Y(n), which only requires a slight change in the condition
regarding the criterion on well determined.
Y(n) =

y1(n)
y3(n)
· · ·
ynr(n)

(3.33)
(np −na)nr ≫na × nc
(3.34)
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
25
Where nr is the number of responses. After estimating the AR matrices, the next
step is to solve equation (3.27) as an eigenvalue problem. To do this, the companion
matrix AC and the discrete state vector ud are defined as:
AC =


0
I
0
0
...
0
...
...
0
...
I
Ana
Ana−1
· · ·
A1


,
ud(n) =


y(n −na + 1)
...
y(n −1)
y(n)


(3.35)
Where the identity matrix I has the same size as the AR matrices.
It can now be realized, that by advancing equation (3.27) by one time step so that
y(n + 1) = A1y(n) + ... + Anay(n −na + 1), a relation between companion matrix
and state vector can be expressed by:
ACud(n) = ud(n + 1)
(3.36)
It can be seen that the state vector ud has advanced one time step by multiplication
of the companion matrix AC. Finally, the eigenvalue problem can be formed from
equation (3.36) by expressing the state vector ud in terms of modal parameters:
ud(n) =


beλ(n−N+1)∆t
...
beλ(n−1)∆t
b

eλn∆t = φdµn
(3.37)
Where λ is the continuous time pole, µ = eλ∆t is the discrete time pole, φd is the
discrete eigenvector and b is the mode shape from the state space. Substitution of
(3.37) into equation (3.36) yields:
Acφd = µφd
(3.38)
Whereby the mode shape and poles are determined as eigenvalue and eigenvector to
the companion matrix AC.
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Modal Expansion
26
3.3
Modal Expansion
As it is neither sensible or practical to place accelerometers everywhere on the struc-
ture, the recorded information from the measured DOFs has to be expanded to others
DOFs of interest mathematically. This issue is solved with a subsequent modal ex-
pansion. The first approximation for this procedure is to obtain the mode shape for
a reasonable FE-model in a linear combination. Two systems A and B are related
through this linear combination, which is shown in equation (3.39)
A = BT
ˆT = B+A
(3.39)
where T defines the linear combination of mode shapes bn in B, which is used to
form mode shape an in A. In this project A contains the mode shape of the OMA
identified modes, while B are the mode shapes obtained from the updated model
in section 5.1.3. When an estimate for T has been obtained, the linear relation in
equation (3.39) is used to estimate the mode shapes from OMA which will contain
the same DOFs used in B. The final equation is as follows:
ˆA = BˆT
(3.40)
Where ˆA is an estimate of mode shape A containing the same DOFs as B.
3.4
Assurance Criterion
3.4.1
Modal Assurance Criterion
The Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) provides a procedure to compare the mode
shapes obtained from different tests or identifications using the collection of data sets.
MAC(a, b) =
|aHb|2
(aHa)(bHb)
= cos2(θ)
(3.41)
This is used in order to compute the best estimate of the modal vector and under-
standing the small errors [17]. This criterion will mainly be used for the updated
FE-model by comparing its modeshapes with the modeshapes obtained from the
FDD and TDPR identification.
3.4.2
Time Response Assurance Criterion
Time Response Assurance Criterion (TRAC) is in principle similar to MAC given in
equation (3.41). TRAC will be used in order to quantify the quality of the strain
prediction obtained from OMA with the strain gauge measurements, in which values
of approximately 90% or above is deemed satisfactory.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Design estimation
This chapter concerns the calculation of design strains using the original FE-model
of VBA. In order to later compare the results to the measured values, the strains
should be estimated in the same locations as the SGs. As the FE-model does not
initially have nodes at those locations, the first step is to create two additional nodes
in the place of the SGs as shown in figure 4.1. Furthermore, the adjacent nodes are
positioned so that an element length of 0.49 m can be attained around the nodes.
The reason for this is that the calculation of strains from the model response is quite
sensitive, and that estimation over too small elements has shown to produce escalated
results.
Figure 4.1: Node configuration in FE-model.
For this analysis, only the wave loads on the center column are taken into account. In
reality, the structure is also affected by wind, current and operational forces, though
the dynamic contribution from those are assumed insignificant in comparison. For the
purpose of this study, such assumption is deemed reasonable and makes the process
of simulating external loads on the structure much simpler.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Design waves
28
4.1
Design waves
The load from the waves is calculated using the wave kinematics reviewed in section
3.1.3. The waves are regarded irregular, in which case it is common practice to model
the surface elevation as a stochastic process defined by a model wave spectra. The
design standard Environmental conditions and environmental loads from DNV GL
[14] recommends two different types of model wave spectra for the North Sea area;
the Pierson-Moskowitz (PM) and the JONSWAP. The latter is an abbreviation for
Joint North Sea Wave Observation Project and is a modification of the PM spectra
describing developing sea states in the North Sea. The JONSWAP spectra is well
suited for the calculation of fatigue damage and will therefore be used in the following.
The JONSWAP spectrum is formulated analytically by equation (3.4) where the
significant wave height Hs and peak period Ts dictate the spectral shape. Normally,
these statistical inputs are obtained from long-term observation and presented in wave
scatter diagrams in the environmental design data. The distribution of the observed
Hs and Ts in the sector of VBA has been provided by Maersk Oil [18], and the full
wave scatter can be seen on figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Scatter diagram representative for VBA-sector in the North Sea [18].
This scatter diagram shows that waves with a significant wave height between 0.5 m
to 2.5 m and a peak period between 5 s to 8 s occur most frequently, making them
the dominating contributor in the fatigue design assessment. However, calculating
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Design waves
29
the fatigue damage using the statistical data given in the wave scatter is not ideal
for this particular analysis. This is because the main objective of this project is to
compare the methods by which the fatigue life can be assessed, and not to ensure the
fatigue design of a structure. In order to compare the results of the different methods,
the basis for the estimations should be the same. Now consider the distribution of
observed data from the monitoring campaign in figure 4.3. This scatter diagram is
composed by 36 data sets listed in table 2.2. So few sets of observations is of course
not adequate for a statistical description of the sea state. The diagram, however,
illustrates that the environmental conditions used are significantly different from the
conditions given by the environmental data report in figure 4.2. For this reason, the
design load will be modelled using the Hs and Tp reported for each set of data during
monitoring campaign instead of the parameters obtained by long-term observation at
the site.
Figure 4.3: Scatter diagram from parameters reported during monitoring campaign.
Using the parameters from the monitoring campaign in table 2.2 means that the
design estimation will be performed over 36 different wave combinations. The JON-
SWAP spectrum for the first set of data with Hs = 6.4 m and Ts = 10.8 s is shown in
figure 4.4. The spectra for the remaining data sets can be found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Design waves
30
Figure 4.4: JONSWAP spectrum for the first dataset.
The spectra is calculated with a frequency resolution of ∆f = 0.003 rad/s and a
sampling frequency of fs = 11.3 rad/s. The transformation into time series result in
a time increment of ∆t = 0.556 s and total duration of T = 2275 s for the simulated
loads.
Figure 4.5: Sketch of how the hydrodynamic force is calculated at each FE node by
integration over intermediate points.
Now that a time history has been established for the sea surface elevation η(t), the hor-
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Model response
31
izontal water particle velocity u and acceleration ˙u can be calculated for each time
step using equation (3.6). The velocity and acceleration profile are then extended
from the MWL to the elevated surface with Wheeler stretching given by equation
(3.7). The vertical coordinates in which the kinematic histories are computed corre-
spond to the nodes of the FE-model with four intermediate elevation points.
Finally, the hydrodynamic forces are calculated by equation (3.8) in all elevation
points and then integrated over half the element on each side on the FE-nodes as
illustrated in figure 4.5. The resulting load history are calculated at the elevation
points corresponding to the nodes of the center column in the FE-model.
4.2
Model response
Now that the wave loads have been simulated, the next step is to apply those forces
to the FE-model and obtain the model response. To do this, the stiffness, inertia
and mapping matrices are extracted from the ANSYS FE-model and imported into
the Matlab script FEcode_design. The function of this script is to generate new
structural matrices using a selection matrix in order to only consider the few DOFs
of interest. This minimizes the computational power and time of further calculations.
For the estimation of design strains, the selected DOFs can be limited to only include
the ones subjected to the wave load and the ones in the area of the SGs where the
response is of interest. In order to properly assign the computed wave forces to the
correct nodes, the sequence of DOFs in the selected matrix has to be consistent with
the indexing of wave load histories. Considering the selected matrices produced by
the FEcode_design script, the response in the selected DOFs can now be calculated
by classic FE analysis.
After obtaining the histories of displacement and rotation in the elements above and
below the location of the SGs, see figure 4.1, the calculation of strains can be carried
out as described in section 3.1.4. As the response is computed in the very center of
the column, the strains calculated in the nodal points have to be projected to the
surface positions c and d of the individual SGs shown in figure 2.3, in order to make
an adequate comparison to the actual measurements. For this, Naviers formular in
equation (4.1) is utilized. The strains in the respective positions of c and d is thereby
given by:
εz,c = N
EA + Mx
EIx
· r cos(θ) + My
EIy
· r sin(θ)
(4.1)
εz,d = N
EA + Mx
EIx
· r sin(θ) −My
EIy
· r cos(θ)
(4.2)
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Model response
32
Where r = 1.705 m is the radius of the center column section, Mx is the bending
moment about the y-axis, and My is the bending moment about the x-axis. The
design estimated strain histories for the first dataset are shown in figure 4.6 for each
of the four SG positions. The standard deviation for each history is indicated by the
dashed line.
Figure 4.6: Design estimated strain histories for the first dataset.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Design Fatigue Factor
33
The cycles of the strain histories are counted using the rainflow procedure described
in section 3.1.2. It is assumed that the response is within the elastic range, whereby
the stress range is simply calculated from the strain range by Si = Eεi. The section
material has a Young’s Modulus of 210 GPa. The rainflow-histograms for the stress
ranges are shown in figure 4.7. Like the strain histories in figure 4.6, the plots are
very similar, but it can be seen that the stress ranges in the two lower SGs extend a
little further over 2 MPa compared to the higher SGs.
Figure 4.7: Stress range histograms for the histories in figure 4.6 (First dataset).
These stress ranges are calculated without consideration of any safety factors. How-
ever, due to the extensive uncertainty related to fatigue design, an important part of
the design process is to determine the value of the safety factor.
4.3
Design Fatigue Factor
The Design Fatigue Factor (DFF) is a safety factor applied in the design fatigue
assessment. This safety factor is based on the NORSOK standard [19] and is shown
in table 4.1. Table 4.1 shows how different considerations are taken into account in
order to determine a value of the DFF.
Table 4.1: Design fatigue factor [19].
Classification of
Not accessible for
Accessible for inspection, maintenance and
structural components
inspection and repair
repair, and where inspections or
based on damage consequence
or in the splash zone
maintenance is planned
Below
Above splash zone
splash zone
or internal
Substantial consequence
10
3
2
No substantial consequence
3
2
1
Mainly two parameters are used to determine the value of the DFF. One of them is
whether the critical points of the structure are accessible for inspection and repair,
and the other is the consequences in the case of fatigue failure.
The distinction
==PAGE:44==
4.4 Equivalent Stress Range
34
between Substantial consequence and No substantial consequence entails following
three criteria:
(a) danger of loss of human life,
(b) significant pollution,
(c) major financial consequences.
If either one of the three criteria are applicable, the DFF is in the category of Substan-
tial consequence. In the case of the VBA, it is known that the platform is unmanned.
However, as the code [19] does not specify how much pollution is considered signif-
icant nor when something is a major financial consequence, it is difficult to reject
the latter two criteria. Thus a conservative decision would be to consider Substantial
consequence. No clear indication about the accessibility to the damaged location has
been given, though it is most likely below the splash zone. Based on what is discussed,
the DFF has been narrowed down to the first two columns in table 4.1, i.e. DFF =
2 and 3. This way the design equivalent stress ranges can be calculated for the best
and worst case scenario. Note that a DFF value of 10 is to be disregarded, since
there is not much value in comparing such conservative safety factors with the OMA
approach later on.
4.4
Equivalent Stress Range
The equivalent stress range can be determined based on the theory outlined in section
3.1. It is important to note that these results are referred to as design equivalent stress
ranges for later discussions. The results for the first six datasets without applied DFF
are presented in table 4.2 while results for DFF = 2 and DFF = 3 are presented in table
4.3. Results from all datasets are included in table A.1, A.2 and A.3 in Appendix.
Table 4.2: Design estimated equivalent stress ranges without safety factor.
Equivalent stress range [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
0.623
0.622
0.656
0.655
4
0.454
0.453
0.478
0.477
2
0.465
0.464
0.490
0.489
5
0.466
0.465
0.490
0.489
3
0.472
0.471
0.497
0.496
6
0.609
0.608
0.642
0.640
Figure 4.8 shows the design equivalent stress ranges values against the significant wave
height of the different data sets. It can also be said that there is a slight tendency of
an increased equivalent stress range for higher significant wave height.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Equivalent Stress Range
35
Table 4.3: Design estimated equivalent stress ranges with DFF = 2 and DFF = 3.
Equivalent stress range, DFF = 2 [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
1.247
1.244
1.312
1.310
19
0.858
0.857
0.904
0.903
2
0.930
0.928
0.979
0.978
20
0.924
0.921
0.972
0.970
3
0.943
0.941
0.993
0.991
21
1.015
1.013
1.069
1.067
Equivalent stress range, DFF = 3 [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
1.870
1.867
1.968
1.965
19
1.288
1.286
1.355
1.354
2
1.395
1.393
1.469
1.466
20
1.386
1.382
1.459
1.455
3
1.415
1.412
1.490
1.487
21
1.523
1.520
1.603
1.600
Figure 4.8: Design estimated equivalent stress ranges plotted with the significant
wave height measured for each set of data.
It can be seen that even for the best case scenario where regular inspection and
accessible repair work, the results are doubled when structural failure is of substantial
==PAGE:46==
4.4 Equivalent Stress Range
36
consequence (DFF = 2). Whether this is due to the many sources of uncertainty in
the fatigue design or just a matter of great precaution cannot be said without knowing
the actual integrity of the structure or how exactly the factor is defined. While the
design method itself is associated with several sources of uncertainty, such as the
sea state description and non-linearities in the model analysis, it is also recognized
that other factors not related to the actual design calculations affect the fatigue life.
Fabrication and assembly of the structure, for example, are not explicitly considered
in the design calculations.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
OMA estimation
5.1
Operational Modal Analysis
The OMA is performed over the 36 sets of acceleration history records. The 4 sensors
are located on the topside of VBA as indicated on figure 2.1, and measures acceleration
in the directions of the three axes over a duration of one hour. This gives a total of
12 signals per data set. A section of the first 20 seconds of measurements for the first
set of data can be seen in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Section of acceleration histories from dataset 1.
The data are measured with a sample rate of 128 Hz corresponding to an initial
Nyquist frequency of fv = 128/2 = 64 Hz. Before commencing the OMA identifi-
cation, the signals are processed in order to better extract the physical information.
First off, the DC component in the signals are removed, thus bringing the mean
value to zero. Secondly, the signals are decimated by a factor 20, which results in a
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
38
new Nyquist frequency of fv = 3.2 Hz and a new sampling time step of dt = 0.156 s.
The data was then filtered using a bandpass filter with a cutoff frequency at 0.4 Hz
and 1.6 Hz. The filtering is done to smooth the signal by removing any short-term
fluctuations and leaving the longer-term trend. Finally, the signal was transformed
from acceleration to displacement by double integration from which the correlation
functions were calculated.
(a) Unfiltered data
(b) Removal of mean and decimation with a factor of 20
(c) Application of bandpass filter
Figure 5.2: Spectral density functions showing the signal processing step by step
(dataset 1).
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
39
Figure 5.2 illustrates the signal processing in steps. The first three modes can be seen
by the peaks in figure 5.2(c), where the first two modes are closely spaced around
0.5 Hz and the third mode at 1.2 Hz-1.3 Hz. Five modes were initially to be consid-
ered, but since the fourth and the fifth mode could not successfully be identified in
either methods for all data sets, only the first three have been taken into account in
the following.
Naturally, the obtained signals also contain noise which can disturb the identification
of physical properties. The recorded response S(t) consists of an actual response y(t)
and a noise component n(t) from the equipment. In terms of correlation functions
this can be expressed as:
RS(τ) = Ry(τ) + Rn(τ)
(5.1)
The noise Rn(τ) is uncorrelated with the response RS(τ) and can therefore be re-
moved from the recording without corrupting the psychical information in the signal.
It is normally assumed that the noise is white for which the correlation function
resembles a delta function. For this reason, the first part, usually around 3-5%, is
disregarded in the estimation of modes. Another source of error stems from the noise
tail that prevents the correlation functions to completely converge to zero. This error
is dealt with by only considering up to 30-50% of the data. The following estimation
includes the correlation function from 8% to 35%.
Another issue to be addressed is the two closely spaced modes around 0.5 Hz. The
estimation of repeated modes give a subspace from which the mode shape vectors
are returned as a vector randomly distributed over both modes. This entails that
identification of closely spaced modes often result in experimental mode shapes that
are not aligned with the corresponding mode shape of the FE-model. To get around
this issue [20], the mode shape vectors of the two first modes are projected onto the
mode shapes of the FE-model using a transformation matrix. The procedure is very
similar to the one used in Modal Expansion described in section 3.3, and significantly
increases the MAC values of the modes, indicating the improved alignment.
5.1.1
Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD)
The FDD identification follows the theory outlined in section 3.2.4.1. The matlab
script used is id_fdd which is provided in the OMA toolbox created by Brincker [21].
The ID function requires three input commands defining an initial frequency, width
of frequency band and number of points used for identification of modal damping in
the time domain. The inputs used for each mode in the function are shown in table 5.1.
Other function inputs include the frequencies in the spectral density matrix, f, the
spectral density matrix, Gy, and the sampling time-step, dt. The identification re-
sults are presented in table 5.2.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
40
Table 5.1: FDD identification input parameters, where m is the mode number.
F(1, m) [Hz]
F(2, m) [Hz]
F(3, m) [-]
mode 1
0.508
0.2
400
mode 2
0.520
0.2
400
mode 3
1.223
0.2
400
Table 5.2: Identification results for the first 6 datasets using FDD.
FDD identification
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Dataset 1
fn [Hz]
0.508
0.524
1.216
ζn [%]
1.81
2.33
1.23
Dataset 2
fn [Hz]
0.529
0.531
1.244
ζn [%]
1.68
1.45
1.18
Dataset 3
fn [Hz]
0.532
0.532
1.245
ζn [%]
1.36
1.31
1.11
Dataset 4
fn [Hz]
0.532
0.532
1.244
ζn [%]
1.27
1.20
1.15
Dataset 5
fn [Hz]
0.520
0.531
1.244
ζn [%]
1.67
1.32
1.19
Dataset 6
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.521
1.230
ζn [%]
1.29
1.71
1.71
The natural frequencies determined by the FDD-function are as expected based on
the singular values in figure 5.2(c).
The results are similar to the FEM-obtained
frequencies listed in table 2.1, although a little smaller in general. Another observation
that can be made, is that the modal damping is within an acceptable range for physical
modes, where a rule of thumb is to have damping ratio below 3-5% [1].
5.1.2
Time-Domain Polyreference (TDPR)
The method of TDPR identification is described in section 3.2.4.2. The matlab script
used for this estimation is the id_tdpr from the OMA toolbox. The TDPR-function
only requires the correlation function matrix and the number of auto regressive co-
efficients, na. By trial and error, it was found that a na value of 3 gave the best
condition to identify the first three modes. As mentioned in the FDD estimation,
psychical modes typically have a damping ratio below 3-5%. Excluding results with
higher damping ratio effectively decrease the number of estimated modes. However,
as not all noisy modes are disregarded due to a low modal damping, the modal partic-
ipation factor π is also considered in the determination of the modes. All this resulted
in the following frequencies shown in table 5.3.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
41
Table 5.3: Identification results for the first 6 datasets using TDPR.
TDPR identification
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Dataset 1
fn [Hz]
0.502
0.529
1.218
ζn [%]
2.34
2.67
1.41
πn [%]
35.06
8.00
0.00
Dataset 2
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.533
1.244
ζn [%]
1.35
1.07%
1.20
πn [%]
51.58
17.77
0.00
Dataset 3
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.535
1.246
ζn [%]
1.29
1.05
1.31
πn [%]
61.77
21.53
0.00
Dataset 4
fn [Hz]
0.518
0.534
1.243
ζn [%]
1.47
1.10
1.18
πn [%]
38.33
20.64
0.00
Dataset 5
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.534
1.245
ζn [%]
1.73
1.32
1.28
πn [%]
22.43
24.31
0.00
Dataset 6
fn [Hz]
0.511
0.519
1.231
ζn [%]
1.66
0.90
1.85
πn [%]
71.49
22.94
0.00
5.1.3
Model updating
By comparing the experimental frequencies in table 5.2 and 5.3 to those obtained
from the original FE-model in table 2.1, it is found that the OMA-estimated frequen-
cies deviate from the FE-frequencies with approximately 6-8%. In order to provide
a better analytic match to the experimental results, a manual model updating is
now performed. This is done manually by redistribution of mass in the FE-model.
The densities of the different materials in the model was edited to fit the frequencies
obtained from the TDPR-identification. As it is common for an offshore platform
to exceed its design mass in its operation years, some extra mass was added to the
topside of the structure. New materials was also introduced and assigned to only
some parts of the platform which helped shift the natural frequencies relative to each
other. The new updated mass distribution is illustrated in figure 5.3.
The natural frequencies of the updated FE-model are shown in table 5.4 along with
the experimentally obtained natural frequencies averaged over all 36 sets of data. The
new deviation between the experimental frequencies and the updated FE-frequencies
are stated as well, showing a deviation below 1% percent for all experimental modes
except mode two in the TDPR-identification, which has a deviation of approximately
2%. Nonetheless, this is still deemed a good improvement to the up to 8% deviation
of the original model.
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
42
Figure 5.3: Model updating with new mass distributions on the topside.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
43
Table 5.4: Updated frequencies.
Frequencies f
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Original model
[Hz]
0.5607
0.5634
1.3311
Updated model
[Hz]
0.5143
0.5186
1.2355
FDD (average)
[Hz]
0.5193
0.5260
1.2342
TDPR (average)
[Hz]
0.5143
0.5291
1.2356
Deviation after update
(FDD)
0.967%
-0.583%
-0.112%
Deviation after update
(TDPR)
0.003%
-1.969%
-0.006%
The first and third mode frequencies in the TDPR-idenfication differs from the ones
in the updates FE-model with 0.003-0.006%, which is considered a fairly close fit.
Therefore, the TDPR-identified modes are used in the further strain estimation.
The structural matrices are now extracted from the updated model in ANSYS and
imported into the matlab script FECode_update whereby the selection matrices are
generated. Contrary to the design method where the selected DOFs where all part
of the center column, the DOFs selected for the OMA-estimation includes the DOFs
where the acceleration is measured and the DOFs needed for the strains estimation at
the location of the SGs, see figure 4.1. The degree of consistency between mode shapes
of the updated FE-model and OMA-estimated mode shapes can now be calculated
by the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC). The MAC values are calculated using
equation (3.41) and can be seen in table 5.1.3.
Table 5.5: MAC values of the FE model before and after update for the first 6
datasets. Based on TDPR mode shapes.
Before updating
After updating
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Dataset 1
99.79%
99.66%
94.73%
99.82%
99.70%
95.73%
Dataset 2
99.82%
99.68%
93.50%
99.85%
99.72%
94.55%
Dataset 3
99.82%
99.68%
94.41%
99.84%
99.72%
95.42%
Dataset 4
99.81%
99.68%
94.12%
99.84%
99.72%
95.14%
Dataset 5
99.81%
99.68%
93.86%
99.84%
99.72%
94.90%
Dataset 6
99.82%
99.69%
94.54%
99.85%
99.73%
95.55%
The first two modes show consistency of approximately 99% for almost all datasets,
whereas the third mode is in the vicinity of 95%. It could be argued that another
model update could be performed to further improve the MAC value for the third
mode, but the manual updating is a time consuming process and this would only have
very little impact on the final result. All the MAC values are deemed satisfactory,
thus making the mass distribution shown in figure 5.3 an acceptable update of the
model. The MAC values for all 36 datasets can be found in table A.6 in Appendix.
It was seen that the MAC values after updating were almost unaffected for mode
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Operational Modal Analysis
44
1 and 2, which is due to the alignment performed on the two closely spaced modes.
The third mode illustrated a very minor improvement around 1%.
According to
Miroslav Pastor [22] ”The Modal Assurance Criterion is a statistical indicator that
is most sensitive to large differences and relatively insensitive to small differences in
the mode shapes”. The changes in the model update could have lead to such a small
changes in the third mode shape, that the differences was barely indicated by the
MAC values of the third mode. To gain higher MAC values for the third mode would
require further redistribution of the mass on the steel deck. However, due to the time
constraint of the project and the time required for a manual updating, it was decided
in collaboration with the supervisors to accept this updated model and proceed with
the analysis.
5.1.4
Modal Expansion and model response
By double integration the displacement histories are known in the DOFs of recorded
acceleration. However, as the equivalent stress range is to be assessed at the location
of the SGs and not accelerometers, the displacement histories has to be extended
to those other DOFs. This is done by performing the Modal Expansion described in
section 3.3. This procedure uses the mode shapes of the updated FE-model to expand
the displacement at the accelerometers to all other DOFs included in the mode shape
vector. Thus, the displacement in the nodes at the SGs shown in figure 4.1 are found
and used in the calculation of strains the same way as in section 4.2.
The strain history in the four different SGs for the first set of data is shown in figure
5.4. The standard deviation is indicated by the dashed lines and can be seen to be
slightly bigger for the lower positioned SGs. This makes sense considering how the
strain contribution from the lateral moments are larger in the lower part due to the
cantilever-like upper structure.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Equivalent stress range
45
Figure 5.4: OMA estimated strain histories for the first dataset.
5.2
Equivalent stress range
The OMA-estimated stress ranges can now be determined from the strains histories
using the rainflow counting described in section 3.1.2 and equation (3.3).
As no
particular safety factor is associated with fatigue-assesment by OMA, none is applied
to the results. The equivalent stress ranges at each SGs is shown in table 5.6 for the
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Equivalent stress range
46
first six datasets. The results for the remaining datasets can be found in table A.11
in Appendix.
Table 5.6: OMA equivalent stress range in [MPa].
OMA Equivalent stress range [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
0.485
0.577
0.511
0.607
4
0.372
0.365
0.392
0.384
2
0.326
0.366
0.343
0.386
5
0.381
0.400
0.402
0.421
3
0.337
0.384
0.355
0.404
6
0.897
0.936
0.944
0.986
Figure 5.5: OMA estimated equivalent stress ranges of 36 data sets plotted with
the significant wave height measured for each set of data.
The OMA-estimated equivalent stress ranges Seq can also be plotted against the
significant wave height Hs for each dataset in figure 5.5. This shows the same tendency
as for the design estimated equivalent stress range in figure 4.8, where there is an
increase of the stress range with higher wave heights. The result from the highest wave
height is slightly off compared to its previous wave height in terms of the equivalent
stress range magnitude.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Quality of strain prediction
47
5.3
Quality of strain prediction
A quality assessment is performed of the strain prediction using Time Response Assur-
ance Criterion (TRAC). The TRAC values are calculated from the strains estimated
with OMA and the ones measured from the SGs. As the displacements used for the
calculation of strains have undergone some signal processing, see figure 5.2, the same
filtering is applied to the measured strains before the comparison. Essentially this
means that the SGs data was detrended, decimated by a factor 20 and bandpass
filtered. A section of the OMA-estimated strain history and measured strain history
can be seen in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Strain histories for the first dataset.
From these plots the OMA estimated strains seem to follow the measured strains well,
with a similar shape and reasonable magnitude. The consistency is also confirmed by
the TRAC values in table 5.7 where the correspondence between the two histories is
calculated to around 89-92%.
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Quality of strain prediction
48
Table 5.7: TRAC values of the OMA estimated strain prediction.
SGc 12.2m
SGd 11.5m
SGc 12.5m
SGd 11.5m
Dataset 1
89.64%
91.88%
90.03%
91.99%
Dataset 2
89.00%
91.19%
89.55%
91.36%
Dataset 3
89.50%
91.42%
89.89%
91.45%
Dataset 4
89.56%
89.54%
89.95%
89.54%
Dataset 5
89.55%
90.85%
89.95%
90.99%
Dataset 6
91.17%
92.31%
91.24%
92.26%
For more datasets the reader is referred to table A.10 in Appendix A. In this regard,
it should be notified that table A.10 does not contain datasets from 11 to 22. This is
because the SGs measurements number 11 to 22 were faulty and could not be used
for the TRAC assessment. Data set 1 - 5 shown in table 5.7 are among those with
the lowest TRAC values of min. 89%. The rest, however, are deemed to be very good
estimates with TRAC above 90% up to 93.8%.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Comparison of methods
Now that the equivalent stress ranges have been estimated by both the design method
and by use of OMA, the respective methods can be compared.
This is done by
considering the accuracy of the two different results using the measured strains.
6.1
Comparison of equivalent stress ranges
The equivalent stress ranges of the SG measured strain histories can be calculated
in the same manner as in the previous methods. It is assumed that the uncertainty
related to the strain gauge measurements are insignificant and that the measurement
for all practical purposes represent the actual strains in the structure. As the SG
measurements have been obtained simultaneously with the acceleration records and
statistical sea state parameters, the results of the individual datasets are comparable.
Figure 6.1: Results of the 24 reliable data sets as a function of reported significant
wave height. Design estimation displayed without DFF.
In figure 6.1 the equivalent stress ranges of the two different approaches and the mea-
sured strains are shown together. Note that the design estimated equivalent stress
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Deviation from actual equivalent stress ranges
50
range is presented without applied DFF. Also, the results from datasets 11-22 does
not appear in the tables due to the corrupted SG measurements. Without these ac-
tual structural strains, the accuracy of the design method and OMA method can not
be evaluated. That means the following findings are only based on the remaining 24
sets of data. The plots in figure 6.1 indicate some correlation between the equivalent
stress ranges and significant wave height. It can be seen that in the lower range of sig-
nificant wave heights, the stress ranges are estimated higher by the design approach
compared to both the OMA-estimates and the measurements. For the higher wave
heights however, the design method is in some cases seen to yield stress ranges lower
than the actual stresses. The same goes for the OMA-results in SG1d and SG2d,
though the underestimation is less pronounced. In general the OMA results are much
more consistent with the strain gauges compared to the design results.
6.2
Deviation from actual equivalent stress ranges
The method accuracy are evaluated by calculating the deviation between the mea-
surements, or actual equivalent stress ranges, and the estimated results. The results
for the two methods are listed in table 6.1 for the first six data sets. For all data sets
consult table A.12 and A.13 in Appendix. It is found that for the design method, the
results deviates from -37.2% to 58.9%, while the deviation in the OMA-results ranges
between -6.84% and 13.4%. The rms-values of all sets of data are also shown in the
table, and varies in between 17.89%-31.40% for the design method, and 3.28%-10.50%
for the OMA method. The deviation of OMA-estimated equivalent stress ranges are
thus reduced by at least two thirds on average relative to the deviation of the design
results with no DFF amplifications.
Table 6.1: Percentage absolute deviation from the measured data for the first 6
datasets. Design values are without DFF. The rms values are calculated
for all 24 valid sets of data.
Deviation in design estimated data [%]
Deviation in OMA estimated data [%]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
41.33%
3.49%
35.50%
6.67%
1
9.94%
-4.07%
5.49%
-1.10%
2
58.91%
31.61%
52.33%
33.28%
2
11.24%
3.81%
6.67%
5.16%
3
54.67%
25.33%
47.87%
26.76%
3
10.53%
2.13%
5.69%
3.36%
4
33.53%
28.73%
27.30%
30.61%
4
9.54%
3.63%
4.47%
5.19%
5
31.76%
22.80%
26.43%
25.15%
5
7.95%
5.70%
3.60%
7.75%
6
-27.79%
-37.20%
-30.61%
-35.74%
6
6.25%
-3.34%
2.12%
-1.03%
rms
31.40%
17.87%
26.75%
18.70%
rms
10.50%
3.00%
6.18%
3.28%
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Deviation from actual equivalent stress ranges
51
For more visual clarity, the absolute deviation is also presented in figure 6.2. The
dashed lines indicate the rms-value for the design method and OMA method, respec-
tively.
Figure 6.2: Absolute deviation of design and OMA estimated results from the mea-
sured data. Design estimation displayed without DFF.
From this plot it is clear that the OMA methods provide results much closer to re-
ality than the design method. Curiously, the estimates of both methods match the
measurements better in the SGs at position d than in position c. It is not exactly
clear why this is the case, but a possible explanation could be that the location of
the real life measurements and the location of calculated strain are a bit off for the c
position.
It is also evident from the plots, that the deviation of design result varies more over the
different sets of data, compared to the OMA-results. The mean standard deviation
of the deviation in the design estimation is 17.5% while it for OMA is 2.4%.
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Deviation from actual equivalent stress ranges
52
The deviation of the OMA-results are thus much more constant, which might make
the prospect of calibrating OMA-results easier.
It is important to note that the design estimated equivalent stress ranges shown in
figure 6.2 have not been multiplied with a DFF value. This is due to the fact that
the DFF is a inspection related safety factor that does not necessarily represent the
uncertainties of calculated fatigue loading. That being said, it can still be interesting
to see how much the deviation of the design results are increased by applying the
relatively low DFF values of 2 and 3. The absolute deviation of these design estimates
are presented in figure 6.3. It can be seen that the rms-value for the design estimates
goes from a range of 18.7%-31.1% to approximately 130% and 250% with a DFF
value of 2 and 3, respectively.
Figure 6.3: Absolute deviation of design and OMA estimated results from the mea-
sured data. Design estimation displayed with DFF values of 2 and 3.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Estimation of Coefficient of Variation for OMA
53
6.3
Estimation of Coefficient of Variation for OMA
A quick analysis is conducted in order to get a Coefficient of Variation (CoV) of the
OMA-estimated equivalent stress ranges. The design code already provides values of
these for the design approach in the DNV GL [23]. The OMA-values are calculated
using the matlab function weighted_cov_test provided by Bruna Nabuco. The Cov
gives a measure of dispersion in data relative to the mean. The function uses the
results from the rainflow counting of both the OMA method and SG measurements,
and calculates the CoV from accumulated stresses in logarithmic bins. The results
for the four SG positions in each of the 24 sets of reliable data are presented in figure
6.4.
Figure 6.4: Coefficient of Variation of OMA-estimated results for all dataset.
The mean value of all datasets was found to CoVOMA,avg = 0.025. This is significantly
less than the values given for the simulated wave loads in the design standard shown in
table 6.2. The CoV calculated corresponds to what was found by Graugaard-Jensen
et al. [10] in which CoV was estimated below 0.03 for OMA approach.
Table 6.2: Uncertainty of calculated fatigue loading in the design and OMA method.
Uncertainty of design fatigue loading [23]
Uncertainty of OMA method
Location
CoV
Location
CoV (avg)
20 meters below MWL and below
0.12
SG1c
0.024
Below splash zone down 20 meters below MWL
0.17
SG1d
0.027
Splash zone and above
0.22
SG2c
0.024
SG2d
0.026
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
The results obtained through this report suggest that equivalent stress ranges esti-
mated by OMA are more exact compared to the equivalent design estimates. This
can be seen even for design results without applied safety factor, and also verifies
the investigations by Graugaard-Jensen [10] in regard to OMA providing results that
are close to what can be measured by strain gauges. Also, the design method in
this analysis only takes wave forces acting on the center column into account. Since
contributions from other operational forces such as wind, current and vibrating equip-
ment are disregarded, this might possibly result in an underestimation of the stresses.
The OMA method on the other hand includes all operating forces as the procedure is
based on measured responses. This also means that uncertainties related to the pre-
sumed forces in the design estimates are not a part of the OMA procedure. The main
idea of using OMA in the fatigue assessment, it to continuously record the structural
responses and thereby obtain a complete, up-to-date strain history and equivalent
stress range for an asset. Due to the good match that has been found between the
SG measurements and OMA-estimated results, it is likely that this procedure could
provide a more accurate fatigue assessment at any given time in the operational life
time of the structure. An example could be an offshore platform reaching its des-
ignated fatigue design life. By performing OMA and using the acceleration records
launched from day one, the structural integrity can be reassessed more accurately.
The evaluation of accumulated fatigue damaged based on more dependable strain
histories may lead to an increased fatigue life expectancy.
A very different aspect of the two approaches are the input data.
OMA requires
acceleration data, whereas the design approach requires information about the wave
parameters. As earlier mentioned, the use of measurements greatly reduce the un-
certainty related to the load history of the structure, but it also means that OMA is
better suited for assessing a structure’s condition at the present. Thus it is important
to establish that the two methods excels in two very acute areas. OMA can be great
for establishing a very realistic account of accumulated damage in the structure for
the elapsed time of operation. The design method, on the other hand, can be used in
advance of a specific time, and are thus able to provide a prospective estimate of the
structure’s fatigue life, albeit less accurate.
The input also presents another challenge to the OMA assessment. In order to get
a good estimate of the accumulated fatigue damage, the measurements have to span
over a period long enough to capture responses representative of the sea-state con-
ditions.
Optimally, the acceleration should be recorded during the entire time of
operation, though several decades of measurements would presumably require some
sort of equipment maintenance and inspections, and not be without economical cost.
There are also the risk of glitches or faulty data in the measurements. As a matter
of fact this issue was encountered in the project, though only for the SG data. Dur-
ing the comparison of strains, it was found that in 12 of 36 sets of data, the strain
==PAGE:65==
7 Discussion
55
gauge measurements were too small to be considered reliable. Even though a third
of the SGs data was useless, all acceleration records showed no sign of measurement
errors. This also supports how SGs are more susceptible to errors compared to the
accelerometers. This is mostly due to strain gauges measuring very small changes in
micro units and are easily corrupted in an offshore environment. The fact that the
OMA-procedure has shown to provide a fairly good estimate of what can be mea-
sured by SGs presents a big advantage in the field of structural health monitoring.
Accelerometers are not only more reliable than SGs in terms of consistent data, they
can also conveniently be installed at easily accessible locations such as the steel deck
of the VBA, whereas SGs have to be placed exactly where the stresses are of interest.
The possibility of recording strains during operation is especially relevant in a time
marked by considerable environmental changes. The life expectancy for an offshore
structure like VBA are typically 25-30 years, and is based on the environmental con-
ditions given in scatter diagrams. However, climate and sea state can change rapidly
over the course of 10 years, loading the structure differently than originally antici-
pated. Setting up a monitoring system and using OMA could benefit in keeping up
with the environmental changes, and more importantly, how these affect the fatigue
life of the structure.
Another matter of some discussion throughout this project is safety factors, and how
these account for different sources of uncertainty in the design estimations. The DFF
for instance, solely depends on the consequence of component failure and availability
of inspection [19]. Neither of these parameters are affected by the choice of method,
and although OMA provides good real-time estimates, it cannot replace the need of
inspections. Hence, it can be argued that a safety factor based on inspection planning
is relevant as well. However, it might be possible too reduce such a factor relative
to what is used in the design method. This would depend on whether or not the
uncertainty of fatigue loading is taken into account by the DFF factor and to what
extend it is, which is not explicitly stated in the standards. For this reason the com-
parison of results has primarily been done without application of the DFF to the
design-estimates. It should be noted that OMA-based fatigue assessment is still lim-
ited by other sources of uncertainties such as fabrication and assembly flaws, stress
magnification at welds, hot spot stresses derived from the FE-model and several oth-
ers variables. In the design case, the uncertainties associated with the hotspot stresses
and manufactured imperfections are covered by the Stress Concentration Factor, or
SCF for short, which is also valid in the OMA fatigue assessment. However, as this
project considers far-field stresses and not any specific joints or welds, this factor is
not applied to the results.
Another relevant factor in the inspection planning is the Coefficient of Variation. This
value is stated in the standards to be 0.12-0.22 for simulated wave loads depending
on the location relative to the splash zone. As expected, the CoV of the fatigue load
in the OMA estimation has been found to be significantly lower with a mean value
of CoVOMA,avg = 0.025. This is a reduction of 79% - 89% which can contribute to
==PAGE:66==
7 Discussion
56
a reduction of the number of planned inspections. Naturally this would benefit the
integrity management on a economic level as well.
While the findings in this project demonstrates how well the OMA results fit the
measured data compared to the design method, it should be kept in mind that that
this is only investigated in four locations with a small spacing of 0.7m between the
two elevation heights. Further verification should be performed in locations more
distributed on the center column.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this project, equivalent stress ranges on the real offshore structure Valdemar BA
has been estimated by both the design method in the standard DNV GL-C03 [3], and
from measured operational responses by use of OMA. It has been found that OMA
yielded results much closer to what could be measured by strain gauges even for the
case where no safety factors were considered in the design results. The mean of the
absolute deviation for the OMA-based estimation was calculated to be in the range
3% to 10.5%, whereas the design approach spanned from 17.9% to 31.4% without any
DFF amplifcation. Intuitively, an even greater discrepancy was seen between OMA-
based estimation with the design approach considering the relative low DFF values
of 2 and 3. This resulted in mean variation beyond 100% for all strain gauge locations.
Another point of interest relates to the uncertainties regarding the calculated fatigue
load. The Coefficient of Variation was estimated based on S-N curves in order to
estimate the CoV of the OMA-based estimation that relates to the loading. The
mean CoV was found to be 0.025, which is a reduction of 79% to 89% from the CoV
of simulated wave loads in the design standard.
It is concluded that OMA in fact provides more accurate results for the Valdemar BA
than what could be determined by the design approach. This means that an OMA-
based estimation has the ability to provide a better fatigue assessment of an existing
offshore structures in comparison to what can be determined by the conventional
design method.
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1]
Brincker, R. and Ventura, C. E. Introduction to operational Modal Analysis.
1st edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
[2]
Vold, H. et al. “A Multi-Input Modal Estimation Algorithm for Mini-Computers”.
In: Vol. 91, Section 1 (1982).
[3]
DNV GL. DNVGL-RP-C203 Recommended practices - Fatigue design of off-
shore steel structures. Aprilr 2016. DNV GL AS, 2016.
[4]
Bendat, J. S. and Piersol, A. G. Engineering applications of correlation and
spectral analysis. 2nd edition. John Wiley & Sons, 1993.
[5]
Brincker, R., Zhang, L., and Andersen, P. “Modal Identification of Output-Only
Systems using Frequency Domain Decomposition”. In: (2000).
[6]
Húsgard, J. et al. “OMA-based modal identification and response estimation of
a monopile model subjected to wave load”. In: (2020).
[7]
Nabuco, B. et al. “A first step in quantifying the value of OMA based fatigue
stress estimation”. In: (2019).
[8]
Maes, K. et al. “Dynamic strain estimation for fatigue assesment of an offshore
monopile wind turbine using filtering and modal expansion algorithms”. In: Me-
chanical Systems and Signal Processing (2016).
[9]
Fernández, P. et al. “Stress Estimation in Structures Using Operational Modal
Analysis”. In: (2009).
[10]
Graugaard-Jensen, J et al. “Modal Based Fatigue Monitoring of Steel Struc-
tures”. In: (2009).
[11]
Hjelm, H. P. et al. “Reduction in Inspection Costs for Dynamic Sensitive Steel
Structures by Modal Based Fatigue Monitoring”. In: (2005).
[12]
Almar-Næss, A. Fatigue Handbook. Offshore steel structures. 1st edition. Tapir
publishers, 1985.
[13]
Journée, J.M.J. and Massie, W.W. OFFSHORE HYDROMECHANICS. 1st edi-
tion. Delft University of Technology, 2001.
[14]
DNV GL. DNVGL-RP-C205 Recommended practices - Environmental condi-
tions and environmental loads. August 2017. DNV GL AS, 2017.
[15]
Nielsen, Jens Henrik, Olesen, John Forbes, and Poulsen, Peter Noe. Bærende
Konstruktioners Numeriske Modellering 1: Elementmetoden. DTU Byg, 2017.
[16]
Newland, D. E. An introduction to Random vibrations and spectral analysis.
2nd edition. Longman, 1984.
[17]
Allemang, R. J. and Brown, D. L. “A correlation coefficient for modal vector
analysis”. In: (1982).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
[18]
Maersk Oil. “General Jacket Design and Assessment Conditions - Environmen-
tal Design Data”. In: (Effective from March 2016 to next revision).
[19]
NORSOK. N-001 - Integrity of offshore structures. June 2010. Standard Norway,
2010.
[20]
Amador, S. “Note on Experimental Mode Shape Projection”. In: (2-04-2020).
[21]
R. Brincker. OMA Toolbox. 2019. url: http://www.brinckerdynamics.com/
oma-toolbox/.
[22]
Pastor, M., Binda, M., and Harc̆arik, .T. “Modal Assurance Criterion”. In: Pro-
cedia Engineering (2012).
[23]
DNV GL. DNVGL-RP-C210 Recommended practices - Probabilistic methods for
planning of inspection for fatigue cracks in offshore structures. November 2015.
DNV GL AS, 2015.
==PAGE:70==
Appendix
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Results for all datasets
This appendix contains values and tables considering all datasets that are calculated
using the various procedures in both the design approach and the OMA identification.
Note that some tables disregard datasets 11-22 due to the later analysis indicated
errors in either the acceleration data or strain gauge measurement, thus it could not
be used for further equivalent stress range estimations.
Table A.1: Design estimated equivalent stress ranges without DFF.
Equivalent stress range [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
0.623
0.622
0.656
0.655
19
0.429
0.429
0.452
0.451
2
0.465
0.464
0.490
0.489
20
0.462
0.461
0.486
0.485
3
0.472
0.471
0.497
0.496
21
0.508
0.507
0.534
0.533
4
0.454
0.453
0.478
0.477
22
0.499
0.497
0.525
0.524
5
0.466
0.465
0.490
0.489
23
0.557
0.556
0.587
0.585
6
0.609
0.608
0.642
0.640
24
0.564
0.563
0.594
0.593
7
0.447
0.446
0.470
0.470
25
0.566
0.565
0.596
0.595
8
0.445
0.444
0.469
0.468
26
0.517
0.516
0.544
0.543
9
0.450
0.449
0.474
0.473
27
0.506
0.505
0.533
0.532
10
0.448
0.447
0.472
0.471
28
0.368
0.367
0.387
0.387
11
0.642
0.640
0.676
0.674
29
0.398
0.397
0.419
0.418
12
0.578
0.577
0.608
0.607
30
0.432
0.431
0.455
0.454
13
0.596
0.594
0.627
0.626
31
0.468
0.468
0.493
0.492
14
0.576
0.575
0.607
0.606
32
0.460
0.460
0.485
0.484
15
0.584
0.582
0.615
0.613
33
0.518
0.517
0.545
0.544
16
0.566
0.566
0.596
0.596
34
0.509
0.508
0.536
0.535
17
0.616
0.615
0.649
0.648
35
0.552
0.551
0.582
0.580
18
0.695
0.693
0.732
0.730
36
0.541
0.540
0.569
0.568
==PAGE:72==
A Results for all datasets
62
Table A.2: Design estimated equivalent stress ranges with DFF = 2.
Equivalent stress range, DFF = 2 [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
1.247
1.244
1.312
1.310
19
0.858
0.857
0.904
0.903
2
0.930
0.928
0.979
0.978
20
0.924
0.921
0.972
0.970
3
0.943
0.941
0.993
0.991
21
1.015
1.013
1.069
1.067
4
0.908
0.906
0.956
0.954
22
0.998
0.995
1.051
1.048
5
0.931
0.930
0.980
0.979
23
1.114
1.112
1.173
1.171
6
1.219
1.216
1.283
1.281
24
1.128
1.126
1.187
1.186
7
0.893
0.892
0.940
0.939
25
1.132
1.130
1.192
1.190
8
0.891
0.889
0.938
0.936
26
1.034
1.031
1.088
1.086
9
0.900
0.898
0.947
0.945
27
1.012
1.010
1.065
1.064
10
0.896
0.894
0.943
0.941
28
0.735
0.734
0.774
0.773
11
1.283
1.281
1.351
1.348
29
0.795
0.794
0.837
0.836
12
1.156
1.153
1.217
1.214
30
0.864
0.863
0.909
0.908
13
1.192
1.189
1.254
1.252
31
0.937
0.935
0.986
0.985
14
1.153
1.151
1.213
1.212
32
0.921
0.920
0.970
0.969
15
1.168
1.165
1.230
1.226
33
1.036
1.034
1.091
1.088
16
1.133
1.132
1.193
1.192
34
1.018
1.017
1.072
1.070
17
1.233
1.230
1.298
1.295
35
1.105
1.103
1.163
1.161
18
1.391
1.387
1.464
1.460
36
1.081
1.079
1.138
1.136
Table A.3: Design estimated equivalent stress ranges with DFF = 3.
Equivalent stress range, DFF = 2 [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
1.870
1.867
1.968
1.965
19
1.288
1.286
1.355
1.354
2
1.395
1.393
1.469
1.466
20
1.386
1.382
1.459
1.455
3
1.415
1.412
1.490
1.487
21
1.523
1.520
1.603
1.600
4
1.362
1.359
1.434
1.431
22
1.497
1.492
1.576
1.571
5
1.397
1.395
1.471
1.468
23
1.671
1.668
1.760
1.756
6
1.828
1.825
1.925
1.921
24
1.692
1.690
1.781
1.779
7
1.340
1.338
1.410
1.409
25
1.698
1.695
1.787
1.785
8
1.336
1.333
1.407
1.404
26
1.550
1.547
1.632
1.629
9
1.350
1.347
1.421
1.418
27
1.518
1.515
1.598
1.596
10
1.344
1.341
1.415
1.412
28
1.103
1.102
1.161
1.160
11
1.925
1.921
2.027
2.022
29
1.193
1.191
1.256
1.254
12
1.734
1.730
1.825
1.821
30
1.296
1.294
1.364
1.363
13
1.787
1.783
1.882
1.877
31
1.405
1.403
1.479
1.477
14
1.729
1.726
1.820
1.817
32
1.381
1.380
1.454
1.453
15
1.752
1.747
1.845
1.840
33
1.554
1.550
1.636
1.632
16
1.700
1.698
1.789
1.787
34
1.527
1.525
1.608
1.605
17
1.849
1.846
1.947
1.943
35
1.657
1.654
1.745
1.741
18
2.086
2.080
2.196
2.190
36
1.622
1.619
1.707
1.704
==PAGE:73==
A Results for all datasets
63
Figure A.1: JONSWAP wave model spectra for dataset 1-18.
==PAGE:74==
A Results for all datasets
64
Figure A.2: JONSWAP wave model spectra for dataset 19-36.
==PAGE:75==
A Results for all datasets
65
Table A.4: Identification results of FDD.
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Dataset 1
fn [Hz]
0.5084
0.5236
1.2159
Dataset 19
fn [Hz]
0.5170
0.5274
1.2437
ζn [-]
0.0181
0.0233
0.0123
ζn [-]
0.0155
0.0115
0.0123
Dataset 2
fn [Hz]
0.5290
0.5308
1.2437
Dataset 20
fn [Hz]
0.5263
0.5291
1.2444
ζn [-]
0.0168
0.0145
0.0118
ζn [-]
0.0147
0.0115
0.0098
Dataset 3
fn [Hz]
0.5317
0.5319
1.2454
Dataset 21
fn [Hz]
0.5253
0.5273
1.2418
ζn [-]
0.0136
0.0131
0.0111
ζn [-]
0.0161
0.0137
0.0099
Dataset 4
fn [Hz]
0.5319
0.5324
1.2440
Dataset 22
fn [Hz]
0.5159
0.5275
1.2433
ζn [-]
0.0127
0.0120
0.0115
ζn [-]
0.0116
0.0112
0.0109
Dataset 5
fn [Hz]
0.5197
0.5310
1.2442
Dataset 23
fn [Hz]
0.5273
0.5274
1.2392
ζn [-]
0.0167
0.0132
0.0119
ζn [-]
0.0123
0.0121
0.0119
Dataset 6
fn [Hz]
0.5124
0.5214
1.2297
Dataset 24
fn [Hz]
0.5237
0.5261
1.2388
ζn [-]
0.0129
0.0171
0.0171
ζn [-]
0.0153
0.0134
0.0121
Dataset 7
fn [Hz]
0.5270
0.5290
1.2396
Dataset 25
fn [Hz]
0.5265
0.5282
1.2376
ζn [-]
0.0137
0.0115
0.0119
ζn [-]
0.0146
0.0127
0.0110
Dataset 8
fn [Hz]
0.5284
0.5285
1.2389
Dataset 26
fn [Hz]
0.5276
0.5296
1.2389
ζn [-]
0.0125
0.0123
0.0118
ζn [-]
0.0139
0.0109
0.0126
Dataset 9
fn [Hz]
0.5282
0.5283
1.2379
Dataset 27
fn [Hz]
0.5277
0.5277
1.2400
ζn [-]
0.0114
0.0114
0.0113
ζn [-]
0.0106
0.0108
0.0129
Dataset 10
fn [Hz]
0.5279
0.5281
1.2395
Dataset 28
fn [Hz]
0.5262
0.5276
1.2310
ζn [-]
0.0115
0.0112
0.0115
ζn [-]
0.0102
0.0080
0.0107
Dataset 11
fn [Hz]
0.5102
0.5203
1.2233
Dataset 29
fn [Hz]
0.5137
0.5261
1.2300
ζn [-]
0.0146
0.0148
0.0164
ζn [-]
0.0110
0.0093
0.0119
Dataset 12
fn [Hz]
0.5133
0.5204
1.2236
Dataset 30
fn [Hz]
0.5223
0.5275
1.2313
ζn [-]
0.0098
0.0127
0.0159
ζn [-]
0.0149
0.0096
0.0093
Dataset 13
fn [Hz]
0.5131
0.5202
1.2280
Dataset 31
fn [Hz]
0.5132
0.5255
1.2293
ζn [-]
0.0152
0.0165
0.0147
ζn [-]
0.0109
0.0101
0.0099
Dataset 14
fn [Hz]
0.5120
0.5213
1.2279
Dataset 32
fn [Hz]
0.5134
0.5257
1.2291
ζn [-]
0.0147
0.0107
0.0155
ζn [-]
0.0115
0.0112
0.0119
Dataset 15
fn [Hz]
0.5128
0.5238
1.2332
Dataset 33
fn [Hz]
0.5122
0.5241
1.2283
ζn [-]
0.0128
0.0126
0.0135
ζn [-]
0.0088
0.0126
0.0114
Dataset 16
fn [Hz]
0.5120
0.5213
1.2304
Dataset 34
fn [Hz]
0.5120
0.5252
1.2282
ζn [-]
0.0137
0.0148
0.0144
ζn [-]
0.0114
0.0113
0.0110
Dataset 17
fn [Hz]
0.5112
0.5214
1.2306
Dataset 35
fn [Hz]
0.5136
0.5249
1.2265
ζn [-]
0.0125
0.0128
0.0141
ζn [-]
0.0145
0.0127
0.0122
Dataset 18
fn [Hz]
0.5097
0.5213
1.2294
Dataset 36
fn [Hz]
0.5105
0.5230
1.2234
ζn [-]
0.0141
0.0133
0.0148
ζn [-]
0.0124
0.0105
0.0141
==PAGE:76==
A Results for all datasets
66
Table A.5: Identification results of TDPR.
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Dataset 1
fn [Hz]
0.502
0.529
1.218
Dataset 19
fn [Hz]
0.517
0.530
1.244
ζn [%]
2.34
2.67
1.41
ζn [%]
1.78
1.31
1.32
πn [%]
35.062
8.004
0.000
πn [%]
42.858
29.848
0.000
Dataset 2
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.533
1.244
Dataset 20
fn [Hz]
0.518
0.530
1.244
ζn [%]
1.35
1.07
1.20
ζn [%]
1.66
1.13
1.18
πn [%]
51.576
17.771
0.000
πn [%]
45.418
14.938
0.000
Dataset 3
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.535
1.246
Dataset 21
fn [Hz]
0.516
0.533
1.242
ζn [%]
1.29
1.05
1.31
ζn [%]
1.58
1.97
1.12
πn [%]
61.766
21.530
0.000
πn [%]
67.960
10.791
0.000
Dataset 4
fn [Hz]
0.518
0.534
1.243
Dataset 22
fn [Hz]
0.515
0.531
1.244
ζn [%]
1.47
1.10
1.18
ζn [%]
0.97
1.24
1.21
πn [%]
38.330
20.641
0.000
πn [%]
36.489
18.802
0.000
Dataset 5
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.534
1.245
Dataset 23
fn [Hz]
0.518
0.529
1.241
ζn [%]
1.73
1.32
1.28
ζn [%]
1.56
1.76
1.29
πn [%]
22.427
24.310
0.000
πn [%]
57.663
8.515
0.000
Dataset 6
fn [Hz]
0.511
0.519
1.231
Dataset 24
fn [Hz]
0.520
0.530
1.241
ζn [%]
1.66
0.90
1.85
ζn [%]
1.63
1.41
1.38
πn [%]
71.488
22.943
0.000
πn [%]
46.779
12.827
0.000
Dataset 7
fn [Hz]
0.515
0.533
1.241
Dataset 25
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.531
1.239
ζn [%]
1.45
1.31
1.38
ζn [%]
1.26
1.80
1.16
πn [%]
23.290
10.334
0.000
πn [%]
43.565
6.934
0.000
Dataset 8
fn [Hz]
0.516
0.531
1.240
Dataset 26
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.530
1.239
ζn [%]
1.70
1.75
1.36
ζn [%]
2.26
1.19
1.30
πn [%]
35.643
5.494
0.000
πn [%]
34.655
3.188
0.000
Dataset 9
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.530
1.240
Dataset 27
fn [Hz]
0.514
0.528
1.239
ζn [%]
1.41
1.40
1.31
ζn [%]
1.40
1.22
1.36
πn [%]
52.540
17.513
0.000
πn [%]
54.553
5.555
0.000
Dataset 10
fn [Hz]
0.518
0.530
1.240
Dataset 28
fn [Hz]
0.516
0.529
1.231
ζn [%]
1.34
1.25
1.16
ζn [%]
1.21
0.98
1.16
πn [%]
29.248
21.121
0.000
πn [%]
56.816
18.491
0.000
Dataset 11
fn [Hz]
0.517
0.532
1.224
Dataset 29
fn [Hz]
0.516
0.529
1.231
ζn [%]
1.97
0.80
1.96
ζn [%]
1.06
1.04
1.17
πn [%]
31.958
4.289
0.000
πn [%]
48.632
26.699
0.000
Dataset 12
fn [Hz]
0.519
0.534
1.226
Dataset 30
fn [Hz]
0.515
0.529
1.232
ζn [%]
1.47
2.86
1.80
ζn [%]
1.12
1.10
1.02
πn [%]
15.149
18.429
0.000
πn [%]
55.953
31.886
0.000
Dataset 13
fn [Hz]
0.513
0.530
1.229
Dataset 31
fn [Hz]
0.516
0.528
1.231
ζn [%]
2.09
2.54
1.85
ζn [%]
1.54
1.00
1.21
πn [%]
45.702
14.825
0.000
πn [%]
33.716
8.242
0.000
Dataset 14
fn [Hz]
0.511
0.526
1.229
Dataset 32
fn [Hz]
0.515
0.527
1.230
ζn [%]
1.53
1.38
1.76
ζn [%]
1.31
0.89
1.31
πn [%]
67.962
18.483
0.000
πn [%]
33.135
24.206
0.000
Dataset 15
fn [Hz]
0.508
0.524
1.238
Dataset 33
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.526
1.229
ζn [%]
1.48
1.58
1.56
ζn [%]
1.40
1.48
1.39
πn [%]
69.127
25.388
0.000
πn [%]
23.798
9.364
0.000
Dataset 16
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.520
1.234
Dataset 34
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.527
1.231
ζn [%]
1.47
1.71
1.37
ζn [%]
1.50
1.25
1.27
πn [%]
51.335
28.628
0.000
πn [%]
42.466
17.459
0.000
Dataset 17
fn [Hz]
0.507
0.525
1.236
Dataset 35
fn [Hz]
0.512
0.528
1.227
ζn [%]
1.38
1.23
1.53
ζn [%]
1.95
1.33
1.25
πn [%]
37.456
4.733
0.000
πn [%]
22.814
2.426
0.000
Dataset 18
fn [Hz]
0.511
0.524
1.235
Dataset 36
fn [Hz]
0.507
0.527
1.227
ζn [%]
1.86
1.54
1.55
ζn [%]
1.49
1.53
1.47
πn [%]
50.365
10.739
0.000
πn [%]
25.154
11.452
0.000
==PAGE:77==
A Results for all datasets
67
Table A.6: MAC values of the FE model before and after update. Based on TDPR
mode shapes.
Before updating
After updating
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
mode 1
mode 2
mode 3
Dataset 1
99.79%
99.66%
94.73%
99.82%
99.70%
95.73%
Dataset 2
99.82%
99.68%
93.50%
99.85%
99.72%
94.55%
Dataset 3
99.82%
99.68%
94.41%
99.84%
99.72%
95.42%
Dataset 4
99.81%
99.68%
94.12%
99.84%
99.72%
95.14%
Dataset 5
99.81%
99.68%
93.86%
99.84%
99.72%
94.90%
Dataset 6
99.82%
99.69%
94.54%
99.85%
99.73%
95.55%
Dataset 7
99.81%
99.68%
94.06%
99.84%
99.72%
95.09%
Dataset 8
99.81%
99.67%
94.16%
99.84%
99.71%
95.18%
Dataset 9
99.82%
99.67%
93.87%
99.85%
99.71%
94.90%
Dataset 10
99.82%
99.67%
94.36%
99.84%
99.71%
95.38%
Dataset 11
99.28%
97.96%
94.02%
99.32%
98.00%
94.99%
Dataset 12
99.63%
99.33%
94.00%
99.66%
99.38%
94.91%
Dataset 13
99.81%
99.68%
94.69%
99.84%
99.71%
95.69%
Dataset 14
99.79%
99.67%
94.00%
99.81%
99.71%
95.03%
Dataset 15
99.81%
99.67%
93.56%
99.83%
99.71%
94.61%
Dataset 16
99.81%
99.65%
95.39%
99.84%
99.69%
96.34%
Dataset 17
99.80%
99.67%
94.71%
99.83%
99.71%
95.70%
Dataset 18
99.81%
99.67%
94.65%
99.84%
99.71%
95.65%
Dataset 19
99.81%
99.67%
94.18%
99.84%
99.71%
95.20%
Dataset 20
99.82%
99.67%
94.18%
99.85%
99.71%
95.20%
Dataset 21
99.81%
99.68%
93.96%
99.84%
99.72%
94.99%
Dataset 22
99.81%
99.68%
93.85%
99.84%
99.72%
94.88%
Dataset 23
99.82%
99.68%
94.34%
99.85%
99.72%
95.36%
Dataset 24
99.82%
99.67%
93.97%
99.85%
99.71%
95.00%
Dataset 25
99.81%
99.68%
93.55%
99.84%
99.72%
94.60%
Dataset 26
99.80%
99.67%
94.40%
99.83%
99.71%
95.41%
Dataset 27
99.81%
99.67%
93.95%
99.84%
99.71%
94.98%
Dataset 28
99.82%
99.69%
95.08%
99.84%
99.73%
96.07%
Dataset 29
99.82%
99.69%
95.40%
99.85%
99.73%
96.39%
Dataset 30
99.81%
99.69%
95.03%
99.84%
99.74%
96.03%
Dataset 31
99.82%
99.69%
95.37%
99.85%
99.73%
96.36%
Dataset 32
99.82%
99.69%
95.56%
99.84%
99.73%
96.53%
Dataset 33
99.81%
99.69%
94.99%
99.84%
99.73%
95.99%
Dataset 34
99.81%
99.69%
95.45%
99.84%
99.74%
96.42%
Dataset 35
99.81%
99.70%
95.17%
99.84%
99.74%
96.16%
Dataset 36
99.81%
99.70%
95.79%
99.84%
99.74%
96.75%
==PAGE:78==
A Results for all datasets
68
Table A.7: Design equivalent stress range in [MPa] without DFF.
Location C - 12.2m
Location D - 12.2m
Location C - 11.5m
Location D - 11.5m
Dataset 1
0.623
0.622
0.656
0.655
Dataset 2
0.465
0.464
0.490
0.489
Dataset 3
0.472
0.471
0.497
0.496
Dataset 4
0.454
0.453
0.478
0.477
Dataset 5
0.466
0.465
0.490
0.489
Dataset 6
0.609
0.608
0.642
0.640
Dataset 7
0.447
0.446
0.470
0.470
Dataset 8
0.445
0.444
0.469
0.468
Dataset 9
0.450
0.449
0.474
0.473
Dataset 10
0.448
0.447
0.472
0.471
Dataset 23
0.557
0.556
0.587
0.585
Dataset 24
0.564
0.563
0.594
0.593
Dataset 25
0.566
0.565
0.596
0.595
Dataset 26
0.517
0.516
0.544
0.543
Dataset 27
0.506
0.505
0.533
0.532
Dataset 28
0.368
0.367
0.387
0.387
Dataset 29
0.398
0.397
0.419
0.418
Dataset 30
0.432
0.431
0.455
0.454
Dataset 31
0.468
0.468
0.493
0.492
Dataset 32
0.460
0.460
0.485
0.484
Dataset 33
0.518
0.517
0.545
0.544
Dataset 34
0.509
0.508
0.536
0.535
Dataset 35
0.552
0.551
0.582
0.580
Dataset 36
0.541
0.540
0.569
0.568
Table A.8: Design equivalent stress range in [MPa] with DFF = 2.
Location C - 12.2m
Location D - 12.2m
Location C - 11.5m
Location D - 11.5m
Dataset 1
1.246
1.244
1.312
1.310
Dataset 2
0.930
0.928
0.980
0.978
Dataset 3
0.944
0.942
0.994
0.992
Dataset 4
0.908
0.906
0.956
0.954
Dataset 5
0.932
0.930
0.980
0.978
Dataset 6
1.218
1.216
1.284
1.280
Dataset 7
0.894
0.892
0.940
0.940
Dataset 8
0.890
0.888
0.938
0.936
Dataset 9
0.900
0.898
0.948
0.946
Dataset 10
0.896
0.894
0.944
0.942
Dataset 23
1.114
1.112
1.174
1.170
Dataset 24
1.128
1.126
1.188
1.186
Dataset 25
1.132
1.130
1.192
1.190
Dataset 26
1.034
1.032
1.088
1.086
Dataset 27
1.012
1.010
1.066
1.064
Dataset 28
0.736
0.734
0.774
0.774
Dataset 29
0.796
0.794
0.838
0.836
Dataset 30
0.864
0.862
0.910
0.908
Dataset 31
0.936
0.936
0.986
0.984
Dataset 32
0.920
0.920
0.970
0.968
Dataset 33
1.036
1.034
1.090
1.088
Dataset 34
1.018
1.016
1.072
1.070
Dataset 35
1.104
1.102
1.164
1.160
Dataset 36
1.082
1.080
1.138
1.136
==PAGE:79==
A Results for all datasets
69
Table A.9: Design equivalent stress range in [MPa] with DFF = 3.
Location C - 12.2m
Location D - 12.2m
Location C - 11.5m
Location D - 11.5m
Dataset 1
1.869
1.866
1.968
1.965
Dataset 2
1.395
1.392
1.470
1.467
Dataset 3
1.416
1.413
1.491
1.488
Dataset 4
1.362
1.359
1.434
1.431
Dataset 5
1.398
1.395
1.470
1.467
Dataset 6
1.827
1.824
1.926
1.920
Dataset 7
1.341
1.338
1.410
1.410
Dataset 8
1.335
1.332
1.407
1.404
Dataset 9
1.350
1.347
1.422
1.419
Dataset 10
1.344
1.341
1.416
1.413
Dataset 23
1.671
1.668
1.761
1.755
Dataset 24
1.692
1.689
1.782
1.779
Dataset 25
1.698
1.695
1.788
1.785
Dataset 26
1.551
1.548
1.632
1.629
Dataset 27
1.518
1.515
1.599
1.596
Dataset 28
1.104
1.101
1.161
1.161
Dataset 29
1.194
1.191
1.257
1.254
Dataset 30
1.296
1.293
1.365
1.362
Dataset 31
1.404
1.404
1.479
1.476
Dataset 32
1.380
1.380
1.455
1.452
Dataset 33
1.554
1.551
1.635
1.632
Dataset 34
1.527
1.524
1.608
1.605
Dataset 35
1.656
1.653
1.746
1.740
Dataset 36
1.623
1.620
1.707
1.704
Table A.10: TRAC values of the OMA estimated strain prediction.
SGc 12.2m
SGd 11.5m
SGc 12.5m
SGd 11.5m
Dataset 1
89.64%
91.88%
90.03%
91.99%
Dataset 2
89.00%
91.19%
89.55%
91.36%
Dataset 3
89.50%
91.42%
89.89%
91.45%
Dataset 4
89.56%
89.54%
89.95%
89.54%
Dataset 5
89.55%
90.85%
89.95%
90.99%
Dataset 6
91.17%
92.31%
91.24%
92.26%
Dataset 7
91.54%
91.91%
91.96%
92.04%
Dataset 8
91.12%
92.92%
91.60%
93.08%
Dataset 9
91.64%
92.20%
92.00%
92.30%
Dataset 10
91.79%
91.16%
92.21%
91.35%
Dataset 23
90.88%
92.10%
91.17%
92.11%
Dataset 24
91.66%
91.80%
91.86%
91.83%
Dataset 25
90.14%
91.83%
90.34%
91.83%
Dataset 26
90.67%
91.67%
91.08%
91.79%
Dataset 27
91.58%
92.13%
91.88%
92.23%
Dataset 28
92.06%
91.51%
92.63%
91.69%
Dataset 29
92.53%
91.95%
92.81%
92.06%
Dataset 30
92.48%
91.11%
92.87%
91.13%
Dataset 31
92.05%
91.68%
92.55%
91.83%
Dataset 32
92.12%
90.67%
92.61%
90.73%
Dataset 33
92.22%
92.12%
92.56%
92.28%
Dataset 34
92.25%
92.05%
92.63%
92.14%
Dataset 35
92.09%
91.82%
92.50%
91.85%
Dataset 36
92.37%
91.29%
92.59%
91.29%
==PAGE:80==
A Results for all datasets
70
Table A.11: OMA equivalent stress range in [MPa].
OMA Equivalent stress range [MPa]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
0.485
0.577
0.511
0.607
25
0.524
0.658
0.552
0.693
2
0.326
0.366
0.343
0.386
26
0.485
0.544
0.510
0.573
3
0.337
0.384
0.355
0.404
27
0.604
0.643
0.636
0.677
4
0.372
0.365
0.392
0.384
28
0.334
0.343
0.352
0.362
5
0.381
0.400
0.402
0.421
29
0.351
0.365
0.369
0.385
6
0.897
0.936
0.944
0.986
30
0.367
0.355
0.386
0.374
7
0.414
0.450
0.436
0.474
31
0.362
0.402
0.382
0.423
8
0.373
0.458
0.392
0.483
32
0.394
0.394
0.415
0.415
9
0.393
0.438
0.414
0.461
33
0.417
0.470
0.439
0.495
10
0.407
0.414
0.428
0.436
34
0.412
0.443
0.434
0.467
23
0.494
0.589
0.520
0.620
35
0.471
0.490
0.496
0.516
24
0.543
0.612
0.571
0.644
36
0.541
0.541
0.570
0.570
Table A.12: Deviation of design estimated results from measured data.
Deviation in design estimated data [%]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
41.33%
3.49%
35.50%
6.67%
25
20.36%
-16.69%
16.45%
-15.82%
2
58.91%
31.61%
52.33%
33.28%
26
17.26%
-6.48%
12.86%
-5.65%
3
54.67%
25.33%
47.87%
26.76%
27
-5.06%
-26.82%
-8.58%
-25.77%
4
33.53%
28.73%
27.30%
30.61%
28
22.51%
8.01%
17.30%
9.65%
5
31.76%
22.80%
26.43%
25.15%
29
24.46%
10.59%
19.81%
11.94%
6
-27.79%
-37.20%
-30.61%
-35.74%
30
29.47%
23.93%
23.58%
25.91%
7
20.91%
-3.54%
15.81%
-1.80%
31
42.83%
17.17%
36.80%
19.50%
8
34.56%
-3.82%
28.42%
-2.32%
32
26.78%
20.44%
21.52%
22.66%
9
26.11%
1.91%
21.19%
3.35%
33
36.92%
9.81%
31.43%
12.16%
10
21.55%
9.66%
16.50%
11.55%
34
35.35%
14.64%
30.09%
16.86%
23
27.55%
-9.51%
22.97%
-8.41%
35
28.52%
11.01%
23.28%
13.17%
24
17.23%
-11.33%
12.90%
-10.03%
36
8.45%
-2.44%
4.59%
-0.31%
==PAGE:81==
A Results for all datasets
71
Table A.13: Deviation of OMA estimated results from measured data.
Deviation in OMA estimated data [%]
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
Dataset
SG1c
SG1d
SG2c
SG2d
1
9.94%
-4.07%
5.49%
-1.10%
25
11.44%
-2.98%
7.82%
-1.96%
2
11.24%
3.81%
6.67%
5.16%
26
9.95%
-1.26%
5.84%
-0.37%
3
10.53%
2.13%
5.69%
3.36%
27
13.36%
-6.84%
9.17%
-5.55%
4
9.54%
3.63%
4.47%
5.19%
28
11.27%
0.98%
6.52%
2.53%
5
7.95%
5.70%
3.60%
7.75%
29
9.74%
1.81%
5.69%
3.08%
6
6.25%
-3.34%
2.12%
-1.03%
30
9.86%
1.96%
4.92%
3.64%
7
12.07%
-2.69%
7.36%
-0.94%
31
10.46%
0.76%
5.85%
2.77%
8
12.60%
-0.80%
7.47%
0.81%
32
8.50%
3.05%
4.05%
4.99%
9
10.14%
-0.57%
5.85%
0.88%
33
10.21%
-0.05%
5.80%
2.10%
10
10.32%
1.42%
5.75%
3.21%
34
9.49%
-0.04%
5.26%
1.90%
23
13.04%
-4.17%
8.98%
-2.97%
35
9.53%
-1.31%
5.12%
0.65%
24
12.84%
-3.71%
8.68%
-2.33%
36
8.56%
-2.19%
4.73%
0.01%
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX B
List of scripts and content description
The list below gives a short description of the main matlab scripts used in this project.
The scripts along with the various utilized functions are included in the accompany-
ing OMA_MasterThesis_scripts_Sirwan_Maria.zip folder. Many of the functions
included in the scripts have originally been created by Bruna Nabuco, Sandro D. R.
Amador and Rune Brincker. The author responsible for each of these functions is
stated in the beginning of each file.
Script
Application
Description
Wave_code
Wave load simulation
Simulation of stochastic wave
load
based
on
statistical
sea-state parameters and JON-
SWAP spectra.
The simulated
loads are also assigned to FE-
dofs in the script,
using the
selective
structural
matrices
from the FE_code.
FECode_Design
Generation
of
selective
structural matrices from
original FE-model for the
design method
The selective matrices are gener-
ated from the defined list of dofs
of interest. Used to compute the
structural response from design
load in the Wave_code
FECode_Update
Generation
of
selective
structural matrices from
updated
FE-model
for
the OMA method
The selective matrices are gen-
erated from the defined list of
dofs of interest.
The updated
mode shape is used to expand
the recorded response from the
accelerometer dofs to other dofs
in OMA_Analysis for the OMA
estimated strains.
OMA_Analysis
Operation Modal
Analysis
Signal processing of recorded ac-
celeration and modal identifica-
tion using FDD and TDPR. Also
compare
analytic
and
experi-
mental mode shapes by MAC
and extend the response to addi-
tional dofs by Modal Expansion
==PAGE:83==
B List of scripts and content description
73
Strain_Estimation
Estimations
of
strain
histories and equivalent
stress range
Calculation of strain histories
and
equivalent
stress
ranges
for both the design and OMA
approach.
Uses
the
struc-
tural response obtained from the
Wave_code and OMA_Analysis
for the different methods. The
comparison to measured strains
are also evaluated in this script
weighted_cov_test
Estimations of Coefficient
of Variation of the OMA-
based estimated results
Calculation
of
Coefficient
of
Variation which uses the strain
gauge measurements as a refer-
ence. The inputs are based on
the results obtained from the
S-N curves, which were deter-
mined in Strain_Estimation.
The script was developed by
Bruna Nabuco
Model data
Application
Description
Ansys_Valdemar
_Wave.txt
Input text file for the
Valdemar
FE-model
in
Ansys
The text file contains all model
information and can be read
directly
into
Ansys
APDL.
Changes of the FE-model (e.g.
addition
of
nodes
and
mass
redistribution) has been carried
out directly in the textfile
MassMatMMF.mmf
StiffMatMMF.mmf
MappingMatMMF.mmf
Structural
matrices
ex-
ported from FE-model
Mass, stiffness and mapping ma-
trix exported from the Ansys
FE-model.
Contains full list
of dofs in the model are used
for the generation of selective
matrices in FECode_Design and
FECode_Update
