==PAGE:1==
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
Master Thesis
DTU Management Science
(Operations Research Division)
==PAGE:2==
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Marc Martínez Ruiz
Copyright:
The reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Published by:
DTU Management Science(Operations Research Division), Akademivej,
Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.ms.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for over six months for the Operations Research division of
the Department of Management Science, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
in partial fulfillment for the Master of Science in Industrial Engineering at the Polytechnic
University of Catalunya (UPC).
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of mathematical modeling.
Marc Martínez Ruiz - s196649
Signature
Date
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis presents, and brings together, the Ship Loading and the Crane Split problems
for shipping container terminals. These problems have been extensively studied in the
available literature, but no efforts have been made to solve them in an integrated manner.
State-of-the-art research only provides interesting ideas on how to separately solve these
problems.
Nevertheless, some integration ideas of related problems are interesting for
possible work lines.
This thesis aims to exploit the flexibility that integrated management of loading operation,
planning of terminal resources (quay cranes), and their proper scheduling can provide.
The flexibility comes from a cooperative agreement between the terminal operator and
the liner shipping company, specifying that the terminal has the right to decide which
specific container to load for each slot obeying the class-based stowage plan developed by
the liner.
Initially, a mathematical model for solving the integrated problem has been formulated.
Additionally, another model to obtain strong lower bounds has also been developed. Then
a matheuristic solution method to efficiently solve the problem has been proposed. Results
prove that the developed algorithm achieves high-quality solutions in a decent amount of
time, outperforming the mathematical model due to its inability to solve large benchmark
instances because of the extraordinary difficulty associated with them.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Obtaining a MSc is always a hard task and, because of that, I would like to express my
thanks to the people that have been helpful and supportive throughout my studies.
First of all, I must thank my parents David and Isavic. For providing me with an education
and for teaching me all the values that modeled the person who I currently am. I would
also thank my sister Maria for contributing, alongside my parents, to the support and joy
that a family can give. My family has been an invaluable help for the periods of studying
and frustration. They have always been standing by me during these years.
Thanks must also go to my supervisor Dario Pacino for proposing this exciting topic and
for his comments, advice and guidance too.
Finally, I would also like to thank the Technical University of Denmark for providing me
the opportunity to write my thesis as an exchange student in this incredible country.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background Description and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement and Definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
General Concepts and Basic Principles
6
2.1
Shipping Containers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Container Vessels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Quay Cranes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Port Terminal Structure and Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Port Terminal Logistics and Operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
State-of-the-art and Related Work
18
3.1
Stowage Planning Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Crane Split Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Mathematical Model
24
4.1
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Model Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Matheuristic Solution Method
32
5.1
Operational Stowage Plan Model Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Construction Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
The GRASP Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Computational experiments
43
6.1
Datasets overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Mathematical Integer Linear Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Parallel GRASP Results. Comparing the performance with different num-
ber of threads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Comparing different strategies for the GRASP algorithm . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.5
Tuning the parameters for the Matheuristic Solution Method . . . . . . . .
48
6.6
Matheuristic Solution Method Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusions
52
7.1
Future Research Directions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Bibliography
54
A Example Solution Plots
58
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background Description and Motivation
The world economy has always relied on the ability to transport goods, and because of
the introduction of containerized shipping and the current globalisation levels, maritime
freight transport constitutes an important part of the global logistics systems.
More
precisely, it can be said that seaborne trade is the main distribution channel in almost
every international supply chain. Thanks to the disposal of vessels with capacities up
to 23.000 TEU1 (Jones 2019), the maritime freight transport is responsible for carrying
about 90% of the world’s trades (UNCTAD 2019).
Due to the huge handling volumes that container vessels operate with, they happen to
be known as one of the most CO2 efficient ways to transport goods – because of minimal
values on the emissions per ton/mile ratio –. Nevertheless, the total amount of pollution
generated by the shipping industry is very significant. In fact, this industry is responsible
for around 2.2% of CO2 global emissions, and of a substantial part of NOx and SOx
emissions.
Because of the significant impact of these absolute numbers on the environment, the emis-
sions regulations have tightened and, as a result, the carriers have adopted a sailing policy
called slow steaming. This sailing policy has great benefits in terms of fuel consumption,
but also in environmental terms, since it aims to reduce the vessel emissions; the reduction
of the sailing speed has been recognized to be the most immediate single factor to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions (UNCTAD 2011). Such a strategy can only make economic sense
if the extra transport times do not affect the customers.
Additionally, as both the demand and the number of container shipments increase, so does
the competition between port terminals; especially between geographically close ones. The
port terminals mainly compete for short sea operators and ocean carrier patronage, as well
as for the land services (i.e. railroad or truck services).
The level of competitiveness of a port terminal is determined by different success factors
such as low rates for loading and discharging, but the most important one is the time
in port, which can become a crucial competitive advantage due to the reduction in the
overall transshipment costs.
These are the main reasons why reducing the vessel’s time at port and minimizing it by
having an effective and time-efficient logistics policy is so important.
1TEU: Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit. Standard measure of a shipping container (20ft x 8ft), used for
denoting a vessel’s cargo carrying capacity.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
2
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Problem Statement and Definition
Due to the complexity of the operations within large port terminals, the logistics decisions
cannot be randomly taken. Therefore the use of operations research methods has become
essential to support and optimize these kinds of decisions.
The Ship Loading Problem is probably the most important set of processes that take place
at any port terminal.
Terminal Ship Loading Problem
Berth
Allocation
Operational
Stowage
Planning
Crane
Split
Equipment
Assignment
(Scheduling)
Loading Sequence
Figure 1.1: Termianl Ship Loading Problem breakdown.
As it is displayed in Figure 1.1, the Ship Loading Problem concerns all the necessary
aspects required in order to successfully load a shipping container vessel. In addition,
it can be divided into several sub-problems which deal with different aspects that the
terminal operators will have to face during the loading process. Because of the exposed
complexity, it is highly important to fully understand all the related aspects of the process.
Note that effectively solving each of the sub-problems presented in Figure 1.1 is crucial in
terms of the overall time that a vessel will spend at the port terminal.
The following paragraphs briefly summarize the previously mentioned sub-problems that
terminal operators must deal with in order to successfully solve the Terminal Ship Loading
Problem:
• Berth Allocation: The berth allocation problem deals with the assignment of vessels
to berths in a port terminal. Vessels arrive over time, but before its arrival, a berth
has to be allocated to the ship taking into account its characteristics. In addition, the
allocation process should aim to minimize total service time (waiting and handling
times), minimize delays and also minimize the operational costs.
An automatic method for berth allocation is crucial in case of delays, as vessels must
be assigned to a new berth whereas containers are already stacked in the yard.
• Stowage Planning: The second step, and the core of the whole planning process,
is to determine the stowage plan. The stowage plan aims to efficiently pair each
shipping container with one of the available slots that the vessel has. Nevertheless,
determining the distribution of the different shipping containers within a vessel is a
complex task, since there are a lot of constraints involved – basically regarding the
stability of the vessel – and it requires a lot of information from both the ship and
the containers characteristics.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
3
==PAGE:9==
• Crane Split: The third step is known as the crane split problem, and consists in
allocating quay cranes to the vessels bays and deciding on which schedule they
should operate. The main constraints for crane allocation include cranes and ships
compatibility, crane accessibility at the berth, and crane interactions (when multiple
cranes are operating in close bays and at the same time).
• Equipment Planning and Scheduling: The Terminal Ship Loading Problem finally
covers the assignment and scheduling of the available equipment and machinery (i.e.
transfer vehicles). Integrating the transfer vehicles into the TSLP is vital because
they are a limited resource in the terminal, and they might cause a bottleneck during
loading operations. Moreover, generating a feasible and efficient schedule of transfer
vehicles will determine the ready time of each container in front of each quay crane.
These ready times directly influence the assignments of containers to each slot and
by extension, the overall time at the port terminal.
Since the sequence in which containers will be loaded is governed by physical rules, and
due to the specific layout of the vessel, some positions must be loaded before others. In
addition, preparation and traveling times are different for every container because they
are affected by other aspects such as container locations in the yard, the availability of
quay cranes and transfer vehicles, the operational stowage plan, etc.
It is of utmost importance to carefully decide the shipping container loading sequence since
it may potentially save a significant amount of time if performed in an efficient manner.
The previously described processes – especially the Operational Stowage Plan and the
Crane Split problems – will have a strong influence in the Loading Sequence of the shipping
containers and, therefore, in the total operational time.
It is also important to remember that these problems are interconnected and mutually
dependent. Considering that monolithic approaches hierarchically solve and optimize a
sequence of operations, may lead to infeasible, sub-optimal or even bad solutions. This
is because initial decisions are made without taking into account the potential effects in
the following stages.
However, recent advances in the modeling of container terminal
problems have pushed the focus towards integration issues, since embedded and multi-
phase approaches have shown promising results (i.e. Kang and Y. Kim 2002, Ambrosino
et al. 2010).
For this reason, the project goal is to exploit the flexibility that class-based pre-stowage
plans can offer when optimizing port operations, by developing a solution method for
both the optimization of the integrated Operational Stowage Plan and the Crane Split
problems.
Finally, it is important to consider that there is no project or paper in current literature
which attempts to provide an embedded solution for both problems at the same time. So,
as well as proposing a new approach to the Terminal Ship Loading Problem, the potential
output of this project may be noteworthy in terms of efficiency and time savings.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
4
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Learning Objectives
This section enumerates and describes the main learning objectives which this thesis in-
tends to achieve through its elaboration and development.
• Breakdown the Terminal Ship Loading Problem and relate it to current literature.
• Mathematically model the problem by defining the variables, the objective function,
and by reflecting the involved constraints.
• Implement a suitable model (even if with relaxed constraints) in order to find lower
boundaries of the problem solution.
• Develop a heuristic approach in order to be able to achieve a feasible and effective
solution within a decent amount of time and regardless of the problem complexity.
• Verify that the provided solutions are indeed physically feasible.
• Analyse the obtained results and compare them among all the different scenarios
(several data sets), studying the effectiveness of the proposed solutions.
• Review the reached conclusions, the learned concepts, and discuss future lines of
improvement.
1.4
Project Scope
This project aims to partially solve the Terminal Ship Loading Problem by addressing the
Operational Stowage Plan and the Crane Split problems.
Therefore, the project scope is set in providing a solution to a class-based pre-stowage
plan by developing the operational stowage plan and also implementing an efficient loading
sequence by properly assigning and scheduling the quay cranes.
In other words, the developed solution method must be able to determine the assignment
of shipping containers within the available vessel slots, and the schedule of each container
and the quay cranes.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
5
==PAGE:11==
2
General Concepts and Basic Principles
2.1
Shipping Containers
Shipping containers are metallic boxes designed for intermodal freight transport, meaning
these containers can be used across different modes of transport – from ship to rail to truck
– without unloading and reloading their cargo (Lewandowski 2016). Therefore, shipping
containers are primarily used to efficiently store and transport materials and products
efficiently and securely in the global containerized intermodal freight transport system.
The dimension of ISO standard shipping containers usually are as follows:
• Length: Standard dimensions are 20ft, 40ft or 45ft long.
• Height: Standard dimensions are 8,6ft tall for regular containers. However it is also
common to deal with high-cube containers (which 9,6ft tall).
• Width: Standard dimensions are 8ft wide for all the containers.
Figure 2.1: Standard Shipping Container Dimensions (Pacino and Jensen 2012)
Shipping containers are equipped with casting sets which allow the terminal operators to
stack multiple containers. As only large containers can be stacked on top, 20ft shipping
containers must always be placed underneath the other ones1. In addition, as a security
measure, sometimes 40ft containers are not allowed to be stacked on top of 45ft ones.
Besides the different available dimensions, shipping containers can also present special
characteristics based on their functionality. For example, containers that need measures
for temperature regulations (i.e. expiring cargo such as fruits or vegetables) have special
requirements. Therefore, insulated shipping containers must be connected to the vessel’s
cooling system and refrigerated/heated containers must be connected to power supplies.
Another example are the shipping containers that carry fluids, foodstuffs, chemicals, and
hazardous cargo, which are usually tank containers. Yet another instance are ventilated
containers, that are a special type of container with small openings allowing air circulation
without requiring any external power.
1A typical stack layout is illustrated in Figure 2.2b as an example.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
6
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Container Vessels
Container vessels are specially structured ships designed to hold and transport large quan-
tities of cargo compacted in different types of shipping containers.
Nowadays the maritime freight transport is responsible for carrying about 90% of the
world’s trades (UNCTAD 2019). Because of the increasing demand in the market, in-
creasing cargo carrying capacity, operating efficiency and environmental improvements
have become a continuous reality.
Since the first models of container ships were launched in the early 1960s with a carrying
capacity of 1530 TEUs (World Shipping Council), there has been a growth of more than
1200% and nowadays the largest vessel can carry 23.000 TEUs (Jones 2019). The most
common way to classify vessels is according to their dimensions and carrying capacity.
According to these criteria, there are several types of container vessels (Eyres and Bruce
2012):
• Small Feeders: Capacity up to 1000 TEUs.
These ships are employed for short
routes. Only used for trades in the coastal areas.
• Feeders: Capacity among 1000 - 2800 TEUs. These ships are usually used to serve
markets that are too small for larger vessels or to feed larger vessels.
• Panamax: Capacity among 3000 - 5000 TEUs. These vessels are designed to be able
to transit the original Panama Canal.
• Post-Panamax: Capacity among 5000 - 10000 TEUs. Post-Panamax ships are too
large to transit the original Panama Canal and undertake transoceanic voyages.
• Post-Panamax: Capacity among 5000 - 14000 TEUs. New Panamax ships (including
most Post-Panamax ships) are able to transit the expanded Panama Canal.
• Ultra-large container ships: Capacity over 14,000 TEUs. These vessels are designed
to take transoceanic routes, and are too large for any of the existing canals.
The Structure of Container Vessels
When studying the position of the different available positions for the shipping containers
within vessels there are several concepts that must be previously introduced in order to
avoid confusion. Primarily, a slot – the position of a container within the vessel –, can be
identified by three coordinates: bay, row, tier.
The bay is the longitudinal coordinate of a slot; the row and the tier represent, respectively,
the transversal and vertical coordinates. Two adjacent slots, sharing the same row and tier
coordinates, are used for storing a two TEUs container. In this case, the bay coordinate is
also referred to as the main bay. The number of bays differs according to the vessel size,
and it can be as high as 24 on the largest ones.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
7
==PAGE:13==
(a) Container vessel layout system
(b) Stack example
Figure 2.2: Structure of the shipping containers within the vessel
Container Vessels Constraints
Before leaving the port terminal, a container vessel must first be declared seaworthy,
which means that the ship’s initial stability is ensured and that all stress forces are within
the established limits. When developing the stowage plan it is critical to consider these
constraints, since a vessel that is not seaworthy will not be able to sail.
The main stability and stress constraints that must be taken into account are draft and
trim levels, intact/statical stability, shearing and bending stress, and torsion moment. The
following aim to give more information on the technical concepts and their influence on
the ship behaviour2.
• Draft: Immersion depth that a vessel presents when floating in the water.
It is
calculated from the waterline to the keel, which is the deepest point of the vessel.
• Trim: Also known as longitudinal stability, the trim is the difference between the
forward and aft draft. If the forward draft is greater than aft draft, the vessel is
trimming by the bow. If aft draft is greater than the forward draft, the vessel is
trimming by the stern.
• Statical stability: Ability to return to the initial position that a ship presents when
inclined by the influence of an external force.
• Shearing and Bending stress: Considering that the vessel is submitted to large forces
due to its own weight, the cargo load and the reacting upward forces generated by
the water (note that these forces may not be evenly distributed), and since it has a
fixed set of frames that do not allow the sections to move, stress is produced due to
shearing forces and bending moments.
• Torsion moment: The magnitude and distribution of torsion moments along the ship
depend on the distribution of the cargo over the vessel and on the advance direction
of the ship (relative to the encountered waves) too. Since the torsion moment may
compromise the stability of the shipping containers, it influences the way containers
should be stacked on deck.
2If readers are further interested in this topic, they are referred to Derret (2006) and Hafez (2010).
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
8
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Quay Cranes
Quay cranes (QC) are the equipment used to load and unload container vessels. Typically,
the cranes have 4 legs each and the space in between each of the 2 rows of legs is divided
into traffic lanes for trucks to pass under. A trolley moves along the arm of the crane and
is equipped with a spreader, which is used to pick up containers from the vessel or the
truck.
As quay cranes run on tracks parallel to the berthing line – this horizontal movement is
known as gantrying –, it is important to preserve a minimum space between two adjacent
working cranes for safety reasons. This safety space is also known as clearance. Note that
gantrying into position takes under a minute, which is less time than needed to handle a
container.
As there are several types of container vessels, there also are different types of quay
cranes. Since each crane handling characteristics are different, it is important to avoid
incompatibilities between the QC and the vessel when berth allocating (Bartošek and
Marek 2013). The following classification is based on the size of the vessel that a QC can
deal with:
• Panamax QC: Capacity to transship vessels up to 11-13 containers wide (rows),
with an outreach of 30-40m. The biggest vessels that are able to load/unload are
Panamax.
• Post-Panamax QC: Capacity to transship vessels up to 17-19 rows, with an outreach
of 45-55m. The biggest vessels that are able to load/unload are Post-Panamax.
• Super Post-Panamax QC: Capacity to transship vessels up to 21-23 rows, with an
outreach of 60-70m. Able to load/unload ultra-large container ships.
In addition, cranes can also be classified according to its boom mechanism:
• High profile: Also known as A-Frame. Cranes with tip-up boom above the water
surface and prove of vessel anchor. This profile exhibits the lowest cost and the
lowest wheel loads.
• Low profile: Cranes where the boom is able either to push forwards or to push in
above vessel deck. Suitable near airports and for reduced visual impact due to their
minimum height. This profile exhibits higher costs and higher wheel loads.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
9
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Port Terminal Structure and Workflow
Container port terminals are specialized harbors for the handling of shipping containers,
and can be simply defined as freight transshipment systems between different transporta-
tion methods. These trans-shipments take place as an interaction of both the loading and
unloading of ships at the quayside, and the loading and unloading of containers on/off
trucks and trains.
Terminals are usually divided into three main areas: the quay-side, where the berths
and the vessels are, the yard, which is a temporary storage area for containers, and the
land-side, where truck and train operations are performed.
Figure 2.3: Port terminal system scheme (Wiese et al. 2011)
In general, the typical operational workflow in a port terminal can be described as follows
(Steenken et al. 2004):
1. The shipping containers arrive at the port terminal by railway or road and are
handled within the truck and train operation areas.
2. Unloaded shipping containers are transported and stored in the yard (ideally placed
in positions near to the place where they will be transshipped in the near future)
until their vessel arrives.
3. When reaching the port terminal, vessels are assigned to a specific berth.
4. Each berth is equipped with multiple quay cranes that will unload the vessel’s
shipping containers and load the stored containers waiting at the yard.
5. The vessel leaves the port with the new freight and the unloaded (new) shipping
containers are transported and stored in the yard.
6. Whenever the time comes, containers are picked up from the yard and transported
to the truck and train operation areas, where they will leave the terminal by land.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
10
==PAGE:16==
2.5
Port Terminal Logistics and Operations
As explained before, the logistics decisions within large port terminals have to be carefully
taken due to the complexity of the operations.
Although data of shipping containers to be delivered may be pre-advised, there are al-
ways unexpected issues such as delays or damaged containers. Therefore, even if all the
operations are previously planned, the terminal must have great flexibility regarding these
unexpected issues by providing quick response times and some contingency measures.
Considering these facts, the different problems that a terminal must deal with can be
grouped into two categories: problems related to Ship Loading Operations and problems
regarding Storage and Stacking logistics. In this thesis, only the former category will be
studied.
The ship loading operations are the set of all the decisions that have to be taken and all
the processes that have to be accomplished in order to unload/load the shipping containers
from/to the vessel.
These operations can be grouped according to the Terminal Ship Loading Problem as
explained in Figure 1.1. In order to properly optimize these decisions and processes, it is
important to fully understand each of the sub-problems that have to be solved.
2.5.1
Berth Allocation
Vessels arrive at the port terminal over time, but before its arrival, a berth has to be
allocated to the ship taking into account its characteristics. The Berth Allocation Problem
(BAP) deals with the assignment of vessels to berths in a port terminal so that loading
and unloading activities can be carried out without any inconvenience, while the Quay
Crane Assignment Problem (QCAP) determines the number of quay cranes to be assigned
for the load and discharge operations. Finally, the integrated Berth Allocation and Crane
Assignment Problem (BACAP), deals with the integration of both problems at the same
time (Iris et al. 2015, Türkoğulları et al. 2016).
Usually, the variables which must be taken into account are the vessel’s dimensions and
characteristics, the expected arrival time, the number of shipping containers that will be
unloaded/loaded, and the storage location of outbound/inbound containers in the yard.
Considering this information, the allocation process should aim to minimize the total
service time (highly influenced by both waiting and handling times), to minimize total
delay times in ship departures and also to minimize the terminal operational costs by
efficiently using the minimum required resources (i.e. berth space, quay cranes, etc.).
The most difficult factor to avoid and to deal with is uncertainty in the arrival of the
vessels. Nevertheless, it is extremely important to have great flexibility, since unexpected
delay harms both the shipping companies and the terminal. While shipping companies
lose time because the ship has to wait until it gets a new berthing schedule, the terminal
suffers from idle of berths and quay cranes.
When dealing with the BAP, there are different possible approaches based on the problem
formulation on two different aspects:
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
11
==PAGE:17==
• Arrival of the vessel: Based on the arrival of the ship, the problem has two possible
formulations (Dai et al. 2004).
– Static: On the one hand, the static approach of the BAP is a ship to berth
allocation where all vessels are supposed to already be waiting at the port
terminal when the berth allocation is planned.
– Dynamic: On the other hand, the dynamic approach of the BAP is a ship to
berth allocation where not all the vessels are already in the terminal. In this
formulation of the problem, as the allocation starts and the time goes by, more
vessels will gradually arrive.
An automatic and dynamic method for berth allocation is crucial to successfully
develop a solution in case of delays, as vessels must be assigned to a new berth
whereas containers are already stacked in the yard.
• Spatial discretization: Based on the possible types of spatial discretization of the
berth, there also are two possible formulations (Imai et al. 2005).
– Discrete: On the first hand, the discrete formulation of the BAP divides the
berth in a finite number of sections and assigns the vessel to one of those spaces.
– Continuous: On the other hand, the continuous approach of the BAP treats the
berth as a whole subject and allows the assignment of a vessel to any available
space. Although the continuous formulation is more complex to solve than the
discrete one, it is more efficient, since it can fully exploit the berths.
2.5.2
Stowage Planning
Stowage planning is considered the most critical phase of the whole transshipping process.
It is a relevant issue for both the shipping company and the port terminal, since its content
has a strong influence on the operations that will take place during the loading/unloading
process and, by extension, the vessel time at port (Delgado et al. 2012).
Based on the liner shipper stowage plan, where most of the constraints of the future
operations are settled, the terminal operators offer efficient and high-level services through
optimal utilization of the terminal resources such as berths, quay cranes, yard spaces and
other equipment. Consequently, it is crucial for the terminal management team to be able
to take part in the stowage planning process, so as to reduce the terminal operative costs
and increase overall efficiency. Therefore, it is becoming more and more common among
the liner shipping companies to introduce the class-based pre-stowage plans.
A class-based pre-stowage plan (Monaco et al. 2014) is a type of plan where shipping
containers are classified in different groups based on a set of common characteristics. These
container classes are then assigned to vessel positions rather than actual containers3, thus
leaving the final decision, to match specific containers with container classes, up to the
terminal.
3As regular stowage plans do, class-based pre-stowage plans also fulfill stability requirements for the
vessel’s entire journey.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
12
==PAGE:18==
As the liner shipper ignores the yard arrangement, a detailed stowage plan might be costly
in terms of transportation time. However, as shown in Figure 2.6, the class-based pre-
stowage plan presents much more flexibility for the terminal since the operators pair each
available slot with the most suitable shipping container placed on the yard.
Figure 2.4: Potential time saving using class-based pre-stowage plans
Taking this into account and assuming that the input that the terminal will receive is a
class-based pre-stowage plan, there are 2 different planning phases that will take place.
• Liner shipper planning phase: This initial phase does not directly concern the port
terminal. It aims to classify and organise the containers based on their attributes,
such as dimension, weight, future destination and the type of load which is carried.
As soon as the containers which will be loaded are properly classified, the liner
shipper is able to develop a class-based pre-stowage plan that will assign a container
class among each one of the vessel’s empty slots.
• Termianl planning phase: Once the liner shipper class-based pre-stowage plan is
finally completed, it is sent to the port terminal where the vessel is heading. The
class-based pre-stowage plan acts as the main input for the terminal planning phase,
where the port operators must perform the Operational Stowage Planning.
The Operational Stowage Plan is created by operationally refining the class-based
pre-stowage plan; by deciding which container to allocate within each slot (according
to the yard distribution and always sticking to the shipping container classes).
When this process is completed and the assignment has been performed, the resulting
stowage plan is completed.
By following the class-based pre-stowage plans the stability errors are mostly negligible
(Pacino et al. 2011), since the container classes ensure weight similarities among containers
of the same class and the pre-stowage plan already considers the stability and stress
constraints.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
13
==PAGE:19==
Stowage Plan Quality
To analyse the quality of a stowage plan there are two main key performance indicators
that are usually evaluated: the number of re-handles and the overall operation time. Since
both indicators are correlated and considering that the overall operation time depends on
many other factors such as the available equipment, the former will be further analysed
in this section.
As explained before, due to the structure of the vessels, containers are stowed in vertical
stacks. If an hypothetical shipping container i is stored underneath another container j,
but only container i has to be unloaded at the following port, j will need to be previously
discharged so that container i can be reached. In addition, j will have to be loaded back
into the vessel. This phenomenon is known as over-stow – the extra moves resulting of
the over-stow are called shifts or forced re-handles –, and will happen every time that a
shipping container that has to be discharged in the following port is not stowed on top of
a stack. Moreover, if container i is stored below-deck, not only container j will need to be
previously discharged, but all the containers placed on top of the hatch independently of
the stack they are in (since it is necessary to open it in order to unload i).
Certainly, a suitable strategy consists of stowing containers with a later discharge port
at the lower levels of the vessel. However, this is not always possible due to container
restrictions explained in section 2.1 as the fact that 20 ft containers must always be placed
underneath the other ones or that reefers need to be connected to power.
Therefore,
sometimes although a shipping container j may not be blocking any other container, it
can be voluntarily unloaded in order to prevent costlier over-stows in future ports.
Finally, note that both voluntary and forced re-handles incur additional crane movements
and, therefore, time and money.
2.5.3
Crane Split
An operational stowage plan uses a crane split, which is a partitioning of the work areas
among the available quay cranes assigned to berth (and therefore to the vessel). In other
words, the crane split allocates a respective number of cranes to a ship and its bays, while
deciding on which schedule the bays have to be operated.
At each port terminal, the vessels will be served by a given number of quay cranes (de-
pending on the size of the vessel, commonly three to five cranes operate at one oversea
container ship) to unload and load the shipping containers.
Because of the physical size of the quay cranes and in order to ensure safe operations, there
should always be a clearance (minimum safety distance) between two adjacent operating
cranes 4. Therefore, if the operating areas of two adjacent cranes are too close, the conflict
arises and one QC has to wait until the other one finishes its work and moves to a far-
enough bay.
4The minimum clearance is determined by the port terminal in accordance to the size of their quay
cranes assigned to the vessel. Nevertheless, it is common that the clearance is, at least, of one bay.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: Quay cranes with a clearance (one bay) separating each adjacent crane.
Since a vessel not only has to pay a fee for loading or discharging operation, but also for
the team operating the quay cranes and the cost of the transfer vehicles feeding these
cranes, it is crucial to discuss crane productivity.
The waiting time of a QC is known as idle time, and too much idle time results in a
low crane utilization, which eventually results in low performance. Therefore, the main
objective of the crane split (and scheduling) problem is to partition all the loading and
discharging jobs such that the workload of each partition is close to equal at any given
time. In other words, in a perfect crane split all quay cranes finish their work at the same
time with minimum idle time.
2.5.4
Machinery Assignment and Sequence
The Terminal Ship Loading Problem finally covers the assignment and scheduling of the
available equipment and machinery (i.e. Transfer Vehicles). Integrating both the cranes
and vehicles into the TSLP is vital because they are limited resources in the terminal, and
they might cause a bottleneck during loading operations. Moreover, generating a feasible
and efficient schedule of transport vehicles will determine the ready time of each container
in front of each QC. These ready times directly influence the assignments of containers to
each slot and by extension, the overall makespan and time at the port terminal.
Pre-marshalling
Besides developing an efficient schedule of transport vehicles in order to reduce the ready
times of the shipping containers, there is another method called pre-marshalling which
involves transport vehicles and that can lead to extra time reduction (Monaco et al. 2014).
Pre-marshalling is to reallocate the export containers in yard areas near to the berthed
vessel, so as to reduce the transportation time (and cost) during the loading operations
and to avoid future reshuffles.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
15
==PAGE:21==
Pre-marshalling may end up being neither feasible nor profitable. Feasibility depends on
the available time and resources (equipment, space and operators) to reallocate the ship-
ping containers before the actual loading starts. Profitability depends on the comparison
of the obtained benefits and the resulting costs. For example, it is important to consider
the fact that yard areas close to the quay represent a strategic terminal resource (these
areas can act as buffers for the cranes). Therefore, the adoption of the pre-marshalling
policy must be carefully studied and always decided on the cost/benefit analysis basis.
2.5.5
Loading Sequence
Before the vessel arrives at the port terminal, there are some decisions that still have to be
made. So the next issue with which the terminal has to deal with is the Loading Sequence
of the containers placed in the yard.
Stowage plan, crane split, and machinery assignment (and scheduling) result in a set of
working instructions that lay the foundations to define the loading sequence for every
shipping container.
Since the sequence in which shipping containers will be loaded is governed by physical
rules, and due to the specific layout of the vessel, some positions must be loaded before
others; the containers that have to be stowed in the base levels of the vessel must be
first loaded. In addition, preparation and traveling times are different for every container
because they are affected by other aspects such as container locations in the yard, the
availability of Quay Cranes and Transfer Vehicles, the yard congestion, the operational
stowage plan, etc.
It is of utmost importance to carefully decide the shipping container loading sequence
since it may potentially end up saving a significant amount of time if performed in an
efficient manner.
Sea to Land policy
The Sea to Land policy is one of the most used loading methodologies because even if it
does not guarantee an optimal loading sequence, the benefits of using it are significant.
This loading policy proposes to load the sipping containers starting from the row or tier
wise for the sea to the land side (Iris and Pacino 2015).
Figure 2.6: Example of the sea to land loading sequence policy.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
16
==PAGE:22==
The two main benefits of using the sea to land policy are:
• No planning is required, since it is simply a systematic method for solving the loading
sequence of each bay.
• Ensured and guaranteed optimal visibility for the crane operators at any given time
of the loading process (Steenken et al. 2001). Note that if the rows closest to the
land are initially loaded, the QC operator may have visibility problems when loading
the furthest ones (the rows closest to the sea).
Double cycling
Besides using the flexibility that a class-based pre-stowage plan provides – by using the
most suitable shipping container in the yard to fill a slot – or using voluntary re-handles
in order to improve the efficiency of the operations, there are other measures that can be
taken into account.
Unlike other techniques, double cycling is a low-cost method that can efficiently improve
the productivity of the quay cranes (Chu et al. 2017). Double cycling strategies increase
the efficiency of the cranes because after loading a shipping container from the quayside
to the vessel, a QC can unload another container from the vessel to the quayside in a
single cycle. Moreover, trucks can carry an inbound container from the quayside to the
storage yard after carrying an outbound container from the storage yard to the quayside.
Therefore, the utilization of both trucks and quay cranes increases.
As with regular methodologies, double cycling strategies must ensure the vessel stability at
any given time. In order to do that, with double cycling strategies, shipping containers are
loaded and unloaded by row. Nevertheless, if multiple cranes are unloading containers at
the same time and in near rows, the vessel may lose its balanced. Therefore, it is important
to optimize the double cycling sequence (taking into account the stability constraints) when
multiple cranes are working at the same time.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
17
==PAGE:23==
3
State-of-the-art and Related Work
The problem studied in this thesis is related to the terminal ship loading operations, and
it covers aspects such as crane split, operational stowage planning, and load sequencing.
Since the 1970s, problems related to the ship loading processes have been studied by
both shipping line companies and researchers. When the ship loading problem study was
first introduced into the science community, both shipping lines and researchers, mainly
focused on establishing a 0-1 Integer Programming (IP) approach that could formulate
the stowage planning problem including all the constraints within a mathematical model.
Theoretically, if linear programming formulations are well defined, an optimal solution
should be reached.
However, since the scope of the mathematical model depends on
uncountable constraints imposed by both the shipping company and container terminal,
solving the model even for a medium size vessel becomes barley possible; the problem
becomes non-trivial due to a large number of variables and inequalities needed to solve it.
Previous academic work is certainly diverse and with ingenious solution approaches, how-
ever the intricacy of the problem has led to many simplifications (in order to relax the
problem constraints) and therefore to limited representative power of the developed mod-
els. Due to this complexity, the available work generally addresses the problem by breaking
it down into several optimization sub-models. A detailed literature review on all of these
sub-problems can be found in recent literature surveys (i.e. Bierwirth and Meisel 2015,
K. Kim and H. Lee 2015, Iris and Pacino 2015, Boysen et al. 2016).
Nevertheless, over the past few years, the number of papers that focus on developing
embedded solutions (even if only by integrating two sub-problems at the same time) has
increased, since recent advances in the modeling of container terminal problems have
pushed the focus towards integration issues as embedded and multi-phase approaches
have shown promising results (i.e. Kang and Y. Kim 2002, Ambrosino et al. 2010).
As stated in Section 1.2, this thesis aims to exploit the potential and flexibility that
class-based pre-stowage plans can offer when optimizing port operations, by developing
an embedded solution method for both the optimization of the integrated Operational
Stowage Planning and the Crane Split problems.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
18
==PAGE:24==
3.1
Stowage Planning Problem
A growing number of studies on stowage planning have been published in the past years.
Initially, the stowage planning problem was proven to be NP-complete and related to the
circle graphs coloring problem (Avriel et al. 1998, 2000). From then on, researchers have
been trying to develop heuristic algorithms to provide fast and efficient workable solutions.
The contributions can broadly be classified as single-step planning-phase approaches or
two-step planning-phase approaches (as previously explained in section 2.5.2).
In the
one-step planning-phase approaches the liner shipper determines the whole stowage plan
and the container terminal operators can just optimize the loading sequence given the
stowage plan, while in the two-step planning-phase approaches the liner shipper develops
a class-based pre-stowage plan that determines where each shipping container type should
be placed within the vessel (in order to guarantee the seaworthiness of the containership)
and then the container terminal operators try to harness it in order to the develop an
operational stowage plan.
An extensive and complete study of the stowage planning problem one-step approach was
conducted by Pacino et al. (2012), where the authors focused on the liner shipper point
of view and developed a method for both Master Planning1 and Slot Planning2. The
presented solution method is performed under a mixed framework where both exact (inte-
ger programming) and heuristic methods are applied. The main advantage of this mixed
framework is that if the exact method is not capable of finding an optimal solution under
a time threshold, the heuristic is performed. Regarding the heuristic method, the authors
opt for developing a Constraint-Based Local Search (CBLS) algorithm that transforms the
constraint satisfaction part of a combinatorial optimization problem into an optimization
problem where the objective is to minimize constraint violations. The CBLS algorithm
initially focuses on finding a feasible solution. Once such a solution is found, the neigh-
borhood function is constrained to remain within the feasible region while optimizing the
objectives. The CBLS consists of gradually reducing the problem complexity so that a
feasible solution is quickly found, allowing to use more time searching for an optimal so-
lution. In order for the CBLS algorithm to pursue different search paths, randomization
is introduced and a race between parallel searches is performed.
A pioneer two-step phase-planning paper was presented by Monaco et al. (2014), where,
by focusing on the terminal point of view, the term Operational Stowage Plan was first
introduced. The importance of this paper lies, especially, in the distinction between the
stowage planning problem (solved by the liner shipper company) and its operational re-
finement performed by the terminal. Furthermore, the authors present a mathematical
model along with several modeling enhancements in order to obtain strong lower bounds.
Finally, they develop a tabu-search heuristic procedure that first creates an initial (fea-
sible) solution and improves it by exchanging containers within the current solution. As
the heuristic method is based on the tabu-search principles, it penalizes container-position
combinations which have a high frequency in low-performance solutions3.
1Distribution of shipping container groups (based on its characteristics) into sub-sections of bays called
locations. The distribution is performed by considering the load-list of the current port and a forecast of
the containers to be transported in future ports.
2Assignment of a specific slot for each shipping container. Performed under the Master Plan guidelines.
3By penalizing non-improving solutions by the frequency of the container-position combinations, the
heuristic method reduces the number of iterations and, therefore, the total computing time.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
19
==PAGE:25==
A two-step phase-planning that just focused on the liner shipper point of view, and which
presented promising results was developed by Parreño et al. (2016). In this paper the
authors developed a Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure (GRASP) algorithm
which ensured ship stability and sea worthiness by first developing a master plan based
on the distribution of container clusters and then proceeding to realise the container class
assignment within the available vessel slots. This method presented an improvement phase
of the solution based on two different strategies. The first strategy consisted in removing
some containers starting from the last inserted, and then reinserted those containers by
using different sequential deterministic procedures. By doing so the authors were able to
relax the late decisions of the algorithm and subsequently find better solutions by follow-
ing a different path in the last steps of the algorithm. The second improvement strategy
consists of exchanging containers between stacks within the current solution. In order to
speed up the algorithm, this procedure uses a statistical filter so that local search is not
applied to all the randomly obtained solutions, but only to the promising ones.
As explained before, researchers have noticed that embedded and multi-phase approaches
have shown promising results. Driven by these facts, Iris et al. (2018) defined the concept
of Flexible Ship Loading Problem (FSLP), which focuses on the integrated management
of a vessel’s loading operations. The authors claim that this problem allows the integra-
tion of four different operations – such as operational stowage planning, load sequencing,
equipment assignment, and equipment scheduling – while exploiting the flexibility that
class-based pre-stowage plans can offer to the container terminal. It is important to have
in mind that this is just a first step towards the optimization of the whole port terminal
operations, since berth allocation or crane split problems (among others) are omitted.
Regarding the developed solution methods, initially a mathematical model is presented
along with various modeling enhancements to obtain strong lower bounds. In addition,
the authors also developed a GRASP algorithm where randomization is included in the
construction heuristic in three different places: the order in which quay cranes should be
processed, the container-position assignment, and the generation of transfer vehicles ser-
vice times. Furthermore, it is important to highlight that the authors boost the GRASP
algorithm adaptivity by dividing the construction process into several segments and by
only using the service times which demonstrate a higher probability of achieving better
solutions4. Finally, two improvement methods are implemented, transport vehicle reas-
signment and shipping container swapping (local search optimization). As calculating the
potential improvement from performing a container swap is the most computationally ex-
pensive process of the method, the algorithm will just calculate the improvement of the
most promising cases. If one container swap improves the solution then the solution will
be updated.
4This strategy makes the overall heuristic robust towards different characteristics in the problem data
set, such as the number of available transport vehicles or quay cranes, the yard layout and density or the
number of shipping containers that have to be loaded, etc.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
20
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Crane Split Problem
The origins of the Crane Split Problem, also referred to as Quay Crane Scheduling Problem
(QCSP) in the reviewed literature, in mathematical programming can be traced to when
it was first introduced by Daganzo (1989), and years later the problem was proven to be
NP-complete (D.-H. Lee et al. 2008).
On its initial formulation, Daganzo (1989) stated that the crane split problem could be
related to the machine scheduling field, parallel machine scheduling problem, and a kind
of resource-constrained scheduling problem with precedence constraints.
However, the
author omitted several important operational constrains, such as interference and safety
distance between two adjacent cranes.
Some years later, K. H. Kim et al. (2004) further considered spatial constraints related to
the relative positions of cranes and jobs within the problem. The authors introduced non-
crossing constraints (avoid inference among cranes), neighborhood constraints (safety dis-
tance between adjacent cranes5) and job-separation constraints (non-simultaneous jobs).
Furthermore, a mixed-integer programming model, which considered various constraints
related to the operation of QCs, was formulated. The study proposed a branch-and-bound
(B&B) method to obtain the optimal solution of the QC scheduling problem and a GRASP
search algorithm to overcome the computational difficulty of the B&B method.
Later on, Moccia et al. (2006) presented a revised model where the quay cranes travel
times among bays was introduced for the first time6. They proposed a branch-and-cut
(B&C) algorithm as the solution methodology and applied to solve the same benchmark
instances used by K. H. Kim et al. (2004).
A couple of years later Bierwirth et al. (2009) revised the previously proposed crane split
models – since there was room for some refinements regarding the model constraints –
and developed a branch-and-bound algorithm. The proposed heuristic outperformed the
other existing methods in terms of both, the computation time and the objective function
value.
Finally, Meisel (2011) presented an improved model where the author divided the solution
method into two steps. First, by using a brunch-and-bound algorithm to assign the tasks
to the different quay cranes. Later on, the crane scheduling was performed by approaching
it as a graph where the minimum cost path was the best solution. It is important to note
that the branch-and-bound based algorithm only considered a unidirectional scheduling
approach, so cranes were assumed to only move from left to right (or vice versa).
5A typical value, used across different articles of the studied literature, for the clearance between two
quay cranes is δ = 1 bay.
6A typical value, used across different articles of the studied literature, for the quay cranes travel time
from one bay to another is calculated using a crane travel speed ˆt = 1 minute/bay.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
21
==PAGE:27==
Despite all the described articles are notably related among them (since the newest work
tries to refine and improve the proposed models in the previous one), there are other
interesting articles that should also be studied and considered.
An interesting heuristic method is proposed by Choo (2007), where the author approaches
the crane split problem under the premise of always dealing with the maximal bay – the
maximal bay is defined as the bay which presents, at a given period of time, a higher work-
load to be completed –. So at each time period (if any cranes are not currently working)
the assignment of the loading tasks is always performed by prioritizing the maximal bay.
In this way, the author aims to optimize the terminal resources, by following an heuristic
method which ensures that the cranes with more pending workload are always in use.
One of the first integration efforts was made by Meisel et al. (2013), where the authors
developed a framework for integrating the resolution of the berth allocation and the crane
split problems using Lagrangian relaxation-based heuristics and dynamic programming.
The framework was performed in three different phases. Initially, productivity rates for
the cranes from the vessels’ stowage plans were estimated. After that, productivity rates
were used to make berthing decisions and to assign crane capacity to vessels. Finally, a
detailed crane schedule was determined by performing an iterative process were unfeasible
solutions where automatically modified to respect all the constraints.
Another paper focusing on the integration of the berth allocation and the crane split
problems was presented by Iris et al. (2015), where the authors try to further extend the
current state-of-the-art techniques by proposing novel set partitioning models. Further-
more, an analysis of the effects of different discretization schemes and the impact of using
a time-variant/invariant quay crane allocation policy is performed. The authors aim to
use a method that optimally solves instances, but when it is not possible, tight upper
and lower bounds on the objective are generated in order to evaluate the performance of
future and past heuristics. The proposed solution method is modeled using a General-
ized Set Partitioning (GSPP) formulation and a set of column reduction techniques are
utilised to limit the number of feasible columns generated and to provide better bounds.
Furthermore, to improve the performance of the set partitioning formulations, a number
of variable reduction techniques are proposed.
V. Nguyen et al. (2019) presented a paper that focused on the resolution of the crane split
problem by applying a custom solution method based on a modified genetic algorithm
combined with several priority rules. This algorithm initially develops a random set of
chromosomes that stand for the loading sequence (solutions) and then uses priority rules
to determine the crane split. The second step is to randomly choose competitors and
figuring out the winner of the tournament according to its objective function value. In the
third step, offspring of the tournament winners is generated (since winners have higher
average fitness than the average population). Finally, some mutations (local search) are
performed to the offspring in order to potentially find a new improving solution. The
advantage of the proposed algorithm is that practical solutions are found while handling
crane interference constraints, non-simultaneous constraints, and precedence constraints
in a simple way.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
22
==PAGE:28==
Finally, although Liu et al. (2010) it is not an article specifically focused on the crane
split, it refers to a key performance indicator called Crane Intensity (Liu et al. 2010) that
easily displays the accuracy of the found solutions.
tq−worktime: Total time that quay crane q spent loading/unloading containers.
tq−idletime: Total time that quay crane q spent waiting due to crane conflict.
tq−movetime: Total time that quay crane q spent moving from one bay to another.
tq−complete: Total time that quay crane q needed to complete all the loading/unloading of
its shipping containers.
tcomplete = tq−worktime + tq−idletime + tq−movetime
(3.1)
tmax: Completion time of the slowest quay crane among the Q allocated cranes.
tmax = max{ tq−complete | q = 1, 2 ... Q }
(3.2)
The duration a ship berthed in a port depends on the completion time of the longest crane
and is mainly decided by the crane split.
C.I. =
Q
∑
q=1
(tq−worktime)
tmax
(3.3)
Considering the exposed information, a good C.I. (close to the number of cranes allo-
cated) indicates that the workloads of the cranes are evenly distributed with minimum
idle and movement time. This therefore minimizes the makespan of the load and discharge
operations and thus minimizes the time at port.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
23
==PAGE:29==
4
Mathematical Model
4.1
Problem definition
Integrating the Crane Split with the Operational Stowage plan is vital because the quay
cranes are key resources in the terminal, which might cause a bottleneck during loading
operations (because of the limited amount of cranes and the limited movement possibilities
due to its spatial constraints). Moreover, generating a feasible crane split combined with
the proper assignments of containers to each position, will lead to optimal makespan
values.
Since quay cranes are mounted on a common track, they cannot cross each other, so a
crane is assigned to a specific set of bays for the entire planning horizon. This means that
some bays can be operated for multiple quay cranes. In other words, the problem deals
with determining which specific container will be picked up by which of the available quay
cranes at what point in time in the most efficient manner.
Assumptions
To simplify the problem, the following assumptions have been taken into account.
• The berth allocation problem has been solved beforehand (i.e. each quay crane can
only move within a finite number of bays).
• Unloading operations are performed first, (i.e. the problem does not include double
cycling (Chu et al. 2017) and only focuses on the loading operations).
• The quay cranes load sequencing policy will always be from-sea-to-land (to ensure
adequate visibility for QC operator as noted by Steenken et al. (2001)).
• The stability of the vessel is ensured with the class-based stowage-plan (stability
errors in class-based stowage plans are mostly negligible as noted by Pacino et al.
(2011)).
• Quay cranes gantrying times cannot be neglected, since they have a notable influence
in the makespan (quay crane travel times are relevant compared to the time it takes
to move a container).
• Quay cranes cannot be added or removed from a vessel during the horizon plan.
• All the quay cranes are similar, so their work rates and performance attributes are
the same.
• There is no delay in transfer vehicles delivering containers at the allocated time (i.e.
containers are always available).
• The loading speed (depending on the layout distribution of the yard, the number
of available transport vehicles, and the container size and weight) is reflected in the
loading times.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
24
==PAGE:30==
Problem Solution
A feasible solution to the Crane Split and the Operational Stowage Plan problem holds
the assignment of each container to a vessel position. It also shows which quay crane
will load each container to its position, the start loading time, and finishing time for each
crane task. The complete schedule of all cranes is also made. A feasible solution fulfills
the requirements of the class-based pre-stowage plan and abides by the cranes spatial con-
straints and the load sequencing policy.
4.2
Model Formulation
Indices:
i
Shipping container number.
p
Vessel slot position number.
q
Quay crane number, in ascending order of their relative location on the vessel.
(i.e. from left to right).
Parameters and Sets:
C
Set of shipping containers that will be loaded to the vessel.
Cpos
p
Set of containers belonging to a class suitable for slot position p.
Q
Set of available quay cranes assigned to load the vessel.
Qpos
p
Set of cranes suitable for loading slot position p.
P
Set of available slot positions to be loaded on the vessel.
PP
Set of dummy slot positions { p = 0, p = T } ∪P.
P0
Set of dummy slot position { p = 0 } ∪P.
PT
Set of dummy slot position { p = T } ∪P.
Pcont
i
Set of positions that match the class of container i.
J
Set of bays in which the vessel is divided. In ascending order of their relative
location on the vessel (i.e. from left to right).
τip
Required time for a crane to load container i into position p. Assumed to be
the same in both directions.
lp
Bay number where the slot position p is placed.
ˆt
Travel time required by a QC to move between two adjacent bays.
δ
Clearance. Minimum space between two adjacent cranes, in number of bays.
H
Last time period of the horizon plan.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
25
==PAGE:31==
Decision variables:
xq
ps ∈B
1 if position p and position s are consecutively filled by crane q ; 0 otherwise.
zps ∈B
1 if position s is filled after position p has also been filled ; 0 otherwise.
wpi ∈B
1 if position p is filled with container i ; 0 otherwise.
If container i cannot be loaded into position p, then wpi = 0.
tlp ∈Z+
Completion time when position p is filled.
tc q ∈Z+
Completion time when quay crane q finishes its last operation.
tkp ∈Z+
Duration of the loading process of position p.
Objective function:
Although the model under study is a multi-objective optimization problem, since the
main goal is to minimize the makespan, the objective function will be modeled as a linear
combination of the makespan and the sum of the crane completion times. By doing so,
it is not necessary to solve the multi-objective problem and, at the same time, secondary
goals are not completely neglected.
As noted by K. H. Kim et al. (2004) and Moccia et al. (2006), minimizing the makespan is
the same as minimizing the ship completion time, while minimizing the completion time of
the cranes maximizes their productivity, since idle times are reduced as much as possible.
Therefore, a linear combination of both objectives can lead to higher productivity solutions
for the minimum possible makespan.
Note that since a vessel cannot leave the port terminal until all the containers are loaded
it is usually assumed that α1 >> α2 .
[ minimize ]
α1 · tl T + α2 ·
∑
q∈Q
tc q
(4.1)
Constraints:
∑
p∈Pcont
i
wpi = 1
∀i ∈C
(4.2)
∑
i∈Cpos
p
wpi = 1
∀p ∈P
(4.3)
∑
i∈Cpos
p
τpi · wpi = tkp
∀p ∈P
(4.4)
∑
s∈PT
xq
0s = 1
∀q ∈Q
(4.5)
∑
p∈P0
xq
pT = 1
∀q ∈Q
(4.6)
∑
q∈Q
∑
s∈PT
xq
ps = 1
∀p ∈P
(4.7)
∑
s∈P0
xq
sp −
∑
s∈PT
xq
sp = 0
∀q ∈Q, ∀p ∈P
(4.8)
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
26
==PAGE:32==
zps + zsp = 1
∀p ∈P, ∀s ∈P | s≺p
(4.9)
tlp + 2 · tks −tls ≤0
∀p ∈P, ∀s ∈P | s≺p
(4.10)
tlp + ttps + 2 · tks −tls ≤H · (1 −xq
sp)
∀p, s ∈P | p ̸= s, ∀q ∈(Qp ∪Qs)
(4.11)
tlp + 2 · tks −tls ≤H · (1 −zps)
∀p, s ∈P | p ̸= s
(4.12)
tls −2 · tks −tlp ≤H · zps
∀p, s ∈P | p ̸= s
(4.13)
ttq
0s + 2 · tks −tls ≤H · (1 −xq
0s)
∀s ∈PT, ∀q ∈Qs
(4.14)
tlp −tc q ≤H · (1 −xq
pT )
∀p ∈P0, ∀q ∈Qp
(4.15)
∑
u∈P0
xv
up + 2 · tks +
∑
u∈P0
xw
us ≤1 + zps + zsp
∀(p, s, v, w) ∈Θ
(4.16)
tlp + ∆vw
ps + 2 · tks −tls ≤H · (3 −zps −
∑
u∈P0
xv
up −
∑
u∈P0
xw
us)
∀(p, s, v, w) ∈Θ
(4.17)
tls + ∆vw
ps + 2 · tkp −tlp ≤H · (3 −zsp −
∑
u∈P0
xv
up −
∑
u∈P0
xw
us)
∀(p, s, v, w) ∈Θ
(4.18)
tc q ≤tl T
∀q ∈Q
(4.19)
xq
pp = 0
∀p ∈P, ∀q ∈Q
(4.20)
xq
sp = 0
∀p, s ∈P, ∀q ∈Q \ (Qp ∪Qs)
(4.21)
zpp = 0
∀p ∈P
(4.22)
wpi = 0
∀p ∈{0, T}, ∀i ∈C
(4.23)
tkp = 0
∀p ∈{0, T}
(4.24)
tl0 = 0
(4.25)
xq
ps ∈{0, 1}
∀p, s ∈PP, ∀q ∈Q
(4.26)
wpi ∈{0, 1}
∀p ∈PP, ∀i ∈C
(4.27)
zps ∈{0, 1}
∀p, s ∈P
(4.28)
tlp ≥0
∀p ∈PP
(4.29)
tcp ≥0
∀p ∈PP
(4.30)
tkp ≥0
∀p ∈PP
(4.31)
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
27
==PAGE:33==
Other considerations:
The expression s ≺p indicates that position s must be handled before than position p.
Position precedence exist due to physic constraints (lower positions must be filled before
the ones above) and the from-sea-to-land loading policy.
It should be noted that safety margin constraints along with non-crossing constraints
restrict the assignment of quay cranes to bays. Therefore, it is useful to calculate the set
Jq which describes the bays reachable by crane q in order to check the obtained solutions.
The set Jq can be defined as follows:
Jcrane
q
= { j ∈J | (q −1)(δ + 1) ≤j ≤J −(Q −q) · (δ + 1)}
(4.32)
Since the set of bays J is sorted in an ascending order (i.e. from left to right), and the
parameter lp links the position p with its bay number, the quay crane travel time between
the bays where two different slot positions are located (ttps) is calculated as:
ttps = ˆt · |lp −ls|
∀p, s ∈P
(4.33)
As noted by Bierwirth et al. (2009) the temporal distance can be computed as a function
of the bay positions of loading tasks, the safety margin, the quay cranes travel times, and
the task-to-QC assignment. Taking this into account, let ∆vw
ps denote the minimum time
span to elapse between the processing of two positions p and s if processed by cranes v
and w respectively. Note that since the cranes are indexed from left to right, v operates
below (above) w if v < w v > w).
In order to avoid crane crossing and to guarantee clearance compliance, the minimum
safety distance between the bay positions of cranes v and w is defined as:
δvw = (δ + 1) · |v −w|
(4.34)
Therefore, for any combination of positions p, s ∈PP and quay cranes v, w ∈Q, the
minimum temporal distance is calculated as:
∆vw
ps =









(lp −ls + δvw) · ˆt
if v < w and p ̸= s and lp > ls −δvw
(ls −lp + δvw) · ˆt
if v > w and p ̸= s and lp < ls + δvw
0,
otherwise.
(4.35)
In order to always guarantee the compliance of the non-crossing and the clearance con-
straints (even if two quay cranes are not adjacent), the minimum temporal distance must
be taken into account in all the position and cranes that can potentially lead to crane
interference. This set of combinations is defined as:
Θ = { (p, s, v, w) ∈PP2 × Q2 | (p < s) ∧(∆vw
ps > 0) }
(4.36)
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
28
==PAGE:34==
Let L be defined as the set of bays where each available slot position p ∈P is located.
L = { lp : ∀p ∈P }
(4.37)
Also, let Lq
i be the set of bays where each position p ∈P is located and where each quay
crane q ∈Q would operate in scenario i ∈Q.
Lq
i =









lp : ∀p ∈P | (q −1) · (δ + 1) + 1 ≤lp ≤(q) · (δ + 1) + 1
if q < i
lp : ∀p ∈P | J −(Q −q) · (δ + 1) −1 ≤lp ≤J −(Q −q) · (δ + 1)
if q > i
lp : ∀p ∈P | (q −1) · (δ + 1) + 1 ≤lp ≤J −(Q −q) · (δ + 1)
otherwise.
(4.38)
Then, the maximum number of time periods that the horizon plan can last H (and an
upper bound for the makespan) can be defined as follows:
H =
∑
p∈P
max(2 · τcp) + ˆt · max
i∈Q [
∑
q∈Q
(
∑
p∈P
ϕq
pi + min(Lq
i) ) ]
(4.39)
Where (4.39a) is the maximum loading time for each shipping container if the worst
possible container-position combination was always selected. And where (4.39b) is the
maximum quay crane travel time under the assumption that all the cranes would load all
the containers in an inefficient way.
∑
p∈P
max(2 · τcp)
(4.39a)
ˆt · max
i∈Q [
∑
q∈Q
(
∑
p∈P
ϕq
pi + min(Lq
i) ) ]
(4.39b)
The quay crane travel time upper bound in (4.39b) is computed under the assumption
that the cranes always load the farthest available positions. This method implies that
the cranes will never load two containers at the same time (if multiple containers must
be loaded into the same bay, cranes will load one container, move to another bay to load
another container, and the go back to the previous one). By doing so, this upper bound
guarantees the maximum travel distance in the worst possible loading schedule.
Finally, it is important to remark that Q scenarios are performed so that in each scenario
a different crane will fill all those positions where it has access, thus limiting the bays in
which the other cranes will work and maximizing the workload imbalance among cranes,
guaranteeing that the worst scenario will be taken into account.
ϕq
pi =









−2 · lp
if lp < med(Lq
i)
2 · lp
if lp > med(Lq
i)
0,
otherwise.
(4.40)
Constraints (4.2) ensure that each shipping container will be loaded into a position that
matches with its container class, while constraints (4.3) guarantee that all positions are
loaded with a shipping container that matches the required container class of that slot
position.
Constraints (4.4) ensure that the loading task time for any given container-
position combination is set correctly.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
29
==PAGE:35==
Constraints (4.5), (4.6), (4.8) are the classical routing tasks, where (4.5), (4.6) guarantee
that dummy positions p = 0 and p = T are respectively assigned first and last in the
loading sequence, and where (4.8) are flow balance constraints which ensure that tasks
are performed in well-defined sequences. Constraints (4.7) make sure that each position
is filled by one and only one quay crane.
While constraints (4.9) state that positions p and s cannot be handled at the same time
if s≺p, constraints (4.10) calculate the minimum task completion time for positions with
the exposed precedence relationship.
Constraints (4.11) calculate the different positions’ completion times and simultaneously
eliminate sub-tours. Constraints (4.14), (4.15) set the correct completion time for the
the first and last not-dummy loaded position on each quay crane. Constraints (4.15) also
determine the quay cranes completion times tc q.
The variables zps are related with the position completion times and therefore defined in
constraints (4.12), (4.13). By defining zps, and combined with constraints (4.16), (4.17),
(4.18), these constraints help prevent crane interference.
In constraints (4.16), the assignments of positions to quay cranes that are realized during
the loading sequence are identified.
∑
u∈P0 xv
up = 1 iff position p is processed by crane v, and ∑
u∈P0 xw
us = 1 iff position s is
processed by crane w. If both assignments take place, the left-hand side reveals a value
of two, and the tasks are not allowed to be processed simultaneously (i.e. either zps = 1
or zsp = 1). In the case zps = 1, constraints (4.17) insert the minimum temporal distance
calculated by (4.2) between the completion time of position p and the starting time of the
loading task associated with position s. The corresponding case of zsp = 1 is handled in
constraints (4.18).
Constraints (4.19) determine the total makespan (which matches with the completion time
of the loading task for the dummy position p = T) as the latest quay crane completion
time.
Finally, constraints (4.20), (4.22) ensure that a task cannot be performed multiple times.
Constraints (4.21) guarantee that a quay crane cannot fill a position where it has no access.
Constraints (4.23) avoid assigning shipping containers to dummy positions. Constraints
(4.24), (4.25) set null dummy tasks loading and travel times.
To conclude, note that if (α1 = 1, α2 = 0) and the objective function (4.1) is simply
defined as:
[ minimize ]
tl T
In that specific case, tc q variables have no influence in the output and therefore constraints
(4.15), (4.19) and tc q variables can be removed from the model.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
30
==PAGE:36==
4.2.1
Problem Lower Bound
It is necessary to first define the minimum total time that is required to transport and load
the shipping containers into the different slot positions (LTmin). This minimum overall
time is obtained by solving an assignment problem that minimizes the total required
loading time, where the objective function minimises the loading time obeying the class-
based stowage plan (taking into account the class compatibility between containers and
positions). This problem can be defined as the Operational Stowage Plan Model and it
is explained in detail, later on, in Section 5.1. Nevertheless, for the current purpose, the
model should be solved using:
β = 0,
so that
LTmin =
∑
p∈P
tkp.
(4.41)
By defining the minimum quay crane travel time TTmin, the most favorable scenario will
be assumed.
It will, therefore, be considered that the cranes are able to load all the
containers by only moving in one direction (avoiding clearance issues). By doing so, the
minimum crane travel time TTmin can be defined as:
TTmin =
ˆt · [ max(L) −min(L) −(Q −1) ]
Q
(4.42)
Once both, the minimum time for the loading tasks and the minimum quay travel time have
been defined, and assuming that the loading task times can be evenly distributed between
the different cranes, the lower bound on the overall completion time (i.e. makespan) can
be set as:
tl T ≥LB = 2 · LTmin + ˆt · [ max(L) −min(L) −(Q −1) ]
Q
= 2 · LTmin
Q
+ TTmin
(4.43)
By using the above propositions, a mathematical model to obtain the lower bound on the
problem can be computed. Since this Lower Bound Model (LBM) is a variation of the
Operational Stowage Plan Model (OSPM), extensively discussed later on in Section 5.1,
it will not be explicitly written1.
1Although by taking into account equations (4.41) and (4.43) the LBM is obtained as a variation of the
OSPM, the interested reader can find the complete LBM model in Annex 1.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
31
==PAGE:37==
5
Matheuristic Solution Method
Due to the complexity of the mathematical model previously exposed in Section 4, an
alternative solution method has been developed in order to solve the problem in the
minimum possible amount of time.
Broadly speaking there are three main decisions to be taken in the studied problem.
1. The shipping container-position assignment (wip, tkp).
2. The positions assignment for each quay crane (xq
ps).
3. The service time of the quay cranes (tcq), where the last finishing time is equivalent
to the makespan.
The objective function heavily depends on the service times of the quay cranes, which at
the same time depends on the container-position and position-to-crane assignments. The
proposed solution method consists of a matheuristic that combines mathematical linear
programming with a Greedy Randomised Adaptive Search Procedure (GRASP).
A matheuristic is the hybridization of mathematical programming with (meta)heuristics
methods. The hallmark of matheuristics is the central role played by the mathematical
programming model, around which the heuristics are built. Therefore, a matheuristic is
not a rigid paradigm but rather a conceptual framework for the design of mathematically
sound (meta)heuristics (Martina Fischetti and Matteo Fischetti 2016).
Resolution Workflow :
Following with the exposed idea of the three main decisions, the developed workflow deals
with the decisions within 2 different big phases.
Phase 1: Determine the Operational Stowage Plan
The first step of the decision process which the matheuristic has to face is the container-
position assignment (determine the loading tasks). The aim of this step is to determine
the container-position combinations that minimize the total loading tasks time.
In
order to optimally deal with this decision, a small mathematical linear program is
computed.
Phase 2: Determine the Crane Split and the Loading Sequence
Once the container-position assignment has been performed, the GRASP method is
in charge of performing all the remaining decisions by using different indicators. The
construction method builds a solution that follows all the problem constraints. Finally,
if the found solution output (makespan) is promising enough, an attempt to improve
the solution using a local search method will be made.
This workflow takes place several times by differently solving the operational stowage plan
(Phase 1). The final solution is the one which presents the lower makespan at the end of
the whole process.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
32
==PAGE:38==
5.1
Operational Stowage Plan Model Formulation
Indices:
i
Shipping container number.
p
Vessel slot position number.
Parameters and Sets:
C
Set of shipping containers that will be loaded to the vessel.
Cpos
p
Set of containers belonging to a class suitable for slot position p.
P
Set of available slot positions to be loaded on the vessel.
Pcom
Set of common positions among multiple quay cranes.
Pcont
i
Set of positions that match the class of container i.
τip
Required time for a crane to load container i into position p. Assumed to be
the same in both directions.
Decision variables:
wpi ∈B
1 if position p is filled with container i ; 0 otherwise.
If container i cannot be loaded into position p, then wpi = 0.
tkp ∈Z+
Duration of the loading process of position p.
Objective function:
Since the resolution of the proposed MIP serves as a starting point for the heuristic
procedures, the objective function includes an adjustable coefficient β that slightly modifies
the optimization direction of the model. By doing so, the matheuristic method can explore
different stowage plan options with the ensured quality that a MIP provides.
The logic behind the parameter β is to minimize the overall loading time of all the tasks
giving a different amount of relevance to the positions that can be loaded by several quay
cranes (These are the most relevant positions since they can potentially lead to more
clearance issues).
[ minimize ]
∑
p∈P
tkp + β ·
∑
p∈Pcom
tkp
(5.1)
Constraints:
∑
p∈Pcont
i
wpi = 1
∀i ∈C
(5.2)
∑
i∈Cpos
p
wpi = 1
∀p ∈P
(5.3)
∑
i∈Cpos
p
τpi · wpi = tkp
∀p ∈P
(5.4)
wpi ∈{0, 1}
∀p ∈P, ∀i ∈C
(5.5)
tkp ≥0
∀p ∈P
(5.6)
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
33
==PAGE:39==
Other considerations:
Similarly to how the set of reachable bays by crane q (Jcrane
q
) has previously been calcu-
lated in (4.32), the set of bays that can be operated by multiple quay cranes Jcom can be
defined as follows:
Jcom = { Jv ∩Jw | j ∈J, (v, w) ∈Q}
(5.7)
Following the same idea, the set of slot positions that can be filled by multiple cranes
Pcom can be defined as all the positions in different bays (lp) that belong to Jcom.
Pcom = { p ∈P | lp ∈Jcom}
(5.8)
5.2
Construction Algorithm
Once the Operational Stowage Plan is solved by the MIP, a set of loading tasks becomes the
main input of the construction algorithm process. With this information, the dictionary
taskDict is created. This dictionary is sorted using the positions as the key elements and
stores the information in Task(p, b, c, t) objects1.
Following an iterative process, the Crane Split and the Loading Sequence will be defined.
This process is based on the selection of unperformed loading operations task ∈taskDict
(always taking into account each position precedence) and its assignation to a quay crane
q ∈Q . The process goes on until all the loading tasks have been performed.
Step 0: Initialization
As stated before, the main input is taskDict, where the information regarding the loading
tasks (container-position assignments) is stored. Nevertheless, to perform the construction
algorithm three custom composite types (i.e. mutable structs or objects) are created.
• LoadingSequence :
This composite type stores the order in which loading tasks are performed, along
with its starting time and the quay crane which is in charge of the task. It also keeps
track of the filled positions, loaded containers and the number of tasks left.
• QuayCrane :
This composite type stores all the relevant information regarding a specific quay
crane, such as its number, the number of the bays where it can operate, its current
status (e.g. idle, loading, moving, etc.), the time left for the current operation, its
current bay, the bay where it is heading (only applies if moving) and a task buffer
for future tasks which are already assigned.
To easily deal with all the quay cranes at the same time an array consisting of
QuayCrane elements is created.
• Timer :
This mutable composite type acts as a timer to keep track of the different time
periods and the available cranes (idle) at any given moment.
1The Task(p, b, c, t) indices stand for the slot positions to be filled, the bay where the filled position
belongs, the shipping containers to be loaded and the necessary time to perform the loading operation.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
34
==PAGE:40==
As a result, after the initialization phase the construction algorithm has three new ele-
ments:
LS ←LoadingSequence,
QC ←Array{QuayCrane, 1},
TIME ←Timer
Step 1: Determine the target bay
Every time that a new task must be assigned to the loading sequence, an analysis of the
pending workload for the different bays is performed. So, the required time of the not
yet loaded positions that belong to a specific bay are summed all together. Due to its
relevance, the bay remaining workload information was used in all the different ideas for
new indicators.
• Maximal Bay:
The bays are sorted according to their remaining workload. The first bay is the one
that requires more time to perform all the loading operations. This indicator aims to
prioritize those bays which a higher amount of pending workload in order to reduce
the total makespan.
• Maximal Bay weighted by distance:
Same idea as the Maximal Bay indicator but giving a different weight to each bay
according to its distance to the quay cranes.
The maximum possible weight is
assigned to those bays where there is a crane already placed. This indicator aims to
give priority to those bays which can be loaded in the earliest possible time, reducing
the total traveling time.
• Maximal Bay weighted by bay number:
Same idea as the Maximal Bay indicator but giving a different weight to each bay
according to its position. The maximum possible weight is assigned the center bays
and the minimum possible weight is assigned to the extreme bays. This indicator
aims to give priority to the common bays and only accessing the extreme bays to
avoid crane idle times.
Step 2: Determine the target task
After selecting the target bay the next step is to determine which task to will be added to
the loading sequence. In order to do that, as explained before in the assumptions made
in (Section 4) the from-sea-to-land policy is performed. Note that it is required to check
the previously filled positions and the precedence information before selecting a task.
Step 3: Select a quay crane
Once a target task has been selected, the next step is to assign this task to a quay crane.
In order to do so, initially, the quay cranes that can operate in the target bay and which
are available at that specific time period are listed (q ∈Qavailable). Those cranes are then
sorted according to one of the following criteria:
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
35
==PAGE:41==
• Current crane bay to target bay distance:
In this case the distance is computed as the quadratic difference between the target
bay and the quay crane current bay. This criterion aims to prioritize those bays which
require a lower amount of travel time in order to perform the loading operation.
dist = ( targetBay −currentBay )2
∀q ∈Qavailable
• Reference crane bay to target bay distance:
On this occasion the distance is calculated as the quadratic difference between the
target bay and the crane reference bay. The reference bays allow to evenly divide the
available surface among the different quay cranes. This criterion aims to prioritize
those bays which are close to its reference position, avoiding crane incompatibilities
due to a single crane multiple consecutive movements in one direction.
dist = ( targetBay −referenceBay )2
∀q ∈Qavailable
Step 4: Check clearance
After selecting both the target task and the quay crane in charge of performing the loading
operation, the next step is to check the crane clearance.
If the clearance constraints
are satisfied, the task will be performed by the quay crane and assigned to the loading
sequence. If the clearance constraints are not met the algorithm will try to assign the
target task to the following available crane q ∈Qavailable.
If none of the available cranes is able to load a container in the target bay due to the
clearance constraints, a second-order clearance check is performed.
This second-order
clearance check looks if it is feasible to assign the task to a quay crane when moving its
neighbor cranes in order to create enough clearance. As explained before, if the clearance
constraints are not met the algorithm will try to assign the target task to the following
available crane q ∈Qavailable.
Finally, it is not possible to perform the target task using second-order clearance either,
a last attempt using third-order clearance will take place (the idea behind the third-order
clearance is the same as the second-order clearance).
If none of the cranes is able to load a shipping container in the target bay, the next one
(from the order established in Step 1) will be selected and the construction algorithm will
continue from Step 2.
Step 5: Add the task to the Loading Sequence
After selecting the target task, the quay crane in charge of performing the loading operation
and ensuring that clearance is respected, the next step is to add the task to the loading
sequence, update the quay crane attributes (status, next bay and remaining time) and
remove the quay crane from the time period available cranes. Once these updates are
performed, the algorithm starts all over again from Step 1.
If it is impossible to add any task to the loading sequence (because none of the cranes
are idle or due to clearance incompatibilities), the time period will have come to an end.
Once a time period is over, the next step is to advance to the next one and restart the
construction algorithm from Step 1. The construction algorithm will continue until all
tasks are assigned to the loading sequence (ergo all positions are filled and all containers
are loaded).
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
36
==PAGE:42==
Note that this algorithm can either serve as a randomized or a deterministic algorithm
whether the indicators include randomness or not.
Algorithm 1 Construction Heuristic
Require:
T ←Timer
ind,
indicator used to sort the bays.
LS ←LoadingSequence
crit,
criteria used to sort the available cranes.
QC ←Array{QuayCrane, 1}
1: procedure Construction Heuristic (ind, crit, T, LS, QC)
2:
while tasks left > 0 do
3:
craneStatus ←”idle”
4:
while craneStatus ̸= ”busy” or craneStatus ̸= ”next time period” do
5:
if q.status ̸= ”idle” for all q in QC then
6:
return ”busy”
7:
end if
8:
9:
sortedbays ←sort(bays, ind)
10:
for b in sortedbays do
11:
task ←LS.remainingTasks | task.bay = b
12:
if checkLoadedFilled(LS, task) · checkPreced(LS, task) = true then
13:
available ←availableCranes(QC, b)
14:
for q in sort(available, crit) do
15:
if checkClearance(QC, q, b) = true then
16:
addTask(LS, QC, TIME, q, task)
17:
return ”task successfully added”
18:
else if checkDoubleClearance(QC, q, b) = true then
19:
addTaskMove(LS, QC, TIME, q, task)
20:
return ”task successfully added”
21:
else if checkTripleClearance(QC, q, b) = true then
22:
addTask2Moves(LS, QC, TIME, q, task)
23:
return ”task successfully added”
24:
end if
25:
end for
26:
end if
27:
end for
28:
return ”next time period”
29:
30:
end while
31:
NextTimePeriod(QC, T)
32:
end while
33: end procedure
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
37
==PAGE:43==
5.3
The GRASP Algorithm
GRASP, Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure (Feo and Resende 1995), is a
multi-start iterative metaheuristic procedure that combines a constructive phase and an
improvement phase. In each iteration, a solution is developed from scratch using a ran-
domised construction heuristic. This constructive phase consists of building the solution
step by step, by consecutively adding one element to a partial solution. For selecting the
next element to be added, a greedy strategy is followed, but the element selection includes
a random strategy that provides more diversity than the deterministic approach. The
improvement phase consists of a local search algorithm.
GRASP has been successfully applied to many combinatorial optimization problems, such
as scheduling, vehicle routing, territory design, quadratic assignment problems, crew
scheduling, inventory routing problems, machine and tool assignments, and location prob-
lems including the crane split problem (K. H. Kim and Park 2004), the container stowage
slot planning problem (Parreño et al. 2016) and the flexible ship loading problem (Iris
et al. 2018).
5.3.1
Randomizing the Construction Algorithm
The constructive algorithm previously described (Algorithm 1) is considered, and the
sorting indicators/criteria in Step 1 and Step 3 are randomized.
The calculation method of all the indicators/criteria remains the same, but an amount of
randomness is introduced to the equation, so the final order differs from the deterministic
calculation. Additionally, in order to introduce even more diversity into the solutions, the
sorting criteria are randomly selected (taken into account some given probabilities) every
time that a new solution is built.
5.3.2
Determining the sorting indicator and criteria
A preliminary computational experiment allowed to conclude that the Maximal Bay
weighted by distance indicator outperformed the other ones in all the instances, so it
ended up being the only adopted indicator by the GRASP algorithm. Nevertheless, the
performed computational experiment also showed that none of the crane-selection criteria
could always provide the best results. Therefore a Reactive GRASP strategy (Prais and
Ribeiro 1998) was adopted.
This procedure consists of initially assigning the same probability to both criteria, but
since during the iterative process a record of the obtained solutions is kept, after a certain
number of iterations the probabilities are modified. Therefore, the probability of the
criteria producing high-quality solutions increase and, conversely, the probability of the
one producing low-quality solutions decrease.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
38
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 2 Reactive GRASP
Require:
D = {currentBayDist, referenceBayDist},
set of possible crane sorting criteria.
P(Di) = 0.5,
∀Di ∈D,
probability of using a criteria Di.
SumDi = 0,
sum of the solution values obtained using that criteria Di.
z∗= ∞; zworst = 0
iter = 0
1: procedure Reactive GRASP
2:
while Stop criterion not satisfied do
3:
Randomly choose Di with probability PDi
4:
iter ←iter + 1
5:
z ←randomizedConstructionHeuristic(Di)
6:
SumDi ←SumDi + z
7:
if z < z∗then z∗←z end if
8:
if zworst < z then zworst ←z end if
9:
if mod(iter, 500) = 0 then
10:
eval(Di) = ( mean(Di)−zworst
z∗−zworst
)2,
∀Di ∈I
11:
P(Di) =
eval(Di)
∑
Ds∈D eval(Ds),
∀Di ∈I
12:
end if
13:
end while
14:
15: end procedure
5.3.3
Improvement Phase - Local search
As explained before, the improvement phase tries to enhance the solutions obtained by
the randomized constructive algorithm by using local search procedures.
The improvement strategy is based on the observation that wrong decisions might be
taken by the randomized constructive process, resulting in bad solutions. Taking this into
account, two different local search approaches have been developed.
Destroying and rebuilding the Loading Sequence:
This strategy consists of removing some of the containers in the solution and then filling
again the empty slots by using a deterministic procedure.
Let γ be a parameter determining how much of the current solution should be kept.
Since the aim of this strategy is to relax the late decisions, loading sequence tasks are
removed starting from the end until only γ % of the original solution is left. The tasks
are then reassigned using the sequential deterministic procedure. Values of γ ∈(35, 95)%
are randomly chosen. The values of the interval are set so as to remove a significant part
of the solution without starting the constructive process from scratch.
To
complete
the
partially
destroyed
loading
sequence,
the
previously
explained
constructive procedure (Algorithm 1) is used. In order to find multiple new solutions,
both sorting criteria and the best-performing indicators in the preliminary tests (Maximal
Bay weighted by distance, Maximal Bay weighted by bay number) are used. Nevertheless,
since this time a deterministic procedure is performed, none of them are randomized.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
39
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 3 Local Search
Require:
z∗,
makespan of the best-found solution.
LSold ←LoadingSequence,
problem solution to be locally optimized.
1: procedure Destroying and Rebuilding
(Local Search)
2:
while Stop criterion not satisfied do
3:
Randomly choose γ ∈(0.35, 0.95)
▷percentage of LSold to be preserved
4:
LSnew ←removeTasks(γ, LSold)
5:
T, QC ←getCurrentState(LSnew)
6:
znew ←deterministicConstructionHeuristic(T, QC, LSnew)
7:
if znew < z∗then z∗←znew end if
8:
end while
9: end procedure
Rescheduling inefficient tasks:
This strategy consists of minimizing inefficient travel times by rescheduling the loading
tasks where a quay crane moves to a specific bay just to load a single shipping container2.
To perform this local search procedure, the loading sequence is analyzed looking for a
specific casuistic that must meet the following requirements:
• At any moment during the planning horizon, the latest quay crane to finish only
loads a single container in a bay.
• After having performed that loading task, the quay crane returns to the previous
direction (if it keeps moving into the same direction the solution cannot be improved).
If that happens, and there are no clearance issues with the other cranes, the studied
solution may have room for improvement as the following figure shows.
Initial solution
Rescheduled solution
time
bay
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20
1
2
3
4
time
bay
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.1: Potential time saving rescheduling an inefficient task.
This improvement procedure can be performed repeatedly as long as the last finishing quay
crane meets the explained casuistic. Finally, note that the performance of all the quay
cranes can be improved by using this strategy (since it will reduce the crane completion
time), but only the last finishing crane can improve the overall makespan.
2Note that by rescheduling those tasks so that a crane has to load, at least, 2 containers at a time in
the same bay, the overall makespan is reduced thanks to the saved travel time.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
40
==PAGE:46==
Statistical Filter:
In order to speed up the iterations of the GRASP metaheuristic a strategy called GRASP
statistical filtering (Feo et al. 1994) is applied. The idea behind this strategy is that local
search is not applied to all the solutions obtained by the randomized construction phase,
but only to promising ones. Therefore, solutions with a low probability of improvement
of the best-known makespan (z∗) after the improvement phase are discarded.
In order to do so, the first 500 iterations are improved using the local search procedures
and their initial and final values are stored. Therefore the set zini contains the makespan
values of all the solutions obtained by the randomized constructive phase, and the set zls
the values of the solution after the improvement phase.
Considering the distribution of zini/zls a quality threshold M is established. Consequently,
in the subsequent iterations, a solution obtained in the first phase with value zini only goes
to the improvement phase if zini ≤M · z∗. Nevertheless, since there are two different local
search procedures with different levels of potential improvement, two different quality
thresholds M1, M2 are calculated.
• Destroying and rebuilding the Loading Sequence (M1): Since this method may have
room for major time improvements in the total makespan, the quality threshold is
computed as the median of the zini/zls distribution.
• Rescheduling inefficient tasks (M2): Conversely, since this procedure improvements
are only travel time savings due to single task reallocation, the quality threshold is
calculated as the 1st quartile of the zini/zls distribution.
Algorithm 4 Statistical Filtering
Require:
z∗,
makespan of the best found solution
z, LS, makespan and loading sequence of the randomized constructive phase execution.
set(zini),
set of first 500 makespan values of the randomized constructive phase.
set(zls),
set of first 500 makespan values of the improvement phase.
M1, M2 = ∞,
quality thresholds.
1: procedure Statistical Filtering
2:
while Stop criterion not satisfied do
3:
if z < M1 · z∗or iter < 500 then
4:
repeat
5:
z1, LS1 ←destroyRebuild(LS)
6:
until LS not improved
7:
end if
8:
if z1 < M2 · z∗or iter < 500 then z2 ←rescheduleInef(LS1) end if
9:
if iter = 500 then
10:
M1 ←ComputeMedian(set(zini), set(zls))
11:
M2 ←Compute1stQuartile(set(zini), set(zls))
12:
end if
13:
if z1 < z∗then z∗←z1 end if
14:
if z2 < z∗then z∗←z2 end if
15:
end while
16: end procedure
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
41
==PAGE:47==
5.3.4
Parallel GRASP. Speeding up the algorithm
During the last decade, parallel computing algorithms have gradually found their way
into metaheuristics. Most parallel implementations of GRASP in the literature follow the
multiple-walk independent thread strategy, which is based on the distribution of the total
iterations over several processors. So each search thread has to perform N/p iterations,
where p is the number of processors and N the total number of iterations to be performed.
Each processor has a copy of the sequential GRASP algorithm and an independent seed to
generate its own pseudorandom number sequence to prevent them from finding the same
solutions. Finally, the communication among processors during the iterations is limited
to the detection of program termination and gathering the best solution found over all
processors. Therefore, one of the processors acts as the master, reading and distributing
the problem data, generating the seeds which will be used by the pseudorandom number
generators at each processor, distributing the iterations, and collecting the best solution
found by each processor.
Taking this into account, Resende and Ribeiro (2010, 2016) pointed out that, due to
partitioning of the search space and to more possibilities for search intensification and di-
versification, parallel implementations of metaheuristics are suitable alternatives to speed
up the search of solutions, and also facilitate solving larger problems and finding better
solutions, with respect to their sequential counterparts. Those are the main reasons why
parallel computing can improve the effectiveness and robustness of metaheuristic-based al-
gorithms, since these type of algorithms are less dependent on time-consuming parameter
tuning experiments and their success is not limited to a few or small classes of problems.
To speed up the solution method, the previously exposed multiple-walk independent thread
strategy has been followed. Further on, Table 6.2 shows a comparison of the performance,
over N = 1000 iterations, between the regular (single-thread) Randomized GRASP and
the parallel (multi-thread) variation of the same algorithm.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
42
==PAGE:48==
6
Computational experiments
The algorithms were coded in Julia 1.3 and run on an Intel Core i5 - 10210U with 8 GB of
RAM. The IP models were implemented in JuMP and run using Gurobi 9.0, with a time
limit of 18000 CPU seconds and using 8 threads. For the GRASP algorithms the stopping
criteria are a time limit of 7200 CPU seconds, or a maximum of 15000 iterations, or 1000
iterations without improving the best-known solution, whichever occurs first.
Finally,
for the matheuristic algorithm, the stopping criteria is a total time limit of 7200 CPU
seconds, or the end of all the GRASP algorithms, since it will be executed multiple times
starting with different container-position combinations (for each execution of the GRASP
algorithm, the stopping criteria based on a maximum of 15000 iterations, or 1000 iterations
without improving the best-known solution applies).
6.1
Datasets overview
To test the formulations and the heuristic, the benchmark set used by Iris et al. (2018)
has been slightly modified to fit the studied problem requirements.
The number of containers to be loaded in the instances is either 60, 240, 500, or 1000,
corresponding to small, medium and large vessels. Also, either 2 or 4 quay cranes are
available depending on the size of the vessel; 2 cranes when 60 or 240 containers must
be loaded, and 4 cranes for 500 and 1000 containers.
The number of container types
(according to the class-based pre-stowage plan) ranges from 10 to 100, again depending
on the size of the vessel.
To describe different yard structures, three different densities are tested. The density will
affect the travel time to the containers in the yard and, as a result, the container loading
time 1. The different densities are Uniform, Scattered, and Less Dense. For the Uniform
case, all containers are stored closely together in the yard, minimising the variance in the
travel times. In the scattered case the containers are stored over a larger area, and it
implies a higher variance in the travel times. The Less Dense is a mix between these two
densities.
Finally, the minimum clearance is set to 1 bay and the adopted crane travel speed is
1 minute/bay 2. The used time unit for the benchmark data-sets are seconds, and a total
of 30 instances have been generated.
1As explained in Section 4.1, the loading times take into account the layout distribution of the yard,
the number of available transport vehicles and the container size and weight.
2 Those values are the most common across different articles of the studied literature.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
43
==PAGE:49==
6.2
Mathematical Integer Linear Model Results
In this section, the computational results of the mathematical model are reported and
analysed.
The results cover the lower bound obtained using the Lower Bound Model
(xLB), the upper bound (xUB), the value of the obtained solution (x∗), and the computing
time in seconds for each model. Finally, the Gap (xUB) and Gap (x∗) columns report the
relative difference between the upper bound/solution value and the lower bound from the
model.
In most of the instances Gurobi cannot find any feasible solutions within the time limit
(18000 s), this event is indicated with the ’-’ symbol, and therefore, the reported time is
the time limit. By contrast, on the few instances when a feasible solution could be found,
the reported time is the time at which the execution was terminated. Note that for the
240, 500 and 1000 instances, the model becomes intractable to solve.
Lower Bound
Ship Loading & Crane Split Model
C (Q)
CT
D
xLB
t(s)
xUB
Gap (xUB)
x∗
Gap (x∗)
t(s)
60 (2)
10
LD
1560
0,1
3460
54,1%
-
-
18000
60 (2)
10
S
1140
0,0
2440
52,1%
1200
2,5%
17525,1
60 (2)
10
U
1760
0,0
4640
61,4%
1860
3,8%
15992,6
60 (2)
25
LD
1910
0,1
3600
46,1%
2000
3,0%
16371,2
60 (2)
25
S
1480
0,1
2840
46,8%
-
-
18000
60 (2)
25
U
1610
0,1
3980
58,8%
1700
3,5%
15461,5
Average
0,1
53,2%
3,0%
16337,6
240 (2)
20
LD
6830
0,3
14620
53,1%
-
-
18000
240 (2)
20
S
4740
0,5
10200
53,2%
-
-
18000
240 (2)
20
U
7020
0,5
18100
61,0%
-
-
18000
240 (2)
60
LD
7150
0,5
14620
50,9%
-
-
18000
240 (2)
60
S
5580
0,5
11820
52,5%
-
-
18000
240 (2)
60
U
7550
0,5
18440
58,9%
-
-
18000
Average
0,5
54,9%
-
18000
500 (4)
20
LD
3268
16604
80,0%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
20
S
2303
1,8
11640
79,8%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
20
U
3513
1,0
14814
76,0%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
60
LD
3473
1,0
15224
76,9%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
60
S
3200
1,0
11700
72,3%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
60
U
3800
1,2
14750
73,9%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
100
LD
3705
2,1
15620
76,0%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
100
S
2613
2,2
11170
76,2%
-
-
18000
500 (4)
100
U
3960
2,1
15220
73,7%
-
-
18000
Average
1,5
76,1%
-
18000
1000 (4)
20
LD
5078
9,6
31240
83,6%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
20
S
3883
9,0
23730
83,4%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
20
U
6030
9,1
31000
80,4%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
60
LD
6355
4,0
29450
78,3%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
60
S
4728
7,6
22670
78,9%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
60
U
8820
8,9
34920
74,6%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
100
LD
6698
9,0
30280
77,7%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
100
S
4700
8,7
21920
78,4%
-
-
18000
1000 (4)
100
U
7513
8,6
31240
75,8%
-
-
18000
Average
8,3
79,0%
-
18000
Average
3,1
68,2%
3,0%
17667,5
Table 6.1: Results for the integer formulation model of problem.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
44
==PAGE:50==
6.3
Parallel GRASP Results. Comparing the performance
with different number of threads
As explained in Section 5.3.4, to speed up the GRASP algorithm, the previously exposed
multiple-walk independent thread strategy has been followed. The following table shows
the computational time comparison, required to solve N = 1000 iterations, between the
regular (single-thread) Randomized GRASP and the parallel (multi-thread) variation of
the same algorithm.
1 Thread
2 Threads
4 Threads
8 Threads
C (Q)
CT
D
t(s)
t(s)
t(s)
t(s)
60 (2)
10
LD
14,2
8,3
6,6
3,8
60 (2)
10
S
24,3
6,9
4,6
3,1
60 (2)
10
U
33,7
9,4
5,7
4,0
60 (2)
25
LD
38,5
10,4
8,5
7,8
60 (2)
25
S
22,1
8,8
5,9
3,9
60 (2)
25
U
14,1
7,7
7,3
6,9
Average
24,5
8,6
6,4
4,9
240 (2)
20
LD
95,2
53,9
38,6
32,9
240 (2)
20
S
80,7
42,0
31,1
25,1
240 (2)
20
U
100,5
52,9
36,6
31,2
240 (2)
60
LD
157,7
56,1
37,7
33,9
240 (2)
60
S
67,2
50,0
33,5
27,8
240 (2)
60
U
95,3
56,2
39,9
32,0
Average
99,4
51,9
36,2
30,5
500 (4)
20
LD
319,6
182,4
129,9
105,1
500 (4)
20
S
249,5
168,0
100,3
83,3
500 (4)
20
U
334,2
202,5
107,3
100,6
500 (4)
60
LD
231,1
174,7
134,9
112,0
500 (4)
60
S
266,1
144,0
109,9
93,5
500 (4)
60
U
454,5
181,6
125,9
103,3
500 (4)
100
LD
487,3
179,6
132,5
114,8
500 (4)
100
S
610,4
151,2
108,2
86,9
500 (4)
100
U
601,6
195,4
128,3
103,0
Average
394,9
175,5
119,7
100,3
1000 (4)
20
LD
1072,5
766,1
656,2
555,7
1000 (4)
20
S
1752,7
660,2
480,7
413,3
1000 (4)
20
U
1515,1
901,9
545,4
458,7
1000 (4)
60
LD
1987,2
1141,5
964,6
825,6
1000 (4)
60
S
1251,4
769,4
521,1
482,5
1000 (4)
60
U
2126,2
1768,3
766,4
718,1
1000 (4)
100
LD
3195,4
1248,9
964,0
814,9
1000 (4)
100
S
2345,8
787,0
621,1
480,6
1000 (4)
100
U
3615,0
1258,8
743,7
593,8
Average
2095,7
1033,6
695,9
593,7
Average
771,9
374,8
253,2
215,3
Table 6.2: multi-thread GRASP computing time comparison over 1000 iterations.
As seen in the presented results, the bigger the number of threads, the fastest the algo-
rithm performs 1000 iterations. This occurs because the different iterations are completely
independent and very little information is exchanged, so speedups are easily obtained (es-
pecially on larger instances) since there are not substantial load imbalances among the
processors. Finally, as a conclusion of this performance comparison, the parallel GRASP
(using 8 threads) has been adopted.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
45
==PAGE:51==
6.4
Comparing different strategies for the GRASP
algorithm
The performance of the different strategies, previously explained in Section 5.3, for the
GRASP algorithm have been evaluated.
Table 6.3 reports the results of the different
strategies across all the instances from the benchmark.
• The Constructive deterministic algorithm.
• The Randomized constructive algorithm (at each iteration a the sorting criteria is
randomly taken).
• The Reactive GRASP algorithm (the probabilities of selecting each criterion are
adjusted as the iterative process proceeds).
• The Reactive GRASP algorithm with Local Search.
• The Reactive GRASP algorithm using a statistical filter to only select the promising
solutions to be improved (Filtering).
Each instance is solved ten times, to account for the randomness. For each method, the
table reports the best-obtained solution (xb), the average solution for the ten runs (ˆx),
and the average computing time.
All the instances have been run by initially solving
the MIP with β = 0 to determine the same loading tasks definition (container-position
assignment). It is also important to remember that, as explained before, all the instances
have been solved following the parallel GRASP strategy, by using 8 threads.
Randomized
Reactive
Local Search
Filtering
C (Q) CT D
xb
¯x
¯t
xb
¯x
¯t
xb
¯x
¯t
xb
ˆx
¯t
60 (2) 10 LD
1660
1660
6,2
1660
1660
5,7
1660
1660
20,3
1660
1660
11,6
60 (2) 10
S
1360
1360
6,0
1360
1360
5,2
1320
1320
17,4
1320
1320
9,9
60 (2) 10
U
1940
1964
9,0
1940
1950
8,1
1920
1922
34,8
1920
1936
14,8
60 (2) 25 LD
2080
2130
9,5
2080
2094
10,8
2020
2078
33,5
2040
2094
15,6
60 (2) 25
S
1660
1660
6,2
1660
1660
5,5
1640
1646
25,1
1640
1646
14,1
60 (2) 25
U
1820
1820
8,1
1820
1820
6,3
1740
1740
27.3
1740
1744
13,2
Average
1765,7
7,5
1757,3
6,9
1727,7
26,4
1733,3
13,2
240 (2) 20 LD
7640
7930
53,2
7720
7856
52,8
7400
7542 257,1 7500
7660
83,5
240 (2) 20
S
5640
5734
51,0
5640
5784
45,5
5260
5416 165,6 5200
5512
68,2
240 (2) 20
U
7840
8164
55,7
7840
8026
64,2
7660
7726 165,6 7700
7878
92,0
240 (2) 60 LD
8120
8220
59,8
8140
8272
48,3
7820
7968 221,8 7700
7994
82,6
240 (2) 60
S
6460
6566
46,7
6300
6544
45,5
6260
6386 165,5 6300
6446
73,9
240 (2) 60
U
8440
8700
68,1
8560
8730
64,2
8160
8412 250,9 8380
8520
93,2
Average
7552,5
55,8
7535,5
54,9
7241,7 217,5
7335,0
82,2
Average
31,7
30,9
122,0
47,7
(a) Small benchmark instances (60 and 240 shipping containers - 2 quay cranes).
Table 6.3: Performance comparison between strategies for the GRASP algorithm
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
46
==PAGE:52==
Randomized
Reactive
Local Search
Filtering
C (Q)
CT
D
xb
¯x
¯t
xb
¯x
¯t
xb
¯x
¯t
xb
ˆx
ˆt
500 (4)
20 LD
4840 4977 218,2 4780 4929 196,4 4740 4826
450,9
4720 4861 243,9
500 (4)
20
S
3850 3942 145,4 3780 3864 172,2 3560 3675 1262,9 3680 3763 202,3
500 (4)
20
U
5140 5243 190,7 4970 5215 171,7 4970 5083
602,7
4990 5130 231,8
500 (4)
60 LD
5020 5141 195,2 4930 5006 199,4 4780 4934
556,5
4840 4998 247,4
500 (4)
60
S
4730 4865 173,9 4690 4788 167,4 4500 4700
460,5
4620 4705 235,3
500 (4)
60
U
5390 5540 242,4 5480 5529 174,1 5310 5414
587,4
5290 5446 273,7
500 (4) 100 LD
5230 5334 207,5 5080 5272 228,1 5090 5161
556,9
5090 5212 244,1
500 (4) 100
S
3740 4063 194,1 3880 4010 160,5 3820 3915
469,5
3800 3956 202,9
500 (4) 100
U
5580 5695 227,6 5530 5670 212,3 5360 5476
670,8
5410 5560 258,2
Average
4977,8
199,5
4920,3
186,9
4798,2
624,3
4847,9
237,7
1000 (4) 20 LD
7060 7145 493,7 6880 7025 692,8 6680 6922 2554,1 6780 6968 957,1
1000 (4) 20
S
5750 5875 555,2 5730 5833 486,3 5600 5654 2248,1 5640 5742 785,3
1000 (4) 20
U
8050 8148 830,3 8050 8140 738,1 7730 7941 3109,8 7930 8043 969,8
1000 (4) 60 LD
8210 8585 876,1 8370 8623 666,7 8239 8432 2363,8 8410 8458 967,0
1000 (4) 60
S
6500 6612 531,8 6520 6553 432,7 6150 6323 2304,2 6190 6328 811,3
1000 (4) 60
U
11110 11455 910,7 11000 11443 1110,3 10970 11088 3233,8 10820 11176 1140,1
1000 (4) 100 LD
8890 9042 689,9 8810 8922 702,8 8490 8750 2304,3 8620 8846 1007,3
1000 (4) 100
S
6690 6745 722,3 6560 6672 667,1 6350 6462 3213,7 6460 6560 915,5
1000 (4) 100
U
9600 9752 1196,2 9580 9738 986,5 9270 9522 2865,5 9480 9625 1306,1
Average
8151,1
756,2
8105,5
720,4
7899,9 2688,6
7985,8
984,4
Average
477,9
453,6
1656,5
607,4
(b) Large benchmark instances (500 and 1000 shipping containers - 4 quay cranes).
Table 6.3: Performance comparison between strategies for the GRASP algorithm
Analyzing the obtained results, it can be concluded that the Reactive GRASP strategy
improves the solution obtained when randomly selecting the sorting criteria, which in turn
significantly improves the results of the deterministic constructive algorithm, also slightly
improves the computational times. Much better result improvements are obtained when
the solutions produced by the randomized constructive algorithm go to the second phase
with the Local Search procedures, although with a substantial increase in the running
times. Finally, using the filter notably reduces the computing times of the Local Search
and obtains slightly worse results than with the Local Search procedures.
Analyzing the overall performance of the different strategies in both terms of results and
computational time, it seems logical to adopt the Local Search strategy for the small
benchmark instances (6.3a). Since spending more computational time is not a problem in
those cases, and to adopt the Statistical Filtering strategy for the large instances (6.3b)
– the obtained results by the Local Search strategy and by the Statistical Filter strategy
are really similar, but the comparison between the computational times shows that the
second strategy is much more efficient –. That way it is possible to always guarantee a
favorable performance in a reasonable time.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
47
==PAGE:53==
6.5
Tuning the parameters for the Matheuristic Solution Method
Once the best strategy for the GRASP algorithm has been selected, a similar approach has been used to identify the top-performing values
of β in the MIP objective function (Section 5.1) for the different benchmark instances. Each instance is solved ten times, to account for the
randomness. For each method, Table 6.4 reports the best-obtained solution and the average solution for the ten runs. All the instances have
been run by using the Filtering strategy for the GRASP algorithm. It is also important to remember that, once again, all the instances have
been solved following the parallel GRASP strategy, by using 8 threads.
β = 1
β = 0, 75
β = 0, 5
β = 0, 25
β = 0
β = −0, 25
β = −0, 5
β = −0, 75
β = −1
C (Q) CT
D
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
60 (2) 10
LD
1780
1780
1720
1720
1720
1720
1680
1688
1660
1660
1660
1660
1700
1700
1720
1720
1740
1740
60 (2) 10
S
1300
1300
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1320
1220
1284
1280
1328
1360
1376
60 (2) 10
U
1880
1896
1880
1896
1880
1908
1860
1888
1920
1936
1860
1916
1860
1884
1900
1904
2040
2048
60 (2) 25
LD
2020
2060
2020
2076
2020
2060
2020
2088
2040
2094
2020
2112
2020
2064
2020
2064
2040
2120
60 (2) 25
S
1580
1592
1580
1608
1580
1604
1580
1720
1640
1646
1600
1600
1600
1608
1600
1604
1620
1636
60 (2) 25
U
1760
1760
1720
1720
1720
1740
1720
1732
1740
1744
1740
1748
1740
1740
1740
1740
1740
1740
Average
1724,7
1723,3
1725,3
1716,7
1733,3
1726,0
1713,3
1726,7
1776,7
240 (2) 20
LD
7600
7796
7820
7880
7560
7696
7620
7732
7500
7660
7440
7648
7560
7728
7580
7768
7980
8148
240 (2) 20
S
5400
5596
5300
5476
5320
5476
5320
5480
5200
5512
5340
5484
5380
5516
5600
5652
6060
6140
240 (2) 20
U
7760
7880
7740
7912
7800
7924
7880
7940
7700
7878
7740
7880
7640
7792
7880
7940
9020
9228
240 (2) 60
LD
7980
8084
7860
8000
7980
8052
7660
7972
7700
7994
7880
8048
7920
8056
7920
8064
8320
8476
240 (2) 60
S
6360
6508
6340
6420
6380
6468
6260
6420
6300
6446
6280
6428
6340
6428
6320
6420
6860
6964
240 (2) 60
U
8440
8520
8440
8528
7560
7696
8320
8484
7500
7660
8340
8456
7560
7728
8420
8564
9280
9312
Average
7397,3
7369,3
7218,7
7338,0
7191,7
7324,0
7208,0
7401,3
8044,7
Average
4561,0
4546,3
4472,0
4527,3
4462,5
4525,0
4460,7
4564,0
4910,7
(a) Small benchmark instances (60 and 240 shipping containers - 2 quay cranes).
Table 6.4: Performance comparison between different β values for the algorithm
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
48
==PAGE:54==
β = 1
β = 0, 75
β = 0, 5
β = 0, 25
β = 0
β = −0, 25
β = −0, 5
β = −0, 75
β = −1
C (Q)
CT
D
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
xb
¯x
500 (2)
20
LD
4790
4894
4590
4766
4810
4884
4840
4890
4720
4861
4810
4896
4850
4882
4870
4946
5040
5196
500 (2)
20
S
3670
3800
3460
3634
3670
3742
3600
3756
3680
3763
3670
3736
3730
3758
3640
3724
4020
4102
500 (2)
20
U
5060
5084
4970
5080
5100
5196
5060
5134
4990
5130
4920
5060
4970
5076
5060
5208
5140
5202
500 (2)
60
LD
4940
5050
4850
5030
4870
5058
4970
5048
4840
4998
4910
4976
4920
5056
4810
5004
5020
5190
500 (2)
60
S
4720
4756
4700
4802
4670
4758
4620
4730
4620
4705
4500
4640
4580
4736
4670
4790
4670
4742
500 (2)
60
U
5350
5526
5390
5464
5430
5520
5430
5452
5290
5446
5220
5434
5390
5486
5390
5508
5460
5570
500 (2) 100 LD
5080
5278
5170
5302
5250
5308
5180
5292
5090
5212
5010
5172
5180
5232
5100
5178
5150
5282
500 (2) 100
S
3920
3996
3970
3988
3970
4010
3860
3934
3800
3956
3820
3918
3910
3964
4050
4134
4070
4170
500 (2) 100
U
5560
5658
5600
5684
5550
5640
5460
5580
5410
5560
5500
5608
5490
5634
5400
5524
5560
5672
Average
4893,6
4861,11
4901,8
4868,4
4847,9
4826,7
4869,3
4890,7
5014
1000 (2) 20
LD
6860
6920
6690
6827
6770
6915
6710
6880
6780
6968
6920
7015
6830
6910
6860
6935
7650
7700
1000 (2) 20
S
5710
5730
5510
5567
5740
5787,5
5700
5775
5640
5742
5650 5757,5 5320
5567
5650
5710
6360
6465
1000 (2) 20
U
8150
8240
8070
8137
8000
8107
7810
8072
7930
8043
7900 8072,5 8060
8115
7930
8055
8380
8430
1000 (2) 60
LD
8400
8470
8590
8633
8070
8502
8310
8442
8410
8458
8160
8555
8450
8515
8310
8520
9050
9125
1000 (2) 60
S
6380
6405
6400
6443
6200
6397
6290
6482
6190
6328
6330
6422
6210
6370
6410
6445
7060
7065
1000 (2) 60
U
11100 11140 11070 11140 10690 11077 10920 11107 10820 11176 11170 11267 11420 11500 11120 11130 11370 11500
1000 (2) 100 LD
8870
8935
8870
8937
8830
8912
8810
8892
8620
8846
8700
8835
8910
8950
8860
8905
9190
9270
1000 (2) 100
S
6470
6620
6620
6650
6490
6632
6460
6580
6460
6560
6570
6677
6540
6660
6690
6810
7020
7080
1000 (2) 100
U
9720
9740
9530
9607
9050
9507
9280
9530
9480
9625
9470
9610
9520
9635
9590
9700
9640
9740
Average
8022,2
7993,3
7982,2
7973,6
7971,8
8023,6
8024,6
8023,3
8486,1
Average
6457,9
6427,2
6442,0
6421,0
6409,8
6425,1
6476,9
6457,0
6750,1
(b) Large benchmark instances (500 and 1000 shipping containers - 4 quay cranes).
Table 6.4: Performance comparison between different β values for the algorithm
After a first general analysis of the results, it can be concluded that the best-performing values for the small instances are β ∈[−0.5, −0.25, 0, 0.25],
and β ∈[−0.25, 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0, 75] for the larger ones. Nevertheless, a deeper analysis showcases a better understanding of the solution method
behaviour according to the value of β. It appears to be a correlation between the amount of container types and the top-performing values. On
the one hand, the larger the amount of container classes (thus less possible containers for each slot), the more important to minimize the loading
times (β ≃0). On the other hand, the smaller the amount of container classes (thus more possible containers for each slot), the less important
to minimize the loading times (β ̸= 0). To determine the best-performing values, both criteria have been simultaneously used.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
49
==PAGE:55==
6.6
Matheuristic Solution Method Results
In this section, the computational results of the developed solution method are reported
and compared with the ones obtained from the mathematical model formulation.
Each instance is solved ten times, to account for the randomness. The table reports the
best-obtained solution (xb), the average solution for the ten runs (ˆx), and the average
computing time.
The table also covers the Gap (xb) and Gap (ˆx) , which report the
relative difference between the best/average solution value and the obtained lower bound
from the model. Finally, in order to have a better understanding of the performance,
relevant information from the model formulation (previously shown in Table 6.5) is also
displayed. As previously explained, in most of the instances Gurobi cannot find any feasible
solutions within the time limit (18000 s), this event is indicated with the ’-’ symbol.
Model Formulation
Solution Method
C (Q)
CT D
xLB
xUB
x∗
Gap (xUB) Gap (x∗)
xb
ˆx
Gap (xb) Gap (ˆx)
t(s)
60 (2)
10 LD
1560
3460
-
54,1%
-
1660
1660
4,2%
4,2%
28,3
60 (2)
10
S
1140
2440
1200
52,1%
2,5%
1300
1308
10%
10,6%
25,2
60 (2)
10
U
1760
4640
1860
61,4%
3,8%
1860
1873
3,7%
4,4%
34,5
60 (2)
25 LD
1910
3600
2000
46,1%
3,0%
2020
2031
4,0%
4,5%
38,6
60 (2)
25
S
1480
2840
-
46,8%
-
1600
1600
5,6%
5,6%
34,9
60 (2)
25
U
1610
3980
1700
58,8%
3,5%
1720
1720
4,7%
4,7%
32,1
Average
53,2%
3,0%
5,4%
5,7%
32,3
240 (2)
20 LD
6830
14620
-
53,1%
-
7400
7620
7,3%
9,3%
177,2
240 (2)
20
S
4740
10200
-
53,2%
-
5260
5391
9,3%
11,5%
139,1
240 (2)
20
U
7020
18100
-
61,0%
-
7660
7715
8,0%
8,6%
180,6
240 (2)
60 LD
7150
14620
-
50,9%
-
7940
7968
9,6%
9,9%
186,3
240 (2)
60
S
5580
11820
-
52,5%
-
6200
6375
9,5%
12,0%
156,4
240 (2)
60
U
7550
18440
-
58,9%
-
7820
8282
3,1%
8,5%
179,7
Average
54,9%
-
7,8%
10,1%
169,9
500 (4)
20 LD
3268
16604
-
80,0%
-
4650
4808
28,7%
31,1%
489,4
500 (4)
20
S
2303
11640
-
79,8%
-
3560
3704
34,1%
36,6%
526,3
500 (4)
20
U
3513
14814
-
76,0%
-
4990
5097
28,7%
30,2%
584,8
500 (4)
60 LD
3473
15224
-
76,9%
-
4850
4920
27,5%
28,5%
581,1
500 (4)
60
S
3200
11700
-
72,3%
-
4560
4652
28,8%
30,3%
578,9
500 (4)
60
U
3800
14750
-
73,9%
-
5270
5408
27,0%
28,9%
642,0
500 (4) 100 LD
3705
15620
-
76,0%
-
5120
5211
26,8%
28,0%
508,3
500 (4) 100
S
2613
11170
-
76,2%
-
3710
3892
28,4%
31,7%
379,2
500 (4) 100
U
3960
15220
-
73,7%
-
5470
5540
26,8%
27,7%
521,0
Average
76,1%
-
28,5%
30,3%
534,6
1000 (4) 20 LD
5078
31240
-
83,6%
-
6420 6752,5
20,2%
24,1% 2190,8
1000 (4) 20
S
3883
23730
-
83,4%
-
5320
5540
26,2%
29,1% 1786,5
1000 (4) 20
U
6030
31000
-
80,4%
-
7750 7937,5
21,6%
23,5% 2051,9
1000 (4) 60 LD
6355
29450
-
78,3%
-
8270
8415
22,6%
23,9% 2074,3
1000 (4) 60
S
4728
22670
-
78,9%
-
6200
6360
23,0%
24,9% 1725,8
1000 (4) 60
U
8820
34920
-
74,6%
-
10940 11057,5
18,9%
19,8% 2704,9
1000 (4) 100 LD
6698
30280
-
77,7%
-
8490 8782,5
20,6%
23,2% 2462,2
1000 (4) 100
S
4700
21920
-
78,4%
-
6420 6537,5
26,1%
27,4% 2150,1
1000 (4) 100
U
7513
31240
-
75,8%
-
9350
9435
19,2%
19,9% 2701,5
Average
79,0%
-
22,1%
24,0% 2205,4
Average
68,2%
3,0%
17,8%
19,4% 862,4
Table 6.5: Final results overview. Comparison between the mathematical
model and the developed matheuristic solution method.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
50
==PAGE:56==
The results in Table 6.5 show that the solution method finds feasible solutions for all of
the instances, with an average gap of 19,4% in approx. 14 minutes on average.
For the 3 instances which the mathematical model could successfully solve, it can be
concluded that the solution method provides near-optimal solutions. For the rest of the
instances, there is no indication of the real quality of the obtained solution, so the com-
parison with the lower bound is the only tool that can help where do the solutions lie.
The results show a smaller gap in the smaller benchmark instances than in the larger
ones. This could be explained due to the fact that the larger bigger instances present
more shipping containers and quay cranes, so the possibilities grow exponentially and the
algorithm loses some effectiveness.
To provide further understanding of the performance of the solution method, the following
figure displays the obtained results taking into account the yard distribution (Less Dense,
Uniform Dense, or Scattered) of the different benchmark instances.
0,00%
5,00%
10,00%
15,00%
20,00%
25,00%
30,00%
35,00%
60 C
240 C
500 C
1000 C
Average Gap
Uniform
Scattered
Less Dense
Figure 6.1: Results overview based on the yard distribution.
As it can be seen in Figure 6.1, the algorithm presents the worst performance when
dealing with the Scattered instances.
The Uniform and Less Dense instances present
similar behaviour even though the first one has slightly better solutions.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
51
==PAGE:57==
7
Conclusions
The aim of this thesis was to partially solve the Terminal Ship Loading Problem by
addressing the Operational Stowage Plan and the Crane Split problems. Therefore, the
project goal was to provide a solution to a class-based pre-stowage plan by developing the
operational stowage plan and also implementing an efficient loading sequence by properly
assigning and scheduling the quay cranes in an integrated manner.
In-depth study of current literature allowed to break down both the crane split and the
operational stowage planning problems, and also showcased the importance of integrating
the different sub-problems of the terminal ship loading process; since most of the previous
work only focuses on single steps, and only some recent papers try to integrate multiple
sub-problems.
The integrated problem has been formulated as a single mathematical model.
This
representative problem includes all the relevant constraints and components of the crane
split and the operational stowage planning problems. Additionally, a smaller model, to
obtain quality lower boundaries, has also been formulated. However, the exact method
becomes computationally intractable for real-life instances due to its complexity. To deal
with this, a matheuristic solution method has been developed.
The algorithmic approach presented in this thesis hierarchically decomposes the problem
into a slot planning, and a crane split - loading sequence phase. The slot planning phase
optimally assigns a container to each available slot position of the vessel. This assignment
is performed using a MIP that minimizes the total container loading time by giving more
or less priority (according to the value of a parameter within the objective function) to
the positions that can be loaded by multiple cranes. The second phase is performed by
a GRASP algorithm which deals with the crane split and the loading sequence.
The
algorithm is based on the principles of avoiding idle cranes and prioritizing the bays with
a higher amount of pending workload. It also takes into account the clearance and non-
trespassing constraints for the cranes. Finally, through the iteration of both phases, while
adjusting the objective function of the MIP, the solution method is able to find quality
solutions in a reasonable time. Regarding the performance of the developed tool, results
show that significant cost savings can be achieved by using local search procedures within
the GRASP algorithm, but by significantly increasing the computational time. This is why
a statistical filter strategy has also been introduced into the algorithm. It is important
to note that the presented results are highly correlated with this filter; the stricter the
filter, the worse the results would be, but the less amount of time would be required (and
vice-versa).
Finally, to facilitate the job of the terminal operators, besides providing all the information
regarding the final solution, the program also plots the crane split distribution. This allows
the operators to easily get a general understanding of the provided solution without having
to carefully analyse all the information. Plots1 are also an interesting tool to spot potential
improvements or errors (since the program validates all the problem constraints for every
generated solution before returning the final output, all of them are indeed feasible).
1Appendix - A displays multiple plots of the reached solutions, so interested readers can have a better
understanding of the final output.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
52
==PAGE:58==
The collected experimental results showcased that automated and integrated stowage plans
and crane splits can be generated for the representative problem within a reasonable
amount of time, thus giving a positive answer to the research question central to this
thesis. Moreover, it has been shown that the solution method is capable of obtaining
quality results, since the gap between the lower bounds and the solutions are significantly
small despite the complexity of the problem.
7.1
Future Research Directions
This thesis has shown a proof of concept that container stowage planning and crane split
problems can be solved in an integrated and automated manner, resulting in quality
solutions within a relatively short time. Nevertheless, there are multiple future research
directions for both the problem definition and the solution method.
On the one hand, regarding the problem, it would be interesting to relax some of the
assumptions in the current model to try to find better lower bound values.
Another
interesting idea would be the comparison of the hierarchical and the integrated problems.
Besides these extensions of the current approach, other interesting research directions in
terms of the taken general approach could also be studied. A promising research path
would be the integrated optimisation of the Crane Split Problem with the whole Flexible
Ship Loading Problem (Iris et al. 2018), so the assignment and scheduling of the transfer
vehicles should also be included into the current problem. Another very promising research
direction would be to allow quay cranes to simultaneously load and unload tasks, instead
of limiting the problem to the loading phase. As proved by Chu et al. (2017), double
cycling improves the efficiency of the terminal resources since it allows higher utilisation
of the quay cranes. Finally, since the shipping containers loading times are related to
the yard distribution, another interesting research direction could be to also integrate the
yard allocation decisions into the problem. All the proposed extensions would make the
problem even more complicated. However, the successful implementation of novel solution
methods could obtain further time savings.
On the other hand, regarding the solution method, there are several options to improve
the current work. The first option would be to improve the actual procedure either by
investing more time optimizing the code in order to further speed-up the algorithm or by
refining the current strategies. A promising idea would be to use dynamic programming
methods to find optimal (or near-optimal) solutions; by recursively breaking it down the
problem into simpler the sub-problems, solving them and storing its solutions (so each
sub-problem is only solved once), and using those stored values to build the best possible
main solution. Note that the effectiveness of this method lies in the fact that by only
solving each sub-problem once, large amounts of time can be saved in comparison with
the typical recursive methods. Finally, another interesting idea would be to use artificial
intelligence to teach the algorithms by systematically analysing historical data. The use
of artificial intelligence and learning algorithms could potentially infer new heuristic rules
that could be applied to improve the current models.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
53
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
Ambrosino, Daniela, Davide Anghinolfi, Massimo Paolucci, and Anna Sciomachen (2010).
“An Experimental Comparison of Different Heuristics for the Master Bay Plan Problem”.
In: Proceedings of the 9th Int. Symposium on Experimental Algorithms, pp. 314–325.
Avriel, Mordecai, Michal Penn, and Naomi Shpirer Belfer (2000). “Container ship stowage
problem: Complexity and connection to the coloring of circle graphs”. In: Discrete Ap-
plied Mathematics 103, pp. 271–279.
Avriel, Mordecai, Michal Penn, Naomi Shpirer Belfer, and Smadar Witteboon (1998).
“Stowage planning for container ships to reduce the number of shifts”. In: Annals of
Operations Research - Annals OR 76, pp. 55–71.
Bartošek, A. and O. Marek (2013). “Quay Cranes in Container Terminals”. In: Transac-
tions on Transport Sciences 6.
Bierwirth, Christian and Frank Meisel (2009). A fast heuristic for quay crane scheduling
with interference constraints.
Bierwirth, Christian and Frank Meisel (2015). A follow-up survey of berth allocation and
quay crane scheduling problems in container terminals.
Boysen, Nils, Dirk Briskorn, and Frank Meisel (2016). A generalized classification scheme
for crane scheduling with interference.
Choo, Shawn (2007). “The crane split and sequencing problem with clearance and yard
congestion constraints in container terminal ports”. PhD thesis. Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
Chu, Yanling, Zhang Xiaoju, and zhong Yang (2017). “Multiple quay cranes scheduling
for double cycling in container terminals”. In: PLoS ONE 12.
Council, World Shipping (Aug. 20, 2019). Container Ship Design. url: http://www.
worldshipping.org/about-the-industry/liner-ships/container-ship-design.
Daganzo, Carlos F. (1989). “The crane scheduling problem”. In: Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological 23.3, pp. 159–175.
Dai, Jim, Wuqin Lin, Rajeeva Moorthy, and Chung Teo (2004). Berth Allocation Planning
Optimization in Container Terminal.
Delgado, Alberto, Rune Jensen, and Nicolas Guilbert (2012). “A placement heuristic for
a commercial decision support system for container vessel stowage”. In:
Derret, Captain D.R. (2006). “Ship Stability for Masters and Mates”. In: isbn: ISBN-13:
987-0-7506-6784-5, ISBN-10: 0-7506-6784-2.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
54
==PAGE:60==
Eyres, D.J. and G.J. Bruce (2012). “Ship dimensions, form, size, or category”. In: pp. 11–
16. isbn: 9780080972398.
Feo, Thomas and Mauricio Resende (Mar. 1995). “Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search
Procedures”. In: Journal of Global Optimization 6, pp. 109–133.
Feo, Thomas, Mauricio Resende, and Stuart Smith (Oct. 1994). “A Greedy Randomized
Adaptive Search Procedure for Maximum Independent Set”. In: Operations Research 42,
pp. 860–878.
Fischetti, Martina and Matteo Fischetti (2016). “Matheuristics”. In: Handbook of Heuris-
tics. Ed. by Rafael Martí, Pardalos Panos, and Mauricio G.C. Resende. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, pp. 1–33. isbn: 978-3-319-07153-4.
Hafez, Prof. Khaled (2010). “Torsion and Shear Stresses in Ships”. In: pp. 213–263. isbn:
ISBN-10: 3-642-14632-5, ISBN-13: 978-3-642-14632-9, e-ISBN: 978-3-642-14633-6.
Imai, Akio, Xin Sun, Etsuko Nishimura, and Stratos Papadimitriou (2005). “Berth alloca-
tion in a container port: Using a continuous location space approach”. In: Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological 39, pp. 199–221.
Iris, Cagatay, Jonas Christensen, Dario Pacino, and Stefan Ropke (2018). “Flexible ship
loading problem with transfer vehicle assignment and scheduling”. In: Transportation
Research Part B Methodological 111, pp. 113–134.
Iris, Cagatay and Dario Pacino (2015). A Survey on the Ship Loading Problem.
Iris, Cagatay, Dario Pacino, Stefan Ropke, and Allan Larsen (2015). “Integrated Berth
Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment Problem: Set partitioning models and computa-
tional results”. In: Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review
81, pp. 75–97.
Jones, Callum (Aug. 20, 2019). World’s biggest container ship MSC Gülsün makes waves on
first European visit. url: https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/worlds-biggest-container-
ship-msc-guelsuen-makes-waves-on-first-european-visit-3z7sfdlbq.
Kang, J. and Y. Kim (2002). “Stowage Planning in Maritime Container Transportation”.
In: Journal of The Operational Research Society 53, pp. 415–426.
Kim, Kap Hwan and Young-Man Park (2004). “A crane scheduling method for port con-
tainer terminals”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 156.3, pp. 752–768.
Kim, Kap and Hoon Lee (2015). “Container Terminal Operation: Current Trends and
Future Challenges”. In: pp. 43–73.
Lee, Der-Horng, Hui Wang, and Lixin Miao (2008). “Quay crane scheduling with non-
interference constraints in port container terminals”. In: Transportation Research Part
E: Logistics and Transportation Review 44, pp. 124–135.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
55
==PAGE:61==
Lewandowski, Krzysztof (2016). “Growth in the Size of Unit Loads and Shipping Contain-
ers from Antique to WWI”. In: Packaging Technology and Science.
Liu, Fan, Malcolm Low, Shell Huang, Wen Jing Hsu, Min Zeng, and Win Aye (2010).
“Stowage Planning of Large Containership with Tradeoff between Crane Workload Bal-
ance and Ship Stability”. In: Lecture Notes in Engineering and Computer Science 2182.
Meisel, Frank (2011). Seaside Operations in Container Terminals. isbn: 978-3-7908-2190-1.
Meisel, Frank and Christian Bierwirth (2013). “A Framework for Integrated Berth Alloca-
tion and Crane Operations Planning in Seaport Container Terminals”. In: Transportation
Science 47, pp. 131–147.
Moccia, Luigi, Jean-François Cordeau, Manlio Gaudioso, and Gilbert Laporte (2006). “A
branch-and-cut algorithm for the Quay Crane scheduling problem in A container ter-
minal”. In: Naval Research Logistics (NRL) 53, pp. 45–59.
Monaco, Maria, Marcello Sammarra, and Gregorio Sorrentino (2014). “The Terminal-
Oriented Ship Stowage Planning Problem”. In: European Journal of Operational Re-
search 239, pp. 256–265.
Nguyen, Vi and Duc Nguyen (2019). “Marine Quay Crane Scheduling Using a Combined
Modified Genetic Algorithm and Priority Rules Approach”. In: International Journal of
Materials, Mechanics and Manufacturing 7, pp. 21–26.
Pacino, Dario, Alberto Delgado, Rune Jensen, and Tom Bebbington (2011). “Fast Gener-
ation of Near-Optimal Plans for Eco-Efficient Stowage of Large Container Vessels”. In:
vol. 6971, pp. 286–301.
Pacino, Dario and Rune Møller Jensen (2012). “Fast Generation of Container Vessel
Stowage Plans: using mixed integer programming for optimal master planning and con-
straint based local search for slot planning”. PhD thesis. IT University of Copenhagen.
Parreño, Francisco, Dario Pacino, and Ramon Alvarez-Valdes (2016). “A GRASP algo-
rithm for the container stowage slot planning problem”. In: Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 94.
Prais, Marcelo and Celso Ribeiro (Nov. 1998). “Reactive GRASP: An Application to a
Matrix Decomposition Problem in TDMA Traffic Assignment”. In: INFORMS Journal
on Computing 12.
Resende, Mauricio and Celso Ribeiro (Sept. 2010). “Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search
Procedures: Advances, Hybridizations, and Applications”. In: vol. 146, pp. 283–319.
Resende, Mauricio and Celso Ribeiro (Jan. 2016). Optimization by GRASP.
Steenken, Dirk, Stefan Voss, and Robert Stahlbock (2004). “Container terminal operation
and operations research - A classification and literature review”. In: OR Spectrum 26,
pp. 3–49.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
56
==PAGE:62==
Steenken, Dirk, Thomas Winter, Uwe Zimmermann, Hamburger Hafen, Lagerhaus Ag,
and Abteilung Edi (2001). “Stowage and Transport Optimization in Ship Planning”. In:
Online Optimization of Large Scale Systems.
Türkoğulları, Yavuz, Z. Taşkın, Necati Aras, and Kuban Altinel (2016). “Optimal Berth
Allocation, Time-variant Quay Crane Assignment and Scheduling with Crane Setups in
Container Terminals”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 254.
UNCTAD (2011). Review of Maritime Transport. Technical Report. Geneva, Switzerland:
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
UNCTAD (2019). Review of Maritime Transport. Technical Report. Geneva, Switzerland:
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
Wiese, Jörg, Leena Suhl, and Hans-Otto Günther (2011). Quantitative Decision Support
for the Layout Design of Container Terminals.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
57
==PAGE:63==
A
Example Solution Plots
As previously explained in Section 7, plotting the obtained solution (combined with
human experience) can help the terminal operators identify potential improvements for the
proposed crane split and loading sequence. In this appendix a couple of representations
of the obtained solutions are displayed1. The plots show the crane movements (dashed
lines) and when the cranes perform loading tasks (thick lines), through the different bays
and over time (in seconds). Each color represents a quay crane.
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
660
720
780
840
900
960 1020 1080 1140 1200 1260 1320 1380 1440 1500 1560 16201660
QC - 1
QC - 2
QuayCrane
QuayCrane
h,j,k,l,arrows,drag to pan
i,o,+,-,scroll,shift-drag to zoom
r,dbl-click to reset
c for coordinates
? for help
?
1
2
3
4
5
6
Bay
Bay
Figure A.1: Visual representation of the obtained solution for the crane split of a small
instance (2 quay cranes).
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
660
720
780
840
900
960
1020
1080
1140
1200
1260
1320
1380
1440
1500
1560
1620
1680
1740
1800
1860
1920
1980
2040
2100
2160
2220
2280
2340
2400
2460
2520
2580
2640
2700
2760
2820
2880
2940
3000
3060
3120
3180
3240
3300
3360
3420
3480
3540
3600
3660
3720
3780
3840
3900
3960
3970
h,j,k,l,arrows,drag to pan
i,o,+,-,scroll,shift-drag to zoom
r,dbl-click to reset
c for coordinates
? for help
?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Figure A.2: Visual representation of the obtained solution for the crane split of a large
instance (4 quay cranes).
1Since creating a user-friendly interface was not one of this thesis goals, the aesthetic and functionality
of the plots has not been taken into sever consideration. If further improvements where about to be made,
the plots would also include a reference to identify the loading tasks (container-position assignments), so
the terminal operators would have all the necessary information directly within the plot.
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
58
==PAGE:64==
Solving the Ship Loading
and Crane Split Problem
59
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.ms.man.dtu.dk
