==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Methods for auto-focusing of
dental panoramic x-ray images
Louisa Zebis Morling (s173581)
Kongens Lyngby 3. July 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The aim of the project is to investigate whether it is feasible to generate one sharp
image by selecting the highest quality parts of a set of dental panoramic x-ray images.
Image quality was quantiﬁed using an Image Quality Assessment (IQA) method
evaluation the diﬀerence in intensity between a pixel and its neighbours. Thereafter
locally high quality segments of the input images were assembled to one globally
high quality image based on the IQA scores. The generated image was evaluated by
experts, where the experts should choose the image with subjectively best quality; the
generated image or a reference. The experts evaluated image sequences of 11 teeth
cropped out of the generated image and the reference image. The image sequences
presented to the experts represented teeth from the upper and lower arch, as well
as the left and right side of the mouth. The experts chose the generated image the
majority of times compared to choosing the reference and declaring no diﬀerence
between the images. Due to subjective and objective evaluation, the image quality
assessment method used has potential for reﬂecting image quality when applied to
dental panoramic x-ray images. Furthermore the suggested pipeline has potential in
generating one image with globally high quality out of a set of images with locally
varying image quality.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Health Technologies at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a
Masters degree in Biomedical Engineering. Furthermore the project was developed in
cooperation with 3Shape.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank my supervisor Vedrana Andersen Dahl, lector at Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) at department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, for guidance through the project period and helping me shape the project.
Furthermore I would like to thank Jacob Frøsig and Thomas Sangild Sørensen from
3Shape for their help with deﬁning and shaping the project, while also providing the
data. I would like to thank Azam Bakhshandeh, lector at oral radiology department
and department for Cariology and Endodontics at University of Copenhagen, Helle
Juul Larsen, dentist specialised within orthodontics, and Helga Largren, dentisk
consulent, for giving their professional evaluation of the results.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgement
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
3
Theory
7
3.1
Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Quantifying Image Quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Layered Surface Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Method
19
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
The Pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Subjective Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results
29
5.1
Pipeline evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Subjective evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
37
6.1
Method Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Eﬀect of patch size and kernel size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Image Quality Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Subjective Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
Reﬂection of process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Conclusion
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
47
Appendix A - Original images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes and diﬀerent versions
of the image quality assessment metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Appendix C - Evaluate generated images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Appendix D - generated image with grid indicating the patches and the
optimal layer for each patch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Appendix E - Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
Medical imaging systems are devices used by health worker to get a view inside the
human body in a non-invasive fashion. The distinct image modalities provides diﬀerent
ways of visualising the insides of the body and they each use a speciﬁc method for
obtaining the information necessary [PL15a].
Projection radiography is an image modality, which foundation is based on the
diﬀerence in how much of a speciﬁc dose of x-rays are absorbed in the diﬀerent
tissues [PL15b]. Panoramic dental x-ray imaging is an imaging system used within
orthodontics, as it uses x-rays from multiple angles to create detailed images illus-
trating a panoramic view of the jaw and teeth. Panoramic x-ray images are obtained
by sampling along a reference layer. This results in all structures located within the
reference layer being sharp and everything else will be blurred. Due to the variation
in shape of the teeth and because jaws vary from person to person, a universal refer-
ence layer for sampling will in many cases result in images with inadequate quality
locally. To accommodate this, for one acquisition several images are sampled using
reference layers displaced in relation to each other. The result is a set of images
with locally varying quality. Evaluating all images together should provide all the
information necessary for establishing a treatment or prepare for surgery, however it
should be noted it requires the dentist or dental surgeon to look through several images.
The primary aim of this project is to investigate a method for auto-focusing of
dental panoramic x-ray images, i.e. the aim is to create a series of processes, a pipeline,
for generating one image with high global quality by choosing the best segments of
all the given input images and assemble them to a single image. The secondary aim
is to quantify high image quality for panoramic x-ray images, and have it evaluated
by experts. This project will be a feasibility study to evaluate whether the suggested
approach is reasonable. This project is relevant as it would save time for dentists and
dental surgeons as they would only view a a single image instead of a series of images.
It might save time as well as heighten the quality of the treatment, as all information
is accommodated within one image.
The project is divided into chapters, with the ﬁrst chapter being the introduction.
Chapter two is a more detailed description of panoramic x-ray imaging and will specify
the scope of the project. Chapter three contains theory related to the topic and the
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
theory used for creating the pipeline. Chapter four is describing the pipeline for the
chosen solution to the scope of the project. Chapter Five contains the results, how
the chosen method pipeline aﬀects the test data set, and a subjective evaluation of
the generated high quality images. Chapter six and seven will be a discussion and a
conclusion respectively.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER2
Background
This chapter will be an introduction to dental panoramic x-ray imaging; the use of a
reference layer when images are sampled, the change in local quality dependent on the
position of the reference layer and how these obstacles are addressed in the project.
Panoramic dental x-ray imaging is a type of medical imaging system, and it provides
grey scale panoramic images of the teeth and jaw, in a non-invasive fashion. This is
achieved by illuminating x-rays through the body part of interest at several diﬀerent
angles around the body and measure the x-rays that was not absorbed in the tissues
with a detector opposite the x-ray source. All tissues within the body has its own
attenuation coeﬃcient, i.e. how much x-rays the tissue absorbs, and this feature is
the foundation of creating x-ray images [NR].
Illuminating x-rays from the source from a single angle is conventional x-ray imaging
where the bones are white and everything else is dark as seen in the x-ray image.
In conventional x-ray imaging it is hard to distinguish between the tissues because
the lack of depth resolution. Illuminating x-rays from many diﬀerent angles provides
enough spacial information about the tissues, and it will create a detailed image
illustrating all the diﬀerent structures in the body in grey scale [PrinceLinks2015].
Panoramic x-ray imaging is primarily enabling dentist and oral surgeons to give the
right diagnosis and to plan treatment for implants, extractions, dentures and braces
[Kro20]
Panoramic x-ray imaging provides a panoramic two-dimensional image of the teeth and
jaw by sampling along a reference layer in a three-dimensional space. All structures
within the reference layer will in the image be in focus. This is due to averaging of the
x-rays going through speciﬁc points on the reference layer. Other structures will be
blurry as the sampling is focused at the reference layer. The reference layer is aligned
with the patients teeth and jaw as best as possible, so that all teeth, the jaw bones and
the temporomandibular joints will be visible. Because each individual is diﬀerent and
that the teeth occupy a three-dimensional space, using a single reference layer will not
produce a globally sharp image. In a dental panoramic x-ray image some teeth might
be of higher quality than others due to the position of the reference layer. A way to
accommodate this, is generating several images by sampling along reference layers
with a 1 mm change in the position of the reference layer in the anterior-posterior
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Background
direction. Figure 2.1 illustrated the position and shape of the 11 reference layers used
to create the 11 input images. From on scan, the 11 images are sampled using the
layers, and the resulting product is a series of images, where they together repre-
sents enough information for a dentist or a oral surgeon to obtain necessary information.
From a dentists perspective, looking through several images to obtain all the in-
formation available is time consuming. The aim of this project is to investigate a way
of creating a single output image from several input images so that all information can
be obtained in that single image. The overall approach is to objectively evaluate the lo-
cal image quality of the images each created from a diﬀerent reference layer. Segments
of the images with high image quality is plucked out and assembled in a new image.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of
the 11 layers being dis-
placed in relation to each
other in anterior-posterior
direction.
The data used in the project is a set of 11 panoramic
x-ray
images.
All
11
images
are
sampled
from
one scan by sampling along the reference layer for
the 11 layers displaced 1 mm anterior-posterior di-
rection in relation to each other.
Figure 2.2, 2.3
and 2.4 illustrate images created by sampling along
the most anterior,
middle and most posterior ref-
erence layer.
The change in reference layer both
change the local quality in the images as well as
change the geometrical structure of the teeth.
In
ﬁgure 2.2 the front teeth in both the upper jaw
and lower jaw are blurry and distorted so they ap-
pear
narrower.
It
is
slightly
better
when
look-
ing
at
ﬁgure
2.3,
as
the
teeth
seems
less
dis-
torted and less blurry.
Looking at the image sam-
pled using the most posterior reference layer in ﬁg-
ure 2.4, the contrast of the front teeth are higher
and do not seem narrower.
This is an example
of one of the local diﬀerences between the 11 in-
put
images
due
to
the
position
of
the
reference
layer.
The 11 input images will be referred to as layer images
due to each image being represented by a reference layer.
The image created based on the objective quality evaluation of the input layers will
be referred to as the generated image.
Input images and generated images have their distribution of grey values adjusted for
better visualisation of the images in the report. The adjustment of the input images
diﬀer from the adjustment of the generated images due to the images being stored as
diﬀerent data types.
Minimum and maximum intensity values for input and output images are:
==PAGE:15==
2 Background
5
• Input images:
– Minimum = 12099
– maximum = 25037
• Generated (output) images:
– minimum = 11860
– maximum = 24424
Figure 2.2: Input panoramic x-ray image sampled using the most anterior reference
layer (layer 1)
Figure 2.3: Input panoramic x-ray image sampled using the middle layer (layer 6)
Figure 2.4: Input panoramic x-ray image sampled using the most posterior reference
layer (layer 11)
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER3
Theory
This chapter covers the theory behind the methods used to create the pipeline, and
the theories covered are registration, image quality assessment and layered surface
detection. Section 3.1 will introduce to the concept of registration and then focus on
non-rigid b-spline registration as it is used in the pipeline. Subsection 3.1.1.1 illustrate
the process of applying a non-rigid b-spline registration to an warped image of a
ﬂower. The method described for achieve the b-spline registration are mentioned as
they are later applied when the input images are undergoing the registration process.
The pipeline will be explained further in chapter 4. In section 3.2 the image quality
assessment will be explained with focus on Image Enhancement Metric, which is the
method adjusted to ﬁt the scope of the project. Section 3.3 explains Layered Surface
Detection, which is the method used for selecting the high quality segments of the 11
input image layers.
3.1
Registration
Registration is the process of aligning two or more images to enable comparison of
the images. Registration results in a template image undergoing a geometric transfor-
mation to align it with a reference image. The aim is to align images in a way, so that
a speciﬁc pixel p1(x1, y1) in image 1 corresponds to the corresponding pixel p2(x2, y2)
in image 2. Image registration is an important tool within the medical ﬁeld, as it is
used in cancer treatment to compare the eﬀect of a treatment, and to align diﬀerent
imaging modalities, e.g. a PET scan on top of a MR or CT image [Koen2018].
The aim of the project is to generate a single image based on an evaluation of
image quality on the input image layers. If the image layers do not align, the evalu-
ation of image quality will not be accurate and thereby the quality evaluation is useless.
Image registration consists of four elements:
1. Geometric transformation.
2. Similarity measure.
3. Optimisation.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Theory
4. Regularisation.
A geometric transformation maps the new location for the template image to
align it with the reference image. The type of geometric transformation depends on
the images undergoing registration. Sometimes a simple transformation is suﬃcient,
however other times a non-linear transformation is necessary. The similarity measure
is the method for evaluating how close the transformed template image align with
the reference image. The optimisation algorithm determines the parameters of the
geometric transformation to maximise the similarity measure. The regularisation term
makes sure that only reasonable transformations are obtained [Koen2018]. This
section will focus mainly on the geometric transformation.
Aligning the template image with the reference image requires ﬁnding commonalities
between the two images. The similarity measure, i.e. the tool used for evaluating the
quality of the registration, will be deﬁned in relation to the chosen commonality type.
Two common commonality types are feature-based registrations and intensity-based.
The most known type of feature-based registration is landmark based registration in
which corresponding landmarks is placed either manually or semi-automatically in
both images. A rigid geometric transformation is applied to the template image to
align the landmarks in both images best as possible. The applied transformation could
be translation, rotation, shearing or a combination of those mentioned [Koen2018].
Intensity based registration is another way of aligning images in which the similarity
measure is deﬁned in relation to similarities in intensities. Intensity based registration
is performed as a fully automated process, so no manual placement of landmarks is
needed.
Intensity based registration can be either rigid or non-rigid in the way the template
image is transformed. Rigid geometric transformations is applied globally to the
image, so that one transformation matrix is applied to the whole image. Non-rigid
transformation works so that the template image works like a rubber membrane that
can be compressed and stretched locally [Koen2018; Paulsen2017].
3.1.1
Non-Rigid Registration
B-spline is a type of non-rigid registration and the registrations type used in this
project. B-spline is a basis function, which is a part of the regression model.
A linear regression model is modelling the relationship between an independent variable,
which is the input, and a dependent variable, which is the output. Linear regression
estimates a linear function to predict an outcome based on an input. Introducing basis
functions to linear regression makes it possible to create a regression model consisting
of linear combinations of smooth, non-linear functions.
f(x) =
M
X
m=1
βmφm(x)
(3.1)
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Registration
9
In equation 3.1 β indicates the parameters to estimate the relationship between the
independent and dependent variable while φ is the basis functions.
A regression model with basis functions makes it possible to estimate a more ﬂexible
model, instead of a straight line. To be able to obtain a smooth regression model, the
basis functions, φm, are chosen to change in a smooth fashion with changes in the
input variable x so that the model is free of any sharp edges [VL18a]
B-splines is a type of basis functions constructed from convolution between rectangular
pulses. A rectangular pulse is a short signal, e.g.:
B0(x) =

1
−1
2 ≤x ≤1
2
0
otherwise
(3.2)
The uniform B-spline consist of shifted copies of series of convolution between
rectangular pulses, and the number of pulses, n, speciﬁes how smooth the basis
function is. If n = 0 the basis function will be rectangular and provide with an
regression model with sharp edges. if n = 1 the basis function will be a triangle, and
as n increases, the basis function will become more and more smooth [VL18a].
The cubic B-spline is a type of B-spline basis function created with convolution
between three rectangular pulses, n = 3, and this model is used for non-rigid b-spline
image registration. One desired property is that cubic B-splines have only local
support, meaning that changing one basis function only have an eﬀect locally. This
property makes it possible to create a good registration when a rigid transformation
is insuﬃcient [VL18a; VL18b].
The non-rigid registration using cubic B-splines works by deforming a grid of control
points to map how the template image is transformed to align with the reference image.
A series of cubic B-splines are spun between the control points in the deformation grid,
each basis function are representing one control point. The series of basis functions
are estimated so that a pixel coordinate in the template image is inserted into the
model and the output is the mapped location of that pixel in the reference image. How
well the pixel is mapped is evaluated using a similarity measure, and the registration
algorithm keeps optimising the B-spline basis functions based on the similarity measure
until a certain criteria is met. The result will be a transformation grid, applying this
grid to the template image, or a similar image, the deformation grid should transform
the template image to align it with the reference image [PM17].
3.1.1.1
Examples
This section will go through an example of using the non-rigid B-spline registration
on an image of a ﬂower. Applying a non-rigid B -spline transformation on an image
require the transformation grid to be two-dimensional, which is the outer product
between two one-dimensional transformation grids [VL18b]. Figure 3.1 is the reference
image. Figure 3.2 shows the same image as ﬁgure 3.1 with the petals of the ﬂower
locally warped. The warped image is the template image, i.e. the image undergoing
transformation to align with the reference image. Figure 3.3 shows the warped image
transformed to align with the original image using non-rigid b-spline registration.
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Theory
Figure 3.1: Reference image - original image
Figure 3.2: Template image - original image locally warped.
Figure 3.3: The warped image transformed to align with the original image using
non-rigid b-spline registration
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Registration
11
Non-rigid registration has the following steps:
1. Deﬁning an initial transformation grid.
2. Register template image using the initial transformation grid.
3. Use interpolation to calculate the values for the transformed image.
4. Perform similarity measure to evaluate the alignment of the transformed template
image and the reference image.
5. Adjust the transformation grid after each evaluation to improve the alignment
between the two images.
6. Run optimisation step until certain similarity is reached.
7. Transform the template image using the optimised transformation grid.
A transformation grid is created to transform the warped image to align with the
original image. As a start point a uniform grid is created with a spacing between grid
points set to an appropriate size dependent on the size of the image being transformed.
The template image is transformed using the initial grid [Kro20].
A transformation grid is created to transform the warped image to align with the
original image. As a start point a uniform grid is created with a spacing between grid
points set to an appropriate size dependent on the size of the image being transformed.
The template image is transformed using the initial grid [Kro20]. A part of this process
is interpolation, which is the process of estimating the pixel values in the transformed
image.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of how backwards mapping takes place [Res]
Backwards mapping is part of the interpolation process and it help estimate the
new intensity value for a speciﬁc pixel in the transformed template image. This is
done by mapping back to the reference image and ﬁnd what value the pixel in the
transformed template image corresponds to in the reference image. The concept of
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Theory
backwards mapping is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.4 [VL18b].
Linear interpolation is the interpolation type used in the pipeline, see section 4.2
chapter 4 describing the pipeline.
The registration is evaluated using similarity measure. Squared pixel distance is
the similarity measure used in the registration process, see section 4.2 in chapter 4
describing the pipeline.
Calculating the similarity measure gives an indication of how well the registration is.
The transformation grid is slightly adjusted, the registration is performed again, and
is evaluated with the similarity measure. The algorithm keeps changing the transfor-
mation grid locally to improve the registration. When the optimal transformation
grid is obtained, the template image is transformed to align with the reference image.
Figure 3.5 shows the original (reference) image laid on top of the warped (tem-
plate) image. The green and purple colour indicates areas where the images do not
align. Figure 3.6 shows the original (reference) image laid on top of the transformed
warped (template) image. The transformed image and the reference image does not
completely align as indicated by little indications of green and purple in ﬁgure 3.6.
When that is said, it is clear to see a diﬀerence in how well the images align with each
other in ﬁgure 3.5 and 3.6.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Registration
13
Figure 3.5: The original image laid on top of the warped image. The colours indicates
where the images do not align.
Figure 3.6: The original image laid on top of the transformed warped image. The
colours indicates where the images do not align.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Theory
3.2
Quantifying Image Quality
When working with constructing high quality images it is relevant to look at how
image quality can be assessed. Image quality assessment can either be subjective or
objective[JG13], and one method is not necessarily better than the other. Subjective
assessment of image quality is an important tool, especially within the health system,
as specialists use medical images for diagnosis, treatment evaluation and preparation
for surgery. The opinion on image quality coming from a specialist is highly valued
within the medical imaging ﬁeld. The downside of subjective image quality assessment
is that it is time consuming, especially when developing and improving image modality
systems, furthermore the components that makes an image high quality can vary on
the viewpoint of the one evaluating the images [JG13].
Objective assessment of image quality is how well the information in an image is
displayed, i.e. sharpness, contrast, and brightness, as these three parameters are
deﬁning whether an image is of high quality or not [JG13]. Several methods for quan-
tifying image quality has been suggested depending on the application. Some quality
metrics are full-reference models based on evaluating an image with an enhanced
version of the same image. Examples are Signal-To-Noise ratio [Erd+04; Sij+96;
JG13] and Mean-Sqare-Error [MeanSqaredError; JG13], which both compare the
enhanced image with the non-enhanced image pixel by pixel. For some applications it
is not possible to use a full-reference model, as there is no reference to compare with.
Blind-reference image quality assessment models rely on information found within the
image to evaluate quality. A popular method is to look at how the intensities change
within the image and evaluate contrast in the image based on these changes[JG13].
Jaya and Gopikakumari [JG13] propose an image quality assessment model based
on the principle that a high intensity diﬀerence between a pixel and its neighbours
indicates changes in contrast and sharpness. Their model evaluates every pixel in the
image in relation to its closest neighbours and sums it up for all pixels. The equation
is as follows:
IEM8n =
Pk1
m=1
Pk2
l=1
P8
n=1
Il,m
e,c −Il,m
e,n

Pk1
m=1
Pk2
l=1
P8
n=1
Il,m
r,c −Il,m
r,n

(3.3)
An image with the dimensions x = 1, 2, ..., X and y = 1, 2, ..., Y is divided into k1 × k2
kernels of size 3 × 3.
The IEM equation compare each pixel to its eight closest
neighbouring pixels and sum up for each 3 × 3 block. e and r refers to enhanced
image and reference image, respectively. IEM8n is a full-reference model comparing
intensity diﬀerences between pixels for an image and an enhanced version of the image.
For this project it has been attempted to modify the equation to be a blind-reference
model, i.e. the image quality is evaluated based on information in the image, not by
comparing it to a non-enhanced version. Moreover the equation is adjusted to not
supply a single value for the whole image, but to give each pixel a quality score based
on that speciﬁc pixels diﬀerence in intensity compared to its closest neighbours. The
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Layered Surface Detection
15
equation will look at follows:
IEM(x, y) =
N
X
n=1
M
X
m=1
Ix,y −Ix−N/2+n,y−M/2+m

(3.4)
N is the kernel width and M is the kernel height.The modiﬁed equation evaluate each
pixel, P(x, y), in the image and evaluate the diﬀerence in intensity to the N × M −1
nearest neighbours. The result will be a X × Y matrix containing information about
local contrast and sharpness in the input image.
N closest neighbours can be set to compare the intensity of a pixel with its immediately
close neighbours, 3×3−1 closest neighbours, though the number of closest neighbours
can be set to compare with a bigger area. The algorithm is evaluating the presence of
sharp edges locally in an image.
If the IEM-score is high, it means there is a big diﬀerence in intensity between a
speciﬁc pixel and its neighbours, which in turn can indicate the presence of a sharp
edge. High contrast, and high image quality in general, can be deﬁned by the presence
of sharp edges [JG13].
It is investigated whether the layers chosen for assemble one high quality image will
vary when changing the number of closest neighbours each pixel is compared to. The
method is further described in chapter 4, method, and evaluated in chapter 5, results
and 6.
3.3
Layered Surface Detection
Layered surface detection is a tool to locate a surface within a data set. A surface can
be a path through a data set, where it is desired to ﬁnd a path yielding a low cost.
Cost is referring to the sum of all the values along the path. The data set might be
an image, where it is desired to ﬁnd the location of one or more surfaces within the
image represented by a line or set of lines darker than the rest of the image. Figure 3.7
shows an image with surfaces represented by two dark lines. The coordinate system
is arranged so that the x-axis is in the direction of the surface that is to be located.
In this case it is the horizontal direction.The y-axis is the third dimension and is
not applicable for this two-dimensional example. The z-axis is the vertical axis. The
layered surface detection algorithm will for each value of x ﬁnd a value along the
z-axis that provides the lowest cost, i.e. will for this example ﬁnd the pixel with the
lowest value in z-director for each value of x. It is assumed that the two surfaces in
ﬁgure 3.7 are not one intensity but a variety on darker grey intensity values and that
the two surfaces are not identical in intensity values. When iterating through the
values along the x-axis, the algorithm will ﬁnd the path that results in the lowest cost,
meaning it will for each value of x ﬁnd the z-value with the lowest value [BA19; And13].
If no restraints are applied to the algorithm, it will ﬁnd the path with the low-
est cost looking at all the values available in the z-direction. If the algorithm is set
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Theory
to only focusing on locating the surface resulting in the lowest cost, the algorithm
might register points not on the surface it was supposed to ﬁnd. ﬁgure 3.8 illustrate
an example on the layered surface detection ﬁnding a surface, which does not reﬂect
the actual surface the algorithm was supposed to ﬁnd in the image. It is possible to
add a constrain to the algorithm, i.e. forcing the algorithm to ﬁnd a surface with the
lowest cost with a constrain in how big the jump in z-direction can be. The restrain
parameter, ∆, limit how much z can change in relation to z in the previous point on
the x-axis, i.e.:
f(x + n, y) −f(x, y)
 < ∆
(3.5)
The restriction has to be adjusted for every surface detected to ensure a smooth surface.
Figure 3.9 illustrate the algorithm ﬁnding the desired surface without detecting other
surfaces, because ∆is adjusted to the data set [BA19].
Layered Surface detection is in this project used to ﬁnd the layer providing the
highest image quality assessment score for each segment of the input layers, though
with a restriction in how big the jump between layers can be. Geometrical diﬀerences
between the input images will result in artefacts in the output image. Therefor it is
desired to restrict how many layers there can be between the diﬀerent patches. How
the algorithm is used on the data set is explained further in chapter 4 section 4.2,
pipeline.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Layered Surface Detection
17
Figure 3.7: Image with two surfaces used as example to demonstrate how layered
surface detection works.
Figure 3.8: Layered surface detection applied to ﬁgure 3.7 with no restriction in the
z-direction.
Figure 3.9: Layered surface detection applied to ﬁgure 3.7 using a restrain in how
much z can change for neighbouring points in the x-direction.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER4
Method
This chapter will go through the methods used to establish the pipeline. In section 4.1
gives a short recap of the data used as input in the pipeline. The pipeline is a series of
processes used to achieve one globally sharp image based on the input layers, and it is
described in section 4.2. Section 4.3 describes how the data was evaluated by experts.
4.1
Data
The data was supplied by 3Shape, and the ﬁrst data set was 19 panoramic CT images
sampled using reference layer with two mm anterior-posterior displacement between
the layers. It was later replaced with a data set containing 11 images with a 1 mm
anterior-posterior displacement between the layers. The change in data set was due to
diﬃculties with the registration process as the two mm displacement between sampling
layers resulted in geometric diﬀerences between the reference and template image in a
way the registration algorithm could not accommodate.
4.2
The Pipeline
The pipeline can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1. The ﬁrst step is to prepare the data for
registration, thereafter align all 11 layers using non-rigid b-spline registration. The
aligned images are then temporarily set aside. The 11 image layers are padded to the
same size as a part of the preparations and an image quality assessment, IQA, process
is applied to the 11 padded image layers. The output from the registration process is
the template images aligned with their corresponding reference images. This includes
the transformation grid and the spacing between grid points used to transform the
template images. These are now used to register the images containing IQA scores
so that these 11 IQA images align as the 11 input layers align. Thereafter both the
aligned layers and the aligned IQA scores are divided into overlapping patches. Each
patch of the IQA images contains a IQA score for each pixel. The values of each
patch are summed so that each patch have a single value indicating the quality of
the patch. From here the optimal layer is found for each patch, and the patches are
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Method
merged together using a triangular ﬁltering method. The pipeline will be described in
detail throughout the rest of this chapter.
Preperations for
registration
Registration of
padded  input images
Image quality
assessment (IQA)
score on padded
input images
Use transformation
grid from previous
registration to align
images with IQA
scores
Divide aligned IQA
score images and
aligned padded input
images into
overlapping patches
summation of IQA
scores for each patch
Find the optimal
layer  for each patch
using surface
detection
Merge overlapping
patches together
using a triangular
ﬁlter
Figure 4.1: Flowdiagram over the pipeline
4.2.1
Preperations
This section describes the preparations necessary before the registration process. The
preparations include loading the images, pad the images to same size, create binary
images for masking the padded areas in the input images and deﬁning the parameters
for the registration. The registration is performed by aligned each image with the
central layer.
The Data is saved as png-ﬁles and are loaded in order from the ﬁrst to the last
layer. The input images are padded to match the size of the largest image, because it
ensures less problems with the registration. Each image size is evaluated against the
largest image to ﬁnd the diﬀerence in number of rows and columns. The diﬀerence is
distributed in both sides, top and bottom to keep the images centred. The images are
padded with zeros for easy implementation, and the padding will be masked during the
registration. In the function used for the registration it is possible to include binary
images for both the template and reference images so everything not wanted in the
registration can be masked. Binary images are created for each image corresponding
to all padding being represented with zeros and the image being represented with
ones.
Registration is the process of applying geometric transformations to an image to align
==PAGE:31==
4.2 The Pipeline
21
it with another image. The image being transformed is referred to as the template
image and the image is transformed to aligned with the reference image. The template
and reference images are deﬁned for both the padded images and the binary mask
images.
The function used for the registration process [Kro20] can be adjusted to the speciﬁc
situation as several parameters can either be set to default or adjusted. The following
parameters can be adjusted: similarity measure, type of registration, penalty, type
of interpolation, number of reﬁnement steps, the initial transformation grid, spacing
between grid points, and mask images for both the template and reference image. The
function will be described in section ??.
The similarity measure can be set to either squared pixel distance or mutual informa-
tion. The similarity measure is set to squared pixel distance. Mutual information is
not a bad choice, but it is unnecessary to compare features in the two images being
compared as they are the same modality.
The type of registration can be set to rigid, aﬃne, non-rigid, or a combination between
aﬃne and non-rigid, the last one being the default setting. The registration type was
set to be non-rigid, i.e. the registration used for this project is a non-rigid b-spline
transformation.
During registration pixels in the template image is moved to align with the reference
image and moving a pixel to far result in a penalty which will aﬀect the cost function.
For this project the penalty is set to zero as large movements should not be penalised.
The interpolation is set to be linear interpolation, i.e. the mapping of the pixels in
the transformed template image is performed using linear interpolation.
The maximum number of grid reﬁnement steps, initial transformation grid and spacing
between grid points were all set to default. It was experienced that the alignment was
much cleaner when the optimisation algorithm found the most optimal transformation
grid and spacing between grid points instead of manually set the parameters.
As all images were padded to the same size, corresponding mask images were con-
structed, and they were given as an input to the algorithm to make sure the padding
did not interfere with the registration.
4.2.2
Registration
Each of the 11 layers, except the central layer, were aligned with the central layer
using the function image_registration.m developed by Dirk-Jan Kroon [Kro20]. The
code is achieved from ﬁle-sharing section at the Mathworks homepage [Mat20]. The
inputs and outputs for the function image_registration.m are:
• Inputs:
– Template Image
– Reference image
– Cell structure containing speciﬁed parameters to overrule the default set-
tings
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Method
• Outputs:
– Template image aligned with the reference image
– Transformation grid used to perform the non-rigid b-spline transformation
on the template image
– Spacing between the grid points in the transformation grid.
– Forward transformation ﬁeld
– Backwards transformation ﬁeld
The transformation grids and spacing obtained from the registration of the input
images can be used to align the images containing the image quality assessment scores
later on.
The registration function has an optimisation step so that the optimal transformation
grid is achieved. The initial grid is an uniform grid with spacing between grid points
based on the dimensions of the moving image. For each iteration the template image
is transformed using a non-rigid b-spline registration, and each iteration is evaluated
using the similarity measure. The algorithm will keep running until the registration
error reaches a certain value decided based on the input variables in the function.
When the optimal transformation grid is achieved, it is applied to the template image.
4.2.3
Image Quality assessment
The image quality assessment, IQA, metric described in 3 will be used on the padded
input images. The code can be seen in the appendix 7. The algorithm works by evalu-
ating each pixel in relation to its neighbours, i.e. each pixels intensity is subtracted
with the intensity of its neighbours. The absolute value of the diﬀerences are summed,
and this value will be the image quality assessment for that particular pixel.
The IQA metric is applied to the padded layers, however, not to the aligned layers
as they are to be used later. The reason is to make sure the interpolation performed
during the registration does not inﬂuence the IQA score, as it might reduce sharpness.
The outcome will be 11 images each representing the IQA score for each of the layers.
• The IQA metric is performed using the following ten kernel sizes:
– 3 × 3
– 5 × 5
– 7 × 7
– 9 × 9
– 11 × 11
– 13 × 13
– 15 × 15
– 17 × 17
– 19 × 19
– 21 × 21
==PAGE:33==
4.2 The Pipeline
23
Figure 4.2: Surface plot over an edge in the central input image.
The number of kernel sizes is decided based on an surface plot of a straight sharp
edge i the central input image, see ﬁgure 4.2. The x-axis represents number of pixels
and the y-axis represents intensity values. A sharp edge will have a transition from a
high intensity to a low intensity, or the other way around. Figure 4.2 illustrates on how
many pixels the transition is spaced out on, and it is approximately ten pixels. When
deciding how big the kernel size should be for generating a globally high quality image,
the surface plot is used to ﬁnd the maximum kernel size. The point of comparing one
pixels intensity with its neighbours intensity is to locate sharp features in the image.
This speciﬁc edge is represented with ten pixels. It is decided that the maximum
kernel size is 21 × 21, i.e. approximately ten pixels between the central pixel and the
edge of the kernel. Possible kernel sizes up til the maximum kernel size are evaluated
as well.
4.2.4
Align IQA images
The IQA images have to be aligned so that the IQA score at position IQA(x, y)
corresponds to pixel p(x, y) in the layer image, e.g. a pixel, p(x, y), in layer one has a
corresponding IQA score at position IQA(x, y) in the image containing IQA scores
for layer one.
Aligning an IQA image with its corresponding layer is achieved by using the trans-
formation grid and spacing between grid points used to register the layer to align it
with the other layers. As an example, the transformation grid and spacing between
grid points used to align layer one with the central layer is used on the IQA image
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Method
for layer one. As the transformation grid is the same, the same transformation will
be applied to the IQA image, and therefor the IQA images will align with the layer
images. Both layers and IQA images for each layer are aligned.
4.2.5
Divide into patches
The layers and their corresponding IQA images are divided into overlapping patches.
Dividing the images into patches is to reduce the computational resources used, as
evaluating each pixel for 11 layers will require a lot of resources. The next step ﬁnding
the optimal layer for each patch, though ﬁrst the patch size has to be deﬁned. The
reasoning behind the chosen patch size was to have them approximately cube shaped
and close to 100×100 pixels in size as it was assessed to be a reasonable starting point.
To evaluate whether the size of the patches would have an eﬀect of the quality of the
outcome, three diﬀerent patch sizes were used and evaluated in chapter 5, results.
The patch sizes are as follows:
1. 115 × 124 pixels
2. 102 × 105 pixels
3. 91 × 91 pixels
All patches are generated so they overlap with half of their width and height, and the
reasoning behind it is to create a smooth transition between each patch. The process
of assembling the patches will be described in subsection 4.2.7 later in this chapter.
Before locating the best layers for each patch, the IQA scores for each patch are
summed so each patch has a single value to indicate the quality of the patch.
4.2.6
Find optimal layer
A layered surface detection algorithm is used to ﬁnd the optimal layer for each patch
[And13; BA19]. The input is a three-dimensional matrix with each patch represented
by the 11 layers. The patches are represented on the x- and y-axis and the z-axis
is the layers. The algorithm ﬁnds the surface through the layers to minimise the
cost function. The restrain parameter, ∆is set to two in each direction, i.e. ∆x and
∆y have the value of two so that the jump between chosen layer for a patch and
its neighbour is at most two layers. As an example, if the algorithm choose layer 3
for Patch(x, y), then the layer chosen should be limited to layer 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 for
Patch(x + 1, y). A limitation of two layers is chosen to minimise discontinuities in the
generated image due to geometric diﬀerence between the 11 layers. The output will
be an index matrix containing the layer number chosen for each patch.
The layered surface detection algorithm is implemented using the Matlab function
grid_cut.m developed by Vedrana Andersen Dahl [And13]. The algorithm is capable
of mapping several surfaces in one data set, but that is not necessary as it is desired
==PAGE:35==
4.2 The Pipeline
25
to ﬁnd only one surface. The function is described with the inputs relevant for this
project. The inputs for the function is the cost function and a constrain. The cost
function contains the IQA scores for each patch for each layer, and the structure of
the cost function is a three-dimension matrix. The function works on the minimum
cost principle, meaning all IQA scores has to be reversed as a high IQA score indicates
high quality. The ﬁrst two dimensions are the patches in x- and y- direction, and
the third dimension contains the 11 layers. The constrain, ∆, is set equal to 2. The
output is a two-dimensional matrix containing the index for which layer is chosen for
each patch.
4.2.7
Merge overlapping patches
The ﬁnal step is merging the patches chosen for the ﬁnal image. All patches are
overlapping with half of it its pixels in the x- and y-direction, so a patch in the ﬁnal
image will be represented by a merging of several overlapping patches. The overlapping
area of two patches is merged together in a weighted fashion so that the value of a
pixel in the overlapping area is dependent on its position between the two patches. A
triangular ﬁlter that was the length and width of a patch was multiplied onto each
overlapping patch. The value uniformly ranged from 0 to 1 for the ﬁrst half of the
patch and then decreased from 1 to 0 until reaching the end of the patch. The ﬁlter
should in one-dimension look like a triangle. The concept is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.3.
The ﬁlter is applied in two dimension as the merging of patches is happening in both x-
and y-direction. The generated image will be free of sharp edges between the patches
as each patch is smoothed together.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of triangular ﬁltering in ine-dimension
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Method
4.2.8
Evaluate best generated image
Three diﬀerent patch sizes and ten diﬀerent kernel sizes for the IQA process are used
to generate 30 images. One image is to be chosen as the generated image with the
highest quality as well as the image used in the subjective evaluation, see section 4.3.
The process of chosen one ﬁnal image is to run the IQA metric on the ﬁnal images.
The result should be a summation of all IQA scores so each image has one value. The
same kernel sizes was used as for the pipeline. The IQA process was performed ten
times for all generated images, and the generated image with the best score for all ten
IQA processes were notated. The generated images chosen for each IQA process were
subjectively evaluated using the same teeth for evaluation as the subjective evaluation
performed by experts, see section 4.3.
4.3
Subjective Evaluation
The pipeline illustrates a potential way to objectively evaluate image quality and using
it to assemble one high quality image from the 11 input layers. This section describes
the process of achieving a subjective evaluation of the generated image.
Three experts have evaluated the data. Azam Bakhshandeh, lector at oral radiology
department and department for Cariology and Endodontics at Copenhagen University,
she will be referred to as expert 1. Helle Juul Larsen, dentist specialised within
orthodontics, and Helga Largren, dentist consultant. They have given their joined
evaluation, and they will be referred to as expert 2.
The data to be evaluated was divided into two parts:
1. Part: 11 individual teeth cropped out of the input layers
2. Part: 11 individual teeth for the generated image and a reference image
Part 1 is designed for the experts to evaluate a single tooth for all 11 input layers
and choose the best layer based on their expertise. The point of part 1 is to compare
the results with the index for which layers the algorithm ﬁnds. Part 2 is designed
to compare whether the image created using the pipeline or a reference image are
evaluated to be the best. The reference image will be the middle layer of the input
layers as that would be the result using conventional panoramic x-ray imaging.
Table 5.1 and ﬁgure 4.4 show which 11 teeth were chosen to be viewed individually by
the experts:
1. quadrant:
2. quadrant:
3. quadrant:
4. quadrant:
2+
8+
+1
+3
+6
-2
-4
-6
1-
3-
7-
Table 4.1: Teeth shown individually to the experts. The numbering is danish standard
[Tan]
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Subjective Evaluation
27
Figure 4.4: Teeth Numbering, the image is adjusted [Adv]
The number system is organised so that + indicates the teeth in the upper arch
and - indicates the teeth in the lower arch. Whether the + or - sign is in-front of
behind the number indicates if the tooth is in the left or right side of the mouth. If
the sign is in-front of the number the tooth is in the left side of the mouth. If the sign
is behind the number the tooth is in the right side of the mouth. Image 4.4 illustrates
the numbering of the teeth.
Due to the circumstances the meetings had to be a video meeting. It required
more detailed preparations of the data to ensure the images are viewed in the right
sequence and with the highest solution. Images of the individual teeth are saved in
each their folder with two sub-folders for part 1 and 2, respectively. The main folder
was sent to each expert and then they were guided over video of how to evaluate each
image and in what order. The images the experts chose were written down together
with any commentary.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER5
Results
5.1
Pipeline evaluation
The pipeline was run through using three diﬀerent patch sizes and ten diﬀerent kernel
sizes for the image quality assessment metric. All the images can be seen in appendix
7. The generated images were evaluated using IQA metric with the ten diﬀerent kernel
sizes used for evaluating whether kernel size has an inﬂuence on quality.
The following results for evaluating quality of the generated images are:
• Kernel 3 × 3: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Kernel 5 × 5: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 9 × 9 kernel.
• Kernel 7×: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 9 × 9 kernel.
• Kernel 9 × 9: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 9 × 9 kernel.
• Kernel 11 × 11: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 9 × 9 kernel.
• Kernel 13 × 13: patch size 91 × 91 pixels - 11 × 11 kernel.
• Kernel 15 × 15: patch size 91 × 91 pixels - 11 × 11 kernel.
• Kernel 17 × 17: patch size 91 × 91 pixels - 11 × 11 kernel.
• Kernel 19 × 19: patch size 91 × 91 pixels - 17 × 17 kernel.
• Kernel 21 × 21: patch size 91 × 91 pixels - 17 × 17 kernel.
Running ten IQA processes with ten diﬀerent kernels on the generated images resulted
in four generated images were singled out as having a higher image quality assessment
score than the rest. The four generated images were subjectively evaluated in a similar
fashion as the subjective evaluation performed by the experts.
The four generated images were evaluated for images of 11 cropped out teeth and the
result were as follows:
• Tooth 3+: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth 7+: no diﬀerence
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Results
• Tooth +1: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth +3: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth +6: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth -2: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth -4: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth -6: no diﬀerence
• Tooth 1-: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth 3-: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
• Tooth 7-: patch size 115 × 124 pixels - 5 × 5 kernel.
Images for all 11 teeth for the four generated images can be found in the appendix 7.
The generated image with the best subjective image quality evaluated by the author
is the image generated using a patch size of 115 × 124 pixels and using the IQA metric
with a kernel size of 5 × 5. This image will throughout the rest of the project be
referred to as the generated image, as it is the image chosen to be the best out of the
30 images generated using diﬀerent patch sizes and kernel sizes. The chosen generated
image can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1. The IQA metric was applied to the generated image
and the scores were visualised, see ﬁgure 5.2. High IQA score is reﬂected as high
intensities in the image. The ﬁgure at page 32 show at heatmap of the layers chosen
for each patch for the generated image with patch size 115 × 124 pixels using IQA
metric looking at the 5 × 5 −1 nearest neighbours. Figure 5.3 illustrate the optimal
layer for each patch. The diﬀerence between ?? and 5.3 is the heatmap illustrate the
algorithms ability to ﬁnd diﬀerent layers for diﬀerent segments of the image and ﬁgure
5.3 does the same, but with the chosen layers displayed on top of the generated image.
The details in the ﬁgure is hard to discern, see appendix 7 for a larger image, sorry
for the poor quality.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Pipeline evaluation
31
Figure 5.1: Generated image evaluated to provide the highest quality with patch size
115 × 124 pixels using IQA metric looking at the 5 × 5 −1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 5.2: IQA score calculated using kernel size 3 × 3 for generated image and
visualised as an image.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Results
Figure 5.3: Generated image divided into patches and shows optimal layer for each
patch. Each patch is represented by four layers as the overlapping patches are merged
together.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Pipeline evaluation
33
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Results
5.2
Subjective evaluation
The results from the subjective evaluation can be seen in table 5.1. The table is
showing the result for the two experts and their answer for part one and two.
Teeth/Experts
Expert 1
Expert 2
Part 1
Part 2
Part 1
Part 2
Choose layer 1-11
Choose reference/
generated image
1. quadrant:
3+
9,10,11
No diﬀerence
No diﬀerence
Generated
7+
No diﬀerence
Reference
No diﬀerence
No diﬀerence
2. quadrant:
+1
11
Generated
11
Generated
+3
11
Generated
5,6,7
Generated
+6
no diﬀerence
Generated
No diﬀerence
Generated
3. quadrant:
-2
1
Generated
3,4
Generated
-4
8
Reference
1,2,3
Reference
-6
1,11
No diﬀerence
No diﬀerence
Generated
4. quadrant:
1-
1
Generated
3
Generated
3-
1/6+7
Reference
4,5
Reference
7-
No diﬀerence
Technical
diﬃculties
No diﬀerence
No diﬀerence
Table 5.1: Results from the subjective evaluation performed by two experts
5.2.1
Qualitative results from subjective evaluation
Expert 1:
For part 1 expert 1 did not see any diﬀerence for 3 out of 11 image sequences.
For tooth 1-, +1 and -4 the quality of the images were poor, though expert 1 found
a small improvement for the compact bone around the tooth for layer 11 for tooth
+1, the enamel was sharper for layer 8 for tooth -4 and layer 1 for tooth 1- seemed
slightly sharper than the rest. For tooth 3- the roots of the tooth was visualised best
in layer 1 and the crown of the tooth was visualised best for layer 6 and 7.
For part 2 it was hard for expert 1 to choose whether the generated or the ref-
erence image had the highest quality for tooth 1- and 3-. The generated image of
tooth 1- shows the roots of the tooth more clearly, otherwise there is no diﬀerence.
The reference image is chosen for tooth 3-, though it was hard for the expert to choose.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Subjective evaluation
35
The generated image for tooth -2 was much clearer than the reference image, and for
tooth 8+ the reference image was chosen as the best, because the pulpa, i.e. the nerve
channel, was more clearly visualised. For tooth 7- there was some technical diﬃculties,
so it does not count.
Expert 2:
For part 1 expert 2 did not see any diﬀerence for 5 out of 11 image sequences;
tooth 3+, 8+, +6, -6 and 7-. For tooth 7- and +6 no diﬀerence were noted as the
tooth was sliding when iterating through the sequence, and it was hard for the expert
to note any diﬀerence in the images. Expert 2 note an overall poor quality of the
images for part 1.
For part 2 expert 2 choose the generated for 7 of the 11 image sequences of teeth. For
tooth 3+ and +3 the generated image was chosen as the best, though the diﬀerence
between the generated image and the reference image was small. For tooth 1- the
generated image was chosen as the best, because the roots seemed more sharp for the
generated image, though the diﬀerence between the images was slight.
5.2.2
Comparison with the objective evaluation
Table 5.2 shows what layers the algorithm found for each of the teeth. The results are
divided into what layers was found for the crown and for the roots as the algorithm
found diﬀerent layers dependent on the part of the tooth.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Results
Teeth/Experts:
Layers chosen by
the algorithm:
Crown:
Roots:
1. quadrant:
3+
6,7,9
5,6,7
7+
6,7,8
5,6,7
2. quadrant:
+1
7,9,10,11
1,3,5,7
+3
7,9,11
5,7
+6
7,9
5,6,7
3. quadrant:
-2
4,5,6
1,2,4
-4
5,7,9
3,4,5
-6
8,9,10,11
4,5,6,7
4. quadrant:
1-
6,7,8
3,5
3-
6,7
1,2,4,5
7-
6,7
7,8,9
Table 5.2: lll
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER6
Discussion
This chapter will discus the results in relation to method reliability, subjective evalua-
tion in relation to objective evaluation and validity of the image quality assessment
tool used to assess image quality. Furthermore improvement and future work will be
discussed throughout the chapter. In the end of the chapter the reﬂections about the
process of creating an optimal pipeline is described.
6.1
Method Reliability
Testing method reliability is evaluating whether the pipeline produce the same quality
of the outcome when applied to another data set than the data set the pipeline was
trained on. Unfortunately it was not possible to run the pipeline on another data set,
due to time management, though it is an important task for future work. Changing
the data set should provide the same quality of the image registration, the image
quality assessment process, the layered surface detection and the generated image.
If it is not the case, the pipeline might too ﬁne tuned to a speciﬁc data set, and it
requires adjustment of the pipeline.
6.2
Eﬀect of patch size and kernel size
The generated image chosen as the image with the highest image quality is generated
using a patch size of 115 × 124 pixels and kernel size 5 × 5. The way of choosing
this combination of kernel size and patch size was not optimal. It relied on an Image
Enhancement Assessment tool not yet validated for use on dental panoramic x-ray
images. Furthermore it relied on the subjective evaluation performed by the author,
which is no expert in evaluating dental panoramic x-ray images. The way of evaluating
whether kernel size and patch size have an eﬀect on the outcome was ﬂawed and should
be performed in a more objective manner with a quality assessment tool validated for
use on this kind of data. When that is said, looking at the 30 generated images, see
appendix 7, there is no obvious diﬀerence between the images. Performing an objective
evaluation of the quality of the generated images resulted in ambiguity in which image
was deemed the best when changing the kernel size. Due to this ambiguity the author
did a visual evaluation to pick one image with highest quality score, as needed for the
subjective evaluation performed by experts.
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Discussion
The optimal combination of kernel size and patch size should be investigated further.
It was decided to divide the images into patches due to time constraints and lack
of computational resources, though it should be investigated whether it is necessary
to divide the images into patches in the ﬁrst place, and whether it would provide at
better result if the optimal layer was found for each pixel instead of a patch of pixels.
6.3
Image Quality Assessment
The image quality assessment tool, Image Enhancement Metric, used is an adjusted
version of the Image Enhancement Metric developed by Jaya and Gopikakumari
[JG13]. The method has been evaluated in three ways, which will be discussed in the
following subsections.
6.3.1
Evaluation 1
Experts evaluated the generated image where the IQA was the basis for choosing the
layers for each patch, see table 5.1 in chapter 5, results.
Overall the method for quantifying high quality does not seem like a bad approach
based on the results from the subjective evaluation. The generated image was chosen
multiple times as the best image for several of the image sequences of out-cropped
teeth by the experts. It gives an indication that the method has potential. The
subjective evaluation will be discussed further in section 6.4.
6.3.2
Evaluation 2
Experts choose which of the input layers had the highest quality, and it was compared
with the index of the layer found by the algorithm for each patch, see table 5.1 and
5.2 in chapter 5, results.
The aim for part 1 of the subjective evaluation is to compare the layers chosen by
the experts with the layers chosen by the algorithm, i.e. compare the objective and
subjective evaluation. Taking a ﬁrst glance at the results from part 1 of the subjective
evaluation the two groups of experts do not agree, except they agree for tooth +1
choosing layer 11.
The subjective and objective evaluation can be seen in table 5.1 and 5.2, respectively.
The results in table 5.2 are taken from ﬁgure 5.3. It is hard to compare table 5.1
and table 5.2 as the algorithm ﬁnds several layers for each tooth and the layers diﬀer
between the crown and the roots. It is unfortunate that the quality of the image in
ﬁgure 5.3 is poor and it is overwhelming looking at an image with so may layers laid
on top of the image.
The algorithm ﬁnds several layer representing a single tooth, due to the patch size
and the overlap between the patches. Due to the lack of consensus between the
experts and the large representation of layers for each tooth it is hard to conclude
==PAGE:49==
6.4 Subjective Evaluation
39
whether the objective and subjective evaluation agree. The objective evaluation has
to be visualised in a more approachable way if the comparison between objective
ans subjective evaluation is investigated in the future. Furthermore it could be an
improvement to have the expert choose the best layer for diﬀerent segments of each
tooth, e.g. choose one layer for the crown, one layer for the roots and one layer for the
surrounding compact bone. It would make it a more approachable task to compare
the subjective evaluation with the objective evaluation. Furthermore it would provide
a better approach to validate the image quality assessment tool.
6.3.3
Evaluation 3
the IQA process was applied to the generated image and visualised as an image, see
ﬁgure 5.2 in chapter 5, results.
The Image Enhancement Metric, i.e. the IQA used for evaluating image quality was
investigated by applying it to the generated image. Each pixel in the generated image
got a IQA score, the scores were normalised and visualised in an image, see ﬁgure
5.2. The high IQA scores are reﬂected in the high intensity values. The IQA metric
evaluates every pixel in relation to its N −1 closest neighbours depending on the
kernel size. A high score indicates a large diﬀerence between a pixel and its neighbours,
which with high likelihood indicates the presence of an edge. In ﬁgure 5.2 the outline
of the teeth are visible, indicating the IQA metric ﬁnds edges in the image. It should
not be the single way of evaluating the validity of using this particular IQA on dental
panoramic x-ray images. Nevertheless it is a good indication that the method reﬂects
contrast in the image, and might be a suitable way of assessing image quality of this
kind of data.
Future work would be to further investigate the validity of whether the IQA method
evaluate the image quality eﬀectively for dental panoramic x-ray images, preferably
by applying it to several data sets.
6.4
Subjective Evaluation
Two set of experts were evaluating the data in two parts. For the ﬁrst part the experts
looked at sequences of images of 11 teeth cropped out of the 11 input image layers
and for the second part the experts should choose whether the generated image or a
reference image had the best quality. The teeth were chosen so that both the upper
jaw, lower jaw, left side and right side were represented. The results can be seen in
table 5.1.
For part one the expert were most in agreement when they could not see any diﬀerence
between the 11 layers, and that was for three of the 11 image sequences of cropped out
teeth; 7+,+6 and 7-. For the remaining image sequences of teeth the experts did not
agree, except for tooth +1, they booth choose layer 11. The disagreement might not
be signiﬁcant as only two experts evaluated the data. It could also indicate that as
the name suggest, the evaluation is subjective and what is important when evaluating
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Discussion
image quality can vary dependent on who is doing the evaluation. The way they look
at the images and how they adjust the brightness, contrast and grey-scale distribution
is controlled by the experts individually, and they might have each their preference in
how they adjust these parameters. The way to reduce the variability in the answers is
to get a large group of experts to look at the same data. It might then be possible to
ﬁnd tendencies in what is evaluated as high quality. Having the two groups of expert
give a good indication whether it is feasible to generate globally high quality images
based on a set of dental panoramic x-ray images. It gives an indication whether the
concept works.
For tooth 7+, +6 and 7- the experts could not see any diﬀerence when looking
through the 11 image layers. A reason for that could be diﬃculties with the way the
teeth were cropped and visualised. All images were visualised in a sequence so the
experts could easily scroll between the images. For the program used to visualise the
images, it was a prerequisite that the images were the same size, i.e. the input image
layers had to be the same size for it being possible to crop out the individual teeth
in a sequence. The input image layers were padded to match the size of the largest
image, and that created sliding of the teeth when looking through the sequence as the
teeth were not in the same position for all 11 images in the sequence. As the teeth
slides, the adjacent teeth become visible in the cropped image and it becomes hard to
ﬁnd any diﬀerences in the images. If a subjective evaluation was to be repeated, then
the material given to the experts should be of a higher standard.
In general, the approach for the subjective evaluation was challenging as the cir-
cumstances demanded that the meetings with the experts were video meetings. This
required that all the material was made available to the expert through an internet
connection, and the control of the course of the meeting was partly given to the experts.
The experts were the ones in control of adjusting brightness, contrast and the distri-
bution of the grey-scale in the image viewer, furthermore, they were the ones to make
sure that these parameters were adjusted so the images were viewed in the best way
possible. An improvement would be having more control of the course of the evaluation.
In part 2 expert 1 choose the generated image 5 times out of 11 images sequences, and
expert 2 chose the generated image 7 times out of the 11 image sequences. For some
of the images of the cropped out teeth the diﬀerence in quality was obvious, where
as for others it was hard for the experts to choose whether the generated image or
the reference had the highest quality. This indicates that the pipeline does generate
images with some improvement in image quality, and that it proves that the method
has potential for being useful in the future. It was a feasibility study, meaning the
aim of the project was to investigate whether it was feasible to generate one globally
high quality image using the described approach. From here the concept has to be
investigated further. The algorithm has to be optimised both in eﬃciency and quality
of the output. Furthermore the IQA metric has to be further investigated whether it
is a valid method for quantifying image quality on panoramic x-ray images and the
==PAGE:51==
6.5 Reﬂection of process
41
algorithm has to run on many data sets to test the robustness of the algorithm. As a
proof of concept, the results are promising.
6.5
Reﬂection of process
This section describes the process of creating the pipeline used to create images based
on image quality assessment scores for the data set.
The initial structure of the method pipeline is ﬁrst to align all images using registration,
establish an image quality assessment model and apply it to each image, along with
creating an algorithm to iterate through the data set and construct a single image
containing the best part of the images.
Before evaluating the diﬀerences in quality between the eleven images, they must
all align. The registration process started out with a simple transformation using
an aﬃne rigid registration. The comparison of the reference image and the trans-
formed template image shows inconsistencies in the success of the registration as the
registration is acceptable in some regions in the images and way of in other regions.
This indicated that a global transformation was not suﬃcient, and a locally changing
transformation could be more suitable as it adjusts the transformation to locally
align the template and reference image. A non-rigid b-spline transformation was then
attempted with better success. An aﬃne transformation was added to the b-spline
transformation to evaluate whether it would make a diﬀerence or not. The result was
unwanted translation so that the teeth did not align vertically.
It was chosen to only apply a non-rigid b-spline transformation to the images, and
the next step was to adjust the parameters and ﬁnd a method for aligning all eleven
images with each other and not just the neighbour.
The ﬁrst data set with the two mm layer displacement was initially used as input to
the registration algorithm. Aligning all images in the data set required that the images
was registered towards the same image. Due to the use of reference layers during the
sampling the structures in each image will vary slightly geometrically, meaning that
the ﬁrst and the last image in the data set will be of the same structures, but the
structures will seem diﬀerent in relation to size. Registration of the ﬁrst image to align
with the last image will make the registration less accurate as the diﬀerences in the im-
ages are too great. To reduce the problem, each image is aligned with the central image.
As a ﬁrst try the images were aligned directly to the central layer, i.e. the cen-
tral image was the reference image for each of the alignments. The result was a poor
registration, especially for the image layers furthest from the central layer. As a second
try, the registration process was divided into two parts; ﬁrst register each layer its
neighbour, and thereafter use the transformation grids to register each image towards
the central image step by step,i.e. image 1 was aligned with image 2, 2 was aligned
with image 3 and so on until reaching the central image. Afterwards transformation
grids and the spacing between grid points from the previous registrations were applied
to the image layers to align them with the central layer. Using the information from
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Discussion
the neighbour-to-neighbour registration to register e.g. image layer 1 to image layer
10, the transformation grid used to align image 1 to 2 would be applied to image 1.
Image 1 is now aligned with image 2. The transformation grid for aligning image 2
to image 3 is applied to image 1, which has already undergone a transformation to
align it with image 2. The procedure is continued until image 1 is registered towards
image 10, which is the central image. This method created problems with the ﬁrst
data set, as the 2 mm displacement between the reference layers created geometrically
changes too great for the method to work. Another data set was then provided with a
1 mm displacement between the layers, and that gave a neater registration of each
image aligned with the central image layer. With the new data set registration directly
towards the central image layer was tried again, and resulted in a neat registration.
It was decided to divide the images into equal size, non-overlapping patches to
make computations easier when performing IQA, ﬁnd the optimal layer for each
speciﬁc patch and assemble the chosen patches to a full image. The size of the patches
was evaluated using three diﬀerent grid. The starting point was a 100 × 100 pixels
patch, from there the size slightly increased and decreased. The generated images
were created using the 5 diﬀerent grids to evaluate whether the patch size would have
an eﬀect on the output.
An image quality assessment metric was applied pixel by pixel to each patch. There-
after the quality scores were summed for each patch, i.e. each patch got a single value
describing the quality of that particular patch. For each patch the layer with the best
quality score is chosen, and the patches corresponding to the index of the layer with
the highest quality score were assembled to a new image. Initially the way of choosing
the patches with best quality was without any restriction in how the best layer was
chosen and the patches were connected without any interpolation between them.
Studying the index of which layer was chosen for each patch, it was discovered
that the best layer consistently would be the central image, the only layer, which has
not undergone a transformation, i.e. the only image not undergoing any interpolation.
Even when the registration was performed directly towards the central layer, i.e. each
image layer undergone a single interpolation, it still caused problems with the optimal
layer chosen for each patch.
It meant the image quality assessment had to be applied to the images before regis-
tration, but the images had to also align, because the quality measure would mean
nothing, if one patch does not represent the same structure in all layers. The solution
was to perform the image quality assessment on all images before registration and
then apply the transformation grid from registration of the input data, i.e. the image
containing quality assessment scores for image 1 was transformed to align with the
quality assessment score for the center image by applying the transformation grid
used to transform image 1 to align with the center image. Thereafter the images with
the quality assessment scores were divided into patches, and the procedure was the
same. Looking at the index for chosen layer with highest quality scores now showed a
==PAGE:53==
6.5 Reﬂection of process
43
diversity in which layer was chosen for each patch.
The procedure used for choosing the best layer for each patch was at ﬁrst not restricted,
meaning the algorithm found the layer with the highest image quality assessment
score not taking the jump between layers into account. The result was a big jump
in chosen layer between neighbouring patches, e.g. one patch chosen from layer 1,
the neighbour chosen from layer 9. Due to the geometric diﬀerence between layers, it
can create hard lines in the ﬁnal image as the patches are connected into an image
with the same dimensions as the padded input images. The algorithm for ﬁnding the
best layer was optimised using a layered surface detection algorithm [BA19; And13].
The method has a smoothness constrain used to restrict the jump in layers between
neighbouring patches to two layers, e.g. if one patch is from layer 5, the chosen
layer for the neighbouring patch must be from layer 3,4,5,6 or 7, as the smoothness
constrain limits how far the chosen layers can be from each other. The constrain
reduced geometric diﬀerences in the ﬁnal image.
As a ﬁrst try the patches was reconnected into an image without any smooth transition
between patches. Creating an image with the image quality assessment scores for each
layer showed harsh lines indicating the boarders of the patches. The image quality
assessment score is an indication of sharp or blurry lines in an image, and the presence
of a hard line between patches indicates no smooth transition between patches, and it
makes it impossible to trust an image quality assessment score of the ﬁnal image. A
Gaussian smoothing between the pixels at the boarder of each patch was tried out,
and the changes in the ﬁnal image was limited and did marginally little for reducing
the hard lines in the quality image. The next try was by applying a triangular ﬁlter
to overlapping patches to create a smooth transition between patches. The patches
would overlap with half of the patch size, and the value inside the overlapping area
would be weighted based on the pixels potion within the overlapping area. If a pixel
within the overlapping area lies close to e.g. patch 1, the value of the speciﬁc pixel
would mainly be inﬂuenced by the pixel value from patch 1. The method reduced the
harsh lines in the image indicating the quality assessment measurement, and improved
the ﬁnal image.
The pipeline is explained in detail in chapter 4.
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER7
Conclusion
The primary aim of the project is to create a pipeline for generating a globally high
quality image based on several dental panoramic x-ray images as input with varying
local quality. The suggested pipeline include a non-rigid registration, an evaluation
of image quality based on Image Enhancement metric, dividing the input layers into
patches, ﬁnd the optimal layer for each patch using layered Surface Detection and
assembled the patches into a ﬁnal image. Images were generated using the pipeline with
changes in patch size and kernel size used for the IQA procedure. After evaluating the
quality of each of the generated images with the IQA procedure, one image was chosen
as the image with the highest quality, and was presented for expert for subjective
evaluation. Overall the aﬀect of patch size and kernel size were limited. The results
from the subjective evaluation indicates the generated image are locally sharper than a
reference image, though the diﬀerence between the generated image and the reference
are overall small. The results from evaluating the validity of the IQA process indicates
it has potential for signiﬁcantly represent image quality assessment of dental panoramic
x-ray images. As a feasibility study the results are promising, though future work is
needed for optimisation of the pipeline and the evaluation techniques, validation of
the IQA method and investigation of the robustness of the pipeline.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[Adv]
Wellness Advocate. Illustrates numbering of teeth. url: https://wellnessadvocate.
com/?dgl=9702. (accessed:26.06.2020).
[And13]
V. Andersen Dahl. Layered Surface Detection. DTU Compute, 2013.
url: http : / / people . compute . dtu . dk / vand / software . html. (ac-
cessed:26.06.2020).
[BA19]
A. Bjornholm Dahl and V. Andersen Dahl. Advanced Image Analysis -
Layered surfaces. 2019. Chapter part 4.
[Erd+04]
D. Erdogmus et al. “Measuring the signal-to-noise ratio in magnetic res-
onance imaging: a caveat.” In: Signal Processing 84 (2004), pages 1035–
1040.
[JG13]
V. L. Jaya and R. Gopikakumari. “IEM: A New Image Enhancement Metric
for Contrast and Sharpness Measurements”. In: International Journal of
Computer Applications 79.9 (2013), pages 1–9.
[Kro20]
Dirk-Jan Kroon. B-spline Grid, Image and Point based Registration. MAT-
LAB Central File Exchange, 2020. url: https://www.mathworks.com/
matlabcentral/fileexchange/20057- b- spline- grid- image- and-
point-based-registration). (accessed:07.02.2020).
[Mat20]
Mathworks. Last seen April 10 2020. 2020. url: https://se.mathworks.
com/.
[NR]
Radiological Society of North America and American College of Radiology.
Panoramic Dental X-ray. url: https://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/
info.cfm?pg=panoramic-xray. (accessed: 26.06.2020).
[PL15a]
Jerry L. Prince and Jonathan M. Links. Medical Imaging - Signals and
Systems. Pearson, 2015. Chapter Part 1 - Basic Imaging Principles.
[PL15b]
Jerry L. Prince and Jonathan M. Links. Medical Imaging - Signals and
Systems. Pearson, 2015. Chapter Chapter 5 - Projection Radiography.
[PM17]
R. R. Paulsen and T. B. Moeslund. 0Introduction to Medical Image Analysis
- Image Registration. 2017. Chapter 11.
==PAGE:58==
48
Bibliography
[Res]
Researchgate. Image illustrating backwards mapping. url: https://www.
researchgate.net/figure/Forward-and-backward-image-warping-
In - the - case - of - foward - warping - A - holes - can - occur _ fig2 _
267946997. (accessed:25.06.2020).
[Sij+96]
J. Sijbers et al. “Quantiﬁcation and improvement of the signal-to-noise
ratio in magnetic resonans image acquisition procedure”. In: Magnetic
Resonans Imaging 14 (1996), pages 1157–1163.
[Tan]
Strandvejens Tandklinik. Hvad hedder tænderne? url: https://grevetand.
dk/hvad-hedder-taenderne/. (accessed: 03.07.2020).
[VL18a]
K. Van Leemput and R. Larsen. 02505 Course Note Medical Image Analysis
- Fitting Image Functions. 2018. Chapter 1.
[VL18b]
K. Van Leemput and R. Larsen. 02505 Course Note Medical Image Analysis
- Image Registration. 2018. Chapter 2.
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A - Original images
49
Appendix A - Original images
==PAGE:60==
50
Bibliography
Figure 1: Original image - layer 1
Figure 2: Original image - layer 2
Figure 3: Original image - layer 3
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A - Original images
51
Figure 4: Original image - layer 4
Figure 5: Original image - layer 5
Figure 6: Original image - layer 6
==PAGE:62==
52
Bibliography
Figure 7: Original image - layer 7
Figure 8: Original image - layer 8
Figure 9: Original image - layer 9
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A - Original images
53
Figure 10: Original image - layer 10
Figure 11: Original image - layer 11
==PAGE:64==
54
Bibliography
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes
and diﬀerent versions of the image quality assessment
metric
==PAGE:65==
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes and diﬀerent versions of the image quality
assessment metric
55
Figure 12: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 3 × 3-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 13: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 3 × 3-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 14: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 3 × 3-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:66==
56
Bibliography
Figure 15: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 5 × 5-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 16: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 5 × 5-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 17: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 5 × 5-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes and diﬀerent versions of the image quality
assessment metric
57
Figure 18: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 7 × 7-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 19: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 7 × 7-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 20: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 7 × 7-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
Figure 21: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 9 × 9-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 22: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 9 × 9-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 23: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 9 × 9-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes and diﬀerent versions of the image quality
assessment metric
59
Figure 24: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 11 × 11-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 25: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 11 × 11-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 26: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 11 × 11-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
Figure 27: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 13 × 13-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 28: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 13 × 13-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 29: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 13 × 13-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes and diﬀerent versions of the image quality
assessment metric
61
Figure 30: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 15 × 15-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 31: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 15 × 15-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 32: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 15 × 15-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
Figure 33: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 17 × 17-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 34: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 17 × 17-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 35: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 17 × 17-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B - Final Images using diﬀerent patch sizes and diﬀerent versions of the image quality
assessment metric
63
Figure 36: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 19 × 19-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 37: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 19 × 19-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 38: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 19 × 19-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
Figure 39: Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA metric
looking at the 21 × 21-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 40: Final image using 102 × 105 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking
at the 21 × 21-1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 41: Final image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA metric looking at
the 21 × 21-1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C - Evaluate generated images
65
Appendix C - Evaluate generated images
Figure 42: Tooth 3+ - Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 5 × 5 - 1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 43: Tooth 3+ - Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 9 × 9 - 1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 44: Tooth 3+ - Generated image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 11 × 11 - 1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 45: Tooth 3+ - Generated image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 17 × 17 - 1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
Figure 46: Tooth +1 - Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 5 × 5 - 1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 47: Tooth +1 - Generated image using 115 × 124 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 9 × 9 - 1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 48: Tooth +1 - Generated image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 11 × 11 - 1 nearest neighbours.
Figure 49: Tooth +1 - Generated image using 91 × 91 pixels patches and using IQA
metric looking at the 17 × 17 - 1 nearest neighbours.
==PAGE:77==
Appendix D - generated image with grid indicating the patches and the optimal layer for each
patch
67
Appendix D - generated image with grid indicating the
patches and the optimal layer for each patch
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
Appendix E - Code
Main Script
clear all; close all; clc;
addpath(genpath("."));
%% FINAL SCRIPT
%% 1. preperations:
% define path and call the function:
% RegistrationPreperations:
% input: directory for the data
% output: mask images, options settings and padded images ready to
% use for registration
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 1: initialization");
path = 'C:\Users\louis\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Speciale\Speciale\LouisaData\
LayerNr = 11;
[Imoving,Istatic,Options,PaddedImage] = RegistrationPreperation(path);
%%
% for i = 1:length(PaddedImage)
%
imwrite(PaddedImage{i},"InputImagePadded"+i+".png");
% end
%% 2. Registration
% load data file containing registration data
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 2: Registration");
RegistrationPath = '.\data\280420EnhancedDirectlyToCenter\registrationEnhancedDirectly2Center
if(isfile(RegistrationPath))
load(RegistrationPath);
end
% if the data does not exist, the registration process will begin.
if ~exist('Registration','var') == 1
parfor i = 1:length(Istatic)
Registration{i} = image_registrationhandler(Imoving{i},Istatic{6},Options{i});
end
end
clear Imoving Istatic Options RegistrationPath
%% 3. plot registered images on top of center image
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 3: Plot Images layered");
String = "NonRigid, pad + mask for both Imoving and Istatic, enhanced images, penalty = 0, sp
= 25x58x2";
PlotRegistratedImages(PaddedImage{6},Registration,String,2,[1:5,7:11],[2:6,6:10])
%% 4. Add center image to the registered images + convert to doubles:
% converting to doubles, because there is problems later with quality measure if not
for i = 1:5
Method.FinalRegImage{i} = im2double(Registration{i}.Ireg);
end
Method.FinalRegImage{6} = im2double(PaddedImage{6});
for i = 6:10
Method.FinalRegImage{i+1} = im2double(Registration{i}.Ireg);
end
%% 4. divide registered images into patches
==PAGE:79==
Appendix E - Code
69
% divide images into patches:
% DivideIinPatches:
% input: how many patches the image is devided into
% (gridsizeX,gridsizeY) and the registered image.
% output: image divided into gridsizeX,gridsizeY number of patches.
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 4: Divide into Patches");
GridSizeX = [30,34,38];
GridSizeY = [11,13,15];
FinalRegImage = Method.FinalRegImage;
parfor j = 1:length(GridSizeX)
for i = 1:LayerNr
[PatchedImage{j,i},xpoints{j},ypoints{j}] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSiz
end
end
delete(gcp('nocreate'))
Method.PatchedImage = PatchedImage; Method.xpoints = xpoints; Method.ypoints = ypoints;
clear PatchedImage FinalRegImage;
%% 5. perform image quality assessment on padded images
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 5: Image Quality Assesment");
for i = 1:LayerNr
Method.IEM1OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},1);
Method.IEM2OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},2);
Method.IEM3OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},3);
Method.IEM4OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},4);
Method.IEM5OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},5);
Method.IEM6OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},6);
Method.IEM7OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},7);
Method.IEM8OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},8);
Method.IEM9OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},9);
Method.IEM10OrgIm{i} = ImageEnhancementMetric(PaddedImage{i},10);
end
%% 6. extract tranformation grid and spacing between gridpoints
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 6: Extract Transformation");
for i = 1:length(Registration)
Method.Grid{i} = Registration{i}.O_trans;
Method.Spacing{i} = Registration{i}.Spacing;
end
%% 7. register the images containing image quality assesment measure
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 7");
for i = 1:5
Method.AlignedQMIEM1{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM2{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM2OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM3{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM3OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM4{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM4OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM5{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM5OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM6{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM6OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM7{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM7OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM8{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM8OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM9{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM9OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
Method.AlignedQMIEM10{i} = Register2Center(Method.IEM10OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.
end
for i = 6:10
Method.AlignedQMIEM1{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method
Method.AlignedQMIEM2{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM2OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
Method.AlignedQMIEM3{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM3OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM4{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM5{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM6{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM7{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM8{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM9{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Spa
Method.AlignedQMIEM10{i+1} = Register2Center(Method.IEM1OrgIm{i},Method.Grid(i),Method.Sp
end
Method.AlignedQMIEM1{6} = Method.IEM1OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM2{6} = Method.IEM2OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM3{6} = Method.IEM3OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM4{6} = Method.IEM4OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM5{6} = Method.IEM5OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM6{6} = Method.IEM6OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM7{6} = Method.IEM7OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM8{6} = Method.IEM8OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM9{6} = Method.IEM9OrgIm{6};
Method.AlignedQMIEM10{6} = Method.IEM10OrgIm{6};
%% 8. divide aligned quality scores into patches
% DivideIinPatches:
% input: how many patches the image is devided into
% (gridsizeX,gridsizeY) and the registered image.
% output: image divided into gridsizeX,gridsizeY number of patches.
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 8");
for j = 1:length(GridSizeX)
for i = 1:LayerNr
[Method.PatchedQMIEM1{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM2{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM3{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM4{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM5{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM6{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM7{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM8{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM9{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.A
[Method.PatchedQMIEM10{j,i},~,~] = DivideIinPatches(GridSizeX(j),GridSizeY(j),Method.
end
end
%% 9. summation of quality scores for each patch - patch grid 1
% generate summation of IEM measure for each patch in all images
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 9");
for l = 1:length(GridSizeX)
for k = 1:LayerNr
for i = 1:length(Method.ypoints{l})-2
for j = 1:length(Method.xpoints{l})-2
Quality.PatchedQMIEM1Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM1{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM2Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM2{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM3Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM3{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM4Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM4{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM5Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM5{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM6Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM6{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM7Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM7{l,k}{i,j}))
Quality.PatchedQMIEM8Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM8{l,k}{i,j}))
==PAGE:81==
Appendix E - Code
71
Quality.PatchedQMIEM9Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM9{l,k}{i,
Quality.PatchedQMIEM10Sum{l,k}{i,j} = sum(sum(Method.PatchedQMIEM10{l,k}{
end
end
end
end
%% 10. extract each patch grid from the struct
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 10");
for i = 1:LayerNr
for j= 1:length(GridSizeX)
Method.PatchGrid{j}{i} =
Method.PatchedImage{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM1SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM1Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM2SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM2Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM3SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM3Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM4SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM4Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM5SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM5Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM6SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM6Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM7SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM7Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM8SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM8Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM9SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM9Sum{j,i};
Quality.PatchedQMIEM10SumGrid{j}{i} = Quality.PatchedQMIEM10Sum{j,i};
end
end
%% 11. Clean Up
disp(datestr(now, 'HH:MM:SS')+" - Step 11");
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM1SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM1SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM2SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM2SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM3SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM3SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM4SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM4SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM5SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM5SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM6SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM6SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM7SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM7SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM8SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM8SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM9SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM9SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchedQMIEM10SumGrid = Quality.PatchedQMIEM10SumGrid;
FinalData.PatchGrid = Method.PatchGrid; FinalData.xpoints = Method.xpoints; FinalData.ypo
ImDimY = size(Method.FinalRegImage{1},1);
ImDimX = size(Method.FinalRegImage{1},2);
%clear Method Quality Resgistration Data;
%% 12. Generate quality images:
for i=1:length(GridSizeX)
disp("start iteration "+i)
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM1Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM2Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM3Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM4Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM4Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM5Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM5Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM6Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM6Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM7Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM7Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM8Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM8Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM9Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM9Grid{i}] = QualityImageGener
[Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM10Grid{i},Outcome.PatchIndexIEM10Grid{i}] = QualityImageGen
end
%% convert from uint8 to uint16:
==PAGE:82==
72
Bibliography
% for i=1:length(GridSizeX)
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM4Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM4Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM5Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM5Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM6Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM6Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM7Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM7Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM8Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM8Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM9Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM9Grid{i});
%
Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM10Grid{i} = im2uint16(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM10Grid{i});
% end
%% save images
% for i = 1:length(GridSizeX)
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM1Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM2Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM3Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM4Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM4Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM5Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM5Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM6Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM6Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM7Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM7Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM8Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM8Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM9Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM9Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM10Grid{i},"FinalImageIEM10Grid"+i+".png")
% end
%%
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{1},'FinalImageIEM1Grid1.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{2},'FinalImageIEM1Grid2.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{3},'FinalImageIEM1Grid3.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{4},'FinalImageIEM1Grid4.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{5},'FinalImageIEM1Grid5.png')
%
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{1},'FinalImageIEM2Grid1.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{2},'FinalImageIEM2Grid2.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{3},'FinalImageIEM2Grid3.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{4},'FinalImageIEM2Grid4.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{5},'FinalImageIEM2Grid5.png')
%
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{1},'FinalImageIEM3Grid1.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{2},'FinalImageIEM3Grid2.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{3},'FinalImageIEM3Grid3.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{4},'FinalImageIEM3Grid4.png')
% imwrite(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{5},'FinalImageIEM3Grid5.png')
%%
% NrPixelsX = zeros(1,5);
% NrPixelsY = zeros(1,5);
% for i = 1:5
==PAGE:83==
Appendix E - Code
73
%
NrPixelsX(i) = floor(ImDimX/GridSizeX(i));
%
NrPixelsY(i) = floor(ImDimY/GridSizeY(i));
% end
% %IEM1:
% StringIEM1 = {"Grid 26x9 IEM 1 - patch size = "+NrPixelsX(1)+"x"+NrPixelsY(1)+"","Grid
% for i = 1:length(xpoints)
% FinalImagePlots(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i},xpoints{i},ypoints{i},Outcome.PatchIn
% FinalImagePlots(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i},xpoints{i},ypoints{i},Outcome.PatchIn
% end
%
% %IEM2:
% StringIEM2 = {"Grid 26x9 IEM 2 - patch size = "+NrPixelsX(1)+"x"+NrPixelsY(1)+"","Grid
% for i = 1:length(xpoints)
% FinalImagePlots(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i},xpoints{i},ypoints{i},Outcome.PatchIn
% FinalImagePlots(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i},xpoints{i},ypoints{i},Outcome.PatchIn
% end
%
% %IEM3:
% StringIEM3 = {"Grid 26x9 IEM 3 - patch size = "+NrPixelsX(1)+"x"+NrPixelsY(1)+"","Grid
% for i = 1:length(xpoints)
% FinalImagePlots(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i},xpoints{i},ypoints{i},Outcome.PatchIn
% FinalImagePlots(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i},xpoints{i},ypoints{i},Outcome.PatchIn
% end
%%
text_str = cell((length(xpoints)-2)*(length(ypoints)-2),1);
position = zeros((length(xpoints)-2)*(length(ypoints)-2),2);
k=1;
for i = 1:length(xpoints{1})-2
for j = 1:length(ypoints{1})-2
text_str{k} = num2str(Outcome.PatchIndexIEM2Grid{1}(j,i));
position(k,:) = [xpoints{1}(i+1),ypoints{1}(j+1)];
k=k+1;
end
end
HeatMap = heatmap(Outcome.PatchIndexIEM2Grid{1});
RGB = insertText(HeatMap,position,text_str,'FontSize',30,'BoxOpacity',0,'TextColor','red'
figure
hold on
imshow(RGB)
%%
%% 5. evaluating quality measure
% for i = 1:length(xpoints)
%
QMIEM1{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM1Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM2{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM2Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM3{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM3Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM4{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM4Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM5{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM5Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM6{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM6Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM7{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM7Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM8{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM8Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM9{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM9Grid{i},1);
%
QMIEM10{i} = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(Outcome.GeneratedImageIEM10Grid{i},1);
% end
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
%%
% for i = 1:length(GridSizeX)
%
imwrite(QMIEM1{i},"QMIEM1Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM2{i},"QMIEM2Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM3{i},"QMIEM3Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM4{i},"QMIEM4Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM5{i},"QMIEM5Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM6{i},"QMIEM6Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM7{i},"QMIEM7Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM8{i},"QMIEM8Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM9{i},"QMIEM9Grid"+i+".png")
%
imwrite(QMIEM10{i},"QMIEM10Grid"+i+".png")
% end
%% subfunction performing the neighbour-to-neighbour registration
function dataReg = image_registrationhandler(Imoving,Istatic,Options)
[dataReg.Registration.Ireg, ...
dataReg.Registration.O_trans, ...
dataReg.Registration.Spacing, ...
dataReg.Registration.M, ...
dataReg.Registration.B, ...
dataReg.Registration.F] = image_registration(Imoving,Istatic,Options);
end
Sub-function - RegistrationPreperations.m
function [Imoving,Istatic,Options,PaddedImage] = RegistrationPreperation(path)
%% 1. Prepare data for registration and registration:
% data is saved in a struct named 'Data', and it contains the preparations
% for registration and the registration for each image to the center image.
% What in this section: load the data, pad images, generate mask images for each input image,
% define template and reference images.
% load data:
%path = 'C:\Users\louis\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Speciale\Speciale\LouisaData
% call function DataLoad;
ImageArray = DataLoad(path);
% defining variables:
%GridSizeY = 13;
%GridSizeX = 34;
% find largest image as preperation for padding.
% FindLargestImage:
% input: input images
% output: size of the largest of the input images
[MaxRows,MaxColumns] = FindLargestImage(ImageArray);
% pad images:
% ZeroPaddingImage:
==PAGE:85==
Appendix E - Code
75
% input: input images, to what size (MaxRows and MaxColumns) the images
% should have
% output: input images padded with zeros to same size
[PaddedImage,Diff] = ZeroPaddingImage(ImageArray,MaxRows,MaxColumns);
% Create mask images:
% BinaryImageForMaskMoving:
% input: input images, difference between largest image and individual
% image, size of largest image.
% output: a binary image for each input image for registration so that the padded are
% each image is not part of the registration.
MaskImage = BinaryImageForMaskMoving(ImageArray,Diff,MaxRows,MaxColumns);
% define binary images for moving and stationary images.
MaskMoving = MaskImage([1:5,7:11]);
MaskStatic = MaskImage([2:6,6:10]);
% Define the moving and stationary images for the registration:
Imoving = PaddedImage([1:5,7:11]);
Istatic = PaddedImage([2:6,6:10]);
% define parameters
- else is default:
for i = 1:length(Istatic)
Options{i}.Registration = 'NonRigid';
Options{i}.Penalty = 0;
Options{i}.MaskMoving = MaskMoving{i};
Options{i}.MaskStatic = MaskStatic{i};
end
end
Sub-function - DataLoad.m
function ImageArray = DataLoad(path)
% takes a file directory and load data
% input: file directory
% output: array containing loaded images
%%
filePattern = fullfile(path, '*.png');
pngFiles = dir(filePattern);
ImageArray = cell(1,length(pngFiles));
for i = 1:length(pngFiles)
baseFileName = pngFiles(i).name;
fullFileName = fullfile(path, baseFileName);
ImageArray{i} = imread(fullFileName); % struct containing 19 images
end
end
Sub-function - FindLargestImage.m
function [MaxRows,MaxColumns] = FindLargestImage(Images)
for i = 1:length(Images)
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
tempRows(i) = size(Images{i},1);
tempColumns(i) = size(Images{i},2);
[~,IRows] = max(tempRows);
[~,IColumns] = max(tempColumns);
end
MaxRows = size(Images{IRows},1);
MaxColumns = size(Images{IColumns},2);
end
Sub-function - ZeroPaddingImage.m
function [PaddedImage,Diff] = ZeroPaddingImage(Image,MaxRows,MaxColumns)
% The function pads all input images to size(MaxRows,MaxColumns).
% input:
% Image: array containing input images
% MaxRows = number indicating the number of rows the the padded image
% MaxColumns = number indicating the number of columns the the padded image
% Output:
% PadedImage = array containing padded images
% Diff = how much each image is padded in each side
%%
ZeroPadMatrix = zeros(MaxRows,MaxColumns);
for i = 1:length(Image)
Diff{i} = [MaxRows-size(Image{i},1),MaxColumns-size(Image{i},2)];
temp1 = round(Diff{i}(1)/2);
temp2 = round(Diff{i}(2)/2);
PaddedImage{i} = padarray(Image{i},[temp1,temp2],0,'both');
if size(PaddedImage{i},1)>size(ZeroPadMatrix,1)
PaddedImage{i} = PaddedImage{i}(1:end-1,:);
end
if size(PaddedImage{i},2)>size(ZeroPadMatrix,2)
PaddedImage{i} = PaddedImage{i}(:,1:end-1);
end
end
Sub-function - BinaryImageForMaskMoving.m
function MaskImage = BinaryImageForMaskMoving(Images,Diff,MaxRows,MaxColumns)
for i = 1:length(Images)
BinaryImage = ones(size(Images{i}));
temp1 = round(Diff{i}(1)/2);
temp2 = round(Diff{i}(2)/2);
MaskImage{i} = padarray(BinaryImage,[temp1,temp2],0,'both');
if size(MaskImage{i},1) > MaxRows
MaskImage{i} = MaskImage{i}(1:end-1,:);
end
if size(MaskImage{i},2) > MaxColumns
MaskImage{i} = MaskImage{i}(:,1:end-1);
end
end
==PAGE:87==
Appendix E - Code
77
Sub-function - DivideIinPatches.m
function [Patches,xpoints,ypoints] = DivideIinPatches(gridsizeX,gridsizeY,Image)
xpoints = floor(linspace(1,size(Image,2),gridsizeX*2+1)); xpoints(end) = xpoints(end)+1;
ypoints = floor(linspace(1,size(Image,1),gridsizeY*2+1)); ypoints(end) = ypoints(end)+1;
Patches = cell(gridsizeY*2-1,gridsizeX*2-1);
for i = 1:gridsizeY*2-1
for j = 1:gridsizeX*2-1
Patches{i,j} = Image(ypoints(i):ypoints(i+2)-1,xpoints(j):xpoints(j+2)-1);
end
end
end
Sub-function - ImageEnhancementMetric.m
function IEM = ImageEnhancementMetric(data,viewsize)
% The function calculate the Image Inhancement Metric for each pixel in an
% image.
% input:
% data: the image
% viewsize: indicating how many neighbours a pixel is compared to,
% viewsize = 1 --> 3x3 voxel, viewsize = 2 --> 5x5 voxel, viewsize = 3
% --> 7x7 voxel.
% output:
% IEM: Image Enhancement measure
IEMPaddedImage = padarray(data,[viewsize,viewsize],0,'both');
IEM_temp = zeros(size(data));
for i = 1+viewsize:size(IEMPaddedImage,1)-viewsize
for j = 1+viewsize:size(IEMPaddedImage,2)-viewsize
for offset1 = -viewsize:viewsize
for offset2 = -viewsize:viewsize
IEM_temp(i-viewsize,j-viewsize) = IEM_temp(i-viewsize,j-viewsize) + abs(I
end
end
end
end
IEM = IEM_temp./((viewsize*2+1)^2-1);
end
%%
%IEM(i-1,j-1) = ((abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPaddedImage(i-1,j-1)))+(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i
%
(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPaddedImage(i-1,j+1)))+(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPadde
%
(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPaddedImage(i+1,j+1)))+(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPadde
%
(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPaddedImage(i+1,j-1)))+(abs(IEMPaddedImage(i,j)-IEMPadde
Sub-function - Register2Center.m
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
function [AlignedImage,T] = Register2Center(OriginImage,Grid,Spacing,NrFromCenter)
% The image take register the individual image towards the center image.
% input:
% OriginImage = the image that is to be registered towards the center
% image
% Grid = a vector containing the grid from the neighbour-to-neighbour
% registration
% Spacing = spacing from the neighbour-to-neighbour registration
% NrFromCenter = how much OriginImage is from the center image.
% output: The OriginImage registered to the center image.
%%
[I{1},T{1}] = bspline_transform(Grid{1},OriginImage,Spacing{1});
for i = 2:NrFromCenter
[I{i},T{i}] = bspline_transform(Grid{i},I{i-1},Spacing{i});
end
AlignedImage = I{NrFromCenter};
end
Sub-function - DivideIinPatches.m
function [Patches,xpoints,ypoints] = DivideIinPatches(gridsizeX,gridsizeY,Image)
xpoints = floor(linspace(1,size(Image,2),gridsizeX*2+1)); xpoints(end) = xpoints(end)+1;
ypoints = floor(linspace(1,size(Image,1),gridsizeY*2+1)); ypoints(end) = ypoints(end)+1;
Patches = cell(gridsizeY*2-1,gridsizeX*2-1);
for i = 1:gridsizeY*2-1
for j = 1:gridsizeX*2-1
Patches{i,j} = Image(ypoints(i):ypoints(i+2)-1,xpoints(j):xpoints(j+2)-1);
end
end
end
Sub-function - QualityImageGenerator3.m
function [QualityImage,Index] = QualityImageGenerator3(IEMPatchSum, PatchedImage, ImDimY, ImD
%%
% The function takes in the image quality assessment scores and evaluate
% from which layer each patch should be takes and connects the patches back
% into an image
% input:
% IEMPatchSum = Image quality asssessment scores for each patch in all layers
% PatchedImage = The aligned images divided into overlapping patches
% ImDimY = image dimension i y-direction
% ImDImX = image dimension i x-direction
% LayerNr = number of layers
% ypoints = coordinates for the position of overlapping patches i
% y-direction
% xpoints = coordinates for the position of overlapping patches i
% x-direction
==PAGE:89==
Appendix E - Code
79
% output:
% Quality Image = an image created based on image quality assessment
% scores
% Index = the index for which layer each patch was taken from
%%
% convert til struct structure of the image quality assessment scores to a
% three dimensional matrix
for i = 1:length(ypoints)-2
for j = 1:length(xpoints)-2
for k = 1:LayerNr
cost(i,j,k) = IEMPatchSum{k}{i,j};
end
end
end
% because 'grid_cut' runs on a minimum cost principle, the values in
% cost has to be inverted.
cost = -cost;
% use the function 'grid_cut' to find which layer each patch comes from
Index = grid_cut(cost,[],2);
% Index is used to find the patches with highest quality and collect then
% in PatchedNewImage
for i = 1:size(PatchedImage{1},1)
for j = 1:size(PatchedImage{1},2)
PatchedNewImage{i,j} = PatchedImage{Index(i,j)}(i,j);
end
end
% I will be the output image and it is defined with zeros. W shows the
% weighting performed on each patch, and it should be only ones.
I = zeros(ImDimY,ImDimX);
W = zeros(ImDimY,ImDimX);
% a triangular mask is created for each patch by calling the function
% 'getmask', and the mask is multiplied with the patch. The patch is then
% added together with the overlapping patches to create a smooth transition
% between patches.
for i = 1:length(xpoints)-2
for j = 1:length(ypoints)-2
Patch = PatchedNewImage{j,i}{1};
mask = getMask(Patch);
res= mask.*Patch.';
% disp("i="+i+" j="+j)
I(ypoints(j):ypoints(j+2)-1,xpoints(i):xpoints(i+2)-1) =...
I(ypoints(j):ypoints(j+2)-1,xpoints(i):xpoints(i+2)-1)...
+ res.';
W(ypoints(j):ypoints(j+2)-1,xpoints(i):xpoints(i+2)-1) = ...
W(ypoints(j):ypoints(j+2)-1,xpoints(i):xpoints(i+2)-1) ...
+ mask.';
end
end
QualityImage = I./W;
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
end
function mask = getMask(patch)
% the function takes in a patch and creates a triangular filter matching
% the size of the patch.
tempY = linspace(0,1,ceil(size(patch,1)/2));
tempX = linspace(0,1,ceil(size(patch,2)/2));
if(mod(size(patch,1),2)==1)
maskY = [tempY,tempY(end-1:-1:1)];
else
maskY = [tempY,tempY(end:-1:1)];
end
if(mod(size(patch,2),2)==1)
maskX = [tempX,tempX(end-1:-1:1)];
else
maskX = [tempX,tempX(end:-1:1)];
end
mask = maskY.*maskX';
end
Sub-function - QualityAssessmentFinalImage.m
function FinalImageQuality = QualityAssessmentFinalImage(FinalImage,step)
TempQuality = ImageEnhancementMetric(FinalImage,step);
low = min(min(TempQuality));
high = max(max(TempQuality));
FinalImageQuality = (TempQuality-low)/(high-low);
end
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
