==PAGE:1==
Plant Modelling for Controlled
Environment Agriculture Systems
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
David Ib Frederik Sørensen
Front page image:
Credit and copyright Aerofarms
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard
Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the MSc degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of software engineering.
ii
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
I propose an adaptable plant agnostic simulation framework built using C# which can sim-
ulate full plants with individually addressable plant cells in 3 dimensions. The framework
provides building blocks for different plant structures and plant cells, giving the ability to
assign properties to the plant cells to perform multiple levels of internal plant operations.
The framework has been tested by running full plant simulations with constant growth
and growth through energy consumption against real-world data. Although the framework
cannot run realistic simulations yet it shows great promise for the proposed 3-dimensional
plant cell model. The framework comes bundled with the ability to distribute simulation
nodes and a plant visualizer to debug the simulated plant.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
David Ib Frederik Sørensen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
I would like to thank my supervisor, Jan Madsen, for the great and knowledgable guidance
during the making of this project. Jan provided great support and insight throughout the
project.
Jan Madsen, Professor, PhD, Deputy Director at DTU Compute, Head of Section Em-
bedded Systems Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
iv
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Scope and Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Plant Simulation Overview
3
3
Plants
6
3.1
The Shoot System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Plant Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Cell Division and Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Photosynthesis and Nutrient Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Aeroponics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Design
13
4.1
The Simulator Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
The Cell and Plant Simulation Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
The Plant Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
The External Simulation Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.5
Simulation State
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.6
Plant Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Implementation
19
5.1
Simulation Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Development Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Simulation Software Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Plant Simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Plant Simulator Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.6
Plant Visualiser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Results
50
6.1
Maize Plant Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Constant Growth Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Growth Through Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Result Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Future Work
59
7.1
Physics Engine and Ray Casting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.2
Geometry Rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Plant Creators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Graphical Processing Unit Utilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Process Reflection and Discussion
65
9
Conclusion
68
Bibliography
69
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
10 Usage Guide
75
A Appendix
77
A.1 Constant Growth Source Code and Simulation State Data . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.2 Energy Growth Source Code and Simulation State Data . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3 Plant Simulator Service Controller Class Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.4 Plant Simulator Runtime Class Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.5 Plant Simulator Class Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.6 Plant Cells Class Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.7 Plant and Plant Parts Class Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.8 Plant Simulation State Class Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.9 Plant Simulation Cell Body System Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.10 IPlantPart Abstract Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.11 IPlantPartDescriptor Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.12 Maize Plant Constant Growth Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.13 Maize Plant Energy Growth Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
vi
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With an increase in world population from 7.7 billion in 2019 to approximately 8.5 billion
by 2030 and 9.7 billion by 2050 [1] the world may face challenges trying to put food on
the table for all the people on earth. Conventional agriculture is already taking up 2/3
of the land in Denmark and with most of the land is already taken up by agriculture,
the rest is used for other purposes such as cities or industry.
The land taken up by
agriculture has decreased over the years but the production of crops has increased due
to the use of technology, optimization, and specialization [2]. Climate change around the
world can potentially pose a big risk for the agricultural businesses with both excessive
rain or extreme drought having the risk of ruining the harvest of many farmers [3] leaving
societies without food and farmers may be in financial trouble. The Covid-19 pandemic
left many people in fear of supply shortage due to the preventive measures implemented
by different countries [4].
A solution to the climate problems, farmers have genetically modified seeds and plants to
for example grow better in drier climates [3]. However, this does not solve the problem of
the amount of land already devoted to agriculture and the population increase. Another
solution that would try and find a solution to both of the problems would be a controlled-
environment agriculture system like aeroponics where the farmer has full control of the
temperature at each level of the plant, humidity, light, nutrients, and more. It also allows
for growing plants inside, stacking the growth medium on top of each other to allow
for vertical farming, and thereby be able to utilize space more efficiently [5]. With the
controlled environment, it is possible to experiment and optimize every detail of the system
to optimize plant growth. With it being a controlled environment, it is now possible to
imitate the growth process in simulation without any uncontrollable variables such as
weather or the actual nutrient conditions of the soil at the exact spot.
Simulations try to imitate a process or system in the real world. Computer simulations
build upon the simulations by utilizing computers to simulate the behavior or outcome of
a virtual environment by incorporating a simulation model. The simulation model takes a
mathematical model describing one or multiple entities in the system. These entities are
often described by defining attributes, functions, interactions, and constraints with itself
or other entities. By observing and analyzing the output results from the simulation, it is
possible to observe the characteristics of the virtual environment and model that depending
on the purpose and use of the simulations can be used for different scenarios [6]. It is useful
when wanting to optimize something like a process, that being able to simulate different
aspects of the process, allows the possibility to experiment with different parameters until
you achieve the most optimal result you are looking for. Some things may however be
infeasible to test in the real world due to the time and investment it would take for the
result to finalize, as the process duration would simply be too long. Figuring out what
conditions a plant grows most optimally in i.e. parameters like temperature, light and so on
can take a long time, as a plant can take a long time to grow and testing every combination
can therefore take years, and most people would probably settle with a set of parameters
that works well enough. Potential is wasted by not using the full possible optimization,
which fits well into the controlled environment agriculture systems like aeroponics where
these parameters can be controlled and optimized for optimal growth.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Thesis Scope and Structure
This thesis will be about plant modeling and simulation and will focus firstly on the
software engineering part around modeling and simulating the plant processes.
As a
software engineer, you specialize in developing software that is performant and works by
a given specification. However, the software is a generic term that can involve almost
anything these days. I feel that as a software engineer that it is an important skill to be
able to take a new subject and be able to build software around that subject, so that you
do not only specialize in only a limited set of subjects but can adapt your knowledge from
subject to subject and still be able to make the program needed to fulfill the specification.
This is where the controlled environment agriculture comes into the picture, and in order
to understand the many internal plant processes, I will have to learn the concepts that
make plants live and grow. The main focus of the biology sections will be to describe
my understanding of what is happening inside the plant and then use those sections to
develop the simulation model. A big task is to digest and split up the biology literature
and create the simulation model around those concepts and then develop the simulator
around the simulation model.
The main objective of this project will be to work towards a simulation model that real-
istically can model different types of plants. Time is a big factor and I will have to make
decisions underway to end up with a project that at least can show how the simulation
can be used through simulation to research or analyze different ideas of how plants grow
or react to different external environments.
2
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:11==
2
Plant Simulation Overview
Algorithmically, plants are an interesting problem to tackle. With the development of the
Lindenmayer system (L-System) [7] it was possible to model many aspects of a plant. The
L-System is a very generic string-based system, that allows modeling of almost unlimited
structures, and is adaptable to also model the general plant structure, organs, cells and
so on [8]. These systems are great for modeling realistic looking plants. However, even
though the L-System is able to generate realistic-looking plants, it is all based on the
perception of a general structure of a generic or specific plant observed in the real-world.
This means that the general L-System generated plants are not based on the actual plant
processes happening inside the plant. This means that the general L-systems does not
simulate the different needs like water and sunlight that a plant has.
Plant simulations come in a variety of functions, depending on what the goal of the
simulation is. When it comes to farming, conventional farming is a vital part of society
and always has been, as it is the primary way of getting food on the table. Farmers,
therefore, try to get most out of their fields, and instead of risking their livelihood and
crops on new experiments, simulation software has been created to try and predict the yield
and outcome of plants grown in their fields. One example is Agricultural Product System
Simulator APSIM which is an agricultural crop simulator developed in C# that model
multiple types of plant crops based on Plants Models that you can input to the system.
These plant models define the different organs like stems and leaves, fruit development for
different sorts like grain and oats, and so on. This allows APSIM to be very flexible and
code can be re-used through its object-oriented programming. APSIM operates through
an asynchronous event-system and daily times steps [9]. Another agricultural simulator
is RECORD which has incorporated the STICS crop model [10] developed in C++. The
STICS model simulates and evaluates the climate, soil, and crop management and the
effects it has on-field production and on negative environmental issues like nitrate leakage.
This allows for more environmental configuration and adaptability of crops for example
during climate change. STICS, therefore, have a more complicated and detailed model
of environmental features like soil, weather but also for the plant itself. Like APSIM,
the STICS crop model allows for a wide variety of different crops to be simulated through
configuration parameters, optional add-on code for added details of some more complicated
plant models, and have implemented some equations for cell division in fruit development.
Like APSIM, the STICS model runs on a daily time step for the plant development cycle.
Common for these simulation tools is that they take a statistical approach to the simula-
tion. Farmers plant many hectares of the same type of crop in a similar setting, meaning
that it makes sense to approximate the parameters across that field and predict the crop
yield based on several equations that take in the different environmental parameters.
These simulations do not predict the actual physical properties of the individual plant but
rather the actual fruit yield of the plant, as this is what the farmers try to maximize: How
much fruit can the field produce to maximize the profit of that field. Also, the simulators
like APSIM and STICS take a very static and passive approach in the sense of the plant
needs like water. A plant in a field passively takes water up from the soil and based on the
geographical locations or farming practices these variables are sort of constant throughout
the day, meaning that it is no problem for these simulators to only run on a daily time
step for the plant cycle. One of the critical things for getting these simulations correct is
that the parameters for a specific farmer’s field are correct [11] [12]. These tests require
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
3
==PAGE:12==
either field tests, expert knowledge, or estimation through the use of satellite imagery [13]
to calibrate the parameters for their crop prediction purposes.
In order to gain more fine-grained control of the plant development, it is possible to dive
into the cellular level of plants. Plants are constructed of many plant cells organized in
a very specific way that allows the plant to live, update and transport water, perform
photosynthesis, and so on [14]. Plant cell development is still an ongoing topic, and we
do not fully understand all aspects of the plant cell functions. Therefore, many of the
cellular simulations try to mimic one observed behavior of for example cell wall placement
during cell division [15] or implementing a generalized cell division algorithm [16]. This
means that getting all the internal processes in plant cells correct is a complicated process.
Different plant organs, like leaves, consists of many of the same plant cells, although
they do have different requirements when it comes to simulation due to their shape and
function [14]. As shown earlier, L-systems are a way of formally defining a set of rules
based on past iterations and this system has been developed into simulation software [17]
that allows for defining the observed patterns in an L-system, and using the L-Studio to
experiment and test. This does however require you to know and specify a lot of different
processes if you want to experiment with whole-plant experiments. General plant models
simulations have been created to experiment with the plant processes rather than specific
plant species [18]. This general approach has been done for different processes that include
the plant cell development to form tissues [19], which is useful for experimenting with
different parameters in the processes of discovering subjects like branching and pattern
forming.
Leaves and their development is something that is separate from the other
plant formations, as they are very different in shape.
This has evolved into its own
virtual leaf simulator [20] which incorporates a general plant cell simulation with cell-to-
cell communication, cell wall interactions, and cell division, and uses this to develop leaves
from the individual virtual plant cells. The Virtual Leaf concept has then been extended
to whole plant simulations with cellular resolution called Virtual Plant Tissue [21]. Virtual
Plant Tissue simulation uses the same cellular building blocks as Virtual Leaf, but enables
researchers to play around with parameters to see the change in growth for the whole
plant, and is not limited to the leaves. Virtual Plant Tissue is also an extension of Virtual
Leaf because it uses much of the same code base from Virtual Leaf for its leaf simulation
and will be able to output a 2D visualization of the cellular structure with a bundled
visualizer. The Virtual Plant Tissue simulation runs on a time step method which can call
external programs for each time step. Other 2D representation cell simulators have been
adapted to simulate generalized plant growth [22].
General for the cellular level simulations is that they are very focused on either the lon-
gitudinal or vertical dimensions of plant cells, and not on the 3 dimensional (3D) plant
cell. This makes it difficult to get an overview of how 3D simulations of plant cell size,
expansion, and division have been done. This does, however, not mean that attempts at
modeling 3D plant simulations have not been done. Fundamental for all 3D modeling is
the structure on how to model, where the vertex-vertex systems have been a great tool for
representing the 3D models of complex evolving plant morphogenesis [23] with increasing
resolution as the plant evolves. A lot of work has gone into both 2D and 3D models in
the later years, and there are some that work at cellular resolution [24] [25]. These do
however not explain the exact size of a plant cell in 3D but use an underlying cell model
that mimics cell growth that leads to growing tissue.
To conclude on the plant simulation overview, it is clear that there exist many different
simulations for many different purposes. It is nonetheless clear from the section above, that
the farming simulations are statistic based simulations that incorporate different plant-
4
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:13==
and environmental models meaning that the plants have needs that need to be fulfilled
which will affect the simulation result. Although farming simulations provide good results
in known environments and parameters, the statistical nature could reduce the dynamicity
needed for exploring how plants react in new and more dynamic environments. Getting
into the cellular level simulations, it should be clearer that these kinds of simulations
allow us to adapt to new and more unknown situations by implementing more physically
correct cell dynamics. Different from the farming simulations, the cellular simulations
generally don’t account for the needs of plants like water, nutrient, and light in order
to grow, but instead, have a constant rate of growth due to the nature of being mostly
academic research. The cellular simulations also seem to focus on a specialized research
topic and do not represent the 3D structure of plant cells needed to model full plants.
It would, therefore, be interesting to see if combining the farming simulations with the
cellular simulations, it would be possible to create a plant model that will create a realistic
model for plant growth in more dynamic environments like those seen in an aeroponics
system.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Plants
In this section, I will describe the basis of vascular plant anatomy required for the sub-
sequent sections. Many of these topics are vast in information and some are still active
research areas for much of the very detailed academic areas of the topics.
Figure 3.1: General plant structure shown through a tomato plant [26]
3.1
The Shoot System
Many plants follow a similar structure as shown in figure 3.1 with some varieties in between
different species. In general, a plant has two systems: A shoot system and a root system.
The shoot- and root system is separated by the ground, meaning that the shoot system
is above ground and the root system is generally beneath the ground. The shoot system
consists of a primary stem which is separated into different sections. Each sections consists
of an internode connected by two nodes at each end. A node is a junction between the
stem and either a secondary stem that has grown out from the primary stem, also known
as a branch or a petiole that holds the leaves. For each node there often exists an axillary
bud that lies dormant until the shoot apex plant has grown enough away from the axillary
bud. The axillary bud may also grow immediately and is dependent on the type of plant.
6
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:15==
The axillary bud has the potential to grow either into a vegetative shoot like a petiole
supporting leafs, or it can grow into reproductive shoots like flowers. The shoot apex is at
the top of the shoot system and is usually made up of a terminal bud, and is the location
where most of the plant cell differentiation happens. [27]
Figure 3.2: The general structure of a simple leaf. 1: Midrib (Primary vein). 2: Secondary
vein. 3: Lamina. 4: Leaf margin 5: Petiole 7: Bud 8: Stem [28]
Leaves are often connected to the petiole and although they are of many different shapes
and sizes, the most general structure of a leaf is shown in figure 3.2. The midrib is going
down the middle of the blade of the leaf where smaller veins runoff from the midrib. This
is where the water and nutrients flow to and from the leaf. Covering the leaf between the
veins is called the lamina. The main function of a leaf is to perform photosynthesis by
capturing sunlight. Leafs also have the ability to evaporate water through the stomata
[27].
The root system has fewer structures compared to the shoot system. Two kinds of root
systems exist: Tap- and fibrous root systems. A taproot is where there is one primary
thicker root where fibrous roots are many similar and thinner roots all originating out of
the primary stem. I will only be considering the root system observed in figure 3.1. The
primary root grows downwards and lateral roots grow outwards from the primary root.
The root contains small hairs that helps capture moisture from the ground. [29]
3.2
Plant Cells
Plant cells are the basic form of life for plants. Plants consist of plant cells stacked together
and they perform all the basic functions that a plant needs to in order to live. Making a
vertical cut and looking through a microscope, as seen in figure 3.3, it is possible to observe
what looks ring-like layers of plant cells. There exist multiple different types of plant cells
at each layer of the plant, with each of the different types of cells having their function.
All the plant cell together forms the plant tissue. Each plant cell has multiple organelles
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
7
==PAGE:16==
that each have their function. One particularly important one is the vacuole organelle
that functions like a water-filled balloon. The vacuole stores both water, nutrients but
also protects the plant cell against waste products. When the vacuole stores water and
gets filled up, it grows and puts pressure on the cell wall and this pressure is called the
turgor pressure.
Figure 3.3: Cross section of a flax stem showing the individual plant cells and their
formation. 1: Pith. 2: Protoxylem. 3: Xylem. 4: Phloem. 5: Sclerenchyma. 6: Cortex.
7: Epidermis [30]
Plant cells are distinct from animal cells by their cell wall. The cell wall is the outside layer
of a plant cell and exists just outside the cell membrane as a form of filtration system. The
cell wall has different characteristics based on the cell type, and together with the vacuole
organelle, is very important for upholding the plant’s rigidity. As the vacuole gets filled
with water it increases the turgor pressure of the plant cell which creates a force against
the cell wall which makes the cell wall rigid. If the plant does not get enough water and
the vacuole in the plant cells starts to loose water, the turgor pressure drops and the cell
wall loses its rigidity and the plant starts wilting, which is easily observed by the plant
starts drooping. Cell walls have pits which are small holes or thin parts of the cell wall
that allows the cell to communicate or exchange fluids with neighboring cells.
The Xylem and Phloem are part of the vascular bundle in vascular plants. These tissues
are responsible for transporting water, nutrients, and photosynthates from photosynthesis
around the plant. These types of tissue are elongated tube-like tissue specially designed
to transport fluids around efficiently. The Xylem is responsible for transporting water
and nutrients from the roots to the stems and leaves. This is done as the cells form an
interconnected system with the tube-like structure, which allows the water and nutrients
to reach all parts of the plant. As water is lost through transpiration and photosynthesis
in the leaves, the xylem is used to re-supply the lost water. The Xylem transportation
defies gravity by transporting water upwards, however, as the plant grows higher this
becomes increasingly difficult. Phloem performs translocation by transporting photosyn-
thates downwards to the parts of the plant that need it. Phloem is, like the Xylem, also a
tube-like tissue that allows fluids to flow more freely with less friction through the plant,
which then deposits the photosynthates to neighboring cells that either need the sugar or
they will transport the sugar through them to other cells that need it.
The outermost layer of plant cells in both the stems, leaves, roots, flowers, fruits, and seeds
8
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:17==
is the epidermis and is often transparent in appearance. Some plants contain one layer
of epidermis plant cells, while other parts of the plant contain several layers of epidermis
cells, like leaves. The epidermis has a special construction and is linked to each other to
strengthen and protect the plant from the external environment such as sunlight, wind,
and moisture.
Plants also consist of ground tissue which can be of three types: Parenchyma, Collenchyma,
and Sclerenchyma. The parenchyma plant tissue is used to fill the plant to give the plant
strength. In plants, the parenchyma is present in multiple places like the cortex, pericycle,
and pith, and is generally the most common tissue in plants. Depending on where in the
plant, the parenchyma cells have different functions: Photosynthesis in leaves, storage in
for example roots, moving material through the plant, and are used to repair the plant if
wounded. They are roughly circular in shape, and remain alive through maturity and are
capable of cell division. Collenchyma tissue is long cells with variable thickened cell walls
which are strongly dependent on the mechanical stress on the plant. This means that if
the plant is exposed to heavy wind, the Collenchyma cell walls are thicker than in plants
that are exposed to light wind. They are primarily for structural support in leaves and
growing tissue, and like the parenchyma, collenchyma is also alive through maturity. The
last of the three ground tissues is the Sclerenchyma which also is a supporting tissue in
plants and is responsible for making the plant hard and stiff. They are dead plant cells
and the cell wall makes up most of the cell [31].
3.3
Cell Division and Growth
Plants grow as the plant cells and nuclei divide and multiply. Through mitosis, which
is the process in the plant cell cycle where a cell replicates or copies itself into two new
nuclei and hereby given the possibility to divide a cell into two identical and functional
cells in which the number of chromosomes is maintained. The cell division is initiated
by a mother cell which divides into two daughter cells. As plants grow this cell cycle is
continually happening throughout the plant’s life and thereby making it possible for the
plant to grow in size. Although cell division happens throughout the life of a plant, plant
cells stop dividing when the cell has reached its final form. Instead, the plant cell goes
into a prolonged period where the plant cell grows in size, differentiate into other types of
cells and mature. Some cells never stop dividing, while others quickly die or mature after
division and it is mostly the type of cell that determines the life of that specific cell.
The plant cells in a leaf usually stop dividing shortly after the leaf is produced by the
plant, and instead increase in size and thereby increase the size of the leaf. Cells in flowers
also die shortly after flowering and for both the leaves and flowers are one the of reasons
that leaves and flowers cannot repair itself and will die shortly after being damaged. As an
example, the plant cells present in the apical meristem at the tip of a stem or a root divide
constantly throughout the life of the plant, and can thereby quickly repair the damage
through continuous cell division in those parts.
The cells located in the tip of both the roots and stems, also known as root- and shoot
apical meristem respectively, divide by mitosis. The cells divide into two daughter cells
approximately half the size of the mother cell. Once the cell has divided into two daughter
cells, those two daughter cells start to grow back into the original size of the mother cell so
that the actual mass is now doubled from before the cell division happened. As the cells
grow they automatically push the meristem upwards if its in the stem or downwards if it
is in the roots. The subapical meristem is located beneath the apical meristem and cell
division still happens here, however certain cells start to elongate and differentiate instead
of dividing, which also pushes the stem upwards and the roots downwards [31].
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.4: Figure showing how a cell goes through its cell cycle by dividing and differenti-
ating. (A) The cell is ready to divide. (B) The cell nucleus divides. (C) The cell divides
and has formed a new cell wall. (D) The cell continues to grow. (E) The upper cell starts
dividing its nucleus again, while the lower differentiates into a fiber (F) The upper cell
has divided and a new cell wall has formed again. (E) The red cells have stopped dividing
and differentiated into fibers, while the blue cells continues to be able to divide. [31]
3.4
Photosynthesis and Nutrient Flow
Photosynthesis is one of the most important processes on earth. It is the process where
plants capture light from the sun and convert the sunlight together with water and carbon
dioxide into oxygen and reduced carbohydrates. The general equation for photosynthesis is
seen in equation 3.1 where six molecules of water and carbon dioxide produce one molecule
of sugar and 6 molecules of oxygen [31].
6H2O + 6CO2 −→C6H12O6 + 6O2
(3.1)
Generally, photosynthesis is focused in the leaves. Leaves contain photosynthetic pigments
that absorb light energy and processes the energy and information into a form that the
plant can use. Chloroplasts are organelles in plant cells commonly found in the leaves, that
captures the light energy and stores the ATP and NADPH compounds that were generated,
and frees the oxygen from water and exude the oxygen. The ATP can provide the energy
and the NAPDH can provide the electrons required to fix the CO2 into carbohydrates.
While sunlight can produce ATP and NADPH, these two compounds can be used to
produce energy molecules to keep the production of energy going, which is called the dark
reaction. However, this means the dark reactions will stop if the plants are out of the light
for too long since they are using up the stored ATP and NADPH from when the plant
was in the light. If the dark reaction uses up all the stored compounds the plant will not
have enough energy to sustain itself and thereby start to die.
Once the photosynthesis has done its part, the plant needs to translocate the photosyn-
thates in the leaves to the rest of the plant. This happens by transporting the converted
carbohydrates through the phloem, and out to mainly the growing parts of the plant.
Phloem transport is multi-directional, meaning they are quite versatile for transporting
the sugar to where it is needed. When a plant is growing the phloem is responsible for
transporting the sugar to the growing parts, but when a plant is dormant the phloem
transports the sugar to the roots, fruits, or similar for storage. Once the photosynthates
leave the phloem to reach parts of the plant that are not directly connected to the phloem
10
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:19==
or its companion cells either through the plant cell or by traversing around the cell wall
for less friction.
Water is transported passively from the root hairs and then transported inwards into the
xylem. Once the water reaches the xylem it will be transported upwards to where it is
needed like the leaves for photosynthesis. The water is transported upwards defying gravity
which can be done in multiple ways: As water is evaporated in the leaves it generates a
negative-pressure making the roots pull water into the xylem and moves the water up.
Another possibility is as the phloem gets filled with photosynthates it can generate a
pressure difference between the phloem and xylem system that creates a negative-pressure
that allows the water to move upwards. The last way that the xylem can transport water
against gravity is when due to high water potential in the roots, the water can by osmosis
move from into the roots from the soil which forces the water towards the leaves by positive
pressure.
3.5
Aeroponics
Aeroponics is a method of growing crops and plants in an air or mist environment without
the use of soil and is considered to be a controlled environment agriculture system. The
plants are placed in small cups that allow the roots to hang in the air and allow the plant
to grow upwards, but the plant is essentially hanging in the air freely. The roots are
sprayed with a nutrient solution by sprayers below the roots. The plants are exposed to
artificial light from the top.
Figure 3.5: Diagram showing the structure of an aeroponics system. The plant roots are
hanging free in the air, and the misters below the roots spray the roots with a nutrient
solution.
Since aeroponics can be done inside and in a controlled environment, it is often possible to
achieve a disease-free environment. Freely hanging roots mean that the roots are exposed
to more oxygen which helps with optimal plant growth. Since the plant is grown in a
medium inside, it is possible to stack the mediums on top of each other creating what
is called vertical farming. This is more space-efficient as you can scale the farm vertical
rather than horizontal [5]. Another upside of growing plants inside is that you are able
to control when and how much water to spray the plant, the nutrient to water mixture,
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
11
==PAGE:20==
how much artificial light and what spectrum of light, and more. This allows the farmer
to optimize the plant growth by giving the plant exactly what it needs at the right times
[32].
Aeroponics does however require a bit more moving parts to get it working properly. The
plant is highly dependent on getting sprayed with water, and if the system malfunctions
the plants can die quickly if it is fixed again. The system has to be very fault-tolerant and
measures have to be made to monitor that the system is spraying correctly. The misters
are also very tiny and the minerals can clog up the sprayers which can lead to the plant
not getting enough water and nutrients. One environmental drawback is that the system
can potentially draw a lot of electrical power to power both the pump and the artificial
lights. This can however be alleviated by using a green sustainable energy source.
With the ability to control variables such as water, nutrients in such a precise manner
is an interesting topic for the simulation plants as it should be possible to find the most
optimal parameters for the plants to grow in an aeroponics system. Not only are you
able to optimize plant growth, plant size and it would also be interesting to see if you can
optimize the power usage by finding a middle ground between plant growth, water, and
power usage. This is however out of the scope for this project.
12
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:21==
4
Design
This section will be about the fundamental ideas and design behind the simulation soft-
ware, which I will go into detail about the implementation of in a later chapter. The
simulation software is an accumulation of the many earlier simulation attempts that were
reviewed in section 2 and will be built upon the ideas, shortcomings, and improvements
outlined in their respective paper.
The main goal of the simulation is to provide a generic and extendable simulation envi-
ronment for plants in a dynamic environment down to a cellular resolution. This would
allow for both experimenting and observing plant-related processes while also providing
the crop yield prediction simulation like the farming simulations described in section 2.
Plants would have to be simulated at a cellular level in order to provide the right amount
of resolution needed for modeling the dynamic environment such as those seen in aeropon-
ics. As discussed in section 3.5, if the plants stop getting the right amount of nutrients,
water, or light they can quickly start to die. The cellular resolution is therefore needed
to model as many of the plant needs, flows and processes as discussed in 3.2, 3.4 and 3.3
without having to rely on too much abstraction and statistical modelling.
However, it is very obvious that describing the full plant growth from start to finish is a
very complicated task that seems to not be fully known and possible at this point. The
original idea of starting with the cellular resolution was that it should be possible to start
with a single cell and model the whole plant from there. This is of course not feasible
at this point for general plant models and not even for specific plant models due to the
complexity needed, as many of the processes are still active research topics needed to be
discovered in full. The simulation software should be able to simulate different types of
plants in very dynamic and controlled environments we must be able to analyze the inner
workings of the plant at a cellular level in order to correctly handle the dynamic changes
like water, photosynthesis and so forth.
With a lot of unknowns in the current state of the art plant modeling and plant biology in
general, the plant simulation software needs to be as generic and abstract as possible so
that it can be used to develop, analyze and research new knowledge observed from real-
world experiments and similar. The most important task of the plant simulation software
is to provide the user, would it be researchers, biologists or anyone who would wish to
experiment with plants in controlled environments, the building blocks to develop simu-
lations to test their work so that they do not have to focus on developing the simulation
runtime or anything other than building their plant model. In other terms, provide the
user with a general plant modeling framework that they can use to discover plant pro-
cesses with a file- and code structure that is easy to navigate, extend and develop upon
to reduce the learning curve for the researchers to be able to test their research with the
plant simulator.
Through an easy and well thought out object-oriented programming model and domain-
driven design, the user should be able to quickly understand the file structure, extend
and be able to use the available tools provided by the plant simulation software to test
their research.
The developer experience should be as easy and fluent as possible to
allow the user to iterate fast, as it is very hard to start working in a framework with a
confusing file structure and a naming scheme that is very hard to figure out what does
what. The simulation software must, therefore, be developed in a well-known language
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
13
==PAGE:22==
that can provide the user with a high-level API with enough functionality so that the user
can focus on their plant model without feeling restricted, but should not have to handle
any low-level simulation complexity if they do not need to.
4.1
The Simulator Platform
To provide as much coverage as possible, the simulator must be built on a framework
such that it can be run on multiple platforms and should not be restricted to a single
platform like Windows. This applies to all the different parts that make up the simulator.
It is computationally expensive to run multiple operations on potentially thousands or
millions of cells that interact and so forth, but this is a necessity in order to have the
detailed simulation level that the cellular level gives. The simulation runtime must be
made so that performance is considered into each operation, but precision is the most
important factor still. Performance increase in computational expensive operations often
involves multi-threading by spreading the load across multiple threads, which has the
potential of speeding up the operation. Multi-threaded applications increase code- and
overall complexity very quickly, which may not be a problem for a computer scientist,
but since this application effectively could be extended and worked on by non-computer
scientists, care have to be taken to make sure that the performance measures taken do not
over complicate the code and still keep the user as performant through something like a
high-level task-based API.
To model real-time plant processes the simulation must be implemented as a continuous
running simulation. The simulator cannot know when the simulation has been completed,
so the simulator must be able to define when to stop simulation so that the user does not
have to be watching the simulator and stop it at the correct simulation cycle. Sometimes
a simulation cycle can be computed too fast and in order to slow down the simulation,
it should also be possible to set the minimum simulation cycle processing time.
This
could also allow the possibility of simulating side by side a real-world experiment and
thereby creating a real-time digital twin to see what is happening inside the real plants
by observing the digital twin in the simulation [33].
With the possibility of implementing detailed and complicated processes performed on
each cell in the plant model, the simulator must first be able to run on a single computer
but a simulation process should also have the ability to be put on a different machine like
a high-performance computer (HPC) and communicate with a service over the network.
Where many other types of computations that are so expensive that they require to run
over a longer period, like complex machine learning models, it is often seen that they
can spread their computational load across multiple machines and then synchronize using
another machine [34]. This would be a great option for complex full plant simulations at
the cellular level. Such a synchronization feature would require too much time to construct
and for the features planned a single multi-threaded machine should be sufficient enough
to perform the simulation at a reasonable time.
4.2
The Cell and Plant Simulation Model
From the simulation overview in section 2, it was clear that the simulator must have
individually addressable plant cells for each part of the plant.
This is needed to get
the realistic models implemented and create the dynamicity needed for the controlled
environment simulations. What many of the simulations described there never addressed
was how their cell implementation was constructed even though they addressed cellular
resolution, and they only had the cells represented in 2-dimensional form. However, for
purpose of a full plant simulation, it is necessary to represent the cell in 3 dimensions to
14
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:23==
also have the height dimension that the other cellular simulation seen in section 2 did not
have. The conceptual model can be split into two parts: The cell model and the plant
part model and together they create the plant.
Formally, the plant cell geometry can be denoted CG where CG is a set containing CG =
{vtop, vbottom, F} where for both vtop and vbottom are vertices in 3-dimensional space in an
euclidean space where vi = [xi, yi, zi]T , and F is a polygon defined as a set of vertices
vi ∈F. For both y in vtop and vbotttom it holds that ytop ≥ybottom, and for both vtop
and vbottom it holds that x ∈vtop ∧x ∈vbottom is equal 1
i
∑i
vi∈F
∑
x∈vi x and it holds that
z ∈vtop ∧z ∈vbottom is equal 1
i
∑i
vi∈F
∑
z∈vi z. This means that the plant cell is defined
by two vertices and a flat polygon, which can be seen in figure 4.1. The two vertices are
defined as highest and lowest point of the plant cell and the x and z are defined by the
average of the all the polygon vertices x and z coordinates respectively.
Top
Bottom
Figure 4.1: 3D representation of a single plant cell as represented in memory during
simulation.
A generalisation of the plant simulation model can be defined formally. Let M denote
a single simulation where M is a set containing one or multiple plants P ∈M where
P = {p | p ∈P} and P ∈M. Each p ∈P can be defined as a graph W = (S, R) where
S is denoted as the plants shoot system and R is denoted as the plants root system. Let
both S and R contain a reference to the primary stem or root defined respectively as a
plant part, so that both S and R can be generalized into SR = (g) where g is a connected
plant part such as a root, leaf, stem or similar. For every plant part gi is a set of plant
cells denoted as C and a directed graph structure to plant parts which are connected to
plant part gi denoted as G. This allows a graph traversal from both S and R through
all the connected plant parts. Let grow (ci) that computes the necessary operations for
primary- or secondary growth on cell ci. Let divide (ci) be a function that performs cell
division of ci into a new set {c0
i , c1
i } which means that we can C ∪divide (ci) to perform
cell division for all ci ∈C ∈gi.
4.3
The Plant Simulation
The plant simulation software must be able to simulate a plant made up of an accumulation
of several plant cells. There exist different plant cell types, which were outlined in section
3.2, and the system must provide the different plant cell building blocks. Each plant cell
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
15
==PAGE:24==
must have different properties respective to the type and placement. This includes the cell
wall properties, organs like the vacuole, turgidity, and geometric properties like size and
shape. The plant cells object should be kept simple and should not have any functional
properties like handling growth or fluid transportation. Operations like growth will be
self-contained implementations.
A plant is made up of a very recognizable and similar structure between plant types, which
can be seen in figure 3.1. Each plant part works as a container for plant cells in order
to tell what plant part each plant cell is part of. The plant structure can be seen as a
graph structure to the connecting plant parts. This graph structure should be able to be
traversed in order to compute operations for the whole plant. Plant parts can but are not
required to contain any information other than the plant cells and the connecting plant
parts, as the plant cells should be the deciding building block of the plant and should
thereby work as the simulation state.
In order to keep the simulation as dynamic and free as possible, each cell must be address-
able, however, the containing data structure that holds the cell data in memory should
not be dependent on an index, sorted, lattice or similar structure so that the simulation
is not limited to algorithms that may require a certain data structure to function. If need
be, the user can keep the cells in a specific order by updating their own data structure
throughout the simulation on the side. However, the basis of the data structure should
always be an unordered index-free cell data structure contained in individual plant parts
to avoid problems like cell sliding with lattice-based cell models [21] [35].
Plants have leaves, however, leaves are a complicated topic of its own and I will therefore
not put too much effort into building a detailed leaf model. Leaves are complicated geo-
metrically and perform a lot of the important processes for a plant such as photosynthesis
and transpiration. This would require too much time to get the leaf operations right that
it would take too much time away from creating a generalized plant simulator. The build-
ing blocks such as cell types and the necessary plant parts for constructing a leaf model
should however be included in the solution but will not be used for any experiments in
this project.
4.4
The External Simulation Environment
Temperature, water, and light are some of the external factors that have an impact on
how a plant grows. These external environmental factors should be retrievable whenever
it is needed by the operational objects so that they can act according to how the external
environment is. Operations like plant cell growth are influenced by the temperature, and
temperature can be different depending on the height and earth temperature. The STICS
model incorporated a more advanced soil and environment model [10], but since this plant
simulator works with plants in very controlled environments, the basic environment model
should simply be able to depict where the light source is located and what the temperature
is. This is because it can be controlled very precisely way and should therefore not fluctuate
unnecessarily. Water and nutrient uptake are not controlled by the external environment
but by physical devices such as mist sprayers, and the simulation does therefore not need
a complicated multi-layer soil model.
Formally, the environment denoted as PE can simple be defined as PE = {tenv, lenv}
where tenv is the temperature, lenv is a vertex in 3-dimensional space like seen in section
5.4.4 describing the placement of the light source like the sun or artificial light which are
used in an aeroponics system.
16
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.2: Figure illustrating the controlled environment with different parameters, the
plant growing and a visualisation of the plant.
The external simulation environment can like everything else in this simulator be changed,
extended, and adapted to the needs of a specific simulation. The base interface should
only contain the above-mentioned temperature and light source but can be extended to
whatever the needs may be.
4.5
Simulation State
The simulator must be able to produce a state that describes the current state of plant
currently running, but also past simulations which have been completed. Otherwise, it
would be hard to quantify how the plant is performing.
Formally, the simulation state abstraction of the plant pi can be defined as a function
state (pi) = psi. It holds that psi is a set containing psi = {SS, RS}, where SS and RS
is the shoot system state and root system state respectively. The distinction is there to
help visualise the plant as both SS and RS are a set of SS = {PP} and RS = {PP}.
PP can be defined as a set PPi = {CO, t}, where CO is a set of vertices described in
two-dimensional space and for each co ∈COi it holds that coi = {x, y}. t is defined as the
thickness of the plant part ppi.
The simulation state can be an abstracted look at the plant, meaning that the simulation
state does not contain every cell but rather combines all of the cells in a plant part and
computes the highest point, lowest point and the thickness of that plant which results in
coordinates which then can be used to visualize the plant. The simulation also contains
some meta-data for the state like the unique simulation ID, date, and the simulation cycle
counter for the particular simulation state.
4.6
Plant Operations
As I mentioned in section 4.3, the plant cells do not contain any logic of their own other
than different properties describing the respective plant cell. Operations could include
things like:
• Plant and Plant Cell Growth
• Plant Cell Division
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
17
==PAGE:26==
• Plant Cell Body System
• Transport System
These operations should be self-contained objects, rather than kept in the logic of the plant
cells, in order to keep logic separated based on the SOLID principle of single-responsibility
principle. Like everything else, these operations should be based on interfaces to keep the
implementations extendable and testable.
Plant growth is directly correlated with each cell growing slowly inside each plant part.
As seen in section 3.3, a cell have both primary- and secondary growth. This growth must
happen based on the external environment, length, age, and plant growing operations must
have access to that kind of information to determine how the cell should grow. When a
cell grows it may push a cell due it its increased size, and these collisions must be handled
and solved by a plant cell body system that moves and resizes cells that collide.
Section 3.4 describes how the phloem and xylem are the primary ways for water and
sucrose to be transported up and down to individual plant cells. To simulate fluid transport
throughout the plant for plant growth or morphology studies, a system must be developed
to handle fluids being transported around the plant from one place to another.
Another important part is that has already been mentioned in section 4.3, is that opera-
tions should not keep any state between the simulation cycles. The plant is all that the
real world has to work with and if the operations would start to keep state other than the
plant data it would in a way start to depreciate the concept of having the individual cells.
This forces the operations to adhere to the real-world physical implementations instead of
leaning to a more the software engineering way.
18
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:27==
5
Implementation
In this chapter, I will describe how each part and function of the simulator is constructed,
how it relates to the design description, why it was implemented this way and I may also
reflect on some of the ups and downsides to how a function has been implemented.
However, this is not a simulation designed solely on discovering cellular processes, meaning
that exact cell shapes, division, and so on will be abstracted at a level to allow full-plant
simulations that allow for the right amount of model accuracy. Continuous evaluation of
the model will be done during development to find the right amount of abstraction.
The simulator should be able to take a configuration as input. The configuration should
allow the user to define the type of plant that the simulator should simulate and also all
of the environmental parameters that the plant will be simulated in. This should allow
for a highly dynamic and configurable simulator that should allow for simulating multiple
types of plants and also allow the user to optimize the growth of the plant.
In order to debug the simulator, a plant visualizer has been developed to be able to connect
to the simulation process. This means that the visualizer reads a simulation state of a
particular simulation cycle and visualize the plant accordingly so that the user can see
how the plant develops throughout the simulation. The plant visualizer is not the main
focus of this project so visualizing the plant with realistic textures, lighting, and so on will
not be implemented. The plant visualizer will mainly be used to debug the simulation, in
order to visually see how the plant is growing which ultimately makes it easier to evaluate
if it is doing the operations I planned.
5.1
Simulation Construction
The simulation environment is modeled in C# 8.0 to allow for easy development using
modern programming practices and techniques. Arguably C++ is a widely-used program-
ming language in the scientific environment due to its arguable performance advantages
[20] [21]. C# is however more adopted in the enterprise world, more developer-friendly
[36], and with the recent development of .Net Core that allows for running the applications
on both Linux, Mac and Windows and even architectures like x86 and ARM [37], it is now
a compelling competitor to Java for multi-platform development, as both C# and Java
provides many of the same features and are very similar in construction and runtime en-
vironment. By utilizing a more developer-friendly language than C++ it would also allow
for easier future development and more community interaction as more people would be
able to contribute to the development and integrate with the simulation environment.
The simulation process would process the configuration and based on this would create
the plant object for simulation. The simulation works as a continuous simulation model
and runs on a step function that constantly runs and updates the model accordingly.
Since the simulation works on a cellular level, each iteration of the step function would
iterate through all the cells and perform the appropriate action. The simulation will not
terminate unless told so, as the simulation can not tell when the plant is fully grown.
5.2
Development Process
The development of the plant simulation was done using an adapted version of SCRUM.
SCRUM involves daily meetings, weekly and monthly meetings in order to get the team on
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
19
==PAGE:28==
board with the progress and alignment [38]. However, since I was developing the simulation
alone I did not need to coordinate as much and I, therefore, adapted the SCRUM process
to only include the sprint planning and execution.
After researching and identifying the parts that I needed to make the simulation work, I
started to plan the development process. Since I had about 4 months of development time
I split the time into 4 sprints: The data model, development of cells, flow and growth, and
user usability.
The first sprint included defining the data model and creating the simulation runtime
program. Creating the data model was about defining the interfaces and data objects
to store the information regarding each plant cell so that the simulation runtime can
efficiently process the data. It also required thinking of a data structure that allowed for
easy future change i.e. if additional data for a cell was needed or if the way that the
cell dimensions needed to be changed. As discussed above, the easiest way to debug the
plant simulation is by visualizing the plant as it grows. This needs to be developed as well
but since we have the data model defined, the last step in this sprint is to develop the
application that visualizes the plants based on the data model.
Once the data model, simulation runtime, and visualizer have been developed, it is then
time to develop some of the processes that make plants grow that was discussed in section
3.3 i.e. cell division and cell expansion. Many of these processes are an active research
subject, as seen in section 2, and seems to be quite difficult to get right, and I have
therefore planned this as a single sprint. Utilizing the data model defined in the earlier
sprint, this should allow the plant to grow at a constant rate as the earlier cellular plant
simulations in section 2.
After being able to grow and divide cells at a constant rate, it is now time to be able to
let them grow based on the environmental parameters so that we can start to optimize
plant growth in aeroponics. For this to happen, the nutrient, water, and light needs should
be modeled so that each cell grows based on what the plant needs at a certain point in
time. The last sprint would then be to make it easier for me and other users to utilize
the simulator for optimizing their types of plants that they want to grow in an aeroponics
system.
Figure 5.1: Screenshot from the planning software that shows part of the tasks for the
first sprint.
After all 4 sprints have been completed, the product should be a simulator that can take
a plant model based on a configuration and simulate how the plant will grow based on the
provided configuration. As seen in figure 5.1, the sprints were planned with a hierarchical
20
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:29==
task board that uses the hierarchies: Epics, features, user stories, and tasks to plan the
development. This provided me with an improved overview of what tasks I needed to
complete the full project.
As the development progresses tasks will be displayed based on the current sprint and I
can move them from column to column in a board as the state of the task evolves. Code
will be stored using a git repository, and when code is pushed to the git repository, the
related tasks can be linked to the commit so that everything is connected and it is easy to
see what and where changes are made. Again, many of these features are great if you are
a team but it still helps single development teams like me to get a structured development
flow so that I and the project stay organized and on track.
5.3
Simulation Software Structure
In this section, I will describe how the simulation software is structured, how it is im-
plemented, and why. As mentioned earlier, the simulation has been developed mainly in
C# which allows for putting multiple projects into a single solution file. I have chosen to
split up the software into multiple parts to keep each part light-weight by implementing
a microservice architecture with the dependency inversion principle [39] by applying a
hexagonal domain-driven structure [40] [41] to each microservice. Figure 5.2 shows the
different projects under the simulation solution. This does make integration, development,
and debugging a little bit more complicated since it is not a single service that needs to
communicate with itself, but now needs to talk to external services through adaptors over
a socket. This also comes with some benefits that I will touch on when we get to the
discussion of each part.
Plant Visualiser
Plant Simulator
Service
Plant Simulator
Plant Simulator Client
Plant Simulator
Plant Simulator Client
Plant Simulator
Plant Simulator Client
Memory
Memory
Memory
gRPC Protobuf
HTTP
...
Figure 5.2: Overview of the different system components. The system components are in
squares while their communication protocol is written on top of the arrows.
As seen in figure 5.2 the system is composed of mainly 3 parts: The Plant Simulator
processes, Plant Simulator Service, and the Plant Visualiser. You could argue that this
structure is over complicating the simulation setup, however for such complicated processes
it is a good idea to be able to visualize the progress, and being able to simulate multiple
models simultaneously can increase prototype efficiency for longer running processes. If
the user wanted to utilize high-performance computing (HPC) it would be easier to put
a Plant Simulator Client with the Plant Simulator process on an HPC and let the HPC
communicate back to a server on a separate computer. This way the HPC would not
waste resources on hosting the web server, Plant Simulator Service, and can solely focus
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
21
==PAGE:30==
on the simulation. This does give the user some flexibility on how they want to use the
simulation software by trading in some setup and runtime complexity.
5.4
Plant Simulator
The Plant Simulator is the Plant Simulator project and the Plant Simulator Client project
combined. The reason for the separation is that I wanted to keep the Plant Simulator
adaptor free and only focus on running and computing the simulation. The simulation is
the main focus of this project and to maintain the well-organized file structure described
earlier, it would be much easier to keep all the files related to the actual simulation part
in one project and then keep the adaptor in a separate project. If someone were to extend
the simulation, this would be the project that they would change or extend. It is hard
to just dive into a project and try to find the structure of how it is put together and I,
therefore, chose to make it two projects.
Somethings have been planned to be extended from other projects like the interface ISim-
ulatorEventHandler which the SimulationRuntimeBroker contains a reference to.
The
ISimulatorEventHandler is an interface designed to handle the different events that happen
throughout a simulation like a state transmission event. The transmitting of a simulation
state is technology and adapter dependent which means that the interface is contained
in the Plant Simulator project to able to reference it, but is implemented in the Plant
Simulator Client project. The Plant Simulator Client project is created to handle the
gRPC calls, like start simulation from the Plant Simulator Service.
5.4.1
Process Lifetime
When the Plant Simulator clients start-up they send a request to the Plant Simulator
Service to tell the service that it is ready to get start a simulation. It can be seen from
The SimulationServerHost, which implements the IHostedService interface from the .Net
Core MVC framework, that it hooks into the life cycle of the application.
When the
application starts the SimulationServerHost executes the StartAsync method and calls the
SayHello service, which can be seen in listing 5.15, using the SimulationClientServiceClient
class which is generated by the protobuf compiler bundled with the gRPC package. The
sequence of actions can be seen in figure 5.3b and how the Plant Simulator Service stores
the Plant Simulator address so that it can be used for simulations requested by the user.
Plant Simulator
Client
Plant Simulator
Client
Plant Simulator
Service
Plant Simulator
Service
Client Storage
Client Storage
SayHello(ip)
Generate Id
Store(hostIp, id)
Send back Id
(a) SayHello sequence
Plant Simulator
Client
Plant Simulator
Client
Plant Simulator
Service
Plant Simulator
Service
Client Storage
Client Storage
SayGoodbye(id)
Remove(id)
(b) SayGoodBye sequence
Figure 5.3: Sequence diagram shows a client going online and offline by sending the
respective message to the Plant Simulator Service
22
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:31==
The SimulationServerHost executes the StopAsync method when the application is stopped
gracefully, and this will send the SayGoodBye message to the Plant Simulator Service, to
tell it that the Plant Simulator process can no longer be used for simulation purposes.
The whole process has been tested by simply starting up the different projects and making
sure that they are communicating and storing the correct information. System-testing a
distributed system can be difficult and is not the main focus of this project.
5.4.2
Simulation Runtime
The simulation runtime is the part of the Plant Simulator that runs the continuous sim-
ulation model. As seen from figure 5.4, the whole sequence of actions from starting a
simulation is done by the incoming message received from the gRPC SimulationServerSer-
vice. This incoming message would most likely be from the Plant Simulator Service that
was told to start a simulation by the Plant Visualiser, and the received message con-
tains the SimululationConfiguration which is the simulation options or configuration. The
simulation options are the options that a particular user has configured to start the sim-
ulation. The interface IRuntimeBroker is implemented as a singleton service injected into
the gRPC service SimulationServerService. So, when the SimulationServerService received
the StartSimulation message, it tells the IRuntimeBroker to start a simulation with this
configuration. It can also be observed from figure 5.4 that the SimulationServerService
passes a CancellationToken to the IRuntimeBroker.
There are two ways of handling concurrency in the .Net Core framework: The Thread
class and the Task-based asynchronous pattern. I have chosen to rely on the .Net Core
framework and utilize the task pattern which is a way of expressing asynchronous oper-
ations in C# that is run on a Thread-Pool managed by the .Net Core runtime, and the
CancellationToken class is greatly used in the task pattern to notify an asynchronous task
that the action should be stopped whenever possible.
SimulationServerService
SimulationServerService
IRuntimeBroker
IRuntimeBroker
ISimulator
ISimulator
ISimulatorEventHandler
ISimulatorEventHandler
ISimulator Task
ISimulator Task
IPlantRunner
IPlantRunner
IPlantGrower
IPlantGrower
IPlantPartDeveloper
IPlantPartDeveloper
IPlantPartDevelopment<TPlantPart>
IPlantPartDevelopment<TPlantPart>
ICellGrower
ICellGrower
StartSimulation(SimulationConfiguration)
StartSimulationAsync(PlantSimulationOptions, CancellationToken)
StartAsync(CancellationToken)
Action()
loop
[true]
Tick(SimulationStateSnapshot)
GrowPlant(IPlant, SimulationStateSnapshot)
Develop(IPlantPart, SimulationStateSnapshot)
Develop(TPlantPart, SimulationStateSnapshot)
GrowCell(IPlantCell, IPlantPart, SimulationStateSnapshot)
alt
[should send state]
OnSimulationTick(object, PlantSimulatorTickEvent)
TransmitState(SimulationState)
StoreState(SimulationState)
[CancellationToken.IsCancellationRequested]
Figure 5.4: Sequence diagram showing the sequence of actions that happens when the user
starts a simulation with the current implementation.
The IRuntimeBroker starts up a new instance of an implementation of ISimulator, which
is in located the PlantSimulator project. As seen in the class diagram in appendix A.4,
the implementation of the IRuntimeBroker holds an instance of the PlantSimulator and
the Task object that references the continuous simulation Task operation that the Plant
Simulator StartAsync method returns. What this all produces is that the IRuntimeBroker
lives for the entire application lifetime as a .Net Core MVC hosted service, and when
initiated to start a new simulation with a specific set of options, it will start the ISimulation
implementation and makes sure that everything is set up correctly with the options, event
handling and so on. Therefore, ISimulation represents a specific simulation instance while
the Plant Simulator is a long-lived process that can simulate multiple simulations, however
not more than one at a time.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
23
==PAGE:32==
The simulation instance is an implementation of the interface ISimulation, which means
that this can be implemented by whatever the specific research requires. However, for this
project, the implementation of ISimulation is PlantSimulator that runs the continuous
simulation model. This is done inside a while true loop, and it can be seen in figure 5.4,
it does the following actions in a sequence for each simulation tick:
1. Is CancellationToken canceled, then stop the simulation
2. Should skip this simulation cycle due to time, then skip and go to the first step again
3. Perform the simulation cycle
4. Is it time to transmit state, then invoke the TickEvent to trigger state the transmis-
sion
5. Increment tick counter
6. Store DateTime for current simulation tick
The simulation cycle runs the whole plant growth sequence, which can be seen from figure
5.4, where the ISimulation Task calls the IPlantRunner which then calls the IPlantGrower
and for both the shoot and root systems it goes through each cell and performs actions
for that cell respectively. An alternative to having multiple interfaces is to have either
the ISimulation implementation handle the growth or having a single interface handle all
of the plant growth. There are so many scenarios for how each plant cell, plant part, or
something else is going to grow and react based on different environments, and having
multiple interfaces handling each part of the growth process gives the flexibility to control
how the plant, plant part, and cells grow and react.
The IPlantRunner may seem like an unnecessary step as it does not at first glance provide
any logic other than calling IPlantGrower. However, the IPlantRunner is a step before the
simulation cycle is started so that the simulation can make any changes to the external
environment as an example or something else before the plant grows. This also implies to
after a plant has grown to maybe clean up some cached data or something else. It is there
simply to provide some flexibility to the simulation runtime.
5.4.3
Plant and Plant Cell Data Model
As seen in section 4.2, a plant is defined by its shoot and root system. The shoot system
has one stem and the root system has one primary root.
The root system has many
similarities to the shoot system, however, the root system does not have the nodes and
internodes so a root has an array of connected nodes. This is different from a stem in that
it is connected to an internode which in turn is connected to a lower node and an upper
node. A node is connected to an upper- and lower internode and an array of petioles.
A petiole is connected to the node and has an array of leaves connected to it. Common
for both the root- and shoot system organs is that they all inherit from the IPlantPart
interface that has an array of plant cells and an array containing a reference to the other
plant organs connected to the current plant organ.
24
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.5: Figure illustrating the directed graph for both the shoot- and root system.
Each arrow represents a reference in the graph. For the shoot system each plant part is
connected by a reference to its upper connected parts. The root has a primary root from
which the lateral roots are connected to.
The plant part is implemented as the interface IPlantPart which can be seen in listing
5.1. The plant part has an Cells property that contains all the cells C for plant part gi.
The directed graph G for gi can be seen in the property Connections as an enumerable of
plant parts connected to it above. An abstract implementation of the IPlantPart interface
can be seen in appendix A.10 where the Cells and Connections have been completed
with a backing field implemented as List<T> type fields.
Although an array may be
more performant when iterating over [42], as the plant grows there may be added new
connections or cells through cell division which makes a list more appropriate, as it can
increase in size without having to manually copy memory to cope with the increase in
array size.
Listing 5.1: IPlantPart interface
1
public interface IPlantPart
2
{
3
/// <summary >
4
/// Get the branch counter for which this plant part is part of
5
/// </summary >
6
public int BranchCount { get; }
7
/// <summary >
8
/// Property describing what this plant part is
9
/// </summary >
10
public PlantPartType PartType { get; }
11
/// <summary >
12
/// Get all the plant cells
13
/// </summary >
14
public IEnumerable <IPlantCell > Cells { get; }
15
/// <summary >
16
/// Get the <see cref="IPlantPart"/> that this <see cref="
IPlantPart"/> is connected to
17
/// </summary >
18
public IEnumerable <IPlantPart > Connections { get; }
19
}
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
25
==PAGE:34==
The PartType is defined as an enum that describes the plant part types such as stem, root,
petiole, node, leaf, or internode. This allows for quick identification of the plant part type
without having to use reflection. The plant part also has a BranchCount property which
is used to identify which branch this plant part is part of. The concept can be seen in
figure 5.6 where it can seen that the BranchCount is incremented for each time a branch
is created. The BranchCount counter can be used for contextual growth like if the plant
is only allowed to have a certain branching feature, the branching plant development can
stop if this counter is above a set value.
1
1
0
1
2
3
0
0
0
Figure 5.6: Branch count displayed accordingly for each plant part
The plant data model definition says that as an example the petiole to have a lower- and
upper node that would fit into the Connection list. Utilizing the object-oriented structure
Internode implements the abstract PlantPart implementation, which can be seen in listing
5.2. It is known from the plant data model definition that an internode has a reference
to the upper node and lower node which can be seen in the Internode class. This means
that a PlantPart has both the Connection graph and direct references to the individual
connections. A method that has IPlantPart as its parameter would not be able to address
the upper- or lower node directly, but through typecasting or reflection this could be
possible for improved usability.
Listing 5.2: PlantPart implementation for Internode (Omitted methods code for brevity)
1
public abstract class Internode : PlantPart
2
{
3
public override PlantPartType PartType { get; }
4
5
private Node upperNode;
6
7
public Node UpperNode
8
{
9
get => upperNode;
10
set
11
{
12
upperNode = value;
13
Connections = new[] { upperNode };
14
}
15
}
16
17
public Node LowerNode { get; set; }
18
}
Each plant cell can be addressed individually and a plant cell, as described in section 3.2,
26
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:35==
are of different types with their own functions in the plant. This means that each plant
cell is simulated as separate objects in memory with properties like cell type, geometry,
neighbors, cell wall properties, vacuole, turgor pressure, and a property defining whether
the plant cell is dead. This way each cell can update its properties during simulation
cycles, and based on both the geometry data and for example turgor pressure they can
be visualized for debugging purposes or if the cellular simulation resolution needs to be
enhanced for morphology studies or something similar.
Listing 5.3: Plant Cell Interface
1
public interface IPlantCell
2
{
3
public object Synchronizer { get; }
4
5
public PlantCellType CellType { get; }
6
7
public ICellGeometry Geometry { get; }
8
9
public ICellWall CellWall { get; }
10
11
public IVacuole Vacuole { get; }
12
13
public float Turgidity { get; }
14
15
public StarchStorage StarchStorage { get; }
16
17
public bool IsDead { get; }
18
19
public void Kill();
20
}
The formal definition of the general data model is the main idea behind the data model
which can be seen from 4.2, and it is from this definition that the implementation is
developed. The actual interface is defined in listing 5.3 where can seen that each cell
has multiple properties that can be used by the simulator. The data model for the plant
simulation is kept simple to keep it easy to maintain and extend in the future if it is
needed. The interface IPlantCell is implemented in an abstract class named PlantCell
which is then inherited by the different plant cell types like XylemCell, PhloemCell and
so on. A great thing about C# properties is that they can be defined in interfaces and
expose them as what seems like read-only fields to the API consumer. The abstract class
PlantCell implements the properties Turgidity and also implements the method Kill() that
simply sets the IsDead property to true.
The final class structure of the data model implementation can be seen in appendix A.6
and A.7.
5.4.4
Plant Cell Geometry Representation
Plants are made up of plant cells and the amount of cells and the cell shapes is what
defines the plant morphology. This means that if the simulator is at a cellular resolution
it is necessary to somehow define what each cell looks like to understand what the plant
looks like. However, it is not completely understood how cell shapes form [43] and therefore
I have chosen to simplify the cell geometry. This can however be extended in the future if
the focus would be on exact morphology that needs an exact representation of the plant.
As discussed in section 3.2, it is hard to find an exact representation of the different types
of plant cells in a 3D representation, as they are often shown as either at a direct vertical
or horizontal cut. The simplification is done by having two vertices defined in a 3D space
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
27
==PAGE:36==
that respectively represent the top- and bottom middle of the cell. The cell face can be
defined by a set of vertices which is extruded flat along with a line descriptor. The line
descriptor is defined for this project by a linear spline defined by the two bottom and top
center points.
Listing 5.4: ICellGeometry and IFace Interface
1
public interface ICellGeometry
2
{
3
public Vector3 TopCenter { get; set; }
4
5
public Vector3 BottomCenter { get; set; }
6
7
public IFace Face { get; }
8
}
9
10
public interface IFace
11
{
12
public Vector2[] Points { get; set; }
13
}
The coordinate system is angled from what can be seen in figure 5.7, where the x coordinate
is the width, y is the height and z is the depth. Figure 4.1 shows the flat polygon face F,
and at the top where vtop is the center point of the plant cell while the same face is at the
bottom of the plant cell with the same F representation only with the center point being
vbottom.
X
Z
Y
Figure 5.7: The plant vertex coordinate system showing that X is width, Y is the height
and Z is the depth.
I started implementing the vertices as an interface called IVertex, with the implementation
as Vertex which would be a simple data holder object with the X, Y and Z coordinates
inside. This was done, as I wanted to discover the idea of having a centralized storage
of vertices that could have a O (1). The storage would then as an example be used to
28
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:37==
check whether a point is on a specific cell in order to check for collisions, neighboring
cells, and so on. The .Net Core framework already has structs for points and vectors,
like Vector3 and Vector2 that contains storage for X, Y, and Z coordinates while also
containing helper methods for common vector operations like distance, arithmetic and so
forth. However, since structs are a value type and interfaces are a reference type, the
IVertex implementation would, therefore, have the benefit of being able to be changed
from a different place in the simulation and the update would be reflected in both the
centralized vertex storage and other places where that specific vertex would be referenced.
This would have been a complicated setup to ensure correct data throughout the system
if the centralized vertex storage would have used structs as you simply can not change the
X value of a struct in a class and let the change be reflected automatically throughout
the system due to it being a value type. The Reference keyword ref could have been
used to get the value type reference through method signatures, however, this is not the
intended way of using value types in C# and I do not believe this to be an elegant solution.
Since the centralized storage would require a lot of memory and resources to keep up to
date as the cells grow, I chose not to go with the centralized storage solution and instead
created the interface ICellGeometry, which can be seen in appendix A.4, that contains a
3-dimensional vector for vtop and vbottom as the bottom and top points while having an
interface IFace as a holder for the array of vertices for describing the face F of a cell. This
means that each cell holds its own information about its geometric properties so that in
order to find neighboring cell you would have to iterate through all the cells in a plant
part g to figure which cells are neighboring the cell, rather than having a centralized table
that keeps track of this.
5.4.5
Cell Growth and Division
As the plant grows the cells that make up each plant part elongate, widen, or divide. As
the cells grow in either way the plant gets larger with it and this is the basis for the plant
growth in the simulator. It is the accumulation of all the cells that define the shape and
size of the plant. This means that there exist two operations for general growth: Growth
and division.
Plant cell growth is defined in the interface ICellGrowth which can be seen in listing 5.5.
The way that the shoot cells and root cells grow is different in that the shoot cells grow
towards light and root cells grow downwards. Therefore I have split up the logic involving
cell growth into those two parts: Shoot- and root growth. Most of the growth is done in
the shoot apical meristems which means that if the ICellGrower needs to determine if a
cell should grow it needs to know some context and that is why the IPlantPart for which
the IPlantCell that is passed with the function is part of. The SimulationStateSnapshot
is a snapshot of the current simulation state containing the simulation cycle counter if the
ICellGrower would need such information to determine growth. Roots do not have cell
growth in the shoot apical meristem but instead at the root apical meristem. The concept
is much the same and the ICellGrower does need some context provided by the method
signature in order to determine whether the cell should grow.
Listing 5.5: ICellGrower interface
1
public interface ICellGrower
2
{
3
public void GrowShootCell(IPlantCell cell, IPlantPart plantPart
, SimulationStateSnapshot state);
4
public void GrowRootCell(IPlantCell cell, IPlantPart plantPart ,
SimulationStateSnapshot state);
5
}
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
29
==PAGE:38==
There exists two implementations of the ICellGrower interface: GenericCellGrower and
FluidsGenericCellGrower which has been built for two different purposes. The Generic-
CellGrower is built for generic constant growth and the FluidsGenericCellGrower is built
to test the transport system that will be discussed later in section 5.4.8. The way that
plants grow is quite complex and I have found it is not plausible to model the cell growth
in time for the project deadline. Therefore, I present two basic models that show the
ability of the plant simulator to handle cell growth. The first GenericCellGrower model
is a model that applies a growth-factor defined in the simulation options. This then leads
to growth and based on the BranchCount property, that was seen in section 5.4.3, the
direction of the growth is affected to reflect the outwards branching features of plants.
The second implementation FluidsGenericCellGrower extends the GenericCellGrower and
overrides the DetermineGrowthFactor method which can be seen in listing 5.6. Here we
see that instead of simply retrieving the growth factor from the simulation options, it is
multiplied by the energy stored through the transport system, which will be discussed in
detail in section 5.4.8, by the growth factor. What this means for cell growth is that the
growth factor does not determine how much the plant growths directly, but how much of
a factor each amount of energy has on growth.
Listing 5.6: FluidsGenericCellGrower overrides DetermineGrowthFactor from Generic-
CellGrower
1
protected override Vector3 DetermineGrowthFactor(IPlantCell cell,
SimulationStateSnapshot snapshot)
2
{
3
float range = Options.Plant.GrowthRange.RandomNumberBetween();
4
5
float energy = cell.StarchStorage.Amount;
6
7
// We use all the energy so reduce it to 0 so that it does not
accumulate
8
cell.StarchStorage.Amount = 0;
9
10
float y = range * energy;
11
12
return new Vector3(y, y, 1);
13
}
The plant geometry was defined in section 5.4.4 where it was shown that the plant cell was
defined by a top- and bottom point. As a cell grows the top point for the shoot system
and bottom point for the root system is moved based on the DetermineGrowthFactor in
the GenericCellGrower and the FluidsGenericCellGrower implementations.
As a cell grows it will reach a certain threshold where it will start to divide [31]. The
threshold that determines when a cell divide is still an active research topic, and most
of the previous simulations have also implemented a threshold for when the cell should
divide [20] [21]. Some simulations have also been developed solely around researching cell
division [44]. It is a complicated topic and I did not have time enough to experiment to get
a model that resembled any of the models from other simulation software. The interface for
all cell division implementations can be seen in listing 5.7, which contains two methods:
One for determining if the threshold is reached for a given cell and then the logic for
actually dividing the provided cell. As with the ICellGrower, the implementation provides
some context information in the form of the IPlantPart and SimulationStateSnapshot for
determining if the plant cell should divide. The SimulationStateSnapshot should not be
needed for the cell division logic in the Divide method, but could be dependent on the
30
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:39==
neighboring cells [15] where then the IPlantPart is needed to provide that information.
Listing 5.7: ICellDivider interface
1
public interface ICellDivider
2
{
3
bool ShouldDivide(IPlantCell cell, IPlantPart plantPart ,
SimulationStateSnapshot state);
4
IPlantCell[] Divide(IPlantCell cell, IPlantPart plantPart);
5
}
As it was hard to find information on how the dimensions of a cell in 3 dimensions were,
it is was hard to find information on how the cell is divided in 3 dimensions. The simple
implementation of the ICellDivider interface is the GenericCellDivider that takes a plant
cell and simply splits it in half, as seen in figure 5.8. Many of the cellular simulation
software has a top-down view of the cells in 2 dimensions, which would correspond to
what I defined in section 5.4.4 to be the cell face. This would not correspond to any
height growth in the plant, meaning that the only plant growth in height would be from
cell elongation and not from dividing cells.
Cell
Division
Figure 5.8: Cell division happens when a certain threshold is reached and halves the cell
5.4.6
Plant Growth
Decisions are made during the growth process to determine whether or not the plant
should develop new plant parts. Maybe a new node or a new branch should be made at
some point. These decisions are based on cellular activities and gene functions in each cell
[31]. However, these processes are very advanced and for this project, I have chosen to rely
on the plant simulator settings defined by the user to determine how the plant outcome
should be. The plant development decision logic is done by implementing the IPlantPart-
Developer interface that is then called by the GenericPlantGrower implementation of the
IPlantGrower interface which was discussed in section 5.4. The implementation of the
IPlantPartDeveloper is the PlantPartDeveloper, and even though I wrote that I would
not use reflection and rely solely on the object-oriented features, this is the only place
where reflection has been used. In order to provide the implementations of IPlantPart-
Development with enough information, I have to check the actual type of the provided
IPlantPart given to the Develop method in the IPlantPartDeveloper interface in order to
pass it to the correct implementation of IPlantPartDevelopment. As discussed in section
5.4.3, the PlantPart implementations like Internode has references to both the upper- and
lower node which is be beneficial information for the IPlantPartDevelopment<Internode>
implementation to know. This could for example be to test whether the height of the
internode corresponds to when it should create a new upper node, but it should of course
not create one if it already has one.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
31
==PAGE:40==
Listing 5.8: IPlantPartDeveloper and IPlantPartDevelopment interfaces
1
public interface IPlantPartDeveloper
2
{
3
public void Develop(IPlantPart plantPart ,
SimulationStateSnapshot snapshot);
4
}
5
6
public interface IPlantPartDevelopment <in T> where T : IPlantPart
7
{
8
public void Develop(T plantPart , SimulationStateSnapshot
snapshot);
9
}
This solution is a way of getting around the fact that I do not know how plants exactly
decide when to for example create a new branching stem or new leaves. This approach
does still allow for separation of logic for each type of plant part, as the model may get
more complex it would be obvious that a single class for all types of plant parts would get
too long and thereby violate the SOLID design principles.
As an example, the implementation of the IPlantPartDevelopment for internode develop-
ment has a very simple control flow that can be seen in listing 5.9. Here it can be seen
that it first determines whether this internode should grow, which is controlled by if this
internode is the most upper internode on the plant. The reason for this is as I described
in section 3.3 and section 5.4.5 that plants mainly grow in the apical meristem. Also, it
provides some logic to determine if this internode is at a length that makes it possible it
creates an upper node. There exist two ways for an internode to create a new upper node:
Simulation cycle count and length which both can be defined in the simulation options
by the user. This provides a clean and simple way to provide logic for each type of plant
part and its development.
Listing 5.9: InternodePartDevelopment Develop method implementation
1
public void Develop(Internode internode , SimulationStateSnapshot
snapshot)
2
{
3
var description = plantDescriptorService.Describe(internode ,
true);
4
5
if (ShouldGrow(internode , description))
6
{
7
GrowInternode(internode , snapshot);
8
}
9
10
if (ShouldAddNewNode(internode , snapshot , description.Height))
11
{
12
internode.UpperNode = CreateNewUpperNode(internode ,
description);
13
}
14
}
To help determine the logic of the plant part development, it can be seen in listing 5.9
that a helper class is used to describe the physical properties of the provided plant part.
These properties are used for example to determine the height, width, lowest point, or the
highest point of the described plant part.
32
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:41==
5.4.7
Plant Cell Body System
As the plant grows each cell must be in the correct place adhering to the correct physical
properties of the world. There are physical limitations that describe that plant cells can
not overlap each other, and if one cell grows it moves other cells in the plant. Such systems
are usually called rigid body systems or a physics engine in a game engine. These systems
work by a body in the system reacts to the physical environment such as gravity, collision,
and so forth. Such a system is required in the plant simulation to move the plant cells if
they collide during growth or movement. It is not as simple as just moving out of the way
if they collide. I have mentioned rigid body systems, however, plant cells can be rigid but
this is not always the case. As described in section 3.2, one of the distinct features of a
plant cell compared to an animal cell is the cell wall. Depending on the specific cell wall
and its properties, the plant cell has some form of rigidity but not all plant cells have a
rigid cell wall. Together with the cell wall, plant cells also have the vacuole organ which
stores water and puts pressure on the cell wall, called turgor pressure, that also determines
the rigidity of the plant cell.
Each plant part can potentially have a very high number of plant cells and constantly
detecting collisions for each plant cell can be computationally expensive. Great care must
be taken to perform collision detection and performing the appropriate adjustments to
solve the collision. Collisions can happen when a cell grows either in width or in height,
and this means that the plant cell body system must then check if a plant cell collides in
height or width and repair the colliding cells accordingly. These operations happen in the
real world intuitively as plant cells can not be inside one another, however, in computer
simulations collisions can and will happen if they are not caught and dealt with.
This means that the plant cell body system must solve the following: Let C be a set of
plant cells, and let collide (ci, c′
i) be a Boolean function that takes two distinct cell ci ∈C,
c′
i ∈C and ci ̸= c′
i and tests for collision between ci and c′
i. Let resize (ci, c′
i) be a function
that changes cell ci so that ¬collide (ci, c′
i). This means that the plant cell body system
ensures that ∀(ci ∈C ∧c′
i ∈C ∧ci ̸= c′
i) →¬collide (ci, c′
i).
A
B
(a) Plant cell A collides with plant cell B
B
A
(b) Plant cell A does not collide with plant cell B
but does coincide
Figure 5.9: Showing how plant cells can collide in both height and width/depth.
Another part of cellular tissue is that neighboring cells can communicate and exchange
fluids.
As described earlier, I have opted for an index-free cell container so it is not
possible to check what cells are neighboring simply by index or any other form of ordered
cell structure. Since the Plant Cell Body System is already capable of making geometrical
analysis to detect collisions, the same system can be used to check whether two plant cells
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
33
==PAGE:42==
have any coinciding cell walls. If they have coinciding cell walls means that the two cells
are neighboring and can communicate with each other, however for simplicity sake this can
also be relaxed to be any cells that have coinciding walls or are colliding. The relaxation
can be done if the collision repair happens after the simulation cycle and not after cell
growth or movement, because if the neighbor relaxation is not made and two neighboring
cells then collide after cell growth then they are not neighboring anymore. This is simply
to give more fine-grained control over how precise the analysis needs to be. This means
that both cell in figure 5.9a and figure 5.9b can be neighboring cells depending on the
relaxation method.
As described in section 5.4.4, a cell is described geometrically by two points defining the
height and center of a cell, and also by an array of 3-dimensional points fixed on a 2-
dimensional place describing the face structure. These two things combined create an
extruded polygon shape, where the polygon face is defined by the 2-dimensional points
and the extrusion height is defined by the two center points. The extruded polygon shape
can be seen in figure 5.9. This simplification of the plant cell physical structure means
that in order to detect a collision, we can simply check if for face F in cell ci that there
is no vertex vi ∈F that is inside the face F ′ for cell c′
i. This Point in Polygon problem
can be solved efficiently by computing whether each point vi ∈F is colliding with F ′. If
the face F is colliding with F ′ then we can check whether the top or bottom points of ci
collide with the bottom and top points of cell c′
i respectively. If the cell ci and c′
i do collide
then appropriate steps must be taken to repair the collision.
A
B
(a) Face of cell A seen from above colliding
with the face of cell B
A
B
(b) Face of cell A seen from above does not collide
with the face of cell B
Figure 5.10: Showing how plant cells can collide in both height and width/depth.
If there is a height collision then it is rather easy to simply push the colliding cell up or
down according to what the specific collision requires. However, if the face collides with
another face then it gets more complicated. We assume that the face of a cell is a polygon,
and as seen on figure 5.10a cell A and B collide with two points. Let FaceCollision(v, F)
be a function that takes a vertex v and a face F and computes if point v is in face F. As
described in section 5.4.4, the face is a set of vertices and for each colliding point vi ∈F
such that ∃vi ∈F →FaceCollision(vi, F ′) then we compute the closest point to vi so
that ¬FaceCollision(vi, F ′). The vertex vi that collided is then replaced with the new
vertex denoted v∗i that does not collide and the whole face is shifted with −−→
viv∗
i = (vi −v∗
i ).
This can be seen in figure 5.11a.
34
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:43==
B
A
(a) The face of cell A collides with the face of cell
B. The red arrows shows the face shift and the
red circles depicts the closest points.
B
A
(b) After reshape cell A is moved outside of
cell B
Figure 5.11: An illustration of how the colliding face of cell A is reshaped to repair the
collision.
Figure 5.10b shows cell A and cell B not colliding even though they are up against each
other meaning that cells are allowed to have face vertex pairs coincident lines.
This
example shows how cell A and B are neighboring cells if and only if the height of the cells
are overlapping like it is also shown in figure 5.9b or another similar variation of this.
The implementation can be seen in appendix A.9. The interface ICellBodySystemSolver
and the implementation GenericCellBodySystemSolver has the method Solve that takes an
IPlantPlart and makes sure that no cell collides with each other in the provided IPlantPart.
If cells do collide then the GenericCellBodySystemSolver has an implementation of the
interface ICellSizer that takes two cells and can resize the width and the height separately.
Different growing interfaces like IPlantRunner and ICellGrower which have already been
discussed in section 5.4.2, know whether a cell has grown in width or simply just height.
Therefore, I have chosen to split the width and height resizing into two methods for
efficiency purposes. A plant or plant part may reach a terminal width where it does not
increase anymore, and since the collision solving part of resizing is the most expensive of
the two it would be beneficial if it could be skipped if it was not needed. This gives more
fine-grained control if it is needed but does add more complexity since the software needs
to keep track of how a specific cell has grown. As it can also be seen in appendix A.9
is that a helper class have been created called IGeometryHelper and the implementation
GeometryHelper.
A helper class or helper methods are usually implemented as static
methods, as an example with the Vector2 and Vector3, however, I have chosen to keep
its interface and instance-based to keep adhering to the domain-driven design principles
and maintaining the testability of the helper methods. The IGeometryHelper helps the
collision detection and cell resizer to test things like whether a point is on a line segment,
if lines intersect, a point inside a polygon, and so forth.
A big part of efficient collision detection is ruling out candidates that does not have a
chance of colliding, so that time can be spent on detecting accurate collisions for those
that have a chance of colliding [45] [46]. Since I know the height of all cells I can efficiently
check whether a cell have a risk of colliding with another cell based on the height of the
cells. If the highest point of a cell can be defined as ytop and the lowest point be ybottom,
then more precisely a cell has the possibility of colliding with another if the following holds
true:
(
ytop < y′
top ∧ytop > y′
bottom
)
∨
(
ybottom > y′
bottom ∧ybottom < y′
top
)
(5.1)
And if it holds, then further investigation can be performed. This rules most plant cells
out immediately and each point in the face does therefore not have to be checked against
each face of other cells. The ICellCollisionDetection interface and the implementation
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
35
==PAGE:44==
CellCollisionDetection is also responsible for getting the neighboring cells of a cell. A
neighboring cell is a neighbor if equation 5.1 holds true and if a point is on a line of a
plant cell face like it can be seen in figure 5.10b. Neighbor detection can be relaxed to
also include points that collide inside another face like it can be seen in figure 5.10a, if the
collision detection is reduced to only being done after the tick and not between each cell
growth step. The plant cell interface IPlantCell had a neighbor property that contained
the neighboring plant cells, in the beginning, however since cells are not static and can
glide away from each other depending on how they grow, the static neighbor property was
not sufficient. An alternative could be to have the neighbor property be a method instead,
but this would require the method to either take an instance of a ICellCollisionDetection
to help return the neighboring cells, or each cell would have to contain a reference to
ICellCollisionDetection which would seem strange compared to the other stored things
and is inefficient from a memory usage standpoint. The neighbor detection is therefore
kept in the ICellCollisionDetection implementation and can be requested as a dependency
by the different plant runners and growers through dependency injection.
5.4.8
Transport System
Plants transport water, nutrients, hormones, and is critical for a plant to function and
grow. As seen in section 3.3 how, when, and why substances are transported throughout
the plant is very dependent on the respective type of system and whether it is water,
sucrose or maybe plant hormone systems like auxin. These are complicated processes as
there are a lot of different factors that influence how the cells transport fluids, energy,
or something else and is still an active research subject on how cells request different
substances.
Providing the infrastructure to perform transport can be seen in many ways whether you
look solely on cell-to-cell transport or you look at the plant as a big system that works
together as a whole. Although these two things may account for the same function, I
believe how they are implemented in code can be very different. If you look at the cell-
to-cell implementation, each cell has a set of properties, like what can be seen in section
5.4.3, and based on these properties they may exchange information, water or similar to
each other. Focusing on the intercellular communication and how molecules are moved
from one cell to another through their membranes or cell walls, can be quite difficult as the
transport system is often affected by external effects like light [47] or maybe contextual
based on where in the plant this cell is located in the meristem [48]. This means that
there can be some factors that determine whether or not to transport sugar from one
cell to another other than those present in the cell. However, you could argue for that if
all the functions that occur through osmosis, water potential and photosynthesis would
be implemented in an accurate enough way that the cell-to-cell implementation would be
a viable method, but until these methods are fully understood and generalized between
plant species then it will prove a difficult implementation.
Each cell has a set of needs that needs to filled for the plant to stay upright, grow, and so
forth, and the process of how each cell communicates and requests is an example through
a series of signaling mechanics [49]. These signaling mechanics can be a sort of pain reac-
tion to tissue damage [50] or a sucrose need signal through the cell proteins [51]. Instead
of having a specialized system for each transport system for a specific need or signaling
scheme, I have opted for a more generalized transportation implementation that by utiliz-
ing generics is transport type agnostic. The system works by having three general terms:
Transporter, Carrier, and Fluid. Transporter contains the logic for the transportation of
a carrier with a specific amount of fluid from a starting cell to a destination cell. In other
terms, a carrier contains a specific amount of fluid that is transported to a specific cell to
36
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:45==
fulfill a certain need of that cell. These needs can, for example, be requested by a specific
cell because it needs energy, water or it may be from the roots taking up water and the
water needs to go to the leaves for photosynthesis, transpiration, or to maintain turgidity
in the plant by maintaining turgor pressure in the cells. The movement of these carriers
throughout the plant is kept in a collection of currently active carriers that is mapped
to the destination cell for constant O (1) lookup to see if it has reached its destination.
For each simulation cycle, this collection of carriers is iterated over and is then used to
transport fluids around the plant cells respectively.
Listing 5.10: FluidCarrier implementation (Constructor method left out for brevity)
1
public class FluidCarrier <TFluid > : IFluidCarrier <TFluid > where
TFluid : IFluid
2
{
3
public IPlantCell Destination { get; }
4
5
public IPlantCell Current { get; set; }
6
7
public IPlantCell ClosestTransportCell { get; }
8
9
private readonly PlantCellType transportType;
10
11
public bool IsInTransportCell => Current.CellType ==
transportType;
12
13
public TFluid Fluid { get; }
14
}
The direct implementation of the carrier can be seen in listing 5.10, where we see that a
carrier is an object keeping track of a certain fluid, which may be water, energy or similar,
and the start and endpoint. This means that the start and endpoint are determined at
the beginning which may be a disadvantage if the purpose of what to model an only
cell-to-cell transport system. However, I have opted for a simpler approach that takes a
certain simulation cycle, and cells can then request based on its needs and then the carrier
flows through the plant to the requesting cell. As the carrier is instantiated its starting
position will be set in the Current property, and while being transported through the
plant its Current placement is changed between the simulation cycles until it reaches its
Destination cell.
It can be seen that the carrier also contains a reference to the closest transport cell, which
type of transport cell, and also whether the current carrier is inside a transport cell. As
seen in section 3.3 most fluids like water and sugar flows through either the xylem or
phloem, therefore a carrier is given the closest transport cell of a specific type from its
starting point upon initialization. This closest transport cell is mostly used as a cache so
that the transporter does not have to keep finding the closest transport cell each simulation
cycle in order to find the next cell during pathfinding.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.12: Transported carrier from one blue cell to another blue cell through the phloem
(Red cells)
Pathfinding is generally a 3 step process: Finding the way to closest transport cells, moving
up or down the transport cells, and then move towards the destination. This process can
be seen in figure 5.12 where a carrier is initialized in the lower blue cell and must move
through the red cells up to the other blue cell above. The first step is started by identifying
the closest transport cell which is done by computing the euclidean distance from the
start cell to all cells of type transportType. Once the ClosestTransportCell has been found,
the transporter will minimize the distance from Current to the ClosestTransportCell by
computing the distance from each of the neighboring cells and the neighboring cell with the
minimum distance from Current is then chosen as the next move. This is repeated until
the carrier has reached the ClosestTransportCell, and once inside a transport cell it will
then move up or down respectively until it has reached the same height as the destination
cell. The same process from the first step is then repeated by minimizing the distance
from Current to Destination until Current is equal to Destination. The transport process
can be seen in listing 5.11, where the control flow is that if it has reached its destination
it returns true, otherwise it first checks if it is inside a transport cell otherwise it finds the
nearest cell towards its goal.
There are some scenarios where this process differs. If the starting cell is neighboring
the destination cell and if the starting cell is part of a different plant part than the
destination cell. The first scenario when Current and Destination is neighboring, it is
caught by the GetClosestCellTowards as it checks if a neighboring cell is equal to the
Destination and short circuits the search. The second scenario requires a bit more work.
The implementation of the plant data model is that a plant part works as a container for
an array of plant cells, and it can be seen in listing 5.11 that the MoveCarrier method is
given a IPlantPart which it retrieves the plant cells from, and it is these cells that it uses
for transportation. However, it could be the case that the destination cell is in a plant
part above the given plant part and therefore can not see the cells of the plant part above.
38
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:47==
If this is the case, then the FluidTransporter traverses the plant part Connection graph G
until it finds an appropriate cell in the connected plant part to move the carrier to.
Listing 5.11: Transporting Carrier Sample Code
1
protected bool MoveCarrier(IFluidCarrier <TFluid > carrier ,
IPlantPart part)
2
{
3
// Get all the cells in the current plant part
4
var cells = part.Cells;
5
// The current carrier placement
6
var current = carrier.Current;
7
// The next current cell
8
IPlantCell next;
9
// If the carrier is at the destination
10
if (carrier.Current.Geometry.TopCenter.Equals(carrier.
Destination.Geometry.TopCenter))
11
{
12
// We have reached the destination so we return true
13
return true;
14
}
15
// If the carrier is in a transport cell, it must move up or
down
16
if (carrier.IsInTransportCell)
17
{
18
next = MoveUpOrDown(carrier , part);
19
}
20
// If the carrier is not in a transport cell then it must move
towards a transport cell
21
// or the destination based on the height of the current
placement
22
else
23
{
24
// Get the neighbors for the current carrier placement
25
var neighbors = GetNeighboringCells(current , cells);
26
// Find the closest cell
27
next = GetClosestCellTowards(carrier , neighbors);
28
}
29
// If we have found a next cell then set the carrier current to
the new cell
30
if (next != null) carrier.Current = next;
31
// We have not found the destination therefore false
32
return false;
33
}
The way the transport system is implemented is in many ways a simplification of the actual
transport system present in plants. A transport regulated by the presence of proteins [51]
or cell wall signaling pathways [48] would be a more true to life implementation, however,
this would again take too long to implement correctly. Therefore, I chose to implement
the more simple implementation seen here that more than anything else proves how the
data model, described in section 5.4.3, is sufficient to perform basic transport analysis
throughout the plant, and also it provides the user with some basic infrastructure on
which to extend a more realistic process implementation.
5.4.9
Plant Environment
The plant exists in an environment that can influence how the plant grows. The plant
growing interfaces, like the IPlantGrower, ICellGrower and so on all have access to the
plant environment and can use the environment as a factor on what to do in a specific
growth scenario. The plant environment is implemented as a singleton, and in order to
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
39
==PAGE:48==
retrieve the plant environment object, a class has to request it through the dependency
injection container and store the reference in a field or property. The implementation can
be seen in listing 5.12, where it can be seen that the environment is just a simple data
holder object.
Listing 5.12: SimulationEnvironment class
1
public class SimulationEnvironment
2
{
3
public IVertex LightPosition { get; set; }
4
5
public float Temperature { get; set; }
6
}
The environment could be made more complex with temperature difference based on
height, temperature individually for the shoot- and root system and so no. However, I
have chosen to keep it very simple as an aeroponics system would be able to make sure
that there is a constant temperature in height so that that the environment model does
not have to be so complicated. The light source is implemented as a single point in space
which most often in closed control systems would be right on top of the plant. If the model
would be a simulation of outside, this would be the sun placement but this would require
the sun moved across the sky to be modeled correctly as well. One could experiment
with the distance from the light source to the plant to experiment if a light source was
closer or further from the plant makes a difference. However, this would probably have
to implement some sort of ray tracing from the light source and I have not had the time
such a feature.
5.4.10
Simulation Options
As mentioned in earlier sections, the simulation options are a vital part of determining
how the plant grows. This includes things like branching count and growth factor. When
the plant simulator receives the options from the plant simulator service over gRPC, the
IRuntimeBroker initiates a new instance of the plant simulator and starts it. Many of
the operations require the simulation options and can request them through dependency
injection, meaning that they would store a reference that potentially would be changed
as a new simulation is started, and the options referenced would be out of date for the
current running simulation.
Listing 5.13: IPlantSimulatorOptionsService interface
1
public interface IPlantSimulatorOptionsService
2
{
3
/// <summary >
4
/// Get the current options set by the plant simulator runtime.
5
/// </summary >
6
public IPlantSimulatorOptions Options { get; set; }
7
}
Instead of requesting the options object directly through dependency injection, the prob-
lem is solved by requesting the interface IPlantSimulatorOptionsService instead which
holds a reference to the current valid IPlantSimulatorOptions. Once a simulation is started
by the IRuntimeBroker, as seen in figure 5.14, it can be seen in listing 5.14 that the Options
property in IPlantSimulatorOptionsService is set to the value of the received options.
Listing 5.14: StartSimulationAsync method in SimulationRuntimeBroker class that starts
a new simulation. Some code has been left out for brevity.
40
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:49==
1
public Task StartSimulationAsync(PlantSimulationOptions options ,
CancellationToken cancellationToken)
2
{
3
...
4
5
// Set the random seed from the options
6
RangeExtensions.Random = new Random(options.Simulation.
RandomSeed);
7
8
// Set the options service options to the received options
9
optionsService.Options = options;
10
11
...
12
}
It can also be seen in listing 5.14 that the options include a seed for randomness, and
this is also set into the static Random field in the RangeExtension. This is done in order
to keep the randomness under control so that simulation results can be repeated across
different runs but still apply some randomness to how the plant grows during simulation.
5.4.11
Simulation State
As mentioned before, the simulation state is a snapshot of what the plant looks like at the
current state in time. The simulation state is an abstracted look at the plant, meaning
that the simulation state does not contain every cell but rather combines all of the cells in
a plant part and computes the highest point, lowest point and the thickness of that plant
which results in coordinates which then can be used to draw the plant in something like
the Plant Visualiser. The simulation also contains some metadata for the state like the
unique simulation ID, date, and the simulation tick time.
What this means is that the abstracted plant description contains an array of PlantN-
odeModel for both the shoot system and the root system, much like the original plant
definition found in section 5.4.3. However, the difference lies in that PlantNodeModel
contains an array of two-dimensional vertices that describes the line of the respective
plant part, while also describing the thickness. I wanted to keep the graph connection
structure from the data model seen in section 5.4.3. However, for more advanced plants
that contain a lot of root- and shoot structures, the nested arrays when serialized into for
example JSON would result in thrown exceptions when trying to deserialize or serialize
as the program would think it had a faulty or repeating data structure due to the very
nested nature of the data model. The conclusion to this problem was instead to have a
flat array that contained each plant part with no context to what part it was connected
to other than the data defined above. Although the flattening gives the plant visualizer
less data about the plant it was important to make the serializers work.
I have chosen to create this abstraction in order to keep the state more lightweight. If the
simulation were to save the full plant cell data each time, the data transfer would contain
much more data and probably more data than is useful while also giving much more
responsibility for the Plant Visualiser to know the actual plant structure. The memory
usage of an increasing amount of plant cells in memory can be seen in figure 5.13, where
we see that an amount of 250.000 plant cells takes up ~180 MB of memory which could
potentially be transmitted over the network each simulation cycle. The memory usage
could be reduced by only transmitting the cellular geometric data but then what if you
also want to see the concentration of water in cells. What to send over the network in
the state is hard to decide at this point, as I do not know what data is needed, and the
abstraction level explained above allows the visualizer to just draw lines based on the
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
41
==PAGE:50==
vertices created by the Plant Simulator making it much simpler to grasp how the plant
looks like during and after simulation. The implementation can be seen in appendix A.8.
However, if the use case were to require that the full plant cell data was transmitted, it
would require small changes in the data format which is sent by the Plant Simulator State
to accommodate those changes. Testing should ultimately determine if sending all the cell
data over the network would affect performance, however, for this project it will be kept
to the high abstract level for simplicity reasons.
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Cell Count
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Memory Usage (MB)
Figure 5.13: Memory usage for an increasing amount of plant cells
If the visualizer would be able to visualize individual cells it would also require a more
complicated visualizer. With the 2 dimensional cellular simulations, all the cells exist on
the same layer. With the 3 dimensional implementations for this project, you would have
to make a cross-section cut of the plant at a certain height to determine what cells are
located at that exact height. This would be a very informative feature when trying to
debug, research and analyze fluid flow or similar features as you would be able to dive
into what the cells are doing exactly, but the implementation would have to require a lot
more work to accommodate this.
5.5
Plant Simulator Service
In order to handle multiple Plant Simulation processes while also having a way to com-
municate with the Plant Visualiser, I have chosen to add the Plant Simulator Service.
This was done mainly to separate the Plant Simulator adaptor that communicates with
the Plant Visualiser, handle multiple Plant Simulation processes and to make it easier to
iterate as fewer services would have to be restarted between each iteration. This separa-
tion also makes it easier to maintain each part because it separates concern. The Plant
Simulator Service will work as an intermediate step, which in turn gives more choice on
the communication protocol for communicating with the Plant Simulation processes that
are more efficient than HTTP like sockets or a Remote Procedure Call (RPC) protocol.
The Plant Simulator Service has also been developed with C# and the .Net Core frame-
42
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:51==
work. The .Net Core framework comes with a built-in Model View Controller (MVC)
framework that has built in dependency injection and allows mapping multiple commu-
nications protocols to multiple controllers. The dependency injection works by defining
the lifetime of each service with its implemented interface as the key. The lifetime can
be either transient, scoped or singleton where most of the services implemented here is
defined as a singleton since the services do not keep any state and it helps for memory
efficiency, performance. The dependencies are then resolved through the class constructor
of the class that depends on them.
Since the .Net Core MVC framework supports multiple communications protocols, it is
possible for the Plant Simulator Service to both handle the HTTP requests to the Plant
Visualiser and also communicate with the Plant Simulator Processes over a more efficient
protocol. There exists multiple protocols however for this project I have chosen to use the
gRPC framework. The gRPC framework is a high-performance RPC framework developed
by Google that have a lot of features like authentication, bi-directional streaming support,
strong-typed and much more. It works by defining the services and messages in the Google
developed Protocol Buffers which then will be used to automatically compile into generated
service stubs and data access objects. For services on the server, it generates an abstract
Controller like class which can be extended for overriding each of the functions defined in
the Protocol Buffer service. For calling a gRPC service from a client, the Protocol Buffer
also automatically compiles a generated Client stub that can be used to call the server.
The service can be mapped in the .Net Core MVC framework so that the requests made
to the gRPC service is routed to the correct class. This makes it easy to implement a
high-performance strong-typed RPC connected services with automatic code generation.
However, having multiple services with multiple Protocol Buffer means that each project
must have a copy of the Protocol Buffer files in order to generate the necessary files. Since
each defined message generates a data access object and by adherering to the hexagonal
domain-driven architecture, these data access objects must be copied to a data access
object that is not the generated one. This creates a lot of repetitive code to keep the
separation of concern.
5.5.1
HTTP Controllers
To communicate with the Plant Visualiser, I have utilized the .Net Core MVC framework
to develop two controllers: SimulationController and ClientController. The Simulation-
Controller is responsible for retrieving Simulation data and starting a new simulation
while the ClientController is responsible for retrieving data about the connected clients
and stop a simulation process at a specific client. As it can be seen from appendix A.3,
both controller classes inherits from the ControllerBase class which is a .Net Core MVC
class that tells the framework that this is a controller and helps with formatting the re-
sponse to a JSON format automatically, which can be easily read and converted by the
Plant Visualiser. All controller actions returns an IActionResult which is also a .Net Core
MVC interface for all HTTP controllers that helps format the response correctly with the
correct response code and so on. The controllers utilize attribute routing, so that each
controller action is mapped with the appropriate HTTP request verb. See table 5.1 and
5.2 for details on each defined controller action.
Name
Verb
Path
Description
GetClients
GET
api/client
Get connected clients
StopSimulation
POST
api/client/{id}/stop
Stop a running simulation
Table 5.1: ClientController Actions and their details
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
43
==PAGE:52==
Name
Verb
Path
Description
GetRunSimulations
GET
api/simulation
Get All Simulations Overview
GetRunSimulation
GET
api/simulation/{id}
Get Single Simulation With
More Detail
DeleteRunSimulation
DELETE
api/simulation/{id}
Delete A Single Simulation
StartSimulation
POST
api/simulation/start
Start A Simulation With The
Provided Options
Table 5.2: SimulationController Actions and their details
As part of the domain-driven design, all logic has been pulled out of the controllers and
been put into a context class. As it can be seen in appendix A.3, both ClientController
and SimulationController has their respective context class which is the only method call
in each controller action. This gives clean controllers and it would be easy to change to
another technology if for example browsers were to natively support gRPC in the future,
the HTTP controllers would easily be changed to gRPC services since the logic is inside
the context classes.
5.5.2
gRPC Services
As I have mentioned earlier, I have chosen to use gRPC to communicate between the Plant
Simulator and Plant Simulator Service. It works by defining the services in .proto files
which are located in the /Simulations/Protos folder. The Plant Simulator Service imple-
ments the Server Part of SimulationClientService defined in simulation_client.proto and
as shown in appendix A.3 the class SimulationClientService extends SimulationClientSer-
viceBase which is the base abstract class generated by the protobuf compiler that contains
the methods defined in listing 5.15 which can be extended into a controller structure like
the one seen with the HTTP controllers. As with the HTTP controllers, the gRPC ser-
vices uses a context class to perform the logic on each method call to keep the service logic
and service adapter separated. And although gRPC supports streaming, I have chosen
to only use unary RPC calls for simplicity. Streaming could have been an option for the
TransmitState, as the Plant Simulator is continually during simulation transmitting its
current state to the Plant Simulator Service. However, since it is not advised to trans-
mit the state every simulation state change, this should not be happening in an interval
that would make it beneficial enough to keep the connection open and stream the states
compared to sending them singularly.
An alternative to using gRPC and would adhere more to decoupled micro service structure
would be an asynchronous messaging system like Apache Kafka or RabbitMQ. However,
this would add another service, configuration and more for the user to handle which I
did not feel was worth the extra complexity at this point. The asynchronous messaging
system would however fit well into such an application, as the Plant Simulator processes
could publish the state on a SimulationState topic for example which the Plant Simulator
Service would listen on and store the state based on the message. Each Plant Simulator
process could also listen on a topic. The asynchronous messaging system could eliminate
the need for SayHello and SayGoodBye message, as the Plant Simulator Service would
not have to keep track of the available clients in the same way.
Listing 5.15: SimulationClientService protobuf definition. Message types have been omit-
ted for brevity.
1
service SimulationClientService {
2
rpc TransmitState (SimulationState) returns (
SimulationStateResponse);
44
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:53==
3
rpc SayHello (ServerHelloRequest) returns (ServerHelloResponse)
;
4
rpc SayGoodBye (ServerGoodByeRequest) returns (
ServerGoodByeResponse);
5
}
As it can be seen from listing 5.15, the service definition using protobuf is very simple
and looks like normal code. The generated class SimulationClientServiceClient that is
generated by the protobuf compiler can also be seen as a dependency to GrpcSimulation-
EventHandler in appendix A.4. The fact that everything is defined by both the client
and server projects means that it is easy to get an overview of what the server can do
and what it needs to send or receive. Combined with the code generation and automatic
de-serialization and serialization of the sent data makes it very simple to use a gRPC
server.
5.5.3
State Storage
When a running simulation on a Plant Simulator process transmits its current simulation
state over gRPC, the message is received by the SimulationClientService service which
can be seen in listing 5.15. The state received will contain the unique simulation id given
by the Plant Simulator Service when the simulation was started, how many cycles the
simulation has done and then the abstracted plant state. This state will then be stored
on the host computer of Plant Simulator Service in a JSON encoded file format. This is
done to ensure a stable and well supported data format across different platforms, and it
is also human readable which can be helpful in some debugging scenarios. The files are
stored with the filenames ”{simulation_id}_{tick_count}.json” so that when a Plant
Visualiser requests the states for a specific simulation, the Plant Simulator Service will
search for all the files with that idea and create a a JSON object that maps the tick count
to the simulation state at that tick count.
The implementation can be seen in appendix A.3 where the SimulationFileStorage imple-
ments the interface ISimulationStorage which contains all the actions involving storing,
retrieving and deleting simulation states. I have chosen to do the storage file based for
simplicity. An alternative to files could be a database structure, however this would again
require a new service for the user to run and maintain. This would of course have some
scalability improves and maybe also performance but the complexity added was not worth
it. An implementation of the ISimulationStorage could of course just be implemented
as a DatabaseSimulationStorage or something to similar to accommodate the database
storage.
5.5.4
Simulation Client
As Plant Simulators comes online and sends the SayHello the clients are stored in memory
in a dictionary that maps from the unique id, given by the Plant Simulator Service which
can be seen in figure 5.3b to the simulation client reference. The simulation client contains
information like the unique id, availability, host IP address and methods to start and stop
simulation on that client. The actual implementation can be seen in appendix A.3. Like
the State Storage it is also possible to store the client information in a database, however
this gives the same complexity about adding a new service and so on. Keeping them in a
dictionary in memory is the easiest and fastest solution.
5.5.5
Starting a Simulation
When the Plant Visualiser calls the StartSimulation in the HTTP SimulationController,
the Plant Simulator Service searches for an available Plant Simulation client. If found,
then the Plant Simulator Service sends the received simulation configuration to the found
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
45
==PAGE:54==
Plant Simulator client through the StartSimulation method in the found Plant Simulator
Client. This will send a gRPC request to the Plant Simulator to start the simulation.
Figure 5.14 shows the sequence of actions that it takes to start the simulation from the
Plant Visualiser request. The actual Plant Simulator action sequence can be seen in figure
5.4.
Plant Visualiser
Plant Visualiser
Plant Simulator
Service
Plant Simulator
Service
Client Storage
Client Storage
Plant Simulator
Client
Plant Simulator
Client
Plant Simulator
Plant Simulator
StartSimulation(SimulationConﬁguration)
GetAvailableClients()
Return Available Clients
StartSimulation(SimulationConﬁguration)
StartSimulation(SimulationConﬁguration)
Start(SimulationConﬁguration)
Figure 5.14: Start simulation sequence diagram
46
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:55==
5.6
Plant Visualiser
The plant visualiser is a simple web application built with the Angular JavaScript frame-
work that makes it easy to develop web applications with reusable components, depen-
dency injection and an easy to use API. I have chosen to build other my services in C#
and there is currently no C# framework for building user interface applications with the
.Net Core framework for cross platform compatibility, which makes a web application an
obvious choice to build the user interface to display and control the plant simulation.
However, since a web application is limited to displaying interfaces and all communication
must be made over a HTTP connection to retrieve data and so on, the plant simulator
service, that I will describe in section 5.5, is needed in order to store, retrieve and start
simulations.
Figure 5.15: Front page of the visualiser showing an overview of past run or currently
running simulation.
The Plant Visualiser shows current and past simulations by retrieving them from the Plant
Simulator Service. The user can then dive into the individual simulations and show the
simulation replay. The simulation replay comes from the Plant Simulator Service in an
abstract data format, that I will describe in detail later in section 5.4.3. The abstract data
format is simply a graph structure with two-dimensional coordinates (X, Y) and thickness
in order to draw the plant for both the shoot- and root system. Since drawing graphics is
very format, platform and technology dependent, I have chosen the abstract data format
and then let the visualiser convert the abstract data format to whatever format it can
draw the plant in.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.16: Detailed view of a simulation where a user can scroll through the states of a
past run or currently running simulation
Since it is built with JavaScript in the browser there are two options for drawing two-
dimensional graphics: SVG and a Canvas. I believe that SVG has an easy to use API and
I do like that the elements exists in the Document Object Model (DOM), rather than just
in memory that the canvas will do, and if the visualiser would be extended in the future to
interact with the drawing it is easy to locate the different elements through the DOM. This
could for example be for displaying different properties for each plant part or something
similar. Performance could degrade if the visualiser is trying to draw a complicated plant
part, because it all has to exist in the DOM where the Canvas may be faster in this case.
It has been seen that the browser will start to run slower with above 300 plants parts.
This performance problem is however browser dependent as performance is better in some
browsers than others.
It is also possible to start a simulation from the plant visualiser. By navigating the left
side menu, you will be able to start a simulation. By clicking start the plant visualiser
will send the request to the Plant Simulator Service which will choose an available client
and send the simulation options to the available client. Once the client has started the
simulation, it is possible to view the simulation progress by clicking the newly started
simulation from the front page simulations overview.
The last feature of the plant visualiser is getting a list of currently connected clients, and
see their current status. If a server is currently running a simulation, you can stop the
simulation from here. I will not go into further details about the Plant Visualiser due to
this being a rather small part of the project.
48
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.17: Client overview page showing the available or unavailable clients
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
49
==PAGE:58==
6
Results
This section will include the test results from verifying the implemented simulator and
model. The most important objective when building a simulator is to verify that your
simulation model reflects reality. Plant modeling can in many ways easily be tested by
observing how plants grow or maybe how they react to certain environments. In the case
of a controlled environment like aeroponics, you can try different types of light spectrum,
intervals, or maybe different nutrients and then write the data points that may be inter-
esting. The data points may be different from applications such as height or fruit output
but as already discussed, these data points may take a long time to get due to the time it
takes for a plant react maturity.
The main verification of the implemented simulator is to make sure that the cell data
model works as expected. This not only includes that the cells growing leads to total
plant growth but also testing whether the whole concept of an unordered array of plant
cells is a viable solution for analyzing the interactions between the cells like inter-cellular
fluid flow. The 3-dimensional data structure of the cells that accumulated creates a plant
which is not something that is well documented before, as seen in section 2, and it is
therefore interesting to discover the possibilities that this system can bring, and more
importantly to discover the limitations of the system.
6.1
Maize Plant Data
In order to test the simulation model, I must first have a real-world model to compare
it against. There exist many ways of determining the growth of a plant and for maize
plants, this could be leaf area index (LAI) [52], weight or height [53]. Although height is
hard to measure precisely it is the only measure that I have at this point in my simulator,
because I have not implemented any form of meaningful leaf model and I am not capable
of weighing the plants at this point. Therefore, I have chosen to compare my simulation
model against a time-lapse of a growing maize plant [54]. The maize plant is growing next
to a ruler from which the height of the plant can be inferred from, and together with the
height, I have also chosen to count the number of leaves and nodes as the plant grows.
This means that the simulation model will be tested against the height of the real plant
but also the actual structure of the plant. Screenshots from the time-lapse video can be
seen in figure 6.1.
Inferring the data from a video does potentially create the risk of a greater error in the
data. However, you could argue that it not necessary to get this plant data completely
accurate since there are so many variables, randomness, and genes that play a part in the
actual result of plant growth. So I believe it is more about getting the concept of how that
specific plant grows and learning what the plant looks like at different stages in its life.
The video is therefore great at learning about how the maize plant looks during its life
and even shows multiple maize plants grown under similar circumstances with different
results. Another reason for choosing the maize plant is that it is a rather simple plant
that grows upwards and is a great starting point for testing the cellular data model, as it
does not complicate the growing process with outwards branching.
50
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:59==
Day
Length (inch)
Length (cm)
Nodes
Leafs
0
0
0
0
0
5
1,5
3,81
0
1
10
3
7,62
2
2
15
4,5
11,43
2
3
20
6
15,24
3
3
25
8
20,32
3
4
35
12
30,48
4
5
40
19
48,26
4
6
45
23
58,42
5
7
50
28
71,12
5
9
55
34
86,36
6
10
Table 6.1: Maize plant data observed from the time-lapse video [54]
(a) Day 5 of the time-lapse
(b) Day 15 of the time-lapse
(c) Day 35 of the time-lapse
(d) Day 50 of the time-lapse
Figure 6.1: Screenshots from the time-lapse video showing the state of the plant of the
day specified in the lower left corner [54]
By observing the top of the plant, excluding the terminal bud and leaves, the height
is observed from the ruler stuck into the ground in the video. For each horizontal leaf
collection on the stem, I count a node and I count each leaf observed below the top. The
result of these observations can be seen in table 6.1. The table includes data for every five
days until day 55. I have inferred the height in inches from the video and converted those
to centimeters, node count, and leaf count. As the plant grew larger it became harder
to observe the actual height of the plant, leaf, and node count and the data error does
increase as the plant grows higher. However, it is again not about the exact measurements.
The data provides a good baseline from which it is possible to determine if the simulation
model can produce a result that is close to the time-lapse data. Another way of observing
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
51
==PAGE:60==
if the simulation model is producing a similar result is to compare the simulation model
to the well-defined stages on the maize plant used by farmers [55], and the data observed
in table 6.1 seems to follow the same concepts as those stages.
I have chosen to stop the simulation after 55 days as it was too hard to observe the correct
height at this point, and the plant would start to go into its reproductive stage where it
wouldn’t grow in height anymore but instead start the fruit development of the actual
maize plant. This should also be the case according to the maize development stages [55],
and modeling fruit development is out of scope for this project.
6.2
Constant Growth Experiment
As the first experiment, I have chosen to model the plant growth at a constant rate. As
seen in section 5.4.5, the simulation options contain the ability to define the growth factor
and this growth factor is added to a specific set of cells in the plant at each simulation
cycle.
As an internode reaches a certain height, defined in the simulation options, it
produces a new upper node that produces a new set of leaves. The amount of leaves that
is created by a node is also defined in the simulation options. As a new node is created,
an internode is added to the top of the new node which will function as the new top of
the plant.
I have made much emphasis on that the simulation model and implementation should be
very extendable and adaptable to any situation. This is shown by how the simulation cycle
is adapted to account for one hour so that for every 24 simulation cycles a day has passed
in the simulation model. This could be any number but 1 hour for each simulation cycle
seems appropriate for this type of experiment due to the lack of information between each
day of the time-lapse data. The simulation options have then been adapted to work by
an hour instead, but if you would want to increase the resolution by for example making
each simulation cycle a second then the options would need to be adapted accordingly.
As the maize plant grows, the growth rate increases as the plant get maturer. To ac-
commodate this increase in growth rate over time, a time factor has been added to the
growth rate. The growth rate can be seen in equation 6.1, where growth is the growth
rate equal to the rate of growth, defined by the simulation options, plus the time factor.
The cycle is the current simulation cycle count which is multiplied by a low constant. It
is divided by 24 as the simulation cycle is defined to be an hour in simulation time as
shown above. The growth is done inside the GenericCellGrower implementation of the
ICellGrower interface.
growthconstant = rate + cycle · 0.0013
24
(6.1)
55 days is 1320 hours so the simulator is set to stop after 1320 simulation cycles. Every
new node can create one or two leaves, and an internode considers to make a new upper
node when it reaches a height between 7 cm and 8 cm. The growth factor is to a range
between 0.03 and 0.036. These are the most influential options that have been set for this
experiment. The full list of options for this experiment can be seen in appendix A.12.
The maize plant cell structure can be seen in figure 6.2b along with how the cells are
located in the coordinate system. Although the cell structure is much simpler in figure
6.2b than in figure 6.2a, they share the same structure in that the they both have the
vascular bundle scattered around the plant in chunks[56]. This cell structure provides
a balance for simulating a high enough number of cells from the beginning while not
52
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:61==
simplifying the cell structure too much. The cell faces are modeled as hexagons as they
can easily be oriented as a grid. This also done as I did not have time to complete an
algorithm to estimate the shape of cells [43] and the hexagon shape has been used in other
cellular simulations before [21] [57].
(a) Figure showing a cross section of the maize
plant [56].
X
Z
(b) Cell structure used in the simulation. Red
cells are xylem cells and orange are phloem cells.
All other cells are parenchyma cells.
Figure 6.2: Cross section of a maize plant in simulation and real world.
With the plant created and options set it is time to run the simulation, and the final results
can be seen in figure 6.3. The height of the plant follows the time-lapse data at almost
a parallel rate. The simulation model is generally a couple of centimeters taller than the
time-lapse data until day 40 where the time-lapse data starts to increase in growth rate
which continues throughout until the end of the simulation. At day 55 the time-lapse and
simulation model is approximately at the same height. The leaf count throughout the
simulation stays close to time-lapse data even though the leaf count is about 1 - 2 leafs
lower than the time-lapse data until day 45 where it surpasses the time-lapse data. The
biggest difference is shown in the number of nodes throughout the simulation, and the
interesting part is that since the leaves are created at the nodes and the node count is
quite higher than the time-lapse data from day 35 must mean that the nodes are created
with a single leaf throughout the simulation.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days
0
20
40
60
80
Height (cm)
Plant Height
Timelapse
Simulation
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days
0
2
4
6
8
10
Leaf Count
Amount of Leafs
Timelapse
Simulation
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Node Count
Amount of Nodes
Timelapse
Simulation
Figure 6.3: Height (cm), leaf count and node count comparison between the simulation
model and the time-lapse data.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 120.
(b) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 600.
(c) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 960.
(d) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 1320.
Figure 6.4: Screenshots from the plant visualiser that shows the simulation model state
at different simulation cycles. Some leafs may seem longer which is two leafs overlapping
each other.
The plant visualizer was used to show the growth of the plant through the simulation
and to debug how the plant was performing throughout the simulation. Screenshots taken
from the plant visualizer showing the experiment is shown in figure 6.4. The root is also
shown to grow in these images, but no work has gone into the root model throughout
the simulation implementation and should, therefore, be disregarded. The visualizations
of the simulation show that for each node the plant creates does create a single leaf and
does not create two leaves even though the simulation options are set to produce the 1 or
2 leaves. The C# Random class produces uniform randomness [58] and should therefore
at one point produce the value 2, however, this was not the case for this simulation or
something is not right with the implementation.
From this test, it is clear that the system proposed shows promise. The plant and its plant
parts grow, develop into new plant parts and cells are growing which results ultimately in
the plant height increasing. The system can be adapted to simulate close to a real-world
example. Although this was a simple test when comparing to many of the simulations in
section 2. However, this data structure shows promise for actually being able to simulate
and visualize plants in full 3 dimensions made up only by the individually addressable
plant cells that have individual properties.
6.3
Growth Through Energy
With the relative success of the constant growth that proves that the simulator data model
has the ability to simulate simple plants that reflect some kind of reality. Extending on the
concepts from the constant growth experiment, meaning that with the same cell structure
seen in figure 6.2b and the same time-lapse data seen in table 6.1, see if it is possible to
make the cell grow based on sugar created in the plant and transported through the cells,
into the phloem and up towards the shoot apical meristem.
The concept is that in order for a cell to grow it must have stored sucrose. The sucrose is
created at randomly selected cells throughout the plant. The sucrose can only move on the
x and z-axis unless it is inside a phloem cell from where it then can move on the y-axis.
Normally the sucrose would be created in leaves through photosynthesis, as described
in section 3.4, but this is an experiment that is more to test the ability for fluid to be
exchanged between plant cells and ultimately reaching the designated destination. Such
a system is very dependent on what is being transported, if it was about water transport
54
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:63==
then it would be transported through the xylem from the roots to leaves.
Therefore,
there must exist different transporter logic for each type of fluid. For this test I have
implemented the SucroseTransporter which inherits from the FluidTransporter<TFluid>
with the TFluid being Sucrose. More details on these classes can be found in section 5.4.8.
For this experiment, the GenericPlantRunner is used to determine when to create new
sucrose to be transported throughout the plant. We know that the leaves convert sunlight
to sucrose, and if we assume that sunlight reaches the plant every 24 hours, then it creates
new sucrose with an interval that can be computed with equation 6.2. To accommodate
the increase in plant growth, the countleaf variable is counting the number of leaves
currently present on the plant, and using this determine the sucrose interval. This does
make some sense in that the more leaves that a plant has, the more sucrose is created.
However, as more leaves are developed the plant is assumed to be bigger meaning that
more energy is needed to sustain the plant. The max is used as the implementation checks
more concretely cycle % interval == 0 and since division by 0 is not possible this would
of course lead to an exception if not for the max function.
interval = max (352 −(24 · countleaf) , 1)
(6.2)
The cell growth equation needs to be changed in order to grow based on the energy present
in the cell rather than on a constant growth factor. The growth factor is still used but
is multiplied with the amount of energy present in the cell so that the growth factor is
not determining how much the plant cell should increase in size but instead how much of
an effect that the sucrose in the plant cell has on the growth. The sucrose amount is an
arbitrary amount between 0 and 100. I have not been able to figure out a unit for sucrose
in plants and how much sucrose leads to how much growth.
growthenergy = rate · energy
(6.3)
The options for this experiment are generally the same as the one for the constant growth
experiment. The only difference is in the growth range which is set to be 0.1. Everything
else is set to the same values as the constant growth experiment. The full options for this
experiment can be seen in appendix A.13. The cell structure is kept the same but for
this experiment, the plant is initialized with 4 layers of cells from the beginning meaning
that plant will start taller than the constant growth. The reason for doing this is that
to test the fluid flow throughout the plant, it makes sense to have more layers of cells
in the beginning so that the system can start to work from the beginning. The same
measurements have been recorded for this experiment, and the result of the simulation
can be seen in figure 6.5.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
55
==PAGE:64==
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days
0
20
40
60
80
100
Height (cm)
Plant Height
Timelapse
Simulation
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days
0
2
4
6
8
10
Leaf Count
Amount of Leafs
Timelapse
Simulation
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days
0
2
4
6
8
10
Node Count
Amount of Nodes
Timelapse
Simulation
Figure 6.5: Height (cm), leaf count and node count comparison between the simulation
model and the time-lapse data.
(a) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 120.
(b) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 600.
(c) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 960.
(d) Simulation state at
simulation cycle 1320.
Figure 6.6: Screenshots from the plant visualiser that shows the simulation model state
at different simulation cycles. Some leafs may seem longer which is two leafs overlapping
each other.
One main difference from this experiment to the constant growth experiment is that the
plant is initialized with a height of 10 as mentioned above. The graph showing the height
of the plant is close to parallel with each other meaning that the rate of growth is close.
The rate of growth is kept similar up until day 40 where the growth of the time-lapse
plants increases and the actual height gap is reduced however it is obvious that the rate
of growth on the simulation model is higher than the one from the time-lapse data which
results in a simulated plant that close to 1.1 m tall compared to the time-lapse plants at
86.36 cm.
The simulation seems to have one fewer leaf throughout the whole simulation until day 55
where the simulation catches up to a total of 10 leaves. The node story from the constant
growth repeats as we see that the number of nodes present quickly overtakes the number
of nodes on the time-lapse plants. This could indicate that the length which an internode
needs to be before it considers creating an upper node is too low, and the same problem
with the single leaf per node seems to be present here as well.
The plant growth stagnates between day 5 and 10 and again between day 15 and 20. This
indicates that maybe the interval method is not the correct way of going about it, as the
time-lapse plants keep growing those days. I have tried to determine the amount of energy
56
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:65==
created based on the number of leaves however with unsuccessful results and this is the
result that came closest to the time-lapse data.
6.4
Performance
I mentioned in section 4.1 that precision is the most important factor for the operation
implementations but performance should also be a concern. A way of increasing potential
performance is by using the multi-threaded machines in most systems today. When using
multi-threaded programming, complexity starts to increase as you need to make sure that
synchronization methods are in place to avoid deadlocks and race conditions.
As the
cell count increases and the plant operations get more complicated it often correlates to
increased computation time for each simulation cycle. For this test, I will try and quantify
if there could be a potential performance increase by using multiple threads in different
implementations.
C# and the .Net Core framework provides convenient helper methods Parallel.For for
running for loops and Parallel.Foreach for runningforeach loops in parallel without having
to manually manage the threads. The helper methods ties nicely into the decision of using
the Task framework provided by the .Net Core framework as it uses much of the same
thread-pool mechanics as the helper methods and it is all managed by the language runtime
engine. Some performance could probably be gained by doing it manually, however, this
adds complexity and is more prone to error than the helper method approach.
The test is set up so that it runs the Growth Through Energy experiment first by running
it single-threaded.
Then the same experiment is run by making the cell body system
solver, seen in section 5.4.7, multi-threaded, and afterward the same experiment is run a
third time by also making the InternodePartDevelopment multi-threaded.
Time taking is done with the StopWatch class from the .Net Core framework. Running the
simulations inside Visual Studio 2019 provides a CPU and Memory utilization graph which
will be used to see if there is still available performance to be gained if the CPU is not
fully utilized. Time is taken between each simulation cycle and the average is computed
for 351 simulation cycles.
(a) Single threaded CPU and
memory utilization
(b) Multi threaded cell body
system solver CPU and mem-
ory utilization
(c) Multi threaded cell body
system solver and internode de-
veloper CPU and memory uti-
lization
Figure 6.7: CPU and Memory utilization for single threaded and multi threaded experi-
ments
The average computation time for each simulation cycle for the single-threaded experiment
was 61.6 ms, while the first multi-threaded test was 26.9 ms and the second multi-threaded
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
57
==PAGE:66==
test was 27.2 ms. Although the computation time for any of them is quite low, as they
are in milliseconds, there is a big improvement going from single-threaded to a multi-
threaded implementation of the cell body system solver. The computation time between
each cycle has been more than halved with a difference of 34.7 ms. The second showed
an increase in the average computation time between simulations which may show that
if an operation is not computational heavy it does not need to be multi-threaded as the
overhead of managing the threads is larger than the potential performance improvement.
Since the difference is marginally at 0.3 ms there could be other ways causes for the slight
increase such as the operating system scheduler.
The CPU utilization shows that the single-threaded test barely uses the CPU while the
other two tests can utilize more of the CPU which is possibly the cause that leads to
performance improvement.
An interesting point is the increased memory usage from
around 115 MB to 315 MB between single-threaded and multi-threaded implementations.
This increase in memory usage could be from the extra reserved memory for the threads
created by the thread-pool. The CPU is not utilized 100% through any of the tests which
shows that there is still room for more computational expensive operations to be performed
before the simulation cycle would start to take longer again.
6.5
Result Summary
To summarize the simulation results from above are that the simulator and simulation
model shows promise. It is possible to simulate real-world looking plants through individ-
ual growing cells and a set of options defined plant growth operations. The processes that
make the two experiments grow are far from the real world processes that make the real
world plants grow. However, these experiments show the potential of the simulation data
model by showing that the accumulation of the individually addressable plant cells which
then creates the plant is a viable way of simulating plants at a cellular resolution. For the
implementation of different operations, the complexity is higher as it needs to be closer
to the real world. The reason for this could be that by having each cell in the system
makes the plant a lot more specific in a way that relying on too much abstraction in the
operations leads to a less precise model than one where the abstraction level of the plant
cells is higher with the same abstraction level would seem less precise.
The performance gains that were seen by utilizing multiple threads emphasis the decision
to implement the distributed simulation infrastructure from the beginning.
Once the
simulations get more complicated and the cell count increases, more threads will mean
faster computation times and ultimately this would mean faster iterations as the user
would get the result faster.
58
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:67==
7
Future Work
Based on the implementation and subsequent results it is clear that the simulation software
is not yet complete. There are a lot of improvements that can be made, and in this section,
I will outline some of the possible future work that I have observed during developing the
simulator which will improve the simulator greatly. I do recognize that there are potentially
other qualified options for potential future work but these are some that I think of at this
point other than the plant processes which are missing.
7.1
Physics Engine and Ray Casting
The roots grow downwards and the shoot can bend towards the ground because of gravity.
If the turgor pressure of a single cell drops it will result in other cells with a higher turgor
pressure to start to fall into the lower turgor pressure cell. If the turgor pressure of the
overall plant cells would drop significantly the plant would become flaccid and start to
bend towards the ground and ultimately die out [31]. Gravity has a significant impact
on the direction that a plant grows which also could affect how well a plant would grow.
If you take away gravity the roots will start to grow in all directions and the overall
function of basically all the plant processes are modified. This has been documented by
submerging plants into water and growing plants under microgravity conditions in space
[59]. Gravity must, therefore, have a huge impact on how the plant grows and functions,
and with gravity not being implemented into the simulation it decreases the amount of
physical correct implementations that can be implemented in the simulations.
The need became obvious when the ICellGrower interface needed two methods: One for
shoot cells and one for root cells. If the physics engine together with gravity is implemented
it would be interesting to see if the interface could be reduced to a single method like
GrowCell(). However, there still needs to be some way for the implementation to figure
out if the plant cell is in the root or is in the shoot. This subject would probably be more
complicated as research indicates that the plant cells through genetic and proteins are
able to detect their placement in the plant [60] [61]. Diving into the genetic and protein
structure of plant cells is out of scope for this project and is not possible at this point.
The solution provides two methods in the ICellGrower should be the solution used until
genetic and protein structures are included in the plant cell data model.
The simulator already has the cell body system that solves the individual cell collisions,
and the same concept could be implemented for the gravity engine. If a cell is modified such
as in size or turgor pressure it would be possible to apply the correct gravity corrections
to the plant cell and the whole plant, just as it would with the cell collision. This could
potentially be an expensive procedure. Testing could show if it would be sufficient to
perform a whole simulation cycle and then perform the gravity corrections as it would be
computational cheaper and faster, or if adjustments need to be made at cell changes.
As gravity have a huge impact on the way that a plant grows and functions. Another
important component is light, whether it be artificial or from the sun. Plants convert the
light energy into sucrose and the shoot system will always try to maximize the amount of
light it is exposed to by growing up and outwards. If something were overshadowing the
plant, the plant would try to grow around it to again be exposed to the light. The amount
of sucrose converted from light energy is therefore also dependent on how much and what
type of light the plant is exposed to. One of the possibilities by having each plant cell
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
59
==PAGE:68==
with exact geometrical properties is that the system would be able to compute if that the
cell is exposed to the light source, and based on this a very detailed implementation of the
photosynthesis could be implemented as each cell knows exactly how much light energy it
has received and does not have to rely on an abstraction like leaf area index. Ray casting
could be a way of implementing such a feature whereby the light source would cast rays
towards each cell and the system would then have to compute whether or not the ray can
reach the cell or if something is blocking it. Based on this information the plant could
also determine the growth direction of a branching internode so that it will try to grow
outwards to maximize the exposure to light.
Light
Source
Rays
Figure 7.1: Visualisation of the ray casting from a light source exposing different parts of
the plant to the light energy.
The light source position is already part of the simulation options, as seen in section 5,
and with this, the distance from the light source to a cell could be computed to simulate
that the light energy deteriorated over time. Another example is that some aeroponics
systems put reflective material at the bottom of a growing medium so that the light source
below reflects and potentially increases the output of the light source by not only emitting
light down on the plant but also from the reflective bottom of the growing medium above.
These reflections could also be modeled from the ray casting method.
Also in the context of aeroponics, the ray casting method could be used to model the mist
sprayers that spray the roots with water through high-pressure nozzles. With the position
of the mist sprayers, the sprayers could emit rays like the ones used for the light energy,
but in this case, it would be water droplets that would land on the root hairs which then
would be absorbed by the roots and then would be transported upwards towards the leaves
for transpiration and photosynthesis. Mistified water does move differently through the
air than light which should be accounted for.
60
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:69==
Water
Mist
Sprayer
Figure 7.2: Visualisation showing the mist sprayer spraying the roots with water.
Ray casting could however be a very expensive procedure depending on the number of
cells present in the plant, as it would have to compute a ray to each cell from each light
source or mist sprayer. An important process in the cell body system solver is to quickly
and efficiently rule out candidates that have no chance of colliding with the current cell.
This would also be the case with ray casting as the light rays would not have a chance to
reach the plants in the core of the plant, but would be most applicable to the plant cells
located in the epidermis.
7.2
Geometry Rotation
The current plant cell geometrical definition defines the plant cell by a set of vertices
describing the face of the cell and a top and bottom point. The face definition was based
on past cellular simulation attempts like Cellzilla [22] and Virtual Plant Tissue [21]. In
an attempt to research the geometrical properties of a plant cell in full 3 dimensions it
did not seem possible to get this information due to the destructible nature of the cross-
sections images. The closest I came to discover a 3-dimensional definition of a plant cell
was a figure showing the approximate structure of a cork plant cell [62]. The figure shown
is much like the cell structure that I concluded for this simulation. Blindsided by the
horizontal or longitudinal cross-section images I simply forgot about the rotation of the
3-dimensional geometries, meaning that all the plant cells are fixed upwards and cannot
rotate. This proves to be a problem for any other plant parts that are not the primary
stem growing directly upwards which rules out quite a lot of parts on the plant, and the
problem is quite visible in the resulting visualizations of the maize plant seen in section
6.2 and section 6.5. The problem can be seen by the petioles created, posing as the leaves,
as the maize plant grows are always vertically oriented which otherwise should be pointing
outwards.
I settled on visualizing the plants in 2 dimensions as it was simpler as I currently do not
have any experience in working with 3-dimensional geometry. I did therefore not have the
experience to see the problem before and there was not enough time to implement it once
I realized the problem. Theoretically, there could be multiple solutions to the problem.
The first solution could be to store all the plant parts as vertically oriented plant cells by
definition of the current plant cell geometry data model and when needed each plant cell
could be computed to their actual orientation. The same concept could be applied to a
collection of plant cells which probably would more efficient as the rotation would only be
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
61
==PAGE:70==
done once but maybe for more cells. These two concepts can be seen in figure 7.3 where
an individual cell is rotated or a collection of cells is rotated.
(a) A single cell being rotated
(b) A collection of cells being rotated
Figure 7.3: Rotation of a plant cell can either be individually or rotated as a collection
like as a plant part.
A second solution would be to store all the vertices for the cells at their current placement
with the rotations applied. This could prove harder to debug as it probably would be
easier to visualize the coordinates of a polygon facing upwards rather than sideways. The
problem of rotation of rigid body structures is a widely used concept in game-engines [63].
A way of representing rotations could be by implementing Quaternions. Unit quaternions,
also called versors, can represent rotation and orientation of 3-dimensional objects with
mathematical notation [64], which should make it effective to implement in software. They
do not count on matrix computations, which does make it easier to represent in C# as C#
does not have any built-in high-performance framework for matrices like the Vector2 and
Vector3 for vectors that have been used throughout the simulator. The implementation
would need to store the quaternion rotation data and orientation data in the ICellGeometry
interface if the implementation was made for the individual plant cell, which would be the
most accurate implementation and since I have emphasized the individually addressable
plant cells, it would make sense to have the information at the cell level.
7.3
Plant Creators
The maize plant has a simple cell structure as I had to manually create the hexagonal
cell grid and assign each of the cells with their cell type. This was quite a lot of work
for even such a simple cell structure. There have been attempts at trying to learn the
generalized cell structure pattern, and although it is not yet known how the cell sizes are
initially, a Voronoi pattern comes quite close to making a more organic and unstructured
cell structure [43] [65] [19].
The general form does seem to create an equal-sized cell
formation but it can be seen from figure 7.4 that not all cells are equally sized and are
generally closer together around the vascular bundles and are much larger inside the pith.
If a Voronoi pattern algorithm were to be made for creating general plant structures, this is
something that should be addressed. The problem of the 3 dimensions does come into play
again as many of the algorithms that mimic a general cell structure are in 2 dimensions
and the plant creator would have to create 3-dimensional cells.
62
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:71==
Figure 7.4: Cross-section cut from cortex of a buttercup stem
Not all plants are the same. This can be seen in the maize plant cross-section in figure
6.2a which showed the vascular bundle as more spread out, smaller and there were more
of them. The generalized plant creator must therefore also be able to take instructions on
these kinds of concepts. It then starts to become more obvious that such a plant creator
quickly becomes very complicated and would be hard to fit into a project like this. This
was one of the reasons that I went with the simpler implementation which can be seen in
section 6.
Computer vision powered by a convolutional neural network could be used to identify the
plant cells and create the memory structure used in the simulator, which would potentially
be a method of creating a more realistic cell structure. However, this would require a lot
of cross-section images that had all the cells marked by a human already. This would
however require a lot of work to manually identify each cell, but if an algorithm could
somehow create the baseline dataset for the convolutional neural network it would ease
the process.
Having a realistic and more true to life cell structure is the basis for simulating plants
realistically. This is especially true for cellular resolution simulations like this one. This
means that if the simulations extend beyond purely tests and experimental the cell struc-
ture must be more true to life, as seen in figure 7.4, to get the internal plant processes
dynamically correct.
7.4
Graphical Processing Unit Utilization
Graphical Processing Units (GPU) is a great tool to perform parallel computation at scale.
A GPU can provide great parallelism optimization for all the cellular computations and
processes. However, programming for a GPU requires very low-level memory management,
and the complexity is increased dramatically if you do not know what you are doing. Most
application programming interfaces (API) for interacting with a GPU is written in C++
[66] [67], and since I have chosen C# as my programming language this would be hard
to implement. Mapping binaries from C and C++ to C# is possible which could be an
option but since I do not have any experience with programming for the GPU this would
require a lot of research and development to be implemented.
If the ray casting that was discussed in section 7.1 would be implemented, I believe that
a GPU would be a requirement as the ray casting would require a lot of computations
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
63
==PAGE:72==
and possibly a lot of vector and matrix computations that the GPU is built for due to
its uses in computer graphics. Other simulation software has seen a great improvement
in performance from utilizing a GPU but they do also recognize the complexity added by
doing so [68].
64
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:73==
8
Process Reflection and Discussion
I started this project because I was part of a side project that would use an aeroponics
system to grow staple crops.
Many of the aeroponics system today grow leafy greens
and herbs [69], but none have seemed to investigate the possibility of growing stable
crops in an aeroponics system. As I have explained earlier, aeroponics is a way of growing
plants in a growth medium inside a controlled environment not influenced by the elements.
Everything in an aeroponics system is under control and this means that such a system
is very applicable for full automation by using sensors and computer systems to control
and monitor the full system. By having sensors to monitor the environmental data such
as temperature and humidity, it would also be possible to automatically adjust the light
spectrum and nutrient mix given to the plants to optimize every part of the growing
process.
In order to capture the data and to optimize the parameters, it would be possible with
internet-connected sensors and the Internet of Things (IoT) to capture and store the data.
With the data streaming in over the network, it would be possible to monitor and adjust
in real-time, and thereby optimize the plant growth through the different plant stages.
Having some experience with distributed systems I thought this would be an interesting
project to take on, as you would have real-time data streaming in and you would have to
react accordingly in order to keep everything at the most optimal parameters.
Another interesting part of the side project was the ability to utilize machine learning
to find the most optimal growing parameters. However, for machine learning to work, I
would have to perform a lot of experiments to find the most optimal parameters and due
to the fact that plants take a long time to grow, the whole data collection for the machine
learning model would take a long time. It did not seem feasible in a reasonable time frame
to complete such a dataset and I then had a talk with my supervisor that suggested how
about trying to simulate the plant processes in order to make an accurate model that could
capture the most optimal parameters. This was a great idea, as you would be able to test
all sorts of different parameters and from the results get a set of the optimal parameters
which then could be used to test in a real aeroponics system.
A way of finding a series of optimal actions using machine learning is a reinforcement
learning model, which has been applied with great success to models learning to play
video games [70] and multi-agent interactions [71]. Simply put, it works by trying different
sequences of actions, and actions are awarded points using a reward function, and the
sequence of actions with most points is said to be the most optimal sequence of actions
[72]. This could potentially lead me to the most optimal set of parameters throughout
the entire growing process of a specific plant. It has been shown that radiating a plant
with a different spectrum of light in different sequences has a positive effect on the growth
of cress [73]. It has also been shown that radiating different light spectrum in different
stages of a grape leaves would affect the senescence rate [74]. These are merely a couple of
examples to show that a very dynamic and exploring model would be needed to capture
the most optimal parameters for growing in an aeroponics system due to the possibilities.
A thing worth mentioning is that I have not had any biology classes since primary school
which means that my knowledge of even the simple concepts of the plant growing process
was quite limited. This also meant that I went into the project with an open mind trying
to explore the core concepts of plant growth. I started researching for already existing
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
65
==PAGE:74==
software that would simulate growing crops based on a set of parameters. As I already
mentioned earlier, these simulations were based on statistical data meaning that if I was
trying to find the most optimal parameters for that statistical model and would that be
able to capture the dynamicity discovered in the light spectrum pages for example. Crop
simulations seemed to be primarily statistical and based on geographical placements of
the seeded field in order to estimate the potential harvest yield of a specific crop. This
makes great sense for a farmer trying to predict the yield of the fields but I still felt that
these simulations were not able to capture what I needed.
I then started to take a deeper dive into the cellular level of plants and what made plants
grow at the cellular level. Many of these concepts are well known and well studied, and it
seemed like a great way of going about the problem as I would be able to simulate every
single cell, have the water flow through the cells, and have the leaves create photosynthesis
so that the plant could grow. I then started researching what software could simulate
plants at a cellular level which lead to many simulators that simulated one or many cells
but not full plants.
And those simulators that claimed to simulate plant growth at a
cellular level did not have any great documentation for how they did it. Another problem
that I have outlined throughout this project is that the simulators were all in 2 dimensions
meaning that they could not simulate the height of the plant but only a single layer of
cells that would interact with each other in those 2 dimensions.
I did however like the idea of having a single cell that would then develop itself into a
full plant.
The same idea could be applied for when a plant decides to create a new
branch, it would be possible to simulate the exact processes that would lead to the plant
creating a new branch. It was these ideas that ultimately made me go with the cellular
level simulation, as it as an example gave me the ability to model the exact processes
that would produce the light spectrum sequence results. The same goes for discovering
what nutrient solution that would give the plant the most optimal growth, as the cellular
growth was modeled with these sets of parameters to discover this. This meant that I
had to learn about how plant cells were structured, how they grew, divide, and so forth.
From earlier I had researched what made plants grow in general but this did not describe
what the plant cell was doing exactly at the moment of photosynthesis and so forth. I
then started to research for generalized plant cell models that I could implement to model
these processes and it was here that I learned something crucial that would affect the rest
of the project.
Much of the biological research into plants and their processes were very specific in discov-
ering how a specific protein in a specific plant reacts to some specific process or it is very
conceptual at a higher level. What I thought when beginning the research was that I was
able to get an equation that given a certain amount of light, at a certain spectrum would
produce this amount of sucrose at photosynthesis. For growth, I thought that I was able
to generalize the cell growth by simply having a single cell growth model that could look
at the properties of a cell and determine how it should grow. However, I discovered that
cell growth was very specific to which of plant and wherein that plant the cell was located.
It maybe would have been possible for me to try and derive a generalized equation from
many of the papers, but I do not feel comfortable in my knowledge of plants to create
these generalized equations.
The simulator should have made it possible to test my generalized growth equations,
however, I ended up spending so much trying to figure out things that simply were not
yet discovered. An example of this would be the actual geometrical properties of a plant
cell in 3 dimensions, which took me quite a long time trying to decide on this as I was
66
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:75==
not able to find any valid information on the subject that could guide me in a direction. I
eventually had to settle for something and that was what I did but this trend of not being
able to find the information I thought existed slowed my progress tremendously. You do
not know, that you can not find the thing that you do not know that does not exist. I was
faced with this dilemma a lot of times during the project and the hard part is deciding
when to stop searching and to decide on something. This may have been reinforced by
the fact that I was very new in this subject, meaning that if I had been stronger in the
subject I might have been able to stop the search earlier and thereby make faster progress
because of faster decision making. Another thing that would have been optimal was if I
could have discussed my ideas with a biology professor, but due to the Covid-19 pandemic,
my access to physical media and people outside my supervisor was not possible.
The result of this project can be seen in section 6 but it is clear from the process reflection
given here that I did not reach my initial goal. The initial goal was a simulator that could
simulate a full plant in order to find the optimal parameters for growing plants in a con-
trolled environment system like aeroponics. I did however end up with a plant simulation
framework that gives the ability to simulate individual plant cells that accumulated makes
up the plant. The simulator has the ability to simulate simple growth based on a constant
growth factor. The simulator also has the ability to simulate cell-to-cell communication
shown with the ability to exchange sucrose throughout the plant and grow based on the
sucrose in the cell. It is all done in an objected-oriented and domain-driven design archi-
tecture developed simulator that can run distributed simulations. So even though I did
not implement a simulator that could simulate the full plant for the more commercial use
that was originally planned, I ended up with a simulation framework that has the potential
of reaching the commercial simulator, but at the current stage is more of a research tool
which can be used to develop and test the specific or generalized hypothesis of internal
plant processes.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
67
==PAGE:76==
9
Conclusion
Controlled environment agriculture systems provide the ability to control many of the
external and internal parameters that influence plant growth. With the ability to control
these parameters in systems such as aeroponics, it provides the ability to optimize every
aspect of plant growth. The dynamic environment of a controlled environment calls for
new and more dynamic simulations that can react accurately to more dynamic actions
and environments that statistic-based simulations do not have the ability to realistically
react to. This includes different light spectrums, light sequences, nutrient solutions, tem-
perature, and humidity.
I propose a plant agnostic continuous running simulation framework that can simulate full
plants with individually addressable plant cells in 3 dimensions. It is built using a well-
structured object-oriented and domain driven design for easy to manage file structure, as
well as a logical naming scheme for all cell and plant building blocks. The plant is created
using conveniently named building blocks to reduce the learning curve and increase the
visibility of what is happening in the system. The plant is defined by the accumulation
of all the plant cells present in the simulation, just as they would in the real world. Each
plant cell has individual properties like cell wall, turgor pressure, water, and starch. The
geometrical properties are defined in 3 dimensions by a cell face and a center top- and
bottom point.
The framework has been tested by comparing the output data from simulations against a
time-lapse video showing multiple maize plants growing over several days. One experiment
tested the ability to replicate the time-lapse plants using a constant growth factor and was
able to replicate within close error margins. Another experiment was performed to test
the fluid transport system by creating sucrose randomly around the plant at an increasing
interval. The plant cells could only grow if they had sucrose stored in them. The output
data from the simulation was again compared against the time-lapse data.
The error
margin became larger but it is still possible to relate the simulation output to the time-
lapse data and it showed that the transport system worked. Although the framework
is not capable of simulating the plants realistically these tests show that the framework
works in its current state.
The framework comes bundled with a Plant Simulator Service and a Plant Visualizer. The
Plant Simulator Service gives the ability to put a Plant Simulators on different computers
connected by a network, and have the Plant Simulator Service synchronize the simulation
state over the network. This allows for utilizing all the compute resources to the simulator
rather than wasting them on other things like visualization. The Plant Visualizer func-
tions as the interface for the simulation, and its primary function is to visualize a saved
simulation state from a past or running simulation. The Plant Visualizer can also show
the clients which are connected to the plant simulator service and their status. The last
feature is the ability to start new simulations.
The framework still has a lot more work to be done before it is complete. Most notably is
that the plant cells in the system can not be rotated which means they are always facing
upwards restricting the possible simulations.
However, the simulation framework with
its 3-dimensional plant cell model shows great promise in simulating multiple plant cell
processes.
68
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
D. o. E. United Nations of Economic and S. Affairs, “World Population Prospects
2019 Highlights”, United Nations, New York, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://population.un.org/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2019_Highlights.pdf.
[2]
Danmarks Statistik and K. Larsen, “Naesten to tredjedele af Danmarks areal er
landbrug”, Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online]. Available: www.dst.dk/stattabel/868.
[3]
C. L. Walthall, J. Hatfield, P. Backlund, L. Lengnick, E. Marshall, M. Walsh, S.
Adkins, M. Aillery, E. A. Ainsworth, C. Ammann, C. J. Anderson, I. Bartomeus,
L. H. Baumgard, F. Booker, B. Bradley, D. M. Blumenthal, J. Bunce, K. Burkey,
S. M. Dabney, J. A. Delgado, J. Dukes, A. Funk, K. Garrett, M. Glenn, D. A.
Grantz, D. Goodrich, S. Hu, R. C. Izaurralde, R. A. C. Jones, S.-H. Kim, A. D. B.
Leaky, K. Lewers, T. L. Mader, A. Mcclung, J. Morgan, D. J. Muth, M. Nearing,
D. M. Oosterhuis, D. Ort, C. Parmesan, W. T. Pettigrew, W. Polley, R. Rader, C.
Rice, M. Rivington, E. Rosskopf, W. A. Salas, L. E. Sollenberger, R. Srygley, C.
Stöckle, E. S. Takle, D. Timlin, J. W. White, R. Winfree, L. Wright-Morton, and
L. H. Ziska, “Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: Effects and
Adaptation USDA Technical Bulletin 1935 ii Climate Change and Agriculture in
the United States: Effects and Adaptation”, Tech. Rep., 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/effects.htmhttp://www.ntis.gov..
[4]
F. Harvey, Coronavirus measures could cause global food shortage, UN warns |
Global development | The Guardian, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
theguardian.com/global- development/2020/mar/26/coronavirus- measures- could-
cause-global-food-shortage-un-warns.
[5]
Aerofarms, AeroFarms - Our Indoor Vertical Farming Technology, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://aerofarms.com/technology/.
[6]
J. Banks, “Principles of Simulation”, in Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons
Inc., 1998, ch. Principles, pp. 3–30, isbn: 0-471-13403-1.
[7]
P. Prusinkiewicz and A. Lindenmayer, The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 2004. [Online]. Available: http : / / algorithmicbotany . org / papers /
abop/abop.pdf.
[8]
P. Prusinkiewicz, J. Hanan, A. Lindenmayer, F. David Fracchia, and K. Krithivasan,
“Lindenmayer Systems, Fractals, and Plants”, Tech. Rep., 1988. [Online]. Available:
http://algorithmicbotany.org/papers/lsfp.pdf.
[9]
H. E. Brown, N. I. Huth, D. P. Holzworth, E. I. Teixeira, R. F. Zyskowski, J. N.
Hargreaves, and D. J. Moot, “Plant Modelling Framework: Software for building
and running crop models on the APSIM platform”, Environmental Modelling and
Software, vol. 62, pp. 385–398, Dec. 2014, issn: 13648152. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.
2014.09.005.
[10]
J. E. Bergez, H. Raynal, M. Launay, N. Beaudoin, E. Casellas, J. Caubel, P. Chabrier,
E. Coucheney, J. Dury, I. Garcia de Cortazar-Atauri, E. Justes, B. Mary, D. Ripoche,
and F. Ruget, “Evolution of the STICS crop model to tackle new environmental
issues: New formalisms and integration in the modelling and simulation platform
RECORD”, Environmental Modelling and Software, vol. 62, pp. 370–384, Dec. 2014,
issn: 13648152. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.07.010.
[11]
D. Wallach and P. J. Thorburn, “The error in agricultural systems model prediction
depends on the variable being predicted”, Environmental Modelling and Software,
vol. 62, pp. 487–494, Dec. 2014, issn: 13648152. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.08.001.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
69
==PAGE:78==
[12]
G. N. Falconnier, E. P. Journet, L. Bedoussac, A. Vermue, F. Chlébowski, N. Beau-
doin, and E. Justes, “Calibration and evaluation of the STICS soil-crop model for
faba bean to explain variability in yield and N 2 fixation”, European Journal of
Agronomy, vol. 104, pp. 63–77, Mar. 2019, issn: 11610301. doi: 10.1016/j.eja.2019.
01.001.
[13]
M. Machwitz, L. Giustarini, C. Bossung, D. Frantz, M. Schlerf, H. Lilienthal, L.
Wandera, P. Matgen, L. Hoffmann, and T. Udelhoven, “Enhanced biomass prediction
by assimilating satellite data into a crop growth model”, Environmental Modelling &
Software, vol. 62, pp. 437–453, 2014, issn: 1364-8152. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.envsoft.2014.08.010. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364815214002345.
[14]
R. Wayne, Plant Cell Biology: From Astronomy to Zoology. Elsevier Inc., 2009, pp. 1–
522, isbn: 9780123742339. doi: 10.1016/C2009-0-01673-0.
[15]
B. E. Shapiro, C. Tobin, E. Mjolsness, and E. M. Meyerowitz, “Analysis of cell divi-
sion patterns in the Arabidopsis shoot apical meristem”, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 112, no. 15, pp. 4815–4820,
Apr. 2015, issn: 10916490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1502588112.
[16]
M. K. Abera, P. Verboven, T. Defraeye, W. Fanta, M. L. A. T. M. Hertog, J.
Carmeliet, B. M. Nicolai, F. Cartenì, F. Giannino, and F. Hans, “A plant cell division
algorithm based on cell biomechanics and ellipse-fitting”, Annals of Botany, vol. 114,
no. September, pp. 555–569, 2014. doi: 10.1093/AOB. [Online]. Available: https:
//academic.oup.com/aob/article/122/2/207/5032920.
[17]
R. Karwowski and P. Prusinkiewicz, “The L-system-based plant-modeling environ-
ment L-studio 4.0”, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
summary?doi=10.1.1.106.7692.
[18]
N. Bessonov and V. Volpert, “Dynamical Models of Plant Growth”, Tech. Rep.,
2000. [Online]. Available: http://math.univ-lyon1.fr/~volpert/plant.pdf.
[19]
B. E. Shapiro, H. Jonsson, P. Sahlin, M. Heisler, A. Roeder, M. Burl, E. M. Meyerowitz,
and E. D. Mjolsness, “Tessellations and Pattern Formation in Plant Growth and De-
velopment”, pp. 1–22, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.2937.
[20]
R. M. Merks, M. Guravage, D. Inzé, and G. T. Beemster, “Virtualleaf: An open-
source framework for cell-based modeling of plant tissue growth and development”,
Plant Physiology, vol. 155, no. 2, pp. 656–666, Feb. 2011, issn: 00320889. doi: 10.
1104/pp.110.167619.
[21]
D. De Vos, A. Dzhurakhalov, S. Stijven, P. Klosiewicz, G. T. Beemster, and J.
Broeckhove, “Virtual plant tissue: Building blocks for next-generation plant growth
simulation”, Frontiers in Plant Science, vol. 8, May 2017, issn: 1664462X. doi:
10.3389/fpls.2017.00686.
[22]
B. E. Shapiro, E. M. Meyerowitz, and E. Mjolsness, “Using cellzilla for plant growth
simulations at the cellular level”, Frontiers in Plant Science, vol. 4, no. OCT, p. 408,
Oct. 2013, issn: 1664-462X. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00408. [Online]. Available: http:
//journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpls.2013.00408/abstract.
[23]
C. Smith, “On Vertex-Vertex Systems and Their Use in Geometric and Biological
Modelling”, PhD thesis, Apr. 2006.
[24]
P. Prusinkiewicz and A. Runions, “Computational models of plant development
and form”, New Phytologist, vol. 193, pp. 549–569, 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
8137.2011.04009.x. [Online]. Available: www.newphytologist.com.
[25]
F. Boudon, J. Chopard, O. Ali, B. Gilles, O. Hamant, A. Boudaoud, J. Traas, and
G. Christophe, “A Computational Framework for 3D Mechanical Modeling of Plant
70
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:79==
Morphogenesis with Cellular Resolution”, PLoS Comput Biology, vol. 11, no. 1, Jan.
2015. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003950. [Online]. Available: www.ploscompbiol.org.
[26]
Homestratosphere, Parts of a Flower and Plant - Do You Know Them All?, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.homestratosphere.com/parts-of-a-flower/.
[27]
L. M. Srivastava, Plant Growth and Development: Hormones and Environment. San
Diego: Elsevier Science, 2002, isbn: 0-12-6660570-X.
[28]
Wikipedia, Leaf, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leaf.
[29]
D. F. Cutler, T. Botha, and D. W. Stevenson, Plant Anatomy: An applied approach.
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2007, isbn: 978-1-4051-2679-3.
[30]
Wikipedia, Ground tissue, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Ground_tissue#Parenchyma.
[31]
J. D. Mauseth, Botany: An Introduction to Plant Biology, ser. Botany: An Intro-
duction to Plant Biology. Jones \& Bartlett Learning, 2014, isbn: 9781449648848.
[Online]. Available: https://books.google.dk/books?id=0BGEs95p5EsC.
[32]
T. W. Tibbitts, W. Cao, and R. M. Wheeler, “Growth of Potatoes for CELSS”, Tech.
Rep., 1994. [Online]. Available: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=19950005536.
[33]
A. El Saddik, “Digital Twins: The Convergence of Multimedia Technologies”, IEEE
Multimedia, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 87–92, Apr. 2018, issn: 19410166. doi: 10.1109/
MMUL.2018.023121167.
[34]
J. Verbraeken, M. Wolting, J. Katzy, J. Klop-Penburg, and J. S. Rellermeyer, “A
Survey on Distributed Machine Learning”, Tech. Rep.
[35]
C. Irons, M. J. Plank, and M. J. Simpson, “Lattice-free models of directed cell
motility”, Physica A, vol. 442, pp. 110–121, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2015.08.049.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2015.08.049.
[36]
Stack Overflow, Stack Overflow Developer Suvery 2019, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2019#technology.
[37]
Microsoft, .NET Core Overview, Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https : / / docs .
microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/about.
[38]
Scrum.org, What is Scrum?, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.scrum.org/
resources/what-is-scrum/.
[39]
M. Noback, “The Dependency Inversion Principle”, Principles of Package Design,
pp. 67–104, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-4119-6{\_}5.
[40]
V. Vernon, Domain-Driven Design Distilled. New Jersey: Addison-Wesley Educa-
tional Publishers Inc, 2016, pp. 0–176, isbn: 9780134434421.
[41]
P. Holmström, Domain-Driven Design and the Hexagonal Architecture, 2020. [On-
line]. Available: https://vaadin.com/learn/tutorials/ddd/ddd_and_hexagonal.
[42]
J. Skeet, For vs Foreach on arrays and lists, Jan. 2009. [Online]. Available: https:
//codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2009/01/29/for-vs-foreach-on-arrays-and-lists/.
[43]
D. L. González and T. L. Einstein, “Voronoi cell patterns: Theoretical model and
applications”, Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics,
vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1–10, 2011, issn: 15393755. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.84.051135.
[44]
L. Dupuy, J. Mackenzie, and J. Haseloff, “Coordination of plant cell division and
expansion in a simple morphogenetic system”, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 107, no. 6, pp. 2711–2716, 2010,
issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0906322107.
[45]
E. Schömer, J. Reichel, and T. Warken, “Efficient Collision Detection for Curved
Solid Objects”, Tech. Rep.
[46]
P. J. Dworkin, “Efficient Collision Detection for Real-time Simulated Environments”,
Tech. Rep., 1985.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
71
==PAGE:80==
[47]
R. M. Klein, “Influence of Ultraviolet Radiation on Auxin-Controlled Plant Growth”,
Tech. Rep. 7, 1967, pp. 904–914. [Online]. Available: https://about.jstor.org/terms.
[48]
B. Bahadur, M. V. Rajam, L. Shijram, and K. Krishnamurthy, Plant Biology and
Biotechnology. New Delhi: Springer, 2005, isbn: 978-81-322-2286-6.
[49]
A. J. Bidhendi and A. Geitmann, “Relating the mechanics of the primary plant
cell wall to morphogenesis”, 2015. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv535. [Online]. Available:
https://academic.oup.com/jxb/article-abstract/67/2/449/2884961.
[50]
M. Toyota, D. Spencer, S. Sawai-Toyota, W. Jiaqi, T. Zhang, A. J. Koo, G. A.
Howe, and S. Gilroy, “Glutamate triggers long-distance, calcium-based plant defense
signaling”, Science, vol. 361, no. 6407, pp. 1112–1115, Sep. 2018, issn: 10959203. doi:
10.1126/science.aat7744. [Online]. Available: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/
361/6407/1112%20https://science.sciencemag.org/content/361/6407/1112.abstract.
[51]
R. Lemoine, Sucrose transporters in plants: Update on function and structure, May
2000. doi: 10.1016/S0005-2736(00)00142-5.
[52]
N. J. Bréda, “Leaf Area Index”, in Encyclopedia of Ecology, Elsevier, Jan. 2018,
pp. 457–462, isbn: 9780444641304. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63768-0.00849-0.
[53]
Pioneer Agronomy Sciences, Staging Corn Growth, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.pioneer.com/us/agronomy/staging_corn_growth.html.
[54]
DNA Learning Center, Time-lapse Video of Growing Maize Plants - YouTube, Feb.
2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B35qxXjC5yw.
[55]
I. A. Ciampitti, R. W. Elmore, and J. Lauer, Corn Growth and Development, Jun.
2016. [Online]. Available: http://corn.agronomy.wisc.edu/Management/pdfs/Corn%
20Growth%20and%20Development%20poster.pdf.
[56]
S. Kamar, Internal Structure of Stem, 2020. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
biologydiscussion.com/shoot-system/stems/internal-structure-of-stem-with-diagram/
13943.
[57]
T. Nagai and H. Honda, “A dynamic cell model for the formation of epithelial
tissues”, Philosophical Magazine B: Physics of Condensed Matter; Statistical Me-
chanics, Electronic, Optical and Magnetic Properties, vol. 81, no. 7, pp. 699–719,
2001, issn: 13642812. doi: 10.1080/13642810108205772.
[58]
Microsoft, Random Class (System), 2020. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.random?view=netcore-3.1.
[59]
T. Hoson, Plant growth and morphogenesis under different gravity conditions: Rel-
evance to plant life in space, May 2014. doi: 10.3390/life4020205.
[60]
R. E. Rodriguez, M. F. Ercoli, J. M. Debernardi, N. W. Breakfield, M. A. Mecchia,
M. Sabatini, T. Cools, L. De Veylder, P. N. Benfey, and J. F. Palatnik, “MicroRNA
miR396 Regulates the Switch between Stem Cells and Transit-Amplifying Cells in
Arabidopsis Roots”, doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00452. [Online]. Available: www.plantcell.
org/cgi/doi/10.1105/tpc.15.00452.
[61]
S. Otero, B. Desvoyes, R. Peiró, and C. Gutierrez, “Histone H3 Dynamics Reveal
Domains with Distinct Proliferation Potential in the Arabidopsis Root”, The Plant
Cell, vol. 28, pp. 1361–1371, Jun. 2016. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.01003. [Online]. Avail-
able: www.plantcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1105/tpc.15.01003.
[62]
H. Pereira, “Chapter 2 - The structure of cork”, in, H. B. T. .-. C. Pereira, Ed.,
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V., 2007, pp. 33–53, isbn: 978-0-444-52967-1. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 044452967- 1/50004- 2. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444529671500042.
[63]
Unity Technologies, Unity - Scripting API: Quaternion, Jun. 2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://docs.unity3d.com/ScriptReference/Quaternion.html.
72
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:81==
[64]
J. M. McCarthy, An Introduction to Theoretical Kinematics. MIT Press, 1990,
isbn: 9780262132527. [Online]. Available: https : / / books . google . dk / books ? id =
glOqQgAACAAJ.
[65]
M. Bock, A. K. Tyagi, J. U. Kreft, and W. Alt, “Generalized Voronoi Tessellation as a
Model of Two-dimensional Cell Tissue Dynamics”, Bulletin of Mathematical Biology,
vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 1696–1731, 2010, issn: 00928240. doi: 10.1007/s11538-009-9498-3.
[66]
NVIDIA, “CUDA C++ Programming Guide”, 2020.
[67]
K. Group, “OpenCL 3.0 (Provisional) Reference Guide”, Tech. Rep., 2020. [Online].
Available: www.khronos.org/opencl..
[68]
Y. Song, S. Yang, and J. Lei, “ParaCells: A GPU Architecture for Cell-Centered
Models in Computational Biology”, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 994–1006, May 2019, issn: 15579964.
doi: 10.1109/TCBB.2018.2814570.
[69]
Aerofarms, AeroFarms - Food Service, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://aerofarms.
com/food-service/.
[70]
O. Vinyals, T. Ewalds, S. Bartunov, P. Georgiev, A. S. Vezhnevets, M. Yeo, A.
Makhzani, H. Küttler, J. Agapiou, J. Schrittwieser, J. Quan, S. Gaffney, S. Petersen,
K. Simonyan, T. Schaul, H. van Hasselt, D. Silver, T. Lillicrap, K. Calderone, P.
Keet, A. Brunasso, D. Lawrence, A. Ekermo, J. Repp, and R. Tsing, “StarCraft
II: A New Challenge for Reinforcement Learning”, Aug. 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04782.
[71]
B. Baker, I. Kanitscheider, T. Markov, Y. Wu, G. Powell, B. McGrew, and I. Mor-
datch, “Emergent Tool Use From Multi-Agent Autocurricula”, Sep. 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.07528.
[72]
J. X. Wang, Z. Kurth-Nelson, D. Tirumala, H. Soyer, J. Z. Leibo, R. Munos, C.
Blundell, D. Kumaran, and M. Botvinick, “Learning to reinforcement learn”, Nov.
2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.05763.
[73]
L. Ajdanian, M. Babaei, and H. Aroiee, “The growth and development of cress
(Lepidium sativum) affected by blue and red light”, Heliyon, vol. 5, no. 7, e02109,
Jul. 2019, issn: 24058440. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02109.
[74]
S. Wang, X. Wang, X. Shi, B. Wang, X. Zheng, H. Wang, and F. Liu, “Red and
Blue Lights Significantly Affect Photosynthetic Properties and Ultrastructure of
Mesophyll Cells in Senescing Grape Leaves”, Horticultural Plant Journal, vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 82–90, 2016, issn: 2468-0141. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hpj.2016.
03 . 001. [Online]. Available: http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2468014116300358.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:83==
10
Usage Guide
This usage guide will guide you through compiling and running the source code provided
in the appendix. It is assumed that you have Node JS with the NPM package manager
installed and .Net Core 3.1 installed with the dotnet CLI available. The steps have been
tested on a Windows Pro version 10.0.18363 build 18363 x64 machine with an Intel i7-
5960X 12-cores and 32 GB RAM. The setup may require you to trust local self-certified
developer certificates which should not be a problem.
1. Download, unzip and open the source file folder from appendix
2. Open a new command prompt window and cd into the PlantSimulatorService folder
3. Run the command ’dotnet run’ and the project should be compiled and started
4. Open a new command prompt window and cd into the PlantSimulatorClient folder
5. Run the command ’dotnet run’ and the project should be compiled and started
6. Open a new command prompt window and cd into the PlantVisualiser folder
7. Run the command ’npm install’
8. Run the command ’npm start’
9. Open a browser window and navigate to localhost:4200
10. Click the plus icon on the left side menu
11. Click the button ’Start Simulation’
12. Navigate back to the frontpage, click on the new simulation and refresh to see the
progress
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix
A.1
Constant Growth Source Code and Simulation State
Data
The source code at the state of performing the constant growth experiment can be found
in the appendix zip file under the ConstantGrowthSourceCode folder.
The simulation state data for the constant growth experiment can be found under the
ConstantGrowthStateData folder.
A.2
Energy Growth Source Code and Simulation State
Data
The source code at the state of performing the energy growth experiment can be found in
the appendix zip file under the EnergyGrowthSourceCode folder.
The simulation state data for the constant growth experiment can be found under the
EnergyGrowthStateData folder.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
77
==PAGE:86==
A.3
Plant Simulator Service Controller Class Diagram
SimulationController
ISimulationContext context
Task<IActionResult> GetRunSimulations()
Task<IActionResult> GetRunSimulation(string)
IActionResult DeleteRunSimulation(string)
Task<IActionResult> StartSimulation(PlantSimulationOptions)
ControllerBase
ISimulationContext
Task<IActionResult> GetSimulations()
Task<IActionResult> GetSimulation(string)
IActionResult DeleteSimulation(string)
Task<IActionResult> StartSimulation(PlantSimulationOptions)
SimulationContext
IClientHandler clientHandler
ISimulationStorage storage
IClientHandler
Task StartAvailableClientAsync(PlantSimulationOptions)
GrpcSimulationClientHandler
IClientCollection clients
ISimulationStorage
Task StoreSimulationAsync(SimulationState, CancellationToken)
Task<IDictionary<string, SimulationState>> GetSimulationState(string, CancellationToken)
Task<SimulationState[]> GetSimulationStates(CancellationToken)
bool DeleteSimulationState(string)
SimulationFileStorage
IOptionsMonitor<FileStorageOptions> options
JsonOptions jsonOptions
ILogger<SimulationFileStorage> logger
IFileHandler<SimulationState> ﬁleHandler
Task<Stream> ReadFile(string, CancellationToken)
Task<SimulationState> DeSerializeState(Stream, CancellationToken)
string CreatePath(string)
IFileHandler
in T
Task WriteFile(string, T, CancellationToken)
Task<byte[]> ReadFileAsync(string, CancellationToken)
string[] GetFilesInDirectory(string)
bool DeleteFile(string)
JsonFileHandler
T
JsonOptions options
void ThrowError(Exception)
SimulationState
string Id
ulong SimulationTime
DateTime Date
PlantModel Plant
PlantModel
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModel> ShootSystem
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModel> RootSystem
PlantNodeModel
Vector2[] Coordinates
int Thickness
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModel> Connections
IClientContext
IActionResult GetClients()
Task<IActionResult> StopClient(string)
ClientContext
IClientCollection clients
ClientController
IClientContext context
IClientCollection
ISimulationClient GetClient(string)
IEnumerable<ISimulationClient>()
void AddClient(ISimulationClient)
void DeleteClient(string)
int Count()
SimulationClientCollection
IDictionary<string, ISimulationClient> clients
ISimulationClient
string Id
bool Available
string Host
Task StartAsync(PlantSimulationOptions)
Task StopAsync()
SimulationClient
SimulationServerServiceClient Client
«generated»
SimulationServerServiceClient
«generated»
SimulationClientServiceBase
ISimulationClientContext
public ISimulationClient SayHello(string);
public void SayGoodbye(string);
public Task TransmitState(SimulationState, CancellationToken);
SimulationClientContext
IClientCollection clients
IClientFactory clientFactory
ISimulationStorage simulationStorage
SimulationClientService
ISimulationClientContext simulationContext
IClientFactory
ISimulationClient CreateClient(string)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0 .. *
0 .. *
0 .. *
1
1
Figure A.1: UML Class Diagram of the Plant Simulator Service Controllers and their
dependencies
78
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:87==
A.4
Plant Simulator Runtime Class Diagram
IRuntimeBroker
out TRuntime
TRuntime Simulation
RuntimeStatus Status
Task StartSimulationAsync(PlantSimulationOptions, CancellationToken)
Task StopSimulationAsync(CancellationToken)
SimulationRuntimeBroker
PlantSimulator Simulation
Task runningSimulation
CancellationTokenSource cancellationTokenSource
ILoggerAdapter<SimulationRuntimeBroker> logger
ISimulationEventHandler eventHandler
IServiceProvider provider
RuntimeStatus
Waiting
Running
ISimulatorEventHandler
void OnSimulationTick(object, PlantSimulatorTickEvent)
GrpcSimulationEventHandler
SimulationClientServiceClient client
ISimulationStateFactory stateFactory
«protobuf generated»
SimulationClientServiceClient
SimulationStateResponse TransmitState(SimulationState)
ServerHelloResponse SayHello(ServerHelloRequest)
ServerGoodByeResponse SayGoodBye(ServerGoodByeRequest)
ISimulationStateFactory
SimulationState Create(string, IPlant, SimulationStateSnapshot)
SimulationStateFactory
PlantModelState CreatePlantState(IPlant)
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModelState> CreateShootState(IShootSystem)
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModelState> CreateRootState(IRootSystem)
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModelState> IterateSystem(IPlantPart)
PlantNodeModelState CreateStateFromPlantPart(IPlantPart)
«protobuf generated»
SimulationServerService
IRuntimeBroker<PlantSimulator> broker
Task<StartSimulationResponse> StartSimulation(SimulationConﬁguration, ServerCallContext)
Task<StopSimulationResponse> StopSimulation(StopSimulationRequest, ServerCallContext)
1
1
1
1
1
Figure A.2: UML Class Diagram of the Plant Simulator runtime
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
79
==PAGE:88==
A.5
Plant Simulator Class Diagram
ISimulator
Task StartAsync(CancellationToken)
Task StopAsync()
IDisposable
PlantSimulator
ILoggerAdapter<PlantSimulator> logger
IPlantRunner plantRunner
IPlantSimulatorOptions options
CancellationTokenSource Stopping
ulong TickCount
DateTime lastExecutionTime
EventHandler<PlantSimulatorTickEvent> OnTick
void Action(object)
bool Tick()
bool ShouldSkip()
bool ShouldSendInvokeTickEvent()
void InvokeTickEvent()
events
IPlantRunner
IPlant Plant
SimulationEnvironment Environment
Tick(SimulationStateSnapshot)
GenericPlantRunner
IPlantGrower plantGrower
IPlantGrower
void GrowPlant(IPlant, SimulationStateSnapshot)
GenericPlantGrower
ICellGrower cellGrower
SimulationStateSnapshot currentState
SimulationEnvironment environment
void IterateRootSystem(IRootSystem)
void IterateShootSystem(IShootSystem)
void IteratePlantParts(IPlantPart, bool)
void HandlePlantPart(IPlantPart, bool)
void HandleRootCell(IPlantCell, IPlantPart)
void HandleShootCell(IPlantCell, IPlantPart)
ICellGrower
void GrowShootCell(IPlantCell, IPlantPart, SimulationStateSnapshot)
void GrowRootCell(IPlantCell, IPlantPart, SimulationStateSnapshot)
GenericCellGrower
IPlant plant
SimulationEnvironment environment
SimulationStateSnapshot
ulong CurrentTime
SimulationEnvironment
IVertex LightPosition
ﬂoat Temperature
IPlantSimulatorOptions
string Id
ISimulationOptions Simulation
ISimulationPlantOptions Plant
ISimulationEnvironmentOptions Environment
PlantSimulatorOptions
ISimulationOptions
uint TickTime
uint TickEventTime
int RandomSeed
SimulationOptions
ISimulationPlantOptions
Range<int> Branches
Range<int> SubBranches
Range<int> InternodeLength
Range<int> PetioleLength
int Axil
SimulationPlantOptions
ISimulationEnvironmentOptions
ﬂoat Temperature
IVertex LightSource
SimulationEnvironmentOptions
PlantSimulatorTickEvent
string Id
IPlant Plant
ulong TickTimer
IVertex
ﬂoat X
ﬂoat Y
ﬂoat Z
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Figure A.3: UML Class Diagram of the Plant Simulator runtime
80
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:89==
A.6
Plant Cells Class Diagram
IPlantCell
PlantCellType CellType
ICellGeometry Geometry
IPlantCell[] Neighbors
ICellWall CellWall
IVacuole Vacuole
float TurgorPressure
bool IsDead
void Kill()
PlantCell
CollenchymaCell
ParenchymaCell
PhloemCell
SclerenchymaCell
XylemCell
ICellGeometry
IVertex TopCenter
IVertex BottomCenter
IFace Face
float Length
CellGeometry
IFace
IVertex[] Points
float Area
Face
IVertex
float X
float Y
float Z
Vertex
IVacuole
float Volume
Vacuole
ICellWall
bool Primary
float Thickness
CellWall
PlantCellType
Xylem
Phloem
Sclerenchyma
Collenchyma
Parenchyma
1
1
0 .. *
1
1
2
1
Figure A.4: UML Class Diagram of the plant cells
A.7
Plant and Plant Parts Class Diagram
IPlant
IShootSystem Shoot
IRootSystem Root
IShootSystem
Stem Stem
IRootSystem
Root PrimaryRoot
IPlantPart
IEnumerable<IPlantCell> Cells
IEnumerable<IPlantPart> Connections
PlantPart
Stem
int BranchCount
Internode Internode
GenericStem
Internode
Node UpperNode
Node LowerNode
bool HasUpperNode()
bool HasLowerNode()
GenericInternode
Node
IEnumerable<Petiole> Petioles
Internode UpperInternode
Internode LowerInternode
bool HasPetiole()
bool HasUpperInternode()
bool HasLowerInternode()
GenericNode
Petiole
float Axil
Node Node
GenericPetiole
Root
IEnumerable<Root> ConnectedRoots
void ConnectRoot(Root)
GenericRoot
IPlantCell
1
1
1
1
0 .. *
0 .. *
Figure A.5: UML Class Diagram of the plant parts. IPlantCell details has been omitted
for brevity. See appendix A.6 for the details on IPlantCell.
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
81
==PAGE:90==
A.8
Plant Simulation State Class Diagram
SimulationState
string Id
ulong SimulationTime
DateTime Date
PlantModel Plant
PlantModel
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModel> ShootSystem
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModel> RootSystem
PlantNodeModel
Vector2[] Coordinates
int Thickness
IEnumerable<PlantNodeModel> Connections
Vector2
ﬂoat X
ﬂoat Y
1
0 .. *
0 .. *
0 .. *
Figure A.6: UML Class Diagram of the Plant Simulation State.
82
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:91==
A.9
Plant Simulation Cell Body System Solver
IGeometryHelper
bool IsOnLine(Vector2, Vector2[]);
Vector2 NearestPointOnLine(Vector2, Vector2[]);
Vector2[][] CreateFacePairs(Vector2[]);
bool IsInsidePolygon(Vector2, Vector2[]);
bool LinesIntersect(Vector2, Vector2, Vector2, Vector2);
Vector2 IntersectingPoint(Vector2, Vector2, Vector2, Vector2);
Vector2 IntersectingPoint(Vector2[], Vector2[]);
bool IsWithinHeight(Vector3, Vector3, Vector3, bool);
GeometryHelper
float Tolerance
ICellSizer
void ResizeWidth(IPlantCell, IPlantCell)
void ResizeHeight(IPlantCell, IPlantCell)
GenericCellSizer
IGeometryHelper geometryHelper
ILoggerAdapter<GenericCellSizer> logger
ResizeFace(IPlantCell, IPlantCell)
Vector2 FindNearestPoint(Vector2, Vector2[][])
void ResizeHeight(ICellGeometry, ICellGeometry)
void ChangeFace(ICellGeometry, Vector2, Vector2)
ICellBodySystemSolver
void Solve(IPlantPart);
GenericCellBodySystemSolver
ICellCollisionDetection collisionDetection
ICellSizer cellSizer
void SolveCell(IPlantCell, IPlantCell)
ICellCollisionDetection
bool Colliding(IPlantCell, IPlantCell, bool);
bool Neighbors(IPlantCell, IPlantCell, bool);
CellCollisionDetection
IGeometryHelper helper
IsWithinHeight(ICellGeometry, ICellGeometry)
bool IsInsidePolygon(Vector2[], Vector2[])
bool IsOnPolygonLine(Vector2[], Vector2[][])
1
1
1
1
Figure A.7: UML Class Diagram of the Plant Cell Body System Solver
A.10
IPlantPart Abstract Implementation
Listing A.1: IPlantPart Abstract Implementation
1
/// <summary >
2
/// Base abstract class for a <see cref="PlantPart"/> that all
other plant parts must inherit from.
3
/// </summary >
4
public abstract class PlantPart : IPlantPart
5
{
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
83
==PAGE:92==
6
public object Synchronizer { get; } = new object();
7
8
/// <summary >
9
/// Get the branch counter for which this plant part is part of
10
/// </summary >
11
public int BranchCount { get; }
12
13
/// <summary >
14
/// Get the type of plant part
15
/// </summary >
16
public abstract PlantPartType PartType { get; }
17
18
/// <summary >
19
/// Backing field for <see cref="Cells"/> property
20
/// </summary >
21
private readonly List<IPlantCell > cells = new List<IPlantCell
>();
22
23
/// <summary >
24
/// Get an enumerable of all the plant cells for this plant
part
25
/// </summary >
26
public IEnumerable <IPlantCell > Cells
27
{
28
get => cells;
29
set
30
{
31
if (value == null) return;
32
cells.AddRange(value);
33
}
34
}
35
36
/// <summary >
37
/// Field for the <see cref="Connections"/> property
38
/// </summary >
39
private readonly List<IPlantPart > connections = new List<
IPlantPart >();
40
41
/// <summary >
42
/// Get an enumerable of all the forward connected plant parts
43
/// </summary >
44
public IEnumerable <IPlantPart > Connections
45
{
46
get => connections;
47
set
48
{
49
if (value == null) return;
50
connections.AddRange(value);
51
}
52
}
53
54
/// <summary >
55
/// Instantiate an empty <see cref="PlantPart"/>
56
/// </summary >
57
protected PlantPart() { }
58
59
/// <summary >
60
/// Instantiate a new <see cref="PlantPart"/> with the provided
plant cells and connections
61
/// </summary >
62
/// <param name="cells">The plant cells for this plant part</
param>
84
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:93==
63
/// <param name="connections">The <see cref="PlantPart"/>
connections for this <see cref="PlantPart"/></param>
64
/// <param name="branchCount">The branch counter for which this
plant part is part of</param>
65
protected PlantPart(IEnumerable <IPlantCell > cells, IEnumerable <
IPlantPart > connections , int branchCount)
66
{
67
Cells = cells;
68
Connections = connections;
69
BranchCount = branchCount;
70
}
71
72
/// <summary >
73
/// Instantiate a new <see cref="PlantPart"/> with the provided
cells and zero connections
74
/// </summary >
75
/// <param name="cells">The plant cells for this plant part </
param>
76
/// <param name="branchCount">The branch counter for which this
plant part is part of</param>
77
protected PlantPart(IEnumerable <IPlantCell > cells, int
branchCount)
78
{
79
Cells = cells;
80
BranchCount = branchCount;
81
}
82
}
A.11
IPlantPartDescriptor Interface
Listing A.2: IPlantPart Abstract Implementation
1
public interface IPlantPartDescriptor
2
{
3
/// <summary >
4
/// The top center point
5
/// </summary >
6
public Vector3 Top { get; set; }
7
8
/// <summary >
9
/// The bottom center point
10
/// </summary >
11
public Vector3 Bottom { get; set; }
12
13
/// <summary >
14
/// The height between <see cref="Top"/> and <see cref="Bottom"/>
15
/// </summary >
16
public float Height { get; set; }
17
18
/// <summary >
19
/// The width between center and <see cref="MaxX"/>
20
/// </summary >
21
public float WidthX { get; set; }
22
23
/// <summary >
24
/// The width between center and <see cref="MaxZ"/>
25
/// </summary >
26
public float WidthZ { get; set; }
27
28
/// <summary >
29
/// The highest X value
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
85
==PAGE:94==
30
/// </summary >
31
public float MaxX { get; set; }
32
33
/// <summary >
34
/// The highest Y value
35
/// </summary >
36
public float MaxY { get; set; }
37
38
/// <summary >
39
/// The highest Z value
40
/// </summary >
41
public float MaxZ { get; set; }
42
43
/// <summary >
44
/// The lowest x value
45
/// </summary >
46
public float MinX { get; set; }
47
48
/// <summary >
49
/// The lowest Y value
50
/// </summary >
51
public float MinY { get; set; }
52
53
/// <summary >
54
/// The lowest z value
55
/// </summary >
56
public float MinZ { get; set; }
57
}
A.12
Maize Plant Constant Growth Options
Listing A.3: Maize Plant Constant Growth Options
1
new PlantSimulationOptions
2
{
3
Id = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(),
4
Simulation = new SimulationOptions
5
{
6
TickTime = 50,
7
RandomSeed = 3,
8
TickEventTime = 24,
9
StopAtTick = 1320
10
},
11
Cell = new SimulationCellOptions
12
{
13
ParenchymaCellSize = .5f,
14
CollenchymaCellSize = .5f,
15
PhloemCellSize = .5f,
16
SclerenchymaCellSize = .5f,
17
XylemCellSize = .5f
18
},
19
Environment = new SimulationEnvironmentOptions
20
{
21
LightSource = new Vertex(0, 1000, 0),
22
Temperature = 21f
23
},
24
Plant = new SimulationPlantOptions
25
{
26
PetioleLength = new Range<int>(5, 5),
27
NewStemWidth = new Range<int>(21, 21),
28
Branches = new Range<int>(0, 0),
86
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:95==
29
PetiolesPerNode = new Range<int>(1, 2),
30
StemsPerNode = new Range<int>(0, 0),
31
NewPetioleWidth = new Range<int>(5, 5),
32
InitialStemWidth = 21,
33
SubBranches = new Range<int>(0, 0),
34
MaxInternodeLength = new Range<float >(7, 8),
35
LeafsPerNode = new Range<int>(0, 0),
36
NewNodeTickCount = new Range<int>(int.MaxValue , int.
MaxValue),
37
GrowthRange = new Range<float >(0.03f, 0.036f),
38
NewNodeInternodeLength = new Range<float >(3, 4),
39
TerminalHeight = new Range<float >(90, 90),
40
Axil = 45,
41
RootTickStopGrowth = new Range<int>(int.MaxValue , int.
MaxValue),
42
TerminalRootLength = new Range<float >(30, 30),
43
NewRootLength = new Range<float >(100, 100),
44
NewRootTick = new Range<int>(9999, 9999)
45
}
46
}
A.13
Maize Plant Energy Growth Options
Listing A.4: Maize Plant Energy Growth Options
1
new PlantSimulationOptions
2
{
3
Simulation = new SimulationOptions
4
{
5
TickTime = 50,
6
RandomSeed = 3,
7
TickEventTime = 24,
8
StopAtTick = 1320
9
},
10
Cell = new SimulationCellOptions
11
{
12
ParenchymaCellSize = .5f,
13
CollenchymaCellSize = .5f,
14
PhloemCellSize = .5f,
15
SclerenchymaCellSize = .5f,
16
XylemCellSize = .5f
17
},
18
Environment = new SimulationEnvironmentOptions
19
{
20
LightSource = new Vertex(0, 1000, 0),
21
Temperature = 21f
22
},
23
Plant = new SimulationPlantOptions
24
{
25
PetioleLength = new Range<int>(5, 5),
26
NewStemWidth = new Range<int>(21, 21),
27
Branches = new Range<int>(0, 0),
28
PetiolesPerNode = new Range<int>(1, 2),
29
StemsPerNode = new Range<int>(0, 0),
30
NewPetioleWidth = new Range<int>(5, 5),
31
InitialStemWidth = 21,
32
SubBranches = new Range<int>(0, 0),
33
MaxInternodeLength = new Range<float >(7, 8),
34
LeafsPerNode = new Range<int>(0, 0),
35
NewNodeTickCount = new Range<int>(int.MaxValue , int.
MaxValue),
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
87
==PAGE:96==
36
GrowthRange = new Range<float >(0.1f, 0.1f),
37
NewNodeInternodeLength = new Range<float >(3, 4),
38
TerminalHeight = new Range<float >(90, 90),
39
Axil = 45,
40
RootTickStopGrowth = new Range<int>(int.MaxValue , int.
MaxValue),
41
TerminalRootLength = new Range<float >(30, 30),
42
NewRootLength = new Range<float >(100, 100),
43
NewRootTick = new Range<int>(9999, 9999)
44
}
45
}
88
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
==PAGE:97==
Plant Modelling for Controlled Environment Agriculture Systems
89
==PAGE:98==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
