==PAGE:1==
Project Report
Hybrid IDS using machine learning in
cloud environments
Malamin Bah
s134536
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
25 June 2020
Supervisor Weizhi Meng
1
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
Cloud computing is a growing market full of unrealized potential, for which numerous large scaled
company’s, are trying to overtake. Cloud services produce on demand services, that are ﬂexible
with low expenditure to a broad amount of users.
But with critical infrastructure and a increase of demanding clients in the cloud services, there
is a need of advanced security precautions, that is in the interest of the clients and the provider.
Intrusion detection system, is just one mechanism out of many, that can be used to provide
security to a certain extent, which is the main focus in this report. Based on their placement
and functionalities, they can be categorized into 4 types: host-based intrusion detection system ,
network-based intrusion detection system, distributed intrusion detection system and hypervisor-
based intrusion detection system. This document provides a detailed description of a proposed
hybrid intrusion detection implementation, in a cloud environment.
1
==PAGE:3==
2
Introduction
In the recent years we’ve seen a growing trend in cloud systems, providing customers with
software, infrastructure and platforms demanded by a growing market. In cloud systems we can
generally provide services in tree diﬀerent ways ways
• Software as a Service (SaaS) where users are able to execute software applications.
• Platform as a Service (PaaS), where the user is provided with developing environments and
can deploy user-created applications.
• Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), where the user has the full administer over complete
virtual machines but do not physically have access them.
Cloud service providers such as Microsoft, Amazon, Google and many others are going full on
of getting the market shares of Paas, Saas and Iaas, which could turn to be a very lucrative
market. Cloud Computing oﬀers pervasive, convenient, on demand access to a shared arrange of
conﬁgurable computing resources such as network , services, storage, applications and servers[9].
However the consequences on high demand cloud computing and strong competition, makes
the cloud services even cheaper and more convenient for hackers to both utilize themselves and
exploit other service customers.
Being on the front edge now, doesn’t guarantee being on the front edge tomorrow, things change
rapidly and every industry dealing with IT infrastructure, must adapt and develop continually.
Connecting more and more devices to the Internet to ease our every day living, seems to be a
growing trend that’s here to stay. But as we connect more and more devices, we become more
and more vulnerable to cyber threats and as we have seen in the past, almost every industry is
aﬀected and have been proven hackable.
Especially in cloud environments where critical data and infrastructure can be at stake it’s
extremely important that security is taken into a very high account, which hasn’t always been
the case from some organisations in the past.
Keeping the security on point is very diﬃcult especially in a vast and complex cloud environment
where we have seen several loopholes in diﬀerent layers being exploited.
2
==PAGE:4==
This report proposes an implementation of a hybrid intrusion detection mechanism in a eucalyp-
tus cloud environment, using multiple machine leaning detecting techniques accompanying with
a signature based detection.
3
Background
In this section, we will introduce theories and frameworks behind cloud networks, where further
theory will be applied in the other sections.
Introducing clouds system [10]
In cloud systems the performance of an intrusion system highly depends on several measures,
like the detection technique, the placement of the intrusion system in the current network and
its speciﬁc conﬁguration [9]. In cloud systems, the intrusion system can be located at diﬀerent
locations such as the network borderline, at a certain host, at the hypervisor, or distributed
in diﬀerent regions in the cloud[9]. We can broadly outline 4 diﬀerent approaches to build a
intrusion detection system in cloud environments
• Host-based intrusion system.
• Network-based intrusion system.
• Distributed intrusion system.
• Hypervisor-based intrusion system.
3.1
Host-based intrusion detection system
Hosts-based intrusion detection systems (also called HIDS) gathers information from a speciﬁc
host, where intrusive events are analyzed and detected if needed. The recorded information is
usually critical host-system logs or vital information about the current state of the operating
system. The HIDS evaluates its current information ﬂow and checks whether there is some kind
of anomaly’s that diverge from normal behavior and if so, the network manager is notiﬁed in
which signiﬁes that the system is under attack.
3
==PAGE:5==
The eﬀectiveness of the HIDS is particularly decided by the collected data features, that pro-
vides the information for detection. If the collected features is a poor collection representative,
the detection rate will naturally also be insuﬃcient. Therefor its very important to get a large
and signiﬁcant collection of feature data, that that segregates good behavior from bad behav-
ior/anomalys. However, too much data can also be an issue in terms of storage and can become
very troublesome if not streamlined in terms of performance and cost. In general we can say
that a HIDS has the following pros and cons :
• No additional hardware needed.
• Eﬀective intrusion Identiﬁer by monitoring a host’s events.
• Required to be install on every host machine in the network to be suﬃcient.
• Limited to only detec attacks on the host machine
In a cloud computing network, the HIDS can be deployed on either the hypervisor VM or a
given host to analyze the most vital sections on the cloud. Deploying the detection system on a
appropriate authority, gives the ability to measure crucial activity, such as user login information,
access control policies, detected intrusion events and system logs. Service customers of Iaas and
Pass has the responsibility themselves to administer and deploy their own HIDS at their given
VM. Whereas the cloud service provider has the responsibility of the distribution of HIDS on
hypervisor level. As we can see below on ﬁgure ?? we can see where the IDS’s er placed in the
cloud system.
4
==PAGE:6==
Figure 1: A simple example of how an HIDS could look like
3.2
Network-based intrusion detection system
Intrusion systems can also be network-based, (called NIDS) where monitored traﬃc of a network
is able to detect potential intrusions. The NIDS is particularly good at detecting probing and
DoS attacks, as well as direct intrusion access attempt[10].
In order to detect intrusions, the NIDS usually monitors the IP and transport layer headers
of monitored network packets[9].
Both anomaly or signature-based detection techniques can
be use to identify intrusions in network-based intrusion systems.
The NIDS can either look
5
==PAGE:7==
for correlations in network packet as signatures of already familiar attacks, or correlations of
behavior in normal and odd behavior in coherent circumstances. However the NIDS has one
particular ﬂaw, which is that it is incapable of performing analysis on encrypted traﬃc [9]. If we
look at NIDS in cloud systems, the intrusions attempted on either hypervisors or VMs can be
detected by placing the NIDS at the external network layer which could be the cloud servers.
Another important thing to keep in mind, is that if we place the NIDS at the external layer,
it will not be suﬃcient enough to protect the cloud entirely and detect attacks inside a virtual
network contained by hypervisor [9]. Therefor we must insure that we include other NIDS’s
positioned internal within the cloud to provide suﬃcient coverage.
The NIDS must be kept hidden from outsiders by any means and even inside from the host
machines perspective. The location of NIDS is usually also hidden, to insure that no attackers
gains conﬁdential information and knowledge, that potentially can harm the system. If attackers
gains knowledge to a speciﬁc intrusion system they can quickly point out the weakness’s and
strengths, where loopholes can be found. Consequently, the intruder will developed new methods
to bypass the detection mechanisms. Therefore its very crucial to properly secure the NIDS from
attackers, by deploying them invisible and unavailable.
Overall we can conclude the following stats for NIDS’s
• Eﬀective network intrusion Identiﬁer, monitoring on a underlying network.
• Can monitor several systems concurrently.
• Eﬀective intrusion Identiﬁer by monitoring a host’s events.
• Detects external intrusion and not internally.
• Tough to detect intrusions on encrypted network traﬃc.
• Complicated to detect network intrusions in virtual network.
On ﬁgure ?? we can see a simple example of a NIDS.
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2: A simple example of how an NIDS could look like
3.3
Distributed intrusion detection system
A Distributed intrusion detection system (Shortening as DIDS) is a collection of several intrusion
systems as previously mention (NIDS, HIDS), which are distributed across an entire system, to
analyze current data for malicious behavior in diﬀerent components. These distributed systems
act collectively to share vital information, where the systems either share knowledge with one
another, or with a centralized server. The central server evaluates all the information from every
IDS and see’s things in a bigger perspective, that can be highly essential the individual units.
The DIDS advantages and disadvantages can can seen outlined below
• Eﬀective network and host intrusion identiﬁer, monitoring a underlying network and on
7
==PAGE:9==
host machines.
• Can monitor several systems concurrently.
• Detects external intrusion and internally intrusions.
• Touch to manage a demanding centralized DIDS.
• Extensive communication and computing required.
To establish the DIDS mechanisms, every individual distributed intrusion system, has its own
detection component and a corresponding correlation manager. The correlation manager gathers
all intel from every other IDS(or from server), where new unknown attacks are noted and classi-
ﬁed. Whereas the detection component surveils a given component in the system and forwards a
standardize form of the monitored intelligence to the correlation manager. DIDS used in clouds,
are placed at both external servers as well as host machines. Figure 3 illustrates how an DIDS
look likes
Figure 3: A simple example of how an DIDS could look like
8
==PAGE:10==
3.4
Hypervisor-based intrusion detection system
A Hypervisor is a platform , that enables us to run diﬀerent virtual machines.
Hypervisor-
based systems are particularly used for hypervisors administration, where its positioned at the
hypervisor layer.
The system obtains information based on interactions at several layers, where communication
between VM and hypervisor are gathered. Moreover the internal interactions from the hypervi-
sors virtual network is also monitored, making the overall availability of information very great
and suitable for detection. On ﬁgure 4 we see the architecture of a hypervisor-based intrusion
system
Figure 4: A simple example of how an hypervisor-based detection system could look like
9
==PAGE:11==
In general this approach is quite new thus the amount of the experience very low making it a
uncertain and risky ”walking on uncharted territory”. We conclude the ther hyperviser with the
following pros and cons in Hypervisor-based intrusion systems
• Eﬀective intrusion detection system that monitors communications between diﬀerent VMs
and hypervisers.
• Can monitor several systems concurrently.
• Not a lot of real world experience and complicated to grasp.
If we look at the speciﬁc attacks that in general occurs in computer systems, we are interested
to simplify them and try to group them into categories, in order to conveniently analyze them.
As well as for cloud intrusion systems, we can describe all the diﬀerent cyber attacks into 4
categories
• Dos attack
• Probing
• User to root -U2R
• remote to local R2L
3.5
Denial of service attack
Denial of service (Dos) attack represents the attacks, where an attacker takes advantage of one
or multiple computing units in order to assign a enormous amount of networking packets to
overcome the availability of a certain system. Consequently, this leads genuine users unable to
access a given resource over the Internet. In respect of cloud environments, the attacker forwards
a huge amount of requests through a puppet controlled network of computing units, in order to
block a targeting virtual machine, disabling its resources, making online services unavailable to
genuine users.
10
==PAGE:12==
3.6
Probing
Probing is a indirect attack where the intruder surveils a speciﬁc target in order to gather
information to then later attempt another attack. The surveillance can done by port scanning,
which supplies the intruder with a list of open, closed and ﬁltered ports. The approach provides
the attackers with vulnerable ports and services, that can contribute to an attacker understanding
of an system . Cloud detailed conﬁdential information like, IP addresses , MAC addresses, router,
gateways, ﬁrewall rules etc. can be comprised and leaked[10]. Port scanning can be achieved with
TCP , UDP, SYN, FIN and ACK scanning depending on how the intruders wants to obtain the
information. Consequently, the intruder gets the opportunity to attack targeted cloud services
previously discovered by port scanning.
3.7
User to root
In user to root attacks (also refereed as U2R), the intruder gets access to legitimate user’s account,
which could be by obtaining the password, in which could be compromised in many diﬀerent
ways(In insider attack could use his/her own user ). Vulnerable passwords, key-loggers,phishing,
brute force, etc. are all examples of how intruders gets the possibility to exploit a given system.
A fatal compromise like an U2R attack, can give the intruder the ability to exploit vulnerabilities
and gain root privileges to system[10]. The breaches are orchestrated by the authorized users
who try to gather and exploit the privileges that are either assigned or not assigned to them
authoritatively. If we look at the cloud perspective, this happens when an attacker achieves
root privileges of host or certain virtual machines by ﬁrst getting access to an authorized users
instances [9].
A typical example could be, buﬀer overﬂows which are mainly used to create
root shells from a particular process that has root rights. This happens when the applications
execution code ﬂoods the static buﬀer[10].
3.8
Remote to local
Remote to local (R2L) attacks, happens when an attacker interacts with a remote machine, to
then exploit the machines vulnerability to illegally gain local access as a VM user or hyperviser
11
==PAGE:13==
[4]. The most common attacks on the clouds virtual layer are SubVir, BLUEPILL, and DKSM
which enables hackers to administer hosts through hypervisors[9].
Intruders in cloud systems, typically targets the hypervisor or virtual machines, where access can
be achieved with zero-day vulnerabilities, making it extremely diﬃcult to defend against, prior
to the administrations little/no experience with such exploits. Cloud providers have especially
in the past, experience a lot of zero-day vulnerabilities in the hypervisor and virtual machines
application which have caused of lot of damage to several cloud providers.
4
Methods
This section describes how our implementation abstracts the overall intrusion detection model
into detailed methods. There are several’s ways to construct a intrusion detection system, but
in general we divide the methods used, into two segments[11] - Signature based detection(also
called misuse detection) and anomaly based detection. Signature based detection methods can
distinguish familiar patterns based on behavior that categories a speciﬁc attack[7]. Whenever a
suspicious behavior that match a malicious pattern occurs, the signature detection notiﬁes the
system immediately. Signature intrusion detection deﬁnes a set of rules or knowledge base, that
decides whether a given pattern is an intrusion. The behavioral characteristics in signature de-
tection are identiﬁed by the networking traﬃc, where all attack patterns are stored in a database.
Variation of the predeﬁned attacks can also aﬀect the intrusion analysis critically, if the detection
system has not been correctly conﬁgured. Consequently, certain signature intrusion systems, can
be a targeted by intruders which fails to detect well-known attack with some modiﬁcation[10].
In this paper we’re mainly going to focus on the tool snort in terms of signature detection.
Overall we can display the pros and cons for signature detection as follows [10]
• Very eﬃcient, low computation required.
• High accuracy on known attacks.
• Cannot detect zero day attacks.
• High false positive on non-detected attacks.
12
==PAGE:14==
• Can be a victim of modiﬁed known attacks.
Anomaly detection methods can be used in cloud systems to detect and prevent unknown attacks
at diﬀerent segments of the cloud. We can generally outline a cloud, as a complex organization
with extensive amount of components (network layer or system layer etc.), which makes it very
troublesome to monitor or control[10].
With anomaly based detection we are able to detect
intrusions at diﬀerent layers at the cloud.
Anomaly based detection can be describes as a
approach that through massive training-data can learn how to distinguish speciﬁc anomaly’s in a
given environment from normal behavior. Anomaly detection has the ability of detecting attacks
that no database has knowledge about or hasn’t occurred before(zero day attack). A crucial
advantage using the anomaly approach, is that it can minimize the false positive rate for both
undiscovered and known attacks.
As for anomaly detection, we can point out the weaknesses and strengths as following
• Can detect zero day attacks
• High computation demand for training
• Requires extensive training time
• Needs accurate training data
• Can minimize false positive rate
Combining the two methods can enhance our performance and give us even better precision in
our detection system. This is the so called hybrid variant, that takes advantages of the two
methods beneﬁts and minimizes the weaknesses. The motivation behind this combination is the
ability to detect both known and zero day attacks using signature and anomaly based detection
systems.
4.1
Signature based detection
As mentioned earlier we are only dealing with the snort tool in terms of signature based detection.
In clouds, signature based detection can either be placed at the front-end of the Cloud to detect
external intrusions, or at the back-end of the Cloud to detect external/internal intrusions[10].
13
==PAGE:15==
4.1.1
Snort
In this paper we use the snort tool to create a signature based detection. Snort is a open-source
tool, providing a intrusion prevention and detection system, that’s capable of evaluating real-
time network traﬃc, based on known attacks. This is accomplished by analyzing network traﬃc,
and gives the user the ability of detecting and neutralizing potential exploits, conducted on the
aﬀected network. In order to do so, snort is dropping malicious packages of the network, before
reaching its original destination. Currently there are two main versions of snort, snort 2 and
snort3 and in our implementation we use snort2.
4.2
Anomaly Based detection
Construction of Anomaly Based systems can be accomplished with several approaches such as
hidden Markov models, machine learning and statistical modeling [10]. Furthermore machine
learning can be divided into two types of learning supervised and unsupervised learning.
To our given problem supervised learning ﬁts extremely well, since we want to create a model that
can separate anomaly’s from normal occurrences given a large set of data with classiﬁcations.
Supervised learning can be describes as a leaning process, that acquires information through
a ”supervised” training process, where wrongly guesses labels are revealed and then adjusted
accordingly. Supervised learning can be branched into two categories, classiﬁcation and regres-
sion. In supervised learning where classiﬁcation is used, diﬀerent ways of ”votation” techniques
is determining the ”class” signifying the ”guess/estimate” of the learning function. Whereas re-
gression problems are returning real numbers which are mapped from the data domain, instead
of classiﬁcation labels.
To strengthen the system even more we use multiple anomaly based systems to improve the
detection rate.
4.3
Cross-validation
Cross-validation gives us the ability to analyze diﬀerent machine learning techniques and see
how well the perform against each other in practice. On a given data-set, cross-validation is
14
==PAGE:16==
a useful tool when we’re hesitate to choose the best ﬁtting ml model.
In order to analyze
numerous machine learning techniques, cross-validation ”folds”(divides) the data-set into minor
blocks based on a predeﬁned arbitrary value, as seen on ﬁgure 5. Whereas the data is trained
on a ratio of predefinedvariable−1
predefinedvariable
=(corresponding to All Blocks -1) of the speciﬁc data-set, and
is being tested on the last withstanding block.
Figure 5: ”N-Folds” cross validation example
This procedure is then done in the amount of the number blocks, where each individual block
is testes and the rest is trained on. The summarized evaluation of all the test is then returned,
and we can at that point tell which machine leaning method that works best in practice.
4.3.1
Hidden Markov models
Hidden Markov models(Also referred as HMM) is a probabilistic model, derived from the original
Markov chain/model. However the HMM and Markov chains diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the way
they interprets the states, where HMM has hidden states that are not observable. A hidden
Markov model gives the ability to operate with observed and hidden events, that deﬁne the factors
in the probabilistic model. The application of hmm’s is noticed in hand writing recognition, text
applications and as far as gesture recognition. If we look at a regular Markov chain M we can
deﬁne it as following
M = (S, P, π, AP, L
(1)
• S is a ﬁnite, nonempty set of states, where n is the number of states.
• P is the transition probability function where, P
s′∈S P(s, s
′) = 1
15
==PAGE:17==
• π is the initial distribution such that P
s∈S π(s) = 1(the probability that the Markov chain
will start in a given state s
′)
• AP is the set of atomic propositions.
• L is the labeling function where L : S →2AP .
Figure 6: An example of a Markov chain
On ﬁgure 6 we can see an example of what a Markov chain could look like and how the diﬀerent
components builds the model. Whereas a Hidden Markov model H can be described diﬀerently
in a tuple as following
H = (S, P, π, O, B)
(2)
• S can be describes as a ﬁnite, nonempty set of states, where n is the number of states.
• P is the transition probability function where, P
s′∈S P(s, s
′) = 1
• π is the initial distribution such that P
s∈S π(s) = 1(the probability that the Markov chain
will start in a given state s
′)
• O is a set of T observations, each derived from the available Vocabulary/dictionary V =
v1, v2, v3, v4, vn
• B is a set of observation probabilities in a given state, (also called emission probabilities)
such that, P
o′∈O B(o
′) = 1. The probability of an observation o
′ being achieved from a
given state s
′.
16
==PAGE:18==
The hidden Markov chains is a unsupervised leaning approach where either K-means or Baum-
Welch can be used to train the speciﬁc model.
Baum-Welch(also called backward-forward
algorithm) trains the emission probability and the transition probability based on the given
observations/training-set[6]. The algorithm inputs and output can be formalized as following
Algorithm baumWelch(Set of hidden states S, observation vocabulary V, set of observations
O) return (A,B)
To calculate the trained emission probability B we need to calculate the probability of a given
symbol Ok from the observation vocabulary V, given a state j, where B(j, Ok)[8].
Here the
”numerator” and ”denumerator” comes into play. The numerator γ is the product of the forward
probability and the backward probability which is the expected number of times in state j and
observing symbol Ok. The numerator for the trained emission probability B can be calculated
as
n
X
i=1
V.size
X
j=1
T
X
k=1
Ok.size
X
t=1
γ(t, k) = α(t, i)β(t, i),∀Oi = j
The denumerator ξ is the expected number of appearances of an state Si which is
n
X
i=1
V.size
X
j=1
T
X
k=1
Ok.size−1
X
t=1
ξ(t, k) = α(t, i)β(t, i),∀Oi
(3)
The emission probability B(i,j) can then be calculated as a fraction of the numerator and the
denumerator.
B(i, j) =
T
X
n=0
γt(k)
ξt(k)
17
==PAGE:19==
(4)
Likewise we would also like to calculate the Transition probabilities A(i, j)
γ as for Transition probabilities, we can describe it as the product of the forward probability,
the backward probability, emission probability of Ot and the backward probability of the next
observation β(t + 1, i). The numerator can be explained as the expected number of transitions
from state i to state j.
n
X
i=1
V.size
X
j=1
T
X
k=1
Ok.size
X
t=1
γ(t, k) = α(t, i)β(t, i)B(j, Ot+1)β(t + 1, i), ∀Oi
The denumerator ξ is th expected number of transitions from state i and is calculated as the
same as for the emission probability
n
X
i=1
V.size
X
j=1
T
X
k=1
Ok.size−1
X
t=1
ξt(k) = α(t, i)β(t, i),∀Oi
(5)
The transition probability A(i,j) can as well be calculated as a fraction of its numerator and
denumerator.
A(i, j) =
T
X
n=1
γt(k)
ξt(k)
(6)
18
==PAGE:20==
The α’s and β’s are given by the forward and the backward algorithms respectively and are
the hidden factors given in a HMM. These factors are calculated in between every observation
sequence to update and train the Hmm model. The forward algorithm computes the forward
probability alpha, which is the the observation probability summed over the diﬀerent probabil-
ities of all possible hidden state paths, generated by the observation sequence[8]. The forward
algorithm consist of 3 steps, initialization, Induction and termination. The overall procedure can
be detailed as following, where j is a state at a given time t
1.Initialization
α(1, j) = πjB(j, Oi)
2.Induction
α(t, j) =
Oi.size
X
i=1
α(t −1, j)A(i, j)B(j, Ot)
3. Termination:
P(O|λ) =
Oi.size
X
i=1
α(Oi.size, i)
(7)
In the initialization step we are calculating all the α variables at time = 0 with the regard of
the initial distribution and the current emission probabilities[8].
The second step Induction,
computes the sum of all the products which is α[t][i] ∗A[i][j]. Finally we reach the last step:
Termination which calculates the probability of an given hmm model λ and a speciﬁc observation
sequence. On ﬁgure 7 we can get an illustration on how alpha is being calculated.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 7: Diagram of alpha computation
We would also like to deﬁne the backward algorithm using a slightly similar approach. Given
the state i at time sequence t and a HMM , we can describe the Backward algorithm as follows.
Backward algorithm
1.Initialization
β(Oi.size, i) = 1
2.Induction
β(t, i) =
1
X
i=Oi.size
A(j, i)B(i, Ot + 1)β(t + 1, j)
3. Termination:
P(O|λ) =
Oi.size
X
i=1
πiB(i, O1)β(1, i)
(8)
20
==PAGE:22==
The backward algorithm computes the backward probability β, which is the overall probability
of encountering a observation sequence from time t+1 to the end. On ﬁgure 8 we can display
how the backward algorithm is calculated.
Figure 8: Diagram of beta computation
Instead of a top-down approach like in the forward process, the backward algorithm uses a
bottom up approach and initializes all the last elements to the value 1. In the Induction step
the backward probabilities is computed inductively in a identical way as the forward probability,
but in a bottom up approach. Lastly the termination step the backward probability is obtain
be summing the initial distribution times the emission probability of O1 and β(1, i), proving us
with probability of encountering a observation sequence.
In order to determine the probability of a given observation and classify it, we can either use the
forward algorithm or the Viterbi algorithm. The Viterbi algorithm provides us with the must
optimal sequence of hidden states along with along with a likelihood probability given a markov
model.
To sum up we can say that hidden Markov chain is a great machine leaning tool especially for time
dependent data. However Hmm’s can also be troublesome to operate with, since the observation
probability is dependable to training data-set size we can experience that with larger and diverse
data set the smaller probabilities of observations we would revolve around. Consequently over-
21
==PAGE:23==
ﬁtting can be a huge problem when dealing with hidden Markov chains. If we look at the ﬁelds
below we can get an overall view on the advanges and disadvantaged in terms of using Hmm’s.
• A solid probabilistic model, to which the leaning algorithms are known to be consistent
and eﬃcient
• Over-ﬁtting can a problem when data-set gets to comprehensive
• The Viterbi and Baum-Welch algorithm has huge expensive, both in terms of computation
time and memory allocation.
•
4.3.2
SVM
Support vector machine(also shorten to SVM) is a widely used tool when coping with learning
problems and is ideal in supervised two category classiﬁcation cases[3]. SVM is also capable of
operating with linear and non-linear circumstances, giving it a good starting point working with
varied shaped training data. SVM trains the data by placing it in a multi dimensional domain
based on training data-sets dimensions. In order to classify instances, SVM uses a threshold to
divide classiﬁed labels, by applying hyper-planes determined by the data’s dimension. In linear
cases the algorithm determines the threshold by using the widest street approach, which takes the
outer extreme samples from the two classes and splits them with a hyperplane. The distance from
the extreme samples to the threshold when ﬁtting with no mis-classiﬁcation is called ”margin”,
one option is to keep the distance between the two extreme samples to be equal, giving us a
hard margin classiﬁer. Another option could be to cherry pick from the two observation from
the diﬀerent classiﬁcations where half of the distance from those two representing the threshold.
This approach is called soft margin classiﬁer and allows mis-classiﬁcation giving us a bigger bias
compared to hard margin classiﬁer. But on the other hand, the soft margin classiﬁer can give us
a lower variance, resulting in better testing estimates in comparison with hard margin classiﬁer.
In order to decide the best soft margins cross validation is used
On ﬁgure 9 we see a two-dimensional example on how the threshold is determining by the margins
on the diﬀerent models.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 9: Example of soft and hard margins
While dealing with non-linear training data-set, SVM is applying kernelization in order to ﬁlter
and separate the diﬀerent classiﬁcations. kernelization uses diﬀerent kernel functions such as
sigmoid, polynomial, radial basis and more,to obtain the best possible hyperplane, by dividing
the sets with hard margins[3].The diﬀerent kernel functions maps the training data into a another
domain where classiﬁcations can be achieve with lower variance. Summed up we can display the
pros and cons using a Support vector machine.
• Eﬃcient with high dimensional data.
• Poor estimates with very small data-sets
• Performance decreases with very large data[5].
• High computation consumption when training.
4.3.3
K-Nearest Neighbor
Another popular supervised leaning approach is K-Nearest Neighbor(shortened as KNN) which
can be used for both regression and classiﬁcation.
K-Nearest Neighbor is a straightforward
classiﬁcation process where the estimate is based on a draw where the classiﬁcation with most
votes of ”K” Nearest Neighbor wins. The K in KNN signiﬁes the number of nearest neighbors
23
==PAGE:25==
that the classiﬁer uses to make its prediction, which has to be an odd number in order to avoid
draw elections.
On ﬁgure 10 we see a two-dimensional example on how a test sample is determine by K-Nearest
Neighbor.
Figure 10: Example of a KNN sample classiﬁcation in a two dimensional data-space
In order to calculate the distance from the sample object, several measuring techniques can be
used such as, Manhattan distance, euclidean distance,hamming distance and more. The KNN
technique is often applied in search engines, weather forecast and ﬁnance. Lastly we can outline
the advantage and disadvantage using KNN.
• Tolerant to data-set with noise
• No extensive training time with large data-sets
• Most eﬀective with large training data-sets
24
==PAGE:26==
• Extensive computing required when classiﬁcation happens to be with high data dimension.
• Hard to ﬁnd good distance approach with high dimensions
4.3.4
Random forest
Random forest is a machine learning method based on decision trees, that builds a ”forest”
consisting of random generated decision trees.
Random Forest is also a supervised learning
method that falls into the category of both classiﬁcation and regression. Since we are dealing
with labeled data the choice of classiﬁcation is rather straightforward. The ﬁnal decision when
using classiﬁcation, is based on what the majority of the forest decides[3]. In order to establish
the the speciﬁc split decision values we use the Gini Index which is given as follows:
Gini(t) = 1 −
c−1
X
i=0
[p(i|t)]2
The gini index, is a cost function that ﬁnds the ideal threshold value and splits a decision based
on that given threshold.
Figure 11: Example of a Random forest tree in a banking environment
25
==PAGE:27==
The application in Random Forrest is particularly seen in banking, object recognition, medical
industry and many more. As we can see on ﬁgure 11, we can see an example of a Random forest
sample tree generation, in a banking environment.
We can overall shortly display why is random Forrest a good anomaly detection method and
where its has some disadvantages.
• Less training time - The training time is very low
• Can handle lack oﬀdata - Can deal with samples with missing data
• Not good in regression problems
• Suﬃcient with large data sets - no over ﬁtting
• Lack of control on how the models perform we can only diﬀerentiate with seeds, forest size,
4.3.5
Naives Bayes
Naives Bayes uses probabilities to estimate likelihoods of data observations on the given clas-
siﬁcations. It can be used for both classiﬁcation and regression. Through training data, the
algorithm stores occurrences where the probabilities of the data observations with a respective
classiﬁcation is calculated. In order to classify an instance, we calculate the likelihood score of
that given observation with all the diﬀerent classiﬁcations. The probability of a observation can
be given as
P(Oo|ci) = P(o1|ci) ∗P(o2|ci) ∗P(o3|ci) ∗P(on|ci)
O is a arbitrary observation
ci is a speciﬁc classiﬁcation label
n is the length of the observation sequence (9)
26
==PAGE:28==
The classiﬁcation with the highest likelihood score is then chosen as the estimate. The reason
why the algorithm is called naive, can be explained in the way its sees the observations, where it
doesn’t distinguish between the orders of the observation, which in some cases doesn’t play and
some cases does. The algorithm doesn’t look for correlation in between the observation, which
gives the naive Bayes a very high bias, but on the other hand the algorithm perform very well in
classiﬁcation, giving it a low variance. Finally we can display the pros and cons of using Naive
Bayes as
• Low computation in classiﬁcation - Fast prediction times
• Performs better with enumerations rather than continuous domains
• No correlation of individual observations
• Poor estimation with unseen observations values
4.3.6
Neural networks
The last machine learning technique which is used in this project, is Neural networks. Neural
network uses a complex structure containing neurons, to classify data instances. The diﬀerent
neurons in the network comes in tree diﬀerent types: input neurons, hidden neurons, and output
neurons. These neurons are interconnected with weights that’s has a speciﬁc value decided by
the back-propagation function. Every neuron has a output that is determined by its in-going
weights, bias and the activation-function, except for the input neurons. The input neurons are
placed at the ﬁrst layer, where all the data is parsed as input to the function and the amount
of input neurons are decided by the data’s dimension. The hidden neurons are placed at the
hidden layer which can be distributed over one or multiple layers(from layer 2 till layer n-1). The
output neurons are positioned at the last layer and returns the ﬁnal output where the estimate
is rendered. The amount of output neurons is usually decided by the number of classiﬁcations.
On ﬁgure 12 we can see an example of a fully connected neural network with only 1 hidden layer
looks like.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 12: example of a Neural network structure
In order to train a data-set we use the algorithms feed forward and back-propagation to ﬁt the
network according to the training data-set. The feed-forward method computes every output
from every neuron and lastly returns the output from the output layer. Except from the input
layer, every output is calculated using activation-function, which can be diﬀerent kinds of linear
functions.
To compute the output we initially take the sum of all the outputs from previous layer times the
given connected weight plus the bias. The purpose of the bias is to align and compensate from
28
==PAGE:30==
a potential deviation to adjust the output so that it ﬁts the model as well as possible. The sum
can be calculated as follows
b +
N
X
i=1
wi ∗ni
Where N is the number of neurons in the previous layer
wi is the weight coming from the neuron i in the previous layer
ni is the output coming the from neuron i in the previous layer
b is the bias of the current neuron
(10)
After the sum is computed the output can ﬁnally be calculated using the activation function, in
this example the sigmoid function is used.
φ =
1
1 + ϵ−b + PN
i=1 wi ∗ni
(11)
To improve the model we use the error function back-propagation, which determines how close
our output is to our target value(training data), where we want to reduce the error function as
much as possible. Back-propagation is a bottom up approach starting from the last hidden layer
and ﬁnishing in the ﬁrst layer, calculating the deviating from the actual target.
• Simple to model particular problems
• Neural networks with many layers can be diﬃcult to train optimally
• Diﬃcult to apply the optimal adjusted parameters - due to the amount of adjustable
parameters
• Extensive training time for large data-sets
29
==PAGE:31==
5
Design
In this section we will dig deeper into the design of the diﬀerent models that corresponds to the
overall system.
5.1
Cloud architecture
In this project the open source software eucalyptus is used to create a cloud environment. Euca-
lyptus provide us with an infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) product, that enables us to run our
own private or hybrid cloud, to simulate a real world situation. Eucalyptus enables us to use our
own assortment of resources such as networks,hardware, and storage. Eucalyptus thus, having
the same name for a plant, is actually a acronym for Elastic Utility Computing Architecture for
Linking Your Programs To Useful Systems. The software is basically a Linux distribution which
provides us with two main components ”S3” and ”EC2” speciﬁcally used for high performance
computing. EC2 stands for elastic cloud compute, whereas S3 stands for simple storage system.
The cloud architecture of eucalyptus is very much scalable given its distributed structure, making
it highly attracted for developers(only the non open-source) to utilize. we can display all the
features that comes with Eucalyptus:
• Supports Linux virtual machines as well as Windows VM’s.
• Can manage several hypervisors from diﬀerent providers( VMware, Xen and KVM).
• Virtualization allows multiple clusters to be joined as a single cloud
• Various administrative features that deals with user and group management.
• Allows for installation and deployment using source code or RPM.
• Is Compatible with simple storage service (S3) and Amazon web services.
On ﬁgure 13 we can visualize the architecture of Eucalyptus where the cloud platform merges
existing virtualized infrastructure to construct cloud resources Saas, Paas and Iass.
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 13: Architecture of Eucalyptus
Cloud Controller
:
The cloud controller service, is a access point beneﬁcial to administrators, developers, end-users,
and project managers. The service enables users to access resources as computer storage and net-
work management, which provides high-level resource scheduling and system accounting. More-
over the services allows for EC2-compatibility along with SOAP based tools and Web interface,
as well as query interfaces in a public setup, where it is distributed within the cloud[1]. Further-
more the controller handles entering requests, and allows for user API requests executed from
command line interfaces such as GUI-based and euca2ools tools like the Eucalyptus management
console[1].
Every Eucalyptus cloud is required to have exactly one cloud controller and is usually placed on
the same host as user-facing services.
31
==PAGE:33==
Storage Controller
:
The storage controller is a unit that interacts with the cluster controller and node controller.
The interaction happens within the distributed cloud architecture, by managing the Eucalyptus
Elastic block alongside the snapshots to all the instances within the same availability zone, (clus-
ter) where the speciﬁc VM is running. The storage controller service is more or less identical to
the Amazon elastic block store and provides comparable functionalities[1]. Given the Eucalyptus
architecture, a storage controller cannot be mutually access by multiple VMs at once and re-
sources outside the cluster cannot access it. In order to write persistent data to memory outside
a availability zone, an instance is obligated to write to the main back-end storage, where every
instance in any cluster, has write access authorities. Users of the current system can generate
snapshots from the storage controller which are then stored by the object storage gateway, to
achieve availability across the diﬀerent clusters.
Cluster Controller
:
The cluster controller is a service executed on a host machine in which has networking and con-
nectivity insights to the current host machines. The controller operates the node controllers and
collects information about its corresponding set of node controllers, where scheduling of virtual
machines execution requests is scheduled on arranged node controllers. Every node controller
positioned in a given cluster has to be set up with its corresponding cluster controller in its
availability zone[1].
Node Controller
:
The node controller is a service that runs on every virtual machine’s hosts on which it administers
the activity on its corresponding virtual machine, where inspection, execution, and termination
of instances is performed[1]. Furthermore it contains a local cache of instance snapshots, that is
being fetched and maintain, to enhance the performance. The node controller controls the host
operating system (also attached hypervisors) and manages incoming requests from the Cluster
controller. The set of nodes can comes as many components, but each individual component
can only withstand a couple of genuine users[1]. However the distributed cloud architecture,
compensate for any bottlenecks in terms of node deﬁcit, given its scalability.
32
==PAGE:34==
Object Storage provider
:
Object Storage provider is a plug and play service that allows administrators dealing with in-
frastructure, to easy implement scaleble storage components on already existing systems, using
open source that can achieve S3 interfaces in a complaisant way. The object storage module can
be either the typical Eucalyptus Walrus back-end, Ceph-RGW, or Riak CS[1]. The most used
component is Walrus, which is designed for moderate S3 usage on a single service.
User Facing Services
:
The user facing services act as a endpoint for all the Amazon web services, in which every cloud
can have up to multiple user facing services host machines to keep up with a speciﬁc demand.
The Amazon web services oﬀered by Eucalyptus, are CloudWatch, LoadBalancing, AutoScaling,
tokens, Euare, and more[1].
Object Storage Gateway
:
The object storage gateway task, is to forward incoming requests to the object storage provider
and communicate to the persistence layer[1], where every single requests is authenticated. The
component is joined with user facing services and act as on one.
Management Console
:
The Eucalyptus Management Console is an simple framework that provide the users the ability
to manages the Eucalyptus cloud, accessible from a web-browser. The Management Console
is usually deployed on the identical host machine as the user facing services and is set with
the default username password ”admin” and ”password” respectively. The services particular
handles images, host instances, loadbalancer, scalling and other, for which every cloud can have
several management consoles.
Eucanetd
:
Finally there’s the Eucanetd service, which manage and deﬁnes the Eucalyptus cloud networking
by implementing artifacts[1]. Eucanetd is either executed with the node controller or cluster
controller depended on the current networking settings.
33
==PAGE:35==
5.2
Anomaly detection
In order to create a Anomaly based detection in generally, we need to achieve the following steps.
Steps of designing a model:
• Deﬁne structure of the selected anomaly detection technique
• Obtain the data set, by parsing it from data ﬁle(.csv/.arﬀ/) to java
• Normalize data
• Determine data for testing and training
• Initializing structure
• Train the network based on a selected data-set
• Test the network
• Come up with results
5.3
Model checking Markov chains
To design a qualiﬁed hidden Markov structure that ﬁts and describes the given problem, we need
to deﬁne the hidden states and their relations according to our model. To represent our model
we deﬁnes our hidden States as individual observations of the data-set. To align every states, we
need every state to have similar observation symbols, meaning every observation is normalized
into a interval of ‘N’ observations symbols in each states. The hidden Markov model is not
compatible with continuous values, and observation are therefore normalized into a interval of
integers. Using continuous domains makes it diﬃcult or even impossible to compute observation
probabilities given an inﬁnitely large spectre of observation symbols of certain observations. In
our stated problem, we use the weka ﬁlter InfoGainAttributeEval and selects the most signiﬁcant
features, to simplify the model and not used the entire data set. To be concrete, we use exactly
12 selected features, which has the best score from the ﬁlter. Every feature is then normalized
in the following manner
x =
xi
xmax
∗(S −1)
34
==PAGE:36==
where x is the normalized value
xi is the actual sample value
xmax is the maximum value the observations has
S is the number of observation symbols (12)
Figure 14, shows the particular Markov model with its transitions probabilities used with the
NSL-KDD data-set.
Figure 14: The probabilistic transition system and its speciﬁc transition with probabilities
The Markov model with its transition table shows the transition from states to states, where the
35
==PAGE:37==
connecting link transition in the ﬁgure indicates that there is a transition, done to simplify the
diagram.
In order to resemble the problem in the most appropriate manner, we create two hidden Markov
models, one for normal behavior and one for anomaly behavior. The Markov model signifying
the normal behavior is only trained (using Baum-Welch) with data classiﬁed as normal, whereas
the anomaly behavioral model is trained with abnormal classiﬁed data.
In pursuance of classifying instances, we would place the two models head to head, where the
most likely model will recognize the unknown observation with higher probability compared to
the other model. The classiﬁcation process can either be done with the forward probability or
the virterbi algorithm, where classiﬁed given unknown sequence is tested in both mark models.
The hidden markov model whose trained parameters recognizes the sample observation with the
highest probability, is classiﬁed as the output.
5.4
Neural network
When we have to determine the structure of a neural network, we initially look at the arrangement
of the input layer and output layer. The size of the input layer is decided by the amount of data
input we get from the training data-sets. The size of the output layer is dependent on the the
number of classiﬁcation labels in the given model. In our model, we have 2 classiﬁcation but
to be more precise, we can actually extend our model and can categorized all anomaly’s into 4
diﬀerent attacks. The following attacks are covered into details section 3.5-3.8
• Probing
• U2R
• Dos
• L2R
On the table below we see all the diﬀerent attacks categorized into the 4 speciﬁc attacks. All
these attacks are gathered and contain in the NSL-KDD data-set
36
==PAGE:38==
Attacks
Dos
Probe
U2R
R2L
apache2
backland
neptune
pod
mailbombe
processtable
smurf
teardrop
upstorm
worm
ipsweep
mscan
portsweep
saint
satan
buﬀer overﬂow
loadmodule
perl
ps
rootkit
sqlattack
xterm
ftp write
guess password
httptunnel
imap
multihop
named
phf
sendmail
snmpgetattack
spy
snmguess
warezclient
xlock
xsnoop
Table 1: All the diﬀerent attacks contain in the NSL-KDD data-set
All these attacks will act as their own output neuron along with a additional normal output
neuron divided into 4 categories. However the structure of the internal hidden layer is even more
diﬃcult to decide given that the optimal settings only can be obtain through trial and error.
But in generally the dimension of the hidden layer should be proportional to the according input
and output layer. To given an example it doesn’t make sense to create large complex structure
of hidden neurons with multiple layers, for simple problems with very few input neurons. A
good rule of thumb is that you do not want increase the amount of neurons rather a decrease,
starting from the input neurons across the network. The testing shoved that only one hidden
layer was necessary given no signiﬁcant better result was achieve with structure with more than 1
hidden layer. Using comprehensive complex structure, when no big improvements is achieved, is
a big trade-of taking into account that massive amount of performance is lost due to the need of
additional extensive calculations. That why the most cost eﬃcient structure has to be considered
ﬁrst.
37
==PAGE:39==
After deciding the the network structure we have to determine the most suitable training param-
eters to our given model, that give us the best possible results. If we look at a neural network,
we have the following adjustable features
• Training/test data-set size
• Training iterations/epochs
• Activation function
• Batch size
• Learning rate
First of all we need to determine the data distribution between test and train data, where cases
as 50/50 60/40 and 70/30 respectively can be considered. The amount of training data is indeed
important and we must make sure that we don’t overﬁt nor underﬁt our current model. The only
way to progress is though brute force trials, where the intuitive considerable cases with others
are tested.
Another critical parameter is the total amount of training iterations, meaning the total number
a times the learning algorithm, will iterate through the entire training data-set with a given
batch set. A Batch set is a set of samples data-collations in which are trained together before
improving the model parameters with learned information. Batch size and epochs are highly
correlated with each other as well at the leaning rate. The learning rate is a parameter that
manipulates the weights of our given network, by adjusting the weights towards the estimated
errors with a given constant factor.
The higher the leaning rate the faster the errors are adjusted towards the most ”optimally”
weights. Whereas with lower leaning rates, it takes longer time to reach a local minima. This
might seem, that higher leaning rate are the most eﬃcient, but lower leaning rates can turn out
to be a better choice. Since high leaning rates can end up with inconsistent behavior in your loss
function, due to proportionally higher updates.
The performance of the leaning rate can calculated as measure mean square, where the measure
mean square error can tell if the model is suitably ﬁtted to the training data-set. Furthermore we
38
==PAGE:40==
can optimize the model be using the right activation functions, where examples as ReLU, sigmoid,
softmax and hyperbolic tangent are classic popular approaches. Diﬀerent activation functions
can also be used in diﬀerent layers in the network, that can improve our model Signiﬁcantly. In
this project sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent are used in the hidden layers and the output layer
respectively, which has been supported by the investigating results.
To classify a given instance, we perform the feed forward process on the trained data, in order
to obtain the outputs where the highest output value is classiﬁed as our estimate.
on ﬁgure 15 we see the particular structure of the fully connected neural network processing the
NSL-KDD data-set.
Figure 15: Design of the Neural network
39
==PAGE:41==
By using this approach, we consequently accepts wrongly categorized attack classiﬁcation as
if they are correct. This means that, Dos attacks classiﬁed as probe attack counts as a true
positive instance and vice versa, since we in the end only distinguish between anomaly and
normal behavior.
5.5
Weka Classiﬁers
The machine leaning techniques apart from HMM and neural network, are all build using the
weka library in java. The methods are described in more detail in section 5.3 and are the following
• Support vector machine
• Random forest
• K-Nearest Neighbor
• Naive bayes
• j48
These algorithms is achieved using weka to, where the only inﬂuence we have to decide its
diﬀerent adjustable parameters.
The option parameters in weka various from method to method, where for example the random
forest has the forest size(number of trees),Number of attributes to randomly investigate,Seed for
random number generator and many others. Parameter options that aren’t conﬁgured are set to
default settings.
5.6
Proposed intrusion detection component
The Hmm and Neural network along with all the weka classiﬁers is collectively forming the
proposed detection system. A diagram of the detection system can be seen on ﬁgure 16
Network packet
:
The network package, is a individual sample with various features that is obtained by the detec-
tion component to analyse.
40
==PAGE:42==
Data preprocessing
:
In this particular component, we preprocess the data from the network packet in order to ﬁt
the criterias of our given methods. The preprocessing consist of normalization including data
labelling.
Snort signature detection
:
The snort module detects anomaly’s using rule-based criterias, combining with historical attack
signatures in order to detect any kind of malicious behavior.
Weka classiﬁers
:
The weka classiﬁer, represents all the classiﬁers constructed by the weka library, where a compu-
tation of several predictions are made by the diﬀerent classiﬁers and returned to the ﬁnal sample
classiﬁcation.
HMM
:
The Hidden Markov model computes its prediction based on the two constructed models and
returns its estimate to the evaluation module.
Neural network
:
The neural network computes a prediction based on a network structure suited to the data and
returns its estimate to the evaluation module.
Sample Classiﬁcation
:
In this module, all the classiﬁcations are evaluated and a ﬁnal prediction/ classiﬁcation is made.
Alert
:
If the sample Classiﬁcation evaluates the network packet to be any kind of malicious activity,
the alert module is then triggered and the system is notiﬁed.
41
==PAGE:43==
Accepts
:
If the sample Classiﬁcation evaluates the network packet to be normal activity then the system
is not notiﬁed, which represents the accept module.
Figure 16: The proposed intrusion detection system component
The proposed intrusion detection system, is a network based intrusion detection system(NIDS,
described in section 3.2) placed between the host machine and the main switch.
The NIDS
monitors the IP and transport layer headers of monitored network packets, where with the use
of Snort, we can log and classify every networking incident for testing and training purposes.
6
Implementation
In this section we will go deeper into how we realized the entire system and how the individual
components are implemented.
42
==PAGE:44==
6.1
Cloud environment
The environment is establish on a centOS 7.6 version conﬁgured with two network card com-
ponents, which are bridge and host only networking cards. In order to be compatible with the
Eucalyptus cloud, we need to conﬁgure the bridged network into static ips instead of dhcp. The
host only network card is created to have an ssh connection between the cloud and my main
laptop for convenience only. The network setup can be seen on ﬁgure 17
Figure 17: Eucalyptus server setup running CentOS together with the host Pc
Whenever centOS is properly conﬁgured we can initiate the Eucalyptus fast start transformation
by entering the following command, in the command-line tool
• bash < (curl −Lshttps : //eucalyptus.cloud/install)
Eventually after the process ﬁnished we need to install an image required for the host machines.
Eucalyptus are compatible with a variety of providers such as Fedora, Ubuntu and centOS. With
the following command, the host machine image is obtained
• python < (curl −Lshttps : //eucalyptus.cloud/images)
43
==PAGE:45==
In our current environment a Ubuntu images is used to represent our tested simulation envi-
ronment, where data is collected though snort and logged in the system. Snort is conﬁgured to
run as a NIDS, by editing a few conﬁguration ﬁles and downloading the rules that Snort will
introduce. The rules set contains both a local rule-set and a community rule set obtained from
snort. After the rule conﬁguration, snort is ready to go and is then run as a demon. All the
network packets monitored by snort, is saved to a local csv.ﬁle. The data attributes is logged
into the csv.ﬁle, by conﬁguring the snort.conf ﬁle using the Barnyard plug in and can be listed
below
• event.reference - Event reference
• protoname - Protocol name
• tv.sec - Duration on event in seconds
• ﬂags - The ﬂag
• priority - Priority id
• ref.tv.sec - The reference in seconds
• interface - The interface
• sport - The source port
• class - Class id
The documentation concerning the Eucalyptus cloud is in general, very limited and is only
restricted to the actual provider, where its nearly impossible to ﬁnd documentation anywhere
else. Many broken links and expired software are distributed, which makes it extremely diﬃcult
to acquire new knowledge.
6.2
Markov chains
In pursuance of creating a Hidden Markov chain, we used java to build the model and its functions
in two diﬀerent ways. First of all we used a library called ”JaHMM” to train and test a particular
44
==PAGE:46==
model.
Jahmm is a java library that provides developers with a Hidden Markov model for
training and classiﬁcation, designed for leaning problems. The library documentation is almost
non-existing and its is very diﬃcult to ﬁnd any useful exempliﬁcation of the coding structure.
Although, we managed to implement the required component to achieve a hidden Markov model,
where we can start explaining how we initialized the object. In order to create a hidden Markov
model object, we would need a the number of states and the object ”OpdfIntegerFactory”. The
object OpdfIntegerFactory is the container for all the data stored in the model as integers, which
allows us to manipulate and operate the model data. The HMM and the OpdfIntegerFactory is
initialized in the constructor of our newly created hidden Markov java class, where the training
data, number of states and number of symbols are given as arguments.
After creating the
model, the transition probabilities along with the initial distribution is initialized with random
values. To train the model, we speciﬁed a new method which creates the Baum-Welch object,
where the amount of training iterations is set based on the argument in the training method.
Using the Baum-Welch object, we can improve our model though training, where the model is
trained by placing the Hmm model alongside with the training-data as arguments. To evaluate
an instance and classify testing data, we can either use the ”ViterbiCalculator” obejct, or the
”ForwardBackwardScaledCalculator” obejct. The evaluating method, returns the likelihood of
the speciﬁc testing observation and is compared to the other model, in a comparison function in
the main class. The Second created Markov model is achieve using our own implemented Baum-
Welch and forward-backward function. The implementation of the Baum-Welch and forward-
backward algorithm, is based on the foundation made in section 5.3.1.
6.3
Weka
In order to implement classiﬁers using the weka library in java, we need to create additional
java classes for each individual weka classiﬁer. Every class is then created with a constructor,
where the training and testing data is parsed from the main class. Moreover the classes are
also equipped with a training method, that’s trains that given classiﬁer, using the required
options. In every training method each classiﬁer is obtain as classiﬁer object in the weka library
and trained with the method ”buildClassiﬁer”, where a training set is expected as argument.
45
==PAGE:47==
The training-set together with with the test-set are beforehand labeled with their classiﬁcation
and with the method ”setClassIndex”, which labels a data-point as a classiﬁcation, with the
expected input argument. Afterwards we would like to classify a given instance, which is done
by the evaluation object from the weka library, where a combination with a trained classiﬁer
can evaluate a particular testing-set, as collection or a single instances. Eventually the training
method returns the set of classiﬁcations as a String Array. The diﬀerent classiﬁers have distinct
set of options parameters, therefore we must make sure that we are using the must eﬃcient ones,
to perform as well as possible.
6.4
Neural Networks
The neural network is implemented in java, realized with a object network, that performs back-
propagation and feed-forward. The network is containing the network of neurons, that also have
been made into a object that contains the neurons information’s. The stored information in
every neuron has been designed to be easy accessible and suited towards the algorithms in the
network class. The Neuron properties can be outlined as the following
• Output
• Bias
• Error
• set of weight
• Methods to obtain all the features
The output is the product of previous neurons outputs and their corresponding weight used in
the activation function. The bias is a adjustment value, that allows us to move the activation
function in a preferable direction. The error attribute also called error signal, is the feature that
updates improved weights. The feature is a estimate of the diﬀerence in what the model predicts
and the actual data output. The set of weights in a given neuron is all the weights values going
into that speciﬁc neuron. All these attributes, have methods to obtain all the features and as
well methods to write on the attributes.
46
==PAGE:48==
To train the neural network, the algorithm back-propagation is utilized to improve the model
towards the best possible result. On the pseudo-code below we see how the Back-propagation
is implemented. But before training the entire network(network of neurons) is initialized with
random values.
Algorithm 1 Back-propagation
1: procedure backProp(A)
2:
setting the error rate for the output layer
3:
for layer = 1, 2, . . . , Layer.size do
4:
Error[netsize-1][layer] = (output[netsize-1][layer] - A[layer]) * Outputdev[netsize-
1][layer]
5:
setting the error rate for the rest of the network
6:
for layerNr = netsize −2, netsize −3, . . . , 1 do
7:
for layer = 1, 2, . . . , Layers[layerNr] do
8:
sum = 0
9:
for layer1 = 1, 2, . . . , Layers[layerNr + 1] do
10:
sum+= Weight[layerNr+1][layer1] * Error[layerNr+1][layer1]
11:
Error[netsize-1][layer] = Outputdev[netsize-1][layer] * sum
If we want to classify an instance, we use the feed forward method. The feed-forward method
computes every output from every neuron and lastly returns the output from the output layer.
If we look at the pseudo-code, we can see that we insert the data-observations in the ﬁrst for-
loop, provided by the argument input, where the output in the ﬁrst neuron layer is set. Bias
and weight are initialized to 0 and null respectively, for which is done since we don’t have any
variance other than the actual data. The output of every neuron in the remaining network is
then computed, and we lastly returns the ﬁnal output from the output layer.
47
==PAGE:49==
Algorithm 2 FeedForward
1: procedure Feedforward(A)
2:
// ﬁll in input on the ﬁrst layer
3:
for neuron = 1, 2, . . . , inputLayer.size do
4:
Neuron temp =(0,A[i])
5:
inputNeurons[i] = temp;
6:
// iterating in the entire network except the input layer, calculation output
7:
for layerNr = 1, 2, . . . , network.size do
8:
iterating through speciﬁc layers
9:
for layer = 1, 2, . . . , Layers[layerNr] do
10:
sum = Bias[layerNr][layer]
11:
iterating in the previous layer and gets output and weight
12:
for layer1 = 1, 2, . . . , Layers[layerNr −1] do
13:
sum+= Output[layerNr-1][layer1] * Weight[layerNr-1][layer1]
14:
Output[layerNr][layer] = sigmoid(sum)
15:
OutputDev[layerNr][layer] = Output[layerNr][layer]*(1-Output[layerNr][layer])
7
Experiments and results
In this section we will take a look on the data-sets used in the project along with the data created
using our own realized cloud environment. Lastly we will represent all the results obtained by the
diﬀerent methods announced in this report, provided by some visualized charts. All benchmarks
were performed on a 2,6 GHz 6-Core Intel Core i7 computer with 32GB of RAM.
7.1
Training Data
When we’re using training data for experimentation and simulation purposes, we have to be
extremely careful, since the overall eﬀectiveness of the system depends on the ”correctness”
of a data-set. The closer the data simulation is to the real world experience, the greater the
performance of the system we get[5].
Its very hard to ﬁnd or build suﬃcient data to train
48
==PAGE:50==
machine learning models, and even more diﬃcult to ﬁlter data with abnormal data [2]
• hard to evaluate
• to much data to brute force
• dynamic notion of optimal data-set
• performance are prioritized
• Output derivative
• Hard to create or ﬁnd suitable data
7.2
NSL-KDD
The NSL-KDD data-set is a improved data-set from the original KDD99 and is a data-set put
in place to solve some of the fundamental problems of the KDD99 data-set causing some incon-
sistencies. The KDD99 data-set had a particular ﬂaw in redundancies, in which questions the
”correctness” of the data-set. Whereas the NSL-KDD data-set have removed the all the redun-
dant data to create a more coherent and productive data-set. However the improved NSL-KDD
data-set is still not totally perfect and does suﬀers from some issues. The data-set cannot be
entrusted to be completely representative of real world existing networks, given its deﬁciency of
public data-sets for network-based intrusion detection systems. Even though we have this ﬂaw,
the data-set can still be applied as an representative of a eﬀective intrusion detection models.
On ﬁgure 18 we can see the distribution of the attacks in the NSL-KDD data-set.
49
==PAGE:51==
Figure 18: NSL-KDD data-set Source:https://towardsdatascience.com/a-deeper-dive-into-the-
nsl-kdd-data-set-15c753364657
7.3
Cloud generated Data-set
In order to simulate data-set we need to establish proper data representing the environment
we want to test. We created snort csv log ﬁle to monitor the network packets including snorts
classiﬁcation analysis. In order to provide a substantial amount of data, we collected network
packets for 2 days, 70 for training 30 for testing. But due to unfortunate reasons, the data
created was lost in the unreliable circumstance in the eucalyptus environment. The time and
resources wasn’t available to recreate the whole process and data, however it can be included in
the defense.
7.4
Results
On the table below we see all the result from the individual and merged anomaly based detection
systems and how well the perform in the diﬀerent data-sets
50
==PAGE:52==
NSL-KDD
KnnNeural NetworkSVMRandom forest J48
Bayes
Hmm
Merged
0
20
40
60
80
100
80.32
74.4
75.07
81.45
80.05
76.56
70.5
77.5
91.1
89.97
90.34
91.7
91.38
89.59
81.5
93.1
%
Improved test
First Test
• First Test - A test with major ineﬃciencies such as default weka settings, no further options
selection and no optimized structure design.
• Improved test - A test with major improvements such as feature selection, optimized option
settings(including weka settings), other
If we look at the graph we see that random forest is the best performer in terms of accuracy and
false positive rate among all the classiﬁers, where our proposed merged classiﬁer is at the overall
top.
51
==PAGE:53==
Detection method
False positive rate
Random forrest
2.4134
Neural Network
3.298
Support vector machine
2.0641
Hidden Markov model
5.298
KNN
3.088
Bayes
5.989
J48
3.378
8
Discussion
Although we managed to implement all the intended goals( except one, will be included in
the defense), there is still a lot of improvements to be made, especially in terms of design and
implementation.
A signiﬁcant ﬂaw and a currently missed objective that has been considered, is the speciﬁc
procedure where we simulate and monitor our cloud environment, through snort classiﬁcation
and logging. If we look at our signature detection module snort, it’s not really necessary and isn’t
undependable, given the factor that it is the main element that collects the data and classiﬁes
it. Signature detection including snort, tends to trigger occasionally on issues that are either
less relevant or doesn’t really belong to the attack category. Wherefore we could end up having
many false alarms, in which we potentially end having a bunch of wrongly classiﬁcations in our
data-set.
In stead, we could use a state of the art detection system, that could detect modern attacks
that snort aren’t capable of and compare to our proposed system to provide more conclusive
details. We could for example see if our remaining detection components would react to attacks
where snort fails to identify malicious behavior. Another approach could be to attempt to come
up with malicious behavior, that snort doesn’t detect, where the results of the withstanding
52
==PAGE:54==
intrusion detection system could be interesting to examine.
Furthermore we could deal with an additionally hot topic, which also have been taken into
consideration throughout this process and it’s how we solve adversarial impact.
Adversarial
impact can be vital and therefore it’s very important that the IDS is hidden from outsiders and
even inside from the host machines perspective. This isn’t particularly a massive issue, since the
location of nowadays intrusion detection systems, usually is hidden, to insure that no attackers
gains conﬁdential information.
Moreover we could also recreate our lost cloud data in which used to be 1 day worth of data,
meaning that the training and testing data-set didn’t really represent broad spectrum of data
samples. This could be solved by doing extensive amount of data collection within several days
to enhance the anomaly detection and provide us with better results.
In addition we could provide more attention to the security for the stored programs and intelli-
gence to avoid adversarial impact. This would avoid intruders to bypass the system by probing.
Another considered component that could complement our overall intrusion system, could be a
rule based component that could add a alternative dimension to our problem and might or might
not improve the system.
If we look back at the whole process, we could also argue using a diﬀerent cloud Iaas provider,
which could had cause less trouble compared to the present Eucalyptus system. Today Euca-
lyptus only provide a fast-start option on speciﬁc centOs older versions, where newer versions
are excluded and not compatible, which in our process has cause at lot of trouble and time
consumption, ﬁnding the particular compatible versions. Eucalyptus cloud still manages to do
the job and is still a acceptable and decent cloud system but is outdated compared to non-open
sources cloud services and contains some unresolved bugs. We experienced multiple bugs, caus-
ing the system to crash, in which a completely new setup was Required in order to make the
system function, where we had to start the entire process over again. This happen occasionally,
on diﬀerent stages in the process which made the entire process troublesome.
But If we look at our current model in general, it performs relatively well on well-known data-sets
compared to other intrusion detection systems and is overall satisfying our proposed standpoint.
53
==PAGE:55==
9
future work
In generally we can conclude that we succeeded our fundamental goals creating a functional
intrusion detection system.
Although notably elements could have been diﬀerent, for which
several settings in the current proposed system could be improved, where this section brieﬂy will
remark all the possible future development. On the list below we have listed various aspects that
could be realized in the future to improve the proposed system.
• Recreate the lost data-set from the crashed ubuntu host.
• Protect internal information
• Implementing a distributed or hypervisor based intrusion detection system.
• Use a more modern cloud system, rather than a outdated Eucalyptus.
• Create attacks that snort cannot detect to bypass and improve the system.
• Collect more cloud data
• Use diﬀerent classiﬁcation detecting system rather than snort, to generate cloud data upon.
• A rule based detection module could be added to improve the overall performance of the
system.
• Enhance the performance even more by intelligent data pruning.
• Implementing the weka used anomaly detection tools ourselves.
• Improve the performance of the hidden Markov model.
• Improve the performance of the Neural Network.
10
Conclusion
In this project, we succeeded covering the background of cloud intrusion detection structures
along with the diﬀerent fundamental attack category. Furthermore we provided a detailed de-
scription of the diﬀerent machine learning techniques used in proposed design, where pros and
54
==PAGE:56==
cons are outlined in each individual method. We can conclude that we managed to implement
a hybrid intrusion detection mechanism, simulated in a eucalyptus cloud environment, where
fundamental ambitions were reach to a certain extent.
References
[1] Eucalyptus
4.4.3
Installation
Guide
introduction
to
eucalyptus.
https://docs.eucalyptuscloud.org/eucalyptus/4.4.3/install-guide-4.4.3.pdf.
Accessed:
2020-05-30.
[2] Preeti Aggarwal and Sudhir Kumar Sharma. Analysis of kdd dataset attributes-class wise
for intrusion detection. Procedia Computer Science, 57:842–851, 2015.
[3] Iftikhar Ahmad, Mohammad Basheri, Muhammad Javed Iqbal, and Aneel Rahim. Perfor-
mance comparison of support vector machine, random forest, and extreme learning machine
for intrusion detection. IEEE Access, 6:33789–33795, 2018.
[4] S Brindasri and K Saravanan. Evaluation of network intrusion detection using markov chain.
International Journal on Cybernetics & Informatics (IJCI), 3(2):11–20, 2014.
[5] Sudhir N Dhage and BB Meshram. Intrusion detection system in cloud computing environ-
ment. International Journal of Cloud Computing, 1(2-3):261–282, 2012.
[6] Shrijit S Joshi and Vir V Phoha. Investigating hidden markov models capabilities in anomaly
detection. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual Southeast regional conference-Volume 1, pages
98–103, 2005.
[7] P Ganesh Kumar and D Devaraj. Intrusion detection using artiﬁcial neural network with
reduced input features. ICTACT Journal on Soft Computing, 1(01):30–36, 2010.
[8] Daniel Jurafsky James H. Martin. Hidden markov models. In Speech and Language Pro-
cessing, page Chapter A, 2019.
[9] Yasir Mehmood, Muhammad Awais Shibli, Umme Habiba, and Rahat Masood. Intrusion
detection system in cloud computing: Challenges and opportunities. In 2013 2nd National
Conference on Information Assurance (NCIA), pages 59–66. IEEE, 2013.
55
==PAGE:57==
[10] Chirag Modi, Dhiren Patel, Bhavesh Borisaniya, Hiren Patel, Avi Patel, and Muttukrishnan
Rajarajan. A survey of intrusion detection techniques in cloud. Journal of network and
computer applications, 36(1):42–57, 2013.
[11] Nong Ye et al. A markov chain model of temporal behavior for anomaly detection. In
Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Information Assurance and
Security Workshop, volume 166, page 169. West Point, NY, 2000.
56
