==PAGE:1==
S×C Contract Generation at
Compile-Time by means of API
Wrappers
Jakob Laursen Vork
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Security-by-Contract (S×C) has shown promising results when it comes to im-
proving security for programs. One current downside of using S×C is that the
contract is manually created. This often requires a lead developer and can be
an error-prone process. In this thesis we ask four research questions:
(1) What is Security-by-Contract and what areas is it being used at?
(2) What techniques are currently used to enforce policies in Security-by-Contract?
(3) What is a wrapper, and can wrappers enforce policies?
(4) Is S×C implementable by means of a wrapper, and what beneﬁts and penal-
ties does such implementation have?
We perform a systematic literature mapping to help answering these. To ad-
dress the last question, we make a proof of concept (PoC) by combining S×C
and security wrappers. This PoC can force internal contract enforcement and
automatically generate a contract that always is up to date while having a min-
imum impact on the developer’s daily routine. A design and implementation
are suggested and then evaluated. This evaluation shows that S×C is imple-
mentable by means of a wrapper, but it adds a run-time overhead. For the
rulesets used in this evaluation the overhead were between 0.6% and 29.6%.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Security-by-Contract (S×C) har vist lovende resultater, når det kommer til at
forbedre sikkerheden ved programmer. En nuværende ulempe ved at bruge S×C
er, at kontrakten er manuelt lavet. Dette kræver ofte en lead-udvikler og kan
være en fejlbehæftet proces. I dette speciale stiller vi ﬁre forskningsspørgsmål:
(1) Hvad er Security-by-Contract, og for hvilke områder bliver det brugt?
(2) Hvilke teknikker bliver nuværende brugt til at håndhæve politikker?
(3) Hvad er en wrapper, og kan en wrapper håndhæve politikker?
(4) Er S×C implementerbar ved brug af en wrapper, og hvilke fordele og ulem-
per har sådanne en implementering?
Vi udfører en systematisk litteratur kortlægning for at besvare disse. For at
adressere det sidste spørgsmål laver vi et ’proof of concept’ (PoC) ved at kombi-
nere S×C og sikkerheds-wrappers. Denne PoC kan påtvinge internt håndhævelse
og automatisk generering af en kontrakt, som altid er opdateret; mens det har en
minimal påvirkning på udviklerens daglige rutine. Et design og implementering
er foreslået og derefter evalueret. Denne evaluering viser, at S×C er implemen-
terbar ved brug af en wrapper, men at den tilfører en run-time omkostning. For
regelsættene brugt i denne evaluering var omkostningen mellem 0,6% og 29,6%.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is written as part of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. degree
in Software Engineering at DTU Compute. It meets the diﬀerent requirements
given by DTU, such as speciﬁed ETCs points, an attached project plan and
aligned with the learning objectives given for theses. See the Programme speci-
ﬁcation1 at DTU’s website for the speciﬁc learning objectives and requirements.
The thesis deals with improving the Security-by-Contract (S×C) paradigm by
combining it with the concept of security wrappers.
The thesis consists of a systematic literature mapping and a design, implemen-
tation and evaluation of a wrapper, where S×C is combined with a security
wrapper. This is done in order to answer the four research questions asked in
this thesis.
Lyngby, 27-June-2020
1https://studieinformation.dtu.dk/english/Master-of-Science-in-Engineering/
Computer-Science-and-Engineering/Programme-specification#Master’s_thesis
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Structure of this Report
This report is structured in the following order:
Identify the research questions to ask, which will be covered in Chapter 1
- Introduction.
This chapter introduces the problem, motivation, scope and
questions asked.
Literature is researched in Chapter 2 - Related Work in order to answer the
research questions. The ﬁrst three can be solely answered by reference to the
literature where the last question requires further investigation.
A S×C wrapper is explored in Chapter 3 - S×C Wrapper as part of answering
the last research question. The ﬁrst section introduces the idea of combining
Security-by-Contract and a security wrapper. The next two contains the design
and implementation of this idea. The last section then evaluates this design by
a performance test and applying it to an example-program that is going through
the diﬀerent stages of the Security-by-Contract framework.
These results is then discussed in Chapter 4 - Discussion and a conclusion is
made in chapter 5 - Conclusion.
In the ﬁnal chapter of the thesis we describe what future work would be relevant
to investigate. Chapter 6 - Future Work is related to the discussion in chapter
5, but highlight the larger topics that need further investigation.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Alberto for the insightful and helpful feedback during this
thesis. I appreciate that you always had time for a question or a meeting. I
would also like to thank Nicola, my supervisor, for introducing me to the concept
of Security-by-Contract that inspired me to write this thesis.
A warmly thanks to my family; especially my mom and dad who always have
believed in me and supported me. You have always been there when I needed
you, and I hope you know how much I love you. I know my grandfather would
have loved to see me ﬁnish my Master’s degree, but he sadly passed away during
the writing of this thesis - you will be missed.
Thanks to my friends and dormmates for making the years of work fun. The
long talks, movie nights, games and parties will be remembered, but there are
hopefully many more to come.
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Structure of this Report
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Search Strings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.5
Data Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
RQ 1 - Security-by-Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Contract & Policy Authoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Program Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Contract Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Usages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.5
Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
RQ 2 - Enforcement and Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
2.4
RQ 3 - Wrappers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
Mobile Application Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.2
Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
RQ 4 - S×C using a Wrapper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
S×C Wrapper
23
3.1
Idea
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Rulesets & Builders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.2
Wrappers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.3
Register . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.4
Ruleset Applier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.5
Contract Generator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4.1
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4.2
Applying the Wrapper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4
Discussion
57
5
Conclusion
63
6
Future Work
65
A Generating the Contract
67
B Wrapper Testing
71
C Project Plan
97
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
While the number of mobile applications, IoT devices and PC programs have
grown substantially over the last decade, the security mechanisms to secure the
user’s data have not followed equally [56]. Code signing gives the user some-
what of a security, since a trusted third party ensures that the code’s origin
and integrity is correct, but it does not contain any information in regard to
the security behaviour of the program. By today’s standards, the user does not
know what servers a program can connect with and what ﬁles it can access when
the user runs the program.
In order to tackle this growing issue the European research project, Security of
Software and Services for Mobile Systems (S3MS), was founded with the task
to [30, 77], "[...] create a framework and a technological solution for trusted de-
ployment and execution of communicating mobile applications in heterogeneous
environments.".
This project resulted in the paradigm Security-by-Contract (S×C), which were
presented at Theory and Practice, EuroPKI 2007 [22]. This paradigm deﬁnes
a framework for verifying that the application’s actions are within the user’s
policy. By extracting the application’s security behaviour into a contract that
then later can be compared with the user’s security policy, the user can deter-
mine what security precautions to take. Although this concept originally was
designed for mobile applications, it has later been applied to other areas thus
showing its potential. Some areas of S×C do however still need to be explored
in order to further improve the usage of this paradigm; this being especially
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
true for the contract generation stage were most research just assume it already
exists or is created by hand by a senior developer.
Wrappers are used for many diﬀerent purposes and on diﬀerent abstractions
in a system.
Some wrappers encapsulate entire programs and others simply
encapsulate methods in a program. These wrappers are being used for diﬀerent
purposes. Some are used as an adapter to alter the interface for a caller, and
others are used to ensure relevant security behaviour.
In this thesis we ask four questions:
(1) What is Security-by-Contract and what areas is it being used at?
(2) What techniques are currently used to enforce policies in S×C?
(3) What is a wrapper, and can wrappers enforce policies?
(4) Is S×C implementable by means of a wrapper, and what beneﬁts and penal-
ties does such implementation have?
1.1
Motivation
As mentioned above, the security aspect of mobile applications, IoT devices etc.
have lacked behind compared to the general development in this area. Security-
by-Contract seems promising regarding improving the security aspect but lacks
on some essential stages such as generating the contract. We believe that by
combining S×C with wrappers we can improve this paradigm when it comes to
contract generation.
1.2
Scope
In this thesis the literature will be searched in order to ﬁnd the answers for the
four research questions. If the literature itself does not provide these answers,
this thesis will try to answer these by designing, implementing and testing a
solution that would provide an answer. This is especially relevant for the last
question that asks if Security-by-Contract is implementable by means of a wrap-
per. This thesis focuses primarily on the feasibility and contract generation -
That is, showing a proof of concept (PoC) that can be used in a program and
works with the S×C paradigm. It does not mean that the entire ﬂow will be
covered in depth, such as static analysis. It also means that not all program-
ming languages will be considered, but rather one language (C#) will be used
for the proof of concept.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Project Plan
3
1.3
Project Plan
Before the project was started, a project plan were formed. This plan was then
later revised when work had begun and the workload distribution were clearer.
The revised plan can be found in appendix C. The plan consisted of three stages:
1) Literature mapping, where the research questions were answered if possible.
This stage turned out to take longer time than initial planned. This meant that
the literature mapping stage was extended compared to the original plan.
2) Developing and evaluating the I/O1 wrapper in order to answer the last
research question. This stage turned out to be faster than initial though and,
therefore, it compensated partly for the longer time used at stage 1.
3) Writing the report itself. Although the report was partly written during the
ﬁrst two stages, some chapters and polish were still needed. Due to the literature
mapping took longer than expected, this last stage was a bit shorter.
These changes in the time-plan, together with some renaming/regrouping of the
tasks to better reﬂect the actual work, resulted in the retrospective Gantt chart
shown on ﬁgure 1.1. Note that this ﬁgure shows a work structure very closely
related to a waterfall model. This is however a bit misleading, since the work
was performed as increments closer resembling an iterative and incremental life
cycle model such as the Uniﬁed Process [78]. This workﬂow was chosen due
to the way a master thesis is structured.
The chart shown on ﬁgure 1.1 is
solely to reﬂect the workload rather than the speciﬁc time at which the task
was performed.
For future projects, more time should be allocated to the literature mapping,
since it took much longer than originally estimated; partly due to it being the
ﬁrst time performing a systematic literature mapping and partly due to the
number of papers needed to be looked through.
Figure 1.1: Revised Gantt chart reﬂecting the workload of the project. Note
that this does not reﬂect one-to-one how the project were done
but rather the workload overall.
1I/O is an abbreviation for Input/Output
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Related Work
In this thesis related work will be identiﬁed by performing a systematic literature
mapping. The chapter will ﬁrst describe the process of this and then the results
will be presented.
2.1
Process
The structure of the process for this systematic literature mapping is based upon
[75]. After all the papers, found via the database searches, had been handled and
their data extracted, additional papers ware found using backward snowballing
as described in [82]. An overview of the number of papers examined, and the
steps taken to ﬁlter these, can be seen on ﬁgure 2.1.
2.1.1
Research Questions
The following four research questions were made in order to understand the
Security-by-Contract paradigm, wrappers and explore the feasibility of combin-
ing these two:
RQ1: What is Security-by-Contract and what areas is it being used at?
==PAGE:20==
6
Related Work
RQ2: What techniques are currently used to enforce policies in Security-by-
Contract?
RQ3: What is a wrapper, and can wrappers enforce policies?
RQ4: Is S×C implementable by means of a wrapper, and what beneﬁts and
penalties does such implementation have?
Figure 2.1: An overview of the num-
ber of papers found for
each step in the system-
atic mapping process.
In section 2.2 we will investigate what
Security-by-Contract is, and in what
areas it has been used at. Section 2.3
will explore what enforcement tech-
niques that currently are being used
to enforce policies in the Security-
by-Contract framework. Section 2.4
will explore the concept of a wrap-
per and investigate whether it can
be used to enforce policies.
Lastly,
in section 2.5 we will investigate the
feasibility, beneﬁts and penalties of
combining a wrapper, investigated in
RQ3, with the Security-by-Contract
paradigm, investigated in RQ1, to en-
force rulesets using techniques like the
ones in RQ2.
2.1.2
Search Strings
Search strings were constructed in or-
der to ﬁlter for relevant papers in
the databases. The search strings for
S×C and wrappers were deliberately
constructed to catch most papers re-
lated to the research questions, meaning the strings were deﬁned in a way that
were fairly broad. After speaking with one of the experts in the ﬁeld, it was clear
that not only should papers regarding Security-By-Contract be found, but also
papers related to standards such as Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD).
Originally, this was also included in a search string, but we found it yielded
too many false positives. The idea was therefore to remove it from the search
string and rely on the snowballing to ﬁnd these papers later. This assumption of
relevant standards, such as MUD, would be included using the snowball method
was checked afterwards and turned out to be correct. A search string was also
constructed for combining both wrappers and S×C but it yielded no results.
The diﬀerent search strings and what databases were queried can be found in
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Process
7
Table 2.1: Search strings used for S×C and wrapper related searches.
Search String
Database
("security by contract" OR "security-by-contract" OR
"SxC") AND "software"
IEEE,
DTU FindIt,
ACM,
Web Of Science
security AND software AND wrapper AND Policy
IEEE,
DTU FindIt
("SxC" OR "Security-by-Contract" OR "Security by Con-
tract") AND ("Wrapper" OR "Wrappers")
IEEE,
DTU FindIt,
ACM,
Web Of Science
table 2.1.
2.1.3
Databases
Before selecting the databases to query, a list of possible databases was made.
For the database to be on the list of possible databases, public or DTU access
needed to be available. This list consisted of:
1. ACM Digital Library1
2. DTU Findit2
3. Engineering Village3
4. Google4
5. Google Scholar5
6. IEEE Xplore Digital Library6
7. Scopus7
8. Springer8
9. Web of Science9
Some of these databases include the others. An example of this is DTU Findit
1https://dl.acm.org
2https://findit.dtu.dk
3https://www.engineeringvillage.com
4https://www.google.com
5https://scholar.google.com
6https://ieeexplore.ieee.org
7https://www.scopus.com
8https://link.springer.com
9https://www.webofknowledge.com
==PAGE:22==
8
Related Work
that also search in ACM, Scopus, Springer and many others.
The included
databases were, however, still on the list as standalones, since the same search
string might yield diﬀerent results, due to diﬀerent search engines. In an attempt
to avoid database bias the databases were randomly selected from the list above
and queried. A new database was selected and queried until many duplicates
began to show up. Although ’many duplicates’ is still a subjective deﬁnition,
the idea was that the search bias would be limited in doing this, but there still
is a risk of missing some relevant papers. For example, DTU Findit may yield
many duplicates, because it serves the same papers that were just queried from
the other databases. In case a paper should be missed with this tactic, the idea
then was that the backward snowballing would catch it. The databases used for
this mapping were: IEEE Xplore Digital Library, DTU Findit, ACM and Web
of Science. Note that this randomisation was performed once and then applied
to all search strings.
2.1.4
Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria
When deciding which criteria to chose, one speciﬁc concern comes to mind
regarding choosing some that are able to ﬁlter the studies, such that all are
relevant, but not ﬁlter them so much that some relevant are ﬁltered away. The
criteria chosen for this systematic literature mapping are therefore as simple
as possible, based on the mentality that an irrelevant paper will be ﬁltered in
the full-text read.
Several criteria were chosen for inclusion, meaning these
attributes had to be present before considering a speciﬁc paper relevant for
including in this mapping.
1. Papers should be within the Computer Science ﬁeld.
2. Papers must, based on the title and abstract, indicate the work is related
to the Security-by-Contract or wrapper topic.
3. Papers should describe the S×C framework or be closely related to it, or
the studies should describe wrappers in a security perspective.
The three inclusion criteria used for this systematic mapping are considered
general enough to cover most papers related to the Security-by-Contract or
wrapper topic, but not so broad that others are included that can not be used
for this thesis. Furthermore, several exclusion criteria were used. If a paper met
just one of these criteria it would be excluded:
1. Papers not written in English.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Process
9
2. Papers not accessible in full-text.
3. Papers not focusing on security.
4. Papers not peer reviewed.
If a study were not accessible via the searched databases, we would try to ﬁnd
it elsewhere, such as Google Scholar10, before deeming the full-text inaccessible.
It was sometimes diﬃcult to check if a study were peer reviewed or not. Papers
found in some databases were known to be peer-reviewed [4, 45, 81] where others
would be judged based on the author’s credibility, number of citations etc.
2.1.5
Data Extraction
When reading the diﬀerent studies, some data were extracted that would help
answer the research questions stated in 2.1.1.
The diﬀerent data extraction
points can be seen on table 2.2. The ﬁrst couple of points are generics, such as
the title, publication year and venue. It is worth noticing that the main focus
and context data points can be biased to somewhat subjective understanding of
the papers, since there is no co-author of this thesis. This means that there is
no second person to review the extracted data points.
Table 2.2: Data points being extracted for each article.
Data item
Value description
Related RQ
Study ID
Unique identiﬁer
Article Title
Name of the article
Author Name
Name of the ﬁrst author
Year of Publication
Calender year
Venue
{Journal, Conference, Book}
Country
Country of the ﬁrst author
Main focus
The main focus of the article
All
Context
In what area is it being applied to
All
Wrapper enforces policy
Yes/No
RQ3
Using wrappers in S×C
Yes/No
RQ4
Short recap
Keypoints from the article
All
10https://scholar.google.com
==PAGE:24==
10
Related Work
2.2
RQ 1 - Security-by-Contract
This section will describe Security-by-Contract (S×C) and in what areas this
paradigm has been applied.
This is in order to answer research question 1:
"What is Security-by-Contract and what areas is it being used at?".
Security-by-Contract at its core is the idea of binding a contract, stating what
security relevant behaviour a program has, with the provided executable.
S×C express the life cycle of a program in six stages, which are shown on ﬁgure
2.2. These diﬀerent stages each pose diﬀerent challenges and solutions. In the
Figure 2.2: The diﬀerent stages in Security-by-Contract.
ﬁrst stage the policy and contract will be authored, which will be described in
section 2.2.1. Afterwards, the program itself gets developed. The contract can
sometimes be altered during this process, since it always needs to reﬂect the
actual behaviour of the program.
When the program is ﬁnished, the contract needs to be bound to the program.
Furthermore, it needs some kind of proof that the contract is correct, which will
be described in 2.2.2. The program can then be deployed. A user, before the
program is run, compares the contract with his policy in order to decide which
actions to take. This matching will be described in section 2.2.3. Depending on
the result of the matching, the program might get executed with some moni-
toring to ensure policy-compliance. The monitoring will be discussed in section
2.3.
2.2.1
Contract & Policy Authoring
The problem with programs that are not using S×C is that these are devel-
oped by some developer who signs the program before release. This signature
does, however, only state that the signed program does indeed originate from
that speciﬁc developer, but it does not tell the user anything in regard to the
security-behaviour of the program, and thereby the signature does not carry
much meaning in regard to if the program is safe to execute or not.
At its
core the Security-by-Contract paradigm works with two concepts: contract and
policy, which is deﬁned as [22]:
Deﬁnition 1 (Contract): A contract is a formal complete and correct spec-
==PAGE:25==
2.2 RQ 1 - Security-by-Contract
11
iﬁcation of the behavior of an application for what concerns relevant security
actions (Virtual Machine API Calls, Operating System Calls).
Deﬁnition 2 (Policy): A policy is a formal complete speciﬁcation of the ac-
ceptable behavior of applications to be executed on the platform for what concerns
relevant security actions (Virtual Machine API Calls, Operating System Calls).
The contract should contain all security relevant actions the program can per-
form, also called traces.
The contract is created during development of the
program and are normally formulated by a lead developer who knows it thor-
oughly. Ensuring that all traces are written in the contract can be diﬃcult and
most likely error-prone. It can be tricky to identify what ’relevant’ is regarding
what to include in the contract. How the contract should be modelled is not set
in stone yet; It would be tempting to create it in a way that allows for unlimited
complexity in order to account for every possible scenario, but that might result
in it being too diﬃcult to use and thus discouraging the use of S×C. The Con-
tract Speciﬁcation Language, ConSpec [2], is a formal language that has been
proposed as a formalism for deﬁning security-contracts and policies.
In [26] a contract is a security policy rule that is represented by four ﬁelds:
Application (Name, domain etc.), Shares, Provides and Requires. Except for
the ﬁeld Application, the rule is merely a list of applications or services.
The policy is somewhat similar to the contract, but rather than stating the
possible actions a program can take, it contains the allowed actions a program
can do. The policy is created by the user or, for instance, an administrator on
behalf of the user.
2.2.2
Program Compliance
Although a contract has been created, the user still needs to have conﬁdence in
it, meaning that the user can trust that the program being executed follows the
contract provided. This can be done in two ways [25]:
Runtime monitors (Inlining): Inlining is a technique were diﬀerent probes
are edited into the code in order to ensure that the program does not do anything
that the contract has not stated. Inlining can be done in two diﬀerent ways,
either by injecting probes into the callee or the caller. These probes are normally
injected into the caller, since injecting them into the callee can aﬀect system
libraries and thus aﬀecting other programs. By injecting them inside the caller,
the compliance is also embedded inside the program and can thus be freely
moved to another device and still be compliant compared to injecting the probes
==PAGE:26==
12
Related Work
into the callee. Inlining aﬀects runtime performance and can be problematic
when multithreading is considered [16]. Even with automated tools and simpler
programs, this can still be a complex task and therefore error-prone, either
because the tool might miss something or that the program becomes unstable
due to the fact that the developer is not aware of this code change being applied.
Static Analysis: The user performs an analysis of the program in order to
identify the security-relevant behaviour of the it. The beneﬁt of static anal-
ysis is that it does no modiﬁcations to the code and has therefore no impact
on runtime performance. The problem with static analysis is, that it can be
error-prone due to the complexity of scanning code. If the analysis identiﬁed
some traces, is it then all of them or did it miss something that resulted in a
false-negative? In order to overcome this issue Proof-carrying Code (PCC) [74]
has been suggested. In PCC the provider makes a proof that a certain program
is safe to execute. The user can then use a proof validator to check whether
the proof is correct. The issue with PCC is, however, that it can be costly and
time consuming to make this proof; and automatically generated proofs are still
problematic. Model-Carrying Code (MCC) [79] tries to overcome this issue by
an approach strongly inspired from PCC. In MCC the code is still accompanied
by addition information to verify its security, but instead of a proof a model is
used that describes the security behaviour.
A trusted third party can also perform this analysis and then sign the mod-
el/contract.
By signing the contract, the third party ensures the user that
the model is correctly aligned with the program’s behaviour. Note that the con-
tract and policy in section 2.2.1 uses MCC, since they contain a security-relevant
model.
2.2.3
Contract Matching
One of the key stages in S×C is the contract matching. This is the stage where
the user evaluates the contract by comparing it with his own policy. Several
papers have suggested protocols [27, 29] and algorithms [22, 7] based on the
ConSpec language for matching contracts and policies. Furthermore, [6] shows
a prototype for matching policies with the program’s contract.
[54] also suggests performing the matching by simulation, meaning that the
contract and policy ’play a game’ and the outcome determines if the contract is
within the policy or not.
Depending on the outcome of the contract-policy matching, diﬀerent precautions
may be taken. The user can choose to run the program, not run the program
or run the program with some sort of monitoring in order to ensure that no
policy is violated. Section 2.3 will investigate what diﬀerent kinds of monitoring-
techniques there currently are in use.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 RQ 1 - Security-by-Contract
13
2.2.4
Usages
The S×C paradigm was originally developed for mobile systems as part of the
European research project Security of Software and Services for Mobile Systems
(S3MS). This means that many of the papers currently published have applied
this paradigm to mobile applications.
In paper [15], Security-by-Contract together with the concept of a trust score
have been applied to the mobile marketplaces, such as Google Store11 and Ap-
ple’s App Store12. This puts some trust into the marketplaces, but with the
idea that accumulating multiple opinions of an app’s security are more precise
than a single user’s analysis. Furthermore, it oﬄoads this calculation to the
marketplace and thereby limiting the additional resources needed on each de-
vice to gain this addition security. It is still based on individual mobile phones,
but the marketplace plays a larger role in this setup.
As shown on table 2.3, S×C has also been applied to other areas.
Table 2.3: The diﬀerent applications S×C has been applied to.
Application
Paper
Mobiles
[22, 15, 25, 21, 18, 23, 7, 13, 17, 24, 5, 39]
Smart cards
[27, 29, 28, 26, 36]
Java Modules
[76]
Java Applications
[47]
Smart Home IoT
[38, 37]
Web Services
[20, 19]
Desktop apps
[5]
The authors of [5] show that not only does S×C work on smart phones, but
desktop programs can also beneﬁt from this - and actually perform the match-
ing faster. [26] proposes an eﬀective way to avoid the need of expensive run-time
monitoring on smart cards, where resources are limited, by applying S×C. Re-
sources can further be saved by outsourcing the contract-policy matching to a
trusted third part [29, 27].
The same idea of outsourcing the potentially expensive contract-policy match-
ing has also been applied to the original application domain, Mobiles [25].
S×C has in [76] been applied to Java Modules, allowing for an easier way to con-
trol policy changes and improve security. The same goes for Internet of Things
(IoT) where the network can consist of a large number of heterogeneous devices
[38, 37].
Based on the found literature, Security-by-Contract has been applied in a large
11https://play.google.com/store
12https://www.apple.com/dk/ios/app-store/
==PAGE:28==
14
Related Work
variety of diﬀerent domains and thereby proving independent of a speciﬁc plat-
form.
2.2.5
Alternatives
Although Security-by-Contract has proven to successfully work in diﬀerent do-
mains, other alternatives exist.
It is of course possible for the user to run the program without applying S×C
and just have some sort of monitoring running - either a speciﬁc monitor for
that program, which will be discussed in 2.3, or some sort of general monitoring,
such as an antivirus program. The issue of doing this is that the user does not
have any idea of the supposed behaviour of the program, which can lead to false
positives or vice versa.
Another alternative would be to have the device itself perform a static analysis
of the code before it is executed (Also called On-the-ﬂy analysis) [32], or as
[3] has suggested, to let a platform handle this. These solutions can both be
impractical and costly due to the constrains there are put on the system in
order to support these functionalities. Both are, furthermore, error-prone, since
a static analysis might miss something important, due to the complexity of a
program; and if a program has bad intentions it might misuse this by being
unnecessary complex in order to avoid these scans.
Cisco employees have suggested Manufacturer Usage Descriptions (MUD) as a
solution for IoT devices [51]. This works by having the providers state what
behaviours are intended from a program - making it easier for the user/network
administrator to monitor and detect unintended behaviour.
Although MUD
can help an administrator to avoid unexpected behaviour, the solution still has
signiﬁcant downsides, such as requiring a network in order for the MUD ﬁles
to be shared.
It also still requires monitoring, since no formal proof of the
content of this MUD-ﬁle is provided. Lastly, MUD focuses on device-network
communication, such as IP addresses and ports, and requires a controller to
substitute network-speciﬁc diﬀerences in the MUD-ﬁle.
2.3
RQ 2 - Enforcement and Monitoring
In this section we will explore the diﬀerent ways policies are currently being
enforced in Security-by-Contract in order to answer research question 2: "What
techniques are currently used to enforce policies in Security-by-Contract".
==PAGE:29==
2.3 RQ 2 - Enforcement and Monitoring
15
As mentioned in section 2.2, the last stage in S×C is execution, monitoring
and enforcement. Based on the outcome of the contract matching, described in
section 2.2.3, the user might choose to apply monitoring. Monitoring is a way to
ensure that the policy is being enforced by tracking what the program is doing
and stop behaviours that are not allowed according to the policy.
In general, the user has the following enforcement mechanisms at his disposal:
Inlining: Inlining can not only be used as compliance assurance, as mentioned
in section 2.2.2, but it can also be applied as a result of the contract-policy
matching. Although the outcome of this technique can seem identical, depend-
ing on what stage of the S×C paradigm the inlining is applied to, there is a
slight diﬀerence. While the inlining in the program compliance stage ensures
that the contract is enforced, the inlining in the last stage ensures that the pol-
icy is enforced. This is done in the same way - by applying probes into the code
that stops it from doing disallowed actions. The result might be the same if the
contract is within the allowance of the policies. The beneﬁt of using inlining is
that all code is running under the same process and minimal code changes are
introduced - meaning minimal code to contain errors or bugs. Furthermore, the
code can be moved to another device without reapplying the inlining, given it
uses the same policy. The downside is that this modiﬁes existing code, mean-
ing unintended consequences/bugs might occur.
Since inlining is a run-time
monitor, some performance overhead will occur.
Sandboxing: Sandboxing works by running the program in a sandbox/secure
environment with minimal privileges and then tunnelling each I/O interaction
through a monitor. There exist many diﬀerent kinds of sandboxing techniques;
each vary in how much are abstracted and how isolated the program is to the rest
of the system. To mention some of the diﬀerent technologies: Workspace with
OS call ﬁltering like Sandboxie13, containering such as Docker14 and hypervisors
such as VMware Workstation15.
Each type of sandboxing works in slightly
diﬀerent ways and is a topic out-of-scope for this thesis, but in general they
work by isolating the program in some manner in order to protect the overall
system.
The monitor, based on a set of rules, decides to allow or block the call made by
the program. Sandboxing can be implemented using wrappers, as described in
section 2.4.2. The beneﬁt of sandboxing is that it does not change the program
itself, like inlining. It, furthermore, completely isolates any harmful actions from
the rest of the system; although sandbox-developers also can make mistakes.
The downside is, that this type of monitoring is device speciﬁc, meaning that
one can not just move the program to a new device without having to install
the monitoring on that device as well. Like inlining, it has some performance
13https://www.sandboxie.com
14https://www.docker.com
15https://www.vmware.com/products/workstation-pro.html
==PAGE:30==
16
Related Work
penalties depending on what type of sandboxing is used.
As shown above, there are generally used two diﬀerent techniques for policy
enforcement - both potentially having a large performance overhead. One author
Costa, Gabriele has in multiple papers ([15, 11, 10, 13, 14]) suggested the notion
of Security-by-Contract-with-Trust (S×C×T) which is the idea of taking a trust-
score of a provider into account. If the provider’s contract does not comply with
the user’s policy, or if the provider breaks a contract, this will aﬀect the trust
score negatively. Based on the trust score, diﬀerent precautions will be taken
regarding how heavily a program will be monitored. If a program has a high trust
score, then it might only be necessary to inspect some samples of the program’s
calls in order to save resources. This decision is, of course, also aﬀected by how
many resources the device, which is running the program, has. For example,
a small IoT-device might want to save as much power as possible where a PC
might apply more monitoring by default.
2.4
RQ 3 - Wrappers
In this section we will answer research question 3 by exploring wrappers; both
what a wrapper is, but also if it can be used to enforce policies.
The term wrapper is used for something that covers or protect something from
outside exposure. The same interpretation applies when using the term in soft-
ware, but is used broadly and in many diﬀerent situations. Wrappers are for
instance used when marshalling between managed and unmanaged memory [59],
but also in design patterns such as the Adapter pattern [48, pp. 139–150] and
Proxy pattern [48, pp. 207–2017]. Wrapper is therefore a term that is used a lot
in many diﬀerent situations and with very diﬀerent purposes in mind.
As the term wrapper has many usages, it is therefore necessary to narrow the
scope of wrapper-types discussed in the thesis. A more relevant type for this
thesis is the security wrapper. This type of wrapper focuses on security; moni-
toring, access control, ﬂow control or other kinds of security relevant behaviour.
This is done by having some sort of policy that this type of wrapper will en-
force; for instance, limiting the bandwidth for a certain program or ensure only
a speciﬁc protocol is used for communication [80]. Security wrappers can be
applied at many diﬀerent layers of the system and for diﬀerent reasons.
One reason could be to protect the program itself against attacks on underlying
components such as SQL- and XSS-injections, which they have been shown to
be eﬀective at [83, 49]. Security wrappers have also been used at the Linux ker-
nel level [73, 35] to provide monitoring, access control, injection protection and
==PAGE:31==
2.4 RQ 3 - Wrappers
17
other useful utilities on an operating system (OS) level that are non-bypassable.
Security wrappers can be used to perform state-based authorization checks [8]
as well as intrusion detection and protection [31, 50].
Another reason can be to protect the user’s data against a potential misuse from
the running program itself. This could for instance be by limiting the program’s
ability to use internet access. The latter will be discussed further when Mobile
Application Management (MAM) is discussed in section 2.4.1. Since security
wrappers apply runtime checks, they also have the beneﬁt that if policies are
fetched from a ﬁle or another external source, like in [52], policies can be changed
runtime and still be enforced.
It is clear that a (security) wrapper has many usages and thus a clear deﬁnition
is needed. In this thesis we will use the following deﬁnition of a security wrapper:
Deﬁnition 3 (Security Wrapper): A piece of code that encapsulates an un-
derlying object and exposes some or all of its methods. The wrapper may apply
mutations and checks to an action before and after it is forwarded to the under-
lying object.
Going forward, security wrappers will just be mentioned as wrappers, since it
is clear from the context what term is used.
Although wrappers have proven to give many utilities in the sense of monitoring
and security, they also have a performance overhead, since it is extra code that
needs to be run. If the wrapper performs complex actions, this overhead can
become signiﬁcant [57]. Therefore, the idea of trust has been applied in some
papers to limit this overhead [42, 41, 40]. The idea is to select how strict a
wrapper is based on a trust level of the software; meaning, if the user has a high
level of trust in the speciﬁc code, the strictness of the wrapper can be lowered
in order to have less overhead.
2.4.1
Mobile Application Management
Mobile phones have been adapted by many companies and therefore employers
need to have some sort of control of the applications the employees are using.
Mobile application management (MAM) vendors oﬀer services where a company
can wrap their employee’s apps in order to enforce company policies. An exam-
ple would be Intune App16, developed by Microsoft, that is applying a wrapper
around the application and lets an administrator control behaviours [66], such
16https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/enterprise-mobility-security/
microsoft-intune
==PAGE:32==
18
Related Work
as enforced data encryption, clipboard restrictions etc. This can both be ap-
plied to an internal developed application via the Intune App SDK or external
applications via Intune App Wrapping Tool [67]. This tool does however only
work on the Xamarin17 platform and somewhat on Cordova18. As Intune App
shows, MAM vendors generally use two techniques to enforce these company
policies:
App wrapping is used when a company uses an application that it does not
have the source code for, and therefore can not apply the security measurements
in the application’s code itself. Although these types of wrappers can enforce
many of the policies a company has, it still has limits such as selective wipe of
data in some scenarios.
Software Development Kit (SDK) is a security wrapper in the sense that it
allows the developer to add extra policy enforcement functionality. This type of
wrapper can in theory enforce any policy, since it is used directly in the source
code. The usage of SDK does, however, require that the company has access to
the source code of the application. When using the SDK, the developer is aware
of the wrapper being implemented and the implementation is on a much more
ﬁne-grained level than app wrapping, since a SDK is applying wrappers on each
call in the source code where app wrapping is on an application interface level,
thus on a higher level.
Intune is just one example of MAM vendors and many others exist; enough so
that they will not be mentioned here, since they generally work in the same
manner as described above.
2.4.2
Alternatives
The app wrapping, mentioned in section 2.4.1, enforces the policy by wrapping
code around the application itself. As described in section 2.3, other monitoring
techniques exist. These alternatives do, however, have resemblance to security
wrappers. Sandboxing can for instance, as shown in [46], be implemented by
means of a wrapper. It is important to emphasize that wrapping is not equal
to sandboxing, since sandboxing is isolating a program where a wrapper is only
checking or mutating a request - meaning that a wrapper can be used to imple-
ment sandboxing, but can also just perform checks and/or mutations.
Depending on how inlining is implemented, this can also be viewed as a wrap-
per, since this is essentially implementing a check or mutation of an action. It
is also important to emphasize that inlining that mutates the existing object
instead of encapsulating it is not a wrapper, although the outcome is the same
in regard to the security checks.
17https://dotnet.microsoft.com/apps/xamarin
18https://cordova.apache.org
==PAGE:33==
2.5 RQ 4 - S×C using a Wrapper
19
2.5
RQ 4 - S×C using a Wrapper
In this section research question 4 will be explored by investigating the feasibility
of implementing Security-by-Contract by means of a wrapper and what beneﬁts
and downsides does such implementation have.
During this systematic literature mapping, no papers regarding wrappers in a
Security-By-Contract context were found. Some concepts were however identi-
ﬁed that share some similarities with using wrappers in Security-by-Contract,
which will be described below.
Security wrappers, as a concept, does in some scenarios share strong similar-
ities with the idea of using a wrapper for S×C. The paper [43] does for example
use the concept of a component contract and a policy. The contract in this
paper is legally binding and contains four parts specifying methods, input- and
output parameters and exceptions. This contract is then enforced by a wrapper.
The wrapper is automatically generated and is an integrated part of the caller
in order to protect against misbehaviour of the callee when calling a method.
Using security wrappers to enforce the contract is similar to the current way of
enforcing policies in S×C. It would, however, be beneﬁcial if the wrapper was not
implemented by the caller to protect against the callee, but rather by the callee
to ensure its own behaviour. This would make the wrapper an embedded part
of the callee’s program and ensure that the called component is always abiding
by the rules - even when called by a third party who has not implemented such
wrapper. This kind of wrapping can, however, not just be moved without extra
security checks, since simply moving the wrapper into the component will have
no security gain, due to the fact that the security would merely rely on the trust
to the callee; which is the same as just calling the methods directly.
Inlining, as mentioned in section 2.4.2, can to some extent be viewed as API
wrapping. Some code is injected as a monitor that guards the underlying object.
This does indeed ensure compliance; but as mentioned before, this is not neces-
sarily an easy task when programs get complex (Reﬂection and multithreading)
and it is therefore error-prone. Furthermore, this does not help the developer,
who still needs to create the contract by hand. The developer does, therefore,
require extensive knowledge to ensure that all possible traces are noted down,
which most likely will not be the case in a complex program. One way to im-
prove this part of the S×C paradigm would be to automate it in a way that
ensures correctness at all time. Although automatic extraction of the code into a
ConSpec contract has been suggested [47], it is not without issues. The contract
might be generated automatically, but issues can still occur. This stems from
two fundamental aspects of the way the contract is generated: (1) it is extracted
based on a static analysis of the code. This means that a static analysis can miss
==PAGE:34==
20
Related Work
something important and thus it is not guaranteed that the contract is correct,
although likely with a lower error rate than by hand. (2) It does not involve
the developer in this contract generation. Since the developer is not an active
part of the generation, although automatically generated, he can not specify
ﬁne-grained details about the contract. This is easiest explained by an example:
Imagine a program that at some point ends up with an input from a user on
were to store a speciﬁc ﬁle. The user might have some UI blocking certain input
paths, but from the save-method’s point of view it accepts any given path. This
would maybe trick the static analyser to think that any path can be chosen,
but in reality, the user is limited. It would have been beneﬁcial if the developer
could be a part of this contract generation in order to state that the program
only store ﬁles in a speciﬁc sub-directory. Storing ﬁles in a workspace is a lot
less suspicious than storing ﬁles anywhere on the system. Were the developer
forced to take this decision, when it was detected that an I/O operation was
performed, he could had speciﬁed that sub-folder path - making the allowed
paths much more speciﬁc and less suspect.
MAM vendors, as discussed in section 2.4.1, make use of SDK solutions, where
the developers have knowledge about wrappers being applied. This approach
ensures the program is compliant with the policies, but the developer does not
have a formalised way of stating how the program is supposed to behave. Us-
ing an SDK does still require a static analysis to ensure that only the wrapper
is used for I/O operations. The enforcement part of the MAM SDKs is fairly
close to the concept of using wrappers inside the program itself to enforce con-
tracts/policies as part of the S×C paradigm. The issue is the lacking contract
stating what the program is supposed to do and that some trust is put towards
a correct implementation of the program - meaning that only the SDK is used
for I/O operations and that the SDK has not been altered by someone.
Based on the above, it is clear that further investigation into applying wrappers
in a Security-by-Contract context is needed. As table 2.4 shows, much eﬀort
has been used at the overall idea of S×C and the Contract-Policy matching.
Furthermore, the trust aspect is also fairly covered, which can improve security
and signiﬁcantly lower the overhead in regard to monitoring. The table does,
however, also show that very little research has focused on the ﬁrst stage of
the S×C program life cycle: Contract/Policy Authoring.
Only [47] gives a
suggestion on how to automate this step.
This master thesis will, therefore, investigate the feasibility of applying wrappers
in a Security-by-Contract context, where the contract is generated automati-
cally, but the developer still has an active part in order to get the ﬁne-grained
details of the contract correct.
==PAGE:35==
2.5 RQ 4 - S×C using a Wrapper
21
Table 2.4: The main focus of papers regarding Security-by-Contract.
Application
Paper
S×C in general
[38, 22, 18, 23, 21, 55, 24]
Trust
[15, 11, 10, 13, 14, 19]
Contract-Policy matching
[27, 29, 7, 54, 6, 39, 53]
Modelling
[12]
Design/Implementation
[25, 76, 28, 37, 17, 5, 26, 36]
Monitoring
[44]
Automatic Contract Generation
[47]
Negotiation strategies
[20]
==PAGE:36==
22
Related Work
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
S×C Wrapper
In section 2.5 we concluded that in order to answer research question 4 further
investigation is needed. In this chapter we will expand on the answer by design-
ing and implementing a suggestion for such wrapper in a S×C context. Section
3.1 explains the overall idea. Section 3.3 implements the design suggested in
section 3.2. Lastly, in section 3.4, the suggested design and implementation are
evaluated by comparing performance and putting the wrapper into an overall
S×C life cycle.
3.1
Idea
As made clear in section 2.4, there are multiple ways of implementing wrap-
pers. We generally want the developer to be a more involved participant in
the contract authoring during the development, but still automatically generate
the contract. This might sound a bit conﬂicting, but what is meant is that the
contract should be generated automatically and the developer should have the
control over the ﬁner details regarding the accessed paths, allowed protocols
etc. By automatically generating the contract, we should avoid scenarios were
a developer requires a lot of domain knowledge and most likely still miss some
traces in the contract. We also want the enforcement to be part of the program
itself. This would make the program easier to move between devices.
==PAGE:38==
24
S×C Wrapper
The idea is to use a wrapper that encapsulates I/O calls, like MAM SDKs. Each
method in the underlying object will be mirrored, but with additional checks
when called. These checks will ensure that the program is compliant in regard to
the contract authored; essentially a security wrapper as deﬁned in deﬁnition 3.
This wrapper should be easy to apply and the integrity should be veriﬁable by
any third party. This can be done by having a Trusted Wrapper Creator creating
the wrapper. The overall life cycle of the wrapper is shown on ﬁgure 3.1. Firstly,
the Trusted Wrapper Creator creates the wrapper. Both the developer and user
must trust this creator, since this will act as the foundation for the security
enforcement. The wrapper can be created as a standalone library that can be
published via a package manager, for instance via Nuget1. The developer will
then include this library in his code. All I/O operations must be performed via
this library. By doing so the wrapper will ensure enforcement. The Developer
will also include a contract, as per usual in S×C, that describes security-relevant
behaviour. This contract will automatically be generated based on a registration
made by the developer. This registration is needed before the wrapper allows
the I/O operation to take place. This will thereby ease up the issue of creating
a contract and thereby removing the ’forgotten traces’-issue. The program and
contract can then be signed to ensure integrity and origin. These are then sent
to a third party, trusted by the user. This trusted third party will inspect the
program and ensure that all I/O operations are called via the wrapper. This
analysis should be simpler than the more complex analysis currently performed
in the S×C’s program compliance-stage, since it does not need to understand
what the I/O operation is doing but rather only identify that this I/O operation
is performed. After the analysis shows that all I/O operations are performed
via the wrapper, the Trusted Third Party will calculate the hash value of the
wrapper library and compare it with a published hash value. This will ensure
that the library has not been altered. The contract is checked for correctness and
then signed. This signature ensures the user that the program only uses the I/O
wrapper and that the contract is correct. The signature also binds the contract
and program together, since it ensures the contract is aligned with the built code.
This can for instance be done using hash values of the build artifacts. Binding
the contract and the program together in such manner ensures integrity and
compliance, since the I/O wrapper will be used for enforcement of the contract.
Lastly, the user will check the signature and perform a contract-policy matching.
Depending on the outcome, the user can decide to run the program or not.
1https://www.nuget.org
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Idea
25
Figure 3.1: The life cycle of the wrapper and how it is used by the diﬀerent
actors.
3.1.1
Implications
Using a wrapper, as described in section 3.1, puts some constrains on the de-
veloped program.
First of all, applying a runtime wrapper of any kind will
have some performance penalties. How much the performance is aﬀected will
be investigated in section 3.4. Since the wrapper is additional code included in
the program, it requires some additional storage on the device. On small IoT
devices this might become an issue.
Due to the way the integrity of the wrapper is asserted - via a hash value - a
compiler can not prune the library. This means that any potentially unused
code, that could be removed normally, must be included as well, which requires
space. One way of limiting the unneeded functionality would be by nesting the
libraries. For instance could each wrapper and their dependencies be provided
as standalones. This means that a developer would need to use a core package
that implements necessary classes for the wrapper to work and all speciﬁc I/O
wrappers for each encapsulated I/O functionality would be provided in other
libraries. These libraries can be checked in the same manner as one big library,
by using hash values. In this thesis we will only look into creating these wrap-
pers in one library, but the suggestion above would be a potential solution to
this issue.
==PAGE:40==
26
S×C Wrapper
Figure 3.2: UML class diagram - Wrappers and their corresponding rulesets.
3.2
Design
In this section, we will design the wrapper described in section 3.1. The design
will be expressed via UML diagrams [33].
We will start with a very simple wrapper, identify an issue and then alter the
design in order to accommodate for the identiﬁed issue. This will be performed
through several iterations until the design of the wrapper is in a stable, safe and
useful condition.
Firstly, a simple wrapper, also known as adapter [48, pp. 139–150], will be made.
This wrapper simply forwards the user’s requests. For each I/O-related object
a wrapper will need to be introduced. An example would be the System.IO.File
and System.Net.Http.HttpClient in the dotnet core (C#) framework.
These
two would result in two diﬀerent wrappers, FileWrapper and HttpClientWrap-
per respectively.
So far, the wrappers are only forwarding the requests made by the developer’s
code. For a wrapper to enforce some sort of policy, a ruleset needs to be pro-
vided.
Since each request might require diﬀerent rules to be checked, each
wrapper will have its own ruleset. Using the previous example, a FileRuleset
and a HttpClientRuleset are provided for each wrapper as shown on ﬁgure 3.2.
Each ruleset can consist of an arbitrary number of rules and might be diﬀerent
for each wrapper they apply to. For example, FileRuleset would have a rule for
what path the delete operation can be performed at, where the HttpClientRule-
set would have a rule for which protocols (http, https etc.) are allowed.
Currently, the developer must create each wrapper he wants to use and their
corresponding ruleset, which needs to be provided to the wrapper. Since it can
be confusing and complex to create these rulesets, an expression builder [34,
pp. 343–350] can be used. This makes the creation much more readable and
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Design
27
easier to use, due to the chaining structure such pattern introduces. An ex-
ample of this is shown in listing 3.1 where the parameters are provided via the
constructor, and listing 3.2 that shows an example where an expression builder
is used to provide the same information. It is worth noticing that this example
is very simple and the code that uses constructor parameters keeps getting more
and more unreadable the more rules that can be set.
1 new
F i l e R u l e s e t ( true ,
" ./
workspace " ,
true ,
[ " ./
workspace " ,
" ./ s e t t i n g s " ] )
;
Listing 3.1: Example code in C#
where an instance of
the
FileRuleset is made
using
constructor
parameters.
1 new
F i l e R u l e s e t ()
2
. AllowDelete ( " . / workspace " )
3
. AllowRead ( [ " ./ workspace " ,
"
./ s e t t i n g s " ] ) ;
Listing 3.2: Example code in C#
where an instance of
the
FileRuleset is made
using an expression
builder.
Now that the developer has a nice way of creating the rulesets and some wrap-
pers that can enforce these, we will have to look into the issue of consistency.
If the developer at any time can create a wrapper with a diﬀerent ruleset, then
there is not really anything gained from this wrapper. As described in section
3.1, we want the developer to register all the rulesets in the beginning and then
have them applied throughout the duration of the program’s execution. In order
to do this a RulesetRegister is introduced. This register has the responsibility
of containing all the rulesets and provide these to the wrappers when needed.
This will ensure that it is the same ruleset that is applied to the same type of
wrapper every time - even if the developer creates new instances of the same
wrapper type. In order for the register to have an easy way of containing the
rulesets in a list, the rulesets need to inherit from the abstract class ruleset.
A new issue arises when introducing the register. The register is introduced in
order to force the developer to register all the rulesets at the beginning of the
execution, and thus it is important that the developer can not alter the rulesets
afterwards. Since the developer creates the rulesets, he also has a reference to
these. Therefore, when these rulesets are provided to the register, the developer
can sill change the individual rules (aka. their properties) via the reference he
has to each of the rulesets.
It is, therefore, important that this reference is
somehow lost or that the rulesets can not be changed after being provided to
the register.
One solution to this, is to simply create a copy of the provided object when
adding it to the register. This will indeed break the reference and thereby stop-
==PAGE:42==
28
S×C Wrapper
ping the developer from manipulating with the rulesets later on. The problem
by ﬁxing the issue this way, is that it is not very developer-friendly in the sense
that the developer still thinks he has a reference to the rulesets that have been
registered. The developer, with evil intentions or not, is still able to mutate the
object he has a reference to - believing that this is the same object reference that
is being kept by the RulesetRegister and enforced by the wrappers. Therefore,
a misalignment between what really happens and what the developer thinks
should happen can occur. A better solution is therefore to use a construction
builder [34, pp. 179–182] for constructing immutable rulesets. The expression
builder can then be merged into the construction builder instead - creating the
same readable behaviour as before, but with an immutable ruleset as a result.
The beneﬁt of this is that any intelligent code completion tool will highlight
that the properties can only be read but not changed. Each ruleset would need
its own builder for separation of duties and easier readability.
Using the original design shown on ﬁgure 3.2 and applying the builders and
RulesetRegister result in the new design shown on ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: UML class diagram - Two example wrappers are used for simplic-
ity. Each wrapper has its own ruleset that is constructed via a
builder. The rulesets are stored in the RulesetRegister that can
provide a ruleset to the corresponding wrapper.
Based on the design shown on ﬁgure 3.3, the developer can now create a Rulese-
tRegister, add immutable rulesets and use the wrappers. The wrapper will then
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Design
29
enforce the rulesets applied. The next issue is that there should only exist one
instance of the RulesetRegister, since there should only be one truth to what the
rulesets are. This can be ensured by using a singleton pattern [48, pp. 127–134]
for the RulesetRegister. By using this pattern, the register will only be created
once and afterwards the same register will be provided at request.
So far, we have some wrappers that can enforce some rulesets provided to the
register. Although it is intended that the developer provides these rulesets in
the beginning, there are nothing stopping him from applying these on-the-ﬂy.
If rulesets can be applied on-the-ﬂy, it can be diﬃcult to know exactly what the
rulesets are; and thus it is diﬃcult to create a correct contract based on these,
since they can change during the code execution. In order to avoid this issue, we
will have to force the developer to provide all the rulesets at once. This can be
done by using a template method [48, pp. 325–330]. By doing so, the developer
will have to create a class that overwrites a method where all the rulesets are
provided. This method will be called internally from the wrapper library. The
developer still has to start the registration process by calling UseIOWrapper,
but this is enforced by the wrappers themselves, since they will not work before
this registration have been completed.
By making the starting call a static
method, the developer can make this call anywhere in the code; it just has to be
before any wrappers are used. The rulesets will then be added to the register
at the same time; and by using an internal boolean, we can ensure that it is
only possible to add rulesets during this call, since only internal library code can
set this internal value. Expanding the design from ﬁgure 3.3 with the template
method, singleton etc., as described above, we arrive at the design shown on
ﬁgure 3.4.
The wrapper itself is now in a state where it can enforce the rulesets provided
by the developer. The rulesets can not be changed while executing the program,
and all must be registered at the same time. The developer can choose to start
the registration process whenever he wants, but the wrappers will not allow any
calls before the static method, UseIOWrapper, is called. However, the concept
of a contract is missing from this design. Since we, as mentioned in section 3.1,
want the contract to be generated automatically, we need to create a new class in
the library dealing with the contract generation. This class, ContractGenerator,
only has one method: GenerateContract. This method generates the contract
that is being enforced by the wrappers. In order for the method to generate the
contract some rulesets need to be provided, since these are the ones resulting in
the contract. We need to ensure that the rulesets being used at program execu-
tion and the rulesets used for generating the contract are always in sync. One
way to do this, is by having the developer make a copy of the WrapperRulesets
and maintain this so these two always are aligned, but anyone familiar with some
sort of development knows that this kind of ’documentation’ tends to get out of
sync very fast. Another, and much better, solution to this issue is by using the
==PAGE:44==
30
S×C Wrapper
Figure 3.4: UML class diagram - The developer can register the immutable
rulesets by implementing a class, WrapperRulesets, that is inherit-
ing from the abstract class RulesetApplier. The rulesets are added
when the static UseIOWrapper method is called.
same ruleset registration process, as the developed code uses, and then generate
the contract based on this. The developer can thereby create a new project
in his solution that automatically builds and run a program for generating the
contract whenever his main program is being built. This contract generation
project is then creating an instance of the WrapperRulesets and proving that to
the GenerateContract method. The concrete way of implementing this will be
explained in section 3.3.
Now the contract is automatically being generated and is always up to date
with the newest build of the main program using the rulesets provided; assum-
ing that the developer is well behaved. The issue with this is the ’assuming’
part. The current way of generating the contract is that it assumes that the
developer actually provides the same rulesets in the main program and the con-
tract generation project. If the developer is ill behaved, he could just create
a new object inherited from the RulesetApplier and provide that instead for
the contract generation. To circumvent this issue, we have multiple options.
One way is to take a hash of the provided rulesets when performing the ruleset
registration. In this way, the RulesetRegister would be the one responsible for
enforcing this check. The downside of this is that it will have a penalty on the
performance when registering the rulesets, and that it requires the contract to
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Design
31
be present in a known location. Furthermore, it requires that we have an imple-
mentation from the contract and back to code objects, which is easy if we use
simple contract formats such as JSON, but it can be a bit more tricky if we for
instance switched to the ConSpec language or similar. This means that more
code would have to be added to the library in order to handle these translations,
and thereby using even more space.
Another way would be to utilize that this wrapper is being used in a Security-
by-Contract context and therefore someone is performing a static analysis. The
analysis would then ensure that it is the same class used for both the registration
and contract generation. This check is a fairly simple check, since the analyser
does not need to understand the details of what is being used, but rather just
check that it is indeed the exact same instance in both cases. By moving this
check to the static analysis, we gain the beneﬁt that it has no runtime penalty,
since it is performed by an external party before the main program is being ex-
ecuted by a user. The downside is, however, that the static analysis may make
an error either by falsely identifying a mismatch between the two or vice versa,
but we believe this to be such a simple check that this would rarely happen.
Using the design from ﬁgure 3.4 and adding the ability to generate contracts,
we now get the design shown on ﬁgure 3.5
We now have a working I/O wrapper library that also can generate a contract,
which is aligned with the main program. One issue is that the developer could
potentially tamper with the built code, creating a loophole in the security. In
order to handle this, we need to look into what information the contract should
contain. So far, the contract only consists of the applied rulesets but nothing
else. In order to ensure that the code has not been tamped with after built
and/or the static analysis, due to it being in a Security-by-Contract context, we
need to note down the hash value of the generated code. The contract should
therefore contain the contract name, description, rulesets and a hash of the
build artifacts. The name and description are just for the developer to express
any extra information that might be useful for understanding the program. The
rulesets are, of course, the security-relevant behaviour of the program.
The
hash value of these ﬁles is to ensure that they have not been tampered with
after the contract generation. This hash value will be compared by the trusted
third party in the static analysis stage of the S×C paradigm to ensure they
are correct. Putting this together and expressing this in a JSON-format we get
what is shown in listing 3.3.
1 {
2
"ContractName" :
"ContractName" ,
3
" Description " :
"Some
d e s c r i p t i o n " ,
4
" Rulesets " :
[ ] ,
5
" ExecutableHash " :
"<hash>"
6 }
Listing 3.3: Overview of a generated contract expressed in JSON.
==PAGE:46==
32
S×C Wrapper
Figure 3.5: UML class diagram - The developer can register rulesets, use
wrappers that enforce these and generate a contract automatically
based on these rulesets.
In order to better understand the usage of this library, let us look at some
sequence diagrams. Figure 3.6 shows the sequence for adding a ruleset. The
method UseIOWrapper gets called somewhere in the developer’s program. This
then instantiate the RulesetRegister and allows it to accept new rulesets. Note
that, without setting the boolean value AllowRulesetRegistration to true, the
RulesetRegister will not accept any new rulesets. Having the AllowRulesetReg-
istration value ensures that rulesets can only be registered via the template
method. This boolean value can only be set from within the library itself and
therefore can not be manipulated by a developer with evil intent.
The UseIOWrapperEnabler then calls the RegisterRulesets, which is implemented
by the developer and is where the rulesets, that will be registered, can be found.
These rulesets will be created by a ruleset builder. The rulesets can in theory be
built before the registration, but they must be added in this method anyway, or
else the RulesetRegister will not accept them. Lastly, the UseIOWrapperEnabler
sets the value AllowRulesetRegistration to false - disabling the possibility of the
developer adding rules outside this registration phase.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Design
33
Figure 3.6: UML Sequence diagram - Adding a ruleset to the RulesetRegister.
The ruleset allows for the read-operation. Note that this sequence
diagram is an overview of the broader idea and therefore details,
such as parameters, are not displayed.
The contract generation is fairly similar. Instead of the developer’s code calling
UseIOWrapperEnabler it will call ContractGenerator instead, which also will
instantiate the RulesetRegister and call the WrapperRulesets instance. However,
it will also calculate the hash value and write the contract to the ﬁle system.
For the interested, this sequence diagram can be found in appendix A on ﬁgure
A.1.
After the developer has registered all the rulesets, he can now use the wrappers.
When creating a wrapper, it fetches the needed ruleset from the RulesetRegister.
The developer can then call the mirrored method and the wrapper will perform
a check against the ruleset before forwarding it to the underlying object. This
ﬂow is shown on ﬁgure 3.7.
The structure of the wrapper library needs to be simple in order for the developer
to use it eﬃciently. The library generally consists of four parts:
Rulesets, which contain the diﬀerent rules.
Builders, that make it easier to create immutable rulesets.
Wrappers, which are the ones that encapsulate underlying classes that perform
I/O operations. Wrappers also enforce the rulesets.
Core, such as the register, are needed classes for the template method and
contract generation.
==PAGE:48==
34
S×C Wrapper
Figure 3.7: UML Sequence diagram - When the wrapper is created it fetches
the ruleset from the register. Afterwards, the developer can call
the mirrored methods. The call is checked against the ruleset to
ensure compliance. If it is compliant, the call is forwarded.
These four parts are logically separated into their own namespaces - making
a library structure as shown on ﬁgure 3.8. This means that if the developer,
for instance, needs to create a FileRulesetBuilder it can be found at IOWrap-
per.Builders.FileRulesetBuilder. It is worth noticing the dependency within the
library. The rulesets are the center of this, because both the builders, wrappers
and core are dependent on these. The wrappers are dependent on the core, since
the wrappers are getting the rulesets from the registry.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Implementation
35
Figure 3.8: UML package diagram - The structuring of the wrapper library.
In C# this is based on namespaces.
3.3
Implementation
In this section we will describe the smaller implementation details there are
needed to realize the design described in section 3.2. We have chosen to im-
plement the wrapper in the language C# using the dotnet core framework2.
In this thesis, we will implement a wrapper for the System.IO.File and the
System.Net.Http.HttpClient class. Not all methods will be mirrored in the im-
plementation, since it is just a proof of concept. The code can be found in the
appendix.
3.3.1
Rulesets & Builders
All rulesets inherit from a common abstract class called Ruleset. In C# this
can be implemented using an interface. Each ruleset should contain public get
methods and private set methods, so they are immutable. Due to the set meth-
ods being private, all rules must be provided as parameters in the constructor.
The rulesets are straight forward, when the rules needed are identiﬁed. For this
proof of concept, the rules are:
FileRuleset:
1. Create paths
2. Read paths
3. Delete paths
2https://dotnet.microsoft.com
==PAGE:50==
36
S×C Wrapper
HttpClientRuleset:
1. Allow http
2. Allow https
3. Allowed URLs
4. Allowed ports
5. Maximum number of requests
The rules for the FileRuleset are based on the fact that an I/O operation essen-
tially consists of two operations, read and write, where write can be separated
into create and delete. The read operation could in theory also be split into con-
tent read and ’ﬁle exists’-read, but for simplicity there are only three rules. It is
worth noticing that this implicit contains additional information; whether the
program is even allowed to perform this operation. An example would be the
create path; if it is set in any way, the program is allowed to perform the create
operation on that speciﬁc path or paths, otherwise we can assume that the pro-
gram is not allowed to use this operation. The path can be arbitrarily speciﬁc
- The paths shown in listing 3.4 are all valid and allow for interaction with the
ﬁle C:\\Program Files\MyProgram\WorkingFile.txt. Note that the wildcard **
means all paths, and * means any given name within the same directory. If a
wildcard is given before the drive, then all drives are also allowed. Each rule for
the FileRuleset will be implemented as a list allowing for more than one path.
1 C:\\ Program
F i l e s \MyProgram\ WorkingFile . txt
2 C:\\ Program
F i l e s \MyProgram
3 C:\\ Program
F i l e s \MyProgram\∗
4 C:\\∗∗
5 ∗∗
Listing 3.4: Examples of paths that all allow interaction with the ﬁle located
at: C:\\Program Files\MyProgram\WorkingFile.txt
The builders for each ruleset are just a regular implementation of a builder using
an expression pattern - meaning some private properties, some public methods
to manipulate these properties and a build method to create the immutable
ruleset. How exactly the methods should be named is a matter of taste, but
in this proof of concept we have chosen to use Allow<Operation> as method
names; for example, AllowCreate(path). Others use with instead of allow, but
this diﬀerence is semantic and therefore not essential for this proof of concept.
3.3.2
Wrappers
When a wrapper is constructed, it fetches the corresponding ruleset from the
registry and enforces it. This also means that the complexity of the wrapper is
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Implementation
37
tightly coupled with the complexity of the corresponding ruleset. Since rulesets,
in a production ready environment, might be fairly large, and the wrapper can
be called many times during an execution, it is important that the wrappers are
fairly optimized.
Many issues arise when implementing the wrappers. We will try to cover some
of them here, but since every underlying wrapped object is diﬀerent in nature,
we can only cover the most common.
The ﬁrst issue that comes to mind is performance. When a wrapper’s method
is called many times during an execution, every addition operation added can
sum up to be a huge overhead. If we, for instance, look at the Read and Write
methods for the File wrapper, then we have to ensure that the performance is
not aﬀected by the size of the content. To avoid this, we ﬁrst have to understand
how provided parameters are passed in C#. In general, there are two ways of
passing an argument to a method. It can either be passed by reference or by
value.
In the ﬁrst case we pass the parameters by reference; this could, for instance,
be the content that should be written to a ﬁle. This means that an array of
characters (i.e. a string) is stored in memory. By passing this by reference, the
pointer to the head of that array is passed as an argument. This means that no
matter if the array has a size of 100 bytes or 100MB the argument will always
be the same in size - 32 or 64 bits, depending the operating system.
Another way to pass this argument is by value. This means that the passed con-
tent is copied to another memory location, when the I/O method is called. The
copy method has to copy each value individually - meaning a time complexity
of O(n). The issue of passing arguments by reference is that underlying changes
to the arguments also have eﬀect when the method returns. Since this is the
case, the developer must declare that the provided arguments can be mutated
and therefore the keyword ref is used [71]. This means that the wrapper no
longer mirrors the underlying object one-to-one. C# does, however, have a way
to combine the constant pass-time using pass by reference and the one-to-one
mirroring by using pass by value. This can be done by using the keyword in
[64]. This ensures that the values are passed by reference, but no modiﬁcations
can be made by the called method. This keyword is, however, only useful when
dealing with value types, and in C# objects and strings are reference types [61].
This means, that in general, this is most useful when passing large value-types
such a structs [72], which our proof of concept does not do. A performance
optimisation for passing parameters in this library is therefore not needed.
Performance will be evaluated in section 3.4.
Another issue arises when the method wrapped does not simply return a string,
DTO [58] or void, but rather returns an object that in itself can perform I/O
operations. If this is the case, as it is for the File wrapper’s Create method, then
this object must also be wrapped. In this PoC, no rulesets exist about maximum
==PAGE:52==
38
S×C Wrapper
ﬁle size, or similar, and it is therefore not needed to wrap the FileStream,
returned from the Create method, since this only gives access to writing content.
On the other hand, a method such as the Get method in the HttpClient wrapper
can simply return to the caller without any wrapping, since it simply returns a
DTO object.
A third issue is asynchronous calls. If we, for instance, have a restriction on
the number of times a program can request a given URL, then we need to
ensure that asynchronous calls are handled in a manner so a developer can not
circumvent this check. Normally, a simple counter would be used for this, but
since two threads can update this at the same time, we might miss an increment.
Therefore, we must be sure that a counter is not being incremented incorrectly,
which could be the case for the maxNumberOfCalls counter. One way of doing
this is by using a lock [70].
The issue of using a lock is that it is slow - it
takes many operations to open/close a lock for a thread, and it, furthermore,
makes each thread wait until the entered thread has exited the locked area. This
might not be an issue on a single core IoT device, since it only has one CPU
core and thus only one active thread at a time, but in multicored processors,
such as the ones found in desktops, this can be a huge performance overhead.
A better solution is to use operations that are atomic such as the Interlocked
class in C# [65]. This operation ensures that a value is incremented atomically,
meaning in one operation. This will ensure that no threads can read, pause and
then later write - essentially missing other threads’ increments. By using atomic
operations, we can ensure minimal performance overhead and still ensure policy
enforcement on asynchronous operations.
3.3.3
Register
For the developer to use the wrappers, the rulesets need to be registered. This
is done with an instance of the RulesetRegister class, which is only instantiated
once. As mentioned in the design section, a singleton pattern is used to enforce
this. It can be implemented by making the constructor of the register private,
using a static property containing the register, and a static method for getting
the register. The RulesetRegister is marked as sealed in order to ensure that
nothing else can inherit it and thereby circumvent the singleton pattern. This
is shown in listing 3.5.
1 public
s eale d
c l a s s
RulesetRegister
2 {
3
private
RulesetRegister ()
{}
4
5
private
s t a t i c
RulesetRegister
instance = n u l l ;
6
public
s t a t i c
RulesetRegister
Instance
7
{
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Implementation
39
8
get
9
{
10
i f
( instance
i s
n u l l )
11
{
12
instance = new
RulesetRegister () ;
13
}
14
return
instance ;
15
}
16
}
17 }
Listing 3.5: The singleton implementation of the RulesetRegister.
The RulesetRegister also contains the methods for adding a ruleset and fetching
them. The rulesets are stored in a dictionary rather than a list. The reason
for this is, that each ruleset should only be inserted once, but might be fetched
multiple time. We would, therefore, strive to have the best time-complexity (in
’Big O’-notation [9]) for search, and being alright to sacriﬁce some performance
for the insert operation. Since a dictionary’s insert operation is of complexity
O(n) and its search operation is of O(1) [62, 63], it is preferred over a list that
has O(1) for insert and O(n) for search [68, 69]. Other structures also exists,
but none that can improve a search complexity of O(1).
When adding the
rulesets, we have to be sure that it is only happening at the ruleset registration.
Although the developer should never have direct access to the register, we add
an extra protection by having an internal boolean controlling whether or not
new rulesets can be added. By making this boolean internal, only the code in
the library can set this variable. This ensures that even if the developer creates
the RulesetRegister in his own code, he can not add extra rulesets outside the
registration method.
3.3.4
Ruleset Applier
Adding the rulesets to the RulesetRegister can be done by the developer creating
a ruleset and then call the AddRuleset on the register.
This does, however,
assume that the developer is well behaved, which might not be the case. As
mentioned in the design section (section 3.2), we use a template method to
force the developer to implement the registration correctly. Template methods
require very little code to implement, but is an eﬀective way to force a behaviour.
The IRulesetApplier is an abstract class (in C# this can be implemented as
an interface, and thus the I in IRulesetApplier) that only has one method,
RegisterRulesets, which takes the RulesetRegister as a parameter, as shown in
listing 3.6.
1 public
i n t e r f a c e
IRulesetApplier
2 {
==PAGE:54==
40
S×C Wrapper
3
void
Reg isterRulesets ( RulesetRegister
r e g i s t e r ) ;
4 }
Listing 3.6: An implementation of RegisterRulesets must be provided by the
developer in his own code. This method will be called in order to
register the rulesets via the register that is passed as an argument.
The method shown in listing 3.6 needs to be called from somewhere inside the
library. This is the UseIOWrapperEnabler’s responsibility. The UseIOWrapper-
Enabler is a static class with one static method: UseIOWrapper. The developer
calls this static method from anywhere in the code and it will trigger the reg-
istration phase. This static method sets the RulesetRegister into a state where
it accepts new ruleset registrations. The static method will only perform the
registration once, which will ensure that the developer can not register new
rulesets later on. This is merely an extra protection, and it could potentially
throw an exception to improve the information given to the developer. The
UseIOWrapperEnabler class is shown in listing 3.7.
1 public
s t a t i c
c l a s s
UseIOWrapperEnabler
2 {
3
4
public
s t a t i c
void
UseIOWrapper ( IRulesetApplier
ruleSetApplyer )
5
{
6
var
r e g i s t e r = RulesetRegister . Instance ;
7
i f
( ! r e g i s t e r . AlreadyCalled )
8
{
9
r e g i s t e r . AllowRulesetRegistration = true ;
10
ruleSetApplyer . RegisterRulesets ( r e g i s t e r ) ;
11
r e g i s t e r . AllowRulesetRegistration = f a l s e ;
12
r e g i s t e r . AlreadyCalled = true ;
13
} // Could throw
exception
i f
true
14
}
15 }
Listing 3.7: The UseIOWrapper method starts the ruleset registration phase
and ensures that the RulesetRegister accepts new rulesets.
The developer now only has to implement the IRulesetApplier, add the rulesets
by using the builders and call the UseIOWrapper somewhere in the code before
any wrappers can be used.
3.3.5
Contract Generator
One of the key ideas by making this library is for the contract to be automatically
generated. The class responsible for generating the contract is ContractGenera-
tor. This class has one public method that generates the contract. The contract
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Implementation
41
consists of ﬁve ﬁelds: Contract name, description, rulesets and hash of build ar-
tifacts. The contract name and description are provided by the developer. The
rulesets are gathered by calling the RegisterRulesets on the WrapperRulesets,
provided by the user. The build artifacts are hashed collectively using SHA265,
meaning that one hash value is generated based on the entire content of the
generated build folder. This will ensure that no external ﬁles can be switched
after build and later provided as if they were part of the build process. The
contract is then generated with the name: <contractName>.contract.
An example of a generated contract is shown in listing A.1 in appendix A.
We now have a way of generating the contract, but we still need a convenient
way for the developer to use it. This can be done by creating a separate project
in the same solution, so it can reference the same WrapperRulesets as the main
program uses, but is otherwise separated from the rest of the code. This program
should be a console program consisting of only a main function that looks like
what is shown in listing 3.8.
1
s t a t i c
void Main( s t r i n g [ ]
args )
2 {
3
var
wrapperRulesets = new SomeProgram . WrapperRulesets ( ) ;
4
5
var
d e s c r i p t i o n = "This
i s
a
t e s t
contract " ;
6
var
buildPath = @"SomeProgram\BuildPath" ;
7
var
contractPath = @" .\ SomePath"
8
var
contractName = " TestContract " ;
9
10
new IOWrapper . Core . ContractGenerator () . GenerateContract (
wrapperRulesets ,
contractName ,
description ,
buildPath ,
contractPath ) ;
11 }
Listing 3.8: Console program for generating the contract automatically. The
developer calls GenerateContract with the needed arguments.
This program should then build and run after the main program has been built.
This can be done by scripts or build targets. In this proof of concept, we will be
using MSBuild targets [60]. This can then be automated with three lines of code,
as shown in listing 3.9. By setting up the contract generation in this manner,
the main program will be build ﬁrst and then afterwards the contract generating
program will build, run and generate the contract. The developer does not have
to do anything after the setup, other than continue with his normal routine of
pressing the build button in Visual Studio or whatever tool he is using.
1 <Target Name="MyPreCompileTarget"
AfterTargets=" Build ">
2
<Exec Command=" dotnet
run −−no−build −−c o n f i g u r a t i o n
$ (
Configuration ) −−p r o j e c t
$ ( MSBuildProjectFullPath ) "/>
==PAGE:56==
42
S×C Wrapper
3 </Target>
Listing 3.9: MSBuild target that will build and run the contract generating
program after the build for the main program has ﬁnished. This
will then automatically create the contract without the developer
having to do anything besides his normal routines.
3.4
Evaluation
We will evaluate the wrapper, described in the sections above, in two parts: (1)
We will look at the performance overhead of using such wrapper, compared to
just running the program without. (2) We will put the usage of this wrapper
into a greater perspective by going through the S×C program life cycle using
this wrapper.
This will help us answering research question four: "Is S×C implementable by
means of a wrapper and what beneﬁts and penalties does such implementation
have". The test program can be found in the appendix together with the code
for the wrapper.
3.4.1
Performance
In this section we will look at the performance of the wrapper. There are mul-
tiple ways of looking at the overhead of this wrapper, such as extra memory
needed, extra time etc. Depending on the system, diﬀerent kinds of properties
will be important for the developer. In this thesis we will look at the perfor-
mance in the sense of run-time overhead that is added by using the wrapper
we implemented in section 3.3. A test program will be developed in order to
measure the general overhead. This test program will perform the same I/O
operations for File and HttpClient with and without the wrapper. Each I/O
operation will be measured and compared in order to understand the runtime
overhead this wrapper impose.
The elapsed time of I/O operations that interact with the ﬁle system or http
requests can vary a lot, since many external process’ can aﬀect the time. There
are multiple ways to counter these variations.
One way would be to simply
measure the absolute time added, by simply calling the wrapper library and
then return instead of performing the underlying action. This would result in
much more stable test data, but the issue of doing this is that the measured
values would only be absolute values, which is system dependent. Although it
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Evaluation
43
would likely result in more stable experimental data, it would be very platform
depended. A method that takes 110ms on one computer might take 220ms on
another. If we instead include the underlying method, we can calculate how
much more time is added by using the wrapper compared to not using it. If,
for instance, the underlying call takes 100ms on the ﬁrst example device and
the other example device takes 200ms, then both cases would result in a 10%
increase. Had we only looked at the absolute diﬀerence then it would either be
10ms or 20ms; depending on what system we measured on. This means that
we will accept more imprecise measurements to gain comparable data and then
try to minimize the external eﬀects as much as possible.
In this test we will look at the FileWrapper and HttpClientWrapper we devel-
oped in section 3.3. For the FileWrapper we will test the Exists, ReadAllText,
Create, WriteAllText and Delete method. The create method will create an
empty ﬁle. The read and write method will both operate on a text string that
is 3499 bytes in size. For the HttpClientWrapper the Get, Post and Delete re-
quest will be tested. The http client will make a request to an API; running on
a localhost port on the same machine as the test program is running at. The get
request will return a 85 bytes JSON object. The post method will be requested
with a text string of 12 bytes in size and have no content returned with an OK
status code. The delete method will, like the post request, immediately return
an OK status code.
As mentioned before, each I/O operation can vary greatly in the elapsed time
measured, due to external factors. In order to get a more realistic value for the
overhead imposed on the program by using the wrapper, the test program will
perform the same operations multiple times (i.e. multiple iterations). The I/O
operations being tested will be perform both with and without the wrapper in
each iteration. It will run for 10,000 iterations with a delay between each one
in order to ensure that the garbage collector, ﬁle system and requested API
can keep up; thereby, limiting the eﬀect these can have on the test as well as
ensuring that the http connection is closed before a new iteration starts.
The test program will be developed in dotnet core (C#), since the wrapper
is developed on the same framework. We will use the inbuilt StopWatch3 to
measure the time elapsed for each I/O operation; meaning that the time needed
for creating the wrapper is not part of this measurement. The same applies
for the time needed to create the HttpClient object and the time needed to
register the rulesets. The test is performed on a laptop running Windows 10
with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6500U CPU. The StopWatch is based on a high-
resolution performance counter with a frequency of 107Hz. This means that it
has an accuracy within 100ns, according to the StopWatch’s internal properties.
3https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.stopwatch
==PAGE:58==
44
S×C Wrapper
We assume that the crystal oscillator, feeding the performance counter, is stable
and accurate within each measurement, since we are measuring elapsed time over
a very short interval.
Before we run this test, we have to be aware of diﬀerent things that can have an
eﬀect on the result. Firstly, we have to be aware of threads and their context
switching. When the scheduler [1] makes a thread switch, it has a performance
overhead. This is usually not an issue, since the scheduler tries to make the
system seem as responsive as possible towards the user. This is, however, an
issue when testing performance, where we want the results to be as consistent as
possible. Although it is not possible for us to disable this behaviour completely,
we can ask the CPU scheduler to prioritise the test program as much as possible.
This will reduce the amount of time the test program’s thread is not running.
Furthermore, we can force the program to only run on one speciﬁc core on
the CPU to avoid even more expensive switching, which occurs when switching
between cores. The same applies to the localhost API that also is used for this
test. The API program will, however, run on another core than the test program
so they do not compete for CPU time.
We also have to keep in mind that the code running needs to "warm up",
meaning that the ﬁrst couple of operations might take longer than the others,
due to Just-In-Time (JIT) compiling, garbage collection and other sorts of start
up eﬀects. This impact can be reduced by simply waiting a while and perform
some dummy requests before the test is performed.
A third issue to be aware of is that we should perform the two scenarios, with
and without the wrapper, as close together as possible without having a bias
towards one of them. The reason we want to execute the two scenarios as close
together as possible is to limit the risk of the system being more busy at one
measurement than the other, which might result in more thread switching and
therefore a longer elapsed time. If we always run the without-wrapper code
ﬁrst, and then the wrapper code after, we might see that the part of the test
that is using the wrapper is faster than the without-wrapper part. This is due
to a systematic execution order, and if the ﬁrst I/O operation always takes a
little longer then we would have a biased test. To avoid this, we randomly pick
either the wrapper or without-wrapper scenario to run ﬁrst for every iteration
we perform. This should avoid any unintended biases due to execution order.
When combining all these precautions we get the code shown in listing 3.10.
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Evaluation
45
1
s t a t i c
void Main( s t r i n g [ ]
args )
2 {
3
var
stopwatch = new Stopwatch () ;
4
5
Process . GetCurrentProcess () . P r o c e s s o r A f f i n i t y = new IntPtr (2) ;
6
Process . GetCurrentProcess () . P r i o r i t y C l a s s = P r o c e s s P r i o r i t y C l a s s .
High ;
7
Thread . CurrentThread . P r i o r i t y = ThreadPriority . Highest ;
8
9
stopwatch . Start () ;
10
i n t
warmUpCounter = 0;
11
while ( stopwatch . ElapsedMilliseconds < 30000 && warmUpCounter <
10)
12
{
13
// Perform
I /O operations
f o r
warming up ,
s i n c e
the
f i r s t
couple
of
requests
are
always
slow .
This
ensures
more
c o n s i s t e n t
t e s t
data .
14
}
15
stopwatch . Stop () ;
16
17
var
ran = new Random() ;
18
19
f o r
( var
i = 0;
i < 10000;
i++)
20
{
21
i f
( ran . Next () % 2 == 0)
22
{
23
// Without
i s
f i r s t
24
}
25
e l s e
26
{
27
// With
i s
f i r s t
28
}
29
30
Thread . Sleep (500) ;
// Wait a
b i t
f o r
en
garbage
c o l l e c t o r
and
other
things
to
catch up
31
}
32 }
Listing 3.10: Code to minimize test result variance and bias caused by other
programs and start up eﬀects. The code requests the program to
run within a speciﬁc core in the CPU, set the process and thread
priority to high - meaning regular, normal priority, processes
and threads should interrupt the code being executed as little as
possible. It then performs a ’warm up’ for at least thirty seconds
and ten iterations to avoid start up eﬀects. Lastly, it randomly
picks what scenario should run ﬁrst in each iteration and then
waits a while between each iteration to ensure previous runs do
not aﬀect the next iteration.
Now that we have done the preparation for the test, we can start the experiment
itself. As mentioned before, we will test the two scenarios: with and without
==PAGE:60==
46
S×C Wrapper
the wrapper. The rulesets need to be registered before the test program can call
the I/O operations via the wrapper. The rulesets used for this test are meant to
resemble a program that has read/write access to a couple of folders on the ﬁle
system and can make http(s) requests to a couple of hosts. The speciﬁc setup
of the rulesets, used for this test, can be found in listing B.1 in appendix B.
The test is then run - resulting in a 10,000 by 16 matrix containing all the
measured elapsed times for each I/O operation with and without the wrapper.
In this section we will use the File.ReadAllText operation as an example. Graphs
for all the other operations can be found in appendix B.
The skewness of the File.ReadAllText without the wrapper is 2.5, and 2.0 with
the wrapper. This means that most calls are fairly ’fast’ with some few slow
elapsed measurements creating a tail.
The kurtosis is 14.7 for without the
wrapper and 9.2 with the wrapper. Therefore, the data points form a leptokurtic
distribution. The two values for all the I/O operations, with and without the
wrapper, can be found in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: The skewness and kurtosis for each I/O operation without and with
the wrapper.
Skewness
(Without)
Skewness
(With)
Kurtosis
(Without)
Kurtosis
(With)
File.Exists
1.5
2.1
4.4
14.5
File.ReadAllText
2.5
2.0
14.7
9.2
File.Create
1.5
1.6
3.9
4.7
File.WriteAllText
1.8
1.9
5.8
6.3
File.Delete
1.8
1.9
4.6
6.0
HttpClient.Get
1.8
2.4
6.3
16.9
HttpClient.Post
7.7
15.2
131.3
621.7
HttpClient.Delete
18.2
9.5
792.9
189.4
To better understand the distribution of data points, we will look at the boxplot
shown on ﬁgure 3.9. We can clearly see, based on the boxplot, the skewness of
the data, since the ﬁrst, second and third quartile are found at one end of
horizontal axis.
The high kurtosis value is also visible, due to the quartiles
being close together. Furthermore, the boxplot shows many outliers - indicating
some external eﬀects on the measurements. It is worth noticing that the outliers
only are found on one side of boxplot.
Although the boxplot is good for understanding the individual data points and
their distribution, it is easier to understand the relation between with and with-
out the wrapper for each operation by looking at a histogram like the one shown
on ﬁgure 3.10. Based on ﬁgure 3.10, it seems that the two graphs have the same
shape but are shifted on the ﬁrst axis. Most operations take around 1880 ticks
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Evaluation
47
Figure 3.9: Boxplot of the File.ReadAllText operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure 3.10: Test result of the elapsed time for the File.ReadAllText opera-
tion, without and with the wrapper, shown as a histogram. Note
that the shown graphs are similar in shape, but the time with
the wrapper is a bit larger than the one without.
Both his-
tograms contain 1,000 bins, since this nicely shows the shape of
the dataset without showing too much noisy data.
==PAGE:62==
48
S×C Wrapper
when using the wrapper and 1690 when not. The graphs do also show secondary,
tertiary etc. spikes.
The two histograms can be depicted on the same graph to get a better view of
the similarities. Figure 3.11 shows the same dataset used for ﬁgure 3.10, but
with the two histograms depicted on one graph with the same bin width for a
better scaling. This is done by plotting the ﬁrst histogram with 1,000 bins, then
getting the bin width of that histogram and plot the second histogram using the
same bin width. The reason for showing the two histograms with the same bin
width is to keep the scale of the graph. Had we not done so, then the histogram
with the most extreme data point would had been larger than the other. This
is because, if we plot both histograms with the same bin count - say 1,000 -
then the histogram with the largest data point would have to span over a larger
interval using the 1,000 bins. This means that each bin had to be wider for it to
span the larger values on the ﬁrst axis. Since both histograms are similar, the
histogram with the largest bin width would have a higher count per bin in the
concentrated areas and thus seem larger. Although these histograms are mostly
for understanding the shape of the data points, it is still most fair to depict the
two histograms with the same bin width.
The data, shown on the boxplot and the two histograms, contain some few very
extreme outliers that make the depiction of the data points less informative.
For a better view we show the combined histogram where the ﬁrst axis uses the
limits: [min 99-percentile]. This means that the graph starts at the smallest
data point and stops at the 99-percentile largest value. This will ensure that
the histograms ﬁll most of the width of the graph instead of just one third. The
99-percentile is based on the data points with the wrapper. The datapoints will
still be counted for all calculations, but the combined histograms will not show
these in order to show the reader a better view of the distribution.
On ﬁgure 3.11, we can see that the two histograms have the same shape but are
shifted. The wrapper should in theory add a constant time overhead for each
operation; given that the same ruleset is used for the same I/O operation. This
does not mean that the File.ReadAllText operation takes the same amount of
time as the File.Write operation, nor does it mean that the http checks take the
same amount of time as the ﬁle client checks. This does, however, mean that
the time it take to execute a call with the wrapper, twith, is the same time as
it would take to execute the same call without the wrapper, twithout, together
with the constant time, twrapper, given that the same operation, operation, uses
the same ruleset, ruleset, for all data points x, as shown in equation 3.1.
twith,operation,ruleset(x) = twithout,operation(x) + twrapper,operation,ruleset
(3.1)
Notice that equation 3.1 assumes that the same operation with the same ruleset
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Evaluation
49
Figure 3.11: Histogram of File.ReadAllText with and without use of the wrap-
per. Both histograms have the bin width of 25.59.
always add the same amount of overhead time, independent of the data size.
In order to support this claim, we performed a test for File.ReadAllText with
diﬀerent content sizes. This test read from four diﬀerent ﬁles containing 10kB,
100kB, 1MB and 10MB data. Each ﬁle was read once with and without the
wrapper in each iteration, and the test contained 10,000 iterations. As shown
on ﬁgure 3.12, the File.ReadAllText operation takes more time the more content
is read, but the diﬀerence between with and without the wrapper stays about
the same, which is shown in table 3.2. The last value is a bit higher than the
others, which we will discuss in chapter 4.
Table 3.2: The absolute overhead when reading a ﬁle of a speciﬁc content-size.
This is calculated by subtracting the mean of the elapsed times for
with the wrapper with the mean of the elapsed times for without the
wrapper. Although the content size increases with a factor ten for
each column the absolute overhead stays roughtly the same.
10KB
100KB
1MB
10MB
Absolute overhead (ticks)
550
559
498
913
==PAGE:64==
50
S×C Wrapper
Figure 3.12: Boxplot of the elapsed time for File.ReadAllText, with and with-
out the wrapper, given diﬀerent content sizes. The test where
iterated 10,000 times.
Since it is not possible to perform the exact same measurement at the same
time under the exact same conditions, as equation 3.1 implies, we can calculate
the mean of twithout and twith instead - resulting in equation 3.2.
twith,operation,ruleset = twithout,operation,ruleset + twrapper,operation,ruleset
(3.2)
twith and twithout are calculated for each operation using the results from the test
run. Equation 3.2 can be rearranged, and twrapper can be calculated based on
the two known values. This value is an absolute value. As mentioned before, we
are interested in the relative overhead, meaning that we want it as an overhead
in percentage. This leads us to equation 3.3.
twith,operation,ruleset −twithout,operation,ruleset
twithout,operation,ruleset
= twrapper_%,operation,ruleset
(3.3)
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Evaluation
51
Using equation 3.3, the overhead as a percentage for each I/O operation can be
calculated. The calculated overhead-values for the test are shown in table 3.3.
Table 3.3: The mean for each I/O-method, both with and without the use of
the wrapper, are calculated, and the overhead as a percentage is
found. The mean values and overhead are in ticks, where one tick
is 100ns.
Method
Without
wrapper
mean
With
wrapper
mean
Overhead
Overhead
(%)
File.Exists
1554.9
2015.8
460.9
29.6%
File.ReadAllText
2921.8
3318.6
396.9
13.6%
File.Create
8459.5
8762.4
203.9
3.4%
File.WriteAllText
29505.9
29795.5
289.6
1.0%
File.Delete
4170.6
4695.1
524.6
12.6%
HttpClient.Get
111309.8
111953.7
643.9
0.6%
HttpClient.Post
16509.1
17287.2
778.1
4.7%
HttpClient.Delete
14330.5
15047.2
716.7
5.0%
The calculated overhead-values from table 3.3 can be subtracted from the ’with
wrapper’ data points. These data points, which are calculated based on this
subtraction, can be depicted together with the ’without wrapper’ data points,
as shown on ﬁgure 3.13.
These two histograms should in theory completely
overlap.
In table 3.4 are shown the standard deviation for the diﬀerent I/O-method’s
data points. These uncertainties, and what they mean for the experiment, will
be discussed in chapter 4.
Table 3.4: The standard deviation for each I/O operation, with and without
the wrapper. Notice that these values are fairly large compared to
the measured values in table 3.3.
Std
(Without)
Std
(With)
File.Exists
838
1146
File.ReadAllText
2037
2261
File.Create
5905
6113
File.WriteAllText
20725
21090
File.Delete
2995
3397
HttpClient.Get
76866
78023
HttpClient.Post
14717
15136
HttpClient.Delete
12878
12269
==PAGE:66==
52
S×C Wrapper
Figure 3.13: The elapsed time for File.ReadAllText without the wrapper and
with the wrapper, where the mean elapsed overhead is subtracted
from the data points with the wrapper.
In this section we have used the File.ReadAllText-method as an example and
just shown the results for the other I/O methods in the tables. Although the
FileWrapper and HttpClientWrapper share the same characteristics, in terms of
time shifting, the HttpClient data points are distributed a bit diﬀerently. The
skewness and kurtosis are generally much more extreme than the ﬁle operations,
as shown on ﬁgure 3.14 and the boxplot in the appendix. We also notice that
the two histograms, when combined, are much closer overlaid than the one for
the ﬁle wrapper. In general, the longer time elapsed for an I/O operation the
closer the overlaid combined histograms look. We will discuss this further in
chapter 4.
3.4.2
Applying the Wrapper
In this section we will use the developed wrapper in a program that is going
through the Security-by-Contract life cycle - thereby ensuring that the wrap-
per ﬁts within the diﬀerent stages for S×C. This will help us answer "Is S×C
==PAGE:67==
3.4 Evaluation
53
Figure 3.14: The elapsed time for HttpClient.Get, with and without the wrap-
per. The two histograms are closer overlaid compared to the ones
for the File operations.
implementable by means of a wrapper" in research question four.
The ﬁrst stage of the Security-by-Contract is contract/policy authoring, as
shown on ﬁgure 2.2 in section 2.2. We will assume that the policy is already
made by a user or an administrator. The policy’s rules can be expressed by
simple key-value pairs or a much more complex language. We will not go into
depth for the policy part, since the wrapper does not aﬀect the authoring of
this, as long as it can be interpreted in the matching stage. However, the con-
tract authoring now works in the automated way as we have explored in section
3.3.5. This results in a contract similar to what is shown in listing A.1 in the
appendix. The contract/policy authoring stage is thereby durable with the de-
veloped wrapper.
Stage two, program development, has also already been showed to work, since
we had to develop a working program in order to perform the test in section
3.4.1. The program compliance stage, stage three, can be done in the same
manner as S×C programs are scanned today. If the scanner has access to the
==PAGE:68==
54
S×C Wrapper
code base, then this can be done with tools like FxCop4 or StyleCop5. These
tools will ensure that classes such as HttpClient are not called from anywhere
in the code except the wrapper. This is a simple true/false outcome-scan, since
the scanner now only needs to ensure that all I/O operations are going through
the wrapper instead of having the need to understand the program’s behaviour
in order to ensure that it is aligned with the contract. This means that the
task of analysing the code is the same, or even simpler than before, and should
therefore be durable in the same manner as without the wrapper.
Now that the code can be analysed and veriﬁed, the third party also needs to
ensure the integrity of the I/O-wrapper. This can, for example, be done by
using the Get-FileHash in PowerShell6, as shown on ﬁgure 3.15. It is worth
noticing that the hash for the IOWrapper.dll does not change during the build
of the program itself. This means that both debug and release builds have an
IOWrapper.dll with a known hash value (assuming it has not been modiﬁed).
This makes it very easy for the third party to verify the integrity of the wrap-
per. The third party can easily calculate the correct hash by hashing a known
IOWrapper.dll or by getting the hash value from the creator of the wrapper.
This also makes the third party able to check what version of the IOWrapper
that is used, in case any known bugs are associated with that speciﬁc version.
The third party signs the contract when the analysis is successfully completed.
Signing the contract means that the third party states that the contract is
aligned with the code, the integrity of the I/O-wrapper is not compromised and
the hash value of the content supplied matches the hash value calculated in the
contract.
Figure 3.15: Using PowerShell to calculate the hash of the IOWrapper.dll.
The DLL does not change hash value after being used in the
program, neither in debug nor release builds. The third party
can therefore easily verify the DLL’s integrity.
4https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.FxCopAnalyzers
5https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ChrisDahlberg.StyleCop
6https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.
utility/get-filehash
==PAGE:69==
3.4 Evaluation
55
The deployment stage has little interest for this master thesis. We will therefore
just assume that the content (program, contract etc.) is, somehow, moved to
the user’s device.
Due to the simple key-value pair structure of the current implementation, the
contract matching is fairly straight forward. The user checks each ruleset in
the contract. If there does not exist any policy for that speciﬁc ruleset then
the user uses a default policy. This could either be default deny, allow, monitor
or other precautions the user would like to enforce. Each rule in the ruleset is
then checked by the user. Given that the user knows the rule-types each ruleset
can have, the matching for each rule is therefor a matter of a boolean check
or a ’within path’. This means that the same logic, as in section 3.3.2, can
be used, were ** is any path and * is a substitute within the same directory.
For this thesis the contract-policy matching was done by hand, but a matching
algorithm could be implemented in code; thereby, automating the matching.
Based on the contract matching, the ﬁnal stage in the Security-by-Contract
framework can be performed diﬀerently. If the contract matches, then the user
does not need to perform any monitoring, since the program itself will enforce
the contract - given that the user trusts the third party’s evaluation of the
program.
If the contract does not match, then the user would just monitor
the actions that the user does not allow. This means that there is no need to
monitor all actions, but only the ones that are not allowed according to the
contract.
Using the wrapper in a program does therefore not prohibit it from going
through the diﬀerent stages in the Security-by-Contract framework.
==PAGE:70==
56
S×C Wrapper
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 4
Discussion
During this thesis we have asked four research questions.
We were able to
answer the ﬁrst three by performing a systematic literature mapping. These
gave answers to what Security-by-Contract is, how policies are enforced, what
a wrapper is and how it can enforce contracts/policies.
However, we were not able to answer the last research question solely based on
the literature alone. In order ﬁgure out if it is possible to implement Security-
by-Contract using a wrapper, we had to design and implement one. In chapter
3, we proposed a suggestion for a wrapper, inspired by MAM SDKs, that will
ﬁt into the Security-by-Contract framework. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
time wrappers and Security-by-Contract have been combined in such manner.
As shown in section 3.4.2, this wrapper is indeed usable in the Security-by-
Contract framework. The last part of the research question, "[...] what beneﬁts
and penalties does such implementation have?", was explored in section 3.1.1
and 3.4.1.
We wanted to investigate the overhead of using such wrapper. This term can
have multiple means depending on the system requirements, but for this thesis
we looked at elapsed time. A test was implemented that measured the elapsed
time for both with and without the use of the wrapper. The test show that a
program using those speciﬁc rulesets for the FileWrapper and HttpClientWrap-
per inﬂicted between 0.6% to 29.6% in elapsed time overhead on the program.
These overhead values varied greatly from method to method. These are a bit
==PAGE:72==
58
Discussion
higher than some other studies have found when using wrappers [42, 41]. Other
studies do however ﬁnd similar [50] or higher values [57]. That being said, it is
important to understand that these calculated values stem from a speciﬁc setup
and that they will change if the ruleset is diﬀerent, or more rules are added,
but would be a constant penalty independent of the content. To emphasise this,
we performed a test showing that the size of the content inﬂuences the elapsed
time, but not on the added constant extra time the use of this wrapper adds.
Although the last measurement (table 3.2) were a bit higher than the other
three values, we would argue that these are within reasonable range to highlight
the statement of a constant overhead. The content size of the ﬁles read grew ten
times for each ﬁle, but the absolute overhead (∆Mean) stayed roughly the same
- even for the 10MB ﬁle, that had about twice the overhead than the others.
Although it was twice as big, we have to keep in mind that the content were
ten to thousand times larger. This can therefore be explained by uncertainties
when measuring these time diﬀerences.
The data points from the test result are highly positively skewed with a lep-
tokurtic distribution. Such result is to be expected, since most calls should be
executed without any disturbance; thereby, resulting in a high peak to the most
left, when viewing the data as a histogram. The histograms do also contain
some smaller peaks with a slower time. This kind of distribution means that
the measurements will have a high standard deviation, since the mean will be
to the right of the high peak, due to the long tail that highly skewed data have.
Had we been able to create a test-program that could eliminate any external
factors, such as thread switching, ﬁle system being busy etc. then these ad-
ditional peaks would not had been present. It is therefore important that the
reader understands the limitations of this performance test, since we have not
been able to completely remove external factors. We would argue that the result
is still valid, since this behaviour appears in both with and without the wrapper
and thus shows the expected trend of the data.
Although it has been a very educational experience to implement the bench-
mark test ourself, in retrospective the performance test would likely had bene-
ﬁted from using a proven benchmark framework, such as BenchmarkDotNet1,
instead. This would likely show the same trend as the test result in this thesis,
but lower the uncertainties of the result.
As mentioned above, the measured overhead only shows the overhead for that
speciﬁc ruleset setup. Although the rulesets were chosen to match a realistic
ruleset setup for a simple program, a developer will certainly experience other
overhead values with his own program, simply due to the rulesets being diﬀerent.
As mentioned in section 3.4.1, we calculate the overhead as a percentage instead
of an absolute value, since absolute values heavily depend on what device is
performing the tests, where a percentage should be comparable.
1https://github.com/dotnet/BenchmarkDotNet
==PAGE:73==
59
Since the overhead is constant and compared to the underlying execution-time,
the overhead as a percentage can in theory become almost zero as shown on
equation 4.1. This means that this test result should be viewed as an example,
reﬂecting a real-world scenario, but knowing that the percentage in overhead
can vary depending on the usage.
lim
twithout,operation,ruleset→∞twrapper_%,operation,ruleset = 0
(4.1)
This also aligns very well with what we are seeing in the test result. We see that
a method like File.Exists has a very high percentage-overhead, but a low overall
elapsed time. The same applies for File.Delete, since it only needs to remove a
entry in the ﬁle system, indicating the ﬁle is removed, but the content itself does
not have to be overwritten right away. We also notice that File.ReadAllText has
a fairly large percentage overhead, but a low overall elapsed time, just like the
other two operations. Operations such as File.Create and File.WriteAllText did
have a low percentage overhead, since the execution takes much longer. This
is because the ﬁle system ﬁrst needs to allocate the needed space for the ﬁle or
the written content, which takes time. The http calls were also generally slow,
but especially the get-request were very slow. This is likely due to the fact that
this method returned an object as a response - meaning that not only does the
caller have to create a request and response object, but the callee also has to
allocate space for creating this addition object, which takes time.
Knowing this, the percentage overhead values are interesting when talking about
the downside of using the wrapper in general, but the overhead in absolute val-
ues are interesting when trying to identify potential issues with the test itself.
Methods that perform the same checks, using the exact same ruleset, should in
theory have the same overhead in absolute value. For the result presented in ta-
ble 3.3, this means that File.Exists and File.ReadAllText should have the same
absolute overhead, since they both check against the ’Read’-rule of the FileRule-
set. The same applies for File.Create and File.WriteAllText, when looking at the
File’s I/O methods. For the HttpClient all three methods should have the same
absolute overhead, since it is the same rules for all the implemented methods in
this thesis. Based on this, it is clear that there are some uncertainties with the
test itself. This aligns well with the comment above, about the uncertainties
with this test.
Since we in this thesis only have implemented a PoC, there are certainly some
performance improvements that can minimize the overhead. The current imple-
mentation of the wrapper checks each request against the ruleset by performing
the comprehensive checks. If we instead realise that one action is likely to be
performed again, then the wrapper can lower the overhead by keeping track on
==PAGE:74==
60
Discussion
what paths that already have been checked. For example, if a program writes to
some directory with the path .\workspace, then it is likely that it will write to
the same path again. This means that if the wrapper has veriﬁed that speciﬁc
path already, then there would be no reason to do the checks again. The lookup
can be done via a dictionary, making the lookup constant. This should signif-
icantly improve performance where a program keeps using the same resources.
On the other hand, this proof of concept only contains very few and simple
rules that might need to be expanded. The more types of rules there are getting
added, the more checks the wrapper needs to perform, which will result in a
larger overhead.
Additional elapsed time is surely a downside of combining such security wrap-
per with Security-by-Contract. Another downside also needs to be highlighted.
Since the wrapper is used in a Security-by-Contract framework, the integrity of
the wrapper is important. This means that a hash of the I/O-library is calcu-
lated, which makes it possible for third parties to ensure that the library has
not been altered in order to avoid some of the checks performed. The issue of
relying on this hash value is that the developer, who is using the library, will
include a lot of code that is not used. This is both a downside, since it occupies
valuable disk space, but it also adds a larger attack surface in terms of security.
This can be avoided if the developer was able to remove all unused methods
from the library. Doing so would alter the hash value and, therefore, make the
Application Compliance-stage much more complicated. This is one of the trade
oﬀs there are by using this wrapper. As mentioned before, this can somewhat
be avoided by splitting up the wrapper into diﬀerent libraries. This means that
the developer then must include a core library and then a library for each I/O
segment he wants to use. For instance, in this thesis the library included wrap-
pers for File and HttpClient. This library could instead be separated into three
libraries: core, httpclient wrapper and ﬁle wrapper. Doing this will signiﬁcantly
limit the size of unused code that the developer has to include in order to use
this.
While discussing the issue with the hash value of the library, we have to mention
the hashing of the build artifacts. With the implementation shown in this thesis,
the hash is calculated when the contract is generated, but looking retrospectively
it would had been better to let the third party not only sign the contract, but
also generate the hash value. Although this does not have any eﬀect on the
security of the setup, it does improve the usability of the wrapper, since the
developer then does not need to provide path(s) for the build artifacts. This
would make the setup for the contract generator much simpler, since the correct
hashing of the build artifacts is the diﬃcult part of it.
The proof of concept in this thesis contains only two wrappers, one for Sys-
tem.IO.File and one for System.Net.Http.HttpClient. However, we would argue
==PAGE:75==
61
that other wrappers can easily be added to the library by implementing them
in the same manner as the two in the PoC. New wrappers are simply added by
introducing a new ruleset, ruleset builder and the wrapper to enforce the new
ruleset. One potential issue is the control of open ports in programs functioning
as APIs. This should be checkable by a wrapper when opening a port, or at
startup when the rulesets are applied. This means that this type of wrapper
can be added in the same manner as the others, but they should be called from
inside the library itself at startup. This aspect of the library could beneﬁt from
further investigation, since the I/O operations are performed by a third party
framework that does not necessarily use this wrapper. The fact that using third
party libraries can impose issues, when using this library, is a major downside
when it comes to the practicality of using this wrapper.
As mentioned before, one of the key beneﬁts of using this wrapper is that the
developer will have the contract automatically generated. This does however
come at a cost. Since the contract’s integrity is based on a hashing, where the
contract is signed to ensure correctness and integrity, the contract can not be
updated runtime to change the allowed actions for the program. The developer
would have to recompile, have the contract resigned and deploy the program
again, if any changes are made to the program or the rulesets. This also leads
to the discussion regarding the diﬀerence between enforcing the contract versus
the policy.
In S×C the policy is the part being enforced, and the contract
merely describes the behaviour of the program. The user then uses these two to
conclude if any monitoring is needed when running the program. When using
wrappers for external policy enforcement, the user has the ability to change these
policy rules at runtime. It would be interesting to investigate if it were possible
to design a wrapper that would enforce the policy instead of the contract, but
still being able to generate the contract automatically.
However, this is not
possible with the current design. The reason for this is, that the contract and
enforcement of the rulesets are tightly linked together in order for the contract
generator to generate correct contracts. If this is broken, for instance by letting
the wrappers fetch the policy instead of the rulesets deﬁned internally, then the
contract generator can no longer know what behaviour is allowed or not. This
would therefore result in a wrongly generated contract.
A ﬁnal remark about the security of the wrapper is that the security is only as
good as the developed wrapper’s checks, like all other wrappers. This means
that if the Trusted Wrapper Creator makes an error in the rules’ checks, then
the library would have to be updated in order to ﬁx this issue. The trusted
third party, who performs the program compliance-stage, should therefore also
check if the program is using the newest version of the library.
We have, based on combining the S×C paradigm with the concept of security
wrappers, shown that it is indeed possible to implement S×C using a wrapper.
==PAGE:76==
62
Discussion
This gives the beneﬁt of having the contract auto-generated and ensures contract
compliance by internally enforcing it.
The downside of this is that it adds
addition overhead in terms of elapsed time for an I/O operation and that it to
some extend locks the developer in terms of what third party libraries he can
use.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The Security-by-Contract paradigm has been described, and shown, in the lit-
erature to be applicable in many diﬀerent areas, such at mobiles, IoT etc. It
consists of six stages and is based on a contract describing what security-relevant
actions the program can perform. This contract is then compared with a policy.
If the contract does not match the policy, then either inlining or sandboxing can
be used by the user to enforce the speciﬁc policy. We have described some of
the many usages a wrapper has, mainly focusing on the concept security wrap-
pers. This type of wrapper is used in many diﬀerent parts of the system. With
inspiration from Mobile Application Management (MAM) SDKs, we combined
the concept of a security wrapper with the Security-by-Contract paradigm to
improve the contract generation stage of the S×C paradigm. This made the pro-
gram enforce the contract internally and allowed the developer to auto-generate
the contract so it is always up to date.
The wrapper was implemented in C# as a proof of concept, tested and shown to
work with a program undergoing the diﬀerent stages in the Security-by-Contract
paradigm. The performance of the I/O operations are aﬀected by using the
wrapper. Depending on what operation is called and what ruleset is being used,
this performance penalty can vary signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:78==
64
Conclusion
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Future Work
While writing this thesis, we have purposely made an assumption that could
beneﬁt some further investigation. We have claimed that using this wrapper
makes the static analysis easier, since the trusted third party now only has to
check if a call is made, but not what it speciﬁcally does. This is because the
enforcement is performed by the wrapper itself, and therefore the understanding
lies within the checked rule. However, this claim about the static analysis being
easier could beneﬁt from further investigation. In this thesis we mentioned that
tools like FxCop and StyleCop can be used, but these tools require the code to
be available. Due to this thesis’ scope, this stage of the S×C framework has not
been the main focus and therefore this part is described vaguely; assuming the
ﬁndings from other S×C research papers also apply in this case.
Another area that would be interesting to investigate further is the format of
the contract. This thesis uses a simple JSON-format, but due to the design
of the wrapper other languages, such as ConSpec, could be used instead. This
would not have any eﬀect on the enforcement itself, but would require some
code to translate it into this language.
The beneﬁt of this is that ConSpec
is already used in many other papers regarding contract-policy matching and
would therefore be a ’plug-and-play’ solution. This would surely make a library
larger in size, due to the additional code needed for the translation. It might
also make the static analysis stage much more complicated. The question is
then, if these two potential downsides do not make it worth the ’plug-and-play’
==PAGE:80==
66
Future Work
beneﬁt in the matching-stage.
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Generating the Contract
The sequence diagram for generating the contract is almost identical to regis-
tering rulesets. The key diﬀerence is that instead of calling UseIOWrapper the
developer calls GenerateContract instead. This method does some additional
steps after the registration. It fetches all the rulesets from the RulesetRegis-
ter, calculates hashes on needed ﬁles and write a contract to the ﬁlesystem. A
sequence diagram of this is shown on ﬁgure A.1.
After the contract has been saved to the ﬁle system it will look like what is
shown in listing A.1.
==PAGE:82==
68
Generating the Contract
1 {
2
" ExecutableHash " :
"
d7f9180ee949cc704b162d9c42b3a9574b29c85455069bb269ad50211f158a7e
" ,
3
"ContractName" :
" TestContract " ,
4
" Description " :
"This
i s
a
t e s t
contract " ,
5
" RuleSet " :
[
6
{
7
"Name" :
" F i l e R u l e s e t " ,
8
" Rules " :
{
9
"AllowedReadPaths" :
[ ] ,
10
" AllowedCreatePaths " :
[
11
" ./ Workspace"
12
] ,
13
" AllowedDeletePaths " :
[ ]
14
}
15
} ,
16
{
17
"Name" :
" HttpClientRuleset " ,
18
" Rules " :
{
19
" AllowedProtocols " :
[
20
" https "
21
] ,
22
"AllowedURLs" :
[
23
" https :// api . openweathermap . org / data /∗"
24
] ,
25
" AllowedPorts " :
[ ] ,
26
"MaximumOfRequests" :
1500
27
}
28
}
29
]
30 }
Listing A.1: Example of a generated contract. Note that, only rulesets that
are registered are included in the contract in order to save
memory.
==PAGE:83==
69
Figure A.1: UML Sequence diagram - Generating the contract. This process is
almost identical to just registering rulesets, except that a contract
is generated afterwards.
==PAGE:84==
70
Generating the Contract
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B
Wrapper Testing
The rulesets (listing B.1) used for testing the wrapper are meant to represent a
simple program that is capable of fetching some data from diﬀerent URLs and
modify some ﬁles in diﬀerent locations in the ﬁle system. All the graphs for the
results are shown below.
1 public
void
RegisterRulesets ( RulesetRegister
r e g i s t e r )
2 {
3
var
paths = new List <string >()
4
{
5
@"C:\ Users \Someone\∗∗\SomeProgram\ t e s t i n g . ∗. t e s t \ t e s t i n g " ,
6
@"F:\∗∗" ,
7
@" .\∗∗" ,
8
@" . \ T e s t f i l e . txt " ,
9
@"C:\ Users \ jakob \ source \ repos \∗∗"
10
} ;
11
12
var
hosts = new List <string >()
13
{
14
" l o c a l h o s t " ,
15
"openweathermap" ,
16
" google " ,
17
"someapi" ,
18
" anotherhost "
19
} ;
20
21
var
ports = new List <int >()
22
{
==PAGE:86==
72
Wrapper Testing
23
5000 ,
24
5001 ,
25
80 ,
26
443 ,
27
8080
28
} ;
29
30
r e g i s t e r . AddRuleset (new
F i le R u l e s et B u i l d e r ( )
31
. AllowCreate ( paths )
32
. AllowRead ( paths )
33
. AllowDelete ( paths )
34
. Build ( ) ) ;
35
36
r e g i s t e r . AddRuleset (new HttpClientRulesetBuilder ( )
37
. AllowHosts ( hosts )
38
. AllowPorts ( ports )
39
. AllowHttps ()
40
. AllowHttp ()
41
. AllowMaximumOfRequests (150000)
42
. Build ( ) ) ;
43 }
Listing B.1: The rulesets used for the wrapper test. The rulesets are made
to reﬂect a simple program that can mutate ﬁles at diﬀerent
locations and fetch some data from diﬀerent URLs.
Figure B.1: Boxplot of the File.Exists operation.
==PAGE:87==
73
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.2: File.Exists with and without a wrapper shown as histograms.
Figure B.3: Overlayed histogram of File.Exists with and without use of the
wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 20.0.
==PAGE:88==
74
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.4: The elapsed time for File.Exists without the wrapper and with
the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is subtracted.
==PAGE:89==
75
Figure B.5: Boxplot of the File.ReadAllText operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.6: File.ReadAllText with and without a wrapper shown as his-
tograms.
==PAGE:90==
76
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.7: Overlayed histogram of File.ReadAllText with and without use of
the wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 25.6.
==PAGE:91==
77
Figure B.8: The elapsed time for File.ReadAllText without the wrapper and
with the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is subtracted.
==PAGE:92==
78
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.9: Boxplot of the File.Create operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.10: File.Create with and without a wrapper shown as histograms.
==PAGE:93==
79
Figure B.11: Overlayed histogram of File.Create with and without use of the
wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 60.3.
==PAGE:94==
80
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.12: The elapsed time for File.Create without the wrapper and with
the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is subtracted.
==PAGE:95==
81
Figure B.13: Boxplot of the File.WriteAllText operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.14: File.WriteAllText with and without a wrapper shown as his-
tograms.
==PAGE:96==
82
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.15: Overlayed histogram of File.WriteAllText with and without use
of the wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 207.2.
==PAGE:97==
83
Figure B.16: The elapsed time for File.WriteAllText without the wrapper
and with the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is sub-
tracted.
==PAGE:98==
84
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.17: Boxplot of the File.Delete operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.18: File.Delete with and without a wrapper shown as histograms.
==PAGE:99==
85
Figure B.19: Overlayed histogram of File.Delete with and without use of the
wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 31.3.
==PAGE:100==
86
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.20: The elapsed time for File.Delete without the wrapper and with
the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is subtracted.
==PAGE:101==
87
Figure B.21: Boxplot of the HttpClient.Get operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.22: HttpClient.Get with and without a wrapper shown as his-
tograms.
==PAGE:102==
88
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.23: Overlayed histogram of HttpClient.Get with and without use of
the wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 1467.
==PAGE:103==
89
Figure B.24: The elapsed time for HttpClient.Get without the wrapper and
with the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is sub-
tracted.
==PAGE:104==
90
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.25: Boxplot of the HttpClient.Post operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.26: HttpClient.Post with and without a wrapper shown as his-
tograms.
==PAGE:105==
91
Figure B.27: Overlayed histogram of HttpClient.Post with and without use of
the wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 759.1.
==PAGE:106==
92
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.28: The elapsed time for HttpClient.Post without the wrapper and
with the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is sub-
tracted.
==PAGE:107==
93
Figure B.29: Boxplot of the HttpClient.Delete operation.
(a) Without the wrapper
(b) With the wrapper
Figure B.30: HttpClient.Delete with and without a wrapper shown as his-
tograms.
==PAGE:108==
94
Wrapper Testing
Figure B.31: Overlayed histogram of HttpClient.Delete with and without use
of the wrapper. Both histograms have the bin width of 358.8.
==PAGE:109==
95
Figure B.32: The elapsed time for HttpClient.Delete without the wrapper
and with the wrapper where the mean elapsed overhead is sub-
tracted.
==PAGE:110==
96
Wrapper Testing
==PAGE:111==
Appendix C
Project Plan
On the next page is shown the original project plan submitted for this project.
The document describes how the time was supposed to be distributed in form
of a Gantt Chart and action points below. The project description itself is also
mentioned.
==PAGE:112==
Project  Plan 
 
In  this  document  I  will  explain  the  project  plan  for  my  master  thesis.  The  Systematic 
Literature  Review  have  been  given  much  time,  since  a  systematic  literature  review  will  be 
conducted,  which  can  be  time  consuming.  On  figure  1  a  Gantt  Chart  for  the  project  are 
shown. 
 
 
 
The  plan  consist  of  three  parts: 
1.  Literature  review,  where  I  explore  others  work  and  get  a  deep  understanding  of  the  SxC 
framework,  the  idea  behind  it,  the  people  working  on  this  etc. 
2.  My  suggestion  on  implementing  an  easier  way  to  do  the  contract  generation  phase  of  the 
SxC  framework  using  API  wrappers.  This  includes  an  working  prototype.  Note,  this  plan 
does  not  mean  an  end-to-end  implementation  of  the  entire  SxC  framework,  since  this  is  not 
the  focus  of  this  thesis. 
3.  Writing  the  thesis  itself.  This  both  includes  using  the  DTU  thesis  template,  writing  the 
reasonings,  ideas,  pros/cons  etc.  but  also  proofreading.  I  have  purposely  given  this  part 
quite  a  lot  of  time,  since  I  want  the  report  itself  to  show  quality,  but  also  to  have  some  extra 
time  in  case  the  implementation  part  turns  out  to  take  longer  than  expected  -  As  I  have 
discovered  the  literature  review  does  during  the  first  month  of  this  project. 
 
The  plan  mentioned  above  should  be  in  alignment  with  the  description  for  this  project: 
“Security-by-Contract  (SxC)  is  a  paradigm  that  has  been  applied  to  different  topics,  from 
smart  cards  to  IoT  devices.  In  this  thesis  I  will  analyse  and  describe  SxC,  mainly  focusing  on 
the  contract  generation  phase.  I  will  then  propose  a  framework  that  implements  SxC  using 
API  wrappers.  The  contract  will  be  generated  at  compile-time  when  using  this  framework. 
Lastly,  the  proposal  will  be  implemented  and  evaluated  based  on  its  benefits  and 
drawbacks. ” 
 
 
This  plan  is  only  used  as  guidance  and  may  be  subject  to  change  later  on.  This  has  been 
created  based  on  my  knowledge  I  have  so  far  regarding  the  workload  distribution  and 
potential  difficulties  I  may  run  into  during  this  thesis. 
1 
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
[1] J. Aas. Understanding the linux 2.6.8.1 cpu scheduler. SGI, 2005, 22:05,
2005.
[2] I. Aktug and K. Naliuka. Conspec — a formal language for policy speciﬁ-
cation. Science of Computer Programming, 74(1):2 – 12, 2008. ISSN 0167-
6423. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2008.09.004. URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167642308001056.
Spe-
cial Issue on Security and Trust.
[3] A. Armando, G. Costa, A. Merlo, and L. Verderame.
Enabling byod
through secure meta-market. Wisec 2014 - Proceedings of the 7th Acm Con-
ference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks, pages
219–230, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2627393.2627410.
[4] Association for Computer Machinery. About acm publications, 2020. URL
https://www.acm.org/publications/about-publications.
[5] N. Bielova and I. Siahaan.
Testing decision procedures for security-by-
contract. In In Joint Workshop on Foundations of Computer Security, Au-
tomated Reasoning for Security Protocol Analysis and Issues in the Theory
of Security (FCS-ARSPA-WITS’08, 2008.
[6] N. Bielova, M. D. Torre, N. Dragoni, and I. Siahaan. Matching policies
with security claims of mobile applications. Ares 2008 - 3rd International
Conference on Availability, Security, and Reliability, Proceedings, pages
4529330, 128–135, 2008. doi: 10.1109/ares.2008.96.
[7] N. Bielova, N. Dragoni, F. Massacci, K. Naliuka, and I. Siahaan. Matching
in security-by-contract for mobile code.
Journal of Logic and Algebraic
==PAGE:114==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Programming, 78(5):340–358, 2009. ISSN 18735940, 15678326. doi: 10.
1016/j.jlap.2009.02.013.
[8] A. Binun and E. Gudes. Policy and state based secure wrapper and its appli-
cation to mobile agents. Proceedings. First Latin American Web Congress,
pages 14–26, 14–26, 2003.
[9] I. Chivers and J. Sleightholme. An introduction to algorithms and the big
o notation. Introduction To Programming With Fortran, pages 359–364,
2015. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-17701-4_23,10.1007/978-3-319-17701-4.
[10] G. Costa and I. Matteucci.
Enforcing private policy via security-by-
contract. Upgrade: the European Journal for the Informatics Professional,
11(1):44–52, 44–52, 2010. ISSN 16845285.
[11] G. Costa and I. Matteucci. Trust-driven policy enforcement through gate
automata. Proceedings - 2011 5th International Conference on Innovative
Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing, Imis 2011, pages
5976187, 208–215, 2011. doi: 10.1109/imis.2011.88.
[12] G. Costa and I. Matteucci. Gate automata-driven run-time enforcement.
Computers and Mathematics With Applications, 63(2):518–524, 2012. ISSN
18737668, 08981221. doi: 10.1016/j.camwa.2011.08.046.
[13] G. Costa, N. Dragoni, A. Lazouski, F. Martinelli, F. Massacci, and I. Mat-
teucci. Extending security-by-contract with quantitative trust on mobile
devices.
In 2010 International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and
Software Intensive Systems, pages 872–877. IEEE, 2010.
[14] G. Costa, A. Lazouski, F. Martinelli, I. Matteucci, V. Issarny, R. Saadi,
N. Dragoni, and F. Massacci. Security-by-contract-with-trust for mobile
devices. Journal of Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and
Dependable Applications, 1(4):75–91, 2010. ISSN 20935382, 20935374.
[15] G. Costa, V. Issarny, F. Martinelli, I. Matteucci, and R. Saadi. Security
and Trust, pages 393–416. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2011. ISBN 978-3-642-21455-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21455-4_12. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-21455-4_12.
[16] M. Dam, B. Jacobs, A. Lundblad, and F. Piessens.
Provably cor-
rect inline monitoring for multithreaded java-like programs.
Journal of
Computer Security, 18(1):37–59, 2010.
ISSN 18758924, 0926227x.
doi:
10.3233/jcs-2010-0365.
[17] L. Desmet,
W. Joosen,
F. Massacci,
K. Naliuka,
P. Philippaerts,
F. Piessens, and D. Vanoverberghe.
A ﬂexible security architecture to
support third-party applications on mobile devices. Csaw’07: Proceedings
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
of the 2007 Acm Computer Security Architecture Workshop, pages 19–28,
2007.
[18] L. Desmet, W. Joosen, F. Massacci, P. Philippaerts, F. Piessens, I. Sia-
haan, and D. Vanoverberghe. Security-by-contract on the .net platform.
Information Security Technical Report, 13(1):25–32, 2008. ISSN 1873605x,
13634127. doi: 10.1016/j.istr.2008.02.001.
[19] N. Dragoni. Toward trustworthy web services approaches, weaknesses and
trust-by-contract framework.
Proceedings - 2009 Ieee/wic/acm Interna-
tional Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology
- Workshops, Wi-iat Workshops 2009, 3:5285015, 599–606, 2009.
doi:
10.1109/wi-iat.2009.359.
[20] N. Dragoni and F. Massacci. Security-by-contract for web services. Sws’07
- Proceedings of the 2007 Acm Workshop on Secure Web Services, pages
90–98, 2007. doi: 10.1145/1314418.1314433.
[21] N. Dragoni and F. Massacci. Security-by-contract (sxc) for mobile systems-
or how to download software on your mobile without regretting it. Telek-
tronikk, 105(1):107–16, 107–116, 2009. ISSN 18918220, 00857130.
[22] N. Dragoni, F. Massacci, K. Naliuka, and I. Siahaan. Security-by-contract:
Toward a semantics for digital signatures on mobile code.
In European
Public Key Infrastructure Workshop, pages 297–312. Springer, 2007.
[23] N. Dragoni, F. Massacci, C. Schaefer, T. Walter, and E. Vetillard.
A
security-by-contract architecture for pervasive services. 2007 3rd Interna-
tional Workshop on Security, Privacy and Trust in Pervasive and Ubiqui-
tous Computing, pages 49–54, 49–54, 2007. doi: 10.1109/SECPERU.2007.2.
[24] N. Dragoni, F. Martinelli, F. Massacci, P. Mori, C. Schaefer, T. Walter,
and E. Vetillard. Security-by-contract (sxc) for software and services of
mobile systems. At your service-Service-Oriented Computing from an EU
Perspective, pages 429–455, 2008.
[25] N. Dragoni, F. Massacci, T. Walter, and C. Schaefer. What the heck is
this application doing? - a security-by-contract architecture for pervasive
services. Computers and Security, 28(7):566–577, 2009. ISSN 18726208,
01674048. doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2009.06.005.
[26] N. Dragoni, O. Gadyatskaya, and F. Massacci. Can we support applica-
tions’ evolution in multi-application smart cards by security-by-contract?
Information Security Theory and Practices: Security and Privacy of Per-
vasive Systems and Smart Devices, 6033:221–+, 2010.
ISSN 16113349,
03029743.
==PAGE:116==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] N. Dragoni, E. Lostal, and D. Papini. (sc)2: A system to secure oﬀ-card
contract-policy matching in security-by-contract for open multi-application
smart cards. In 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Policies for Dis-
tributed Systems and Networks, pages 186–187. IEEE, 2011.
[28] N. Dragoni, O. Gadyatskaya, F. Massacci, and A. Philippov. High-level
algorithms and data structures requirements for security-by-contract on
java cards. International Journal of Critical Computer-based Systems, 3(4):
284–304, 2012. ISSN 17578787, 17578779. doi: 10.1504/ijccbs.2012.053207.
[29] N. Dragoni, E. Lostal, D. Papini, and J. Fabra. Sc2: Secure communication
over smart cards. In J. Garcia-Alfaro and P. Lafourcade, editors, Foun-
dations and Practice of Security, pages 32–48, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-27901-0.
[30] European Commission.
Security of software services of mobile systems,
2006. URL https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/027004.
[31] R. Filman and T. Linden.
Safebots: A paradigm for software security
controls.
Proceedings New Security Paradigms Workshop, 129440:45–51,
1996. doi: 10.1145/304851.304863.
[32] A. Fontaine, S. Hym, and I. Simplot-Ryl. On-device control ﬂow veriﬁcation
for java programs. Engineering Secure Software and Systems. Proceedings
Third International Symposium, Essos 2011, pages 43–57, 43–57, 2011. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-19125-1_4.
[33] M. Fowler. UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Standard Object Modeling
Language. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2 edition, 1999.
ISBN 0201657838.
[34] M. Fowler. Domain Speciﬁc Languages. Addison-Wesley Professional, 1st
edition, 2010. ISBN 0321712943.
[35] T. Fraser, L. Badger, and M. Feldman. Hardening cots software with generic
software wrappers. Foundations of Intrusion Tolerant Systems, Oasis 2003,
pages 1264946, 399–413, 2003. doi: 10.1109/ﬁts.2003.1264946.
[36] O. Gadyatskaya, E. Lostal, and F. Massacci. Load time security veriﬁcation.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 7093:250–264,
2011. ISSN 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25560-1_17.
[37] A. Giaretta, N. Dragoni, and F. Massacci. Iot security conﬁgurability with
security-by-contract. Sensors (basel, Switzerland), 19(19):4121, 2019. ISSN
14243210, 14248220. doi: 10.3390/s19194121.
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[38] A. Giaretta, N. Dragoni, and F. Massacci. Protecting the internet of things
with security-by-contract and fog computing.
In 2019 IEEE 5th World
Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[39] P. Greci, F. Martinelli, and F. Matteucci. A framework for contract-policy
matching based on symbolic simulations for securing mobile device applica-
tion. Communications in Computer and Information Science, 17:221–236,
2008. ISSN 18650937, 18650929.
[40] P. Herrmann.
Trust-based protection of software component users and
designers. Trust Management. First International Conference, Itrust 2003.
Proceedings (lecture Notes in Comput. Sci. Vol.2692), pages 75–90, 75–90,
2003.
[41] P. Herrmann. Trust-based security policy enforcement of software compo-
nents. 2007.
[42] P. Herrmann and H. Krumm. Trust-adapted enforcement of security poli-
cies in distributed component-structured applications. In Proceedings. Sixth
IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications, pages 2–8, 2001.
[43] P. Herrmann, L. Wiebusch, and H. Krumm. State-based security policy en-
forcement in component-based e-commerce applications. Iﬁp International
Federation for Information Processing, 105:195–209, 2003. ISSN 18612288,
15715736.
[44] A. M. Hoole and I. Traore. Contract-based security monitors for service
oriented software architecture. 2008 Ieee Asia-paciﬁc Services Computing
Conference, Vols 1-3, Proceedings, pages 1239–1245, 2008.
[45] IEEE.
About
the
peer
review
process,
2020.
URL
https://journals.ieeeauthorcenter.
ieee.org/submit-your-article-for-peer-review/
about-the-peer-review-process.
[46] C. Jensen and D. Hagimont. Protection wrappers: A simple and portable
sandbox for untrusted applications.
Proceedings of the 8th Acm Sigops
European Workshop on Support for Composing Distributed Applications,
Ew 1998, pages 104–110, 1998. doi: 10.1145/319195.319211.
[47] Y. Jin, Z. Li, D. Wei, and L. Liu. Automatic generation and enforcement
of security contract for pervasive application. Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing, Euc 2008, 2:
4755207, 55–60, 2008. doi: 10.1109/euc.2008.29.
[48] R. Johnson, E. Gamma, J. Vlissides, and R. Helm.
Design Pat-
terns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.
Addison-Wesley,
==PAGE:118==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1995. ISBN 9780201633610. URL https://books.google.dk/books?id=
iyIvGGp2550C.
[49] C. Kern. Preventing script injection vulnerabilities through software design.
Communications of the Acm, 57(9):38–47, 2014. ISSN 15577317, 00010782.
doi: 10.1145/2643134.
[50] C. Ko, T. Fraser, L. Badger, and D. Kilpatrick. Detecting and countering
system intrusions using software wrappers. Proceedings of the 9th Usenix
Security Symposium, pages 145–156, 2000.
[51] E. Lear and B. Weis. Slinging mud: Manufacturer usage descriptions how
the network can protect things. 2016 International Conference on Selected
Topics in Mobile and Wireless Networking (mownet), pages 182–187, 2016.
ISSN 23788194. doi: 10.1109/mownet.2016.7496625.
[52] S. H. Lee, S. H. Kim, S. Kim, and S. H. Jin. Appwrapper: Patching security
functions with dynamic policy on your insecure android apps. Proceedings
- 29th Ieee International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
Workshops, Issrew 2018, pages 8539160, 36–41, 2018. doi: 10.1109/issrew.
2018.00-34.
[53] F. Massacci and I. Siahaan. Matching midlet’s security claims with a plat-
form security policy using automata modulo theory. 2007.
[54] F. Massacci and I. S. Siahaan. Simulating midlet’s security claims with
automata modulo theory.
Plas’08: Proceedings of the Acm Sigplan 3rd
Workshop on Programming Languages and Analysis for Security, pages 1–
9, 2008. doi: 10.1145/1375696.1375698.
[55] F. Massacci, F. Piessens, and I. Siahaan. Security-by-contract for the future
internet. Future Internet - Fis 2008, 5468:29–+, 2009. ISSN 16113349,
03029743.
[56] D. Mendez Mena, I. Papapanagiotou, and B. Yang.
Internet of things:
Survey on security. Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective,
27(3):162–182, Apr 2018. ISSN 1939-3547. doi: 10.1080/19393555.2018.
1458258. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19393555.2018.1458258.
[57] L. A. Meyerovich, A. P. Felt, and M. S. Miller. Object views: Fine-grained
sharing in browsers. Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
World Wide Web, Www ’10, pages 721–730, 2010. doi: 10.1145/1772690.
1772764.
[58] Microsoft.
Create
data
transfer
objects
(dtos),
2014.
URL
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/web-api/overview/
data/using-web-api-with-entity-framework/part-5.
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[59] Microsoft.
How
to:
Create
wrappers
manually,
2017.
URL
https://docs.microsoft.com/da-dk/dotnet/framework/interop/
how-to-create-wrappers-manually.
[60] Microsoft. Msbuild targets, 2019. URL https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-targets?view=vs-2019.
[61] Microsoft.
Built-in
types
(c#
reference),
2020.
URL
https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/
builtin-types/built-in-types.
[62] Microsoft.
Dictionary<tkey,tvalue>
class,
2020.
URL
https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.
generic.dictionary-2#remarks.
[63] Microsoft.
Dictionary<tkey,tvalue>.add(tkey,
tvalue) method,
2020.
URL
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.
collections.generic.dictionary-2.add#remarks.
[64] Microsoft.
in parameter modiﬁer (c# reference), 2020.
URL https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/
keywords/in-parameter-modifier.
[65] Microsoft. Interlocked class, 2020. URL https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.interlocked.
[66] Microsoft. Microsoft intune app sdk overview, 2020. URL https://docs.
microsoft.com/en-us/mem/intune/developer/app-sdk.
[67] Microsoft.
Prepare
line-of-business
apps
for
app
protection
poli-
cies,
2020.
URL https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/mem/intune/
developer/apps-prepare-mobile-application-management.
[68] Microsoft. List<t>.add(t) method, 2020. URL https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.generic.list-1.add?
view=netcore-3.1#remarks.
[69] Microsoft.
List<t>.ﬁnd(predicate<t>) method, 2020.
URL https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.collections.
generic.list-1.find#remarks.
[70] Microsoft.
lock
statement
(c#
reference),
2020.
URL
https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/
keywords/lock-statement.
[71] Microsoft. ref (c# reference), 2020. URL https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/ref.
==PAGE:120==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[72] Microsoft.
Structure
types
(c#
reference),
2020.
URL
https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/
builtin-types/struct.
[73] T. Mitchem, R. Lu, and R. O’Brien. Using kernel hypervisors to secure
applications. In Proceedings 13th Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference, pages 175–181, 1997.
[74] G. C. Necula.
Proof-carrying code.
In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Principles of programming languages,
pages 106–119, 1997.
[75] K. Petersen, S. Vakkalanka, and L. Kuzniarz. Guidelines for conducting
systematic mapping studies in software engineering: An update. Informa-
tion and Software Technology, 64:1–18, 2015.
[76] A. Philippov, O. Gadyatskaya, and F. Massacci. Security of the osgi plat-
form. Ceur Workshop Proceedings, 834:11–16, 2012. ISSN 16130073.
[77] M.
Roveri.
S3ms
-
security
of
software
and
services
for
mo-
bile
systems,
2013.
URL
https://es.fbk.eu/projects/
s3ms-security-software-and-services-mobile-systems.
[78] S. R. Schach.
Object-Oriented and Classical Software Engineering.
McGraw-Hill Pub. Co., 8th edition, 2011. ISBN 0073376183.
[79] R. Sekar, V. Venkatakrishnan, S. Basu, S. Bhatkar, and D. C. DuVarney.
Model-carrying code.
Acm Sigops Operating Systems Review, 37(5):15,
2003. ISSN 1943586x, 01635980. doi: 10.1145/1165389.945448.
[80] P. Sewell and J. Vitek. Secure composition of insecure components. In
Proceedings of the 12th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop,
pages 136–150, 1999.
[81] Web of Science. Web of science core collection: Introduction, 2020. URL
https://clarivate.libguides.com/woscc.
[82] C. Wohlin. Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a
replication in software engineering. In Proceedings of the 18th international
conference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering, pages
1–10, 2014.
[83] X. Yang and M. Zulkernine.
Security monitoring of components using
aspects and contracts in wrappers. In 2011 IEEE 35th Annual Computer
Software and Applications Conference, pages 566–575, 2011.
