==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Algorithms for the study and anal-
ysis of human mobility from mobile
phone location data
Eleonora Girardini (s182556)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Human mobility has become increasingly more studied in the past years due to its impor-
tance in numerous fields, such as traffic, city and transportation infrastructure layouts,
spreading of diseases and travel destinations. Understanding and studying human move-
ment can give great insight about people’s behavior.
In this project, we will analyze mobile phone location data from real mobile phone users.
Using this data for research tasks and analysis of human mobility is a challenging, be-
cause the data is imprecise and noisy. The accuracy and precision are related to multiple
factors, such as the density of base stations in the considered area and the activity of
the users.
Our first contribution in this thesis was to review existing works that conduct analysis
using mobile phone location data. We tried to understand and analyse the challenges
and complications that arise when using these data, and what solutions have been pro-
posed (if any) to overcome such issues.
Secondly, we carried out a data-driven analysis and characterization of mobile phone
location data, with the goal of potentially identifying the spatial an temporal character-
istics that would lead us to understand and identify the oscillation phenomenon.
Finally, we tried to develop tools and heuristics and tried existing state-of-the art meth-
ods for detecting and filtering such inconsistencies in a mobile phone location dataset.
We were able to introduce various probabilistic approaches, based on the analyzed fea-
tures of oscillation phenomenon occurrences in our dataset. The validations of such
methods showed at best a 84% accuracy. However, some limitations were identified,
such as the small amount of subjects considered in this research, and the arduousness of
properly identify and define an oscillation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc.
degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The period of
the thesis was between the 3rd of February 2020 and the 3rd of July 2020 consuming
30 ECTS points. The thesis was supervised by Nicola Dragoni, Processor at the De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science of the Technical University of
Denmark, and co-supervised by Panagiota Katsikouli, Postdoctoral Researcher at the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science of the Technical University
of Denmark.
Kongens Lyngby, July 3, 2020
Eleonora Girardini (s182556)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Nicola Dragoni, for his guidance and advice on
the thesis and Panagiota Katsikouli for all the patience and guidance throughout all
the process. Moreover, I would like to thank my family and friends for the support
during the all my studies. I would like to thank especially my parents who supported
and encouraged me during my university career. A special thank you goes to Federica
Chittaro, who kept me motivated and put up with me during the quarantine. I also
would like to thank my manager Yan Drugalya for being so understanding and supportive
throughout these months. Also a thank you to all my friends (Andrea, Giacomo, Giulia,
Martina, Albo, Sere, Gio, Claudia, Ale, Emilie, Coco, Tolga, Apostolis, Anne, Maani)
who have always helped me and cheered me up throughout the ups and downs of the
writing process.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis purpose
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis’s layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Methodology
7
3
Literature Review
9
3.1
The means of human mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Cellular Data Records (CDR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Oscillation phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Handover
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Problem and Solution
27
4.1
Description of the Problem and Its Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Description of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Mobile Session Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Introduction to the AXA patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
AXA pattern analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Labelling AXA patterns using GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.7
Creating a Spatial Probabilistic Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.8
Creating a Duration Based probabilistic approach . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.9
Creating a Base Station Frequency based probabilistic approach . . . . .
56
4.10 Recursive look-ahead filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.11 Combining probabilistic approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.12 Removing noisy patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.13 Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Discussion
69
5.1
Mobile sessions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
AXA patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
General Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6
Conclusion
77
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A Appendix
81
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Human mobility, the study of how people move within and across cities and within and
across countries, has many benefits in multiple research fields: traffic[furno2016tale],
travel destinations, city infrastructure [zhao2017user; sila2016analysis], spreading of
diseases [kraemer2020effect], transportation [reddy2010using], and network layouts
[sila2016analysis].
Understanding how people interact with the city infrastructures, or where people tend
to spend most of their time can make a difference in periods such as during the Global
Pandemic caused by COVID-19, to predict how and where the virus would spread
[kraemer2020effect].
Studying mobility patterns in a city leads to unveiling how people interact with loca-
tions at specific times, allowing to improve the urban infrastructure [zhao2017user],
transportation services [reddy2010using], distribution of facilities
[calabrese2011estimating], and networks’ layout [sila2016analysis].
At first, human mobility patterns data were retrieved by the researchers with surveys,
interviews, and space-time diaries, which, due to the high expenses and being trouble-
some, lead to produce poor and confined mobility analysis [sila2016analysis].
One of the first technology-based methods to gather mobility data utilized was the GPS,
which has been widely used for military purposes [gps_gov_2019].
However, during the 1980s, researchers started to notice the possible connection between
travel and telecommunication, allowing for new and improved mobility studies. In recent
years, with the diffusion of mobile phones, more and more studies aimed to discover new
techniques to examine human travel behaviors [wang2019relationships].
Mobile devices introduced new data types, such as Cellular Data Records(CDR),
cellular network data and social media data, from which human mobility traces could
be extracted from. Moreover, with the market launch and subsequent popularity of
smartphones, GPS data have become easier to collect [oliveira2016regularity]. GPS
locations are very accurate and, since it is possible to set the interval between two consec-
utive records acquisition, mobility traces extracted from these data can be very detailed
[sila2016analysis].
On the other hand, computing such precise and frequent locations drains the bat-
tery of the devices, which could result in mobile traces truncated or not detected
[rhee2011levy], as well as user dissatisfaction for the loss of the device usability.
Additionally, the GPS signal could fluctuate if the user is inside a building, moving
through a tunnel or any other area where the satellite is not able to receive information
from the device, resulting in having gaps in the trajectories [thierry2013detecting;
sila2016analysis].
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Multiple studies have been conducted with the aim to propose different solutions to
solve to the battery problem [qi2015gps; sila2016analysis]. Other studies focused
on finding ways to overcome the absence of logs in the trace by introducing different
reconstruction techniques [thierry2013detecting; sila2016analysis; rhee2011levy].
Another source of mobility data comes from WLAN networks, by examining the flow
connections throughout the access points forming the network.
For example, Universities’ campuses or big companies have numerous routers positioned
in multiple known places. By studying the movement of devices’ IPs across the net-
work in different time of the day, researchers are able to extract mobility behaviors
[kim2005modeling; lee2006modeling].
Differently from the GPS data, the traces extracted from WLAN networks are sparse in
time and and space, which leads to a not very precise trajectory. This is mainly caused
by being dependent on the network usage of the users and by the approximation of the
actual location of the devices with the access point coordinates [kim2005modeling].
Thus each position detected is in reality the location of the access point and the user is
somewhere in the radius of connection of this access point.
One way of collecting mobility information, that allows to consider a wide range of
users is through the cellular record data, which are collected by mobile operators for
billing purposes [rodriguez2018detecting].
Each record represents a person’s phone-related event, a message, or a call. During which,
the device is connected to a base station that registers the timestamp, the coordinates
of the station, and information about the device.
The traces constructed from these records are only an estimate of the actual movements
of the users. The locations composing the trajectories are the coordinates of the cellular
towers the user is associated with, meaning that the person was in the connectivity radius
of the antenna. In rural areas however, this could indicate an approximation of more
than 1km. In areas where multiple base stations are positioned close to each other, for
example in city centers, the approximation of the actual user’s location is more accurate.
However, due to load balancing or other noise in the cellular network, the device could
connect to a different cellular tower than the closest one to the user. While doing that,
what in literature is usually called oscillation phenomenon, occurs. Meaning that the
device switches back and forth between neighbouring base stations. These switches will
then appear as movement when analyzing the mobility traces extracted from the mobile
phone records.
The results in the mobile phone records of these cellular tower switches could lead to
errors or wrong mobility analysis. For example, if the user was static but the device
resulted to have changed cellular tower connection between two or more neighbouring
towers, the researches interpreted the corresponding records as movement. Furthermore,
if the person was moving but the change of connection between cellular towers does not
represent his actual movement, for example, showing a faster or in the wrong direction
movement than the reality, the mobility analysis correctness on these data could be
affected.
As said before, these type of phenomena affecting mobile phone data is called oscillation
phenomenon, and we will further discuss it in Section 3.3.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Thesis purpose
3
A very similar dataset which has been utilized in human travel behavior studies is
the one from cellular network data. It is an event-driven dataset that, in addition to
messages and phone calls, records the interaction to 2G/3G/4G services.
Cellular network operators collect records that are denser and heavier to analyze, and
Zhao ([zhao2017user]) and Qiao ([qiao2016mobility]), have therefore approached
the issue by developing cloud-based frameworks capable of managing and processing the
amount of data.
Since the human mobility traces are still described by cellular tower coordinates,
a degree of inaccuracy is present. Furthermore, the above-mentioned oscillation phe-
nomenon influences the correctness of the trajectories as well. For the same reasons
explained above, the device connects to various cellular towers and records are collected
of these device appearances in different locations. This will lead to assume, by looking
at the data, that the user moved or travelled towards those registered locations.
Lastly, one of the more recent sources of human locations are social media
[lenormand2014cross; beiro2016predicting], where users can share their locations
while posting pictures or other information. These positions are accurate, since calcu-
lated with the integrated GPS antenna in the phone, but, each new log is dependent on
the users’ frequency of usage, thus the traces are coarse in space and sparse in time.
Moreover, human mobility studies based on social media data are biased towards younger
demographics and highly dependent on social aspects of life rather than work-home re-
lated [hasan2013understanding].
1.1
Thesis purpose
As mentioned in the introduction, mobile phone data records sometimes present incor-
rect locations due to signal fluctuations or load balancing of the network, which make
devices connect to a different cellular tower instead of the one closer to the user.
This phenomenon is known in literature as oscillation or ”ping-pong” effect [shad2012cell;
qi2016oscillation; wu2014oscillation ; katsikouli2019characterizing] The noisy
locations result in false movement detection when examining the traces thus altering the
correctness of the mobility analysis.
Detecting and removing the oscillation patterns in the traces is a challenge
[qi2016oscillation] and approaches have been adopted in literature to cleanse the data
[wu2014oscillation; qi2016oscillation; shad2012cell; katsikouli2019characterizing].
Following the previous considerations, we were able to define our research question:
How can we distinguish between a user’s actual movement and a sequence
of noisy records when an oscillation phenomenon occurs in cellular data
records?
The goal of the thesis is to investigate what type of information would help to correctly
identify, distinguish and label the oscillations events as noise from the real user move-
ments in the mobile phone data traces. To do so we considered a real dataset of mobile
phone records.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
The first step to answer our research question was to review the existing literature review
of the topic. Following this, we examined the mobile trace properties to evaluate our
data. Then we extracted suspicious oscillation sequences. We further investigated these
sequences of logs to uncover possible information that would have helped us introduce
a method able to classify correctly the sequence as noise or movement.
In our opinion, identifying the features of the noisy patterns could lead to enhance-
ments in the detection algorithms, since if we were able to isolate some distinctive traits
it would be easy to distinguish them from the real movements and consequently cleanse
the traces.
1.2
Thesis contributions
Here we describe the contributions made and steps taken in this work:
• Present an overview of the most used data types for human mobility studies, de-
scribing the benefits and drawbacks of each of them, as well as the existing solutions
in the literature to overcome each data type shortcomings.
• A systematic state-of-the-art review of the techniques and methods to filter the
noisy data caused by oscillations phenomenon in the cellular records data, high-
lighting the shortcoming of every research considered.
• Extracting and investigating suspicious oscillations sequences in our dataset to
present an overview of their spatial and temporal characteristics, such as their
duration and the density of the area where the cellular towers are located.
• Offer a description of the oscillation based on the features analyzed of the suspicious
oscillations sequences.
• Applying a state-of-the-art technique, the look-ahead-filter, to try to remove some
of the oscillation noise to our dataset. This filter utilizes a defined speed threshold
to remove the records that seems too unreasonable to be a user’s movement. We
apply the look-ahead-filter with three different threshold values and compare the
results.
• Classify as noise or as movement the extracted suspicious oscillations sequences,
with the help of GPS ground truth, in order to examine the traits of the noisy
oscillations to define and propose different probabilistic classification methods
• Evaluate the proposed techniques, utilizing the GPS ground truth, and combine
them with the aim of improving the found results. We further combined the look-
ahead-filter technique with our proposed methods.
• Assess the accuracy and precision of each of the methods applied to our datasets
to identify the best approach, and discuss the limitations of each technique.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Thesis’s layout
5
• Once classified the oscillation sequences we removed the faulty records from the
initial data and compare this cleansed mobile trajectories with the raw data to
evaluate the changes.
• Present an evaluation of our results and a summary of our contributions
1.3
Thesis’s layout
This thesis is structured as follow: in Chapter 3 we firstly define the literature review
methodology employed in our work. We follow with an introduction to the data types
commonly utilized for human mobility studies. Furthermore, we carry out an in-depth
analysis on each of the data types, reviewing their benefits and their shortcomings. At
the end of the Chapter 3 we summarize the state-of-the-art techniques employed to
remove noisy oscillations phenomenon in mobile phone data.
In Chapter 4 we formally define the problem we are aiming to solve and the reasons why
proposing a solution would provide value to human mobility studies. Successively, we
describe the dataset employed and further display a first analysis of its characteristics.
In Section 4.4 we formally define what an AXA pattern is and how we are going to
extract these suspension sequences from our dataset. Successively, we carry out an initial
analysis of these patterns, and introduce how we utilized the GPS dataset. From Section
4.7 to 4.12 we outline our approach towards building different probabilistic approaches.
Finally, we describe our method to remove the classified noise and then evaluate our
techniques.
In Chapter 5 we discuss in depth the steps of our work and the achieved results, as well
as the limitations of the introduced techniques.
Finally we summarize our study and results in Chapter 6 and outline future works.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
In this section we will give an overview of the methodology followed while conducting
this research: The aim of our study is to introduce a new way of detecting and removing
noisy sequences of logs in the cellular data records, that would improve the studies on
human mobility carried out with this data type.
Our intent, as a first step of our research, is to investigate and examine the already
existing solutions in literature. The purpose of this literature analysis is to discover
what are the approaches already considered by other researchers and the obstacles they
encounter while trying to solve the above described problem.
Before delving into the specific research towards solving the oscillation phenomenon
problem, we wanted to present an introduction to the different human mobility sources.
Presenting the different data types employed for the mobility studies and some of their
shortcomings that researches had to overcome to improve the accuracy and usability of
each source. We will discuss on how we selected the papers for our literature review in
Section 2.0.1
Once we discuss the existing oscillation phenomenon solutions, we considered the cellu-
lar data records dataset and the GPS dataset gathered by Katsikouli et al.
[katsikouli2019characterizing] to study and examine the properties and features of
such oscillation sequences.
We analyze the log sequences’ characteristics to then in-
troduce multiple probabilistic approaches with the purpose of solving the oscillation
problem defined above.
Through our work we utilized two different sources of data: the datasets gathered
by Katsikouli et al. [katsikouli2019characterizing] and the papers considered for the
literature review and analysis of the existing solutions.
We will further give information about the data employed in our research in Section
4.2.
2.0.1
Selecting the sources
In this section we describe the approach taken to search and select relevant sources for
the literature review.
For the literature review we started from considering Katsikouli et al.’s work performing
a forward snowball as described by Wohlin et al. [wohlin2014guidelines]. We looked
at all the papers Katsikouli et al. reviewed and forward snowball from those as well.
After analyzing the aforementioned papers,we were able to identify a number of keywords
that were used frequently. Starting from these, we then defined a list of keywords to
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Methodology
further help us research relevant papers: oscillation, resolution, mobility, cellular,
human, tracking, GPS, trace, base-station, sampling, trajectory reconstruc-
tion, origin, destination. We selected these keywords by identifying the scope of our
research and the research question stated in 1.1.
The selection of sources was further carried on using the DTU Find-it database ser-
vice, which is connected to ACM, IEEE, Scopus, Cite-Seer, arXiv and other widely used
journals and databases, following these steps:
1. A first raw collection of publications based on the keywords stated above.
2. Application of filtering based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, described
below.
3. Completed a manual duplicate removal
4. Completed a manual removal based on abstract and title
5. Full-text read-through
6. Performed forward snowball
To search for relevant papers for our research we used the keywords listed above, in pairs
or group of words up to four.
To filter the papers we used some exclusion and inclusion criteria (EC and IC) fol-
lowing [petersen2015guidelines] guidelines:
• EC1: paper is not accessible in full-text
• EC2: paper is not presented in English
• EC3: the paper has no title or abstract
• IC1: the paper should study some aspect of human mobility using some location
data(GPS, GSM, CDR, etc)
• IC2: the paper should describe the dataset used
• IC3: the paper should be recent, not older than 16 years
The source collection was completed on the 30 of June 2020, considering approxi-
mately 35 papers.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Literature Review
A review of the state-of-the-art literature has been carried out to evaluate the exist-
ing solutions in regards to the oscillation phenomenon affecting the mobile phone data
records, with respect to human mobility fields. However, an initial analysis of the dif-
ferent data types commonly utilized in human mobility studies has being conducted to
explain the background of the research. Each data type has its benefits and shortcom-
ings, therefore we will summarize them and discuss which of the drawbacks have been
solved and how. Moreover, since our work aims to solve one of the drawbacks of Cellular
Data Records(CDR), the oscillation phenomenon, we will review the existing solutions
and present why our work could bring value in this field.
3.1
The means of human mobility
Before the diffusion of mobile phones and GPS devices the only way to study human
mobility was through travel surveys, where demographics and travel habits could be
determined with simple, personal information and general questions regarding recent
trips: locations, duration, dates of the journey, and transportation modes. These types
of surveys would also provide demographic information, place of residence, and household
structure [calabrese2013understanding].
Travel surveys however, are particularly expensive, according to Calabrese at al.
[calabrese2013understanding], which is why their data is only updated every 5-10
years. Additionally, the spatial and temporal ranges of the datasets derived from surveys
are limited and not sparse enough to analyze a big portion of the population. Moreover,
surveys lack information regarding daily mobility patterns.
Alternatives to surveys are GPS traces, WLAN connections, and Cellular Data Records
(CDR), which have now been utilized for human mobility studies. These sources are less
expensive, can gather more detailed information, and are more sparse in the population
range. With the diffusion of mobile devices, GPS and CDR became more popular among
human mobility studies [schulz2012human]. However, in more recent years cellular
network data and social media applications started to be used daily, introducing to the
human mobility field two new low-cost, dense, and scattered sources of information.
Various studies employed these datasets to analyze human mobility to derive trans-
portation demand in metropolitan areas [reddy2010using], or to estimate the traffic
flows [furno2016tale] [demissie2013intelligent] [calabrese2011estimating].
Usually, traffic estimations are provided by static sensors which are expensive and re-
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Literature Review
quire installations and constant maintenance, thus various studies considered cellular
record data as an alternative for traffic estimation [horn2014detecting]
Demissie et al. [demissie2013intelligent] were able to measure the traffic levels by
counting the number of ongoing calls, that while moving, got reconnected to a cellular
tower closer to the user.
Furno et al. [furno2016tale] estimate traffic flow by analyzing the mobile demand of
the users aggregating their mobility traces by areas and time of day. Moreover, they
took under consideration the extension of the area and the duration of each mobility
trace in the considered section.
Calabrese et al. [calabrese2011estimating] instead computed origin-destination ma-
trices to estimate the traffic volume in a metropolitan area.
From cellular record data, researchers were also able to identify the work and home
locations of the users [calabrese2011estimating] [xu2015understanding].
Xu et al. [xu2015understanding] extract the home locations by computing for each
user the distribution of connections in each cellular tower.
After detecting the two cellular towers that, in a period of multiple days, had the most
amount of connections for a specific user, the home location was identified by the base
station that, between the two, had the most connections outside normal working hours.
Calabrese et al. [calabrese2011estimating] divided into a grid cell the studied area
to then evaluate the number of nights each user was identified as static in the same cell
and labeled the one with the highest amount as home location.
Another application of human mobility studies is public transport layout improve-
ment by understanding the distribution of commuters during the week and hours of the
day, changes can be introduced in the transportation infrastructure of a
city[reddy2010using].
In the following sections, we will review the state-of-the-art techniques for studying
human mobility by analyzing the data types employed. We will mainly focus on the
data properties and features, as well as their shortcomings and the existing solution to
overcome them.
3.1.1
Global Positioning System (GPS)
The GPS is a multiple-satellite based radio positioning system, in which the satellites
send signal waves, which in turn are received and bounced back by antenna devices on
earth. By utilizing triangulation techniques the global positioning system can compute
the location of the users, velocity of movement between two locations, and time from
the devices’ sequence of signals.
At first, the global position system has been widely used by both military organizations,
as well as civilians around the globe for all types of vehicle navigation [gps_gov_2019].
These datasets were however particularly hard to acquire for mobility studies pur-
poses, due to the subjects being asked to carry around GPS trackers at all moments for
prolonged periods of time.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 The means of human mobility
11
It was therefore expensive to ask a large set of people to carry a GPS tracker around
all the time, thus making it difficult to have access to a dataset with a large number of
participants. Moreover, if you were to use publicly available GPS datasets, it would be
almost impossible to have traces coming from various cities [oliveira2016regularity].
Lately, with the rising popularity of smartphones and smartwatches, as well as car
built-in navigation systems, a plethora of different applications started to make use of
the GPS technology: sports tracking, travels, and social media content
[zignani2010extracting], making this type of dataset cheaper to acquire than before.
For example, there are web applications where people record their trips with a GPS
device. And later they upload the traces online to share their experiences and provide
information for future travelers more easily and effectively than by using text-based
modes [zheng2010understanding]. An example of uploading GPS trace is the Open-
StreetMap project, in which people upload their traces to keep update the publicly
available map [openstreetMap].
Due to the rising popularity of the Global Positioning System in mobile devices and web
applications, GPS datasets have become one of the ways to infer human mobility that
has been predominately used in recent
years [zignani2010extracting; oliveira2016regularity].
Another example of research which is possible thanks to the ready availability of GPS
trackers and datasets is the study conducted by Zheng et al. [zheng2010understanding].
The researchers tried to infer the transportation mode and mean of transportation
change points by analyzing only raw GPS data from 65 people.
This was done in
order to improve multiple web applications that rely on this information.
By deriving the transportation modes from the GPS traces, we gain more insight into
human mobility and use the GPS datasets to improve cities’ transportation infrastruc-
ture.
Zheng et al. [zheng2010understanding] were able to infer transportation modes with
a supervised learning approach, independent from any additional sensors’ information.
The central characteristics of GPS datasets are the accuracy and the density of the
data, which are the reasons as to why researchers employ them for validating other
human mobility models, by utilizing them as a source of ground
truth [zignani2010extracting].
The accuracy is due to the precision with which the satellites can compute the actual
location of the device; the density is usually due to the high sampling rate, which is the
frequency at which we can measure a new location. The sampling rate commonly utilize
vary from few seconds to a couple of minutes [katsikouli2019characterizing].
As mentioned above, GPS trackers can be found in cellphones and smartwatches,
facilitating and lowering the expenses of researches in collecting the data.
Furthermore, a lot of vehicles have on board devices that can track GPS locations,
this advantage can lead to a more cost-effective way to analyze traffic instead of using
sensors. Herrera et al. [herrera2010evaluation] implemented a prototype system for
traffic monitoring using GPS-enabled mobile phones demonstrating the feasibility of the
idea. The density of the GPS datasets is due to the highly frequent position sampling
rate. Lowering the rate would help with one of the main drawbacks of the acquisition
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Literature Review
of this data type: battery consumption of the tracker.
Katarzyna Siła-Nowicka in [sila2016analysis] reviewed the used temporal sampling
rate in previous existing literature, drawing the conclusion that 5 seconds is the best
balance between storage capacity and battery life.
To face the battery demand of the collection of GPS, Qi in [qi2015gps] tried to
implement a new framework that would reduce the battery drain of GPS tracking in
mobile phones, without having to lose the accuracy and density of the data. In the study,
they proposed a GPS-Tether framework that saves cellphone battery by reducing the
number of phones collecting GPS trace. This is thanks to assigning the GPS tracking
responsibility to only one device and let it share the GPS information among near devices
with the help of WiFi connection.
This is possible if one device is in charge of gathering GPS positions and then employ
an Access Point(AP) to share it among neighbors. With this approach, the GPS-server
phone consumes more battery, due to the tethering function, but the GPS-clients are
not required to spend battery on GPS tracking only on connection to the GPS-server
AP to collect the data. As Qi further points out in [qi2015gps], this method improves
the GPS battery consumption problem, however, this enactment is highly dependent on
the number of GPS-clients that take advantage of the significant battery expenses of the
GPS-server.
As mentioned before, one of the problems that could arise with a high-frequency
sampling rate is the presence of gaps in the data; this shortcoming could also occur due
to signal interruption, for example, caused by being inside a building, in a tunnel or in
an area where reception is low.
In order to face this problem, researchers focused on finding reconstruction algorithms
that would allow restoring missing data in the GPS trajectories by filling the gaps with
artificial information [thierry2013detecting][sila2016analysis]
Rhee in [rhee2011levy] utilizing statistical methods was able to show that human
mobility patterns are similar to Levy’s walks: patterns consisting of a sequence of short
straight-line trips followed by really long trips. While gathering the data they experi-
enced some discontinuity due to low battery or due to insufficient connection with the
satellite. To overcome the issue, they assume that in the blind period created by the lack
of connection, the person was walking at 1 m/s. This assumption is made if the disap-
pearing and reappearing positions are within a 20 meters radius and the timestamps are
on the same day. If so, then it is assumed that the person walked to the next detected
position. Otherwise, it is concluded that the trace was ended before the blind spot and
a new trace started in the next reported position [rhee2011levy].
As mentioned above, Levy’s walks are patterns consisting of something called ”flights”:
longest straight-line trips done without changing direction or making any stops. Usually,
Levy’s walks are a sequence of short flights followed by really long flights that cancel the
purpose of the short trips. Rhee was able to demonstrate that human mobility follows
Levy’s walks structure considering a 10km bound; This discovery can help to outline
and to construct improved mobile networks.
One shortcoming in GPS dataset is the lack of heterogeneity usually caused to an age
bias selection of subjects. Before smartphone subjects were asked to carry bulky GPS
==PAGE:23==
3.1 The means of human mobility
13
trackers, thus elderly people were not interested in participating, now GPS datasets can
be collected from social media, knowingly used more frequently by young generations.
To overcome the problem of not enough heterogeneity in GPS data Katarzyna Siła-
Nowicka in [sila2016analysis] to recruit volunteers of all ages and demographics for
their research sent invitations emails to a randomly selected group of people. Moreover,
to further expand the spatial boundary they extended their subjects selection over three
different towns and randomly selected addresses to send the invitations to.
Overall collecting such a detailed dataset for a vast population is quite arduous, thus
the need for substitute methods was inspect by researchers [hoteit2016filling].
3.1.2
WLAN
Wireless local area network (WLAN) allows devices to communicate wirelessly, this type
of network is commonly used to access the internet through Access Points (APs) which
connect the WLAN to the wired network.
Studying human mobility by collecting Access Points’ data can be quite limited, since
these data source have space constrains and not a vast number of subjects can be con-
sidered at once. Since there is the need of accessing a large WLAN. In fact, most of the
research present in literature has been carried out in universities campus, which allow
researchers to retrieve this type of dataset easily. Every time a device interacts with an
AP a log can be recorded composed by the time of the connection, IP of the device, and
other information regarding the characteristics of the communication.
In a university campus where the access points locations are known and managed by
the same central unit, collecting all the APs interactions information together can be
adopted for human mobility studies.
Kim in [kim2005modeling] considered a dataset collected from Dartmouth Univer-
sity to study human mobility patterns based on the influx and outflux rate of users in
the various access points around the campus.
They firstly divided the hours of the day into four groups representing the different hour
peaks, then they examined the flow of people in each of the access point in the network.
Furthermore, they assign each AP to a cluster based on the higher frequency rate hour.
To do so they considered the number of arrival and departure for each of the time cluster
in every AP.
Similarly, Lee in [lee2006modeling] was able to show the correlation of time and user
mobility of students around the campus gathering the connection records of the WLAN.
Analyzing the timestamps on each AP traffic flow of all the scattered AP around campus,
they noticed, for example, that at lunchtime there was an influx of connections in the
AP located near the cafeteria.
Furthermore, while studying users’ traces they noticed that people were usually connect-
ing repetitively to two or three neighboring APs resulting in lowering the accuracy of
the mobility trajectories. This ”ping-pong effect” registers as the user moved from one
AP to another and back but in reality, he/she was static. Lee, to filter these ”ping-pong
effect” decided to replace these noisy location logs with the location of the most relevant
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Literature Review
AP, meaning where the user spent the most time.
The type of data generated by a WLAN is suitable for human mobility studies, it is
cheap to acquire and can have huge amounts of records. However, it has a significant
limitations: the small possible studied area and the lack of heterogeneity of the selected
population, since it is limited to university campuses or corporate WLANs where people
share similarities as age, temporal behavior and habits.
3.1.3
Cellular networks data
Nowadays, everyone has a smartphone capable of connecting to the internet through
means of cellular network data: 2G/3G/4G.
The carriers of the before-mentioned networks collect a large amount of data for billing
purpose. Among these accumulated data there are records of all the interaction that
people had with the cellular network [qiao2016mobility]. Each time a person benefits
from the network service, for example, interacts with a social media application or
searches information on the internet, a record is created of the cellular station he is
connected to and the time of the connection alongside other network traffic-related
information,for example what type of website the user was interacting with.
From these cellular network data records, human mobility studies can be conducted,
as a movement trajectory can be extracted from the time-aligned sequence of network
connections based on all the cellular tower locations the user was assigned to while
utilizing the network services.
Zhao et al. [zhao2017user], studying users’ trajectories extracted from 4G data
traffic, focused on exterminating the following mobility features: trip distance, Radius
of Gyration, number of distinct staying points and temporal daily travelling distribu-
tion. By analyzing the results and comparing them to already known mobility traits
values they were able to confirmed that this type of data is suitable for human mobil-
ity researches, but has some limitations. For example, researchers are only capable of
accessing a limited amount of data due to the different monopoly of cellular network
provider companies [wang2019relationships].
The important aspect of cellular network data is the capability of collecting data of
extend population and with vast spatial coverage. Due to the high usability of network
traffic numerous records are produced and gathered by mobile operators. Therefore, if
researchers want to study human mobility from these records an efficient framework to
analyze big mobile data is necessary. Yuanyuan et al. [qiao2016mobility] focused on
the heavy data problem. They developed a cloud-based framework capable of collecting,
saving, and processing these records. High storage capacity and computing power are
necessary to analyze such heavy amount of data, thus a cloud-based service is an optimal
solution, since it allows to allocate new memory and processing power easily if need it.
Wang [wang2019relationships] was able to expand on the already known relation-
ship between mobile phone and travel with the help of cellular network data, composed
not only by locations of mobile internet connection, but also by the users’ categories
of visited websites and applications used. This information leads to the study of the
==PAGE:25==
3.1 The means of human mobility
15
relationships between mobile internet usage and activity-travel behavior, which was the
focus of Wang’s research.
They discovered a relationship between the frequency of internet mobile usage mobility
behavior: the frequent user tends to have the longest commute, the highest number of
distinct visited places, and spends the most time away from home.
Additionally, there is a relationship between users’ content preferences and travel. The
non-commuters are more passionate about online shopping and news, the users with
short commute are more interested in finance and games, and the ones who have the
longest commute are more likely to be browsing about education and entertainment
information.
As previously mentioned the locations considered while employing this type of dataset
for research are not representing the actual position of the users, but they are indicating
the cell towers’ geographical coordinates to which the users are connected to. Meaning
that the mobility traces extracted from these logs are less accurate in comparison to
the GPS-based trajectories, since the users true position is approximated to the cellular
tower coordinates.
Therefore, the detected users’ locations accuracy and precision are dependent on the net-
work layout and the cellular tower availability of connection. Since if the signal strength
is low the user’s device might connect to a different cellular tower than the one closest
to him, affecting the mobility trajectories, which might result in present the so-called
“ping-pong” effect [wang2019relationships].
The ”ping-pong effect” or ”cell tower oscillation” causes noise in the trajectory of the user.
The records register a number of different neighboring cell towers, as if the user moved
from one cell tower to another. In reality, the user could have been static and the oscil-
lation was caused by load-balancing issues or, the user could have been mobile but the
registered logs locations do not represent his true movement [wang2019relationships].
Qiao et al. [qiao2016mobility], to reduce the oscillation’s noise in their data took
into consideration each user trajectory and computed the average time between all the
consecutive connections of different cellular towers in the set. If the user switches position
in less than the average time they labeled it as possible oscillation and replace this noisy
location with the coordinates of the cell tower to which the user has been connected for
the longest duration.
The oscillation phenomena are common in all the datasets where the detected locations
are not representing the users’ actual location. We will discuss on known methods to
detect and filter the noisy data in Section 3.3
3.1.4
Social media data
Most of the social media application and website commonly used in current times al-
low the user to share their locations alongside their activities, for example, on Twitter,
Flickr, Instagram, and Facebook. One may post a photo on Instagram with the location
in which the picture was taken, or create an invitation to an event indicating where it
will take place with a post on Facebook.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Literature Review
The positions shared are very accurate since they are usually computed by the applica-
tion with the help of the GPS tracker integrated into the smartphone.
Many researchers considered this type of data to describe different human mobility-
related analysis which used to be carried out with GPS or census data. For example,
Lenormand [lenormand2014cross] was able to study the highway and roadway trans-
portation network taking the information from Twitter users.
These location records are highly intermittent, two consecutive locations of a user
could range between a few meters to thousands of kilometers, or very long time could
pass between them. The temporal and spatial sparsity of the dataset influence the cor-
rectness of the extract mobility patterns introducing limitations in aspects of human
mobility studies. One of which is the fact that the shared locations are tightly related
to social human behaviors. However, compared to the previously mentioned ways of
collecting human mobility data this is the lower in expenses and publicly available, thus
it is the easiest to have access to [beiro2016predicting].
It opens opportunities to examine travel demand, epidemiology, urban planning, se-
curity, and health monitoring [hasan2013understanding], all by understanding the
behavioral characteristics of social media users, since alongside the user’s coordinates
the purpose of the movement can be identified.
Hasan et al. [hasan2013understanding] examined the data from Twitter, firstly
categorizing, and dividing into six specific activities: home, work, eating, entertainment,
shopping, and recreation. Secondly, they created a grid of equivalent define size cells
that overlying the city with the intention of analyzing the density of records in each cell
based on the above-defined activity categories.
With this method, they were able to notice time-related behaviors with respect to the
activity categories. For example, they noticed data peaks for the eating activities re-
flecting the usual meal hours, moreover, entertainment activities peaks are late at night.
For the shopping and recreation the distribution of data tend to be during the weekends,
showing a tight correlation of human mobility with the urban environment and layout.
However, they noticed that social media users tend to have few or no home and work
activities, causing limitations in human mobility studies when utilizing these types of
datasets as mentioned above.
Another shortcoming of these data is the recorded location is biased towards younger
demographics since those are the ones using social media the most. Thus this type of
data source cannot describe all the human population mobility patterns. Furthermore,
this way of studying human mobility is very limited to only the destinations of different
activities. It was found that social data can describe from 10% to 30% of human mobility
[hasan2013understanding].
However, social media geolocalization data are not affected by the already mentioned
oscillations phenomenon; this is due to the fact that the traces extracted are computed
with the user’s actual coordinates and are not an estimation based on the cellular tower
to which the device is connected to. Thus, they resemble more the GPS dataset than
the WLAN or cellular network data.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Cellular Data Records (CDR)
17
3.2
Cellular Data Records (CDR)
Cellular Data Record(CDR) is event-driven data, which is collected by mobile oper-
ators, every time a user is making/receiving a call or sending/receiving a message
[rodriguez2018detecting]. This section is different from the Section 3.1.3 since the
CDR registers events only related to phone calls and messages. The cellular network
data records all the internet related interaction of the user. Moreover, since our work
will employ a CDR dataset this section is more detailed and expanded than the previous
data types ones.
Cellular Data records are one of the alternative ways of collecting human mobility
data. These records are gathered by mobile operators for management purposes, they
are large in size and collected daily.
Each time a call or message event occurs, the
mobile operator saves a record composed by the timestamp of the occurrence, the coor-
dinates of the cellular tower to which the phone was connected to, and the device ID
[wang2018data].
Thus each user movement that can be extracted analyzing these records is sparse in time
and space since each location of the mobility trace is strictly dependent on the person’s
mobile phone usage. Furthermore, the spatial sparsity is dependent to the coverage area
size and the density of cellular towers in the area.
This direct correlation of phone usage and movement detection can lead to a biased
mobility analysis since people might not use their phone uniformly throughout the day
[rodriguez2018detecting]. Other biasing factors are the coverage size or the frequency
of the cellular towers where people live or visit. Thus some user data present scattered
events resulting in gaps in their trajectories. To overcome this defect completion data
techniques are required. Data completion consists in filling these mobility gaps in the
traces extracted from CDRs with estimation of the user’s location. Thus after apply-
ing these completion techniques the new artificially reconstructed mobility trajectories
present less mobility gaps and should more closely reassemble the user’s true movement.
Hoteit et al. [hoteit2016filling] assess the quality of the state-of-the-art completion
CDR data techniques, using GPS dataset as ground truth. The techniques considered
are: a static model, which assumes that the user remained in the same position as
the last CDR data detection, a continuous-movement model, which hypothesize that
the user is moving between each consecutive CDR samples, and the stop-by approach,
which considers the time interval between two consecutive CDR locations and if it is
less than one-hour-long it is assumed that the user spent equal time in the two stop
locations.
To evaluate the performance of these techniques two aspects are compared: the accuracy
and the coverage. The accuracy is computed as the spatial error between the ground-
truth GPS locations and the CDR traces after applying one of the techniques. The
coverage is computed as the percentage of times that the improved CDR traces are
identifying the actual position of the user [hoteit2016filling].
Another drawback of studying human mobility with the use of CDR data is the
lack of demographic information of the population sample. It is possible to obtain such
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Literature Review
information only if each user give consent to it, otherwise, it would be a privacy violation.
The data collection process has also been influenced in this regard by the introduction
of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). This regulation, introduced by the
European Union in 2018, imposes strict obligations regarding the collection of personal
data of people on European soil.[gdpr.eu_2019] Gathering all these consents, while also
being compliant with the GDPR, would probably introduce limitations on the number
of samples and make the researchers spend a longer period of time on the data collection
process.
The demographic information of the users is important to understand the heterogene-
ity of the population sample [wang2018data]. Since different age demographics have
dissimilar mobile phone usage behavior, the human mobility analysis could therefore be
potentially incomplete or biased.
Additional variables affecting the data sample completeness are the market shares of
the mobile phone operators or the calling plans available from a company, which could
limit the phone data acquired every day [calabrese2011estimating]. For example, if
a calling plan limits the amount of calls or minutes a person can be on a call, it would
restrict and lower the number of recorded locations.
Nonetheless, the extensiveness of the population sample that can be considered with this
data type allows for large metropolitan areas mobility studies [oliveira2016regularity].
For example, Calabrese et al. [calabrese2011estimating] were able to derive the de-
mand of transportation in Boston. They were able to do so by understanding the origin
and destination of a person’s movements from CDR data, which in turn helps to improve
the transport layout infrastructure of the city.
Moreover, CDR data has been investigated as a potential replacement for traffic sensors,
since drivers already carrying their cell phones with them and, as said before this data is
collected by mobile operators with no additional costs. Stationary traffic sensors, on the
other hand, require expensive maintenance and installations. Furthermore, cell phone
data are not altered by weather conditions [horn2014detecting].
As mentioned above the detected location coordinates of the user are not the actual
position of the user but those of the cell towers to which the device is connected to. This
affects the correctness of the trajectories since the coordinates are an estimation of the
true location and the accuracy of the approximation is related to the size of the sector
covered by the cellular tower signal range [oliveira2016regularity].
When in a dense region, for example a city center, multiple antennas are located close
to each other to face the high band usage expected by the density of people in the area.
The larger number of antennas results in smaller cell tower coverage area, since they are
not required to cover extended space. Therefore, resulting in a more accurate approxi-
mation of the user location.
On the other hand, in a rural regions, where the density of cellular towers is lower and
their radius broader, the users’ approximated position could be far away from the true
one.
In the Figure 3.1 are represented Voronoi cells of some base stations taken from our
dataset. The base stations are the identified by the blue dots, and their coverage bor-
ders by the red lines. The value 50,65, on the base station, indicates its perimeter, in
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Cellular Data Records (CDR)
19
kilometers. As we can see there are cells coverage with smaller areas than others, which
represent less dense areas. Furthermore, it is to be noticed that the Voronoi cells are
only an approximation of the actual coverage of the cellular towers. In reality most of
the areas have overlapping regions.
Figure 3.1: Base stations and their Voronoi cells.
In the next section we will address and discuss in more detail the oscillation phenom-
ena which affects the CDR mobility studies accuracy.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Literature Review
3.3
Oscillation phenomena
Authors
Existing oscillation solution approaches
Benefits
Drawbacks
Wu et al.
DECRE alghoritm, detection with speed,
distance, and time thresholds
Their algorithm improved the
correctness of session by 10%
No definition of oscillations
Katsikouli, Panagiota et al. Probabilistc and decision tree aproach
Formal definition of oscillation
for static session
Only studied oscillations for static sessions
Bayir et al.
Clustering approach. Clusters defined by
the occurrence frequency of
cellular tower pairs
Definition of oscillaiton pair
Trajectories approximated to clusters.
No definition of oscillations
Calabrese et al.
Clustering approach. Clusters formed with
spatial threshold of 1km
Clusters based only on time and
space thresholds.
No definition of oscillations.
Missing evaluation of clustering method performance
Shad et al.
Clustering approach. Clusters defined by
the network configuration, overlapping cell
tower coverage in the same group.
Detect home work location stops easily Utilized additional users information
to divide the clusters
Rodriguez-Carrion et al.
Oscillation detection by checking the appearances
of same cellular tower in the trace
Proposed and evaluated different
filtering techniques
No significant difference
before and after the data filtering
Zhang
Applied two threasholds for each consecutive
log in a trace, a distance
and a probabilist one.
Efficient method for large-scale data
No ground truth to validate the method
In this section, we indicate with a cell site, cell tower, cellular tower, and base station
the location of the antenna structure for cellular network communications. We sketch
a diagram in Figure 3.2, which a base station its represented, as well as its coverage
area and a possible user with a device connected to the station. As mentioned before in
Section 3.2, users’ locations, when considering the CDRs or cellular network data types,
are approximated to be the coordinates of the cell tower. It is important to notice that
the coverage does not have a perfectly circular shape but it depends on the surroundings.
Figure 3.2: Cell tower diagram.
While on a call, or while sending or receiving a message, a device should be connected
to the nearest cellular tower. If there are changes in the signal strength, in the load
balancing of the network, or there is random noise, oscillations may occur, and the
device therefore switches between multiple nearby base stations causing to register users’
location far away from the actual one [wu2014oscillation].
Due to this phenomenon, when researchers analyze the Cellular Data Record (Section
3.2), multiple logs could represent inaccurate movements. This inaccuracy could lead to
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Oscillation phenomena
21
identifying the user as mobile when in reality he is static, or to registering a wrong trip
from the real one [katsikouli2019characterizing].
Without cleaning the data from these noisy records, the correctness and accuracy of the
users’ trajectories are compromised, affecting the human mobility studies’ results.
Various studies [bayir2010mobility; calabrese2011estimating; shad2012cell;
qiao2016mobility; wu2014oscillation; katsikouli2019characterizing]
[rodriguez2018detecting] have therefore aimed to the detection and removal of the
incorrect records produced by the oscillation phenomenon.
One of the approaches taken when trying to detect the faulty logs in the datasets is to
consider the time interval between two consecutive cellular towers connections of a user.
For example, Qiao et al. [qiao2016mobility] computed the time interval between two
switches, and took the average of all such durations and utilized that value as threshold.
If one switch duration is lower than the computed threshold, an oscillation might have
happen. Thus, they replace these two switching logs with the location that the user
connected the most between the two.
One approach adopted by several researchers [bayir2010mobility; shad2012cell;
calabrese2011estimating] is the clustering method. When processing the data, cel-
lular towers that are spatially close are grouped in clusters, and the same coordinates
are assigned to the components in the group. Thus, when retrieving users’ movements,
fewer distinct positions are recognized, but a more limited number of noisy switches
between close cellular towers are present in the traces [calabrese2011estimating].
Bayir et al. [bayir2010mobility], for example, utilized a cell clustering method to
reduce oscillations in the mobility paths. To determine the clusters’ divisions the au-
thors examined the occurrence frequency of the same two cellular tower pairs in all the
mobility traces. If they appeared at least three times in a sequence they were labeled as
oscillating pairs. From the marked pairs, they formed an oscillation graph, implemented
and applied a graph clustering algorithm to identify the cell tower clusters causing os-
cillations in the data.
On the other hand, Shad et al. [shad2012cell] formed cell clusters, by selecting the
base stations that had overlapping areas based on the network configuration. Moreover,
the subjects participating in the study provided information on their most frequent stop
locations, for example, home and workplace, allowing the researchers to label the differ-
ent clusters for a better understanding of the users’ movements. When an oscillation
event occurs between two cell towers, Shad et al. checked whether or not the stations
are assigned to the same cluster, and if that is the case the user is considered stationary.
Another work that relies on cell clusters to remove the oscillations in the data is
[calabrese2011estimating], where Calabrese et al. applied a spatial threshold of 1km
to determine the clustering divisions. Additionally, they calculated the cluster centroid,
by computing the mean of the distances between the cellular tower in the group, and
considered that as the location to new clusters.
Other approaches and techniques have been investigated to cleanse the cellular record
data from the oscillations phenomenon noise.
Zhang [zhang2014user], analyzing cellular network data, introduced an oscillations
filter divided into three steps: first, identify the cell neighbors inclined to cause oscil-
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Literature Review
lations by calculating the conditional probability of each pair and limit the value with
a threshold. The second step consists in not considering the cells that are 70km or
more apart (since the max radius of a cell is 35km). Lastly, Zhang examined each users’
path and removed the instances of the most frequent occurrences between the oscillation
candidate selected in the step prior.
Qi et al.[qi2016oscillation] introduced an algorithm called SOL, with which they
discover oscillation sequences by applying distance and speed thresholds between consec-
utive logs. Successively, they compute the frequency of each cellular tower’s appearance
in the sequences. The frequencies are then considered as weights when computing the
cells’ locations centroid. Once the distances from all the cells to the weighted centroid
are measured, the cell with the smaller distance is considered as the user’s true location,
removing the rest of the logs from the considered sequence.
With the SOL algorithm, they remove around 15% of the records which were due to
oscillations phenomenon. To prove the effectiveness of this method they compared the
prediction of users’ future locations before and after the noise filtering showing that the
accuracy of the predicted location has improved.
Rodriguez et al. [rodriguez2018detecting] identified as oscillation each sequence
of logs where one base station appeared two times, and in between these occurrences
one or more distinct base station logs are present. To replace them they proposed three
methods: the noisy pattern is either replaced by its most frequent cellular tower appear-
ance, by the base stations that appears two times, which bounds the oscillation sequence,
or by a hybrid version of these two.
Wu et al. [wu2014oscillation] proposed a filter algorithm called DECRE that detects
and removes the oscillations’ data noise. They first identified suspicious sequences apply-
ing a speed threshold between each consecutive logs. Once they identified the possible
noisy patterns, they considered the previous and following minute in the sequence. They
labeled the sequence as noise if they presented a cycle of cellular towers. Wu et al. de-
fined the aforementioned cycle as a continuous series of locations whose first and last log
are the same cellular tower and there is at least one log from a different cellular tower
between them.
Lastly, they replace the detected oscillation sequence with the coordinates of the base
station which describes most accurately the true position of the user, thus the one that
appears most frequently in the selected arrays of logs and has the smaller distance from
the others. After applying the filter the trajectories’ they computed the distance from
each log to its corresponding log in the ground-truth data. They noticing that the av-
erage distance improved by 10% in respect to the not filtered trajectories distance with
the ground-truth.
Wang et al. [wang2018data], inspired by Wu et al.’s work [wu2014oscillation]
introduced a time-window-based method that analyzes the trajectories, labeling them
as caused by oscillation phenomenon if the trace’s duration was less than a defined
threshold, and if these sequences presented a cycle of cellular towers. Due to the tem-
poral sparsity of the cellular data records, Wang et al. [wang2018data] decided to
also employ a modified pattern-based method to further detect the noisy patterns. This
method relies on considering as possible oscillations events the trajectories in which a
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Oscillation phenomena
23
double cycle of cellular towers is present (example L1 −L0 −L1 −L0), to then apply
the time-windows base method only on this identified selection of sequences. Lastly, to
substitute the noisy logs with the closest location to reality, they took under consider-
ation all the monthly user’s traces where similar noisy sequences occurred, to identify
the position where the user usually spent the majority of his time during the considered
month.
Katsikouli et al. [katsikouli2019characterizing] focused their attention only on
the oscillations phenomenon occurrences in absence of mobility, meaning that the user
was static but the device switched between neighboring cell towers resulting in the
registration of false movements. The authors considered 80% the data, and computed
the characteristics of oscillation occurrences in the absence of mobility with the help
of the GPS ground truth data. They then applied both a probabilistic and a decision
tree approach on the reaming 20%, in order to detect if the found oscillation pattern in
the dataset was actually a static period of the user or not. Once detected all the noisy
oscillations phenomenon occurred in absence of movement, they replace the faulty base
station location with the coordinates of the main cell tower in the sequence, for example,
(bsA, t0), (bsX, t1), (bsA, t2) with (bsA, t0), (bsA, t1), (bsA, t2).
In the Table 3.3 we summarized the existing methods and techniques proposed and
utilized to face the oscillation phenomena noisy patterns in Cellular Data Records.
Bayir et al.
[bayir2010mobility], Calabrese et al.[calabrese2011estimating] and
Shad et al. [shad2012cell] approached the problem with clustering algorithms. The
first one grouped together base stations based on the station frequency in the sequence.
They introduced a definition of oscillation pair as two cellular towers that appear in a
mobility pattern multiple times, switching back and forth between them throughout the
mobility sequence of logs. However, they did not filter the oscillations but only approx-
imate the mobility trajectories to these clusters instead of base station locations.
Calabrese et al. just cluster together multiple cell towers based on a spatial threshold of
1 km. However, since their research was more focus towards defining origin-destination
of a mobility pattern, they did not evaluate the proposed clustering methods. They kept
analyzing the origin-destination of the mobile sessions in respect to the clusters not to
the actual base station locations.
Shad et al. utilized additional information coming from the subjects regarding the users’
most visited locations. These information helped them grouping together base stations
based on the users’ point of interests. This method reduces the occurrences of oscilla-
tions since neighboring base stations are approximated to the cluster location, but this
technique would not be feasible for an extensive number of people. Since gathering each
subject information on their most visited places can be expensive and arduous.
Zhang [zhang2014user], on the other hand, by applying only a speed threshold filter
between each logs in the mobility patterns, introduced an efficient method for big data.
However, due to lack of ground-truth data, it was impossible to evaluate the accuracy
and improvements of such filter.
Rodriguez-Carrion et al. [rodriguez2018detecting] proposed three filtering techniques
but none of them was able to achieve a more cleansed mobility trajectory.
Lastly, Wu et al. [wu2014oscillation] and Katsikouli et al.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Literature Review
[katsikouli2019characterizing] were the ones with the most significant results. Wu
et al. was able to improve the mobility trajectories by introducing and applying to their
dataset the DECRRE algorithm. However, as for the above mentioned papers, no one
tries to properly define the oscillations. The only exception are Katsikouli et al. who
proposed a formal definition of oscillations for static sessions. Therefore, they only con-
sidered the case in which the oscillation phenomenon occurred and the person was not
moving, but the CDR data implied that he was.
After examining the state-of-the-art for oscillation phenomena in CDR dataset we dis-
cover the lack of characterization and definition of oscillations.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Handover
25
3.4
Handover
Handover is the mechanism that ensures the Quality of Service(QoS) by transferring an
ongoing call from one base station to another [lin2004improved] in cellular networks.
The oscillation phenomena discussed in the previous section is related to the handover.
The device always tries to have the best connection possible to perform a call or send
a message. The handover mechanism, by ensuring the QoS, makes the device connect
to the cellular tower that will ensure the best connection instead of ensuring that it is
the nearest to the user. Improving the handover mechanism might lower the oscillation
phenomena occurrences in the CDR data [lin2004improved].
Handovers occur when one or a combination of the value of the following variables
changes: received signal strength(RSS), signal to interference ratio(SIR), the distance
between the device and the base station, and traffic load [lin2004improved].
Dong et al. [dong2013modeling] proved that handovers occur even when a device
is static. They performed an experiment where a stationary user periodically interacts
with the cellular network would experience handovers between cellular towers.
The
experiment confirmed that handovers between multiple cellular towers happened while
the user was static. Since a handover can occur when the device is static, for example,
caused by signal strength fluctuations, this event will result in a registration of a new
base station connection in the CDRs. The new base station connection record would
later be detected as an erroneous movement when studying the mobile phone traces.
Lin et al. [lin2004improved] focused on the handover caused by signal strength fluc-
tuation with the aim of proposing an improved handover algorithm. This new approach
should help reduce the ping-pong effect introduced by handovers. The algorithm pro-
posed is based on the estimation of mobile location and speed when a base station switch
occurs.
Lin et al. applied the new handover improving algorithm in Taipei city, showing that
the number of unnecessary handovers was reduced by 18-26%
If no unnecessary handovers occurred, the locations extracted from the cellular data
records or the cellular networks would not describe faulty movements, thus have less
noisy patterns reducing the presence of oscillation phenomenon.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Problem and Solution
For human mobility studies, several data collections and resources have been employed
as we illustrated in the Chapter 3.1. Each data type has different challenges to face in
order to obtain a more accurate human mobility analysis. Our focus is towards CDR
data type, in particular the oscillation phenomenon that could cause to detect false
movements in the users’ trajectories.
This paper is a continuation of the work carried out by Katsikouli et al.
[katsikouli2019characterizing], in which they were able to recognize and filter the
oscillation events occurring when the user was static. However, they did not analyze the
case in which the user is mobile and an oscillation phenomenon occurs, resulting in the
registration of a faulty movement.
As we said before each mobile phone record has information regarding when the
message or phone call happened and the coordinates of the base station to which the
device was connected to in the moment that the event occurred. If we consider a user’s
mobility trajectory as a sequence of his mobile phone data records, we can obtain a trail
of the user movements. Sometimes though, one base station is present multiple times,
alternated by other cellular towers.
For example, if A and B are coordinates of two different base stations, a mobility tra-
jectory of a user can be described as T = {(t0, A), (t1, B), (t2, A)}. The first log with
timestamp t0 assumes that the user was under the signal coverage of A’s cellular tower.
Successively, at time t1 the user was in B’s coverage, and lastly at time t2 the user was
back in A’s base station area.
If we consider this data for human mobility purposes, we may believe that the user
travelled from A to B and back in t2 −t0 time. In reality, it could be that the user never
went to B, and that instead he was moving around A’s cell coverage when an oscillation
phenomenon occurred, causing noise in the trajectory estimation.
Differentiating between the event being a genuine movement or only an oscillation
phenomenon effect is an arduous job. Various researchers introduced different techniques
and approaches to filtering such noise, as we reported in the Section 3.3. However, to
the extend of our knowledge, no one analyzed the characteristics of such noisy patterns.
Discovering specific features of the noisy patterns will help improving existing filtering
methods or to introduce a new one.
We will therefore see in the next section why
improving oscillation filtering algorithms is valuable.
The structure of this chapter is as follows: first, we provide a formal definition of the
problem, with the reason why it is indeed important to find a solution. Successively, we
describe the data employed in our research and how it was collected. Then we introduce
the definition and analysis of mobile sessions, followed by a spatial characterization of the
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Problem and Solution
cellular towers present in these sessions. In the Section 4.4 we introduce the definition of
AXA patterns and then an analysis of their features to compare with the mobile sessions
properties analysis. Successively, a spatial and temporal characterization of the AXA
patterns is outlined.
We then provide a description of how we utilized the GPS data as ground-truth to
help us find a solution to the oscillation phenomenon problem. This is followed by an
explanation on how we labeled the AXA patterns as oscillation with the GPS ground-
truth. These found faulty movements were studied to see if and which features can be
used to build a probabilistic approach able to detect the noisy AXA patterns from the
mobility traces.
We further outline the employed probabilistic approaches and the other techniques we
considered as possible solution for the detection of oscillation phenomenon.
It is important to notice that in this section we will simply present the results of our
research. The results will instead be discussed in depth in the Discussion Chapter 5 of
the paper.
4.1
Description of the Problem and Its
Importance
In the CDR datasets, when considering a mobile session, which is a sequence of locations
describing the movement trail of the user, it is difficult to identify if an oscillations
phenomenon describes an actual movement or if it just due to signal balancing in the
network.
The problem we are aiming to solve is being able to distinguish an oscillation sequence
that represents an actual movement from the ones that are just noise, thus caused
by signal balancing.
We are trying to solve this problem by only considering CDR
mobility sessions with the help of the GPS ground truth, without the help of additional
information, such as network layout, coverage area, users’ point of interests, etc.
Being able to detect and filter all the noisy oscillation phenomenon events will lead
to having only the users’ actual movements. This means that each recognized position in
the user’s mobile phone records, which contributes to the user mobility traces, is indeed
a true and accurate movement of the user.
Reducing the number of oscillation events in mobility sessions has many implications in
human mobility fields. The oscillation events suggest that the person is moving more
than he actually is, since erroneous positions are registered.
When studying traffic flows from cellular data records, the presence of noisy patterns
could result in inaccurate traffic estimations. For example, if the traffic volume is com-
puted by counting the number of connections per cell tower [demissie2013intelligent],
the estimation will be incorrect.
Moreover, while considering mobile phone data to improve public transportation lay-
outs having precise and correct analysis on the distributions of commuters across the
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Description of the data
29
metropolitan area is significant [reddy2010using].
However, if the oscillations patterns are polluting the users’ traces, people appear to
travel for a longer time and longer distances. An example of this would be if a person
was just walking in the coverage of a cellular tower A but in the trace is present a log
which suggests that the user travelled to the coordinates of another cellular tower B,
and then back to A’s area. The travel distribution of this user will mistakenly affect the
transportation analysis, suggesting a more disseminate commute behavior.
Another study field that would benefit from cleansed trajectories is the detection of pop-
ular paths. Similarly for the aforementioned transportation and traffic studies, the popu-
lar path analysis helps to improve the urban infrastructure of a city [qiao2016mobility].
However, if the noisy oscillation patterns are present in the users’ traces, the identifying
similarity between them can be arduous.
Finding a method or algorithm able to recognize, with high precision, if a user move-
ment is due to an oscillations phenomenon or instead it is a real users’ movement in the
mobile sessions, will improve greatly each human mobility field that utilizes the Cellular
Data Records for their research.
The CDR data type, as mentioned in the previous chapter, is able to consider an exten-
sive amount of population [oliveira2016regularity]. Comparing to the other, already
described data types, such as GPS, Social Network data, or Cellular Network data, it
is easily accessible and not computationally heavy to process. For these reasons, even if
the cellular data records are sparse in time and space, not precise or accurately detecting
the locations of the user, they can produce a complete human mobility analysis, since
they are able to consider a high amount of subjects in a metropolitan area.
4.2
Description of the data
In our analysis, two different types of data have been employed: GPS and Cellular Data
Records (CDR). As introduced in the literature review (Section 3.1), these two data
types have very different properties. While the GPS data is dense in information and
precise, the CDR is sparse and inconsistent, due to its event-driven nature.
The datasets utilized in the research are borrowed from Katsikouli et al.
[katsikouli2019characterizing] work. The data was collected between 2014 and 2016,
for different amounts of time depending on the user. For the data collection, 11 vol-
unteers in Lyon(France), agreed to record their movements with the support of a GPS
application on their cellphones. Moreover, the subjects gave consent to access the cell-
phone operator data in the corresponding period of time. These datasets are employed
only for research purposes. Both GPS and CDR mobile sessions are grouped by user,
but no personal information regarding the subject has been disclosed. However, the
distinction between the users is kept by utilizing randomly generated IDs. Moreover,
before Katsikouli et al. acquired the data one hour at the beginning and at the end of
each trip has been removed from the data. This was done with the purpose of protecting
even more the privacy of the users by hiding as much as possible home and work locations.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Problem and Solution
As already mentioned, the CDR is an event-driven data type, meaning that each
collected record in the CDR dataset was registered because the subject, at the moment
of the recording, was either engaged in a phone call ,or either receiving or sending a
message. These records contain information regarding the cellular tower to which the
phone was connected to during the subject’s interaction with his phone. Alongside the
cell tower location is present a timestamp identifying the moment in which this event
occurred.
The position recorded by the cellular operator identifies where the cellular tower is lo-
cated but not the actual position of the user. This results in an inaccurate and imprecise
mobility trace since the user could be in the vicinity of the tower or, as discussed before
in the oscillation Section 3.3, not even in the tower coverage area.
The GPS dataset, on the other hand, is not event-driven, resulting in a denser and more
precise collection of positions, as we already outlined in Section 3.1.1. The samples
describe the exact locations of the device, thus it is possible to reconstruct the actual
movements of each subject. Since the GPS data is precise, this dataset will be used as
ground truth for our analysis.
Each log in the CDR dataset presents the latitude and longitude of the place where
the cellular tower is located, plus a timestamp indicating the time of the event recording.
On the other hand, each GPS data log has the coordinates of the position of the user
and the timestamp of the time they were measured.
In the CDR dataset if A is a base station with coordinates (x1, x2) to which the user
was connected, and an event occurred at time t0, the log registered will be represented
as (t0, x1, x2). Similarly, the logs present in the GPS dataset are a sequence of three
elements (t0, l1, l2), where l1 and l2 are respectively the latitude and the longitude of the
user’s position, and t0 is the timestamp of the recording.
Both the GPS and CDR datasets have been collected and utilized in a previous study
by Katsikouli et al. [katsikouli2019characterizing]. In their research, the authors
introduced a heuristic to distinguish a mobile session from a static session. Firstly they
extracted all the users’ trajectories, which are the sequence of locations that have at least
a 2-hour duration, and have no more than twenty minutes between two consecutive logs.
Then they applied their heuristic, to distinguish between a static and a mobile session.
The method utilizes two thresholds applying them to two parameters in the CDR user’s
trajectory: the average instance speed, and the radius of gyration. In a trajectory T
= {(bs0, t0), (bs1, t1), (bs2, t2)}, where bs0, bs1 and bs2 identify the coordinates of the
base stations in each log. The average instance speeds are computed by measuring the
average of the instance speeds between each log. The instance speed between each log is
equal to the distance between two consecutive base stations divided by the time passed
between the two logs. For example, the instance speed s1 between the first two logs of
the trajectory T is
s1 = d(bs1, bs2)
|t1 −t0|
(4.1)
where d(·, ·) indicates a distance measure which considers the base station coordinates.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Mobile Session Analysis
31
The Radius of Gyration is a widely adopted measure to understand the spatial dis-
placement of a trajectory and it is computed with the following formula:
√1
n
∑
n
d2(bs, pc)
(4.2)
where n is the number of logs present in the trajectory and pc are the coordinates of
the centroid of the considered sequence.
Each trajectory is analyzed dividing it into segments of a predefined temporal window
size w. For each of these segments, the average instance speed and the radius of gyration
are calculated. If both of the parameters result to be less than the specified thresholds,
which are 1.5 m/s for the speed and 20m for the radius of gyration, the segment is
labeled as static session, mobile otherwise (ibid).
After assigning a static or mobile label to the first segment of the trajectory the
temporal window size w is shifted one time-step ahead. The now considered segment
will be labeled as a mobile or a static session utilizing the same thresholds methodology
described above. If the first and second sessions are classified equally, they get combined
together, otherwise, if the sessions have different label the heuristics restart from the
last log of the already classified segments.
In our analysis we consider the mobile sessions identified by Katsikouli et al.
[katsikouli2019characterizing] heuristic, as described above, where the temporal win-
dows utilized in their method is 60 seconds (w=60).
Thus, all the sequences of locations from the CDR data that we considered, represent
only the mobile sessions of each user’s trajectory. The GPS data had already been di-
vided to identify the corresponding CDR mobile sessions. Due to battery consumption,
missing GPS signal, or the time elapsing between two consecutive GPS measurements,
the complete and overlapping time frame of CDR mobile sessions and GPS mobile ses-
sions is impossible.
4.3
Mobile Session Analysis
As mentioned above, our analysis will be focused only on the mobile sessions, which
were extracted by Katsikouli et al. [katsikouli2019characterizing] in their work.
A mobile session S can be expressed as a sequence of n logs:
S = {(bs0, t0), (bs1, t1), ..., (bsn, tn)}
(4.3)
of which bsξ are the coordinates of the base stations and tξ are the timestamps of the
occurrences.
We approached the problem, described in Section 4.1, by firstly computing the sig-
nificant characteristics of the mobile sessions, such as duration of the sessions, radius
of gyration and temporal characterization. Moreover, we wanted to compare and show
the differences of duration of the sessions and radius of gyration in the CDR dataset
with the GPS ground truth. Doing so we were able to get an insight on the possible
inaccuracy of our CDR mobile sessions.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Problem and Solution
4.3.1
Duration of mobile sessions
The first aspect of the mobile sessions we examined was the duration of the sessions. For
each mobile sessions we computed the duration as difference between the first and last
log’s timestamp. Comparing the GPS and CDR sessions’ duration can give us insight
into the completeness of the detected mobile sessions.
We identified the GPS sessions correspondent to the CDR’s ones by checking the start
and end timestamps of each CDR session, and searching for a correspondent value in the
GPS data. The value can be in a range of 15 minutes before the actual start timestamp
or 15 minutes after the end timestamp of the CDR session. Moreover, as we said before
in Section 4.2, the GPS sessions might not be perfectly overlapping the CDR ones due
to missing data.
We chose to assess the differences by plotting the Cumulative Density Function(CDF)
of the GPS and CDR sessions’ duration together as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: CDFs of the GPS and CDR mobile sessions duration.
In the Fiigure 4.1 we have the sessions’ duration in seconds on the x axis and the
corresponding CDF value on the y axis. From the plot, we can see that cellular mobile
sessions generally last longer than GPS mobile sessions. This means that the overlapping
of GPS and CDR sessions is not perfectly accurate, as expected. 90% of the mobile
sessions last less than one and a half hours, whereas 90% of the GPS sessions have a
duration slightly longer than a hour.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Mobile Session Analysis
33
4.3.2
Radius of Gyration of mobile sessions
In order to understand the spatial displacement of the mobile trajectories we then ex-
amined the Radius of Gyration(ROG).
In the Figure 4.2 we have the ROG values expressed in kilometers on the x axis and
the CDF range on the y axis. As can be seen from the graphic, in the case of the CDR
the Radius of Gyration is generally smaller than that recorded in the GPS case. What
we can extrapolate from this figure, is that when checking the CDR data the apparent
distance travelled by the users is smaller than the true distance measured with the GPS.
One interpretation of the phenomenon could be that since the CDR is event driven, in
the lack of events, no registration is carried out. The data may therefore be incomplete
and the full trajectory of the users may have not been recorded.
Figure 4.2: CDFs of the GPS and CDR mobile sessions Radius of Gyration.
Further discussion on the ROG and duration of mobile session will be outlined in
Chapter 5.
4.3.3
Temporal characterization of mobile sessions
The aim of this section is to analyze how the sessions are distributed during a 24 hour
temporal window. We analyzed all the CDR mobile sessions. It is important to notice
that the date in which the sessions were recorded is not relevant in this case, only the
time of the day is considered. For each mobile session we considered the first and the
last timestamps. If these were in the same 1 hour window, then we associate the mobile
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Problem and Solution
session temporal bin to that hour. For example, if the first timestamp was at 10.15 and
the last at 10.55, we associate the session to the 10th hour bin. In case the two are not
in the same hour window, we take in consideration the hour of the last timestamp. For
example if the first log is at 10.55 and the second at 11.30, the session is associated with
the 11th hour bin.
Figure 4.3: Temporal characterization of mobile sessions.
On the x axis of the Figure 4.4 are represented the one hour bins, numbered from 0
to 23, representing the 24 hours in a day. On the y axis is represented the percentage,
in decimal numbers, of sessions falling in a determined bin (0.01 is equal to 1%). It is
observable that the distribution is fairly uniform. There are however determined peaks
during rush hours: 37% of the mobile sessions are between 14 and 18, which can be
considered as the times in which students and workers are commuting.
4.3.4
Spatial characterization of base stations in
mobile sessions
As explained in previous sections (Section 4.2), the only data available in the datasets
are the coordinates of the base station to which the user was connected and the times-
tamp of the event. This means that we are unaware of the characteristics of the base
stations, including information regarding the actual coverage of each cell tower. This
information may be useful to spot and detect oscillations, but it is not always available
to researchers therefore, this work explores what we can learn just from the mobility
records at hand. It is possible, however, to calculate an estimation of the density of the
area in which the cell tower is positioned as well as its coverage. The total number of
base stations used for this part of the research is 3112.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Mobile Session Analysis
35
This can be done using two distinct methods: 10th nearest neighbour distance, and the
Voronoi perimeter. The usage of these two methods was inspired by the research method
employed by Katsikouli et al. [katsikouli2019characterizing] who utilized these two
methods for every base station that they considered in the research. We instead used
the two techniques only to analyze the base stations present in the mobile sessions.
The 10-est nearest neighbour distance is a method that calculates how distant each
base station is from its 10th farthest station. After selecting a base station, the distance
to all the other cell towers is calculated. After all these distances are calculated, the
10th smallest distance is considered. This data gives information on whether the base
station is in a dense area (for which the value is going to be lower) or in a rural area
(where the value is going to be higher). In a dense area, there is going to be a larger
number of stations in a smaller radius, meaning that the distance is going to be lower.
In rural areas, the coverage of the towers is higher, and they are placed farther from
each other than in dense areas, meaning that the distance is higher.
As can be seen in Figure 4.4, on the y axis the CDF of the distances of the 10-est
nearest neighbours are represented, and on the x axis the distance is presented in km. It
is possible to observe that 80% of all the base stations have a 10-est nearest neighbour
distance of less than 15km. 40% is however below 5km, for which we can assume that
the base stations are in metropolitan areas.
Figure 4.4: CDF plot of sessions base stations 10-est nearest neighbour distances.
The 10-est nearest neighbour distance gives us an insight regarding the type of area
in which cell towers are placed, either metropolitan or rural. From this value it is also
possible to assume that cell towers in dense areas have a smaller coverage than in rural
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Problem and Solution
areas.
To further try and analyse the coverage of the towers, we will now discuss the Voronoi
Perimeter, assuming that if a cells has a small perimeter the base station coverage area
is small as well.
We firstly computed the Voronoi cells, as there can been seen in Figure 4.5, and then
their perimeters, considering all the 3112 base stations. However, we analyzed only the
perimeters of the cells corresponding to base station appearing in one or more logs in
the mobile sessions. 30% of the perimeters of the base stations in the mobile session
were lower than 10 kilometers.
As data regarding the coverage areas of the base stations is not available, we calculated
the Voronoi perimeters. These perimeters give us an approximation of the coverage
areas of the cell towers.
This coverage usually depends on the presence of buildings or landscape characteristics
that go and influence the signal of the stations. Since we do not make any considerations
about these structural characteristics in our research, the approximations provided using
Voronoi perimeters were considered sufficient for our purposes.
In the Figure we show a zoomed section of the Voronoi cells of figure A.1 in the Appendix
A. The blue dots represent the cellular towers and the red lines the cell boundaries. The
number 2.97 identifies the perimeter in kilometers of correspondent base station cell.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Introduction to the AXA patterns
37
Figure 4.5: Voronoi Cells.
4.4
Introduction to the AXA patterns
In this paper we utilize the term AXA pattern, which is commonly used in related
researches [katsikouli2019characterizing].
Definition 4.4.1 AXA pattern
Let M = {(bs0, t0), (bs1, t1), ..., (bsn, tn)} be a sequence of registered base station bsσ con-
nections during the time interval [t0, tn] describing a user’s movement. An AXA patterns
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Problem and Solution
is identified in [ti, tj] if there exists a subset sequence S ={(bsa, ti), (bsx, tξ1), ..., (bsx, tξm), (bsa, tj)},
such that (1) a ̸= x and (2) ti < tξ1 < .. < tξm < tj.
The timestamp ti identifies the users’ last connection to the base station A (bsa), and
tj identifies the users’ first reappearance back to the same station A (bsa). In between
these two logs there has to be present at least one occurrence of a different cellular tower
X at timestamp tξ1 ∈[ti, tj]. However, there can be multiple logs of the bsx base station
in between the two A’s cellular tower logs with timestamps [tξ1, tξm] ⊂[ti, tj].
An AXA pattern can be an oscillation or a movement.
We informally define as
oscillation an AXA pattern that identifies a noisy and incorrect movement of the user. It
is however arduous to properly define an oscillation. Thus we wanted to analyze the AXA
patterns present in our mobile sessions in order to possibly identify some characteristics
that are distinctive and could help us distinguish oscillations from movement in the case
of mobility sessions.
As seen in the literature, several researchers have considered as oscillations also the
cases in which more than two distinct base stations are involved [wu2014oscillation]
[rodriguez2018detecting].
In our case however, we have decided to consider as possible oscillation only the case
in which no more than two distinct cell towers are involved, the main associated base
station A and the possible faulty base station generically identified as X. Moreover, we
assumed that a subset of mobile sessions that has at least three consecutive distinct base
stations is indeed a movement. For example ABC = {(bsa, tα), (bsb, tβ), (bsc, tγ))} where
tα < tβ < tγ and a̸=b̸=c
For the rest of the paper we will indicate with A the non-faulty base station and
with X the faulty one.
For each mobile session we extracted all the AXA patterns as follows: Let M =
{l0, l1, .., ln} be a mobility session of n logs l, where each log is composed by a timestamp
and the coordinate of a base station.
We consider the first log l0 in the session and compare the base station bsl0’s coordinates
with the successive log’s base station, in this case bsl1. If bsl0 ̸= bsl1 we save l0 and l1
as possible AXA pattern and we continue by considering the successive log, l2. Now we
can have two cases:
(1) if bsl0 = bsl2 and bsl1 ̸= bsl2 then we have an AXA pattern with A = bsl0 = bsl2 and
X = bsl1 and we restart the algorithm from l1.
(2) if bsl0 ̸= bsl2 and bsl1 ̸= bsl2 we stop considering l0 as a possible AXA starting point,
because we find a sequence of three distinct base station, which we assumed are move-
ment, thus we decided to not consider them. We restart the algorithm from l1
(3) if bsl0 ̸= bsl2 and bsl1 = bsl2 we keep this pattern and continue to check weather or
not the l3 has a base station equal to the bsl0, thus considering again the (1) and (2)
step without restarting the iteration, but keep considering bsl0 as initial base station in
the possible AXA pattern.
For example, let indicate with A,B,C,D four distinct base stations and let S={A,B,C,B,D}
be a mobile session of 5 logs identified, for the purpose of the example, only by base
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Introduction to the AXA patterns
39
stations.
The first step is considering the log A as a possible starting point of an AXA pattern.
We then examine each of the subsequent logs of the session, starting, in this case, with
B. To be considered as an AXA pattern, the third element of the sequence has to be
either A or B again. In case of it being A, we have one AXA pattern, which is saved, and
the process starts again from the log following the first A (in the case of our example
B). Otherwise if the third log is equal to B, the following element needs to be inspected
until we either keep finding logs equal to B or the log is equal to A.
In the case of our example, the third element in the session is not equal either to A or to
B. Therefore the sequence is discarded and the algorithm restarts from the second log
in the sequence (B).
In this case we have an AXA pattern identified by BCB since there is a log between
two equally identified base station B, that has a different base station (C). The BCB
sequence will be saved as AXA pattern and the algorithm will restart from the third log
of the sequence in this case C. This process continues for the entire length of the session
considered.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Problem and Solution
4.5
AXA pattern analysis
Once we extracted all the AXA patterns present in our mobile sessions, we examined
the duration, the radius of gyration and the average instance speed as we previously did
in Section 4.3
4.5.1
Duration AXA patterns
Figure 4.6: The CDF of the duration in seconds of all the AXA patterns.
If we consider an AXA pattern P = {(bsa, ti), (bsx, tξ), (bsa, tj)} its duration is ∆t =
|tj −ti|. We computed the duration of all the found AXA patterns as the difference
between the first and last timestamp in the sequence. Subsequently we plot the CDF
values. The figure 4.6 shows the CDF’s values on the y axis and the AXA patterns’
duration expressed in seconds on the x axis. As we can see 90% of the patterns have a
duration of less than 2000 seconds (33 minutes). We expect that longer trips correspond
to actual movements, but shorter trips, such as less than 20 minutes, from A to X and
back might be noise, thus an oscillation.
4.5.2
Radius of Gyration of AXA patterns
The second aspect of AXA patterns that we investigated is the value of the Radius
of Gyration(ROG), which we already discussed in section 4.2. The ROG value gives
us insight on the the distance that a user travelled in ∆t = |tj −ti|. What could be
==PAGE:51==
4.5 AXA pattern analysis
41
expected is that the ROG value for AXA patterns would be low since as mentioned
before we only considered two base stations in our analysis, A and X. From the spatial
characterization of the base stations done for the mobile sessions we have observed that
most of the stations were in dense areas with a small coverage.
We wanted therefore to compare the GPS trace corresponding to the moment the AXA
pattern was detected. To find the corresponding GPS traces, we have considered each
user’s AXA pattern and relative GPS mobile session of each user. To avoid possible
misinterpretations of the data, it is important to keep in mind that it was possible to
uniquely identify the sessions of each user. This means that the GPS trace of one user
could not have been erroneously linked to another user’ mobile session.
In order to correctly identify the right GPS session to the corresponding CDR, we
checked the timestamps of the first and of the last log of the AXA pattern. Since the
CDR is sparse in time, we decided to consider the initial time of the sequence as a
moment 15 minutes before the actual recorded timestamp. Similarly, the final time of
the sequence considered is a moment 15 minutes after the last recorded timestamp of
the AXA pattern. This means that the corresponding GPS trace will be 30 minutes
longer in time than the AXA pattern, while still respecting the bounds of the session. If
the full GPS data was not available for the 15 minutes before or after the beginning of
the AXA pattern, we considered only the data available. Thus, not all the GPS sessions
considered are 30 minutes longer than the AXA ones. From now on, we will call the
GPS traces corresponding the AXA patterns GPS patterns.
Once we determined the GPS patterns, we computed the Radius of Gyration of these
traces. We then computed the CDFs of both the GPS patterns and the AXA patterns
and plotted them together in Figure 4.8.
As expected from the spatial characterization analysis on the mobile station base
stations, 90% of the AXA patterns’ ROGs are less than 3km. From the data in the
graph, we can assume that the initial 48% of AXA patterns were not actual movement
of the user. This is because the GPS pattern shown for this data, shows that the ROG
was 0, meaning that the user did not move from the centroid.
4.5.3
Average Instance Speed of AXA patterns
In this subsection we will talk about the analysis we performed on the Average Instance
Speed of AXA patterns. The reason why this information may be relevant for our re-
search is that we wanted to check and see if the data regarding this could help identify
whether a user was actually moving or if the movement recorded was actually just noise.
We expected to perform this analysis by comparing the average instance speed of the
AXA patterns with that of the GPS patterns.
In the graph, on the x axis is represented the average instance speed of AXA patterns,
expressed in km/h, and on the y axis the CDFs of both CDR and GPS patterns.
As it can be seen, 50% of the CDR AXA patterns show an average instance speed
above 400km/h.
The fastest mode of public transportation are trains (without con-
sidering planes), and the fastest train operating travels at a max speed of 431 km/h
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Problem and Solution
Figure 4.7: The CDFs of the Radius of Gyration of all the AXA patterns and their
corresponding GPS patterns.
[drescher2018]. This means that 50% of the observations show an average instance
speed which is simply not plausible with standard modes of transportation.
There is a significant difference in the CDF of AXA and GPS patterns. This difference
could be given by the fact that the sequences of GPS patterns have more detailed infor-
mation in smaller space-time intervals than the ones of AXA patterns. This is due to
the intrinsic characteristics of both data types.
4.5.4
Spatial characterization of base stations in AXA
patterns
In this section of the research, we performed an analysis of the spatial characteristics of
the AXA patterns. We previously showed our analysis of the base station characteristics
for all the CDR mobile sessions in Section 4.3.4, showing the results using the 10-est
nearest neighbour distance method and the Voronoi Perimeter method.
We used the exact same methods for this part of the analysis but concentrated uniquely
on the AXA patterns. We took all the found AXA patterns, and we considered the
faulty base stations.
We decided to analyze only the faulty base stations in every AXA pattern, since, if the
pattern is an oscillation, the faulty base stations identify the noisy logs in the user’s
movements.
Let P = {(bsa, ti), (bsx, tξ), (bsa, tj)} be an AXA pattern we consider only the base station
==PAGE:53==
4.5 AXA pattern analysis
43
Figure 4.8: CDFs comparison of the Average Instance Speed of all the AXA patterns
with their corresponding GPS patterns.
bsx for our following analysis of Voronoi and 10-est nearest neighbour distance. If we
have more instances of the same base station inside an AXA pattern, we considered it
only once.
Additionally if there were other patterns that had X as a faulty base station, they were
still considered only once in the analysis.
For example if P1 = {(bsa, ti), (bsx, tξ0), (bsx, tξ1), (bsx, tξ2), (bsa, tj)} we consider only one
time the bsx even if there are three logs/occurrences of it.
It is important to understand the process of attribution of the 10-est nearest neigh-
bours to the bins. Firstly, we computed for all the faulty base stations their 10-est
nearest neighbour as explained in Section 4.3.4. Then we ordered this distances from
the smallest to the largest. Once the neighbours were ordered, we divided them in bins
of sizes of 0.5km. This means that for example, the 10-est nearest neighbour with dis-
tance 0.8km is attributed to the bin equal to 1km, as its distance is bigger than 0.5km
but lesser than 1km.
From the graph, we observed that more than 80% of the base stations have the 10-est
neighbour at a distance less than 2.5km, they must be in dense metropolitan areas. In
Figure 4.4 above, which showed all the base stations considered in the CDR sessions,
40% of the stations’ 10-est neighbours were at a distance of less than 5km. From the
two figures we were able to assume that a large part of the AXA patterns are therefore
very close to each others, thus probably in a highly dense metropolitan areas.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Problem and Solution
Figure 4.9: Bins of 0.5 km size of the 10est nearest neighbour distances of the faulty
base stations in the AXA patterns.
Considering the same faulty base stations we used in the 10-est neighbour method
analysis, we now analyze the Voronoi perimeter.
Figure 4.10: Bins of 1 km size of the Voronoi cells perimeter of the faulty base stations
in the AXA patterns.
We can see in Figure 4.10 the values of the Voronoi perimeters of all the faulty base
stations in the AXA patterns. Similarly to the 10-est nearest distance neighbour, we
assigned the perimeter values to bins of size of 1 km. As expected from the values found
for the 10-est nearest distance neighbour, approximately 60% of the cellular towers have
a perimeter of less than 4 kilometers.
It is to be noticed that the Voronoi cells are only an approximation of the actual cells
and in reality, most of all in dense areas, the cellular tower coverage areas are signifi-
cantly overlapping. This would explain why 70% of the stations have the 10-est nearest
==PAGE:55==
4.6 Labelling AXA patterns using GPS
45
neighbour at a distance of less than 1.5 km, but the perimeter of 60% of these stations
is less than 4 km.
4.5.5
Temporal characterization of AXA patterns
Following the temporal characterization of the sessions previously presented in Section
4.3.3, we now present the same characterization for the AXA patterns. Similarly to
the previous analysis, the AXA patterns were placed in temporal bins representing 1
hour temporal windows. The method of attribution of the AXA pattern follows the
same criteria of the temporal characterization of the mobile sessions explained above in
Section 4.3.3.
Figure 4.11: Temporal characterization of the AXA patterns divided in an hour long
bins.
On the x axis of the graph are represented the temporal bins in which the AXA pat-
terns are attributed. The y axis presents the percentage of instances of patterns present
in a certain temporal bin. The AXA patterns detected are similarly distributed along
the 24 hours, with the exception of the hours between 22 and 5 AM. In particular from
2AM until 4AM included there were no instances of AXA patterns observed. Similarly
to what was observed in the analysis in section 4.3.3, there are however some clearly
identifiable peaks. In particular, about 24% of all AXA patterns were between 16 and
18, which, as we mentioned before, may be considered as rush hours.
4.6
Labelling AXA patterns using GPS
In this section we will explain the process followed in the tackling of the research question.
In particular we will explain the approach followed to try and determine whether an AXA
pattern is actual movement or if it is just noise.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Problem and Solution
To do so, we started by dividing our data. We first started by considering only 70%
of the total mobile sessions, which were randomly selected. The identified 70% was
used in our research as a training set for our models. The remaining 30% of the data
were instead used for the validation process of our approaches. In the validation section
(Section 4.13), we calculated the accuracy of each probabilistic approach to get and idea
of its validity. While not strictly necessary, we also decided to calculate the accuracy on
the training data set. Since the approaches created were data driven and were designed
starting from the 70% of the data, the accuracy of the training sets may show a better
performance than in the validation set. The aim of calculating both accuracies was
however to compare the results of the training set and of the validation set.
Starting from the 70% of the total data, we determined the AXA patterns in the
session using the methods explained in Section 4.4. Subsequently, for the AXA patterns
determined we also extracted the respective GPS patterns, following the methods in
Section 4.5.2. The GPS patterns were then used as ground-truth in our processes.
Our ultimate goal was to determine whether the user has actually been in the area
covered by base station X, and not only in the area of station A. If the user had at any
point been in the vicinity of X, we assumed that the user has actually made a movement
towards the faulty base station.
In order to check whether the user has actually been in the vicinity of X, we needed to
check the GPS pattern of each AXA pattern.
Our idea was to consider the centroid for each of the GPS pattern and evaluate if
the centroid location was closer to the faulty base station or to the non faulty one in the
corresponding AXA pattern. If the first case is true, we assumed that the user was in
the vicinity of X, the faulty base station, thus labelling the AXA pattern as movement.
On the other hand, if the distance between the centroid and the non-faulty base sta-
tion, A, was smaller than the one between centroid and X, we assumed that the user
was only moving in the A coverage area, and the logs identified by X base station are
due to noise. Let AXA = {(bsa, ti), (bsx, ti+1), (bsa, ti+2)} be an AXA pattern and G
= {(p1, tj), (p2, tj+1), , ...(pn, tn)} be the corresponding GPS pattern, where tj<ti and
ti+2<tn. If Pc is the position of the centroid of G, we compute (1) ∆Pca = d(bsa, Pc)
(2) ∆Pcx = d(bsx, Pc) where d(·, ·) indicates a distance measure which considers location
coordinates. If ∆Pcx > ∆Pca then AXA is considered a movement, otherwise it is labeled
as noise.
In the Figures 4.12 and 4.13 we represented two distinct AXA patterns and corre-
sponding GPS pattern trace. We drew the GPS trace in green, and the base stations of
the AXA pattern in red. The red dot labelled as X is the possible faulty base station
present in the AXA pattern. Moreover, the black triangle labeled as c is the location of
the GPS pattern’ centroid. In the Figure 4.12 the GPS trace indicates that the subject
travelled from A to X. The centroid C is positioned almost in the middle, more towards
X, thus this AXA pattern is considered as movement by the algorithm described above.
On the other hand, the Figure 4.13 shows a user moving around the A station, pre-
sumably in A’s coverage area. However, the CDR registered a connection to X’s base
station, leading to a noisy pattern due to oscillation phenomenon. Applying the method
described above, we can see that the GPS centroid in the Figure 4.13 is closer to A’s
==PAGE:57==
4.7 Creating a Spatial Probabilistic Approach
47
base station, thus labelling this AXA pattern as noise.
Figure 4.12: AXA pattern labelled as movement.
Figure 4.13: AXA pattern labelled as oscillation.
4.7
Creating a Spatial Probabilistic Approach
In this section, our aim is to further investigate the AXA patterns. For these purposes,
we analyse the selected 70% of the AXA patterns by keeping in consideration their la-
bels, which were attributed using the GPS data. The explanation on how the data was
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Problem and Solution
labeled is in Section 4.6 .
The ultimate goal of this process was to compute the probabilities that an AXA pattern
is either noise or movement. The idea behind the process is that, by creating a prob-
abilistic approach, we would be able to distinguish true movement from noise without
using the GPS patterns.
In order to compute these probabilities, we utilized three methods that have been pre-
sented in previous sections: the 10-est nearest neighbour and Voronoi perimeters (pre-
sented in Section 4.5.4), and Temporal Characterization(presented in Section 4.5.5).
In this section, we will disclose the results of our analysis and the found probabilistic
approach, and in the next section we are going to apply our findings to the data to
further observe the results.
4.7.1
10-est nearest neighbour
To try and test whether it is possible to distinguish actual movement from noise, we
again used the 10-est nearest neighbour distance method. In the case of the picture
4.14, we considered all the AXA patterns that were labelled as movement or as noise by
using the GPS data. We then computed all the 10-est nearest neighbour distance of the
faulty base stations in the AXA patterns, in order to compare the percentage of both
movement and noise at different distances.
On the x axis are represented the distance bins in which the 10-est distance neigh-
bours are placed. On the y axis is represented the percentage of AXA patterns which
are labelled as movement or as noise relative to the number of AXA patterns in a bin.
For example, if the number of AXA patterns in the 1km bin were ten, of this ten 4
would be labelled as noise, the probability of an AXA pattern being noise if the faulty
base station has the 10-est nearest neighbour distance from 0.5 to 1km would be of 0.4.
In the graph, the distance bins go up to 8km. Any distance higher than 8km is bundled
in the 100km bin.
In the distance bins between 0.5km and 2.5km there is no clear distinction between
noise and movement, as they are approximately split 50/50. Some bins instead show
significant presence of noise, in particular in the distances between 7km and 8km.
We consider the probability of an event being noise, the percentage of instances of AXA
patterns recognized as noise in a certain bin. For example, the probability of an AXA
pattern in the 0,5km bin being noisy is 0,75. It becomes important to state, however,
that this analysis only provided a starting point.
It allowed us to assume that the
probabilistic method would not provide a clear cut solution by using just these values.
We therefore considered additional data provided by the Voronoi parameters and the
Temporal characterizations.
==PAGE:59==
4.7 Creating a Spatial Probabilistic Approach
49
Figure 4.14: Percentage 10est nearest neighbor distance of movement and noisy pat-
terns.
4.7.2
Voronoi Perimeter
The next part of our process to determine a probabilistic approach regards the analysis
of data about the Voronoi cells perimeters.
In the Figure 4.15, on the x axis are represented the Voronoi cells perimeter bins, ex-
pressed in kilometers. Each of the considered AXA patterns is placed in one of this bins.
On the y axis is represented the percentage of AXA patterns placed in a determined bin
that were identified as either movement or noise. It is important to again state that for
the calculation of these perimeters, the faulty base stations were considered.
As it can be observed from the graph in Figure 4.15, approximately 90% of the AXA
patterns faulty base stations with value assigned to the 1km perimeter bin were labelled
as noise using the GPS method exposed in Section 4.6. The same observation is true
for the patterns in the 8km bin. The values in the 2km, 3km, 5km, 7km, and 100km
(which contains all patterns with a perimeter bigger than 8km) are approximately split
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Problem and Solution
Figure 4.15: Percentage Voronoi perimeter of movement and noisy patterns.
50/50 between movement and noise.The values for bins 4km and 6km instead show that
approximately 20% of the patterns were labelled as noise.
Similarly to what was expressed in the previous section, we considered these percent-
ages to derive the probabilities that observations not checked with the GPS method are
either movement or noise. This consideration is fundamental for the understanding of
the probabilistic approach devised.
4.7.3
Temporal characterization
This section is dedicated to the process of determining the probability that an AXA
pattern occurring in a determined time of the day is either noise or movement.
The reason for this analysis is that, as it was observed in Sections 4.3.3 and 4.5.5, in
some temporal bins a larger number of AXA patterns was observed (16-18). We wanted
to check therefore if during so-called ”rush hours” the distribution of patterns showing
actual movements or noise would be affected. We then decided to plot the distribution
==PAGE:61==
4.7 Creating a Spatial Probabilistic Approach
51
of noise and movement AXA patterns during the day to the derive the probabilities.
Figure 4.16: Percentage temporal characterization of movement and noisy patterns.
The x axis of the graph in Figure 4.16 presents the temporal bins to which the
selected AXA patterns were attributed. Similarly to the two previous sections, in the y
axis are represented the percentages of observation of movement and noise in the AXA
patterns.
As it is observable in the graph, all the observations are split approximately in a 50/50
manner. This observation does not rely any useful information in the determination of
a probabilistic approach based on the distribution of actual movement and noise. For
this reason, it was not considered in the final probabilistic model created.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Problem and Solution
4.7.4
Implementation of the Spatial Characterization
probabilistic approach
The first attempt at detection of AXA patterns’ noise or movement was done using the
probabilities determined in Sections 4.7.1 and 4.7.2. As mentioned before, the temporal
characterization probabilities did not introduce a defined distinction between noisy or
true movements patterns,thus we decided to not employ them.
Moreover, as stated
before, we applied the methods both on the training set and validation set respectively,
with the intent to assess the different accuracy and precision of each approach.
The spatial probability approach makes use of only the 10-est Nearest Neighbour
Distance and Voronoi cells perimeter aspects of the AXA patterns’ faulty base stations.
With the methods already explained in Sections 4.7.1 and 4.7.2, we looped through all
the AXA patterns and computed the values of 10-est Nearest Neighbour Distance and
Voronoi perimeter of X.
Successively, we approximated all the Voronoi perimeter values to the corresponding
bins, keeping the same range, from 1 to 8 kilometers, and same step size of 1 kilometer,
as in Figure 4.15. Similarly for the the 10-est Nearest Neighbour distances, we assigned
each value to the corresponding 0.5 kilometers bins as in Figure 4.14, keeping the range
from 0.5 to 8.0 kilometers. Moreover, for both Voronoi perimeters and 10-est Neighbour
Distances, all the values above 8 kilometers were assigned the symbolic value of 100 km.
In order to label an AXA pattern noise or movement without the help of the GPS
data, we checked the spatial characterization probabilities of its faulty base station X.
This means that we considered the X’s Voronoi perimeter and 10-est Nearest Neighbour
Distance bins and found the matching ones in the probability figures 4.15 and 4.14. The
way the probabilities were computed is explained more in depth in Sections 4.7.1 and
4.7.2.
For example if an AXA pattern has the faulty base station X with Voronoi perimeter
V = 1km and 10th nearest neighbour distance K = 0.5km , we take the probabilities
shown in Figures 4.14 and 4.15 of the corresponding bins.
Thus, we can express the probability of the pattern being a movement if the Voronoi
perimeter is equal to 1 as P(V=1|M) where M indicates movement. In the same way
we can express the probability of it being noise as P(V=1|N), where N indicates noisy
pattern. Looking at the probability values for the Voronoi perimeters we can say that
P(V=1|M) = 0.1 and P(V=1|N) = 0.9. Similarly we can express the probability based on
the value of the 10th nearest neighbour distance. P(K=0.5|M)= 0.22 and P(K=0.5|N)=
0.78 , meaning that for K = 0.5 the AXA probability of being a movement is equal to
0.22 and of it being noise is 0.78.
Once we found the correspondent probability values of the considered faulty base station
spatial characterization bins, we multiplied together the probabilities of movement com-
ing from the 10-est nearest neighbor distance values and the Voronoi perimeters values.
Similarly, we multiplied the noise probabilities coming from the 10-est nearest neighbor
distance values and the Voronoi perimeters value. The multiplication was done as the
events are independent, therefore their combined probability is equal to the multiplica-
==PAGE:63==
4.8 Creating a Duration Based probabilistic approach
53
tion of their probabilities.
We then compared the values of the combined probabilities of the pattern being move-
ment, and of the pattern being noise. If the probability of it being movement was higher
than that of it being noise, we labelled the AXA pattern as movement. If the opposite
was true, we labelled the pattern as noise.
Considering the example above, we now consider a pattern with a faulty base station
in the 1km Voronoi perimeter bins, and with the 10-est nearest neighbour distance in
the 0.5 km bin.
The probability of this pattern being movement using this data is
P(V=1|M)*P(K=0.5|M)= 0,1*0,22 = 0,022.
We then perform the same calculations but regarding the probability of the event being
noise. P(V=1|N)*P(K=0.5|N)= 0,78*0,9 = 0,702. Since the probability of the event
being noise is higher than the probability of the event being movement, an AXA pattern
falling in these bins will automatically be labelled as noise.
We performed the labelling process using this probabilistic approach. Once we assigned
labels to all the AXA patterns, we checked the level of accuracy of the method by using
the GPS data as ground truth. We checked if the predictions of the model were coherent
with the GPS assigned labels as described in Section 4.6. We calculated an accuracy of
0,6399, computed by sum of true positives and true negatives, divided by the number
of patterns considered.
The true positives are all the AXA patterns labelled by both the GPS and the proba-
bilistic approach as noise. The true negatives are the AXA patterns labelled as noise by
the GPS but as movement by the probabilistic approach.
It is to be remembered that this accuracy value is calculated on the training set from
which we computed the probabilities for the approach, therefore it might be biased. In
the validation Section 4.13 we will discuss the results of this and the following proba-
bilistic approaches on the validation set.
4.8
Creating a Duration Based probabilistic
approach
As explained in Section 4.4, we extracted AXA patterns from the session by keeping
only from the last occurrence of bsa before the faulty base station bsx to the first new re-
occurrence of bsa after the faulty base station logs. Thus for example an AXA patterns
can have the following structure p= {(bsa, t0), (bsx, t1), (bsx, t2), (bsa, t3)} and if the log
before (bsa, t0) had the same base station bsa we decided not to consider it.
However, we wanted to examine if the user before the AXA pattern had spent time in
bsa. To do so we applied a new extraction algorithm to all the mobile sessions that saved
all the logs before the first appearance of bsx if these logs were identifying by the same
non-faulty base station bsa.
Thus, let M = {(bsa, t0), (bsa, t1), (bsa, t2), (bsx, t3), (bsx, t4), (bsa, t5), (bsa, t6)...} be a mo-
bile session and bsa ̸= bsx. The new algorithm will save all the occurrence of bsa before
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Problem and Solution
detecting the first log at timestamp t3 which is identified by different base station. This
implies that the now extracted AXA pattern can be seen as
p= {(bsa, t0), (bsa, t1), (bsa, t2), (bsx, t3), (bsx, t4), (bsa, t5)}.
The AXA pattern extraction algorithm follows the same steps as described in 4.4, with
the only difference that more information regarding the user’s previous movements is
available. If there are no logs before the first faulty one, with bsa as base station, no
occurrences are saved, thus the extracted AXA pattern will be the same as the one
extracted with the previous algorithm explained in Section 4.4.
From now on, this specific type of AXA pattern will be referred to as Extended AXA
pattern.
One thing to keep into consideration is that no logs after the first re-occurrence of the
non-faulty base station are taken under consideration by the algorithm.
These new extended AXA patterns were utilized to employ an additional probabilistic
approach that focuses on the duration of the user’s movement in the A’s base station
coverage area in contrast to X’s one.
The idea behind this method is based on the assumption that if the subject was just
moving in A’s coverage area, the duration of his movement in X should be brief, since
it is just caused by a noisy phenomenon. On the other hand, if an extensive amount of
time has passed before the user was detected back to A’s station, we assumed that the
user was actually close to X’s cellular tower.
Thus, we wanted to examine if the duration spent in A’s area compared to the one spent
in X’s area could give us a point of reference to distinguish movement from noise in the
AXA patterns.
The duration spent in A is calculated by computing the difference of the timestamps
between the first occurrence of X and the first log in the AXA pattern, thus from the
example above ∆ta = t3 −t0. Similarly, the duration spent in X’s area is computed
considering the difference between the last timestamp in the pattern and the first occur-
rence of X, ∆tx = t5 −t3.
We took all the values and we calculated the ratio between the time spent in A (∆ta)
with the time spent in X (∆tx). If the resulting value is bigger than 1, the subject has
spent more time in A than in X. Once we measured all these ratios, we attributed them
to bins. Each bin is separated from the subsequent one by a value of 0.5.
In Figure 4.17, on the x axis are represented the aforementioned bins to which the ratios
are attributed. In a similar way to other figures discussed in this research paper, on
the y axis is represented the percentage of AXA patterns recognized as movement or as
noise.
As we can see in the Figure 4.17 the division of probability of movement and noise is
not distinctive. Most of the bins have a balanced percentage, the noise ranges between
40% and 60%, except for the 7.0 and 5.0 bin, which are lower than 40%, and the 6.5 bin
which is higher than 60%.
We can assume from these probabilities that employing them for a probabilistic approach
would not give exhaustive results.
==PAGE:65==
4.8 Creating a Duration Based probabilistic approach
55
Figure 4.17: Percentage duration ratio of movement and noisy AXA patterns.
4.8.1
Implementing the Duration Based probabilistic
approach
In this section, we are going to present another probabilistic approach, developed in a
similar way to the approach based on the spatial characterization presented in Section
4.7.
While the approach to the development was similar, the AXA patterns were extracted
differently. As described in the previous subsection, the AXA patterns employed for
this probabilistic approach contain all the logs that preceded the faulty base station, as
long as they are relative to the A station.
In this case, rather than computing the spatial characterization parameters we only mea-
sured the spent duration in A and in X as described above.
Once we computed for all the AXA patterns their duration relative to A’s logs and their
duration relative to X’s logs, we calculated the ratio of A over X and assigned them to
the correct bin.
Successively, we checked each AXA pattern ratio bin value to find the related probability
value of movement and noise. For example, if the duration ratio of an AXA pattern is
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Problem and Solution
equal to 6.5, we have a probability of it being a movement equal to 0,68, thus it will be
labelled as movement.
As previously noted, a non satisfactory result was to be expected. The accuracy, com-
puted by dividing the sum of true positive and true negative by the number of AXA
patterns considered, is 0.55. And as said for the previous probabilistic approach, this
accuracy value is computed by applying the model to the training set.
4.9
Creating a Base Station Frequency based
probabilistic approach
We noticed, by looking at the AXA patterns’ faulty base stations, that occurrences of
the same cellular tower coordinates appeared in various patterns. Thus, we wanted to
investigate if the noisy patterns were related to the faulty base stations or not.
We therefore analyzed the number of times each base station was indeed the faulty one
in the AXA patterns, and the pattern was labelled as noise by the GPS, as described
previously in Section 4.6.
For example, if the base station Y appeared in 10 AXA patterns as the faulty base
station, and 8 of them were labelled as noise by the GPS ground-truth, then we have
0.8 of probability that an AXA pattern with Y as faulty base station is noise.
In Table 4.1 are represented some of the probability values found with the method
exposed above. In the first column we have the Station ID, which is a label assigned by
us to distinguish between all the cellular tower coordinates faster and easier.
The second column represents the probability values of the station appearing in noisy
patterns. The third column the probability values of the station appearing in movement
patterns.
Once computed the probability of each faulty base station in the matter just described,
we employed a probabilistic approach similarly to the previously described ones.
For each faulty base station in the AXA patterns we checked the probability value of it
being either a movement or a noise and labeled the AXA pattern consequently.
For example if an AXA pattern has the faulty base station equal to C0 we labelled the
pattern as movement since the probability value is 0.83. However, if the faulty base
station of an AXA pattern is Z5 we identified the pattern as noise since the probability
of it being noisy is 0.91.
We will discuss the model results in Chapter 4.13
4.10
Recursive look-ahead filter
The Recursive Look-Ahead-Filter (LAF) has been utilized in the past by other re-
searchers [katsikouli2019characterizing; horn2014detecting]. It introduces a speed
threshold, which should help detect movements that would be not physically possible,
==PAGE:67==
4.10 Recursive look-ahead filter
57
Table 4.1: Probability example for the base station frequency approach.
Station ID
Probability Noise
Probability Movement
O5
0,056478405
0,943521595
C0
0,163461538
0,836538462
Y5
0,846153846
0,153846154
Z5
0,913043478
0,086956522
removing the noisy oscillations.
Each consecutive log instance speed is examined, if this speed is higher than the prede-
fined limit, the look-ahead filter investigates further to understand which of these two
logs should be removed. To decide, the algorithm considers the following mobile session
step in the sequence, and compares the distances with the previous two logs. The log
with base station further away from the third log gets removed from the mobile session.
Algorithm 1 Recursive LAF
bs0, bs1..bsn the coordinates of the base stations
t0, t1, ..tn timestamps of the logs
t0 < t1 < .. < tn
M={(bs0, t0), (bs1, t1), ..., (bsn, tn)} mobile sessions of n logs
Tspeed the defined threshold speed.
for i=0 to n do
if i > 0 AND i ≤n −1 then
d = distance(bsi, bsi−1)
∆t = |ti−1 −ti|
speed = d
t
if speed > Tspeed then
d1 = distance(bsi+1, bsi)
d2 = distance(bsi+1, bsi−1)
if d1 > d2 then
M = M - (bsi, ti) Remove (bsi, ti) from M
else
M = M - (bsi−1, ti−1) Remove (bsi−1, ti−1) from M
end if
end if
end if
end for
Return M
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Problem and Solution
This algorithm considers three consecutive logs for each loop. For example, let Ms
= (bsa, ta), (bsb, tb), (bsc, tc) be a subset of the mobile session. The algorithm computes
the speed between the first two logs s = distance(bsa,bsb)
|ti−1−ti|
. If this instance speed (s) results
higher than our predefined threshold (Tspeed), the third log (bsc, tc) is considered. The
distances of the first two logs with the third get computed, thus d1 = distance(bsa, bsc)
and d2 = distance(bsb, bsc). The log with higher distance with the third base station
gets removed from the mobile session. Thus if d1 > d2 the log (bsa, ta) gets removed
from the mobile session.
We applied the recursive look-ahead filter to our mobile sessions with thresholds of 100
km/h, 200km/h and 300 km/h.
Successively, we extracted the AXA patterns, as described in Section 4.4, from the
new filtered mobile sessions to see if the LAF actually removed some oscillations. The
number of AXA patterns found is outlined in the Table 4.2 for each of the utilized
threshold values. We can see that the percentage of movement and noisy patterns does
not improve. It is to be noticed that the values in the Table 4.2 represent the results of
the LAF applied on the training set, thus on the 70% of the data.
Table 4.2: LAF thresholds values and AXA patterns comparison on the training set.
Threshold
N° of AXA patterns
% of movement
% of Noise
Initial values
2007
49,8754
50,1245
100 km/h
961
49,0114
50,9885
200 km/h
1555
49,9678
50,0321
300 km/h
1720
50,1744
49,8255
Moreover, we extracted the relative GPS patterns of these new found AXA patterns
to then employ our GPS labelling technique, explained in Section 4.6. By doing so, we
were able to count the number of found AXA patterns that should be considered as
noise and the number of patterns that should be considered as movement by the GPS.
Moreover, in the table we added the number of newly found AXA movements labelled
as movement or as noise by the GPS based on the threshold. What can be seen from
the table is that the number of movement patterns and noise patterns are nearly split
50/50.
It is important to make some considerations regarding the AXA patterns shown in Table
4.2. The patterns that were found after the application of the filter could be different
from the patterns that were originally found. If for example in the mobile session we have
a session ABCA, before the application of the filter this would not have been identified
as an AXA pattern. Applying the filter however, C or B may be removed, leaving ABA,
which would recognized as an AXA pattern that was not identified in the earlier analysis.
==PAGE:69==
4.11 Combining probabilistic approaches
59
4.11
Combining probabilistic approaches
After determining the different probabilistic approaches, we then wanted to check if
by combining the different approaches we would obtain more accurate results.
It is
important to notice that all the following results refer to the methods applied to the
training sets. In Section 4.13 we will show the results with respect to the validation set.
4.11.1
Combining the LAF with the Spatial
Characterization probabilistic approach
The first combination of approaches was done by applying a Look Ahead Filter to cleanse
the sessions, and then applying the spatial characterization probabilistic approach.
The intent of this method was to assess the accuracy of the spatial probabilistic approach
if the LAF was applied before the analysis or not. In order to perform this comparison,
the LAF was applied to the data with three different thresholds: 100km/h, 200 km/h,
and 300 km/h.
The first step was therefore to apply the LAF to the mobile sessions, and then extract the
AXA patterns from these ”cleaned” sessions. This was done using the method explained
in Section 4.4.
The following step consisted in calculating with the GPS patterns whether an AXA
pattern was movement or noise. The technique used for this calculations is identical to
the one presented in Section 4.6. Subsequently both the Voronoi Perimeters and the
10-est nearest neighbour distances were calculated of the just extracted AXA patterns,
using the method illustrated in Section4.7.
Once the calculations were done, we labelled the AXA patterns as noise or movement
with the same approach described in Section 4.7 utilizing the probabilities extracted
from the values shown in Figures 4.15 4.14. After completing this process, we computed
the accuracy values with the different LAF thresholds applied, utilizing the GPS labels
as ground-truth.
In Table 4.3, these results are shown. As it can be seen, the level of accuracy is very
similar for every threshold, meaning that the threshold does not affect the accuracy of
the method. The Spatial Characterization, without the LAF filter was however lower,
with these values: accuracy equal to 0,639940239, precision 0,724683544, and recall
0,454816286.
4.11.2
Combining the LAF with Duration Based
probabilistic approach
In this section of the paper, we continue the process of combining different approaches.
In this case, we will combine the usage of Look Ahead Filters with the Duration Based
probabilistic approach introduced in Section 4.8.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Problem and Solution
Table 4.3: LAF plus Spatial Characterization accuracy, precision and recall.
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
Spatial Characterization
0.639940239
0,724683544
0,454816286
LAF 100 + Spatial
0,681582
0,778788
0,52449
LAF 200 + Spatial
0,680386
0,81153
0,470437
LAF 300 + Spatial
0,676163
0,819149
0,449242
Similarly to the process employed in Section 4.11.1, we applied the LAFs with the three
thresholds expressed before, and then extracted the AXA patterns from the filtered mo-
bile sessions. This time, the AXA patterns are the extended AXAs, since they were
extracted with the method explained in Section 4.8.
Once we extracted the AXA patterns, we calculated the duration A and duration X of
the newly found AXA patterns. We define as duration A the duration between the first
timestamp of the AXA pattern and the timestamp of the first occurrence of X in the
pattern. The duration X instead, is the duration between the first timestamp of X and
the last timestamp of the AXA pattern.
As before, we labelled the patterns as movement or noise using the GPS data,in order
to later compute the accuracy of the model.
Once the all the durations were calculated, we computed the ratio of Duration A/Du-
ration X and assigned the values to the corresponding 0.5 sized bin, as explained in
Section 4.8. Lastly, we calculated the probability of each AXA pattern being noise or
movement based on the probabilities extracted previously in Section 4.8. It is to be
noticed that the same probabilities computed from the AXA pattern analysis displayed
in Figure 4.17 were employed.
The results of this probabilistic approach are represented in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: LAF plus Duration Based probabilistic approach accuracy, precision and
recall.
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
Duration Based
0,556076
0,55106383
0,655696203
LAF 100 + Duration Based
0,530697
0,544622
0,485714
LAF 200 + Duration Based
0,525402
0,514925
0,886889
LAF 300 + Duration Based
0,54186
0,536431
0,592765
==PAGE:71==
4.11 Combining probabilistic approaches
61
4.11.3
Combining the LAF with Base Station Frequency
Based probabilistic approach
In this section of the paper we will illustrate how we considered the Look-Ahead filter
together with Base Station Frequency Based probabilistic approach to try to achieve
enhanced results.
Once we acquired and labelled all the AXA patterns, we employed the Base Frequency
method on these newly extracted AXA patterns, as explained in Section 4.9, but without
re-computing the probabilities, thus employing the ones already computed.
We then classified the AXA patterns by checking their corresponding faulty base station
X’s probability of it being a noise or movement.
The results of the accuracy, precision and recall are presented in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: LAF plus Base Station Frequency Based probabilistic approach accuracy,
precision and recall.
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
BS Frequency
0,857072
0,901786
0,802383
LAF 100 + BS Frequency
0,905307
0,923567
0,887755
LAF 200 + BS Frequency
0,8791
0,925072
0,825193
LAF 300 + BS Frequency
0,865116
0,922869
0,795799
4.11.4
Combining the Spatial Characterization
probabilistic approach with the Duration Based
probabilistic approach
In this next subsection, we will highlight how we identified an additional probabilistic
approach which combines the Spatial and the Duration based approaches. In order to
combine these two probabilistic approaches, we first needed to identify the extended
AXA patterns. The reason why we needed the extended AXA patterns, rather than the
standard AXA patterns, is that we needed to calculate for each pattern the ratio of the
duration of A and of X. This process was previously explained in Section 4.8.
The extended AXA patterns were extrapolated from raw mobile sessions, meaning that
no filter was applied before. This means that the AXA patterns that we considered were
the exact same patterns used in Section 4.8.
The extended AXA and the ”normal” AXA are based on the exact same faulty base
stations. The only difference in the two patterns is that extended AXA show additional
information about the logs that directly precede the ”normal” AXA patterns. We em-
ployed the already computed probabilities in Section 4.7 and Section 4.8 to label the
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Problem and Solution
patterns. We followed the same approach explained in Section 4.7, but with the only
difference that the probabilities of an extended AXA pattern being movement or noise
were considered as well. This means that for each AXA pattern we analyzed, we consid-
ered the probability value of it being movement based on the Voronoi perimeter, 10-est
nearest neighbour distance and duration bin computed in the training set. We multi-
plied together these three probabilities to obtain the probability of it being movement.
We computed the probability of it being noise in the same manner, taking the probabili-
ties of it being noise from the Voronoi perimeter, 10-est nearest neighbour distance and
duration bin.
Once the calculations were made, if the resulting probability of a pattern being move-
ment was higher than the probability of it being noise, the AXA pattern was labelled
as movement. Otherwise, the pattern was labelled as noise. In Table 4.6 the accuracy,
precision and recall of this combined approach alongside the singular approaches are
outlined.
The accuracy of the combined method has improved, but the precision is lower than the
Spatial Characterization probability approach alone.
Table 4.6: Combination of Spatial Characterization and Duration Based probabilistic
approach accuracy, precision and recall.
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
Spatial Characterization
0,63994
0,724684
0,454816
Duration Based
0,556077
0,551064
0,655696
Spatial + Duration Based
0,660981
0,649083
0,716456
4.11.4.1
Combining the Spatial Characterization probabilistic
approach with Base Station Frequency Based probabilistic
approach
The probabilistic approach illustrated in this subsection is a combined approach. It
mixes the Spatial Probabilistic Approach with the Frequency Based probabilistic ap-
proach.
The creation of this approach was very similar to the processes used for the other com-
bined approaches. We started from the raw sessions, from which we extracted the AXA
patterns, following the method exposed in Section 4.4. Then, we computed the Voronoi
cells’ perimeters and 10-est nearest neighbour distances of each of the faulty base sta-
tions in the AXA patterns and assigned them a bin. The bins have the same size and
range of the ones in Figure 4.15 and Figure 4.14. This is because we employed the same
probabilities computed in Section 4.7 and Section 4.9.
For each AXA pattern we checked its faulty base station’s Voronoi perimeter and 10-est
==PAGE:73==
4.12 Removing noisy patterns
63
nearest neighbour distance bins, and got the corresponding probability values of it being
movement. Moreover, we checked the Station ID of the faulty base station and search
for the probabilities of it being movement in the list computed in Section 4.9. We then
multiplied together these three probabilities to have the overall probability of the AXA
pattern being a movement. In a similar manner we computed the probability of the
AXA pattern being noise. Lastly we compare these two values, if the value of the AXA
pattern being movement is gather than it being noise we labelled the pattern movement,
noise otherwise.
It is to be noticed, that while applying the method to the training set, all the faulty
base stations will be present in the list computed in Section 4.9, but it is not true for
the validation set. We will discuss our procedure in case of missing information in the
validation section.
In the Table 4.7 the comparison of accuracy, precision, and recall between the three
methods is presented. In this case we achieve similar results to the base station Fre-
quency Based Probabilistic approach alone. This is expected to not be the case in the
validation set, due to the possible lack of data regarding the faulty base station frequency
probabilities.
Table 4.7: Combination of Spatial Characterization and Base Station Frequency Based
probabilistic approach accuracy, precision and recall.
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
BS Frequency
0,857072
0,901786
0,802383
Spatial characterization
0,63994
0,724684
0,454816
Spatial + BS Frequency
0,856574
0,908059
0,794439
4.12
Removing noisy patterns
After applying the different methods, exposed in the sections before, we wanted to re-
move the found noisy patterns. This would have been done to evaluate if the new mobile
sessions were more accurate. In order to do so we applied the same technique to the
raw mobile sessions for every probabilistic approach considered, Spatial Characteriza-
tion (Section 4.7), Duration Based (Section 4.8) and Base Station Frequency (Section
4.9), as well as for all the combination methods described in Section 4.11.
This technique to cleanse the data consists in looping through all the raw mobile sessions
to find the AXA patterns that were labelled as noise by the different probabilistic ap-
proaches. For every noisy AXA pattern we replaced the coordinates of the base station
X in the noisy logs with the ones of the non faulty base station. This means that if
we have an AXA pattern P = {(bsa, t0), (bsx, t1), (bsx, t2), (bsa, t3)} that was labelled as
noise, we replaced the coordinates of bx with bsa keeping the logs in the sequence, thus
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Problem and Solution
resulting in P ′ = {(bsa, t0), (bsa, t1), (bsa, t2), (bsa, t3)}.
After cleansing the data, by replacing the noisy base station logs, we extracted again
the AXA patterns from these new cleansed mobile sessions. Moreover, we applied the
GPS centroid pattern technique, as described in Section 4.6, to examine the number of
the now present noisy AXA patterns.
Replacing the faulty locations with what is assumed to be actual movement is a
method utilized in other studies [katsikouli2019characterizing; qiao2016mobility].
Removing the logs completely would mean deleting occurred events, instead we wanted
to obtain movement trajectories that resemble the GPS ground truth data.
In the Table 4.8 we show the different probabilistic approaches and the found AXA
patterns after cleansing the sessions.
It is important to notice, that the raw method identifies the statistic of AXA patterns
found without applying any filtering techniques to the data.
Furthermore, all these
results are relative to the 70% of the total amount of mobile sessions.
The base station frequency based approach is the one that reduces the most the number
of AXA patterns going from 2007 to 625, thus 69% of removed patterns.
Table 4.8: Number of removed AXA patterns from the mobile sessions in the training
set.
Method
N° AXA pattern
% of movement
% of noise
Raw
2007
49,87544
50,12456
Spatial Characterization
1206
54,72637
45,27363
Duration Based
1083
50,23084
49,76916
BS Frequency
625
66,56
33,44
Spatial + Duration Based
1097
52,14221
47,85779
Spatial + BS Frequency
637
66,09105
33,90895
LAF 100 + Spatial Characterization
1547
51,19586
48,80414
LAF 200 + Spatial Characterization
1372
52,55102
47,44898
LAF 300 + Spatial Characterization
1345
53,30855
46,69145
LAF 100 + Duration Based
1178
50,33956
49,66044
LAF 200 + Duration Based
918
50,65359
49,34641
LAF 300 + Duration Based
862
51,04408
48,95592
LAF 100 + BS Frequency
1191
52,7288
47,2712
LAF 200 + BS Frequency
867
56,63206
43,36794
LAF 300 + BS Frequency
818
58,43521
41,56479
==PAGE:75==
4.13 Validation
65
4.13
Validation
Table 4.9: Accuracy, Precision and Recall of all the methods applied on the validation
set.
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
Spatial Characterization
0,61284
0,68
0,478424
Duration Based
0,515564
0,527646
0,626642
BS Frequency
0,799611
0,796733
0,82364
Spatial + Duration Based
0,596304
0,649746
0,4803
Spatial + BS Frequency
0,807393
0,826511
0,795497
LAF 100 + Spatial
0,6102
0,662222
0,519164
LAF 200 + Spatial
0,619593
0,7
0,464373
LAF 300 + Spatial
0,617991
0,701818
0,440639
LAF 100 + Duration Based
0,457195
0,479751
0,540351
LAF 200 + Duration Based
0,48855
0,504219
0,58867
LAF 300 + Duration Based
0,505841
0,51462
0,60274
LAF 100 + BS Frequency
0,839709
0,817891
0,891986
LAF 200 + BS Frequency
0,848601
0,86
0,845209
LAF 300 + BS Frequency
0,838785
0,853774
0,826484
In this section we will illustrate the validation of our models. As stated previously,
we divided our mobile sessions data into subsets of 70-30% so that we could train the
data on the 70%, and test the models on the remaining 30%, the test set.
To conduct our validation analysis, we extracted the AXA patterns from the 30% sessions
data. We followed the methods described in Section 4.4 for the Spatial Characterization
and the Base Station Frequency probabilistic approach and the combined versions of
these approaches. We utilized the AXA extended extraction method (Section 4.8) to
compute the validation for the Duration Based probabilistic approach and all its combi-
nations outlined in Section 4.11.
We applied each method with the probability computed on the training data.
This
means that no GPS data was utilized in this process.
For the Spatial Characterization probabilistic approach we computed the Voronoi perime-
ters and 10-est nearest neighbour distances of all the faulty base stations present in the
30% AXA patterns’ data. We divided it in equal size, and same range, bins as the ones
utilized in the training set. Then we considered the probabilities computed in Section
4.7 and enforced them on the validation set to label the patterns as movement or noise.
For the Duration Based probabilistic approach we considered the extended version of
the AXA patterns extracted from the validation set. We computed the duration ratio
of each pattern, as explained in Section 4.8 and sorted in bins of same size and range as
the ones employed in the training. We must have the same bin distribution in order to
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Problem and Solution
apply the method onto the test data, since we employed the probabilities estimated in
Section 4.8 and displayed in the Figure 4.17.
For the Base Station Frequency method, we considered only the faulty base stations
present in the patterns. We searched for corresponding values of the faulty base stations
in the list computed in Section 4.9.Moreover, we want to highlight that if, while applying
the Base Station Frequency approach, there were missing faulty base stations related
probabilities, we decided, as convention, to label the pattern as noise.
On the other hand, when computing the combined Spatial Characteristic and Base
Station Frequency approaches together, if in a pattern no information regarding the
probability of noise of its faulty base station was found, we labelled the pattern only in
respect to the spatial characterization probability values.
Moreover, we applied the Look-Ahead Filter on the validation set for the already con-
sidered speed thresholds (100km/h,200km/h and 300km/h). After filtering the sessions
with the LAF with 100km/h limit, 479 fewer AXA patterns were detected. For the
threshold equal to 200km/h, instead, only 242 less than the original value and lastly for
the 300km/h speed only 172 fewer than the original value of 1028. This was expected,
due to the application of the LAF. Moreover, we classified as movement or as noise the
newly found AXA patterns with the GPS method outlined in Section 4.6, to see the
percentage in the cleansed sessions. The Table 4.10 displays the results. The values are
similar to the ones measured on the training set summarized in Table 4.2
Table 4.10: LAF thresholds values and AXA patterns comparison on the validation
set.
Thresholds
N° of AXA patterns
% of movements
% of noise
Initial values
1028
48.1517
51.8482
100km/h
549
47.7231
52.2768
200km/h
786
48.2188
51.7811
300km/h
856
48.8317
51.1682
We further applied, in similar manners, the Spatial Characterization, Duration Based
and Base Station Frequency probabilistic approaches onto the newly extracted AXA pat-
terns from the mobile sessions filtered with LAF. It is to be noticed that the probability
values employed in each of the models are the ones computed on the training set, as
explained in Section 4.11. For example, the Duration Based probabilistic approach of
AXA patterns extracted from previously filtered mobile sessions, utilizes the same prob-
abilities computed from the percentages shown in Figure 4.17 for all of the considered
LAF thresholds filtered sessions.
In Table 4.9 all the methods employed in our analysis are summarized. The table shows
the Accuracy, Precision and Recall obtained by checking the result achieved on the val-
idation set using the GPS ground-truth.
After applying all the models, we removed the noisy patterns from the sessions, always
considering just the validation set, with the method explained in Section 4.12. The
==PAGE:77==
4.13 Validation
67
results on the number of removed AXA patterns form the validation set sessions are
summarized in Table 4.11
Table 4.11: Number of removed AXA patterns from the mobile sessions in the valida-
tion set.
Method
N° AXA patterns
% Movement
% Oscillation
Raw
1028
0,4815
0,5184
Spatial Characterization
606
53,30033
46,69967
BS Frequency
299
61,20401
38,79599
Duration Based
368
49,18478
50,81522
Spatial + BS Frequency
329
60,79027
39,20973
Spatial + Duration
586
52,73038
47,26962
LAF 100 + Spatial
292
53,42466
46,57534
LAF 200 + Spatial
471
53,29087
46,70913
LAF 300 + Spatial
292
53,42466
46,57534
LAF 100 + Duration Based
292
53,42466
46,57534
LAF 200 + Duration Based
471
53,29087
46,70913
LAF 300 + Duration Based
292
53,42466
46,57534
LAF 100 + BS Frequency
137
64,9635
35,0365
LAF 200 + BS Frequency
222
63,06306
36,93694
LAF 300 + BS Frequency
252
62,30159
37,69841
On the cleansed sessions, we then calculated the Hausdorff distance between all the
cleansed mobile sessions and their respective GPS sessions. This was done with the
purpose of checking if this distance has lowered; if that is the case, the mobile sessions
are close to the GPS pattern, so to the actual trace.
The Hausdorff distance takes into account two curves, in our case the GPS and the
mobile session traces. For each of the coordinates in the mobile sessions, we computed
the smallest distance of that point to the GPS trajectory. We do the same for the GPS
coordinates with respect to the mobile session points. Once we have these two sequences
of distances between each coordinates and the opposite curve, we take the distance with
the maximum value. This means that we take the greatest value of distance computed
from the GPS with respect to the mobile sessions, and the maximum distance from the
mobile session to the GPS. Now that we have two distances we take the maximum value
between them and we considered that the Hausdorff distance between the two traces.
It is to be noticed that we utilized the Haversine metric to compute the distance between
the coordinates.
The first distance calculated was between the raw mobile sessions and the GPS
sessions.
Then we calculated the distance between the clean sessions and the same
GPS sessions considered. In Figure 4.18 on the y axis are shown the CDFs, on the x
axis instead is shown the Hausdorff distance expressed in meters. Since the difference
between the various distances is small, we wanted to show a zoomed section of the plot
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Problem and Solution
Figure 4.18: CDF comparison between the raw mobile session Hasudorff distance and
the cleansed sessions with the Base Station Frequency based and Spatial
Characterization probabilistic approach.
to show that there was a difference between the distances. Moreover, for the plot we
considered only the session that had a different distance from the raw mobile session one.
Furthermore, we were not able to show a comparison of all the models in one plot, since
the CDF values of their Hausdorff distances overlapped, due to it being only slightly
different.
In the Discussion section 5 we will further elaborate on these findings.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
Now that we have presented the problem and why it is relevant, along with the solutions
obtained from our work, we will delve into the discussion of our results.
At the beginning of our paper, we set the following goal for our research: finding a
method to detect and remove noisy oscillation phenomena from CDR mobile sessions,
and try to propose a definition of oscillations.
5.1
Mobile sessions
As a first step in our analysis we investigated the temporal and spatial sparsity of the
CDRs. This sparsity usually represents one of the issues of this type of data, therefore
it was fundamental to get information about it. To do so we looked respectively at the
duration, for the temporal sparsity and to the Radius of Gyration (ROG), for the spatial
sparsity.
The CDR sessions show different durations when confronted with the GPS ground truth
data. The temporal sparsity could have influenced the duration, as a single session stud-
ied could represent more than single movement. The results however show a difference
between the registered sessions of about 2000 seconds (33 minutes), which is a significant
time difference.
The Radius of Gyration instead relates to the spatial sparsity. From our results, 90%
of the sessions show a difference of 7.5 kilometers between the GPS sessions and the
mobile sessions. This could be due to the features of the CDR data, as they consider
the position of the cellular towers and not that of the user. The CDR therefore do not
consider whether the user was close to the cellular tower or at the limits of its coverage
area. Thus, if the coverage area is large, the ROG computed with the GPS is expected
to be larger than that of the CDR. Since the maximum ROG registered is 25 km, a
difference of 7.5km is however quite significant. This could mean that some part of the
mobility trace was not detected by the CDR due to the fact that it’s event-driven.
Considering then the temporal characterizations, we saw that the mobile sessions
follow the normal patterns of daily human life, already considered in other papers
[katsikouli2019characterizing; qiao2016mobility]. As expected there were peaks
in the temporal bins due to commuting times. There were however limited data regard-
ing the times between 23 and 6 in the morning. In the limitations Section 5.3, we will
discuss the issues regarding the quantity of data considered in our research. This may
provide a reason for the scarcity of data in the mentioned time frame.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Discussion
The spatial characterization provides an idea of the area where the cell towers are
placed. Using the 10est nearest neighbour distance we were able to determine that about
40% of the base stations are positioned in very dense areas. This is because 40% of the
stations have the 10th nearest neighbour cell tower at a distance of less than 5km.
The density of the area is related to the oscillation phenomena, since the presence of
closer cell towers allows the user’s phone to switch from one to the other more easily.
While more oscillation phenomena might occur, being in a dense area allows the esti-
mated location of the user to be close to the real one. This is because the coverage
area of the stations is smaller. In case of larger coverage areas, there are more possible
positions the user could be in, meaning that the estimates could be significantly different
from the actual positions of the users.
Furthermore, the Voronoi perimeters allowed us to have an estimate of the coverage ar-
eas. This allowed us to visualize the distribution of the base stations as well as calculate
the perimeters, which we assumed to be directly proportional to the coverage area. The
results confirmed that 30% of the base stations in the mobile session have a perimeter
of less than 10 kilometers. As previously mentioned, the Voronoi cells are only approxi-
mation of the actual coverage area. In reality the coverage of two or more base station
might overlap, especially in dense areas. This explains why 40% of the stations have
a 10th nearest cell tower distance value of less than 5km, but have a perimeter that is
approximately 10 km.
5.2
AXA patterns
We then considered the AXA patterns, which presented two distinct base stations, found
in the mobility sessions. We analyzed some of their characteristics to try to understand
if it was possible to distinguish some distinctive values, which would have helped us in
the process of identifying the noisy patterns.
Looking at the duration data, about 90% of AXA patterns lasted less than 2000 sec-
onds(33 minutes), which is a plausible amount of time for a return trip between two close
points. This information would give us the idea that a large part of these patterns could
be plausible movement. However, approximately 50% of the AXA patterns present a
duration of less than 500 seconds (about 8 minutes and 30 seconds). This data is more
ambiguous than the one just presented, as it is plausible given certain circumstances.
These include the hypothetical distance covered as well as the means of transportation
of the user while the pattern was registered. For example, it would not be plausible
for a walking user to cover a distance of two kilometers and back, however it may be
possible with the use of a car. This would mean that the movements may be noise, or
movements in between two base stations’ coverage area borders.
We then followed with an analysis of the ROGs of the AXA patterns. Here a clear
distinction between the CDRs and GPS patterns was found. The results are also sig-
==PAGE:81==
5.2 AXA patterns
71
nificantly different from the previous mobile session ROG plot presented. Before, the
maximum mobile trajectory was 25km. In this second analysis, the GPS sessions show
a maximum ROG of 20km. The AXA patterns, which should be relative to the GPS
traces, show a maximum of 4km. This confirms the hypothesis that AXA patterns are
predominantly present in dense areas. It is important to remember that we considered
the values 15 minutes before and after the GPS patterns, which could have influenced
the values of the ROGs.
From the graph in Figure 4.8, 48% of the GPS patterns seemingly have a ROG equal
to zero. This implies that the user was either static, or that his movement was so small
that it is imperceptible in the graph. While this 48% is basically not movement, the
CDRs still registered it as such. This could however be due to the fact that the GPS pat-
terns and the AXA patterns do not perfectly coincide, and have in fact different duration.
We followed with the average instant speed calculations on the AXA patterns. This
data gives information about whether the movements are plausible or not. We took into
consideration two movements when considering this data: From the last A base station
to the first occurrence of the X base station, and from the last occurrence of X to the
first instance of A following the last X. It is plausible for average instance speed of the
AXA patterns to be higher than the GPS one, as it is an average between only two
values.
In the plot, it may look as if the lowest average instance speed is zero, but in the reality
that value is approximately 1km/h for the CDRs and 6km/h for the GPS.The CDR
data indicate that approximately 40% of the patterns show average speeds of less than
200km/h, which is a plausible speed if the user was travelling with a car or a train. It
would seem however that 50% of the AXA patterns show a speed of 400km/h or higher.
This speed results impossible with standard methods of transportation, if we exclude
planes.
We were actually expecting the CDR data to have much higher instance speeds relative
to the GPS patterns. This is because, in the AXA patterns, movement between two base
stations can happen in a few instants, due to the speed of the switching between two
base stations, and the distance between the base stations may also be long. Therefore,
a high speed movement could be recorded, when in reality the user may have moved by
just a small amount of meters in between two base stations’ coverage areas.
The spatial characterization using Voronoi perimeters was performed exclusively on
the faulty base stations of the patterns. From the calculations of the perimeter we got
confirmation that approximately 60% of the oscillation occur between base stations with
a small coverage area. The small coverage area means that the stations are positioned
in dense areas. The density of the area is also confirmed by using the 10-est nearest
neighbor. The nearest neighbor method confirms that about 70% of the values indicate
the 10th nearest station to be at a maximum distance of 2km.
This is what gave us the idea that producing a probabilistic approach based on Voronoi
perimeters and the 10-est nearest neighbor distance would help determine whether AXA
patterns are movement or noise.
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Discussion
Additionally a temporal characterization was performed to see if the distribution of the
patterns during the day would be useful. This has proven to be incorrect, and we did
not get significant information from such characterization.
5.2.1
Probabilistic approaches
All the probabilistic approaches that were analyzed during this research were based on
the utilization of GPS patterns to correctly evaluate if AXA patterns were movement or
noise. We will further discuss the limitations of using these methods in the Section 5.3
of the paper.
In this section we will simply discuss the actual results obtained from the application of
these probabilistic approaches on the validation data.
The first probabilistic approach which was discussed in our analysis was the Spatial Char-
acterization based approach. This approach extracted probabilities of an AXA pattern
being movement or noise from the Voronoi perimeters and the 10est nearest neighbor
distances.
As observed in the Graphs 4.14 and 4.15, only some of the bins in which the AXA pat-
terns were placed showed a clear distinction of patterns being movement or noise. This
consideration implied that a low accuracy of the method should have been expected.
Looking at the accuracy levels shown in Figure 5.1, this prediction is confirmed, as the
model shows an accuracy of 61,2%.
Following the labelling of the patterns, the AXA patterns recognized as noise were re-
moved, forming cleaned sessions. Then we searched again for other AXA patterns. Con-
fronting the number of patterns identified, present in the Table 4.11, it was observed
that the number of identified AXA patterns was 422 patterns lower. The 606 patterns
found in the cleaned sessions could however not overlap to the same 1028 ones that were
originally identified.
The probabilistic approach built around the duration bins is based on the idea that
an AXA pattern is to be considered noise if the time spent in the proximity of the faulty
base station is less than the one actually spent. Alternatively, if a user has actually gone
from station A to X, the time in-between them should be distributed evenly for it to be
considered movement.
In general, as seen in Figure 4.17, since the ratio observed in the approach is A/X, it
seems that the users spent more time in A. There is a distinction even less clear than
in the Spatial Characterization approach regarding the AXA patterns being movement
or noise. Nonetheless we applied this approach, and we obtained the expected results,
since the distribution of noise and movement was 50/50. The level of accuracy (51,5%)
and of precision (52,7%) of the approach were actually the lowest recorded in our study
among all the approaches, proving this method to not be satisfying enough to label the
oscillations.
Similarly to the other approaches, the patterns labelled as noise by the approach were
removed, and we found 368 patterns which were equally distributed between movement
==PAGE:83==
5.2 AXA patterns
73
and noise when checking their values using the GPS method.
It is to be noticed that, for the Voronoi perimeter, 10th nearest neighbour distance and
the duration bins employed in the above mentioned methods, different sizes of bins have
been considered. In this research we only considered the bin sizes that had the best
visible distinctions.
The Base Station Frequency probabilistic approach is based on the frequency of the ap-
pearances of the faulty base stations across all AXA patterns. This makes the approach
highly dependent on the number of AXA patterns considered for the training of the
model. As we already mentioned in the validation portion of this paper, in certain cases
it was not possible to attribute the right label. The default label chosen in such cases
was noise, because the values relative to the base stations were not computed in the
training process as the base station did not show up.
Nonetheless the accuracy and precision of the method were both 79,6%. It is to be
noticed, that the accuracy and precision on the training set were respectively 85,7% and
90,1% thus having a limited dataset has a big impact especially for this probabilistic
approach.
Once the noisy patterns in a session were removed, we computed the number of AXA
patterns extracted from the clean sessions. Only 299 patterns were found, of which 61,2
% labelled as movement by the GPS and 38,8% as noise by the GPS. This means that
at the moment this method is the one which obtained the best results in the labelling
process as well as the removal of the largest number of noisy patterns.
To further try and find the most reliable method for the labelling of noisy patterns,
we tried to combine different probabilistic approaches to check if the new approaches
showed better results than the ones previously discussed.
The first combined approach was done by uniting the Spatial Characterization probabilis-
tic approach with the Duration Based approach. The accuracy of the combined approach
was 59,6%, and the precision was 64,9%. The accuracy of the combined method is higher
than the Duration based approach, but not of the Spatial Characterization probabilistic
method. The precision of the Spatial approach was also higher when taken singularly,
without combining it with the Duration Based method.
In general, while the approach has a slightly higher accuracy than the Duration Based
approach alone, it is not better than the Spatial Characterization approach. In fact, af-
ter the cleaning of the sessions, it was still possible to find 586 patterns. The number of
found patterns is higher than the one resulting only from the Duration Based approach.
However, the number of AXA patterns with the combined approach is lower than when
utilizing only the Spatial Characterization approach. The distribution between noise
and movement considering the GPS is worsened than if considering only the Spatial
probabilistic approach.
Overall, this combined approach is no better than using just the Spatial Characterization
one.
The discussion of a combination of the Spatial Characterization approach and the
Base Station Frequency probabilistic approach follows.
These two approaches are both tied to the intrinsic characteristics of the base stations,
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Discussion
such as position, coverage area, and the density of the area in which the base station is
placed. Both the precision and the accuracy of this method are slightly lower than those
of the Base Station Frequency probabilistic approach alone. As it was mentioned in the
section regarding the validation (Section 4.13), this is mainly due to the amount of data
that we consider in the training of the model. If a base station does not show up in the
training of the model, and shows up subsequently, we do not know how to perform the
labelling.
In the combined approach however, if the Base Station Frequency probability relative
to a base station is missing, it is possible to keep into consideration only the probability
provided by the Spatial Characterization approach, which would give an accuracy of
61,2%. The accuracy of the model on the validation set was 80.73%, whereas for the
training set it was 85.6%.
Moreover, we decided then to implement the Look Ahead Filter at different thresh-
olds (100 km/h, 200km/h, 300 km/h). The values of these thresholds were based on the
analysis made with the Average Instance speeds, which revealed that 90% of the GPS
patterns had an average speed of less than 300km/h. 80% less than 200km/h and 65%
less than 100km/h. AXA patterns however showed average instance speeds higher than
400 km/h in 50% of the cases.
The idea of inserting the filter with a threshold of 100km/h could have proven to be coun-
terproductive as it could have removed a large chunk of movement patterns alongside
noisy ones. Looking at the Table 4.2 we can partially confirm this assumption. It was
possible to find only 961 patterns following the cleaning session, of which 49% movement
and 51% noise, when applied on the training set. Similarly, after the application the
Look-Ahead-Filter on the validation set, the number of found patterns is lower than the
initial value of 1028. The percentage of noise and movement of those newly extracted
patterns, however, is still approximately 48% noise and 52% movement (Table 4.10).
This means that, since the percentage ratio of movement and noise has not changed,
some of the initial AXA patterns that were actually movement were removed with the
filter.
It is important to consider, however, that after the removal of the logs by the LAF,
new AXA patterns could be introduced to the sequence. The AXA patterns after the
filtering could therefore not be the same as the ones that were considered before the
LAF.
After filtering the mobile sessions with the Look Ahead Filter, we applied on these new
sessions the three methods: Spatial Characterization, Duration based and Base Station
Frequency based probabilistic approaches to see if the models performed better. The
Spatial Characterization and Duration Based probabilistic approaches did not improve
much, but in some cases, such as LAF with 200km/h as threshold and the Duration
Based probabilistic approach had an accuracy of 48%, 3% less than without the LAF
filter. This can be explained by the fact that the application of the Look-Ahead-Filter,
by removing some logs, resulted in having different AXA patterns in the sessions than
the ones obtained without applying the LAF.
However, the Base Station Frequency Based probabilistic approach improved the accu-
racy by 5% if applied after an LAF filter with 200km/h of threshold.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 General Limitations
75
In Figure 5.1, all the models’ accuracy and precision are summarized, always consid-
ering the 30% of the data, thus the validation set.
Figure 5.1: All methods accuracy and precision on the validation set.
In the validation Section 4.13, we further computed the Hausdorff distance for each
of the methods. The Hausdorff distance tells us how far from the GPS ground-truth the
cleansed mobile sessions are.
Our results show only a slight improvement. For example, in Figure 4.18, we can see
that the probabilistic approach has a lower Hausdorff distance compared to the raw
sessions. However, this is not the case for all the methods. The plots for each of the
methods are in Appendix A. Most of the figures show an overlapping CDF, or slightly
worse Hausdorff distance values than the distances calculated on the raw sessions. This
could be due to the removal technique we employed (presented in Section 4.12) or due
to the way we utilized the GPS ground-truth to label the AXA patterns as movement
or oscillations. Furthermore, it could be caused by the spatial sparsity of our CDR data
resulting in a not distinctive improvement in the Hausdorff distances between the GPS
and the cleansed mobile sessions.
5.3
General Limitations
Once the results of our research have been illustrated and discussed, it becomes imper-
ative to provide a reflection on the limitations encountered during the study.
Most of the limitations that will be discussed in this section relate in particular to the
data employed in our research.
The first consideration is about the sample size from which the data were collected.
As it was mentioned in Section 4.2, the data was collected from 11 users who agreed to
participate in the study. While the data collected was rich of information, the amount
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Discussion
of people considered in the study is particularly limited.
In addition to the limited number of people participating in the study, the information
regarding the mobile sessions came from a single Mobile Operator. The method utilized
for our research was unbiased by the presence of the single operator, and could be in
fact replicated if other operators provided CDRs similar to the ones used in the research.
The results may however be biased by the presence of a single operator, therefore future
researchers should consider this possible bias.
Furthermore, the data provided by the mobile operator relates solely to the CDR and
the position of the cell towers of the network. Since no information was provided re-
garding the actual coverage area of the base stations, we had to employ approaches to
estimate this information. Our research relied heavily on the methods used, the Voronoi
Perimeter and the 10est nearest neighbour distance.
The data provided by these methods are however mere approximations, meaning that
more accurate information may provide different results from the ones obtained by our
research.
Additionally, the data used for the research were the same data used by Katsikouli
et al. [katsikouli2019characterizing]. The data were therefore already partially elab-
orated. Furthermore, the considerations about whether a user was static or moving in
the sessions were based on the probabilistic approaches previously devised by the afore-
mentioned researchers. This means that there is still a margin of error, related to the
method utilized by Katsikouli et al. in their work, which divided the static sessions from
the mobile ones. Moreover, they removed, for privacy purpose, one hour at the start and
at the end of each session, thus possibly affecting our temporal characterization analysis
performed on the mobile sessions.
Another limitation of our research relates to the reliability of the GPS labelling
method.
As mentioned at different points in our paper, the GPS data were mainly
used as the ground-truth of the research. The ground-truth was however provided by
the labels assigned through the centroid method proposed in Section 4.6. This method
employed to label the AXA patterns from the GPS might be at times inaccurate. We
examined its correctness by plotting the traces and base stations of each AXA pattern
as in Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13, to check the correctness and accuracy of the GPS
labelling. We noticed that part of the AXA patterns was labelled inaccurately. Thus,
further examining and improving the GPS labelling method would probably improve
the results of our models.
This is mainly due to the fact that all the probabilistic
approaches illustrated in the paper are based on the idea that the labelling is correct.
Future research should therefore keep into consideration this issue.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
Human mobility studies are able to provide information to different fields by helping
them improve: transportation layouts, traffic, city infrastructure, determination of dis-
ease spreading patterns, and network layout.
The human mobility studies have become more efficient and effective, by being able to
consider vast populations at once, and huge areas for long and spread out period of
times with the help of mobile phones, GPS trackers and internet networks.
In our thesis Introduction, and in more detail in the Section Thesis Contribution
(Section 1.2), we tried to illustrate what the possible contribution of this work would be.
In this section we will therefore discuss the actual contributions made.
• We were able to properly present and describe all the different data types used in
mobility research, analyzing both the benefits and the drawbacks of each type. The
data types discuss included: GPS, CDR, WLAN, social media data, and cellular
network data. Here we summarize the findings for the GPS and CDR data, since
they are the ones employed in our work.
We started by discussing the GPS data. This data type provides extremely accu-
rate information about the coordinates of the user, and can be used to reconstruct
movement patterns very accurately. One of the main drawbacks of GPS data how-
ever is given by excessive battery use in the users’ devices. This issue, coupled with
the lack of signal in determined positions (such as inside buildings, tunnels etc.)
sometimes create a gap in the data collected. We have therefore analyzed some
of the studies which propose solutions to the battery issues, and papers analyzing
the reconstruction of trajectories when there are gaps in the data.
CDR data, which have been used for the purposes of our research, only identify
the position of the base station to which the user’s device is connected and the
timestamp of events. One of the main drawbacks of using this type of data, to
which we dedicated one of the main sections of the paper (Section 3.3), are the
oscillation phenomena. These phenomena are however present also in other types
of data, such as WLAN and Cellular Network Data. Due to the nature of this
research, we only focused on the aspects of the phenomena in the CDR datasets.
We performed a review of the existing literature and research and analyzed the
proposed solutions to the problem, evaluating the pros and cons of the methods
used by other researchers.
• We described in detail how the data we used for our research were collected and
pre-processed. We then performed an analysis of the mobile sessions in our CDR
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Conclusion
dataset, analyzing in particular the duration, the radius of gyration, the spatial
characterization and the temporal characterization. We found that 90% of the
mobile sessions have a radius of gyration lower than 15km and a duration of less
than 6000 seconds. Moreover, all the mobile sessions are distributed between 6
and 23. Looking at the spatial characterization, most of the base station present
in our study were in dense areas, therefore most likely in metropolitan rather than
rural areas.
• We then provided a definition of AXA patterns and described the method used
to identify and extract them from the sessions. We then carried out an analysis
similar to that performed on the general sessions, considering the duration, ROG,
temporal and spatial characterization. We also investigated the average instance
speed of the AXA patterns and compared them with their respective GPS trace.
We used all the information derived with these methods to understand whether
there are distinctive characteristics that could help distinguish oscillations. With
the spatial characterization we confirmed that the base stations involved in AXA
patterns are placed in dense areas, as we had hypothesized.
• Following the analysis of the characteristics of the AXA patterns we introduced a
method to use the GPS data as ground truth to identify and label noise and move-
ments. This method uses the GPS traces that correspond to AXA patterns and
then identifies the GPS’ centroid. If the centroid is close to the faulty base station
of the AXA pattern, then the trace will be identified as movement, otherwise it
will be labelled as noise.
This method has some limitations, however it allowed us to label the AXA patterns
as noise or movement. The ability to label the patterns has allowed us to analyze
the oscillations more in depth, to understand if they have distinctive qualities that
would allow us to label them as noise without the use of the GPS ground-truth.
• We introduced and analyzed three different probabilistic approaches: Spatial Char-
acterization probabilistic approach, Duration Based probabilistic approach, and
Base Station Frequency based probabilistic approach. Following the analysis of
the three methods used independently, we then tried to apply two approaches si-
multaneously to check if the results varied. The combined approaches were formed
by the Spatial Characterization and the Duration Based approaches, and by the
Spatial Characterization and Base Station Frequency based approach. We com-
puted the probabilities of each characterization considered: Voronoi Perimeters,
the 10-est nearest neighbor distance, the duration ratio and the frequency of base
stations. As with previous approaches, we tried to identify if any of these methods
showed any distinctive traits relative to the oscillations. Spatial Characterization
and Duration approaches did not give any significant results, the Base station
Frequency instead gave us some information regarding oscillations. Base station
==PAGE:89==
6 Conclusion
79
frequency allows us to identify movement from oscillations based on the history of
the faulty base stations present in other oscillations. This means that if the model
had additional training with a larger amount of data collected through longer pe-
riods of time, it may be possible to correctly identify the oscillations.
This is
because we found an accuracy on the training set of approximately 85%. When
performing the same analysis on the set used for validation, in which only 30% of
the data was used, the model performed worse, with an accuracy of 79.9%.
• In addition to the methods just discussed, we also decided to apply a state-of-the-
art technique, the Look Ahead Filter, to filter the raw sessions of our research. We
used three speed thresholds to filter the sessions, which we determined after study-
ing the average instance speeds of the AXA patterns: 100 km/h, 200 km/h, 300
km/h. Using this filter we were able to remove some of the logs from the mobile
sessions. However, the cleansed sessions presented the same percentage ratio of
AXA patterns being either noise or movement, implying that the LAF removed
logs related to actual movements alongside the noisy ones.
Successively, we applied the probabilistic approaches to the newly extracted AXA
patterns following the application of the LAF filter. We noticed that, for the Spa-
tial Characterization approach, no significant improvements were found. For the
Duration Based approach, the accuracy and precision of the model decreased. The
Base Station Frequency approach was the only one showing an improvement after
the LAF filter.
Moreover, we combined the Spatial Characterization probabilistic approach with
the Duration Based one, which revealed a worse performance than by applying
the Spatial Characterization alone. We then also combined the Spatial Character-
ization probabilistic approach with the Base Station Frequency approach, which
lead us to achieve a slightly better result than that of the Base Station Frequency
approach.
Initially, we wanted to also use this research to provide a formal definition of oscillation,
which had not been done before when considering moving subjects. Our idea was to con-
sider the distinguished traits of the oscillations to provide a formal definition. However,
while studying the features such as the Spatial characterization, duration and others, no
distinctive characteristics were found that defined clearly the distinction between move-
ment and noise. It was therefore not possible to provide a formal definition, thus we
employed the probabilistic approaches to try and label the AXA patterns as oscillation
or as movement.
In conclusion, with our work, we reviewed the existing methods employed to filter oscil-
lation phenomena in the CDR datasets, we provided an analysis of the mobile sessions
in our dataset. Furthermore, we examined the characteristics of the AXA patterns, such
as duration, ROG, average instance speed, Spatial and Temporal Characterization, to
then propose various probabilistic approaches. We then validated our results and dis-
covered that the Base Station Frequency probabilistic approach was able to detect with
an accuracy of 79.9% the noisy patterns from the movement ones. We further combined
==PAGE:90==
80
6 Conclusion
a state-of-the-art technique to enhance the performance of this method. The accuracy
was improved by 4% when the method was applied to the AXA patterns extracted after
the LAF filter with 200km/h threshold was enforced on the raw mobile sessions.
6.1
Future Work
We have mentioned in previous sections some of the possible directions for future works
related to this research.
As we mentioned in the GPS section (Section 4.6), we only used one GPS labelling
method. As all the results of the research depend on such labelling, trying different
GPS labelling approaches could provide different results. The comparison of the accuracy
using different methods could improve the found results.
Another possible direction for future work could be regarding the use of Look Ahead
Filters. Further analyzing the data using LAFs at different thresholds may provide more
accurate results.
The utilization of different thresholds could prove beneficial especially in regards to the
combined probabilistic methods applied after the LAF.
As already mentioned in the limitations section, the amount of data utilized for the
research is limited.
Being able to collect additional data from a bigger number of users and from a plethora
of mobile operators would particularly help with the training of the model. This would
help especially for the Base Station Frequency based probabilistic approaches, because
this model does not preform well when there is a lack of data on the base stations.
Another future improvement for this work would be implementing different filtering tech-
niques and methods to replace or remove the faulty logs identified by the probabilistic
approaches.
Furthermore, another direction could be to continue the analysis of the CDR data
to try and formally define and detect oscillations from movement. This would be done
either only in mobility sessions or in static sessions, or without having to consider them
separately. This would allow to detect the oscillation phenomena occurred in the user’s
trajectory independently from the user being static or mobile.
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Figure A.1: All Voronoi Cells.
==PAGE:92==
82
A Appendix
Figure A.2: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after the
Spatial Characterization method and the raw sessions, only considering
the validation set..
Figure A.3: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the Duration Based method and the raw sessions, only considering the
validation set..
==PAGE:93==
A Appendix
83
Figure A.4: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the Base Station Frequency Based method and the raw sessions, only
considering the validation set..
Figure A.5: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined Spatial Characterization and Duration Based method and
the raw sessions, only considering the validation set..
==PAGE:94==
84
A Appendix
Figure A.6: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after the
combined Spatial Characterization and Station Frequency Based method
and the raw sessions, only considering the validation set..
Figure A.7: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined LAF with 300km/h as threshold and the Spatial Charac-
terization method and the raw sessions, only considering the validation
set..
==PAGE:95==
A Appendix
85
Figure A.8: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined LAF with 200km/h as threshold and the Spatial Charac-
terization method and the raw sessions, only considering the validation
set..
Figure A.9: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined LAF with 100km/h as threshold and the Spatial Charac-
terization method and the raw sessions, only considering the validation
set..
==PAGE:96==
86
A Appendix
Figure A.10: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined LAF with 300km/h as threshold and the Duration Based
method and the raw sessions, only considering the validation set..
Figure A.11: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined LAF with 200km/h as threshold and the Duration Based
method and the raw sessions, only considering the validation set..
==PAGE:97==
A Appendix
87
Figure A.12: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions after
the combined LAF with 100km/h as threshold and the Duration Based
method and the raw sessions, only considering the validation set..
Figure A.13: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions af-
ter the combined LAF with 300km/h as threshold and the Base Station
Frequency based method and the raw sessions, only considering the val-
idation set..
==PAGE:98==
88
A Appendix
Figure A.14: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions af-
ter the combined LAF with 200km/h as threshold and the Base Station
Frequency based method and the raw sessions, only considering the val-
idation set..
Figure A.15: CDF values of the Hausdorff distance between the mobile sessions af-
ter the combined LAF with 100km/h as threshold and the Base Station
Frequency based method and the raw sessions, only considering the val-
idation set..
==PAGE:99==
==PAGE:100==
