==PAGE:1==
MSc. Architectural Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elsa Maria Iuliano & Helena Brandt Rejndrup
DESIGN AND ASSESSMENT OF A 
PREFABRICATED WALL ELEMENT 
MADE OUT OF THE SUSTAINABLE 
MATERIALS HEMP AND BAMBOO
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design and assessment of a prefabricated wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Elsa Maria Iuliano & Helena Brandt Rejndrup
(s182746, s145492)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Helena Brandt Rejndrup, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000]
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0]
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months, from the 3rd of February to 3rd of July
2020, for the Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is suggested that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of structural-, hygrother-
mal analysis and LCA.
The team and work methodology
The thesis team consists of two master students with different areas of expertise, different
methodologies were developed during the thesis period, to integrate the work between
each of the areas. One team member, s145492, has expertise within structural analysis
and thereby took charge of the structural aspects of the design. The other, s182746, has
expertise in energy and indoor climate, and took charge of the insulation and moisture
related properties of the element. Furthermore, the team has expertise in LCA, economy,
buildability and design from their studies. During the project some subjects were strictly
divided between the team members, but several were developed with knowledge from
both. How the thesis was divided between the parties can be found in A.13.
The concept of developing a prefabricated wall element was based on the desire to create
an alternative to some of the most polluting materials of the construction industry. The
analysed materials are hemp as insulation and bamboo as structure for the wall element.
This were chosen based on initial research about natural materials, as well as inspiration
from the companies HempCrete ApS and Holse&Wibroe at the Building Green Fair 2019.
This thesis was developed during the COVID-19 crisis in 2020, which began about a
month into the project. The crisis led to an adjustment of the evaluation and work methods.
The initial plan for the thesis was to develop a knowledge source based on tests and lab
based research. The element would be evaluated based on its tested performances and
compared to the ones of the competitors (prefabricated concrete/brick and wooden facade
element). Due to the restrictions, the team was only allowed a total of five days in the
concrete labs, where only the most relevant work was performed. This was determined
by figuring out which hypothesis were possible to prove or disprove with literature review
or theoretical based calculations; the remaining hypothesis were case based and needed
to be proven in the lab. This and the set design requirements were the determining factors
for the project development.
The communication and collaboration between the parties of the thesis, was also altered
due to the crisis. Which meant that all collaboration throughout March, April until the
middle of May was performed through video calls. Each week day, the two partners met
over online meeting on Microsoft Teams, where all day meetings were held. This way
discussions and issues could be resolved as they appeared, as well as it would be ensured
that the parties of the project were working in the same direction at all times.
Supervision meetings were as well held through Microsoft Teams once a week or second
week. Here the team had prepared drawings and questions for each session to gain the
most from them. No face-to-face supervision meeting was held after the 11th of March.
ii
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:5==
3rd of July 2020
3rd of July 2020
Elsa Maria Iuliano - s182746
Signature
Date
Helena Brandt Rejndrup - s145492
Signature
Date
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
In this paper the design of a prefabricated wall element made of natural materials, hemp
and bamboo, is presented. The main goal is to create a solution that can compete with
conventional building techniques on a technical and economical level, while offering an
alternative which reduces the environmental impact of the building sector. Therefore, it
should be possible to implement the design proposal on a large scale in the main new con-
struction types in Denmark, such as five-storey buildings and single family houses. Hemp
and bamboo are chosen, based on their valuable properties, both are sustainable and
have favorable structural and hygrothermal characteristics. An iterative design process
is performed, where different design concepts are assessed based on their load-bearing
capacity, insulation- and moisture handling properties. The wall element is tested on a
theoretical level based on the Glaser method and with the software WUFI Pro, to deter-
mine the water content and moisture related issues. The strength of the bamboo elements
is calculated based on the theory for wood structures of the Teknisk Ståbi. The preferred
concepts are combined in possible wall designs and the elements’ buildability as well as
the production process are assessed, from which the best option is chosen. This element
design is evaluated based on its Life Cycle Assessment and costs, calculated with the
methods used in Sigma Enterprise. Finally, a prototype of the best option is built as a
scaled model, to evaluate all the practical challenges that could not be foreseen in the
previous theoretical design process. During the prototyping, the cohesiveness of the dif-
ferent materials is assessed as the combination of bamboo and hemp is state-of-the-art.
The end result is an optimized, integrated and simple prefabricated wall element, which
fulfils the set design requirements. Furthermore, it is cost wise a competitive solution and
has a lower environmental impact compared to the concrete/brick wall which is typically
used in Danish constructions. Further research and lab tests are required to make the
design proposal a market-ready product, but big potential is seen in the solution. The
implementation of this prefabricated wall alternative on a large scale, both for five-storey
building or in single-family houses, would reduce the overall environmental impact of the
construction phase in Denmark by 80% while still offering a high performing building en-
velope solution.
iv
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We want to thank everyone that in this five months helped us creating this amazing project.
In particular we thank:
Christian Rønne, Associate Professor, our thesis supervisor, for the calming talks and
guidance in our bewildered moments.
Egil Borchersen, Professor, for guidance in structural analysis.
Eva B. Møller, Professor, for guidance in moisture evaluation, and for the countless in-
teresting ideas for moisture tests, which we hope to perform in the future.
Klaus Bræmer, Concrete Lab technician, for guidance during the prototyping and for
having faith in our project.
Kristian Riskær Povlsen, Team leader of the workshops in 119, for allowing us to be
creative in the workshop and providing the materials and staff we needed.
Helle Brandt Rejndrup, for proof reading our thesis, with a lot of patience for our lack of
English grammar knowledge, and for asking critical questions about the content.
Trine Bentzen, for LCA guidance and for believing in us yet keeping us grounded.
Holse & Wibroe for providing us with laminated bamboo beams as well as inspiration for
the possibilities of the material.
CalceCanapa for providing knowledge and alternative solutions for hemp insulation.
HempCrete ApS for providing HempCrete for our prototype.
CERA ApS for providing an office space to work in.
Personal acknowledgments - Elsa Maria Iuliano
I want to thank my thesis mate, Helena, as without her, this work would have not been
possible. She made the thesis time not only interesting but also very nice and fun, proving
that friendship can even improve during a thesis. I thank my Italian family who always
supports me, also when I am far away, as well as my new Danish family that makes me
feel at home in a foreign country. I thank Mariana for helping us with her creativity, for
always listening and for being amazing. Finally I thank all the people that crossed my
path in these last two years, which were source of big inspiration and made me grow into
the person I am today. A special thought goes to Ale who was there since the first day
and was the ”cherry on the top” to make this Masters time unforgettable.
Personal acknowledgments - Helena Brandt Rejndrup
I would like to thank my thesis mate, Elsa, who has been a constant support in all aspects
in the past 5 months. I could not have wished for a better partner in this project, as she
has brought so much inspiration and passion to it. And I hope this is not the last time I
get to work with her. I would also like to thank my family and friends for take an interest in
our project, even though they might not fully understand the specifics. And especially my
family for pushing me in the direction of this education and encouraging my dreams with
a critical eye. Finally, I want to thank DTU for creating a study line with courses which
enforced creativity and inspired me to find an in between of technological knowledge and
creative thinking.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition - Building sector nowadays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The goal of this report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Why hemp and bamboo?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
The construction sector in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology
9
2.1
Methodology and integrated design process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Methodology and process for choosing the materials . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Methodology and process for the prefabricated facade element design . . . 10
2.4
Requirements and theory for the element design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Research
25
3.1
Introduction to the element design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Evaluation of structural concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Evaluation of insulation concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.4
Buildability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Results
53
4.1
Final design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.2
Performance requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.3
Aestetics requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.4
Buildability requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.5
Sustainability requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
5
Discussion
81
5.1
Limitations and further developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
5.2
Comparison with the competitors in the industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
5.3
Production potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
5.4
Sustainability goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
6
Conclusion
91
Bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Bibliography
93
A Appendix
97
A.1 Initial concept design matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
A.2 Structural description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
A.3 Structural handcalculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
A.4 U-value calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
A.5 Moisture evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
vii
==PAGE:10==
A.6 Detailed drawings of designed element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
A.7 Life Cycle Assessment of designed prefabricated wall element
. . . . . . . 217
A.8 Cost estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
A.9 Costs of hempcrete, -fibers and finishing plaster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
A.10 Material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254
A.11 Fire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
A.12 Adjusted project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
A.13 Author Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
viii
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Problem definition - Building sector nowadays
“
Energy efficiency and climate change: Buildings account for the largest
share of total EU final energy consumption (40%) and produce about 35%
of all greenhouse gas emissions [1].
”
The modern building sector has globally a major share of both the energy consumption
and the greenhouse gas emissions. This big impact on the environment has several rea-
sons, but it can roughly be divided in the following shares. The impact from fossil fuels
for energy and heating of buildings makes up more than 80% of these emissions. The
remaining share comes from the production phase of building materials, mainly steel, ce-
ramic, concrete or bricks and finally around 3% of the impact is from the end-of life phase
and disposal of building materials [2].
The building sector is not only contributing to climate change, but also to other impact
categories such as water and resource depletion, mainly from the material extraction. In
the EU, the sector is considered to be one of the main consumers of raw materials [3].
Where the commonly used material, cement, is the fourth most polluting one, after crude
oil, natural gas and oil. The pollution comes from the mining, high burning temperatures,
amounts of water and energy required for the production of cement [4]. After use, the
building materials end their lifespan as waste and landfill, where they may release dan-
gerous substances into the ground. Yet, there are very few recycling options.
All these factors prove the point that as it is now, the building sector needs to change
in a more sustainable and environmentally friendly direction. There are several attempts
to lower the impacts of the construction industry: regulations demand lower and lower
energy consumption for buildings, and there is big interest in the development of new
construction techniques with alternative building materials. However, to get the construc-
tion industry to change its traditional methods, the new alternatives, besides being the
environmentally preferred solution, must also be a technically and economically competi-
tive option to known building techniques. This means the alternative materials must have
similar functions, fulfill the same technical standards and be affordable cost- and time-
wise. Otherwise companies will have no interest in adopting the new ways and replace
the old ones on a large scale, and the environmental issue of the sector will not be tackled.
The challenge in this thesis is to address the issues mentioned above by developing an
alternative product with the natural materials hemp and bamboo. The reasoning for this
choice is elaborated in 1.3. This makes the main research question of the thesis: ”Is a
designed hemp-bamboo prefabricated wall element able to compete on a large scale with
the traditional materials used in today’s constructions?”.
1.2
The goal of this report
This report presents the development of an alternative solution to the traditional construc-
tion techniques. The challenge is to create an element that is both as far as possible CO2
neutral, and a design concept which can compete on the economical and technical levels,
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
1
==PAGE:12==
to make it appealing to companies and contractors. The idea is to develop a prefabricated
facade wall element made from the natural building materials hemp and bamboo. The el-
ement must be simple to manufacture and install on site, withstand strong climates and
provide a sufficiently supporting structure for a building of up to five storeys. Furthermore,
the element must perform well thermally and for what concerns moisture. The environ-
mental impact of the design is assessed by performing a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) to
evaluate if there is any negative unforeseen impact. To assess the economy of the design,
a cost and time estimation is made to evaluate the business case for the element. Finally,
the prefabricated wall is compared to traditional solutions (prefabricated concrete/brick or
wood wall elements), to see in which situations the designed solution could replace the
old ones, and how the environmental impact of the building sector could be changed by
this.
To fulfill the requirements of the thesis, the design process to develop the wall element is
performed by following an innovative and creative iterative process. Where several dif-
ferent design concepts are evaluated on different levels (performance, aesthetics, build-
ability, and sustainability), and the combination of the best solutions converges in the final
prefabricated wall design. By using this process, based on the requirements set in 2.1,
the thesis approaches the best possible result for the designed solution.
1.3
Why hemp and bamboo?
There are a lot of alternatives when natural renewable building materials are considered.
In this report hemp and bamboo are chosen, because it is believed that besides hav-
ing very high sustainability potential as both plants grow fast, their structural and hygro-
thermal properties can potentially be combined into a highly competitive wall element.
1.3.1
Alternative materials for load-bearing structures - Bamboo
Figure 1.1: Bamboo ecosystem [5]
The most common materials for load-bearing structures are currently concrete, bricks and
steel, but also wood has been varying in popularity for construction throughout the ages.
As of now, wood construction is becoming more attractive, as the demands for lowering
the carbon footprint becomes higher. Conventional wood for construction in Denmark
includes the species: pine, spruce, oak and more. Complete wooden buildings often are
built with pinewood. The Danish forest holds more than 100 different wood species, and
2
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:13==
the world has even more potential wood species, but the species’ possibilities have yet
to be discovered. In the latest years different wood and plant species have entered the
building sector in Denmark, such as tropical wood and plants for flooring, cladding and
occasionally for visible beams and columns [6]. One of these species is bamboo, which
has become somewhat popular to use for items such as toothbrushes, clothes etc, with
the claim of being the sustainable substitute for other materials.
Looking deeper into the LCA of bamboo, there is a lot of truth in it, depending on the
context the material is used. Bamboo, which is a grass specie, has shown to be very
beneficial due to its fast growth and its wood-like properties. For now, bamboo is mostly
known in Denmark as a garden plant with very thin stems, but in other countries the plant
shows it self in a treelike appearance and it is used in construction in larger parts of Asia,
Africa and South America. In Denmark several companies are selling bamboo flooring
and cladding due to the strong resistance of the material. No company in Denmark has
yet copied the construction techniques of other parts of the world, despite the strength
potential of some bamboo species [7]. For this thesis, the MOSO bamboo specie is used
for all structural concepts, as this is the specie used by the bamboo flooring company
(Holse & Wibroe) who provided bamboo samples for the prototyping.
The reasoning for using bamboo instead of conventional wood, is that bamboo can be
planted in degraded or problematic land where wood plantation becomes hard or impos-
sible. Furthermore, bamboo can be harvested and utilized just 3 to 5 years after planting
the seeds. For conventional wood species, most takes more than 25 years from plant-
ing to harvesting for construction. The growing time for wood as well as the unforeseen
deforestation (fires, illegal logging etc.) demand a strict forest management to avoid too
large deforestation and still match the increasing needs of wood. Deforestation removes
vital spaces for animals and insects, as well as it decreases the potential release of oxy-
gen from the trees and the carbon storage [8]. In future, the deforestation issue could be
tackled, and balance between consumption and production could be established, but due
to the slow wood growth and the critical climate state of the earth, an immediate solution
is preferred. Therefore, cultivating and using bamboo can become a great alternative to
planting trees, especially if bamboo can perform as well as wood on most parameters and
even better on some.
Figure 1.2: MOSO Bamboo forest [9]
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
3
==PAGE:14==
The summed up arguments for planting bamboo for constructional purposes are the fol-
lowing:
• The rate of reforestation in China for bamboo is higher than for softwood in Europe.
This gives an opportunity for a faster reforestation of degraded land and less need
for forest management.
• The root to shoot ratio is higher for bamboo than for wood. This is due to the plant’s
extensive root system, which also stores most of the CO2 that the plant absorbs
from the atmosphere.
• Bamboo has the advantage of being a grass specie, meaning that it can be har-
vested without damaging the root system, which will keep shooting new bamboo
stems. This is unlike trees, that are usually clear cut, which can result in deforesta-
tion.
• Bamboo grows fast without requiring high maintenance, irrigation water or pesti-
cides.
• Some bamboo species have compression and flexural strength which is much higher
than for wood and is similar to concrete or steel, which makes the material highly
durable and efficient for bigger structures.
Information is gathered from [10].
1.3.2
Alternative materials for insulation - Hemp
The most common insulation materials used in the modern building sector are fiberglass,
rock wool, polystyrene or polyurethane foam. Even though these differ a lot between each
other there are some common characteristics between them. They have good insulating
properties and are known products, but they all have a high embodied energy for their
production. Either they are made out of plastic (fossil fuels) or require very high manufac-
turing temperature and only few of them are recyclable: they are not an environmentally
friendly choice ([11], [12]). Therefore, natural insulating materials should become more
and more popular. There are three different natural insulation types: animal-based such
as sheep wool, plant-based (hemp, straw, cotton or others) or mineral such as pearlite
and clay [13]. Every type of natural material has a lower environmental impact, because
it’s a renewable resource, it has less embodied energy, and sometimes it can even be
carbon neutral or passive when the embodied CO2 while growing (plant based solution)
is higher than what is required for its processing and transportation.
Hemp is the material which has been chosen for the development of the low impacting
wall element. This is due to the material’s special properties, as it is competitive option in
terms of thermal performance and moisture-related aspects (see next paragraph). This
makes the material, compared with the other alternatives, the best choice for a simple but
functional element design. The hemp will be assessed both in its fiber form, as insulation
panels, and in a hemp and lime mixture, which creates the so called hempcrete.
Hempcrete
Hempcrete is a composite material made from hemp shiv, the woody part of the plant
stem, and a lime based binder. The two materials are mixed with water to form a material
similar to concrete which is cast around a load bearing structure to make the composite
element. The structure is needed because hempcrete has low load bearing capacities,
and can only carry its self-weight. As any other composite material hempcrete has to cure
properly. It takes around 4 to 8 weeks [14], depending on the thickness of the element, to
4
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:15==
develop fully the mechanical properties and be dry, after which the finishing layer can be
applied on the element .
Figure 1.3: Hemp shiv, lime binder and water mixed together create the hempcrete com-
posite
The hemp-lime technique was developed in France in the eighties as a renovation tech-
nique. It was necessary to use a material that would keep the vapour permeability of
the wall around the old timber frame, and thereby maintain the building envelope in bal-
anced health between new and old elements [15]. The material also became popular in
other parts of Europe and in North America, not only as a renovation material but for new
constructions as well. This is because of the following qualities of the material:
• The good vapour permeability of hempcrete allows moisture to travel through the
wall. The permeability reduces moisture and mould issues, possible condensation
should dry out fast [16]. This leads to one of the main positive properties, as there
are fewer condensation issues, there is no need of extra layers such as a vapour
barrier, which allows a very simple and efficient construction [17].
• Hempcrete walls are good moisture buffers, which means that they can absorb and
release moisture fast enough to regulate and improve the indoor climate [18].
• Adding to the average insulation properties, thermal conductivity of 0.065 w/mK [19],
hempcrete also has a good thermal mass, since its density is between 220 and 950
kg/m3 [18]. This indicates the capacity to absorb and release heat, as it happens
slower than in other materials. The hot and cold peaks from outside are cut in the
indoor environment, improving the indoor climate quality.
• The high basic pH values of the lime binder should prevent the growth of pest inside
the element [17].
• It is a fire safe material, as it does not burn and there is almost no temperature
increase around the burning point [17].
• Hemp shiv is a renewable material as it is plant-based and Hempcrete is recyclable,
as it can be reused in new composites or decomposes in landfill without any harm
[15].
Furthermore, lime-based binders have less embodied carbon compared to other types
as for instance cement. This is because of the less energy demanding manufacturing
process and the fact that it re-absorbs carbon dioxide during the curing period, through
carbonization [20]. The hemp plant, on the other hand, grows with great adaptability in
different types of rich soil and climates, therefore it can be produced in several parts of
the word. It grows quite easily and fast, in four months the plant can reach a height of
1.5 to 4 m depending on the climate, without need of pesticides, herbicides or irrigation
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
5
==PAGE:16==
water. It can be planted in the rest year of the crop rotation resulting in a positive influence
on the soil. All parts of the plant (seeds, leaves, fibers, and so on) are used in different
applications, from the food and cosmetic sector, to the building and feed stock industry,
the shiv is the part that historically has the less value and use [15].
Hemp fiber panel
Apart from using the fibrous part of the hemp stem for paper and clothes, it is also possible
to create insulation panels out of the fibers. These are carded, pressed and heat treated
into the panel shape. This works because a smaller amount of plastic fiber is added,
which melts with the heat. The panels are a good solution for facade insulation, as they
have exceptionally good acoustic and thermal insulation properties (thermal conductiv-
ity of 0.039 w/mK [19]). Furthermore, it is a good substrate surface for plaster finishes
and is mechanically stable for horizontal loads. In general, the same moisture handling
properties apply to the hemp fiber as to the hemp shiv, therefore the combination of the
hempcrete and fibre insulation should maintain the same vapour-permeability as well as
”breathable” envelope characteristics presented in the previous paragraph ([21] and [22]).
Figure 1.4: Hemp panels (source: CalceCanapa®)
1.4
The construction sector in Denmark
Denmark and the Danish building sector are used as a reference in this thesis. The idea is
that a successful design could also be used in other similar contexts outside of Denmark.
The Danish building sector is presently highly active and the construction activity has been
at its highest in the last decade. It is enough just to look around to see that, especially
in urban context like Copenhagen or Aarhus, entire new neighbourhoods of multi-storey
buildings are been developed in the peri-urban areas. The demand of housing in the
city is constantly increasing and therefore, the urban growth has to happen very fast,
efficiently and at an affordable price [23]. The fast development only increases the use of
known material and construction technique, which is supported by long years of building
tradition and know how. The most common materials used in Danish building industry are
prefabricated reinforced concrete or light weight concrete elements, bricks and insulation
material such as EPS or rock wool, which are often put together in masonry cavity walls
(see figure 1.5) [24]. Furthermore, wood is becoming increasingly popular in Denmark
as a construction and cladding material, and several simple solutions with prefabricated
components are being developed, yet bricks and concrete remain the preferred option
[25].
6
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.5: Typical wall layout for Danish modern construction
In figure 1.6 the new construction activity in Denmark of the last year can be seen (from
second quarter 2019 to first quarter 2020). This shows that the most build building types
are multi-storey buildings, single family houses and office buildings. The goal of this re-
port, is to develop and recommend a design for a prefabricated wall element which can
move the building sector in a more sustainable direction. Thus, the prefabricated wall
should be compatible for installation in multi-storey construction up to five storeys, in a
two storey row house design and single-family houses. If this can be achieved, the new
prefabricated wall concept could positively affect the environmental impact of the Danish
building sector.
Figure 1.6: Amount of new construction square meters build within the last year (from
2019 K2 to 2020 K1), subdivided per building type (source: Statistics Denmark)
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:19==
2
Methodology
2.1
Methodology and integrated design process
To design a competitive element and ensure the full use of its properties, several process
and design methodologies were used. Due to the Corona virus crisis, the team was only
allowed 5 days in the lab to create prototypes and perform tests of the highest relevance.
Therefore a combined theoretical and empirical approach to perform the element design
was developed for this thesis.
Before making use of the given days in the lab, most of the theoretical design methods
were put to use. Here the hemp and bamboo materials were assessed based on known
ways to use them. The different material concepts were evaluated with theoretical ap-
proaches: the structural analysis was based on the Eurocodes, uni- and bi-dimensional
calculation were made for U-values in Therm 7.7 and moisture simulations in WUFI Pro
for the hygrothermal analysis. The results from the assessments were combined in the
following design phase, here the integration of the different materials was of the highest
relevance. In this design phase the material concepts were put into different combina-
tions of elements, and the connections between them were assessed using 3D drawing
program SketchUp. The drawings, analysis and simulations raised several questions
throughout the process, which could not be answered by literature, as the materials are
new to the market. These questions were brought into the lab, where the creation of a pro-
totype of the prefabricated element was performed. The prototype was scaled down, as
a whole element would be to complicated to do by hand as well as move afterwards. The
prototyping was used as an empirical method designed to answer the questions which
were left unanswered by the theoretical approach.
Most issues were solved in an iterative process. If by choosing one solution for the el-
ement another issue would appear, the team would take a step back and find a simpler
solution which avoided too many issues or included quick fixes for them. The optimiza-
tion required integration between the different materials, compromises between the de-
sign subjects and constant communication between the team members. With this, the
process would preferably result in the most optimized product in terms of economy, sus-
tainability and technical performance.
2.2
Methodology and process for choosing the materials
Before defining the project description for the thesis, the main focus was chosen based
on research about sustainable materials. During this research several materials were
considered, but hemp and bamboo seemed to reappear, as they both are a sustainable
and renewable choice. They are already considered as building materials, but still in their
early stage of use and never in the combined version - there is a lot to be discovered.
The reason why the two materials were chosen, is given in Section 1.3. This thesis is
seen as an opportunity to explore the two materials and take them to the next step, the
construction industry.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
9
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Methodology and process for the prefabricated facade
element design
The design of the prefabricated facade element was based on of the following 6-step
research process.
Figure 2.1: Design process methodology
2.3.1
Step 1: Determining requirements and appertaining evaluation
criteria
Several requirements were set based on building regulations, Eurocodes, sustainability
requirements etc. (see Table 2.1). A few requirements were determinants for the first
steps of the design process, these are highlighted in the figures below. For each further
step taken in the process, more requirements were considered. The requirements and
evaluation criteria for each design step were ruling out which designs and concepts would
be used in the further development.
Figure 2.2: Requirements leading to the choice of the materials hemp and bamboo
2.3.2
Step 2: Material concept design
This step of the design process included research of different ways to use the materials
in buildings. Here a matrix of each possible material designs for both the structural and
10
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:21==
insulation materials was developed. The matrix (see Appendix A.1) was used to get an
overview of the possible material’s use concepts and the inspiration of possible combina-
tions between the insulation and structural designs. All the combinations were based on
reasoning and theory which is elaborated in Chapter 3.
2.3.3
Step 3: Evaluation of material designs
When developing further the design concepts, parameters such as low U-value and high
load bearing capacity were considered in the evaluation of each material design. In this
phase some of the material designs were discarded as they did not meet the evaluation
criteria.
Figure 2.3: Requirements for step 3: Evaluation of material design
2.3.4
Step 4: Design of the prefabricated element
The final wall element was designed in step 4, based on the resulting best options of the
material designs from step 3. For this step two additional parameters were added in order
to discard further material designs. The buildability and the prototyping were assessed
to analyze the combination further. This step determined the final prefabricated element
design which was evaluated in step 5.
Figure 2.4: Requirements for the wall element design
2.3.5
Step 5: Evaluation of the prefabricated element
When evaluating the final designed prefabricated wall element, additional requirements
and appertaining evaluation criteria were considered in order to optimize the solution.
The requirements and evaluation criteria are all notated in Table 2.1. Whether the final
element meets the criteria is stated in Chapter 4.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.5: Design requirements
2.3.6
Step 6: Comparison with the competitors in the industry
The final element design was compared to traditional building techniques for what con-
cerns the construction costs and impact on the environment in terms of global warming
potential (emitted kg of CO2 eq). With this, it is possible to assess the environmental
impact (emitted kg of CO2 eq) of implementing the design in the construction section, as
well as the economical viability of the solution.
2.4
Requirements and theory for the element design
In this paragraph, the applied theory, the tools or software used to assess the main design
requirements are explained.
2.4.1
Requirements
To be able to evaluate the final element, the following requirements must be applied to
the element:
12
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:23==
Requirements
Evaluation criteria
Reference
BR18
Performance
3-5 stories. Capacity ≥loads
High load
bearing capacity
based on Eurocodes
§344 & §348
Stable construction
Capacity ≥horizontal loads
§344 & §348
Designed joints
Capacity ≥loads
Must be below
Appendix B2:
Low U-value
0.30 [W/m²K]
tables for chpt. 11
Limited moisture content
§ 334 - § 339
Line loss
Appendix 2:
Airtight
maximum 0,06
Tables for chpt. 11
Materials must
Certification of materials
be certified
Materials must be
Fire proof
fire proof for 60 minuts
§ 82
Acoustics must be within
§ 369
Acoustics
class C in DS 490
Glass area must make up
§ 377
Light and view
Min of 10 pct. of the floor area
Aesthetic
Surfaces must be
Uniform & plane surfaces
uniform and plane
Buildability
System integration
Integration between materials
Elements should
Possibility of openings
come with openings
Possibility of leading
Integration of fittings
installations in walls
Simple prefabrication
A minimum of
materials and processes
Few element types
Simple system
Simple uniform connections
Transportable
No breakage during transportation
Must not be damaged if
Protected against rain
it rains during construction
Floor plan design
No restrictions to floor plans
§ 339
Low maintenance and
Low maintenance
easy renovation
Elements should be possible
Reusable
to disassemble and reuse
Table 2.1: Requirements for final element design
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
13
==PAGE:24==
Requirements
Evaluation criteria
Reference
Sustainability
The element must mainly
Natural materials
consist of natural materials
Sustainable materials
CO2 neutral based on LCA
Low costs
Design at a competitive price
Minimum work steps
Minimum man-hour use
at building site
Table 2.2: Requirements for final element design
The main requirements will be evaluated through the stated evaluation criteria in Chapter
3 and the results for all the requirements will be presented in Chapter 4.
2.4.2
Structural analysis
Each of the structural concepts is analysed based on load of a one storey building, with
a flat roof and concrete slabs. Each of the concepts is evaluated based on its strength
capacity.
Loads
The capacity calculations are based on prerequisites from Teknisk Ståbi [26], the wood
structure analysis is taken from [27], [28] and [29], loads are determined using the follow-
ing Eurocodes:
• DS/EN 1990 Basis for project engineering for load carrying structures DS/EN 1990
DK NA
• DS/EN 1991-1-1 Densities, self-weight and live loads for buildings DS/EN 1991-1-1
DK NA
• DS/EN 1991-1-2 Fireloads DS/EN 1991-1-2 DK NA
• DS/EN 1991-1-3 Snowloads DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA
• DS/EN 1991-1-4 Windload DS/EN 1991-1-4 DK NA
• DS/EN 1991-1-5 Thermal loads DS/EN 1991-1-5 DK NA
• DS/EN 1991-1-6 Loads on constructions during excecution DS/EN 1991-1-6 DK NA
The specific loads and self weights of the materials are taken from:
Imposed loads
DS/EN 1991-1-1:2007
Self weight concrete
DS/EN 1991-1-1:2007
Self weight hempcrete
CalceCanapa®
Self weight hemp fibers
CalceCanapa®
Self weight laminated bamboo
[30]
Self weight raw bamboo
[30]
14
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:25==
All loads are considered to be carried by the bamboo structure in each element, which
distributes the loads between elements and to the foundations. All loads, including im-
posed, live, natural loads and self-weight are considered in load combinations. Concrete
slabs are used for the design, as concrete slabs are commonly used and would create the
largest load on the structure. This ensures that the element can be used in all situations,
both for new buildings, and as a substitute element in renovation. All bamboo elements
are calculated as if they were timber structures, as no standards for bamboo structures
are available and certified yet.
Load bearing capacity
Firstly the different structural concepts are compared by load bearing capacity. The pre-
ferred option for the element design, is when a high load bearing capacity is reached
with the lowest amount of bamboo material in the structure. An example of the calcula-
tion method can be found in Appendix A.3. The final structural concept is chosen based
on the findings and the other set requirements, afterwards the elements are tested and
adjusted to a capacity matching a five storey building.
Capacity of beams
The upper beam in the structure obtains the load from the slabs and distributes it to the
supporting columns. The beams are designed for both roof slab and indoor slab, as the
load combinations for each scenario give different load sizes. The beams are designed
as simply supported beams, spanning between two columns with 0.6 meters, as this is
the worst case scenario. The dimensions for the beams in the element are determined
by the necessary moment of resistance Wy, which is designed by the maximum moment
MEd created by the load, p, on the beam. Furthermore, the beams are validated against
cracks due to shear, lateral buckling and deflection < L/400.
Properties for elements
Length of beam:
L [m]
Area:
A = w × h [m2]
Moment of resistance:
Wy = 1/6 × w × h2 [m3]
Moment of inertia:
Iy = 1/12 × w × h3 [m4]
Point load:
P [kN]
Distributed load:
p [kN/m]
Max moment:
MEd = 1/8 × p × L2 [kNm]
Bending capacity of beam
Design flexural strength:
fmd [MPa]
Bending stress:
σm = MEd/Wy
Utilization of flexural strength:
U = σm/fmd ≤1
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
15
==PAGE:26==
Shear capacity of beam
Design shear strength:
fvd [MPa]
Max shear:
VEd = 1/2 × p × L
Modification factor for shear:
kcr = min(3/fvk or 1)
Effective width:
wef = kcr × w
Design shear stress:
τd = 3/2 × VEd/(wef × h)
Utilization of shear strength:
U = τd/fvd ≤1
Deflection of beam
E-modulus:
E [MPa]
Designed deflection:
u = 5/384 × p × L4/(E × Iy)
Capacity of columns
For the columns in each solution, the stresses in the cross section are calculated in order
to determine the necessary moment of resistance. A cross section for the column is set
and the column reduction factor is determined due to the slenderness, then the stresses
in the column can be calculated. Finally the utilization of the columns capacity, based
on the stresses from the vertical and horizontal loads, are examined. All columns are
calculated as simply supported columns, and slenderness of the columns is taken into
account. Furthermore, the columns are validated against cracks due to shear, lateral
buckling and deflection < L/400.
Capacity of columns
Inertia ration:
iy =
√
Iy/A
Column length:
Ls = 1 × L
Slenderness:
λy = Ls/iy
Relative slenderness:
λrel,y = λy/π ×
√
fc,0,k/E
Column reduction factor:
ky = 0, 5 × (1 + β × (λrel,y −0, 3) + λ2
rel,y)
Normal stress:
σc,0,d = P/A
Bending stress:
σc,0,d = MEd/Wy
Utilization of flexural and compression:
σc,0,d/(ky × fc,0,d) + σm,d/fmd ≤1
The shear capacity and deflection of the columns are designed with the same method as
for the beams, using the horizontal loads on the column.
The capacities of the beams and columns are based on the strength given by the scientific
report for laminated and raw bamboo [30]. No tests are performed to verify the material
strength.
2.4.3
U-value calculation
The Danish building regulation gives strict requirements on the energy use of a building.
The stated energy frames to be fulfilled, apply to several technical aspects of the con-
16
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:27==
struction such as heating, cooling, DWH and ventilation. The performances of the build-
ing envelope surely influence the energy consumption through heat losses, infiltration,
thermal bridges and more. The BR18 [31] states the following requirements concerning
the building envelope excluding windows and doors.
• For new buildings the U-value of external walls can maximum be 0.30 W/m2K (Annex
2: Tables for Chapter 11, Table 1)
• In the voluntary Building Class 2020 for the low energy classification, the following
stricter requirements for design transmission losses trough the envelope are stated
(§ 476):
Voluntary low energy class [W/m]
Single-storey
3.7
Two-storey
4.7
Three or more storey
5.7
Table 2.3: Summary of low energy class targets in BR18
Figure 2.6: Recommended U-values to fulfill the Danish energy framework (source: Rock-
wool).
The U-value for the elements is calculated, both in a uni-dimensional (see formula) and
in a bi-dimensional way with the software Therm 7.7; this to consider also the bamboo
structure inside the element and see if it creates thermal bridges and affects the thermal
performance of the wall.
To calculate the U-value for a wall the following formula is used:
U =
1
(Rso + R1 + R2 + R3 + Rn + Rsi)[W/m2K]
Where R is the resistivity of each wall layer calculated as R = l/λ[m2K/W] (λ is the
thermal conductivity and l the thickness of the layer), 1 to n indicates the layers of the
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
17
==PAGE:28==
wall, Rsi and Rso indicate the fixed internal and external resistance. The lower the U-
value is, the better are the insulating performances of the considered wall element. The
aim in this research is to see which of the considered options has the lowest U-value.
2.4.4
Moisture evaluation
The Danish building regulation has a specific chapter related to moisture (Chapter 14 in
BR18 [31]), in this no specific limits, but overall requirements are set. Water, moisture
contents and condensation should not damage the building components or create health
risks. There should not be issues with mould and fungus growth, especially related to
thermal bridges, and no penetration of water from the ground, from rain or melt-water
should happen [31].
To fulfill these requirements, moisture evaluation and simulations are made, both in a
stationary and in a non stationary way. For the stationary ones, the Glaser method is
used, which calculates and assesses the moisture transport in a building component by
considering the vapour diffusion throughout its layers. The amount of possible interstitial
condensation for the winter months can be calculated, and it can be assessed whether
the wall dries out during the summer months. If this happens and if generally the conden-
sation amounts are low, then the building component is considered safe [32].
The needed input data for the calculations for each material in the assembly is the thermal
conductivity λ[mK/W] and the vapour permeability δ[kg/msPa]. Generally building ma-
terial companies provide the water vapor diffusion resistance factor µ[−] for their products,
this is the proportionality coefficient between the vapor permeability of air and the one of
the considered material. Therefore to obtain the parameter needed for the calculations
the following inverted formula was used:
δ = δ0
µ [kg/msPa]
Where δ0 is the the vapor permeability of an ideal air layer, 2×10−10 kg/msPa [33]. The
complete calculation process for the Glaser method can be found in Appendix A.5.
The Glaser method has some limits, especially if very vapour permeable materials, such
as the one chosen for this report (see Chapter 3.1), are considered. It only evaluates
moisture transport through vapor diffusion and not the capillary moisture transport or the
sorption capacity, which reduces the risk of damage due to condensation in permeable
materials [34]. All material parameters are constant and excess water appears as con-
densation, which is not true for hygroscopic materials. Anyhow, as it is a fast and simple
tool and it is considered to be on the safe side due to its strict boundary conditions, it was
chosen for a pre-assessment of the hygrothermal behaviour of the design concepts.
To overcome the limits of the Glaser method, the permeable properties of hemp need
to be included and a more realistic simulation of moisture conditions can be obtained.
To perform the simulations the software WUFI® Pro was used. The software calculates
one-dimensional non-stationary hygrothermal profiles for a cross-section [35], consider-
ing also events such as construction moisture, driving rain and solar radiation.
The required input information consists of the layer layout of the component, its orien-
tation, surface transfer coefficient and initial conditions. The simulation time period, the
outdoor climate and building location as well as the indoor climate conditions are required.
Furthermore, six main parameters must be inserted for every considered building mate-
rial: the bulk density [kg/m3], the material porosity [m3/m3], the specific heat capacity
[J/kgK], the thermal conductivity [W/mK], the water vapor diffusion resistance factor
18
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:29==
[−] and the typical built-in moisture [kg/m3]. Finally for each material the moisture stor-
age function needs to be inserted in the program.
The simulations are performed with an iterative process, where only one parameter is
changed at a time, to assess how much this influences the results (see Section 3.3.3).
Overall, the following parameters are evaluated to interpret the simulations:
• Total water content of the wall, this must be low and become stationary over the
years, otherwise it means that the wall is soaking up water over time.
• Water content in each layer, if this oversteps certain limits it could deteriorate the
material and affect its properties. No specific recommended water content levels
were found for the assessed materials, but to prevent rot in organic materials (wood
or natural fibers) the water content should not exceed 20 mass-percent over long
periods of time. This considers a safety margin as wood rot fungi starts the de-
composing process at a moisture content of 25-30% [36]. The limit is taken as a
guideline: moisture content exceeding this levels for short time can be tolerated if
temperatures are low (no fungi grows with low temperatures); furthermore the sorp-
tion capacity and high PH value of hempcrete should prevent moisture issues [16]
and [17].
• The relative humidity (RH) in certain monitoring points in the wall. In permeable ma-
terials there is a gradual transition between sorption moisture and dew water, there-
fore it is not possible to identify a specific amount of condensation water. However
if RH is close to 100% free saturation condition is reached, which means a large
amount of water is transported to the considered point. This could on the long term
have negative effects on the material.
• Effects of driving rain.
• Possible mould growth on indoor surface, by looking at the temperature-moisture
diagrams and the limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II [36].
• Loss of thermal insulation capacity (thermal conductivity increasing with moisture
contents).
• Codependency of moisture levels in between the adjacent materials.
2.4.5
Buildability
To determine whether the element was possible to be manufactured and installed on site,
3D drawings, detail drawings and prototyping are performed.
3D drawings of wall element
SketchUp was used to reveal whether a combination of the two materials leads to issues
in the system integration, as well as determining whether the system could become a
simple system with a minimum of steps to be performed on the building site.
Detail drawings of the wall element
Detailed drawings were performed in order to determine the connections between the
elements and with other building components, as well as to design how openings for
windows and doors can be implemented.
Prototyping in concrete lab
Prototyping was performed, in order to prove or disprove the hypothesis made throughout
the research and the development of the prefabricated wall element. The team was given
five days to work in the concrete lab in 119 at DTU, where three different prototypes were
built.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
19
==PAGE:30==
Method to create the hempcrete blocks:
Two times six hempcrete blocks in the size shown in Figure 2.7 were cast, which where
done to try out two different mixture recipes.
Figure 2.7: Hempblock with dimensions
1. Preparing of the formwork, by cleaning and oiling them
2. Mixing of the hempcrete
3. Filling the formwork with hempcrete
4. Tapping the hempcrete at ever 2 cm layer
5. Leaving the hempcrete in the formwork to cure
6. Removing the formwork after maximum 24 hours and leaving the block to cure for
30 days
Method to create the prototypes with hempcrete and bamboo structure:
Two blocks with bamboo beams and columns placed differently in the formwork were
created to assess how the combination of the materials would perform and if the bamboo
would be affected by the moisture of the mixture, or detach during the curing.
Figure 2.8: Prototype one
Figure 2.9: Prototype two
One scaled down corner of the final wall element design was built, to assess how con-
nections and material combinations would work. All the theoretical steps of manufacturing
before transport to a building site and those required after installation for finishing the en-
velope were performed.
20
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.10: Prototype three - Corner of wall element
The following steps were performed to create the prototypes mentioned above:
1. Preparing of the formworks, by cleaning and oiling them
2. Cutting the bamboo beams and columns
3. Creating the bamboo structure by joining the beams and columns
4. Placing the structure in the formwork
5. Mixing of the hempcrete
6. Filling the formwork with hempcrete
7. Tapping the hempcrete at ever 2 cm layer
8. Leaving the hempcrete in the formwork to cure
9. Removing the formwork after maximum 24 hours and leaving the block to cure for
30 days
Following steps were performed only for prototype three, to evaluate the wall system in
its whole:
• Attaching the second bamboo structure to assess connection system
• Attaching insulation panel on the outer side to assess attaching system with bolts
• Finishing of the internal side with lime based plaster
2.4.6
Sustainability
The sustainability of the design is assessed by performing a cradle-to-gate Life Cycle As-
sessment (LCA) of the final wall element. The resulting global warming potential (emitted
kg of CO2eq) is used to evaluate the actual impact of the design, analyse whether there
are some hot spots in the production phase and compare environmentally the solution to
the traditional building techniques (prefabricated concrete/brick or wood wall).
To perform the LCA, the standard ISO 14044 [37] is taken as reference. The standard
states requirements and guidelines which were followed when performing the LCA. The
different steps of an LCA are:
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
21
==PAGE:32==
• Goal and scope definition: The goal and scope of the LCA must be defined before
starting. This includes defining the reason for performing the LCA, what the calcu-
lation is used for, the object of it, the method and who is going to use the results.
• Life cycle inventory analysis: The life cycle of the considered calculation object
is researched in detail, this consists of data collection for all the input materials and
processes which the considered object goes through.
• Life cycle impact assessment: The third step in an LCA consists of the actual
impact calculation. In this case, the calculation was performed with the software
SimaPro by using the input data from the previous step for the hemp-bamboo wall.
The walls used in the comparison were assessed in program LCAbyg by using sam-
ples found in the software’s database.
• Interpretation phase: The results are assessed whether they are feasible and their
significance is interpreted. In this step the hot spot analysis is performed, and if
mistakes are found, corrections of the model are performed.
• Completeness and consistency check: It must be assessed whether the input
data set is complete or if major processes were left out, and if the the assumptions
are consistent through out the model.
• Sensitivity analysis: The sensitivity analysis is performed to measure the relia-
bility of the results. The calculations are performed again by changing some of
the inserted quantities or processes to see how much these influence the result.
Furthermore, the calculation method can also be changed to assess if the overall
resulting impacts are correct and reliable.
• Reporting and critical review: The results are presented in a report, and in some
cases they must go through a critical review by an external expert.
A LCA is performed on an object which is called the functional unit of the LCA. In this
case the final wall element from the design process is taken as functional unit. When
a comparative LCA is performed, where different products with the same function are
compared based on their impact, it is important that the same functional unit is used for
them all. This is why, when the results of the hemp-bamboo wall LCA were compared to
the one of the other wall elements, it was important that the same dimension in width and
height as well as the same insulating properties (U-value) and load-bearing capacities
were considered.
The used calculation method is the CML-IA baseline. The choice derives from the fact
that, in general, building companies as well as the DGNB system use this calculation
system for their certification [38]. Furthermore, it is the methodology used by the LCAbyg
software, which was used for the LCA of the two reference wall elements. The considered
impact category for the comparative LCA is climate change, which is expressed with the
global warming potential for time span of 100 years (GWP100). The calculated results
give the potential greenhouse gases emitted in the air, as emitted kg of CO2 equivalent
[39]. The LCA is performed in a cradle-to-gate version, which means that the wall element
is considered until the moment it is installed on site and is ready for use. This is because
only a wall element and not an entire building design is considered, therefore there is no
available information for the use phase. Furthermore, the three different assessed wall
types have the same thermal properties, and thereby, the same amount of energy goes
into the building during the use phase, and their impacts should be identical.
Maintenance and end-of-life stage are discussed outside of the LCA calculation as, again,
22
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:33==
there is not enough information about the materials’ disposal, which means that too many
assumptions would be made.
The sensitivity is performed by assessing the ILCD 2011 Midpoint+ calculation methodol-
ogy for the overall result evaluation. And the most impacting processes were increased/de-
creased by 10% in their quantity or changed with alternative similar processes, to asses
their weight on the final impact. By doing this, hot spots and future focus points for the
product development were possible to detect.
The results of the LCA for the prefabricated wall-element can be found in Chapter 4.5.2
while the comparison with the other building techniques can be found in Chapter 5.2.2.
2.5
Programs
For the development of the wall element several programs were used to prove and support
the hypothesis made for the solutions.
Excel was used in order to develop a program for the structural concept. This ensured that
any change or optimization of the structural elements was simplified. To support the re-
sults from the Excel program several hand calculations were performed for the elements.
Furthermore, the software was used for the uni-dimensional U-value calculations, the
Glaser method, and the Life Cycle Inventory for the LCA.
WUFI Pro was used to perform non-stationary hygrothermal simulation on the assessed
wall cross-sections. The results from the simulations were interpreted to see whether the
wall section would perform well or have moisture related issues.
Therm 7.7 was chosen to perform bi-dimensional U-value calculation of the assessed
wall layouts. The program also shows the isotherm lines in the section, and if there would
be any risk of thermal bridges in the building component.
Sketch up was utilized for all 3D drawings, as the program creates a simple frame for
the 3D work. This ensured the team a way to assess the theoretical integration of the
materials as well as buildability.
Autocad was used for all the detailed 2D drawings of the element.
Fire con was used to calculate the minimum thickness of the materials which insulates
the combustible structure from a fire. Whether or not the combustible structure would
be sufficiently insulated from a design fire for at least 60 minutes, is determined by the
temperature the structure is exposed to, within that time frame. The temperature limit
for the combustible material was set to 200 degrees C°. The results determined the wall
element’s fire resistance on a theoretical level.
Simapro was used to perform the LCA of the final wall element. In the program’s database
it is possible to find most common manufacturing processes and materials, but it is also
possible to create new ones. This was necessary for some of the assessed processes as
hemp and bamboo are not common materials.
LCAbyg was utilized for the LCA calculations of the competitive wall elements so that the
comparison with the hemp-bamboo elements could be made. The program was chosen
as its database contains all the processes and materials for the most common building
techniques. The calculation method from this program was used as well in Simapro, to
ensure the same method for all elements, so that the comparison between them would
be possible.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
23
==PAGE:34==
Sigma estimate was used in order to understand the costs of the element and to compare
it with the competitors. Information about the competitive elements was collected from
the Molio database and a process was developed for the hemp-bamboo element based
on prices given by the reference companies and man-hours for similar processes. The
results from the program were assessed considering that some input data, as for instance
man-hours, are uncertain because of the process novelty.
24
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:35==
3
Research
3.1
Introduction to the element design
All evaluations and designs were based on creating system integration between the dif-
ferent subjects and the different materials in the final element. The integration was mainly
performed in the buildability assessment of the final element, but it is also represented in
many of the set requirements, which are dependent on each other (see Chapter 4).
3.1.1
Structural concepts
Different alternatives for the load bearing structure made out of bamboo were found based
on research. Three different concepts were found interesting to investigate further, and
are analysed in the evaluation of the structural concept 3.2.
Figure 3.1: From the left: structural concept 1: Bamboo stem structure, concept 2: lami-
nated bamboo structure and concept 3: ”LEGO”-block structure
Structural concept 1: Bamboo stem structure
The bamboo stem structure was inspired by the most traditional way of using bamboo, and
different techniques for using and connecting them have already been developed. The
bamboo stems can be joined in a low tech way, by tying the stems together or in a high
tech way, where steel joints are designed to distribute the loads from one stem to another.
These methods can be used either with single stems or a combination of more stems to
create beams and columns, if more strength is needed. This concept was appealing to
use, due to the few steps to produce a bamboo stem for constructional purpose, which
makes the concept seem very sustainable. The concerns for this concept were mostly the
possibilities of creating a prefabricated element with a standardized solutions to connect
elements.
Structural concept 2: laminated bamboo structure
The laminated bamboo structure is the solution closest to the building style used today,
when it comes to wood structures. To create laminated bamboo, bamboo strips are cut,
glued and pressed together, a process similar to glue laminated timber. In this project,
laminated beams and columns are joined to create a bamboo version of a stud wall. This
concept was appealing due to the strength certainty which the lamination method creates,
ensuring that flaws in the bamboo do not weaken the strength of beams or columns. So by
gluing pieces of bamboo together it lowers the impact of imperfections [40]. The concerns
for this concept were mainly the impact of the added glue and the long process of creating
a beam or column in glue laminated bamboo.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
25
==PAGE:36==
Structural concept 3: ”LEGO”-block structure
For the ”LEGO”-blocks columns or stems of bamboo are cast in a block of hempcrete, with
a part sticking out of the block to fit in the block above. This has to fit with the columns in the
block above, from where the ”LEGO”-name comes. The idea was particularly interesting
if proved that the one size block could fit most possible projects. The main concerns for
this concept were whether it had the capacity for a multistorey building.
3.1.2
insulation concepts
The following presented options and their combination are assessed in this report as insu-
lation and infill alternatives for the prefabricated facade element design (see Section 3.3).
The hemp-lime mixture can be used in three different ways, furthermore also a hemp fiber
possibility is assessed.
Figure 3.2: From the left: insulation concept 1: hempcrete cast around structure, concept
2: hempcrete pre-cast into blocks or panels, concept 3: hempcrete mixture sprayed in
situ
Insulation concept 1: hempcrete cast around structure
This is the typical way of using hempcrete, the composite mixture is prepared and then
poured and tapped in apposite form-works around the load-bearing structure. This pro-
cedure is normally made by hand on site. In this report it needs to be assessed whether
it is possible to cast prefabricated elements with a load-bearing structure in the factory
and then transport them on site, to optimize and possibly automatize the casting and
installation method.
Insulation concept 2: hempcrete blocks or panels
The hempcrete blocks or panels are created in a factory, with or without inserted load
bearing structure and can be of various dimensions. They are used as a regular brick and
jointed with mortar on site, although they must be combined with a load bearing structure.
The positive aspect is that the elements can be cast, cured and stored before an order is
received. No specific design is needed for a project, but they can be mass-produced for
any application.
Insulation concept 3: Sprayed hempcrete on site
In this case the hempcrete is sprayed by machine in a specific one side open form-work
around the load bearing structure on site. It is considered the most efficient and fast way
of casting, and makes it easier to cast around structures and other delicate places. The
method, although, is quite expensive and requires specific machinery, furthermore it is
used only for construction in-situ. It will be assessed whether the machines can be used
in a factory to optimize the construction of the prefabricated elements, or if they can be
used for finishing work on site.
Insulation concept 4: hemp fiber panel
Adding to the hempcrete options, also hemp fibers can be used as insulation in external
facade walls. These come in fiber panels and have a similar layout and application as
26
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:37==
wood fibers panels or Rockwool insulation. This infill option needs to be combined with
other element components, as it needs support to carry the horizontal loads.
3.2
Evaluation of structural concepts
3.2.1
High load bearing capacity
The properties for both hempcrete and bamboo were taken either from the reference com-
pany or from scientific reports which would assess the same type of material as the ones
of this report. This was done to get the most coherent results possible. For the hemp
materials all properties were found based one the given values from the company Cal-
ceCanapa® [19], as the company has given all the properties needed for the materials.
From here, the compressive strength of hempcrete was found to be between 0.4 and 2.5
MPa. Though as the Youngs modulus was not given by the company, it was determined
from [41] by choosing the mixture with the same strength as the hempcrete mix used in
the design. For the bamboo structure, all used properties are based on findings from
[30]. This report was used as it tests laminated MOSO bamboo, which is the same bam-
boo specie used in this report. Furthermore, the tests presented in [30] gave the results
needed to perform the essential analysis of the elements.
The high load-bearing capacity assessment is a part of step 3, ”Evaluation of material
designs”, of the design process. All three mentioned structural concepts were analysed
as a possibility for the final structure. The formulas used to calculate the capacities were
based on [27], [28] [29], [26] and are presented in 2.4.2.
In the following tables the material properties for both raw and laminated bamboo, as well
as for the hempcrete are presented:
Raw bamboo
Laminated beam
Compressive strength
f.c,0,k
53 MPa
77 MPa
f.c,0,k,pe
22 MPa
-
Tensional strength
f.t,0,k
153 MPa
90 MPa
f.t,0,k,pe
-
2
Shear strength
t
16 MPa
16 MPa
Flexural strength
f.m,k
135 MPa
80 MPa
Elastic modulus
E.b
9000 MPa
12000 MPa
Density
ρ
666 kg/m3
686 kg/m3
Table 3.1: Strength capacity of bamboo [30]
Hempcrete
Compressive strength
f.c,0,k
0.4 MPa
Elastic modulus
E.b
5.11 MPa
Density
ρ
240 kg/m3
Table 3.2: Strength capacity of hempcrete [19] & [41]
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
27
==PAGE:38==
Comparison of structural concepts
The load-bearing capacity and stability of each of the three solutions were compared
with the amount of material used to produce one element. The material amount was
determined based on one element carrying the load from one storey including self weight,
which simplified the selection process. All solutions were designed to carry the vertical
and horizontal loads on the bamboo structure without taking the hempcrete into account.
All calculations are based on the calculation methods for timber, as no regulations have
been issued and certified for bamboo in Denmark.
Combinations
Volume V
[m3]
Density ρ
[kg/m3]
Weight
[kg]
Hemp blocks
Hemp
0.30
240
165.6
Laminated bamboo
0.03
686
20.58
Laminated bamboo structure
Hemp
0.7
240
167.2
Laminated bamboo
0.02
686
15.95
Bamboo stem structure
Hemp
0.70
240
167.59
Raw bamboo
0.02
666
14.45
Table 3.3: Amount of material of a wall which is able to carry 1 storey
Bamboo stem structure
Figure 3.3: Bamboo stem structure
The load bearing capacity of the bamboo structure was found to be very interesting due to
the geometry and strength of raw bamboo. Furthermore, when looking at the material use
for a wall element, the bamboo stem structure needed the least amount of material of the
three concepts to gain the needed capacity to carry the load of a one storey building. The
stems also showed great potential as they are ready to use only after a treatment and a
drying period of 2-3 months. On the other hand the geometry and composition of the fibers
in a bamboo stem, can create issues in terms of standardizing a prefabricated element
with them, especially if several stems have to be combined to obtain the load bearing
capacity. The geometry of the stems can make the casting of hempcrete around them
28
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:39==
difficult, and this could create thermal bridges. Furthermore, the fibers in the stem are all
in the longitudinal direction, which makes its splitting very likely, especially when using
nails and screws trough the material. Therefore, very low tech connections are normally
created with ropes, or high tech connections of steel are built for specific applications.
LCA wise, the stems make a good material due to the few process steps and non toxic
treatments. But as the geometry of the stems makes up a large volume, additional space
is needed for the same amount of material, compared to bamboo strips. This makes the
transport costs in terms of CO2 quite high compared to the remaining phases for the stem
[42]. Even though the solution showed great promise, the limitations of the connections
between elements and integration with the insulation made a simple manufacturing and
installation process out of question.
Laminated bamboo structure
Figure 3.4: Laminated bamboo structure
The glue laminated bamboo structure demands approximately the same amount of mate-
rial as for the bamboo stems to gain the needed strength capacity. The laminated bamboo
structure has similar strength capacities as the bamboo stems, but is also influenced by
the glue in the material. The whole process of creating a glue laminated bamboo element
is long and costly, but it ensures that the strength is uniform throughout the element. The
bamboo stems can have different strength capacity in different parts of it, for instance the
notes are stronger than the internodes. Furthermore, the concept is very similar to the
known techniques of glue laminated timber which makes the transition from the traditional
work method easier. This solution does not have limitations in terms of creating connec-
tions with screws and bolts and the CO2 emission from the transport of the elements is
lower, as the strips takes up a smaller volume on a transport. Due to this solution’s triv-
ial limitations, compared to the other two, the team chose to proceed with this concept.
Therefore the rest of the requirements will only be developed for this structural concept.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
29
==PAGE:40==
”LEGO”-block structure
Figure 3.5: ”LEGO”-block structure
The blocks are cast in hempcrete with poles of laminated bamboo inside, where the
hempcrete creates the insulating element and the bamboo the structural concept for the
solution. The smart thing about these blocks, is that they can be produced and cured
before an order is received. The blocks would not be designed for a specific project, but
mass-produced for any project. When analysing the compressive strength capacity of the
elements, different scenarios were developed in order to create the highest capacity with
the lowest material use.
Hemp Blocks
Figure 3.6: Development of hemp blocks
The initial amount of poles was inspired by an actual manufacturing company, which cre-
ates blocks of hempcrete with structural poles inside. Here eight poles are cast in the
hempcrete, and the blocks are already created with plaster. This method was tested with
bamboo poles, which resulted in slender poles with a too low capacity for the horizontal
loads on the facade. From this, the hemp blocks were further developed with an Excel
program created for the purpose by the team. The different options were tested, the first
reasonable solution for the hemp blocks, was to create them with four poles instead of
eight. The poles were still placed in two rows. For the compression from slabs and self
weight, this was the best solution, only the horizontal load from wind still created issues.
The bamboo itself did not have the capacity to withstand the wind load, due to its slen-
derness. Though due to the hempcrete around the bamboo, the block was theoretically
able to withstand the wind load. Anyhow, due to the fact that the bamboo and hempcrete
can possibly detach and not act as a coherent material, this is not a reliable result. If the
bamboo poles alone should be able to withstand the horizontal loads, the poles should be
of such size, that the solution would become somewhat the same as the laminated bam-
boo structure 3.2.1. This issue is added to the eccentricity which likely would be created
due to non-precise production and placement of the blocks. The bamboo poles must be
produced precisely and placed exactly on top of each other to avoid this issue. As this is
highly unlikely, the solution was discarded for the final element.
30
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:41==
3.2.2
Stable construction
The concept’s capacity was examined through the horizontal loads based on the Eu-
rocodes for wind actions [43].
Figure 3.7: Element with bracing system
To stabilize the laminated bamboo structure against wind load, a bracing system was im-
plemented. The bracing system design was based on the windload on the perpendicular
wall that the element must withstand. The design load for each truss was Ft = 17, 97kN,
see Validation of trusses Appendix A.2. One truss per direction in each facade side must
be placed per floor. To ensure this, one element is designed to contain the two braces,
so only one element per facade side must contain trusses. The trusses were designed
in stainless steel to avoid any corrosion in the element. Besides stainless steel trusses,
also bamboo trusses were validated in terms of dimensions, as bamboo has a large tensile
strength. See Table 3.4 for the material use and capacity for each material.
Material
Height x Width
Volume
Capacity
Stainless steel
2 mm x 40 mm
3.07 × 10−4 m3
24 kN
Laminated bamboo
15 mm x 20 mm
1.15 × 10−3 m3
22.85 kN
Table 3.4: Details for wind trusses in steel and bamboo
The laminated bamboo is considered to be less impacting in terms of CO2, and would be
preferred in a sustainable view. But due to the simplicity and low costs of the prefabricated
solution of the steel wind trusses, this solution was preferred for the final element.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
31
==PAGE:42==
3.3
Evaluation of insulation concepts
3.3.1
U-value calculation
Four different layer structures for the wall were considered for the U-value calculation. In
the first the bamboo structure is cast in hempcrete, as it would be in the traditional in-situ
construction. The second one has a mixed wall construction with outer Hempcrete panels,
supported by the bamboo structure which is filled in with hemp fibers insulation. The third
is a hempcrete block wall construction. The last one is similar to the first, but with a thinner
hempcrete layer and an additional outer insulation layer. All cases are plastered on the
internal and external side with a lime based vapour permeable plaster. A specific lime
plaster mixed with hemp shiv was considered, as other alternative, for the external side of
the wall to see how much it would improve the hygrothermal performance of the wall. In
Table 3.5 a summary of the technical data of the considered materials can be found. For
all the U-value calculation it was taken into account that laminated bamboo beams were
used for the load bearing structure.
Material
Thickness
d [m]
Thermal
conductivity
λ [W/mK]
Vapour diffusion
resistance factor
μ [-]
Source
Exterior plaster
0.02
0.315
12.5
CalceCanapa®
Exterior thermoplaster
0.02
0.085
5.3
CalceCanapa®
Exterior finishing
0.02
0.195
7.5
CalceCanapa®
Hempcrete
-
0.065
6
CalceCanapa®
Hemp fiber panels
0.14
0.039
2
CalceCanapa®
Ext hemp insulation
0.14
0.039
3.9
CalceCanapa®
Bamboo beams
0.14
0.3
-
[44]
Interior plaster
0.02
0.195
7.5
CalceCanapa®
MgO plate
0.024
0.29
7.7
Doha MgO Boards®
Mortar
0.01
0.4
-
Therm 7.7 Libraries
Table 3.5: The table shows the main input data for the U-value and condensation calcu-
lation. The thicknesses are fixed for all the considered layouts except for the hempcrete
layer.
The resulting U-values for the different considered cases are summarized below, the full
calculation can be found in Appendix A.4. In each case a section of the wall element
with the isotherms line is shown to illustrate the temperature distribution and the possible
thermal bridges, no joints between the wall elements are considered for now.
32
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:43==
Wall layout 1 - Traditional hempcrete layer structure
Figure 3.8: Traditional hempcrete wall layout with load bearing structure inside
The hempcrete is cast all around the structure then finished on the inner and outer side,
no extra components are needed in this layout.
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Regular exterior lime-based plaster
0.44
0.154
0.161
Exterior lime-based thermoplaster
0.44
0.15
0.157
Table 3.6: Summarized U-values of Wall layout 1
Wall layout 2.1 - Mixed hempcrete panel and fiber insulation structure
Figure 3.9: Mixed wall layout with internal MgO plate as finishing
In this case, on the inner side of the wall a MgO plate is used as finishing layer (grey
layer on figure 3.9), this is a vapour permeable suitable solution for hempcrete walls on
the internal side [14].
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Regular exterior lime-based plaster
0.444
0.126
0.141
Exterior lime-based thermoplaster
0.444
0.124
0.139
Table 3.7: Summarized U-values of Wall layout 2.1
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
33
==PAGE:44==
Wall layout 2.2 - Mixed double hempcrete panels and fiber insulation structure
Figure 3.10: Mixed wall layout with hempcrete panels on both sides
The previous MgO plate is substituted with another hempcrete panel which is evenly plas-
tered on the inner side. This is to increase the thermal insulating and moisture buffer-
ing properties of the wall. Furthermore, it is believed that the shiv-lime composite has a
smaller environmental impact than the MgO board. It needs to be assessed if moisture
flow in between the two hempcrete panels could create issues in the hemp fiber or in the
bamboo structure (see Chapter 3.3.3).
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Regular exterior lime-based plaster
0.46
0.121
0.134
Exterior lime-based thermoplaster
0.46
0.119
0.131
Table 3.8: Summarized U-values of Wall layout 2.2
Wall layout 3.1 - Blocks, single lined
Figure 3.11: Wall made out of a single line of hempcrete blocks
Hempcrete blocks with a thickness of 38 cm were chosen for this wall layout as it is the
largest thickness offered by CalceCanapa®.
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Regular exterior lime-based plaster
0.42
0.173
0.176
Exterior lime-based thermoplaster
0.42
0.168
0.171
Table 3.9: Summarized U-values of Wall layout 3.1
34
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:45==
Wall layout 3.2 - Blocks, double lined
Figure 3.12: Wall made out of a double line of hempcrete blocks
To study how much the mortar between the bricks would affect the thermal properties of
the wall, a double line of brick is considered. The bricks have a thickness of 20 cm.
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Regular exterior lime-based plaster
0.45
0.165
0.165
Exterior lime-based thermoplaster
0.45
0.16
0.16
Table 3.10: Summarized U-values of Wall layout 3.2
Wall layout 4 - Hempcrete wall with external insulation layer
Figure 3.13: Hempcrete wall with later on applied external insulation
In this case the wall layout is similar to the first one. To improve the thermal properties, an
external insulation is added after the prefabricated wall has been installed on site. This is
a commonly used building technique in Denmark. The chosen external insulation is made
out of hemp fibers and it is a finished product offered by CalceCanapa®, it comes with a
specific attachment method and requires a different external lime finishing. This is why
the Thermoplaster will not be considered for this layout.
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Exterior lime-based finishing
0.45
0.123
0.128
Table 3.11: Summarized U.values layout structure Wall layout 4
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
35
==PAGE:46==
3.3.2
Moisture evaluation - Glaser method
The Glaser method was applied to the same four different wall layouts of the previous
paragraph, considering that wall layout 1 and 3 have the same uni dimensional cross-
section. The input data can be found in Table 3.5 and complete calculation results can be
found in Appendix A.5, the following tables summarise the calculation outcomes for each
wall type.
Wall layout 1/Wall layout 3: the layout of this wall is external plaster, hempcrete layer
and internal plaster (see Figure 3.8).
Wall layout 1/
Wall layout 3
When is the
RH exceeding
100%?
Where?
Ammount
of
condesation?
Complete
dry out in?
Regular external
plaster
January
Between external
plaster and
Hempcrete
0.05 kg/m2
April
February
0.02 kg/m2
Thermo plaster
RH never
exceeds 100%
-
-
-
Table 3.12: Summarizing table of condensation profile for Wall layout 1/Wall layout 3
Wall layout 2.1: the layout of this wall is external plaster, hempcrete panel, hemp fibre
insulation and internal MgO plate as finishing (see Figure 3.9).
Wall layout 2.1
When is the
RH exceeding
100%?
Where?
Ammount
of
condesation?
Complete
dry out in?
Regular external
plaster
January
Between external
plaster and
Hempcrete
0.09 kg/m2
May
February
0.07 kg/m2
Thermo plaster
RH never
exceeds 100%
-
-
-
Table 3.13: Summarizing table of condensation profile for layout Wall layout 2.1
Wall layout 2.2: the layout of this wall is external plaster, hempcrete panel, fiber insulation
as infill of the bamboo structure, hempcrete panel and internal plaster (see Figure 3.10).
Wall layout 2.2
When is the
RH exceeding
100%?
Where?
Ammount
of
condesation?
Complete
dry out in?
Regular external
plaster
January
in the entire
ext Hempcrete
panel
not considered
not considered
February
not considered
Thermo plaster
RH never
exceeds 100%
-
-
-
Table 3.14: Summarizing table of condensation profile for layout Wall layout 2.2
36
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:47==
Wall layout 4: the layout for this wall is external plaster, hemp fiber insulation, hempcrete
layer around bamboo structure, internal plaster (see Figure 3.13).
Wall layout 4
When is the
RH exceeding
100%?
Where?
Ammount
of
condesation?
Complete
dry out in?
External finishing
RH never
exceeds 100%
-
-
-
Table 3.15: Summarizing table of condensation profile for Wall layout 4
In this layout, the RH never exceeds 100% even though between the external plaster and
the hemp fiber panel, in January it gets to 99.6% and in February to 97.3%.
Generally, the weakest spot is between the external plaster and the hempcrete or hemp
fiber layer, because of the different vapour permeability of the two adjacent materials.
But with the different plaster (the thermoplaster or the finishing for Wall 4) there were no
issues, as these have higher vapour permeability. It is therefore very important to chose
the right plaster as finishing. The calculated amount of condensation in Wall 1 and 2 are
very small, and are acceptable.
To conclude, the results were quite worrying for Wall layout 3, as the entire external
hempcrete panel exceeds the 100%, this means that the entire layer is wet and soaked
with water, this could affect the material properties and make it deterioration faster. Fur-
thermore, the high humidity levels affect also the hemp fiber layer and the load-bearing
structure in between the hempcrete panels. As the Glaser method has the limits pre-
sented in Chapter 2.4.4, it is not possible to evaluate further, the simulations in WUFI are
necessary to assess the issue.
3.3.3
Moisture evaluation - WUFI Pro simulations
Several non-stationary simulations were performed in WUFI Pro, but mainly wall layout
2.2 and wall layout 4 were assessed, as they were the preferred U-value options. As said
in Chapter 2.4.4, these were evaluated with an iterating process where parameters would
be change one at a time. The variable parameters were:
• Orientation (south or north)
• Different types of external plaster (critical point in Glaser method)
• The addition of a possible rain screen
• The geographical location, either Scandinavian climate (Lund, Sweden) or Mediter-
ranean climate (Marseille, France)
• Build-in moisture from the composites at the start of the simulation period
The main input data, material properties and their sources, as well as climate files and
other data taken from the WUFI Pro database can be found in Appendix A.5. Each as-
sessed wall type got optimized by changing the parameters iteratively and keeping the
best results. In the following paragraph the main evaluations will be summarized. The
complete graphs and comments can be found in Appendix A.5.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
37
==PAGE:48==
South vs. north facing walls located in Lund:
In the simulations there is a big difference between south and north facing facades, and
surprisingly the second one is performing better. This is because driving rain in Lund
mainly come from the south (see Figure 3.14) and the main source of water in the wall
elements is absorbed rain, which does not dry out fast enough. So even though the north
facing wall has less exposure to sun, it has a lower moisture content.
Figure 3.14: From left, solar radiation and driving rain diagram for Lund, Sweden
Different types of external plaster:
As seen with the Glaser method calculation, the features of the external plaster can in-
fluence the water content of the wall a great deal. This is why four different plasters
were assessed in the simulations: the regular exterior plaster, the thermoplaster from
CalceCanapa and two plasters from the WUFI Pro material database. As an example, in
Figure 3.15 the resulting total water content in wall layout 2.2 with two different types of
plaster is shown. The quality of the plaster is so influencing that in the case on the left,
the water content increases constantly over the years while on the right it is acceptable.
Figure 3.15: Total water content of wall layout 2.2 with two different assessed plasters,
only the plaster differs in the simulation (CalceCanapa one on the left and WUFI one on
the right)
38
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:49==
The two assessed plasters from the example differ in the following parameters:
Material
origin
Bulk density
[kg/m3]
Porosity
[m3/m3]
Heat Cap.
[J/kgK]
Therm. Con.
[W/mK]
Vap. Res.
[−]
Calcecanapa plaster
1100
0.3
1200
0.195
7.5
Wufi database plaster
1600
0.3
850
0.7
7
Table 3.16: Summarizing table of two assessed plasters
Based on the results of the analysis, the plaster needs to be vapour permeable, or at least
have a similar vapour permeability to the adjacent materials (as seen with the Glaser
method). The plaster must both allow vapour flow from the inside to the outside and
prevent the absorption of rain to perform satisfactorily. Preferably, to deal with the issues
found in the simulation, a better performing plaster with a higher density and a lower heat
capacity, would ensure the wall to dry out faster.
Possible rain screen:
As the absorption of driving rain is the main cause of issues, the possibility of a rain screen
was assessed. This could either be a cladding system as external finishing or a bigger
roof eave. In WUFI Pro it was modelled as a ventilated facade cladding, the ventilation
is required to allow moisture flow and not create a moisture barrier. In both wall layouts
the rain screen adjusted all the assessed parameters to acceptable values within the set
limits.
The geographical location:
Both wall layouts perform better in the dryer and warmer climate of Marseilles. Also in this
case the main issues derive from rain absorption, which again comes from the south. The
outer side of the wall could on the long term be affected by this, even though the layouts
dry out faster as there is more sun radiation than in Scandinavia. Overall water contents
and RH levels are lower and closer to the set limits, for further information see Appendix
A.5.
Build-in moisture:
The built-in moisture could derive from not completely cured hempcrete before its in-
stalled. It was assessed whether the same construction built in-situ and not prefabricated
(highest possible in-built moisture) would have issues. In both cases the water contents
and the RH level would be higher in the first simulation year, but then stabilize on the
same levels of the other simulations. It is concluded that possible in-built moisture should
not cause any major damage to the wall.
Internal surface mould growth:
In none of the assessed simulation there is risk of internal surface mould growth.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
39
==PAGE:50==
Wall layout 2.2:
Figure 3.16 shows the best optimized simulation of the wall located in Lund facing south.
This is the closest possible scenario to a real one located in Copenhagen.
Figure 3.16: Best performing cross section assessed in WUFI of Wall layout 2, tempera-
tures, RH and water content throughout the section can be seen in the figure
The limits of the Glaser method made it impossible to assess wall layout 2.2 as the entire
external panel was exceeding the 100% RH. The same result was found from the WUFI
simulation: the external hempcrete panel constantly has a RH exceeding 95% and its
water content constantly exceeds 30 mass-percentage, which is definitively over the set
limits. This is because of the absorbed rain by the external plaster layer, in fact the accu-
mulated water content in between this two layers is very high. Furthermore, the external
side of the hemp fiber insulation is affected by this intense water flow. The water content
in this layer is constantly over 28%, which does not only affect the insulating properties
of the material, but could also have a long-term effect on the load-bearing bamboo struc-
ture. To conclude, it can be said that the wall can not fulfill the set requirements if the rain
absorption issue is not first solved.
40
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:51==
3.3.4
Wall layout 4
Figure 3.17 shows the results of the best south facing simulation located in Lund for what
concerns wall layout 4.
Figure 3.17: Best performing cross section assessed in WUFI of Wall layout 4, tempera-
tures, RH and water content throughout the section can be seen in the figure
This wall layout is performing considerably better as its total water content is stationary and
lower compared to wall layout 2.2. The hempcrete layer that surrounds the load-bearing
structure never exceeds a water content of 13% mass-percentage which is under the set
limit of 20%. There is a slight issue with the absorbed rain as the external side of the
hemp fibers still has high RH levels, especially in winter, and the water content fluctuates
between 22% and 33%. This is still too high to fulfill the requirements and could affect the
insulation properties of the panels. On the other hand it is way better compared to wall
layout 2.2 and it is believed that with the choice of a slightly more dense insulation panel
the issue could be solved, as less absorption would happen.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
41
==PAGE:52==
3.4
Buildability
Throughout earlier presented process steps, several set requirements were dependent
on each other and interfered with the concept development. Also the buildability require-
ments determined if the initially chosen material concepts could be well integrated in a
simple system. To conclude whether a combined insulation and structure concept would
work as a whole, as well as create an element with most possible prefabricated parts, 3D
sketches were created for the preferred concepts.
3.4.1
3D drawings of wall element
The 3D drawings were the initial way of developing the materials into a wall element
system. The elements were combined theoretically in a visual way as if they would be
built digitally. This gave the required knowledge to evaluate the combination.
Wall element design 1: laminated bamboo structure with prefabricated insulation
panels
When creating the first wall concept, the moisture issues from wall layout 2.2 were un-
known, and the concept showed potential in a mix with structural concept 2 (Section 3.2.1).
This combination will, from now on, be called element design 1. Step 4 of the design pro-
cess (see Figure 2.4) was determined by the criteria of system integration and simple
system in the design of the prefabricated wall. From these criteria, the laminated bam-
boo beams were combined with the wall layout, by placing the hemp fibers insulation
between the structure and adding panels of hempcrete on the interior and exterior side of
the structure.
Figure 3.18: Element design 1: sandwich element with fibers and hempcrete panels
Prefabrication method
Not all manufacturing steps were possible to be prefabricated for this concept design, due
to the joints between each element and with the slabs. Therefore, for one wall element
with the dimensions of 1200 mm x 3000 mm the structure is prefabricated with only the
exterior panels attached to it. The exterior panels are attached to the structure with L-
brackets and screws. For the interior panels the L-brackets were discarded, for it was
42
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:53==
estimated that the panels should be attached with several L-brackets as the strength of
hempcrete is very low. This could create issues for the structure’s load bearing capacity
due to the holes from the screws. No pull out tests for hempcrete was performed due to
the limits of the project.
Figure 3.19: Element design 1: displaced elements
Benefits
• Interior and exterior hempcrete panels can be mass produced
• Panels are designed with tongue and groove
• Panels are attached to each other with mortar in the tongue and groove joints, for
airthightness.
• Hemp fibers can easily be placed in between the structure
• The structure will not be subjected to moisture due to the the curing process of the
hempcrete
• The panels can be created to extend above the wall, creating an insulation layer on
the exterior of the slabs
• No bolts in the interior panels
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
43
==PAGE:54==
• Streamlined workflow for the panels, as the sliding tracks can be attached to the
slabs prior to the placement of the wall elements
Issues
• Attachment of panels to structure
• Panels are hard to place in corners
• Panels above openings can be difficult to fasten
• A large part of the element must be assembled on the building site
• Thermal bridges due to metal tracks for panels
Adding to the complicated installation process on site, another issue of the concept is how
the panels are attached and carried above openings. Here they can not be supported by
the slab, and an additional bracket system needs to be implemented on the structural
beam above the opening. The panels were designed with a thickness of 140 mm, which
means that a panel above an opening with a width of 1200 mm, weighs around 35 kg.
This is an additional weight that the beam needs to carry, which limits the freedom of
the opening sizes. Additionally, the brackets could make the interior finishing with plaster
complicated and ugly.
As said, the panels were designed to be attached to the structure. On the interior side of
the elements, the metal tracks were designed, to be able to slide the hempcrete panels in
front of the structure, as well as attach them to the slabs. However, they initiate a thermal
bridge, as the tracks are placed next to the structure and no insulation material covers the
connection. The process for minimizing the thermal bridges from the metal tracks can be
seen in Figure 3.20 & 3.21.
Element design 1.1 and 1.2: attachment of the internal hempcrete panels
Figure 3.20: Element design 1.1
Element design 1.1 was an alteration created with a mini version of the sliding tracks seen
in Figure 3.19, which saved material as well as limited the thermal bridges. Furthermore,
it can simplify the assembling of the building corners, as the small bracket system gives
more freedom of moving the panels. Though for this solution, the panels must be man-
ufactured with a small indentation for the brackets to fit under the them. The brackets
44
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:55==
can be attached to the slabs with bolts prior to the placement of the elements, in order to
streamline the work on the building site.
Figure 3.21: Element design 1.2
Element design 1.2 was developed to simplify the installation process of element design
1.1. further, by attaching the hemp-panels to the slabs with L-brackets and screws. This is
a simpler version as it does not include alterations to the panels in order to fit the brackets.
This solution would save steel compared to the element design 1.1, and would make the
attachment of interior panels in corners easier.
In general the whole idea of using steel brackets was a way to simplify the attachment
of the hemp panels, but in fact, it ended up adding more and more issues. At the end a
somewhat simple version was developed, Element design 1.2, but the actual work to put
all the brackets on site would in the end create a very complicated construction process.
It is assumed that steel contributes to a large part in the environmental impact of the
element. Therefore, the amount of steel elements should be limited, and that is not the
case of this solution. The complicated construction process is mainly a result of the very
low amount of prefabrication, which is meant to simplify the process. This element design
was discarded based on the complicated process as well as the moisture issues found in
3.3.3.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
45
==PAGE:56==
Wall element design 2: Bamboo stems structure as sandwich element with fibers
and hempcrete panels
Figure 3.22: Element design 2: Bamboo stems structure as sandwich element with fibers
and hempcrete panels
Before deciding which structural concept was the optimal one for the final element, the
structural analysis showed that the bamboo stem structure was the one consisting of
least material. Furthermore, the bamboo stems appears very sustainable. The stems
can be taken directly from the forest and after treatment and drying, they are ready for
use. Though as mentioned in Section 3.2.1, the geometry of the stems makes the pre-
fabrication of the structure difficult. The prefabrication method for this method is similar
to the method described in Section 3.4.1, only with a different structure type (see Figure
3.19).
For this concept the following benefits and issues where taken into account:
Benefits
• No adhesive is used to produce the stems
• The structure consists of natural materials only
46
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:57==
Issues
• The geometry of the stems makes connections difficult in all aspects
• Small air gaps due to the difficulties of wrappings insulation around the stems, pos-
sible issues with airtightness
• It is difficult to certificate the low tech joints where the stems are tied together
• Screws and bolts might splinter and lower the strength of the stem
Figure 3.23: Element design 2: displaced element
The main issues which arise from this solution, are how to connect the different element’s
components and the building elements between them. The beams must be connected
with the columns, the insulation panels to the structure and at last the elements to each
other and to the slabs. The element design was discarded based on this complicated
manufacturing and installment process, as well as the possible airtighness issues due to
the geometry of the bamboo stems.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
47
==PAGE:58==
Element design 3: Laminated bamboo structure cast inside hempcrete with
external hemp fiber insulation system
Interior
Exterior
Figure 3.24: Element design 3: Laminated bamboo structure cast inside hempcrete with
hemp fiber ”jacket”
Prefabrication method
This element was created to simplify and remove some issues from the element de-
signs above. To remove the issue of connections between the structure and insulation,
hempcrete is cast around the structure. Where the interior and exterior hempcrete in Fig-
ure 3.25 is cast as one element with the laminated bamboo structure inside. Thereby no
brackets and screws are necessary to keep the insulation in place. By doing this, the
amount of steps on the building site is lowered.
Benefits
• Elements can be mass produced
• Most parts of the element can be prefabricated
• No issues with panels above openings
• The hempcrete can be cast to extend above the wall, creating an insulation layer on
the exterior side of the slabs
48
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:59==
• The external hemp insulation is placed across element connections to lower thermal
bridges
Issues
• Structure will be subjected to moisture due to the curing of the hempcrete
• The process for creating the beams and columns is long and includes large amount
of glue
• The openings in the hempcrete for bolted connections between elements has to be
filled after assembly on site
Figure 3.25: Element design 3: displaced elements
Despite the smaller issues for this element design, this design was chosen for all further
investigations as it has the best performing qualities both structurally and hygrothermally
(see 3.2 and 3.3.4), as also considering the buildability of the element. Only this element
design will be evaluated in the remaining part of the thesis.
To ensure that all options were considered, this wall element design was also assessed
with bamboo stems as structure. In this case, no issues with airtightness or with the
attachment of the insulation to the structure would arise. The remaining issues of attach-
ing the beams to the columns, as well as creating a standardized connection between
elements remain, and a larger investigations of possible new connections must be per-
formed. Due to the limited tests which could be performed during the thesis, it was not
possible to start these evaluations. As the laminated bamboo solution involved already
existing solutions for these connections, the concept with the laminated bamboo elements
became the main focus of the thesis.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
49
==PAGE:60==
3.4.2
Prototyping in concrete lab
After creating the 3D drawings of the elements in SketchUp various questions and as-
sumptions were left unanswered. Therefore several prototypes were created, as stated
in 2.4.5. The prototypes were used in order to test whether the assumptions made can
be justified.
From the prototypes the following observations were made:
• The small layer of hempcrete on the inside of the structure is stable.
• Corners are very brittle when not fully cured, but are hard and stable when well cast
and fully cured.
• Elements can be transported without being damaged. Only individual shivs fell of
the prototypes, as they were transported.
• The holes in the hempcrete for the bolts connections must be larger than originally
thought or designed with a slope, to allow the use of an electric tool for the bolt.
• It is possible to screw directly into the hempcrete.
• Insulation panels were reattached to the hempcrete surface three times in the same
hole, and they were still fastened after the last time.
• The structure was held in place by the hempcrete after curing.
• No bigger deterioration signs due to moisture were seen on the bamboo structure
• The designed connection between bamboo structure of different elements seems
working well.
• The surface of the hempcrete is very hard as well as flat when cured.
• The surface which was facing down on the wood plate during curing was brittle and
soft, moisture got soaked up by the support wood, which affected the curing process.
• Plastering to finish the element works well and looks nice.
Figure 3.26 shows the resulting built prototype (the element corner) of the final design.
Views from all sides as well as the detail of the developed connection system can be seen.
50
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:61==
B
D
C
B
A
D
C
A
C
B
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.26: Different views of the prototype to show the wall layers and details. Top left:
connection detail between elements. Top right: external side of the prototype. Bottom
left: internal side of the prototype. Bottom right: section of the prototype (inner plaster,
prefabricated element, exterior hemp fiber panels attached to the hempcrete).
3.4.3
System integration
The successful integration between the insulation and structural materials was finally as-
sessed by creating the prototypes in the concrete lab. For example, it was found that the
bamboo beams and columns absorbed some of the moisture from the curing hempcrete
mixture, without creating major issues. On the other side, some practical information were
discovered, for example that the two materials can easily detach if not manufactured prop-
erly. This creates further questions, whether the possible small air-pockets between the
two materials, would create condensation issues. Only further test on the prototypes could
assess this.
However most issues were solved in an iterative process, performing the evaluations in
parallel and then finally assessing them in the prototyping phase. When one solution for
the element was chosen to solve a problem but another issue would appear, the team
would take the process one step backwards, to find a simpler solution avoiding having
too many problems or finding quick fixes. For the structure, three solutions where tested,
the ”LEGO” blocks, bamboo stem structure and the laminated bamboo structure. Where
all three were analysed and compared by strength vs. material use and stability. These
properties showed that the ”LEGO” block structure was not feasible, even though the con-
cept showed great promise and simplicity. The bamboo stem structure was initially the
solution which gave the best results based on strength versus material use, but the solu-
tions for the build-ability became too complicated due to the geometry. This finally led to
the use of the laminated bamboo structure, which in the end was the simplest and most ef-
ficient solution. The same process was performed for the insulation. The best performing
layouts on a thermal insulation level, were the walls were both hempcrete and hemp fiber
insulation were considered (wall layout 2.2 and wall layout 4). On the moisture handling
side the best performing wall was definitively wall layout 4. Wall layout 2.2 instead resulted
to have some issues with to high water content on the external side of the wall. During
the buildability assessment the initial idea was to use hempcrete panels, which were pre-
fabricated and attached on site. This solution seemed simple, but made the process on
site complicated due to the many elements to consider during construction. Furthermore,
issues with attaching elements above openings and in corners became visible as the 3D
drawings of the elements were created. So with the risk of the structure being subjected
to too much moisture during the curing process of the hempcrete, it was decided to cast
the structure inside the hempcrete. This solution gave more possible issues, but issues
which could be tested in the lab, as the team created the prototype.
Finally, the best structural concept (the laminated beams) was combined with the best
performing one on the hgygrothermal level (wall layout 4). This was made in the most
efficient way determined during the buildability assessment. The resulting final prefab-
ricated element and whether this fulfills all the set requirements will be presented in the
next chapter.
52
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:63==
4
Results
Figure 4.1: Overview sketches of the final designed prefabricated element, main function
and layers are shown
4.1
Final design
As presented in Chapter 3, the best performing structural and insulating concepts were the
laminated bamboo beams (structural concept 2) and the hempcrete wall with the external
applied insulation system (wall layout 4). This applies both for their technical properties
such as the load-bearing capacity and the thermal insulation values, as for their combina-
tion in a whole integrated building system. Furthermore, the manufacturing of the element
and its installation on-site were assessed in the buildability, Section 3.4. In Figure 4.2 an
overview of the final element is given. This chapter describes the designed structure el-
ements, the required insulation thicknesses and the optimizations made to the elements
in the evaluation process.
The assessment whether the elements would fulfil all the initially set requirements, re-
sulted in an iterative improvement process for the design. The evaluations and results
can be found in the following chapter and the detailed drawing of the final element in
Appendix A.6.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.2: Elevation and cross sections of the designed prefabricated wall element
4.1.1
Evaluation of the prefabricated element
It was assessed whether the design fulfills the requirements set at the beginning of the
design process (see Table 2.1), Each requirement will be assessed in the following sec-
tions.
4.2
Performance requirements
4.2.1
High load bearing capacity
The wall elements are designed with a capacity to carry five stories of residential housing,
where all calculations and loads are based on the Danish Standard Eurocodes and the
methods from [27], [28] and [29].
54
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:65==
Calculation requisite
Notation
Value
No. of stories
No
5
Height of wall
H.w
3 m
Span of slab
L.s
5.4 m
Beam dimension
Beam height
h.b
0.06 m
Beam width
w.b
0.14 m
Beam length
l.b
0.6 m
Column dimension
Column height
h.c
0.14 m
Column width
w.c
0.05 m
Column length
l.c
3 m
Table 4.1: Structural requisites
Citical values for the beams
Stresses
Utilization of capacity
Maximum flexural stresses in beam
From permanent load (a)
8.99 MPa
26%
Maximum shear in beam
From dominating imposed loads (c)
5.4 MPa
73%
Citical deflection of beams
Designed deflection
Limite value
Deflection
From dominating snow load
L/549
L/400
Table 4.2: Maximum use of load bearing capacity and deflection for beams
Table 4.2 shows the critical values for flexural and shear stresses as well as deflection
for the beams in the structure. The most critical value for the beam is determined as the
design value. The design value is used to determine the cross-section area of the beams.
For the beams, the deflection from the load combination with dominating snow load was
the design value. If the cross-section area was decreased, the deflection would exceed
the requirement of a maximum deflection of L/400. Furthermore, Table 4.2 shows, that the
flexural capacity of the beam is not fully utilized, and an optimization of the cross-section
could ensure a better utilization.
Critical values for the columns
Stresses
Utilization of capacity
Maximum stresses from bending
and compression
From permanent load
7.53 MPa
88%
Maximum shear stresses
From wind load
0.95 MPa
7%
Maximum deflection
Designed deflection
Limit value
From dominating snow load
L/871
L/400
Table 4.3: Maximum use of load bearing capacity and deflection for columns
Table 4.3 shows the most critical values for the columns. From the table it can be seen that
the shear capacity is inefficiently utilized, as it is the most critical value which determines
the cross-section area, For the columns, the design value is the bending and compression
capacity. If the cross-section area was decreased, the utilization would exceed the 100%.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
55
==PAGE:66==
For further information about the capacities of the elements see Validation of laminated
bamboo beams and columns Appendix A.2.
4.2.2
Stable construction
The construction is stabilized against the wind load by a bracing system, and is designed
for a building with a maximum span between stabilizing walls of 5.6 meters, which is the
set length of the slabs. The bracing system consists of one wind truss in each direction,
which can be placed together in one element or separately. One bracing system must
be used for each facade side and on all floors in the building, as the wind load affects all
sides of a building. The trusses are connected to the structure by screws, and all trusses
are made of stainless steel. The stainless steel is chosen based on the requirements of
DS/EN 10088-4:2011 [45] as the truss will be exposed to moisture in the wall element and
corrosion must be avoided.
Figure 4.3: Element with bracing system
Figure 4.4: Connection of truss to structure
Spacing and distance
Amount
Dimensions
Steel truss
two per facade side
2 mm x 40 mm
Steel plate
thickness of 4 mm
Table 4.4: Details for wind trusses in stainless steel
Screw dimensions
a1
a2
a3t
a3c
3.4 x 100 mm
16 mm
13 mm
34 mm
24 mm
Table 4.5: Minimum distance and spacing in the truss connection
As the distance to the loaded end of the connection was insufficient with original dimen-
sions, an additional block of laminated bamboo is placed in the corners to avoid connection
failure. The additional corner pieces must be a minimum of 35 mm x 50 mm, but is only
necessary when placing a truss in the element.
For further information about the trusses see Validation of trusses in Appendix A.2.
4.2.3
Designed connections
The structure in the wall elements is connected to adjacent structure by the use of bolts.
The bolted connections are designed for vertical displacement between two wall elements
56
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:67==
and the horizontal displacement between the wall elements and slabs. The failure mode
which the bolts are designed for is illustrated in Figure 4.5
Figure 4.5: Failure mode for bolted connec-
tion between two columns
Figure 4.6: Distance to edge from bolt
Three bolts are placed in the length of the columns on each side of the element to connect
element to element. Four bolts are placed in the length of the beams to connect the
element to the slabs above and below. Each bolted connection consists of a single M6
bolt with a nut and washer in each end.
Bolt dimensions
a3c
a3t
M6 x 130 mm
34 mm
80 mm
Table 4.6: Minimum spacing to edge from bolted connection
The minimum distance for the bolt is fulfilled, as the dimensions of the columns allow
the distance from the bolt to the unloaded edge to be 70 mm. As the bolted connection
consists of single bolts, the necessary spacing between the bolts is not determined. Fur-
thermore, the distance from the bolt to the loaded edge must be a minimum of 80 mm,
which determines the minimum distance from the top and bottom of the element to the
bolt.
For further information about the connections see Validation of connections in Appendix
A.2.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
57
==PAGE:68==
4.2.4
U-value
Figure 4.7: Cross section of prefabricated wall element design with quotes in mm and
isotherm lines from the Therm 7.7 calculation
Thickness
d [m]
Unidimensional
U [W/m2K]
Therm 7.7
U [W/m2K]
Exterior lime-based finishing
0.47
0.117
0.123
Table 4.7: Summarized U-values for the final wall layout
The element resulting from the optimization has an improved U value compared to the
one calculated in Section 3.3.1, this because the hempcrete layer is 30 mm thicker (fire
safety evaluations) and the plaster is slightly thinner. The uni-dimensional calculation can
be found in Appendix A.4.
The resulting U-value not only fulfills the requirement set by the BR18 of 0.30 W/m2K,
but also reaches the levels recommended for the low energy class 2020 of 0.12 W/m2K.
Furthermore, there are no thermal bridges in the elements nor in the considered joints
(element to element, element to slab, to roof and to basement wall), to assess this, see
detailed drawing in Appendix A.6.
4.2.5
Limited moisture content
In Chapter 3.3, it was assessed that wall layout 4 was the best performing option. In the
Glaser method calculation it was the only cross section that never reached 100% of rel-
ative humidity, this means that there are no issues with moisture transport due to vapour
diffusion and deriving interstitial condensation. Furthermore, the WUFI Pro simulations
helped to overcome the limits of the Glaser method in case permeable materials are con-
sidered. The simulation interpretation resulted in several design optimizations, which can
be summarized by the following considerations:
• The final design materials were chosen considering that the vapour diffusion factor
of adjacent materials need to be of the same order of magnitude. This is so that the
moisture flow is not blocked in between materials and flows smoothly throughout
the section.
• In cold wet climates the material could absorb too big quantities of driving rain, this
issue can be solved in two ways:
– To choose an appropriate external plaster, which is vapour permeable but does
not absorb rain, or has a fast drying out capacity (bulk density and specific heat
capacity).
58
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:69==
– To install a rain screen, which could either be a roof with protruding eaves or a
ventilated facade cladding system. The ventilation would be required to avoid
additional moisture issues for the accumulation of moisture under the cladding.
A last simulation with the optimized final cross section of the wall was made to assess
whether new issues would pop up. The wall performed in a similar way to the one as-
sessed in Chapter 3.3.3 (see figure 4.8). Following are the summarized results:
• The moisture content in the hempcrete layer is within the set limits of 20 mass-
percentage as it never exceeds 13%, this means that there is no mould or fungi
issues in this layer and that the bamboo structure is well protected.
• The main issue of the wall layout is the driving rain absorption. This is why the
water content in the hemp fiber insulation is not always under the set limits (20-
25%). This could on the long term affect its insulation properties and deteriorate the
organic material. The issue is solved if the above mentioned solution for the rain
absorption are implemented. Furthermore an insulation panels with a slightly higher
density would ensure a lower water content and moisture would affect the material
less.
• There are no issues with internal surface mould growth, in-built moisture and total
water content of the wall.
• Detachment of the material and frost damage does not occur if rain absorption is
avoided.
• The wall performs better in warmer and dryer climates.
Full results of the final simulation can be found in Appendix A.5.
Figure 4.8: Cross section assessed in WUFI Pro of the resulting wall element design,
where temperatures, RH, water content and their variation throughout the section is illus-
trated.
4.2.6
Airtight
When the elements are installed on site, they must create an airtight building envelope in
integration with the other elements and building components. This was one of the main
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
59
==PAGE:70==
aspects to keep in mind during the buildability assessment. The solution for this is to use a
mortar layer between the hempcrete in the building parts, when the wall is installed on the
building site (see figure 4.9). This solution is very similar to how the regular prefabricated
concrete elements are installed and should therefore be functional and easy to implement.
The solution is also used by a hemp-lime panel company called Studio Green [46]. Finally,
it is important that as little as possible mortar goes in between the bamboo beams and the
connection as it could affect the quality of the connection and deteriorate the bamboo.
Figure 4.9: Cross sections of connection details, on the left with general floor slab, on the
right between elements.
4.2.7
Fire proof
Based on the properties of the material given in the CalceCanapa material data sheet
(see Appendix A.10), the following fire classifications for the materials are determined.
The layers are presented from the interior to the exterior with thicknesses.
Material
Thickness
Fire classification
EN13501
Lime plaster
15 mm
A1
Hempcrete
60 mm
A2
Glue laminated bamboo
140 mm
Combustible
Hempcrete
100 mm
A2
Hempfibers ”jacket”
140 mm
B-s1,d0
Lime plaster
15 mm
A1
Table 4.8: Fire classification for layers of element
The wall element must comply with the demands for the classification REI 60, which is
normally proven by fire tests. From the fire tests, the element is checked based on it
60
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:71==
ability to keep flames and gasses out (E) and its ability to insulate from the heat from a
fire (I). From these results, the resistance (R) of the element is determined. The notation
REI 60 means that the element must withstand the fire for 60 minutes based on the de-
mands above. Since this thesis does not involve fire tests, the wall element was run in the
software ConFire.exe. This software was used to show the maximum temperatures in the
critical points of the construction. For the insulation demand (I) the maximum temperature
rise must be below 180 degrees C°and the average temperature rise below 140 degrees
C°.
For the element, the following factors where used. The opening factor is set to 0.02 and
the fire load to 200 MJ/m2 for residence based on information from [47].
Figure 4.10: Calculation point for temperature rise from fire
The structure in the wall element must not be weakened within the first 60 minutes of a fire.
As the bamboo structure is combustible, the interior layer of hempcrete and plaster acts
as insulation for the structure. The minimum thickness for the insulation was determined
using the ConFire.exe, with the requirement, that the temperature should be below 200
degrees C°at the surface of the structure after 60 minutes [47]. The surface of the structure
is notated as point (x,y) (Figure 4.10). Using the ConFire.exe with the original 50 mm,
the temperature at the surface of the structure was calculated to exceed 200 degrees
C°. To ensure that the temperature does not exceed the 200 degrees C°at t = 60 min,
the minimum thickness for the interior hempcrete and plaster layer is 70 mm (Appendix
A.11). Therefore another 30 mm hempcrete is added to the interior layer, to benefit the
fire resistance as well as lowering the brittleness of the thin interior layer.
4.2.8
Certification of materials
Due to the laws in Europe all building materials must be certified, to ensure that they meet
the required standards. No certifications are applied to the bamboo structure during this
study, but it is a must if the wall element is to be used in a building. In Denmark FSC
certification is used to ensure that all wood used in buildings is sustainable, where a sim-
ilar certification can be applied to the laminated bamboo. Furthermore, CE-branding is
a requirement for building materials in all of Europe [48], and therefore all hemp mate-
rials used in the element are assumed certified as they are produced in Italy. For now
the bamboo beams and columns, which where used for the prototype, are produced in
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
61
==PAGE:72==
China, which has its own requirements. To allow the materials to be imported and used
in Denmark or EU in general, they must be controlled continually to ensure an identical
process, which is up to the standards of the CE-branding.
4.2.9
Acoustics
In the building regulation it is stated that acoustic class C from the Danish standard DS
490 needs to be achieved. This gives limits for the airborne sound insulation (≥55dB), the
impact sound level (≤53dB) and the noise levels (≤53dB) [49]. As this project focuses
only on the external wall element, without a definite dwelling layout, it is not possible
to define whether the acoustics insulation levels are fulfilled or not. Sound propagates
throughout the entire building components. Normally test and measurements must be
performed to empirically assess the noise levels or complicated calculation must be made
as many different parameters influence the acoustics [50]. This will not be a focus of this
report, and the acoustic design of the design will be left out for further investigations. The
only data which was given by Calcecanapa, is that the hempcrete has a sound reduction
index of 52 dB (see data sheet in Appendix A.10).
4.2.10
Light and view
In the building regulation it is stated that the window glass area in the wall must make up
min 10% of the walk-able floor area. A hypothetical window design was made for the final
prefabricated wall elements, to assess its possible dimensions and how the installation
would work (see Figure 4.11). The resulting window has a 120 cm tall and 96 cm wide
glass pane which means a glass surface of 1.15 m2. One prefabricated wall element can
cover the requirements of window surface of 11.5 m2 net floor area, which is a large span
considering that the wall element is only 2.4 m wide.
It was not possible to make any other daylight assessment, as only the wall is considered
and not an entire building. But when the window was designed in the detail drawings the
following general guidelines were kept in mind to ensure a good daylight scenario:
• The bottom part of the window is placed at a height from the floor of 85 cm to allow
the inhabitants to have a good view out.
• The window is placed as far out as possible as this allows more daylight in (due to
reflection and avoided shadowed corners). This is why the board system to attach
the window to the bamboo beams is implemented (see Figure 4.11).
• A high placement of the window in the wall allows a deeper penetration of light in
the room [51]. Therefore if the daylight scenario is not sufficient, the first thing to
change would be the window height. In this design it would not be an issue as only
the upper beam needs to be moved.
62
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.11: Cross section of possible window installation
4.3
Aestetics requirements
4.3.1
Uniform and plane surfaces
The hempcrete elements can, if not properly flattened during prefabrication, have an un-
even surface. But even though the plastering process becomes a bit more time-consuming
by the uneven surface, an experienced worker can easily level it out during plastering.
This demand mainly applies for the internal surface, as the exterior surfaces of buildings
in urban areas of Denmark often have bricks or other decorations of the facades. For
now the exterior facade of the element is considered plastered, but as this might clash
with the preferred architectural expression of Denmark, another vapor permeable exterior
cladding can be developed.
4.4
Buildability requirements
4.4.1
System integration
The final element consists of four materials: lime plaster, hempcrete, hemp fiber insulation
and laminated bamboo beams. It is important that the different materials, its properties
and its function are integrated between each other. The system integration took part in
the choice of the material design, as the focus was to create a simply prefabrication and
installation process.
To ensure a good system integration, prototyping, 2D and 3D drawings for both the prefab-
rication and installation process of the element were performed and are shown in Section
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
63
==PAGE:74==
4.4.4 & 4.4.5. From the drawings the following issues were resolved:
• The external hemp fiber panels extends across connections of the elements, to
avoid thermal bridges.
• The hempcrete layer extends above the element to insulate the slab above.
• The structure is placed on the warm side of the element to avoid thermal losses and
its deterioration by cold climate and rain from outside.
• The hempcrete is cast around and inside the structure instead of attaching insulation
panels to it, to simplify the process.
• The hemp fiber panels replace a thicker and heavier hempcrete element, to avoid
large momentum affecting the structure, while improving the thermal insulation ca-
pacity.
From the prototyping of the element the following issues were resolved:
• The connection holes must be filled with solid material, to avoid that the filling needs
to cure or dry for a longer period.
• The connection holes must be 15 cm x 30 cm for easy access to place and fasten
the bolts.
• The surface of the element does not have to be completely plane, as the plastering
process can make the surface plane. A plane surface does make the plastering
process easier.
• The structure is attached to the hempcrete, when the hempcrete is completely cured.
The element should be moved with caution in the first days of curing, as the structure
is not attached when the hempcrete is still wet.
• Mortar is used for the connections between hempcrete surfaces
• The surface of the element must be damp before plastering, as the dry hempcrete
otherwise drags the moisture from the plaster.
• The hempcrete must cure on material which does not drag moisture, as it creates a
soft surface of the hempcrete.
• The panel must cure with the smallest surface covered, as the covering makes the
surface less hard.
• The structure is subjected to moisture during the curing process of the hempcrete,
but does not show signs of moisture or fungi issues,
64
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.12: Section showing the layers of the final element design
4.4.2
Possibility of openings
The structural system created as a stud wall, makes it simple to have openings in the wall.
The necessary dimensions for the beams and columns around openings are designed
for the elements on ground floor in a five storey building. The sizes of the load bearing
elements above and around the opening were altered, as they obtain load from a larger
span. The beams above openings span 1.2 meters instead of the 0.6 meters, which it
was designed for. Therefore the height of the beam’s cross-section is increased to 110
mm from the original 60 mm to avoid an unacceptable deflection. The opening also gives
additional load to the columns, which causes the columns’ required width to increase from
the original 50 mm, to 70 mm. The new dimensions for the elements only apply to the
beams and columns which distribute the loads around openings.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure 4.13: Opening in wall element
For further information about the design values for elements around openings see Vali-
dation of laminated bamboo beams above openings and Validation of laminated bamboo
columns around openings in Appendix A.2
4.4.3
Integration of fittings/installations
Electrical installations and fittings can be installed in the elements, though the openings
and ducts for the installations must be created during the cast of the element. Ducts for
electrical cables must be attached to the structure, and cords can be lead through them.
The connection holes are utilized for placing the power outlets, to avoid creating more
holes in the element [52].
4.4.4
Simple prefabrication
As well as for the required simple installation on site, a simple prefabrication will save
time and material loss in the process. A simple prefabrication method must be standard-
ized, by developing standard sizes and solutions for openings, electrical installations, etc.
Furthermore, the fewer components there is in the facade the simpler the manufacturing
process is. The following presented steps can ensure that the prefabrication is performed
with the least issues and mistakes. Also changing the prefabrication method from pro-
duced by hand to an automated process could simplify the process.
Before the prefabrication can begin, the following elements must be ready for the process
to run smoothly:
• A mixture of 2.25 m3 hempcrete must be prepared per element, preferable with
additional 10% in case of waste during the process.
• Form-work must be oiled and ready to use with the internal dimensions of 2.4 m x
3.18 m.
• A laminated bamboo structure of five columns and two beams with the outer dimen-
sions of 2.4 m x 3 m must be constructed.
66
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:77==
• Form-work for creating the connection holes in the element.
• A plate with the dimensions 2.4 m x 3.18 m with handles on one side for planing the
hempcrete surface after cast.
• A plate with the dimensions 1.7 m x 2.46 m with handles on one side for planing the
hempcrete surface on the inner side of the connection holes.
• Plates with handles which match the areas of the hempcrete on the outer side of
the form-work, to plane the hempcrete surface where the connection holes are.
Figure 4.14: Prefabrication step 1
Figure 4.15: Prefabrication step 2
Figure 4.16: Prefabrication step 3
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
67
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.17: Prefabrication step 4
Figure 4.18: Prefabrication step 5
Figure 4.19: Prefabrication step 6
68
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:79==
Figure 4.20: Prefabrication step 7
Figure 4.21: Prefabrication step 8: curing and storage position
4.4.5
Simple system
To be competitive on the market, each element must be as easy to install as the elements
it is replacing. To ensure this, the elements must be ready for installation and are stan-
dardized with the lowest possible amount of steps to be performed on the building site. It
is particularly important to reduce the number of man-hours, as in Denmark labor is a big
part of the costs of a construction project.
For the on site process to work, the following elements must be ready at hand:
• Foundations for the building on site
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
69
==PAGE:80==
• Slabs with prefabricated anchors to match the connection holes in the wall elements
• Hemp fiber panels for exterior insulation system
• Hemp fibers for filling connection holes in elements
• 14 hemp blocks of 14 x 29 cm for closing the connection holes for each element
• Mortar for in between the hempcrete of all wall element connections
• Plaster for the final finish of the elements
On site the process steps are:
Figure 4.22: Transport to building site
Figure 4.23: Placement of element on slab
70
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.24: Wall elements are connected by bolts and mortar
Figure 4.25: Slabs above elements are placed
Figure 4.26: Connection holes are filled
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
71
==PAGE:82==
Figure 4.27: Interior surface is plastered
Figure 4.28: Hemp fiber panels are attached on the exterior side of the facade
Figure 4.29: Exterior surface is plastered and system is finalized
72
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:83==
4.4.6
Transportable
One of the set requirements was that the elements would not be harmed during transport.
As no 1:1 scale element was created, the prototypes were used for the test of distress
during transport. After creating the prototypes in the lab, they had to be moved several
times. During the process both transport by trolley and by car was performed. This re-
sulted in single hemp shives falling from the elements, but no major parts or corners were
damaged. Based on the small tests it is concluded that the elements are fit for transport,
but further investigations on a full scale element are recommended.
4.4.7
Protected against rain
The element must not be subjected to rain during construction, especially the exterior fiber
panels. There is a large risk that the element absorbs to much rainwater, which can not
be released again. (see Section 3.3.3). To ensure that the materials are protected against
rain, all materials must be covered with plastic during transport and when being stored at
the building site. Furthermore, the materials must never be placed directly on the ground,
and they should be elevated at all times.
During construction the prefabricated elements are difficult to keep covered, therefore it is
not recommended to crane and install the elements when it is raining. When the elements
are installed on site, they must be covered until the slabs are placed on top of them.
This makes the process more difficult, but is highly recommended as all the materials in
the prefabricated element are organic. When the whole building is constructed with the
elements, the fiber panels can be attached to the exterior side of the facade. It is very
critical that the fiber panels are well covered as the low density of the material makes them
highly exposed to rain.
Looking at other building sites, mineral wool and similar materials are not covered during
construction, even though the materials are also very exposed. Therefore, it is recom-
mended to do tests of the construction process to determine the necessity to cover the
panels. Based on experience from past construction sites, there is a high need to protect
all materials during construction, as many buildings experience issues with mold after the
building is finished [53]. Furthermore, there have been several attempts to reduce the
general risk of building materials being exposed to rain during the construction process.
For instance SiteCovers [54] has developed a recyclable tent for a construction site, which
could be explored as an option to avoid moisture issues.
4.4.8
Low maintenance
The wear of the element over time is very uncertain, as the materials are not commonly
used yet. Specific data on the maintenance of the material is not available, but some of
the materials can be compared with commonly known materials. See life spans for each
material in Table 4.9. If properly maintained, the wall element is expected to have a life
span of more than 100 years. Maintenance is expected to include retouch of the plaster
on both the interior and exterior side of the facade. For smaller holes in the hempcrete
mortar can be used to close them, but it is recommended to fill larger holes in the facade
with fresh hempcrete. The curing time for the hempcrete is long, but if the facade lacks
a larger piece of hempcrete it creates a thermal bridge in the element. Exterior insulation
panels can be removed and a new panels can be attached to the facade, after which the
facade is plastered again.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
73
==PAGE:84==
Material
Life span
Reference material
Lime plaster internal
120 years
Lime plaster
Glue laminated bamboo
120 years
Glue laminated timber
Hempcrete
+100 years
[19]
Hempfibers
Unknown
Plaster external
120 years
Lime plaster
Table 4.9: Life span for materials
The life spans of reference materials, plaster and glue laminated timber, is based on
information from the program LCAByg.
4.4.9
Reusable
Several sources claim that both bamboo and hemp can be reused and recycled, as the
hempcrete can be broken down and reused in a new hempcrete mixture [15]. The fiber
panels however will be difficult to reuse, as they would most likely break when being de-
tached, as they are glued to the surface of the hempcrete. It is plausible that the bamboo
structures can be reused, in the same way as timber structures, though it depends of the
level of decay as well as how easily the bamboo can be detached from the hempcrete. To
avoid that single materials should be detached from the element, the whole element can
be reused, if the building is being transformed or removed before the end of its lifespan.
All the natural materials of the elements can be put in landfill at the end of their life cycle,
without any harm to the ground.
4.5
Sustainability requirements
4.5.1
Natural materials
The element fulfills the requirement of consisting of natural materials, with a few excep-
tions. The exceptions include the bolts and screws which are made out of steel and plastic,
the glue in the structure and the polyester which can be found in the fiber panels.
4.5.2
Sustainability of the final design
The sustainability of the design was assessed by performing a cradle-to-gate Life Cycle
Assessment (LCA) of the final prefabricated wall element. The result indicates the total
global warming potential of the wall element when installed on site and allows to point out
the hot spots in the manufacturing process.
Functional unit:
To start the LCA process the functional unit was established. One whole finished wall
element was taken as functional unit, this includes the prefabricated wall element, the
inner plaster and the outer insulation system, as well as the bolts that are required to
install the element on site. The main dimension of the wall can be found in Figure 4.2.
From this dimensions all the required materials quantities were calculated (see Appendix
A.7).
Life cycle inventory analysis:
To fill out the life cycle inventory, first a flow diagram of the life cycle was compiled and
the system boundaries for the modelling where set (see F igure 4.30). This was helpful
to point out all the different processes the materials have to go through before ending up
in the final element.
74
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.30: Simplified Life Cycle flow diagram of the wall system, the red line is showing
the system boundaries for the considered model.
For the full Life Cycle flow diagram see Appendix A.7
Afterwards the life cycle inventory was compiled in tables. This means every manufac-
turing and assembling process was established, including the required amounts and pro-
duction process for the materials, the required energy, water consumption, packaging,
transport and more. In this phase a lot of research was conducted to gather all the re-
quired information. The main data providers were:
• CalceCanapa is used for reference for hemp products, and Holse & Wibroe as ref-
erence for bamboo products.
• Reference LCAs for hemp shiv and fiber production ([55] and [56]), MOSO bamboo
beams production [10] and insulation panel production [57].
• Online research for electric power of the required machinery, necessary metal and
plastic production processes for screws, bolts, and trusses etc.
The full life cycle inventory tables, with all the comments, assumptions and data sources
can be found in Appendix A.7. Ones all the required information was gathered, it was
assessed whether the processes could be found in Sima Pro or if new process had to be
created.
Results and interpretation
All the input data from the tables was inserted in the Sima Pro software and the impact
calculation was made with the CLM-IA baseline methodology. When natural renewable
materials are considered, during the production phase the CO2 absorption of the growing
plant can be taken as a reducer of the global warming potential, because it has a positive
influence on the total amount of emitted kg of CO2 equivalent. This quantity of carbon
dioxide is then released back in the atmosphere in the end-of-life of the material, when it
decomposes in landfill or it is burned in the incinerator, even though in the second case it is
source of energy or heat. In this case the end-of-life phase is not considered in the LCA,
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
75
==PAGE:86==
because the uncertainty is too big. Both the resulting impacts are shown, whether the
carbon dioxide absorption is not considered during the manufacturing (see Figure 4.31)
or it is and it does lower the total impact of the element (see Figure 4.33). This because
in the first, all the negative impacts of each main process can be seen and analysed while
in the second from the beginning the total impact is cut down by the positive influence of
the organic material.
In Figure 4.31, the total global warming potential of the wall can be seen with its main
contributors, without taking into account the amount of CO2 hemp and bamboo would
absorb while growing.
Figure 4.31: Global warming potential of the wall system, without considering the CO2
uptake from the growing plants. The total global warming potential is then subdivided in
its main contributors.
Furthermore, the impact of the packaged hemp shiv, hemp fiber panels and the complete
bamboo structure are summarized in Figure 4.32. This shows the main influence of the
material transport, the production (for example the used electricity in China for the lami-
nated bamboo beams) and the side products such as screws and bolts or the packaging
in plastic and paper.
76
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:87==
Figure 4.32: Global warming potential share of the packaged hemp shives, hemp fiber
panels and the complete required bamboo structure.
Worst case scenario was considered for the LCA, not counting the carbon dioxide uptake
from the plants and with the following considerations:
• The carbonation of the lime (further CO2 absorption by the lime binder while curing)
is not considered, as it happens over a long span of time, and it was not possible
to quantify it for the considered wall system. Regardless, the carbonation should
lower the impact of the burning and slacking process in the lime production. In this
assessment only the fact that lime has around a third of impact in the production
phase compared to cement is considered [20].
• It is assumed that metal products as screws, bolts and trusses are created from new
produced steel. It should be considered that they might be made out of recycled
steel scraps at least in a certain percentage [58].
• The plastic products such as the bolts for the insulation system, the PET fiber in the
hemp fiber panels and the plastic net are assumed to be produced and imported
from China and consisting of new plastic billets. Again it is possible, especially for
the PET fibers in the insulation, that these are made out of recycled material ([59]
and [57]).
A further iteration of the LCA would implement the considerations and assess how much
the global warming impact would decrease. Furthermore, it can be seen from the results
that surprisingly against any predictions, the transport of the bamboo beams from China
has not such a big influence on the results (only 3% on the total impact). While the trans-
port of all the materials in Europe accounts for around 25% of the total global warming
potential, in the sensitivity analysis a different type of transport is assessed. Another sur-
prising result is that the consumed electricity for the laminated bamboo beams in China
accounts for 17% on the total kg of CO2 eq. This is because a big amount of electricity
is required for the beam production and the Chinese electricity mix in SimaPro is mainly
made out of non-renewable electricity sources. Finally, a 10% share goes to the pro-
duction of the hemp shiv and fibers, which is due to land use and the ammonium nitrate
based fertilizer. However, the impact from the hemp shivs and fibers completely evens
out, when including the carbon dioxide uptake of the production.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
77
==PAGE:88==
Figure 4.33, shows the result of the total global warming potential of the wall system, when
the kg of absorbed carbon dioxide are subtracted. It is considered that while growing the
absorption is of 1.8 kg of CO2 for each kg of hemp plant stem [56] and 0.7 kg of CO2 for
each kg of bamboo stem [10]. It can be concluded that the complete wall system has a
global warming potential when installed on site of 167 kg of CO2eq.
Figure 4.33: Global warming potential of the wall system when the carbon dioxide uptake
is considered.
Sensitivity analysis
The first sensitivity analysis was made on the used calculation methodology: the CML-IA
baseline was replaced by the ILCD 2011 Midpoint+ methodology. In this case the climate
change impact of the wall system is of 706 kg of CO2eq, which is approximately 10 %
less compared to the other methodology. Nevertheless the impact share for the different
elements are almost the same: 67% for the prefabricated element, 9% for the internal
plaster and 24% for the insulation system. This means that the results are consistent
and reliable, the CML-IA Baseline probably has stricter rules and weighting factors and
therefore results in slightly higher kg of CO2eq.
Two other sensitivity analysis were performed for the two most surprising results of the
LCA: the impact of the transport methodology in Europe and the amount of used elec-
tricity in the laminated bamboo beams production. This is to assess how much the two
processes would weight on the total impact. The results are summarised in the following
table:
Sensitivity Analysis
Total Impact
kg CO2eq
Difference
kg CO2eq
Weight of parameter
relative change in %
-10% consumed electicity
for beams production
748
13
-1.71%
Transport in Europe made
by train and not truck
618
143
-18.79%
(-9% for the prefab element,
-3% for the internal plaster and
-7% the insulation system)
Table 4.10: Summary of performed sensitivity analysis
78
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:89==
Even though it is not very likely that the material transport in Europe would happen by train,
it is interesting to see how much difference it would make on the final impact (-19%). The
same applies to the consumed electricity in China. The hot spots in the production chain
are not always where they were expected, and the sensitivity analysis allows to spot them
and see how much they weight in the final result. Furthermore, if the sensitivity analysis
is performed on all the main impacting process it can suggest where the production chain
should be changed for a less impacting solution. In the future the product could be even
more optimized on an environmental level by investing in new techniques or change the
processes to similar less polluting ones (for example different transport ways).
4.5.3
Low costs
The price of the element is calculated based on Molio Pricedatabase 2019, used in Sigma
Enterprise. The chosen calculation method is: Net prices without fees. This calculation
method only includes labour, material costs and rent, which excludes taxes, scaffolding
and building site costs [60].
Element type
Costs
Hempcrete/laminated bamboo
29,346.5 DKK
Table 4.11: Costs per element (inner surface: 7.2 m2, outer surface: 7.6 m2)
The cost of the hempcrete, exterior hemp fiber panels and finishing plasters was given
by the company CalceCanapa® (see Appendix A.9). To adjust the prices from Italian to
Danish, 50% was added to the prices from Calcecanapa. This is assumed to include
importing transport, taxes etc. for importing the materials to Denmark.
Only material prices were given by the hemp company, and thereby additional costs due
to labour was inserted in the estimation. The labour for each task was determined based
on similar tasks. The casting of Hempcrete was determined by the labour costs for casting
of concrete. The hemp panels installation labour costs were based on light weight bricks,
the cost for plastering was based on the costs of plastering a brick wall. And the costs of
creating the bamboo structure was based of labour costs for a timber structure.
Costs of 1 m2 element is compared with the competitors of the industry in Section 5.2.1.
In the comparison with the competitive elements, the same prerequisites are taken into
account.
4.5.4
Minimum of man-hour use
The man-hour use per m2 is determined based on the man-hour use for similar processes
as mentioned in the previous section.
Element type
Costs
Man hours
Hempcrete/laminated bamboo
4,293 DKK
4.56 hours
Table 4.12: Costs and man-hours per 1 m2 element
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
79
==PAGE:90==
80
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:91==
5
Discussion
In this chapter the main limitations of the applied design methods will be presented, how
these can be overcome and which future developments would benefit the project. Fur-
thermore, the element will be compared with common building methods (prefabricated
concrete/brick or wooden elements) based on costs, environmental impacts and produc-
tion capacity. This to assess what the implementation of the developed element would
mean.
5.1
Limitations and further developments
5.1.1
Structural analysis
The main limitations for the structural analysis, was that all strength values were deter-
mined based on results from one scientific report. No further tests were performed, due
to the limited time slots the thesis team was allowed in the research labs. Strength tests
of the laminated bamboo elements would have confirmed or dismissed the used strength
values.
Looking at the beams and columns in the structure, their load bearing capacity can be
further optimized in terms of utilization of the material. To do this a different shape of
cross-section could be developed, as composite beams and columns. This could save
material in the long run, but further tests of moisture issues of the element’s thin webs, as
well as different connections must be developed, for such an optimization to be feasible.
Though before optimizing the structure for the solution, a certification and standardiza-
tion of bamboo structures must be developed. As the load-bearing capacity is based on
the standardization of timber structures, the result has an uncertainty. Furthermore, all
structural calculations must go through quality control of a certified structural engineer, to
ensure the safety of the buildings being created with the wall elements.
As the laminated bamboo is not produced in Europe, CE-branding must be applied to the
elements as it is a demand for building materials in Europe. To allow the materials to be
imported and used in Denmark or EU in general, they must be controlled continually to en-
sure an identical process, which is up to the standards of the CE-branding. Furthermore,
a certification similar to the FSC certification for construction wood, is recommended as
especially public building developers have demands for using FSC certified wood [61].
5.1.2
Hygrothermal analysis
The main limitation of the moisture evaluation for the wall elements, is the quality of the
input data. As the assessed materials are not commonly used or researched, no com-
plete database with the several required input parameters for the WUFI Pro simulations
was found. The input data was collected through several sources: the material provid-
ing companies, scientific reports on hempcrete and the material database of the program
when analogies with similar materials were possible.
There are no specific regulation or suggested limits for the simulation evaluation that con-
cerns this materials, therefore general parameters for wood and organic materials were
taken into account. These as mentioned in Chapter 2.4.4 are on the safe side and there-
fore, the interpretation of the simulation results is reliable. However, it is of interest in the
future, to repeat the assessment using data based on more specific material input. To do
so, tests of the single materials must be performed to measure their different character-
istics, which are inserted in the simulation program to assess the material combination.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
81
==PAGE:92==
Furthermore, to have a even better evaluation of the combination, it is of high interest to
perform moisture tests on the entire wall element (as it was done in [62]). To perform this,
the element is placed in controlled climates and humidity scenarios or left in a real case
situation, with the exterior side exposed to the Danish outdoor climate and the interior to a
set indoor climate. The results of these test are expected to show the actual performance
of the whole wall throughout a set time.
The main issue resulting from the moisture evaluation, is that the external hemp fiber
insulation in some periods has an above limit water content (see Section 3.3.3), which
is due to high rain absorption. The issue can be solved by applying a better performing
plaster, installing a rain screen or using a denser insulation panel. Furthermore, the actual
acceptable water content for the panels must be determined, to make it clear when the
issues arise and which of the solutions would be the most beneficial.
The input data for the U-value calculation is all provided by CalceCanapa, and the results
are similar both in the uni- as in the bi-dimensional calculation method. Therefore the
results are considered strong and reliable.
5.1.3
Buildability
The buildabiltiy of the element was assessed on a theoretical level with 3D and 2D detailed
drawings as well as with digital development for both the manufacturing and installation
process. A scaled down prototype, a corner of the element, was built to assess all the
aspects that could not be addressed digitally. The result is an optimized system on a
theoretical level. Though in practice the only way to demonstrate, that the prefabrica-
tion and installation process works, is by creating several 1:1 elements and install them
in a test building. All the considered processes, manufacturing and installation, as well
as time and cost of the solution could then be assessed in a real case scenario. In this
way parameters such as real dimensions and weight or transport of the elements, would
play a determining role in the results. When the production method is optimized, cos-
tume machinery and production system for the elements must be developed for the most
economically beneficial process.
The construction of a test building would give the tools to assess all the parameters of
the building’s performance, where a whole building design is required, such as acoustics,
daylight scenarios, energy consumption during the use phase and indoor climate.
5.1.4
Other further developments of the project
The environmental aspect of the design can be developed further, and it should be as-
sessed and researched whether there are local alternative materials which can replace
the hemp or bamboo. The replacement would cut out all the impacts due to transport
(see Section 4.5.2) and create a local circular solution. The materials in question must
have the same technical properties (load-bearing capacity, vapour permeability, insula-
tion properties) and have similar organic structure. For example, a different fiber based
material such as seaweed could replace the hemp fiber insulation or a plant with a woody
shiv such as straw could become an alternative in the composite mixture.
The previous mentioned further researches on the prefabricated wall element, are the nat-
ural development of the design process, and will lead to a market-ready product. When
the wall concept fulfills all the necessary requirements, it is of high interest to apply the
same development process to other building components such as slabs, roof elements
and internal walls. This could create a low environmentally impacting and complete build-
ing solution.
82
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:93==
5.2
Comparison with the competitors in the industry
The competitors in the danish building sector, were found to be the masonry cavity wall
and the prefabricated wooden structure wall elements. The two competitors were anal-
ysed based on LCA and costs.
5.2.1
Sigma Estimates
Sigma Estimates was used in order to determine the man-hours and costs of the de-
veloped element (see Chapter 4.5.3), and to compare these with the competitors in the
market. All data for the production and installation of the competitors was found in the
Molio database for new constructions. Figure 5.1 shows the costs per m2 for each of the
three elements.
Figure 5.1: Cost per m2 for each considered element
To understand the prices for each element, the graphs in Figure 5.2 illustrates the cost
category division for each element.
Figure 5.2: Cost share by category (labour, material and rent) for each element. Rent has
relevant share only for the concrete/brick wall, in the other cases it is less than 5%
The costs of the element pr. m2 are similar, but the hemp/bamboo element is more similar
to the concrete element in how the costs are distributed. The reason for this, is that most
of the labour costs are based on processes from the concrete element, where only the
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
83
==PAGE:94==
bamboo structure and trusses are based on labour costs from the wooden element. The
wooden wall element stands out with a larger labour cost than the competitors, which is
due to the installation of many different individual components in the wall.
Table 5.1 sums up the price for one element for each of the three competitors.
Element type
Costs
Wood/mineral wool
29,347 DKK
Concrete/mineral wool/brick
31,198 DKK
Hempcrete/laminated bamboo
30,912 DKK
Table 5.1: Costs per element (Height: 3 m, Width: 2.4 m)
Based on the data given, the designed element is not the cheapest alternative, but is
highly competitive. To ensure that the cost of the developed element is accurate, several
actual project should be performed, and prices from experience must be developed and
included in a database. This especially applies for all hemp elements, as the bamboo
elements are very similar to wood. However the estimated costs are highly reliable on a
theoretical level, as they are based on experience from other similar materials.
5.2.2
Impact of competitors
The panel of hempcrete and bamboo was analysed in Simapro into detail (see Section
4.5.2). The competitive wall components were run through LCAByg with standardized el-
ements from the program. Smaller changes to the panels, such as insulation and concrete
thickness were performed to create elements with the same properties as the hemp/bam-
boo panel. As said in 2.4.6, it is important to establish the same functional unit in dimen-
sions and technical properties to make the different objects comparable.
The two competitive panels are:
Figure 5.3: Wall element A: con-
crete/brick element
Figure 5.4: Wall element B: wooden
element
Wall element A: concrete/brick element This element is considered the unsustainable
prefabricated competitor. The element consists of a 150 mm reinforced concrete inner wall
84
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:95==
insulated with 250 mm mineral wool and an exterior layer of bricks on the outer surface.
The wall element is equipped with a vapor barrier and steel fastening system for the brick
wall.
Wall element B: wooden element This element is considered the sustainable prefabri-
cated competitor. The element consists of a 245 mm CLT stud wall insulated with mineral
wool, with an inner cladding of painted gypsum and an outer cladding of wood boards.
In Table 5.2, the resulting global warming potentials for each of the competitive panels,
calculated with LCA byg, can be found.
LCA
Wall element A
Wall element B
Concrete/brick element
Wooden element
Materials
[kg CO2eq]
[kg CO2eq]
Insulation
133.9
119.2
Metal
56.6
30.8
Minerals
712.6
97.8
Synthetics
126.7
Wood
225
Phases
[kg CO2eq]
[kg CO2eq]
Production wo. CO2 uptake
895.8
310
CO2 uptake
0
-1307.2
End of life
7.25
1595.5
[kg CO2eq]
[kg CO2eq]
Total
903
600
Table 5.2: LCAByg results for competitors
Figure 5.5: Cradle-to-grave for the concrete/brick element
Only the production and end of life phase is considered for each element, as all elements
are considered to have the same properties in the use phase. Therefore, the same en-
ergy demand for the use phase can be assumed for each element type. Furthermore,
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
85
==PAGE:96==
all repairing and maintenance of the elements are taken out of the calculations, as they
create a large uncertainty.
Figure 5.6: Cradle-to-grave for the wooden element
Looking at the production of the three elements (cradle-to-gate perspective), the most
impacting one is the concrete/brick element (895.8 kg CO2eq). The wooden element has
the lowest impact of the three, namely 310 kg CO2eq without taking the CO2 uptake of
the pine into account. This puts the hemp/bamboo element in between the two elements
with a production impact of 761 kg CO2eq.
When taking the CO2 uptake into account the wood and hemp/bamboo elements have
respectively each an impact of -996.9 kg CO2eq and 167 kg CO2eq. For the concrete
element no CO2 uptake is considered. For the production of each element, the wood
element is the preferred element. But due to lack of data for end of life phase of the
hemp/bamboo element, no final conclusion can be drawn. It could be that in a cradle-to-
grave perspective the impact of the disposal of the designed element is lower than the
one of the wooden element. Furthermore, the production potential of the bamboo is higher
than for construction wood for at least the next 20 years [10], due to the fast growth of the
bamboo. Therefore, wood scarcity due to its increasing demand for construction can be
avoided if bamboo is utilized as a substitute.
86
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:97==
5.3
Production potential
One hectare dedicated to hemp farming produces 9000 kg of hemp shiv and 2400 kg of
hemp fibers [55]. This means that, considering the required quantities of material calcu-
lated in the LCA (see Appendix A.7) and an additional 10% of waste during the production,
one hectare approximately produces 39 prefabricated wall elements of which 29 can be
covered with the insulation panels.
For what concerns the bamboo production, only 42% of bamboo stems harvested in the
forest can be used for laminated bamboo, while the rest goes into less valuable side prod-
ucts or is used for energy production. One hectare of bamboo forest produces annually
approximately 5 m3 of this first quality products [10]. This means that a hectare of land
has the potential to produce material for the structure of 35 prefabricated elements.
Figure 5.7: Production of hemp and bamboo in 1 hectare of land
If a five-storey building and a single-family house are considered, the two main construc-
tion types in Denmark (see Chapter 1.4), the following quick estimation can be done. A
standard rectangular five-storey dwelling building, where each storey is approximately 100
m2, requires 86 prefabricated elements in the considered dimensions for its construction
(see Figure 5.8). A two storey one-family house of 120 m2 requires 22 prefabricated ele-
ments. This brings to the conclusion that if the concrete/brick technique, with an impact
of 896 kg CO2eq per element in the manufacturing phase is replaced with the hemp-
bamboo element (impact of 167 kg CO2eq) in the construction of a multi-storey building
and a single-family house respectively 62 and 16 tonnes of CO2eq can be saved.
As seen in Chapter 1.3, bamboo forests can grow in areas where only few other crops
and plants can (for example eroded slopes), and it regenerates it self as it is a grass
species. The Chinese bamboo growth potential is very high and there is no scarcity risks
for the product [10]. Therefore, the European hemp production is taken as measurement
to evaluate the production and replacement potential of the designed element.
The hemp production in Europe has been constantly increasing in the last 10 years and
by 2017 around 105,000 hectares were dedicated to hemp farming [63]. Around 50% per-
cent of this is produced in France and Italy, which are the locations where the considered
hemp products in this report are from. Furthermore, a survey from 2013 says that of the
produced fibers and shiv, respectively 26% and 16% go into the construction sector [64].
This percentage as well as the dedicated hemp farming hectares are higher nowadays,
as the building sector is becoming more interested in hemp construction and overall hemp
production is increasing, but for now they will be taken as references.
Moreover, this means that still considering the 10% of material waste during the produc-
tion, the production potential in France and Italy is 329,300 prefabricated wall elements
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
87
==PAGE:98==
of which 246,500 can be covered with the fiber insulation system.
Figure 5.8: Considered dimension of standard buildings in Denmark for production po-
tential calculation
To conclude, with the overall production potential of 246,500 complete hemp-bamboo wall
systems, as they were designed, it would be possible to build 2860 multi-storey houses
or 11200 single storey buildings. This would cover the danish new building activity of
the last year for one of the considered building types (see Figure 1.6) and save 180,000
tonnes of CO2eq. This conclusion is made by assuming that all the produced hemp in
Italy and France, dedicated to the construction industry, would be shipped to Denmark.
Furthermore, also the dimensions for the assessed building types are assumed as well
as the building footprint. However the impact of the replacement is so big that even with a
larger error margin it would be definitively worth it to invest further in the design and make
it a marketable solution.
5.4
Sustainability goals
In this final section, it is assessed which Sustainable Development Goal set by the United
Nations, would be tackled with the implementation of the designed element.
Bamboo and hemp are both sustainable materials, based on the research made not only
in this thesis, but also in other research papers. The potential shown in this report is only a
small part of the materials potential, as both materials are used for many other application,
for example food, clothes, utilities and much more. The resources can be used to ease the
pressure for forest management, lower the CO2 emissions of the construction industry and
become new income sources for rural populations. The following are the UN Sustainable
Development Goals [65] which would be supported:
5.4.1
SDG 3: Good Health and Well-being
”Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages”
One of the main good properties of hemp and hempcrete is that it is a vapour perme-
able material. This brings along several advantages, such as a good indoor air quality,
no mould and fungi issues and regulated indoor temperatures (see Section 1.3). A good
indoor environment is fundamental for the health of the inhabitants, as it can avoid respi-
ratory and cardiovascular diseases [65].
88
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:99==
5.4.2
Goal 7: Affordable and clean energy
”Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all”
From the the LCA for MOSO bamboo [10], it was concluded that almost all industrial
bamboo production is CO2 negative. This is due to the credits for bio-energy production
which the bamboo can be utilized for at the end-of-life, as well as the carbon sequestration
due to land change. This positive impacts outweigh the emissions of production and
shipping. The same can be assumed for the hemp which can also be utilized for bio-
energy. Though the end-of-life of the two materials is not taken into account in this thesis,
this is a potential which should be investigated further.
5.4.3
SDG 13: Climate Action
”Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts”
13.1: Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural
disasters in all countries.
Especially bamboo as a construction material is utilized for housing in areas with large
earthquake risk, due to the bamboo’s flexibility which is highly adaptable for earth quakes.
Furthermore both bamboo and hemp have big carbon uptake rates while growing, bigger
than wood for example, as they grow very fast. This is seen as a good potential to tackle
climate change.
5.4.4
SDG 11: Sustainable cities and Communities
”Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”
One of the main goals in the design of the prefabricated wall was that it could be imple-
mented in new constructed multi-storey buildings. This are been built all over the biggest
cities in Denmark because of the big housing demand and fast urbanization need. If the
design would be used on a large scale, all this new developing neighbourhood could claim
an environmental sustainable urbanization process.
Furthermore as bamboo and hemp are largely produced in Asia([10] and [63]), it could
be of an high interest to assess the implementation and impacts of the wall element in
Asian context. This could decrease even more the element’s global warming potential, as
the transport share of it would be cut out, as well as offering a local, fast and sustainable
development opportunity for rural or degraded urban contexts.
5.4.5
SDG15: Life on land
”Protect and restore terrestrial ecosystems and halt all biodiversity loss”
Where the two materials can be of use to reach the sub-goals: 15.3 ”By 2030, combat
desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification,
drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradation neutral world.” and SDG 15.b,
which calls for the integration of natural resources into developing countries including
reforestation.
By utilizing the two materials and planting it systematically in degraded land for the bam-
boo and in the rest years for the hemp, the potential of optimizing land use and for storing
millions of tons of carbon becomes great [10].
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure 5.9: From left: SDG 2, SDG 7, SDG 11, SDG 13 and SDG 15, taken from [65]
90
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:101==
6
Conclusion
The goal of this report was to design an alternative prefabricated wall element, made out
of the natural materials hemp and bamboo, to replace more climate-impacting materials
on a large scale. The solution was expected to be competitive with other common build-
ing techniques (prefabricated concrete-brick or wood facade walls) on a technical and
economical level while being the environmentally preferred option.
In a cradle-to-gate perspective the final prefabricated wall design has a very low impact
on the environment, the absorbed CO2 while growing (594 kg) lowers the global warming
potential of the element to 167 kg CO2eq. In the comparison with the competitive build-
ing techniques, it showed that the designed hemp-bamboo element has a lower global
warming potential than the concrete-brick element (896 kg CO2eq). This in both cases,
whether the carbon uptake of the growing bio-materials is considered or not. Compared
to the wood element it was not possible to conclude the same, as both alternatives (wood
and hemp) uptake CO2 while growing. The comparison showed that in a cradle-to-gate
perspective the wooden element would perform better (-997 kg CO2eq). However, the
absorbed carbon during the production phase is released again in the end-of-life phase
with the disposal of the materials from the wooden element. The end-of-life phase was
not considered for the hemp-bamboo element due to too big uncertainties, while it cre-
ates a very big impact for the wooden element (1596 kg CO2eq). Further development
of the LCA could prove that in a cradle-to-grave perspective the hemp-bamboo element
has a lower impact in the disposal and therefore in the whole life cycle. Furthermore,
on a short term bamboo has less scarcity issues compared to wood, therefore it can be
concluded that the element is a better choice for an immediate change in the impact of
the construction sector.
The technical design was carried out by following the Eurocodes and the requirements
set by the Danish standards. For the structure of the element, the goal was to develop
a solution with the capacity to carry the load from five storeys. The high strength of the
bamboo ensured this possibility and the element in theory has the capacity to replace the
polluting concrete-brick solution which is used now. The strength of the glue laminated
bamboo is high compared to glue laminated timber, but the stiffness of the material is very
similar. Therefore, the strength of the bamboo’s is not fully utilized, as the deflection of the
material exceeds its limit at lower loads due to its low stiffness. This issue can be tackled
by the development of composite beams and columns, to optimize the utilization of the
structural elements strength capacities. A final conclusion for the capacity of the element
can only be drawn if the standards and certifications for bamboo are developed. It can be
concluded, that the results are close to realistic, as bamboo has wood like properties, but
the standards for the material is a must for future development of the structure.
The Danish building regulations requires that a building envelope has good insulating
properties, no thermal bridges and no moisture related issues. The designed final ele-
ment reaches a very good U-value (0.123 W/m2K), which is definitively competitive with
not natural insulation materials and fulfills the requirements. The moisture related prop-
erties were difficult to assess on only a theoretical level. The final wall layout was chosen
based on the solution, which theoretically does not give interstitial condensation, and
stays within the set limits for total water content. For an improved assessment of the
moisture handling properties of the wall, lab tests on the materials and the element must
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
91
==PAGE:102==
be performed: both of the single materials to improve the input information, and on the
wall layout chosen for the wall. A real case scenario of constructing a building with the
designed wall element would benefit the assessment of moisture issues, as it would grant
the possibility of finalizing empirically the conclusions.
Besides the performance of the element, the main requirement of being buildable is very
essential for the evaluation of the element, as without it the element would not be usable.
The method of creating a 3D model and a scaled prototype of the final element ensured
a theoretical optimization of the component. All components in the element are designed
to be simple and with a standardized solutions to create a simple construction process.
In theory the element is highly buildable, but the limitations of the used method are that
some processes and issues can be overlooked. If tested on a 1:1 scale element in a
designed building, unforeseen issues could arise. To fully understand the manufacturing
process and buildability of the element, a building for the element to be used in must be
designed and build.
The central idea for the wall element was to implement it on a large scale, which would
improve consistently the environmental impact of the construction industry. For this to
be possible, the element must be economically appealing to companies. The price of
the hemp/bamboo element is not the cheapest alternative, but it is highly competitive
according to the performed comparison. However, the uncertainty of the data for the
designed element (material import from Italy and man-hours pr m2 element), requires
further investigation. To conclude the production and installation costs with certainty, the
element must be produced in full scale and installed on site.
Furthermore, based on the evaluated production potential: there is enough cultivation of
bamboo in Asia and hemp in Europe to produce elements on a large scale. The Danish
demand, for either new construction of multi-storey buildings or one-family houses can
be satisfied, if all the hemp produced for construction in Italy and France is exported to
Denmark. This scenario is not realistic, but it gives an indication that even on a bigger
scale, the chosen materials have a large potential to handle the demand.
The architectural look of the element’s finishing is plane and uniform, as it is plastered on
both sides. This contradicts with the external facade expression of multi-storey buildings
in Danish cities where brick surfaces is often preferred. This difference could make the
element less appealing and harder to sell from an architectural point of view. To give the
element more competitive advantage, further possibilities for an external cladding must
be developed.
In theory all the set design requirements (Table 2.1) were fulfilled for the element, even
though some results are limited by the methods. The element works on a theoretical level,
but would benefit from a more practical approach, where a real case scenario is at the
highest recommendation. The element must be tested for fire resistance, acoustics, mois-
ture performance, daylight scenarios and buildability, prior to concluding that the element
is sufficient for its purpose.
To answer the research question of the thesis: yes, the designed hemp-bamboo prefab-
ricated wall element has a large potential to compete with the traditional materials used
in today’s constructions, on a large scale. The road for a market-ready product is still
long, and different research procedures must be performed, but it is highly possible. By
completing the recommended further investigations, the element will in time allow a big
step in the direction of a more sustainable construction industry.
92
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. Construction. 2018. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/
sectors/construction/.
[2]
Monica Lavagna et al. Benchmarks for environmental impact of housing in Europe:
Definition of archetypes and LCA of the residential building stock. eng. 2018.
[3]
Tyler Disarufino. Construction Practices in Austria and the European Union. eng.
2015.
[4]
Jonathan Watts. “Concrete: the most destructive material on Earth”. In: (2019). URL:
https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2019/feb/25/concrete-the-most-destructive-
material-on-earth.
[5]
Pull Up Stumps. Growth behavior to create a bamboo forest. URL: https://www.
pullupstumps.com.au/bamboo-removal/.
[6]
kulturstyrelsen Niels-Holger Larsen. Træ til husbygning. 2012. URL: https://slks.
dk/fileadmin/user_upload/SLKS/Omraader/Kulturarv/Bygningsfredning/Gode_raad_
om_vedligeholdelse/8.2_Trae_til_husbygning.pdf.
[7]
Arjanvan der Vegteb Bhavna Sharmaa. Nonconventional and Vernacular Construc-
tion Materials, chapter 21: Engineered bamboo for structural applications. English.
Woodhead Publishing Series in Civil and Structural Engineering, 2020. ISBN: 978-
3-319-14133-6.
[8]
FAO. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 - key findings. FAO, 2020. ISBN:
978-92-5-132581-0. URL: http://www.fao.org/3/CA8753EN/CA8753EN.pdf.
[9]
wallpaperpass. Bamboo wallpaper. URL: https://www.wallpaperpass.com/download-
bamboo-wallpaper-54/.
[10]
PhD P. Van der Lugt and PhD J. G. Vogtländer. The Environmental Impact of Indus-
trial Bamboo Products - Life-Cycle Assessment and Carbon Sequestration. English.
PO Box 100102-86, Beijing 100102, P. R. China: International Network for Bamboo
and Rattan (INBAR), 2015. ISBN: 978-92-95098-90-9 (online).
[11]
Therma XX Jackets. Five most common Thermal Insulation materials. 2018. URL:
https://www.thermaxxjackets.com/5-most-common-thermal-insulation-materials/.
[12]
G.A. Perry. “Mineral Wool Insulation is Not Green, Sustainable or Environmentally
Friendly”. In: (2019). DOI: https://miscimages-2.s3.amazonaws.com/3353/Gavin+
Perry+Mineral+Wool+Insulation+is+Not+Green+Sustainable+or+Environmentally+
Friendly+2019-06-09.pdf.
[13]
Laura Mark. “Natural insulation materials”. In: (2013). DOI: https://www.architectsjournal.
co.uk/buildings/specification/natural-insulation-materials/8643176.article.
[14]
Hemp Technology Global. Building with Hemp/Lime FAQ’s. URL: https://hemptechglobal.
com/page79/page79.html.
[15]
William Stanwix and Alex Sparrow. The Hempcrete Book : Designing and Building
with Hemp-Lime. English. Green Book, 2014.
[16]
PrzemysĹ‚aw Brzyski. “RISK ASSESMENT OF WATER VAPOR CONDENSATION
IN WALL MADE OF HEMP-LIME COMPOSITE”. In: Architecture Civil Engineering
Environment 9 (June 2016). DOI: 10.21307/acee-2016-021.
[17]
Hempcrete.dk. Facts HempCrete. URL: http://www.hempcrete.dk/faktaomhempcrete.
html.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
93
==PAGE:104==
[18]
Eshrar Latif et al. “Moisture Buffer Potential of Experimental Wall Assemblies In-
corporating Formulated Hemp-lime”. In: Building and Environment (2015). DOI: 10.
1016/j.buildenv.2015.07.011.
[19]
La Banca Della Calce srl. Products. URL: https://www.bancadellacalce.it/bdc/
calcecanapa/.
[20]
Maris Sinka, Genadijs Sahmenko, et al. “Sustainable thermal insulation biocom-
posites from locally available hemp and lime”. In: Environment. Technology. Re-
sources. Proceedings of the 9th International Scientific and Practical Conference.
Vol. 1. 2013.
[21]
Bioizol s.r.o. Hemp Insulation Panel. URL: https : / / www . bioizol . eu / en / hemp -
insulation-panel.
[22]
HempFlax. Panel insulation. URL: https://www.hempflax.com/en/applications/
construction/panel-insulation/.
[23]
Christian Fertner. “Urbanisation, urban growth and planning in the Copenhagen
Metropolitan Region with reference studies from Europe and the USA”. In: Forest
& Landscape Research 2012 (Jan. 2012), pp. 1–151.
[24]
Dan Hoffmeyer and Birgit Rasmussen. “Building acoustics throughout Europe Vol-
ume 2: Housing and construction types country by country”. In: (2014), pp. 102–
118.
[25]
Andrea Boller. “Timber construction in Denmark: a sustainable solution for afford-
able accommodations.” In: (2018).
[26]
Bjarne Chr. Jensen. Teknisk ståbi 20. edition. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2009. ISBN: 978-
87-571-2685-3.
[27]
Sweedish Wood Federation. Design of Timber Structures. Volume 1. 2015. ISBN:
978-91-980304-8-8.
[28]
Sweedish Wood Federation. Design of Timber Structures. Volume 2. 2015. ISBN:
978-91-980304-3-3.
[29]
Sweedish Wood Federation. Design of Timber Structures. Volume 3. 2015. ISBN:
978-91-980304-4-0.
[30]
Ana Gatóo Bhavna Sharma. Engineered bamboo for structural applications. Con-
struction and Building Materials. Elsevier Ltd, 2015.
[31]
Ministry of Transport, Building and Housing. Executive order on building regulations
2018 (BR18). 2018.
[32]
Carsten Rode. The Use of Spreadsheets to Calculate Water Vapour Diffusion Ac-
cording to the Glaser Method. English. 2003.
[33]
PrzemysĹ‚aw Brzyski. “Risk assessment of water vapor condensation in wall made
of hemp-lime composite”. In: Architecture Civil Engineering Environment 9 (June
2016). DOI: 10.21307/acee-2016-021.
[34]
Hartwig M. Kunzel. “Moisture risk assessment of roof constructions by computer
simulation in comparison to the standard Glaser-method”. In: International Building
Physics Conference Eindhoven (2000).
[35]
Fraunhofer IPB. WUFI® Pro. URL: https://wufi.de/en/software/wufi-pro/.
[36]
WUFI Pro. Analysis, interpretation and assessment of the calculation results. 2018.
URL: https://www.wufi-forum.com/viewtopic.php?t=1623.
[37]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 14044 Environmental manage-
ment — Life cycle assessment — Requirements and guidelines. 2016.
[38]
DGNB System. Building life cycle assessment. eng. 2020. URL: https: / /static .
dgnb.de/fileadmin/dgnb-system/en/buildings/new-construction/criteria/02_ENV1.1_
Building-life-cycle-assessment.pdf.
94
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:105==
[39]
Sima Pro. SimaPro Database Manual - Methods Library. eng. 2019. URL: https:
//simapro.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DatabaseManualMethods.pdf.
[40]
Træ.dk - Danmarks Træportal. Limtræ. 2017. URL: https://www.trae.dk/leksikon/
limtrae/.
[41]
ICBBM. Statistical analysis of hemp concrete mechanical properties variability. 2015.
URL: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/4ce4/ea312eaa59f005b36d43b3e4bfa61d15aa0f.
pdf.
[42]
INBAR. Bamboo, a Sustainable Solution for Western Europe Design Cases, LCAs
and Land-use. 2009. URL: http://www.aha-kh.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/4-
inbar-bamboo-a-sustainable-solution-for-western-europe-design-cases-lcas-and-land-
use.pdf.
[43]
Dansk Standard. Eurocode 1: Actions on structures - Part 1-4: General actions -
Wind actions. Second edition. Dansk standard, 2007.
[44]
Darshil U. Shah et al. “Thermal conductivity of engineered bamboo composites”. In:
Journal of Materials Science (2016). DOI: 10.1007/s10853-015-9610-z.
[45]
Dansk standard. Stainless steels - Part 4: Technical delivery conditions for sheet/-
plate and strip of corrosion resisting steels for construction purposes. 2. edition.
2011.
[46]
Studio green pte ltd. Prefabricated hempcrete product catalogue. 2015. URL: https:
//www.slideshare.net/JayeTan/prefabricated-hempcrete-product-catalogue-2015-by-
studio-green-pte-ltd-55192490.
[47]
Kristian Hertz. Vejledning i dimensionering af bygningskonstruktioner for fuldt ud-
viklet brand. 2006. URL: https://www.bef.dk/media/20826/vejledning-i-dimensionering-
for-fuldt-udviklet-brand-kristian-hertz-sep-2006.pdf.
[48]
ETA-Danmark A/S. CE-mearkning. URL: https://www.ds.dk/da/om-standarder/ce-
maerkning/produktgrupper.
[49]
Jonas Brunskog. Acoustics in renovation projects. 2019.
[50]
Luciano Mattevi. Requisiti acustici degli edifici. 2005. URL: http://www.inquinamentoacustico.
it/.
[51]
Stegbar. Window Planning - Light. URL: https://www.stegbar.com.au/info-centre/
tips-and-tricks/window-planning-light.
[52]
sustainandbuild. Building with Hemp Part 1/2. 2009. URL: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=FcctSvVFheA.
[53]
Line Jensen Susie Frederiksen. “Sådan minimeres risikoen for skimmelsvamp i nye
bygninger”. In: (2017). URL: https://www.bolius.dk/saadan-minimeres-risikoen-for-
skimmelsvamp-i-nye-huse-19394.
[54]
Ulrik Andersen. “Kæmpetelt med indbygget kran giver Novos byggeri tørvejr”. In:
(2015). URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/kaempetelt-med-indbygget-kran-giver-novos-
byggeri-toervejr-179607.
[55]
S. González-garcía et al. Life Cycle Environmental Analysis of Hemp Production for
Non-wood Pulp. 2007.
[56]
Luca Zampori, Giovanni Dotelli, and Valeria Vernelli. “Life Cycle Assessment of
Hemp Cultivation and Use of Hemp-Based Thermal Insulator Materials in Build-
ings”. In: Environmental Science & Technology (2013). URL: https://doi.org/10.
1021/es401326a.
[57]
Francesca Intini and Silvana Kühtz. “Recycling in buildings: An LCA case study of a
thermal insulation panel made of polyester fiber, recycled from post-consumer PET
bottles”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment (2011). DOI: 10.1007/
s11367-011-0267-9.
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
95
==PAGE:106==
[58]
SteelConstruction.info. Recycling and reuse. URL: https://www.steelconstruction.
info/Recycling_and_reuse#Steel_and_recycling.
[59]
How It’s Made. How It‘s Made Polyester. 2016. URL: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=zYkglUysDKk.
[60]
Molio. Brugervejledning til Molio Prisdata. 2019. URL: https://docplayer.dk/107494952-
Brugervejledning-til-molio-prisdata.html.
[61]
Technologisk Institut. CE-mearkning. URL: https://www.teknologisk.dk/ydelser/ce-
maerkning-og-dokumentation-af-byggevarer/28613.
[62]
Amandine PIOT et al. “Study of a hempcrete wall exposed to outdoor climate: Ef-
fects of the coating”. In: Construction and Building Materials (2017). DOI: 10.1016/
j.conbuildmat.2016.12.143.
[63]
Chris Hudock. Hemp Cultivation in Europe. 2019.
[64]
Michael Carus. “The European Hemp Industry: Cultivation, processing and applica-
tions for fibres, shivs, seeds and flowers”. In: European Industrial Hemp Association
(2017).
[65]
United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals. URL: https://sustainabledevelopment.
un.org/?menu=1300.
96
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:107==
A
Appendix
A.1
Initial concept design matrix
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
97
==PAGE:108==
A: LAMINATED BAMBOO
B: BAMBOO STEMS
C: WOVEN PLATE
E: CROSS-LAMINATED
PLATE
1: HEMPCRETE BLOCKS
2: HEMP FIBERS
3: SPRAYED HEMPCRETE
4: CAST HEMPCRETE
STRUCTURAL CONCEPTS
INSULATION CONCEPTS
HEMPCRETE CAST AROUND STRUCTURE
“LEGO” BLOCKS
HEMPCRETE SPRAYED ON STRUCTURE
HEMPCRETE BLOCKS W. INTERIOR STRUCTURE
WALL CONCEPTS
Developed from crossing the structural and insulation concepts
Possible combinations:
A4 & B4
Or with fibers: A4+2, B4+2 
Possible combinations:
A3, B3, C3, E3
Possible combinations:
A1, B1
Possible combinations:
A1 & B1
==PAGE:109==
A.2
Structural description
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
99
==PAGE:110==
 
 
 
2020
STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
OF PREFABRICATED ELEMENT 
HELENA REJNDRUP, S145492 
100
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:111==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 1 af 41 
Table of contents 
Perquisitions for design of structure in prefabricated load bearing wall element ........................................... 3 
Description of structure ................................................................................................................................ 3 
Description of the area the wall element is to be used ............................................................................ 3 
Description of the panels........................................................................................................................... 3 
Perquisitions for the calculations .................................................................................................................. 3 
Norms, literature and IT-programs............................................................................................................ 3 
Reliability class ........................................................................................................................................... 4 
Materials ........................................................................................................................................................ 4 
Laminated bamboo .................................................................................................................................... 4 
Hempcrete ................................................................................................................................................. 5 
Loads .............................................................................................................................................................. 5 
Load groups ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
Self-weight ................................................................................................................................................. 5 
Imposed loads............................................................................................................................................ 6 
Snow load .................................................................................................................................................. 6 
Windload ................................................................................................................................................... 6 
Material usage per element .......................................................................................................................... 7 
Structural analysis ............................................................................................................................................. 8 
Horizontal and vertical loads ......................................................................................................................... 8 
Wall element ................................................................................................................................................. 8 
Dimensions of elements in a panel of 2.4 m x 3 m ....................................................................................... 9 
Perquisitions for structural analysis ........................................................................................................ 10 
Beams ...................................................................................................................................................... 10 
Columns ................................................................................................................................................... 12 
Trusses ..................................................................................................................................................... 14 
Connections ............................................................................................................................................. 15 
Calculations ................................................................................................................................................. 18 
Validation of laminated bamboo beams ................................................................................................. 18 
Validation of laminated bamboo column ................................................................................................ 20 
Validation of laminated bamboo beams above openings ....................................................................... 21 
Validation of laminated bamboo columns around openings .................................................................. 23 
Loadcombinations ................................................................................................................................... 24 
Validation of laminated bamboo beams and columns ............................................................................ 25 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
101
==PAGE:112==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 2 af 41 
Eccentricities ............................................................................................................................................ 36 
Lateral torsional buckling for beam ......................................................................................................... 38 
Lateral torsional buckling for columns .................................................................................................... 39 
Validation of trusses in facade ................................................................................................................ 40 
Validation of connections ........................................................................................................................ 41 
 
 
 
 
102
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:113==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 3 af 41 
Perquisitions for design of structure in prefabricated load bearing wall 
element 
Description of structure 
Description of the area the wall element is to be used 
The panel is calculated to be used in a building with 5 stories with either wood or concrete slabs. A building 
like this would be 16 meters tall. These buildings would either be placed in the city or in the suburbs. The 
element is assumed to be used for residential buildings. 
No slabs or foundations are calculated.  
Description of the panels 
This thesis concerns the design and evaluation of a load bearing façade panel, which can easily substitute the 
more CO2 emitting façade panels being used in the industry today.  
The panels consist of a laminated bamboo structure, which is created as a framing structure with trusses. It 
is to create an easy transition from the traditional way to construct wood buildings, to creating buildings with 
bamboo. Each element is created of 5 columns as well as two continuous beams connecting the columns. 
This creates an element of 3 x 2.4 meters.  
Each panel is cast in hempcrete, which also creates the surface of the panels. The hempcrete is not 
considered as a load bearing element, but only as load on the structure.  
Perquisitions for the calculations 
Norms, literature and IT-programs 
Eurocodes:  
 
DS/EN 1990 Basis for project engineering for load carrying structures DS/EN 1990 DK NA. 
 
DS/EN 1991-1-1 Densities, self-weight and live loads for buildings DS/EN 1991-1-1 DK NA. 
 
DS/EN 1991-1-2 Fireloads DS/EN 1991-1-2 DK NA. 
 
DS/EN 1991-1-3 Snowloads DS/EN 1991-1-3 DK NA. 
 
DS/EN 1991-1-4 Windload DS/EN 1991-1-4 DK NA. 
 
DS/EN 1991-1-5 Thermal loads DS/EN 1991-1-5 DK NA. 
 
DS/EN 1991-1-6 Loads on constructions during excecution DS/EN 1991-1-6 DK NA. 
Literature: 
[1] Jensen, Bjarne Chr., 2009. Teknisk ståbi, 20. edition. Nyt Teknisk Forlag.  
[2] Munch-Andersen, J.  & Larsen, H., 2009. Træ Informations Beregning ad forbindelser, part 1 and 2, 1 
edition. Træinformation. 
[3] Munch-Andersen, J.  & Larsen, H., 2009. Træ Informations Beregning ad forbindelser, 1 edition. 
Træinformation. 
[4] 2015. Design of Timber Structures, Volume 1. Sweedish Wood Federation. 
[5] 2015. Design of Timber Structures, Volume 2. Sweedish Wood Federation. 
[6] 2015. Design of Timber Structures, Volume 3. Sweedish Wood Federation. 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
103
==PAGE:114==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 4 af 41 
[7] Sharmaa, B., der Vegteb, A. (2020). Nonconventional and Vernacular Construction Materials, chapter 
21: Engineered bamboo for structural applications. English. Woodhead Publishing Series in Civil and 
Structural Engineering.  
[8] 
Spæncom. 
Dækelementer, 
Xtrumax. 
Accessed: 
12th 
of 
March 
2020. 
URL: 
https://spaencom.dk/betonelementer/daekelementer/ 
[9] Taasinge Elementer. Dækelement type D-1 - etagedæk mellem celler i fleretages boliger. Accessed: 
10th of March 2020. URL: https://www.taasinge.dk/produkter/daekelementer/d1-etagedaek/ 
[10] 
Calcecanepa, 
accessed: 
15th 
of 
June 
2020, 
product 
information: 
https://www.bancadellacalce.it/bdc/calcecanapa/ 
Programs 
 
Excel  
 
MatCad 
Reliability class 
The calculations are based on the reliability class CC3, high reliability class. The consequence of failure gives 
a high risk of loss of human life, as the building is more than 4 stories tall. The factor K.FI is to be used when 
calculating load combinations for the elements. 
Table 1 - factor for reliability class CC3 
 
 
 
Materials 
Laminated bamboo 
The laminated bamboo is used for the structural concept in the load bearing wall element. For reference, 
laminated bamboo is compared to one of the strongest laminated timber, GL32h. 
Table 2 - Strength properties for glue laminated wood versus gluelaminated bamboo [10] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reliability class
CC3
5 stories building
K.FI
1.1
Wood, GL32h
Laminated bamboo
Compression
MPa
MPa
Parallel to the fibers
f.c,0,k
32
77
Perpendicular to the fibers
f.c,0,k,pe
2.5
22
Tension
MPa
MPa
Parallel to the fibers
f.t,0,k
25.6
90
Perpendicular to the fibers
f.t,0,k,pe
0.5
2
Shear
MPa
MPa
Shear strength
v 
3.5
16
Flexural
MPa
MPa
Bending strength
f.m,k
35
80
E-modulus, average
E.0
14200
12000
104
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:115==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 5 af 41 
Table 3 - Density for GL32 and laminated bamboo 
 
 
 
 
In the table above the difference between the materials are quite clear. Bamboo has more than double of 
compressive and tensile strength than wood, though a quite small E-modulus. Furthermore, the laminated 
wood only has a density of 70% compared to laminated bamboo.  
Hempcrete 
Table 4 - Hempcrete properties 
Hempcrete properties
Strength properties
Notation
Formula
Value
Unit
Compressive strength
f.c,0,k
0.4
MPa
E-modulus
E.0 
 
4 
MPa 
 
Even though the hempcrete has some strength, it is only a small percentage compared to the bamboo, and 
therefore it is not considered as a load bearing material in this element. Hempcrete is only considered to 
carry its self-weight in each panel, where the load is distributed to the bamboo beam below.  
Loads 
Load groups  
Table 5 - load groups for calculating "wood"-structures 
Load Groups
Load type
P
Permanent load >10 years
L
Long time load 1/2 - 10 years
M
Medium long-time load 1 week - 1/2 years
K
Short time load <1 week
Ø
Instantaneous load < 5 seconds
 
Self-weight 
Self-weight of each material is based on certain literature, one for each material type. This is done, due to 
the uncertainty of the material properties. 
Table 6 - Densities and self-weight for materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GL32 
Gluelaminated bamboo 
Density
kg/m3
kg/m3
Average
k 
490
686
Element
Density
Self weight
Wooden slab [9]
0.43
kN/m2
Concrete slab [8]
23.5 kN/m3
4.32
kN/m2
Plaster
12 kN/m3
0.23
kN/m2
Laminated bamboo beam
6.7 kN/m3
0.06
kN/m
Laminated bamboo column [7]
6.7 kN/m3
0.05
kN/m
Hempcrete
2.35 kN/m3
1.86
kN/m
Hemp fibers [10]
0.78 kN/m3
0.35 
kN/m
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
105
==PAGE:116==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 6 af 41 
Imposed loads 
                         Table 7 - page 143, Teknisk Ståbi, edition 20 
Category
Imposed load 
Residential (distributed load)
1.5
kN/m2
Point load (residential)
2
kN
Office
2.5
kN/m2
Roof (distributed load)
0
kN/m2
Roof (point load)
1.5
kN
 
Snow load 
The snow load on roof is determined by the formula: 
S = μ୧∙Cୣ∙C୲∙S୩ 
Where  
μ୧ = the snow load shape coefficient 
A flat roof is assumed, therefore,  μ୧ = 0.8 
Cୣ = the exposure coefficient = 1.0  
As typography assumes normal, as the buildings constructed with this façade would be very similar in size 
and shape of the surrounding buildings.  
C୲ = the thermal coefficient = 1.0 
S୩ = the characteristic value of snow load on the ground = 1.0 kN/m2  
S =  0.8 ∙1.0 ∙1.0 ∙1.0 𝑘𝑁
𝑚ଶ= 0.8 𝑘𝑁
𝑚ଶ  
Windload 
The following values are determined based on DS_EN 1991-1-4. The building is assumed to be placed in either 
terrain category III or IV, and therefore category III is chosen, as it is the most unfavorable. From the terrain 
category, the graph page 145 ([1] Teknisk Ståbi, edition 20) is used. 
Table 8 - properties for calculation of the windload on the facade 
Windload
Windload on face of facade
Notation
Formula
Value
Unit
Terrain category
III
Terrainfactor
k.r
0.215
Roughness length
z.0
0.3
m
min. Height
z.min
5
m
Peak velocity pressure
q.p
0.7 kN/m2
Reference height
z.e
15
m
Factor, wind pressure
c.pe,10 (D)
0.8
Factor, wind suction
c.pe,10 (E)
-0.7
106
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:117==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 7 af 41 
Characteristic wind pressure
we,d
q.p ∙c.pe,10
0.56
kN/m2
Characteristic wind suction
we,e
q.p ∙c.pe,10
-0.49
kN/m2
Windload on corner of facade
Notation
Formula
Value
Unit
Factor
c.pe,10 (A) 
1.2 
 
Characteristic wind pressure
w.e
q.p ∙c.pe,10
0.84
kN/m2
 
          Wind load is only calculated for zone D, E and A, as the 
building, which the element is used for, is not designed in 
complete.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Material usage per element 
The material usage and weight of the element is shown in the table below 
Table 9 - Material use for one panel without openings 
 
 
 
Material use for one panel without openings
Width: 
2.4 
m 
Height inner
 
3 
m 
Height outer
The panels extend above the slabs to lower the thermal bridges 
3.18 
m 
Hemp
1,83
m3
240,00
kg/m3
439.14
kg
Hempfibers
1,01
m3
80,00
kg/m3
80.64
kg
Laminated bamboo
0,11
m3
686,00
kg/m3
78.37
kg
Plaster exterior
0,11
m3
1200,00
kg/m3
129.60
kg
Plaster interior
0,11
m3
1100,00
kg/m3
118.80
kg
Total kg
3,17
m3
846.55
kg
Figure 2 Windload on building (Teknisk Ståbi, edition 20) 
Figure 1 Windload on facade of building 
(Teknisk Ståbi, edition 20) 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
107
==PAGE:118==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 8 af 41 
Structural analysis 
Horizontal and vertical loads 
The vertical loads consist of self-weight, imposed loads including snow loads. These loads will be distributed 
from the slabs in the building to the beam in the wall element. The beam is simply supported by each of the 
columns, and the load from the beam is distributed equally to the supporting columns. The load is then 
distributed from the columns to the beam in the bottom of the element. Where the load is distributed from 
the element, to the slab below.  
The elements are designed with bamboo trusses, which is to stabilize the elements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wall element 
The wall elements consist of a traditional stud wall structure, using laminated bamboo instead of glue 
laminated wood. In each panel the columns are placed with 600 mm from center to center, with a beam 
spanning in top and bottom. The calculations are conducted for one panel in an element, with two columns, 
600 from center to center. As well as two beams, a top and bottom, which spans from column to column. 
Figure 3 - Bamboo structure with truss 
108
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:119==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 9 af 41 
Dimensions of elements in a panel of 2.4 m x 3 m 
Beams 
 
 
 
Columns 
Width 
w.c
= 0.045 m 
Height 
h.c 
= 0.14 
m 
Length 
L.c 
= 3.00 
m 
 
Trusses 
Width 
w.t 
= 0.04 
m 
Thickness 
t.t 
= 0.002 m 
Length 
L.t 
 
 
= 3.84 
m 
 
Hempcrete 
 
 
Hemp fibers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From all the information above, the structural analysis is conducted in the pages below. 
Width 
w.b
= 0.14 
m 
Height 
h.b 
= 0.06 
m 
Length 
L.b  
 
 
= 2.4 
m 
Thickness 
t.h 
  
  
= 0.27 m 
Thickness 
t.hf 
  
  
= 0.14 m 
Figure 5 - Exterior of wall element, with 
hempcrete, hemp fibers and bamboo 
structure 
Figure 4 - Interior of wall element, 
surface of hempcrete 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
109
==PAGE:120==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 10 af 41 
Perquisitions for structural analysis 
All elements are dimensioned and designed to carry 5 stories of concrete slabs including: imposed, live and 
natural loads as well as self-weight. Concrete slabs where used for the design, as concrete slabs are heavier 
than wooden slab elements. This ensures that the element can be used in all situations, both for new 
buildings, and as a substitute element in a renovation. All bamboo elements are calculated as if they were 
glue laminated timber, as no standards for bamboo structures are available and certified yet.  
Beams 
The beam is dimensioned to be 140 mm x 60 mm and spans over a length of 2.4 meter. The beams in one 
element spans over five columns which the it distributes the loads to. 
The beams are subjected to loads from 
 
Elements above beam 
 
Imposed and live loads 
 
Nature loads 
 
Self-weight 
Beams are calculated for both roof slab and indoor slab, as the load combinations for each scenario gives 
different load sizes. Beams are calculated as simply supported beams, spanning between two columns with 
0.6 meters between.  
Moment capacity 
The beams moment capacity was calculated based on the design bending strength fm,d. Each beam was 
designed based on the maximum moment, which creates stress in the cross-section area. The stresses from 
the moment are designed to be lower than the bending strength of the element. Each beam was design for 
different load cases, as wood structures normally is. The beams are designed based on the maximum of the 
P-, M- and K-load.  
 
 
 
 
 
Maximum moment:   
𝑀ாௗ= 1
8 ∙𝑝∙𝐿ଶ 
Bending stresses from moment, based on cross-section area: 
𝜎௠= 𝑀ாௗ
𝑊௬
 
Utilization:  
𝑈= 𝜎௠
𝑓௠,ௗ
 
Figure 6 - Beam dimensions 
Figure 7 - Static system for beam 
110
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:121==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 11 af 41 
The beams are design so that the utilization is less than 100% of the beam’s capacity, to ensure that the 
beam can handle the stresses. 
Shear capacity 
The beams shear capacity was calculated based on the design shear strength d.  
Maximum shear in beam:   
𝑉ாௗ= 1
2 ∙𝑝∙𝐿 
Stresses from shear, based on cross-section area:    
௩= 3
2 ∙𝑉ாௗ
𝑤 ∙ℎ 
Utilization:   
𝑈= ௩
ௗ
 
The beams are design so that the utilization is less than 100% of the beam’s capacity, to ensure that the 
beam can handle the stresses. Furthermore, the shear capacity was checked in case of cracks based on 
shear in the beam.  
Lateral torsional buckling 
The calculations are based on the method of Design of timber structures, volume 2: example 3.4 
Size factor for glue laminated timber 
𝑘௛: 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚 ቆ൬600
ℎ൰
଴,ଵ
 𝑜𝑟 1.1ቇ 
Effective length of beam, for uniformly distributed load 
𝑙௘௙= 0.9 ∙𝑙+ 2ℎ 
Critical bending stress 
𝜎௠,௖௥௜௧= ቆ0.78 ∙𝑤ଶ
ℎ∙𝑙௘௙
ቇ∙𝐸 
Relative slenderness for bending 
𝜆௥௘௟,௠= ඨ𝑓௠,௞
𝜎௠,௖௥௜௧
 
Lateral stability factor 
𝑘௖௥௜௧∶ 𝑖𝑓 𝜆௥௘௟,௠< 0.75 = 1 
𝑘௖௥௜௧∶𝑖𝑓 0,75 < 𝜆௥௘௟,௠≤1.4 = 1.56 −0.75 𝜆௥௘௟,௠ 
𝑘௖௥௜௧∶𝑖𝑓 1.4 < 𝜆௥௘௟,௠=
1
𝜆௥௘௟,௠
ଶ
  
Deflection 
The beams are designed to have a deflection less than the allowable deflection.  
Allowable deflection for self-weight: L/400 [1] & [2] 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
111
==PAGE:122==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 12 af 41 
Designed deflection of beam 
𝑢= ൬5
348൰∙ቆ𝑝∙𝑙ସ
𝐸௕∙𝐼௬
ቇ+ ൬3
20൰∙ቆ𝑝∙𝑙ଶ
𝐺௠∙𝐴ቇ 
The designed deflection is designed to be less than the allowable deflection for the beam. Eb is assumed the 
same as Em and Gm is assumed based on the highest strength laminated timber.  
Columns 
The column is dimensioned to be 50 mm x 140 mm and spans over a length of 3 meter. 
The columns are subjected to loads from: 
 
Elements above column 
 
Imposed and live loads 
 
Nature loads 
 
Self-weight 
 
Moment from façade  
The vertical loads working on the columns includes the loads from elements above, slabs and walls including 
imposed and live loads. Besides from the vertical loads, horizontal loads from wind acts on the structure, 
both as pressure and suction. The most critical load scenario taken the moment of the eccentricities of the 
elements and façade into account with suction from the wind, as well as an outer eccentricity from the 
placement of the slab on the element. This scenario creates the larges outwards moment and is thereby the 
dimensional scenario, as the wind load in pressure would only benefit the load bearing capacity of the 
element.  
 
 
 
The columns are designed as simply supported. 
The load bearing capacity was determined based on the following calculations.  
Effective column length 
1 ∙𝐿 
Slenderness 
𝜆௬= 𝐼
𝑖௬
 
Relative slenderness 
𝜆௬௥௘௟=
𝜆௬
𝜋∙ඥ𝑓௖,଴,௞/𝐸଴,௞
 
β for gluelaminated timber: 0,1 
𝑘௬= 0.5 ∙(1 + 𝛽൫𝜆௬௥௘௟−0,3൯+ 𝜆௬௥௘௟
ଶ
) 
Figure 9 - Effective column length
Figure 8 - Column dimensions and 
koordinate system 
112
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:123==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 13 af 41 
Column reduction factor 
𝑘௖௬=
1
൬𝑘௬+ ට𝑘௬ଶ−𝜆௬௥௘௟
ଶ
൰
 
Where the load bearing capacity was designed by taken the column reduction factor into account.  
The stresses in the cross section was found to be 
𝜎௖,଴,ௗ= 𝑃
𝐴 
When the moment was calculated for the columns, both the moment from the wind load and the moment 
from different eccentricities of loads where taken into account.  
Excentricities from facade insulation 
e1.1 
0.12 m 
NOH 
0.45 kN 
e1.2 
0.24 m 
NOF 
0.2 kN 
e1.3 
0.32 m 
NOP 
0.12 kN 
e2.1 
0.095 m 
NIH 
0.2 kN 
e2.2 
0.13 m 
NIP 
0.13 kN 
Moment from excentricities 
MFI 
e1.1*NOH+e1.2*NOF+e1.3*NOP-(e2.1*NIH+e2.2*NIP) 
0.10 kNm 
Excentricities fromplacement of slab 
From the load combinations for roof slab 
es1 
0.023 m 
Np.load 
9.07 kN 
es2 
-0.023 m 
Nk.load 
10.71 kN 
NI.load 
11.70 kN 
 
The moment from the eccentricities was calculated by: 𝑀ா,௜= 𝑁∙𝑒 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figur 11 - eccentricities and moments 
from facade and slab placement 
Figur 10 - outer eccentricity of slab placement 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
113
==PAGE:124==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 14 af 41 
The maximum moment from the wind load was determined by 
𝑀ாௗ= 1
8 ∙𝑤∙𝐿ଶ 
The bending stresses from the moments 
𝜎௠,ௗ= 𝑀ா,௜+ 𝑀ாௗ
𝑊௬
 
Where both bending and normal stresses where considered, compared with the compression and bending 
strength of the laminated bamboo material. The total of this was designed to be smaller than 1, to show that 
the capacity of the column is sufficient.  
𝜎௖,଴,ௗ
(𝑘௖௬∙𝑓௖,଴,ௗ) + 𝜎௠,ௗ
𝑓௠,ௗ
< 1 
Deflection  
The deflection of the column was determined by the following formula 
𝑢= ൬5
348൰∙ቆ𝑤∙𝑙ସ
𝐸௕∙𝐼௬
ቇ 
Maximum allowable deflection for characteristic wind load is: L/250 [2] 
Trusses 
In order to stabilize the walls against the wind pressure and suction, wind trusses are implemented into the 
structure. The trusses are designed for the wind load, W.k, on a corner, with a load width of 2,7 meter (half 
the length of one slab element).  When the windload hits “Façade A”, “façade B” must stabilize the wall, 
which the truss is designed to do.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 - Windload on facade A uptained by 
facade B 
Figure 13 - Windload on facade
114
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:125==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 15 af 41 
 
The load which the trusses must uptain is calculated by finding the 
point force from the windload, which the truss must uptain. 
The load combination for wind load was used.  
Point load from wind 
𝑊ହ= 𝑤∙ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙 
Force in truss 
𝐹௧=
𝑊ହ
𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝐴) 
The truss is designed based on the strength of the steel being 
higher than Ft. One truss must be placed for each direction, in order 
to stabilize for the wind load from all sides.  
 
Connections 
All connections are calculated based on the methods in the three volumes of Design of Timber Structures 
Design of Timber Structures – volume 1 – chapter 4: Design of timber joints 
Design of Timber Structures – volume 2 – chapter 4: Design of timber joints 
Design of Timber Structures – volume 3 – chapter 4: Design of timber joints 
Design of truss connection with structure 
Connection I: connection between truss and structure 
Capacity of the connection, steel-to-timber connection  
Yield moment screw
My,Rk
0.3 ∙fu ∙def2,6
Embedding strength parallel fibers
fh0k
0.082 ∙ (1-0.01def) ∙k 
Softwood, correction factor
k90
1.35 + 0.015def
kd 
𝑘௠௢ௗ/𝛾ெ
Embedding strength in the direction of the force
fhak
𝑓௛,଴,௞
𝑘ଽ଴∙𝑠𝑖𝑛ଶ𝛼+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠ଶ𝛼 
Characteristic withdrawal strength
fax,k 
0.52  d-0,5  lef-0,1  k0,8 
 
Characteristic withdrawel capacity for screws
Fax,,Rk 
𝑛଴,ଽ∙𝑓௔௫,௞∙𝑑∙𝑙௘௙∙𝑘ௗ
1.2 ∙cosଶ𝛼+ sinଶ𝛼 
Design withdrawel capacity for screws
Fax,d 
Fax,,Rk∙𝑘ௗ
Failure mode a
Fv,Rk,a 
0.4 ∙fh,k ∙t1 ∙d
Failure mode b
Fv,Rk,b 
1.15ට2 ∙𝑀௬,ோ௞∙𝑓௛,௞∙𝑑+ 𝐹௔௫,ோ௞
4
 
Figure 14 - Design of element with one truss 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
115
==PAGE:126==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 16 af 41 
Characteristic capacity of connection
Fv,Rk 
Minimum(Fv,Rk,a, Fv,Rk,b)    
Design capacity of joint 
Fv,d 
𝑘௠௢ௗ∙𝐹௩,ோ௞
𝛾ெ
 
Total capacity of connection
Fv 
 𝐹௩,ௗ∙𝑛 
 
Failure mode a 
 
 
 
Failure mode b 
 
 
 
Connection II: connection between elements 
Capacity of the connection, timber-to-timber connection  
Yield moment screw
My,Rk
0.3 ∙fu ∙def2,6
Embedding strength parallel fibers
fh,i,k
0.082 ∙ (1-0.01def) ∙k,i 
kd 
𝑘௠௢ௗ/𝛾ெ 
Capacity of bolt
Fax,washer,Rk 
3 ∙fc,90,k ∙Awasher 
Design capacity of bolt
Fax,washer,d 
Fୟ୶,୵ୟୱ୦ୣ୰,ୖ୩∙𝑘𝑑
Shear capacity, failure mode I
Fv,Rk,I 
fh,1,k ∙t1 ∙d 
Shear capacity, failure mode II
Fv,Rk,II 
fh,2,k ∙t2 ∙d
Shear capacity of connection
 
Min(Fv,Rk,a, Fv,Rk,b)
Design shear capacity of connection
Fv,d 
𝑘௠௢ௗ∙𝐹௩,ோ௞
𝛾ெ
 
Total capacity of connection
Fv 
 𝐹௩,ௗ∙𝑛 
 
 
Figure 76 - Failure mode I & II 
(Design of timber structures 1 - section 4.3.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 65 - Failure mode a &b (Design of timber structures vol 1 – table 4.4)
116
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:127==
Perquisitions for design of structure in  
Architectural Engineering 
prefabricated load bearing wall element 
S145492  
Side 17 af 41 
Distance between bolts and screws in the connections 
Table 10 - minimum distance for screws with predrilling (Eurocode 5: “Beregninger af forbindelser”) 
Spacing and end/edge distance
Angle  
Minimum distance
a1 (parallel to grain)
0 ≤𝛼≤360°
(4 + |cos 𝛼|) 𝑑
a2 (perpendicular to grain)
0 ≤𝛼≤360°
(3+|sin𝛼|) 𝑑
a3,t (loaded end)
−90° ≤𝛼≤90°
(7 + 5 |cos 𝛼|) 𝑑
a3,c (unloaded end)
−90° ≤𝛼≤90°
7 𝑑
a4,t (loaded end)
0 ≤𝛼≤180°
𝑑< 5𝑚𝑚
(3 + 2 sin 𝛼) 𝑑
𝑑≥5 𝑚𝑚
(3 + 4 sin 𝛼) 𝑑
a4,c (unloaded end)
180° ≤𝛼≤360°
3 𝑑
 
Table 11 - minimum distance for bolts (Design of Timber Structures vol 2: table 10.4) 
Spacing and end/edge distance
Angle  
Minimum distance
a1 (parallel to grain)
0 ≤𝛼≤360°
(4 + |cos 𝛼|) 𝑑
a2 (perpendicular to grain)
0 ≤𝛼≤360°
4 𝑑
a3,t (loaded end)
−90 ≤𝛼≤90°
max(7 𝑑; 80 𝑚𝑚)
a3,c (unloaded end)
90° ≤𝛼≤150°
(1 + 6 sin𝛼)𝑑
150° ≤𝛼≤210°
4 𝑑
210° ≤𝛼≤270°
(1 + 6 |sin𝛼|)𝑑
a4,t (loaded end)
0 ≤𝛼≤180°
Max[(2 + 2 sin𝛼) 𝑑; 3 𝑑]
a4,c (unloaded end)
180° ≤𝛼≤360°
3 𝑑
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 12 – spacing and distances for bolted and screwed connections 
Connection
Bolt/screw dimension
Spacing between bolts/screws
Distance to edge
I
3.4 mm x 100 mm
Parallel to grain: 15 mm
Perpendicular to grain: 13 mm 
Unloaded: 23.8 mm
Loaded end: 34 mm 
II
M6 x 130 mm
Only one bolt per 1 meter is used
Unloaded: 24 mm
Loaded end: 80 mm 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 - Spacing between 
bolts and screws [6] 
Figure 18 - Distance to 
edge (loaded end) [6] 
Figure 19 - Distance to edge 
(unloaded end) [6] 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
117
==PAGE:128==
Notation
Formula
Value
Unit
Stories
=
5
Height of wall
H.w
=
3 m
Span of slab
L.s
=
5.4 m
Dimensions for hempcrete
Length
L.h
=
0.60 m
Width
W.h
=
0.27 m
Dimensions for fibers
width
W.hf
=
0.14 m
See all formulas in the calculations for the laminated bamboo beam
Width, w.b
=
0.14 m
Height, h.b
=
0.06 m
Length, L.b
=
0.60 m
Number of stories
=
1.00
Flexural load bearing capacity, beam under roof
Critical state 1, P-load
σ.m
=
8.14 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.22 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
σ.m
=
9.02 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.18 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
σ.m
=
10.48 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.19 < 1
Check
OK
Shear load bearing capacity, beam under roof
Critical state 1, P-load
t.v
=
4.34 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.59 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
t.v
=
4.81 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.49 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
t.v
=
5.59 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.50 < 1
Check
OK
No. Of stories and dimensions
Validation: laminated bamboo beams, simply supported, span of 0,6 m
118
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:129==
See all formulas in the calculations for the laminated bamboo beam
Deflection, P-load, beam under roof
Check
OK
L/
707.64 > 400
Deflection, K-load (snow)
Check
OK
L/
549.49 > 400
Flexural load bearing capacity, under indoor slab
Critical state 1, P-load
σ.m
=
9.49 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.26 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
σ.m
=
8.99 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.16 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
σ.m
=
9.70 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.14 < 1
Check
OK
Shear load bearing capacity, under indoor slab
Critical state 1, P-load
t.v
=
5.06 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.69 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
t.v
=
4.79 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.65 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
t.v
=
5.41 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.73 < 1
Check
OK
Deflection P-load
Check
OK
L/
606.76 > 400
Deflection K-load (snow dominating)
Check
OK
L/
567.6 > 400
Validation: laminated bamboo beams, simply supported, span of 0,6 m
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
119
==PAGE:130==
See all formulas in the calculations for the laminated bamboo column
Width
w.c
=
0.05 m
Height
h.c
=
0.14 m
Length
L.c
=
3.00 m
Number of columns in one line 
=
1 pcs
Self weight leading
P-load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
7.53 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.88 <1
Check
OK
Dominating snowload
K-Load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
8.02 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.63 <1
OK
Dominating snowload
I-load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
8.02 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.50 <1
OK
Dominating windload
I-load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
7.71 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.59 <1
OK
Shear capacity
Windload dominating 
I-load
Utilization
=
0.07 <1
OK
Service limit state, deflection, column
Check
=
OK
Deflection of columns
L/
871.11 > 400
Validation: Laminated bamboo column, simply supported, 3 meter
120
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:131==
Notation
Formula
Value
Unit
Stories
=
5
Height of wall
H.w
=
3 m
Span of slab
L.s
=
5.4 m
Dimensions for hempcrete
Length
L.h
=
1.20 m
Width
W.h
=
0.27 m
Dimensions for fibers
width
W.hf
=
0.14 m
See all formulas in the calculations for the laminated bamboo beam
Width, w.b
=
0.14 m
Height, h.b
=
0.12 m
Length, L.b
=
1.20 m
Number of stories
=
1.00
Flexural load bearing capacity, beam under roof
Critical state 1, P-load
σ.m
=
17.81 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.48 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
σ.m
=
19.71 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.40 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
σ.m
=
22.89 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.41 < 1
Check
OK
Shear load bearing capacity, beam under roof
Critical state 1, P-load
t.v
=
4.55 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.62 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
t.v
=
5.04 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.51 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
t.v
=
5.85 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.53 < 1
Check
OK
No. Of stories and dimensions
Validation of laminated bamboo beams, above opening
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
121
==PAGE:132==
See all formulas in the calculations for the laminated bamboo beam
Deflection, P-load, beam under roof
Check
OK
L/
516.67 < 400
Deflection, K-load (snow)
Check
OK
L/
401.84 < 400
Flexural load bearing capacity, under indoor slab
Critical state 1, P-load
σ.m
=
20.70 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.56 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
σ.m
=
19.57 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.35 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
σ.m
=
21.15 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.31 < 1
Check
OK
Shear load bearing capacity, under indoor slab
Critical state 1, P-load
t.v
=
5.29 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.72 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
t.v
=
5.00 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.68 < 1
Check
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
t.v
=
5.65 Mpa
Utilization
=
0.77 < 1
Check
OK
Deflection P-load
Check
OK
L/
444.43 > 400
Deflection K-load (snow dominating)
Check
OK
L/
415.9 > 400
Validation of laminated bamboo beams, above opening
122
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:133==
See all formulas in the calculations for the laminated bamboo column
Width
w.c
=
0.11 m
Height
h.c
=
0.14 m
Length
L.c
=
3.00 m
Number of columns in one line 
=
1 pcs
Self weight leading
P-load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
8.60 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.96 <1
Check
OK
Dominating snowload
K-Load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
9.16 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.68 <1
OK
Dominating snowload
I-load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
9.16 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.55 <1
OK
Dominating windload
I-load
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
8.81 Mpa
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/f.m,d
=
0.58 <1
OK
Shear capacity
Windload dominating 
I-load
Utilization
=
0.03 <1
OK
Service limit state, deflection, column
Check
=
OK
Deflection of columns
L/
1829.33 > 400
Validation of laminated bamboo columns, around opening
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
123
==PAGE:134==
Case
Load group
Self weight leading
a
1.2
K.FI
1.1
P
b
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
a .n
(depends o
K.FI
1.1
M
c
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
a .n
(depends o
K.FI
1.1
1.5
0.3
K.FI
1.1
K
d
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
a .n
(depends o
K.FI
1.1
1.5
0.3
K.FI
1.1
1.5
0.3
K.FI
1.1
I
Pointload
e
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
K.FI
1.1
I
f
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
ψ.0,p
0.5
K.FI
1.1
1.5
K.FI
1.1
K
g
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
ψ.0,p
0.5
K.FI
1.1
1.5
K.FI
1.1
1.5
0.3
K.FI
1.1
I
Dominating windload
h
1
K.FI
1.1
1.5
ψ.0,p
0.5
K.FI
1.1
1.5
K.FI
1.1
I
Self weight in favour
i
0.9
1.1
1.5
K.FI
1.1
I
Slab (indoor)
Case
G.k
P.k
W.k
Group
Horizontal load
kN/m 2
kN/m 2
kN/m
kN/m
Self weight leading
a
5.60
0.00
0.00
5.60
0.00
P
b
4.67
1.55
0.00
6.21
0.00
M
c
4.67
1.55
0.00
6.21
0.00
K
d
4.67
1.55
0.17
6.21
0.17
Ø
f
4.67
1.24
0.00
5.90
0.00
K
g
4.67
1.24
0.17
5.90
0.17
I
Dominating windload
h
4.67
1.24
0.55
5.90
0.55
I
Self weight in favour
i
4.20
0.00
0.55
4.20
0.55
I
Slab (Roof)
Case
G.k
P.k
S.k
W.k
Group
Horizontal load
kN/m 2
kN/m 2
kN/m 2
kN/m
kN/m 2
kN/m
Self weight leading
a
5.60
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.60
0.00
P
b
4.67
1.55
0.00
0.00
6.21
0.00
M
c
4.67
1.55
0.40
0.00
6.61
0.00
K
d
4.67
1.55
0.40
0.17
6.61
0.17
Ø
f
4.67
1.24
1.32
0.00
7.22
0.00
K
g
4.67
1.24
1.32
0.17
7.22
0.17
I
Dominating windload
h
4.67
1.24
0.00
0.55
5.90
0.55
I
Self weight in favour
i
4.20
0.00
0.00
0.55
4.20
0.55
I
0
0
0
Load combinations for bamboo multistory building
G.k
P.k
S.k
W.k
Loadcombination
Dominating imposed load
0
0
0
0
0
Dominating snowload
0
0
0
0
Dominating imposed load
Dominating snowload
Vertical load
kN/m 2
Dominating imposed load
Dominating snowload
Loadcombination
Vertical load
124
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:135==
Validation of laminated beams and columns 
Simply supportet
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
125
==PAGE:136==
Conditions
Service class
=
2
Reliability class
=
0.8
Properties
Width, w.b
=
0.14 m
Height, h.b
=
0.06 m
Length, L.b
=
0.60 m
Cross section area, A
=
=
8.40E-03 m2
Moment of resistance, W.y
=
=
8.40E-05 m3
Moment of inertia, I.y
=
=
2.52E-06 m4
Inertia ratio, i.y
=
=
0.02 m
Density, r.b
=
6.74 kN/m3
No. Of stories
=
5
Slab length
=
5.4 m
Contribution from hempcrete
Length, L
=
=
0.60 m
Width, w
=
=
0.4 m
Area, A
=
=
2.40E-01 m2
Moment of inertia, Iy
=
=
0.0032 m4
Stiffness- and strength parameters
P-load
Compression strength, f.c,0,d
=
=
35.54 Mpa
Flexural strength, f.m,d
=
=
36.92 Mpa
Shear strength, t,d
=
=
7.38 Mpa
M-load
Compression strength, f.c,0,d
=
=
47.38 Mpa
Flexural strength, f.m,d
=
=
49.23 Mpa
Shear strength, t,d
=
=
9.85 Mpa
K-load
Compression strength, f.c,0,d
=
=
53.31 Mpa
Flexural strength, f.m,d
=
=
55.38 Mpa
Shear strength, t,d
=
=
11.08 Mpa
I-load
Compression strength, f.c,0,d
=
=
65.15 Mpa
Flexural strength, f.m,d
=
=
67.69 Mpa
Shear strength, t,d
=
=
13.54 Mpa
Properties, laminated beam
w*h
1/6*w^2*h
1/12*w^3*h
k.mod*t,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.c,0,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.m,k/Y.M
k.mod*t,k/Y.M
√(I.y/A)
k.mod*f.c,0,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.m,k/Y.M
k.mod*t,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.c,0,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.m,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.c,0,k/Y.M
k.mod*f.m,k/Y.M
k.mod*t,k/Y.M
126
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:137==
Characteristic loads
Vertical loads
Self weight, G.b, beam
=
0.06 kN/m
Self weight, G.h, Hemp wall
=
1.86 kN/m
Self weight, G.hf, Hemp fibers
=
0.33 kN/m
Horizontal loads
Windload
=
0.336 kN/m
Load combinations, Ultimate state limit, slab, indoor
K.FI
=
1
Load from slabs (indoor)
Case
Self weight leading
=
a
P
17.72 kN/m
Dominating imposed load
=
b
M
16.78 kN/m
Dominating imposed load
=
c
K
18.94 kN/m
Dominating snowload
=
f
K
18.11 kN/m
Dominating snowload
=
g
I
Vertical
18.11 kN/m
Horizontal
0.17 kN/m
Dominating windload
=
h
I
Vertical
18.11 kN/m
Horizontal
0.55 kN/m
Load combinations, Ultimate state limit, roof
Point load from beams
Case
Self weight dominating
=
a
P
=
15.19 kN/m
Imposed load dominating
=
b
M
=
16.84 kN/m
Imposed load dominating
=
c
K
=
17.91 kN/m
Snowload dominating
=
f
K
=
19.57 kN/m
Snowload dom. Incl. Windload
=
g
I
Vertical
=
19.57 kN/m
Horizontal
=
0.17 kN/m
Windload dominating
=
h
I
Vertical
=
16.00 kN/m
Horizontal
=
0.55 kN/m
Load combinations, laminated beam
Reliability class = CC2
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
127
==PAGE:138==
Flexural load bearing capacity, beam under roof
Critical state 1, P-load
Maximum moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.68 kNm
σ.m
=
=
8.14 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.22 <1
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
Maximum moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.76 kNm
σ.m
=
=
9.02 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.18 <1
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
Maximum moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.88 kNm
σ.m
=
=
10.48 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.19 <1
OK
Shear load bearing capacity, beam under roof
Critical state 1, P-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
4.558 kN
t.v
=
=
4.341 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.588 <1
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
5.051 kN
t.v
=
=
4.811 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.489 <1
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
5.870 kNm
t.v
=
=
5.591 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.505 <1
OK
Deflection, P-load, beam under roof
Deflection of beam, u.k
u.ϴ
k.k
=
=
1
u.k
=
8.48E-01 mm
u.ϴ
=
1.06E-05 mm
Total deflection, u.a
=
0.8479 mm
Allowable deflection
=
1.5 mm
Check
OK
σ.m/f.m,d
1/8*P.f*L2
M.Ed/W
σ.m/f.m,d
1/2*P.a*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w*h)
Load bearing capacity, laminated beam
1/8*P.a*L2
M.Ed/W
σ.m/f.m,d
1/8*P.b*L2
M.Ed/W
t.v/t.d
(5/384)*(p*l^4)/E.b*I)*k.k
3/20*p*l^2/G.m*A
t.v/t.d
1/2*P.b*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w*h)
t.v/t.d
1/2*P.f*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w*h)
h.max=h.min
L/400
128
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:139==
Deflection, K-load (snow)
Deflection of beam, u.k
u.ϴ
k.k
=
1
u.k
=
1.09E+00 mm
u.ϴ
=
1.37E-05 mm
Total deflection, u.a
1.092 mm
Allowable deflection
=
1.5 mm
Check
OK
Deflection, laminated beam, under roof
(5/384)*(p*l^4/E.b*I)*k.k
3/20*p*l^2/G.m*A
h.max=h.min
L/400
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
129
==PAGE:140==
Flexural load bearing capacity, indoor slab
Critical state 1, P-load
Maximum moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.80 kNm
σ.m
=
=
9.49 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.26 <1
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
Maximum moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.75 kNm
σ.m
=
=
8.99 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.16 <1
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
Maximum moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.81 kNm
σ.m
=
=
9.70 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.14 <1
OK
Shear load bearing capacity
Critical state 1, P-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
5.316 kN
t.v
=
=
5.063 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.686 <1
OK
Critical state 2, M-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
5.033 kN
t.v
=
=
4.793 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.649 <1
OK
Critical state 3, K-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
5.683 kNm
t.v
=
=
5.412 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.733 <1
OK
σ.m/f.m,d
1/8*P.f*L2
M.Ed/W
σ.m/f.m,d
1/2*P.a*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w.ef*h)
Load bearing capacity, laminated beam, indoor slab
1/8*P.a*L2
M.Ed/W
σ.m/f.m,d
1/8*P.b*L2
M.Ed/W
t.v/t.d
t.v/t.d
1/2*P.b*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w.ef*h)
t.v/t.d
1/2*P.c*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w.ef*h)
130
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:141==
Deflection, P-load
Deflection of beam, u.k
u.ϴ
k.k
=
=
1
u.k
=
9.89E-01 mm
u.ϴ
=
1.07E-05 mm
Total deflection, u.a
0.9889 mm
Allowable deflection
=
1.5 mm
Check
OK
Deflection, K-load, imposed loads
Deflection of beam, u.k
u.ϴ
k.k
=
1
u.k
=
1.06E+00 mm
u.ϴ
=
1.15E-05 mm
Total deflection, u.a
1.057 mm
Allowable deflection
=
1.5 mm
Check
OK
Deflection laminated beam, indoor slab
(5/384)*(p*l^4)/E.b*I)*k.k
3/20*p*l^2/G.m*A
(5/384)*(p*l^4/E.b*I)*k.k
3/20*p*l^2/G.m*A
h.max=h.min
h.max=h.min
L/400
L/400
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
131
==PAGE:142==
Deflection, P-load
Deflection of beam, u.k
u.ϴ
k.k
=
=
1
u.k
=
9.89E-01 mm
u.ϴ
=
1.07E-05 mm
Total deflection, u.a
0.9889 mm
Allowable deflection
=
1.5 mm
Check
OK
Deflection, K-load, imposed loads
Deflection of beam, u.k
u.ϴ
k.k
=
1
u.k
=
1.06E+00 mm
u.ϴ
=
1.15E-05 mm
Total deflection, u.a
1.057 mm
Allowable deflection
=
1.5 mm
Check
OK
Deflection laminated beam, indoor slab
(5/384)*(p*l^4)/E.b*I)*k.k
3/20*p*l^2/G.m*A
(5/384)*(p*l^4/E.b*I)*k.k
3/20*p*l^2/G.m*A
h.max=h.min
h.max=h.min
L/400
L/400
132
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:143==
Conditions
Application class
=
2
Reliability class
=
0.8
Properties
Width, w.c
=
0.05 m
Height, h.c
=
0.14 m
Length, L.c
=
3.00 m
Cross section area, A
=
=
7.00E-03 m2
Moment of resistance, W.y
=
=
1.63E-04 m3
Moment of inertia, I.y
=
=
1.14E-05 m4
Inertia ratio, i.y
=
=
0.04 m
Density, r.b
=
6.74 kN/m^3
No. Of poles in one row
=
1 pcs.
Load pr. xx length
=
0.60 m
Slab length
=
5.4 m
Characteristic loads
Vertical loads
Self weight, G.k, column
=
0.14 kN
Horizontal loads
Windload
=
0.336 kN/m
Load bearing capacity, laminated column
Simply supportet in top and bottom, and locked in one direction against deflection
w*h
1/6*h^2*w
1/12*h^3*w
√(I.y/A)
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
133
==PAGE:144==
Load kombinations, Ultimate state limit, slab+beam+column, indoor
K.FI
=
1.1
Hempcrete load is included
Point load from beam + selvweight
Case
Self weight leading
=
a
P
10.82 kN
Dominating imposed load
=
b
M
10.22 kN
Dominating imposed load
=
c
K
11.52 kN
Dominating snowload
=
f
K
11.02 kN
Dominating snowload
=
g
I
Vertical
11.02 kN
Horizontal
0.16632 kN/m
Dominating windload
=
h
I
Vertical
11.02 kN
Horizontal
0.5544 kN/m
Load kombinations, Ultimate state limit, roof
Point load from beam + selvweight
Case
Self weight leading
=
a
P
9.30 kN
Dominating imposed load
=
b
M
10.26 kN
Dominating imposed load
=
c
K
10.90 kN
Dominating snowload
=
f
K
11.90 kN
Dominating snowload
=
g
I
Vertical
11.90 kN
Horizontal
0.17 kN/m
Dominating windload
=
h
I
Vertical
9.76 kN
Horizontal
0.5544 kN/m
Load combinations, laminated column
Reliability class = CC2
134
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:145==
Load bearing capacity, ultimate state limit
"udknækning" around strong axis (x-axis)
"Free" column length 
=
=
3.00 m
Slenderness, λ.y
=
=
74.23
Relative slenderness, λ.rel, y
=
=
1.89
β
=
=
0.10
k.y
=
=
2.37
Column reduction factor, k.c,y
=
=
0.26
Lateral stability factor, k.crit
=
=
1.36
Self weight leading
P-load
Load
=
=
52.72 kN
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
=
7.531 MPa
Dim. Moment, M.0Ed
=
=
0.31 kNm
Bøjningsspænding, σ.m,d
=
=
1.91 MPa
=
=
0.884 <1
OK
Dominating snowload
K-Load
Load
=
=
56.12 kN
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
=
8.017 MPa
Moment, M.0Ed
=
=
0.35 kNm
Bøjningsspænding, σ.m,d
=
=
2.14 MPa
=
=
0.630 <1
OK
Dominating snowload
I-load
Load
=
=
56.12 kN
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
=
8.02 MPa
Moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.19 kNm
Moment, M.0Ed
=
=
0.37 kNm
Bøjningsspænding, σ.m,d
=
=
3.43 MPa
=
=
0.502 <1
OK
Dominating windload
I-load
Load
=
=
53.98 kN
Normal stress, σ.c,0,d
=
=
7.71 MPa
Moment, M.Ed
=
=
0.62 kNm
Moment, M.0Ed
=
0.37 kNm
Bøjningsspænding, σ.m,d
=
=
6.10 MPa
=
=
0.59 <1
OK
Load bearing capacity, laminated column
1*L
I.s,y/i.y
λ.y/π*√(f.c,0,k/E.0,k)
M.Ed/W.y
P.g/Area
1/8*P-load.hori*L^2
M.Ed/W.y
P.h
P.h/Area
1/8*P.h,hori*L^2
Moment from slab placement and 
facade
Moment from slab placement and 
facade
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/(f.m,d*k.
crit)
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/(f.m,d*k.
crit)
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/(f.m,d*k.
crit)
σ.c,0,d/(k.c,y*f.c,0,d)+σ.m,d/(f.m,d*k.
crit)
M.Ed/W.y
P.f
P.f/Area
M.Ed/W.y
P.g
"Limtræ"
0,5*(1+β*(λ.rel,y-0,3)+λ.rel,y2)
1/(k.y+√(k.y2 - λ.rel,y 2 ))
P.a
P.a/Area
Moment from slab placement and 
facade
Moment from slab placement and 
facade
if 0,75 < λ.rel,m ≤ 1,4
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
135
==PAGE:146==
For the maximum horizontal load only (Windload dominating)
Modification factor for shear, kcr
=
=
0.19
Effective width, w.ef
=
=
9.38 mm
Windload dominating 
I-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
0.83 kN
t.v
=
=
0.95 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.07 <1
OK
Deflection, laminated column
Service limit state, deflection, column
Deflection of the column will be 
found from the windload. The 
formula from Teknisk Ståbi for simply 
supported beams (formula 3.3) is 
used. 
E-modulus for bending (the only one we know so far) is used
u.inst
=
=
3.44 mm
Restriction
=
7.5 mm
As ψ.2=0 for windload = u.inst = u.fin
OK
L/400
1/2*P.h*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w.ef*h)
t.v/t.d
5/384*W.k*L^4/(E.0,k*I.y)
k.cr*w
min(3/f.v,k or 1)
Shear capacity, laminated column
136
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:147==
e1.1
0.12 m
NOH
0.45 kN
e1.2
0.24 m
NOF
0.2 kN
e1.3
0.32 m
NOP
0.12 kN
e2.1
0.095 m
NIH
0.2 kN
e2.2
0.13 m
NIP
0.13 kN
Moment from excentricities
MFI
0.10 kNm
Excentricities from facade insulation
Excentricities from loads on structure
The structure inside the facade 
is subjected to several 
excentricities from facade 
insulation and the placement of 
the slab. All the excentricities 
are considered most critical 
when creating an exterior 
moment, as they, combined 
e1.1*NOH+e1.2*NOF+e1.3*NOP-(e2.1*NIH+e2.2*NIP)
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
137
==PAGE:148==
From the load combinations for roof slab
es1
0.023 m
Ns.p.load
9.07 kN
es2
-0.023 m
Ns.k.load
10.71 kN
Ns.I.load
11.70 kN
Moment from excentricities
MFI1
0.21 kNm
MFI2
0.25 kNm
MFI3
0.27 kNm
The moments from the excentricities will be added in the calculations for the laminated bamboo
columns, to verify their capacity
The excentricities from the placement of the slab was calculated based on the following
eNs1*NI.load
Excentricities from placement of slab
eNs1*Np.load
eNs1*Nk.load
𝑒ே௦ଵ= 0,14𝑚ȉ 2
3 −1
3 ȉ 0,14𝑚= 0,023𝑚
138
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:149==
Conditions
Service class
=
2
Properties
Width, w.b
=
0.14 m
Height, h.b
=
0.06 m
Length, L.b
=
0.60 m
Cross section area, A
=
=
8.40E-03 m2
Moment of resistance, W.y
=
=
8.40E-05 m3
Moment of inertia, I.y
=
=
2.52E-06 m4
Inertia ratio, i.y
=
=
0.02 m
Density, r.b
=
6.74 kN/m3
No. Of stories
=
5
Slab length
=
5.4 m
Factor for medium duration loading M and service class 2
K.mod
=
=
0.8
Size factor for gluelaminated timber
k.h
=
=
1.1
Effective length of beam
Uniformly distributed load
l.ef
=
=
0.66 m
Critical bending stress
σ.m,crit
=
=
4632.73 N/mm^2
Relative slenderness for bending
λ.rel,m
=
=
0.13
Lateral stability factor
k.crit
=
=
1
Crack factor for glulaminated timber
Volume 2 chapter 6
Crack factor
kcr
=
0.19
Effective width of beam
w.ef
=
0.03 m
The effictive width of the beam, is used in all shear capacity calculations in the beam validation
Since λrel,m ≤ 0,75, full bending strength can be achieved without risk for lateral torsional
buckling.
Properties, laminated beam
w*h
1/6*w^2*h
1/12*w^3*h
√(I.y/A)
Check of effect from lateral torsional buckling check of beam
k.cr*w
min(3/f.v,k or 1)
if λ.rel,m < 0,75
squareroot(f.m,k/σ.m,crit)
((0,78*w^2)/(h*l.ef))*E.0,05
0,9*l+2h
Min (600/h)^0,1 or 1,1)
Check of cracks in cross section due to shear in beam
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
139
==PAGE:150==
Critical state 2, M-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
5.05 kN
Design shear stress t.d
=
=
4.81 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.49 <1
OK
The beam dimensions is sufficient, considering cracks and lateral buckling
1/2*P.b*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w.ef*h)
t.v/f.vd
140
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:151==
Conditions
Service class
=
2
Reliability class
=
0.8
Properties
Width, w.b
=
0.05 m
Height, h.b
=
0.14 m
Length, L.b
=
3.00 m
Cross section area, A
=
=
7.00E-03 m2
Moment of resistance, W.y
=
=
1.63E-04 m3
Moment of inertia, I.y
=
=
1.14E-05 m4
Inertia ratio, i.y
=
=
0.04 m
Density, r.b
=
6.74 kN/m3
No. Of stories
=
5
Slab length
=
5.4 m
Factor for medium duration loading M and service class 2
K.mod
=
0.8
Size factor for gluelaminated timber
k.h
=
=
1.1
Effective length of beam
Uniformly distributed load
l.ef
=
=
2.98 m
Critical bending stress
σ.m,crit
=
=
56.09 N/mm^2
Relative slenderness for bending
λ.rel,m
=
=
1.19
Lateral stability factor
k.crit
=
=
0.66
Effective width of beam
Crack factor for glulaminatec timber
Volume 2 chapter 6
Modification factor for shear, kcr
=
=
0.19
Effective width, w.ef
=
=
9.38 mm
The effictive width of the column, is used in all shear capacity calculations in the column validation
min(3/f.v,k or 1)
k.cr*w
Check of cracks in cross section due to shear in column
Properties, laminated beam
w*h
1/6*w^2*h
1/12*w^3*h
√(I.y/A)
Effect from lateral torsional buckling check of column
if 0,75 < λ.rel,m ≤ 1,4
squareroot(f.m,k/σ.m,crit)
((0,78*w^2)/(h*l.ef))*E.0,05
0,9*l+2h
Min (600/h)^0,1 or 1,1)
Which means the bending strength of the columns must be reduced by the lateral stability factor
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
141
==PAGE:152==
Critical state 2, I-load
Max. shear, V.Ed
=
=
0.832 kN
t.v
=
=
0.950 Mpa
Utilization
=
=
0.070 <1
OK
Thecolumns dimensions are sufficient
1/2*P.b*L
3/2*V.Ed/(w.eff*h)
t.v/f.vd
142
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:153==
Properties of wall
Load width
w.l
=
2.70 m
Load height
h.l
=
3.00 m
Height
h.w
=
3.00 m
Length
L.w
=
2.40 m
Properties of thruss
Length
l.t
=
3.84 m
Angle
B
=
38.66 Degrees
Angle
A
=
51.34 Degrees
Load and reactions
Windload on corner of facade
=
0.84 kN/m2 
Windload
w.k
=
2.27 kN/m
Load combination
g
=
1.12 kN/m
h
=
3.74 kN/m
Windload pointload
W.5,g
=
3.37 kN
W.5,h
=
11.23 kN
Tension load
load from the wind
F.t,g
=
5.39 kN
F.t,h
=
17.97 kN
Max force from wind
F.tmax
=
17.97 kN
As the tension load from the wind is smaller than the self weight, the wall will not be lifted
by the wind, and the windtrusses will be used to stabilize the structure from F.t
Validation, trusses in facade elements
w.g/cos(A)
w.h/cos(A)
w.k*K.FI*1,5*0,3
w.k*K.FI*1,5
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
143
==PAGE:154==
Partial coefficient
Y.M2
=
1.2
Ultimate stress
f.ub
=
400 Mpa
Stress area, strap
A.p
=
80 mm^2
Steel quality
=
4.8
Tensile strength of truss
F.t,Rd
=
24 kN
Utilization
=
0.75
Material use
V
=
3.07E-04 m^3
Partial coefficient
Y.M
=
1.3
Kmod
=
1.1
Tensile strength
f.t,0,k
=
90 Mpa
f.t,d
=
76.15 MPa
Height of truss
h
=
15 mm
Width of truss
w
=
20 mm
Area
A.bt
=
300 mm^2
Tensile strength of truss
F.t,Rd
=
22.85 kN
Utilization
=
0.79
Material use
V
=
1.15E-03 m^3
From the tensional load the vertical column is affected with a force of:
F.vert
14.0 kN
This force will be transfered between the wall elements and the bolted connections must have the
capacity to transfere the force
f.t,d*A
One strap
Bamboo truss
Kmod*f.t,0,k/Y.M2
Ø-load
h*w
Validation, trusses in facade elements
F.tmax*COS(B)
Force tranferede between elements
Steel thruss
One truss
Materials
F.tmax/F.t,Rd
F.tmax/F.t,Rd
2 mm x 40 mm
0,9*((f.ub*A.p)/Y.M2)
144
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:155==
Steel thickness
t
=
4 mm
Screw diameter
def
=
3.4 mm
Screw length
ls
=
100 mm
Screw length in the bamboo
t1
=
96 mm
Penetration lengt of the treaded part
lef
=
Angle between force and grain direction
a
=
51.34 Degrees
Number of wood screws
n
=
5
Properties
Characteristic density, laminated bamboo r.k
=
686 kg/m^3
Wood screw strength
fu
=
410 Mpa
Partialcoefficient, connection
γM
=
1.3
Material factor for connection at the ULS kmod
=
0.8
M-load service class 2
Capacity of the connection
Yield moment screw
My,Rk
=
2963.1 Nmm
Embedding strength parallel fibers
fh0k
=
53.4 Mpa
k.d
=
0.62
Embedded strength in the direction of
fhak
=
53.4 Mpa
the force
Characteristic withdrawal strength
fax,k
=
33.20 N/mm2
The withdrawel capacity
F.ax,Rk
=
26.3 kN
For nails other than smooth nails
Shear capacity of steel to wood connection
Fv,Rk,a
7.0 kN
Fv,Rk,b
7.8 kN
Shear capacity
7.0 kN
Design capacity of connection
FRd
4.3 kN
Total capacity of connection
Fv
21.5 kN
Force in connection (from truss calculations)
18.0 kN
Capacity check
OK
0,3 fu def
2,6
kmod ∙ FRk/γM
The failure modes for the steel-to-timber connection can be failure mode a or b, as the steel plate is thin 
(thickness ≤ 0,5 d)
0,4 ∙ fh,k ∙ t1 ∙ d
Shear capacity: Minimum of the two 
failure modes
0,082(1-0,01def)rk
kmod/γM
Validation of connections
Minimum(Fv,Rk,a , Fv,Rk,b)
FRd ∙ n
Fv ≤ Ft
Connection between truss and laminated bamboo (steel to timber connection), connection I
Geometry
ls-t
𝑓௛,଴,௞
𝑘ଽ଴ȉ 𝑠𝑖𝑛ଶ𝛼+ 𝑐𝑜𝑠ଶ𝛼
1,15 2 ȉ 𝑀௬,ோ௞ȉ 𝑓௛,௞ȉ 𝑑+ 𝐹௔௫,ோ௞
4
0,52 ȉ 𝑑ି଴,ହȉ 𝑙௘௙
ି଴,ଵȉ 𝜌௞
଴,଼
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
145
==PAGE:156==
Spacing between nails
Parallel to grain
a1
=
15.724 mm
Perpendicular to grain
a2
=
12.85 mm
Loaded end
a3t
=
34.42 mm
a4t
=
8.31 mm
Unloaded end
a 3c
=
23.8 mm
a4c
=
10.2 mm
3d
7d
Additional bamboo must be added to the corners to ensure the distance to the edges
Distance between nails
3 + sin 𝛼
𝑑
−90° ≤𝛼≤90°
90° ≤𝛼≤270°
7 + 5 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼
𝑑
0° ≤𝛼≤180°
3 + 2 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛼
𝑑
180° ≤𝛼≤360°
−90° ≤𝛼≤90°
0° ≤𝛼≤360°
4 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼
𝑑
146
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:157==
Bamboo thickness
t1
=
50 mm
Bamboo thickness
t2
=
50 mm
Bolt diameter
d
=
6 mm
Number of bolts
n
=
3
Capacity of the connection
Embedding strength parallel fibers
fh0k
=
52.9 Mpa
k.d
=
0.62
Failure mode I
Fv,Rk,I
=
15.86 kN
Failure mode II
Fv,Rk,II
Failure modes are the same
=
Shear capacity of connection
=
15.86 kN
Design capacity of connection
Fvd
=
9.76 kN
Connection capacity
Fv
=
29.29 kN
Force in connection (from truss calculations)
14.0 kN
Capacity check
OK
Spacing between nails
a2 (perpendicular to grain)
=
24.00 mm
a3t (loaded end)
=
80.00 mm
The loaded end is parallel to the fibers
a3t (unloaded end)
=
24 mm
The unloaded end is perpendicular to the grain
4d
kmod/γM
Geometry
Fvd ∙ n
kmod ∙ FRk/γM
0,082(1-0,01def)rk
Minimum(Fv,Rk,I , Fv,Rk,II)
Fv ≤ Fvert
Distance between bolts
Bolted connection between elements, connection II
−90° ≤𝛼≤90°
150° ≤𝛼≤210°
max 7𝑑 ; 80 𝑚𝑚
4𝑑
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
147
==PAGE:158==
A.3
Structural handcalculations
148
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:159==
==PAGE:160==
==PAGE:161==
==PAGE:162==
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
==PAGE:166==
==PAGE:167==
==PAGE:168==
A.4
U-value calculation
158
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:169==
ELSA MARIA IULIANO 
U-VALUE CALCULATION OF PREFABRICATED WALL ELEMENT 
Unidimensional U-Value Calculation 
 
In this section the unidimensional calculation of the U-value for the different wall layouts is presented. 
The calculation was performed by applying the following formula: 
𝑈=
1
𝑅𝑠𝑜+ 𝑅1 + 𝑅2 + 𝑅3 + 𝑅𝑛+ 𝑅𝑠𝑖
 
Where R is the resistivity of each wall layer calculated as R= l/lambda [m^2K/W] (lambda is the thermal 
conductivity and l the thickness of the layer), 1 to n indicate the layers of the wall, Rsi and Rso indicate 
the fixed internal and external resistance. 
The materials properties for the calculation were all taken from the chosen product’s technical sheets, 
this were provided by the company CalceCanapa®.  
 
Wall  layout 1 - Traditional Hempcrete layer structure 
Regular external plaster  
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.315 
0.063 
Hempcrete  
0.4 
0.065 
6.15 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
6.49 
  
  
U Value 
0.154 
 
External Thermoplaster 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.085 
0.235 
Hempcrete  
0.4 
0.065 
6.15 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
6.66 
  
  
U Value 
0.150 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
159
==PAGE:170==
 
Wall layout 2.1 - Mixed Hempcrete plate and fibre insulation structure 
Regular external plaster  
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.315 
0.063 
Hempcrete  
0.26 
0.065 
4.00 
Hemp fibre insulation 
0.14 
0.039 
3.59 
MgO boards 
0.024 
0.29 
0.083 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
7.91 
  
  
U Value 
0.126 
 
External Thermoplaster 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.085 
0.235 
Hempcrete  
0.26 
0.065 
4.00 
Hemp fibre insulation 
0.14 
0.039 
3.59 
MgO boards 
0.024 
0.29 
0.083 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
8.08 
  
  
U Value 
0.124 
 
Wall layout 2.2 - Mixed double Hempcrete plates and fibre insulation structure 
Regular external plaster  
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.315 
0.063 
Hempcrete  
0.14 
0.065 
2.15 
Hemp fibre insulation 
0.14 
0.039 
3.59 
Hempcrete  
0.14 
0.065 
2.154 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
0.46 
Sum R 
8.23 
  
  
U Value 
0.121 
 
160
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:171==
External Thermoplaster 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.085 
0.235 
Hempcrete  
0.14 
0.065 
2.15 
Hemp fibre insulation 
0.14 
0.039 
3.59 
Hempcrete  
0.14 
0.065 
2.154 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
0.46 
Sum R 
8.41 
  
  
U Value 
0.119 
 
Wall layout 3.1 - Blocks, single lined 
Regular external plaster  
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.315 
0.063 
Hempcrete blocks  
0.38 
0.07 
5.43 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
5.76 
  
  
U Value 
0.173 
 
External Thermoplaster 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.085 
0.235 
Hempcrete blocks  
0.38 
0.07 
5.43 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
5.94 
  
  
U Value 
0.168 
 
 
 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
161
==PAGE:172==
 
Wall layout 3.2 - Blocks, double lined 
Regular external plaster  
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.315 
0.063 
Hempcrete blocks 
0.2 
0.07 
2.86 
Mortar 
0.01 
0.4 
0.03 
Hemocrete blocks 
0.2 
0.07 
2.86 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
6.08 
  
  
U Value 
0.165 
 
External Thermoplaster 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.085 
0.235 
Hempcrete blocks 
0.2 
0.07 
2.86 
Mortar 
0.01 
0.4 
0.03 
Hemocrete blocks 
0.2 
0.07 
2.86 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
  
Sum R 
6.25 
  
  
U Value 
0.160 
 
Wall layout 4 - Hempcrete wall with external insulation layer 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Hempcrete  
0.27 
0.065 
4.15 
Cappotto  
0.14 
0.039 
3.590 
Plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
0.103 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
0.45 
Sum R 
8.12 
  
  
U Value 
0.123 
 
162
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:173==
Final design of prefabricated wall element - Hempcrete wall with external insulation layer 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Thermal 
resistance 
Abbreviation 
d 
lambda 
R = d/lambda 
Unit 
m 
W/m*K 
m2*K/W 
Exterior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.04 
Plaster 
0.015 
0.195 
0.077 
Hempcrete  
0.3 
0.065 
4.62 
Cappotto  
0.14 
0.039 
3.590 
Plaster 
0.015 
0.195 
0.077 
Interior surface 
resistance 
  
  
0.13 
total 
0.45 
Sum R 
8.53 
  
  
U Value 
0.117 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
163
==PAGE:174==
A.5
Moisture evaluation
164
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:175==
1 
 
ELSA MARIA IULIANO 
MOISTURE EVALUATION OF PREFABRICATED WALL ELEMENT 
Contents 
Glaser Method Calculations ................................................................................................................................... 2 
Input Data ........................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Calculation Method ............................................................................................................................................ 2 
Main results ........................................................................................................................................................ 6 
Input data and results of WUFI Pro Simulations..................................................................................................... 8 
Material data ...................................................................................................................................................... 8 
Climate data ...................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Evaluation criteria of the simulations ............................................................................................................... 15 
WALL LAYOUT 2.2 ............................................................................................................................................. 15 
South oriented and located in Lund ............................................................................................................. 16 
North oriented and located in Lund ............................................................................................................. 21 
South oriented, located in Lund and with rain screen.................................................................................. 24 
South and north oriented, located in Marseille ........................................................................................... 26 
WALL LAYOUT 4 ................................................................................................................................................ 28 
South oriented and located in Lund ............................................................................................................. 28 
North oriented and located in Lund ............................................................................................................. 33 
South oriented, located in Lund and with rain screen.................................................................................. 34 
South and north oriented, located in Marseille ........................................................................................... 36 
FINAL PREFABRICATED WALL DESIGN .............................................................................................................. 38 
 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
165
==PAGE:176==
2 
 
Glaser Method Calculations 
Input Data 
The three main parameters needed to perform the Glaser calculation are the thicknesses of the different wall 
layers, the thermal conductivity and the vapour permeability of the material. The following table summarizes 
the used parameters. 
Material 
Thickness 
Thermal 
conductivity 
Vapour 
permeability 
Source 
  
d 
lambda 
delta 
  
  
m 
W/m*K 
kg/m*s*Pa 
  
Exterior plaster 
0.02 
0.315 
1.60E-11 
CalceCanapa® 
Exterior Thermoplaster 
0.02 
0.085 
3.77E-11 
CalceCanapa® 
Exterior finishing 
0.02 
0.195 
2.66E-11 
CalceCanapa® 
Hempcrete 
variable 
0.065 
3.33E-11 
CalceCanapa® 
Hemp fiber panels 
0.14 
0.039 
1.00E-10 
CalceCanapa® 
Exterior hemp insulation 
0.14 
0.039 
5.13E-11 
CalceCanapa® 
Interior plaster 
0.02 
0.195 
2.66E-11 
CalceCanapa® 
MgO plate  
0.024 
0.29 
2.60E-11 
Doha MgO Boards® 
 
Calculation Method 
The Glaser method calculates and assesses the moisture transport in a building component by considering the 
vapour diffusion throughout its layers. The amount of possible interstitial condensation for the winter month 
can be calculated and it can be assessed whether this dries out fast during the summer month.  
In this section the two used tools are shown which were used to perform the calculation. The first one is the 
table used to calculate amount of water that flows through the wall in the dry out period, this is needed in the 
month when no condensation occurs and the amount of vapour flows out of the wall (dry out in summer). The 
second tool is the one used two calculate the amount of interstitial condensation when it occurs in the winter 
months.  
Both calculation methods calculate the temperature and vapour pressure profiles of the cross section. When 
the vapour pressure exceeds the saturated vapour pressure for the calculated temperature, condensation 
occurs. In this case the vapour pressure profile needs to be adjusted as when it exceeds the saturated vapour 
pressure it needs to be replaced with this one (relative humidity can not be higher than 100%), then the amount 
of condensed water can be calculated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
166
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:177==
3 
 
Calculation table in case no condensation occurs, wall layout 2.2 in the month of October is presented in the 
example.  
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
167
==PAGE:178==
4 
 
Calculation table in case condensation occurs, wall layout 2.1 in the month of January is presented in the 
example. The first is the table that indicates the condensation point. The second one is where the vapour 
pressure profile is adjusted and the amount of condensed water is calculated. 
 
 
168
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:179==
5 
 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
169
==PAGE:180==
6 
 
Main results 
The assessed wall layouts are wall layout 1/wall layout 3, Wall layout 2.1, wall layout 2.2 and wall layout 4. The 
following tables show the results of the calculations, starting from October the results will be shown until 
complete dry out occurs. Both regular plaster as thermoplaster were assessed.  
Wall layout 1/wall layout 3: 
Wall layout 1/ 
wall layout 3 
Regular plaster 
Thermoplaster 
* the result is 0.12 but it is not 
considered for the dry out because 
RH is very close to 100% (97.37%) 
therefore it is assumed that the 
vapour flow is high in this month 
but does not contribute to the dry 
out 
Month 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
October 
0.08 
- 
0.08 
- 
November 
0.11 
- 
0.12 
- 
December 
0.13 
- 
0.14 
- 
January 
- 
0.05 
0.15 
- 
February 
- 
0.02 
0.15 
- 
March 
* 
- 
§ 
- 
§ As condensation did not 
happen in the winter month, no 
further calculation where 
made. The wall layout does not 
have vapour flow related issues 
April 
0.10 
- 
- 
- 
May 
0.07 
- 
- 
- 
June 
- 
- 
- 
- 
July 
- 
- 
- 
- 
August 
- 
- 
- 
- 
September 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  
Complete dry out occurs  
 
Wall layout 2.1: 
Wall layout 
2.1 
Regular plaster 
Thermoplaster 
* the result is 0.15 but it is not 
considered for the dry out because 
RH is very close to 100% (99.6%) 
therefore it is assumed that the 
vapour flow is high in this month 
but does not contribute to the dry 
out 
Month 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
October 
0.10 
- 
0.10 
- 
November 
0.13 
- 
0.14 
- 
December 
0.16 
- 
0.18 
- 
January 
- 
0.09 
0.18 
- 
February 
- 
0.07 
0.19 
- 
March 
* 
- 
0.16 
- 
§ As condensation did not 
happen in the winter month, 
no further calculation where 
made. The wall layout does not 
have vapour flow related issues 
April 
0.12 
- 
§ 
- 
May 
0.09 
- 
- 
- 
June 
- 
- 
- 
- 
July 
- 
- 
- 
- 
August 
- 
- 
- 
- 
September 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  
Complete dry out occurs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
170
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:181==
7 
 
Wall layout 2.2: 
Wall layout 
2.2 
Regular plaster 
Thermoplaster 
(-) The whole external hempcrete 
exceeds the 100% of RH which 
means that not only interstitial 
condensation occurs but the whole 
layer is wet. The calculation was 
made anyways by changing slightly 
the boundaries conditions, the 
result is used to assess whether 
the entire hempcrete plate could 
absorb this amounts of water 
without any moisture issues.         
* the result is 0.14 but it is not 
considered for the dry out because 
RH is very close to 100% (99.3%) 
therefore it is assumed that the 
vapour flow is high in this month 
but does not contribute to the dry 
out.                               
§ As condensation did not happen 
in the winter month, no further 
calculation where made. The wall 
layout does not have vapour flow 
related issues 
Month 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
October 
0.09 
- 
0.10 
- 
November 
0.13 
- 
0.14 
- 
December 
0.16 
- 
0.17 
- 
January 
  
0.02 
0.19 
- 
February 
(-) 
0.05 
0.19 
- 
March 
* 
- 
§ 
- 
April 
0.11 
- 
- 
- 
May 
- 
- 
- 
- 
June 
- 
- 
- 
- 
July 
- 
- 
- 
- 
August 
- 
- 
- 
- 
September 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  
Complete dry out occurs  
 
Wall layout 4: 
Wall layout 4 
Regular plaster 
No thermoplaster was assessed for this 
layout as Calcecanapa offers the whole 
external insulation systemn as one, 
insulation panels, panel glue and external 
finishing 
Month 
g not 
condensated  
 g 
condesated 
October 
0.09 
- 
November 
0.12 
- 
December 
0.15 
- 
January 
0.16 
- 
February 
0.17 
- 
March 
0.13 
- 
  
April 
0.11 
- 
May 
0.08 
- 
June 
0.06 
- 
July 
0.03 
- 
August 
0.04 
- 
September 
0.04 
- 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
171
==PAGE:182==
8 
 
Input data and results of WUFI Pro Simulations 
In this section the input material data and climate files are presented as well as the main graphs from the most 
significant simulation in WUFI Pro. The graphs show total water content and water content in each layer, 
temperature-relative humidity graphs and temperature-moisture diagram. With this all the evaluation 
summarized in the report can be demonstrated and assessed.  
Material data 
The following tables and graphs show the material properties of the four materials used for the different wall 
layouts in the best simulation. The data was taken from the Calcecanapa® product sheets for what concerns bulk 
density, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity and water vapour diffusion factor. The missing data 
(porosity and  sorption curves) was researched in literature (Transient hygrothermal behaviour of Lime-Hemp 
Materials, Arnaud Evrard, 2008) or taken from similar materials in the WUFI Pro material database, when 
analogies were possible. Some assessed plasters were taken directly from the WUFI Pro material data base.  
 
172
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:183==
9 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
173
==PAGE:184==
10 
 
 
 
174
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:185==
11 
 
 
Climate data 
In this section the used climate files are quickly presented. the outdoor climates are chosen from the climate 
map in WUFI Pro. Lund was chosen because it is the closest available to Copenhagen, while Marseille was chosen 
to assess a Mediterranean climate. For the indoor climate three options are offered by the program: climate 
conditions from the European EN 15026 standards, the international ISO 13788 standards and the ASHRAE 160 
standards. All three concern hygrothermal evaluation of building components. For Lund the ISO 13788 was 
chosen because it was the worst performing one as the internal temperature is set two 20°C and therefore has 
the smallest summer dry out potential. For Marseille the AHRAE 160 was chosen as it had the hottest internal 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
175
==PAGE:186==
12 
 
temperatures and quite high internal relative humidity levels: the worst case for a hot climate was considered 
(no air conditioning and so on). 
South facing external and internal conditions for Lund, Sweden: 
 
 
176
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:187==
13 
 
 
 
South facing external and internal conditions for Marseille, France: 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
177
==PAGE:188==
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
178
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:189==
15 
 
Evaluation criteria of the simulations 
The following list summarizes the used evaluation criteria to interpret the performed simulations :  
• 
Total water content of the wall, the amount and if in the years it stabilizes on a constant value, 
otherwise it means that the wall is soaking up water throughout time. 
• 
Water content in each layer, if this oversteps certain limits it could deteriorate the material and affect 
its properties. No specific recommended water content levels were found for the accessed materials, 
but to prevent rot in organic materials such as wood, or natural fibres the water content should not 
exceed 20-25 mass-percent over long periods of time. The standard considers a safety margin as 
wood rot fungi start the decomposing process with a moisture content of 25-30 mass-percent. 
• 
The relative humidity in certain monitoring points in the wall. In permeable materials there is a 
gradual transition between sorption moisture and dew water, therefore it is not possible to identify a 
specific amount of condensation water. Anyhow if RH is close to 100% free saturation condition is 
reached, which means a large amount of water was transported to the assessed point, this on the 
long term could have negative effects on the material. 
• 
Effects of driving rain. 
• 
Possible mould growth on indoor surface, by looking at the temperature-moisture diagrams and the 
limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II. 
• 
Loss of thermal insulation capacity (thermal conductivity increasing with moisture contents) 
• 
Cohesion between materials 
The evaluation criteria are taken from [WUFI Pro.Analysis, interpretation and assessment of the calculation 
results. 2018.URL:https://www.wufi-forum.com/viewtopic.php?t=1623] 
WALL LAYOUT 2.2 
The figure shows the cross section and monitoring points for all the wall simulations involving wall layout 2.  
 
 
 
A 
B C 
D 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
179
==PAGE:190==
16 
 
South oriented and located in Lund 
This is the worst considered case in Scandinavian climate and also the closest scenario to a possible one located 
in Copenhagen, if this would have been chosen as final design in the project. All other assessed cases are better 
performing. Only the relevant graphs are shown with a comment to explain what can be seen in the graph. 
Total water content:
 
Water content slightly increases after the first year but gets to a stationary condition, which means it is 
acceptable. 
Water content in exterior plaster: 
 
Water content in the external plaster is very high, this is because of the absorbed rain. In winter it is worst as 
in summer it dries out a bit. 
 
180
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:191==
17 
 
Water content in external Hempcrete plate: 
 
The water content in the Hempcrete plate is definitively to high as it is constantly over 35 mass percentage, 
this would definitively affect the material. 
Water content in hemp fibre plate: 
 
Also in the insulation panel the water content is definitively to high, in this case though it is even more 
affecting the wall as the water could deteriorate the bamboo structure which is surrounded by the panel. 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
181
==PAGE:192==
18 
 
Water content in internal Hempcrete plate: 
 
This levels of water content are acceptable. All other simulation show a similar result, were the water content 
reaches a maximum of 12,5 mass percentage, therefore no more graphs of this layer will be shown. 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
This is the RH between the external plaster and the hempcrete layer, it is quite high in the whole winter 
season. In general the external side of the hempcrete plate is often wet and soaks up a lot of water. This wall 
layout in the assessed location does not perform within the set limits. 
 
182
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:193==
19 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B: 
 
In general when the RH is over 95% for too long, it is not good for the wall, in this case this happens constantly, 
in the external hempcrete plate and in the outer side of the hemp fibres. The whole hempcrete plate is filled 
with moisture or even worst soaked with water, as well as the external side of the insulation. This can also 
affect the structure inside the wall. Same applies to point C. 
Relative humidity in monitoring point C: 
 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
183
==PAGE:194==
20 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point D: 
 
Relative humidity in this  monitoring point stays in acceptable levels, in this as in all the other assessed 
simulations. 
Temperature-moisture diagrams with limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II, mould on internal surface: 
 
No mould growth on the internal surface, in this case and in all the other considered simulations. 
 
 
184
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:195==
21 
 
North oriented and located in Lund 
Total water content 
 
Water content is way lover compared to the same wall element facing south and is also stationary in time.  
 
Water contend in external plaster: 
 
The water content in the north facing plaster is considerably less wet compared to the south facing one (one 
fourth). This is because the main driving rain comes from the south in the climate file of Lund. Less absorbed 
rain in the layer. 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
185
==PAGE:196==
22 
 
Water content in external Hempcrete plate: 
 
The water content in this layer almost reaches the set limits, as it is for most of the time under 25%. It still has 
to high peaks. 
 
Water content in hemp fibre plate: 
 
Water content in this layer is still to high, as it is always over 25%. 
 
 
186
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:197==
23 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
In this case the RH rarely goes over 95%. The RH levels are considerably better compared to the south ones. 
 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B: 
 
In monitoring point B and C of the north facing wall, the relative humidity levels are acceptable. The graph of 
point C is very similar to this one and is therefore not shown. 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
187
==PAGE:198==
24 
 
South oriented, located in Lund and with rain screen 
The assessed wall layout with the rain screen has acceptable levels of water content and relative humidity levels, 
this proves the fact that the main issue of this wall in the chosen location is the quantity of absorbed driving 
rain. Only the relevant graphs will be shown. This demonstrate that both in the external hempcrete plate and in 
the hemp fibre, the moisture content does not affect the material properties, as in the other location. The wall 
layout could be chosen as final design in the project only if a rain screen system, as for instance the ventilated 
façade cladding would be integrated in the design . 
Total water content:
 
Very low and stationary water content, even if it needs three years to become stationary. 
Water content in external Hempcrete plate: 
 
188
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:199==
25 
 
The water content in the external hempcrete plate is constantly under 20% mass-percentage. 
Water content in hemp fibre plate: 
 
The water content in the fibre is at the edge of the set limit. It needs to be assessed weather the bamboo 
structure is less affected by the moisture content compared to a regular wooden structure. 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
RH in the outer side of the Hempcrete plate are considerably low. 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
189
==PAGE:200==
26 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B: 
 
In monitoring point B and C of the wall with rain screen, the relative humidity levels are acceptable. The graph 
of point C is very similar to this one and is therefore not shown. 
South and north oriented, located in Marseille 
 
 
190
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:201==
27 
 
 
Only this two summarising cross section are presented for the simulations in Marseille. In overall the wall is 
performing better in Mediterranean climate than in Scandinavian one.  As it can be seen in the figures the 
external hempcrete plate is not completely wet and the insulation never reaches the 100% of relative humidity. 
In this case the main driving rain comes from south east, therefore again the north facing façade performs in 
general better than the south one, but in this case no constant increasing of the total water content is happening. 
• 
Total water content: varies constantly in time between 12 and 24 kg/m2 for the south facing wall and 
between 11 and 18 kg/m2 for the south facing one 
• 
Water content in external Hempcrete plate: the water content in the external south facing plate is 
still too high as it reaches peaks of 37 mass percentage (the limit is set to 25-28%), which on the long 
term could affect the material and its properties. The north one instead is ok, as only mass 
percentage of 20% is reached. 
• 
Water content in hemp fibre plate: the water content in the hemp fibre is in both cases acceptable. 
• 
Water content in internal Hempcrete plate and internal insulation: also in this materials for both the 
north and south facing walls the water content is acceptable. 
• 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: In winter the RH reaches 100% a few times but in overall it 
fluctuates between 85 and 95% for south and 70 and 95% for the north. This values enter in an 
acceptable range, as water probably does not accumulate excessively. 
• 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B and C: In this monitoring points, the relative humidity is less 
worrying than the levels assessed in the walls located in Lund, as in winter it peaks at 94% in the 
south facing wall and at 85% for the north facing one.  
• 
Temperature-moisture diagrams with limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II, mould on internal 
surface: no risk of mould growth on the internal surface of the wall 
 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
191
==PAGE:202==
28 
 
WALL LAYOUT 4 
 
The figure shows the cross section and monitoring points for all the wall simulations involving wall 
layout 4.  
 
 
 
South oriented and located in Lund 
 
This is the worst assessed case in Scandinavian climate and also the closest scenario to a possible one located in 
Copenhagen. This is the chosen wall layout for the design of the prefabricated wall element as it is the best 
performing one. All other assessed cases of the same wall are even better performing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
 
192
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:203==
29 
 
Total water content: 
 
The average total water amount in this wall layout is half compared to wall layout 2.2. Furthermore it gets 
constant in time while decreasing, which is a good sign as the wall gets dryer. 
 
Water content in exterior plaster: 
 
This layer has a very similar water content compared to the other wall layout. This because it is actually the 
same external finish, therefore it absorbs the same amount of water. 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
193
==PAGE:204==
30 
 
 
Water content in external insulation panels: 
 
The external hemp fibres have averagely a slightly to high water content for the set limits (20-25%). This could 
on the long term affect its insulation properties which would worsen the energy frame of the building and 
furthermore bring to a slow deterioration of the material. It could in worst case detach or affect the quality of 
the external finish. 
Water content in the Hempcrete layer: 
 
194
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:205==
31 
 
The water content in the Hempcrete plate is definitively acceptable. In this case and in all the other assessed 
simulation the water content never exceeds 13%, which is very similar to the internal hempcrete plate in wall 
layout 2.2. This results is very comforting as it means that the hempcrete plate will not lose its insulating 
capacities and the bamboo structure inside is not affected. No more graphs of this layer will be shown. 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
Relative humidity is also higher in this first monitoring point in the hemp fibres compared to the other wall 
layout, this could be because of the different material properties, the hemp fibres are way less dense compared 
to the hempcrete and are more affected by the moisture. 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B: 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
195
==PAGE:206==
32 
 
In this monitoring point as in all the other simulation made for the wall layout 4 the RH levels are acceptable. 
The same applies for monitoring point C. 
Relative humidity in monitoring point C: 
 
 
Temperature-moisture diagrams with limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II, mould on internal surface: 
 
No mould growth on the internal surface, in this case and in all the other considered simulations. No more of 
this graphs will be shown. 
 
196
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:207==
33 
 
North oriented and located in Lund 
Total water content 
 
Water content is way lover compared to the same wall element facing south, as well as compared to the water 
content in the north facing wall layout 2.2.  
 
Water content in external insulation panels: 
 
In this case the water content in the layer is acceptable as it is hardly in the set limits. 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
197
==PAGE:208==
34 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
RH are considerably lower in this case compared to the south facing wall, they almost never exceed the 95%. 
As said in previously all the other monitoring point have acceptable RH levels which do not exceed 70% therefore 
the graphs will not be shown. 
 
South oriented, located in Lund and with rain screen 
The assessed wall layout with the rain screen has acceptable levels of water content and relative humidity levels. 
The same observations made on wall layout 2.2  apply here. The main water source of the wall is the absorbed 
rain and the parameters issue of not being within the set limits is solved with the rain screen. 
Total water content: 
 
198
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:209==
35 
 
The water content in the wall is low, between 10 and 11 kg/m2, and stationary in time. 
Water content in hemp fibre insulation: 
 
The water content in the fibre is at the edge of the set limit (20-25% of moisture content in mass percentage).  
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
After the first year of the simulation period the RH stabilized on acceptable levels as it peaks on 95% in winter. 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
199
==PAGE:210==
36 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B: 
 
In monitoring point B and C the RH levels are acceptable. 
South and north oriented, located in Marseille 
 
 
200
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:211==
37 
 
 
Only this two summarising cross section are presented for the simulations in Marseille. In overall the wall is 
performing better in Mediterranean climate than in Scandinavian one, even though the outer side of the wall 
(external plaster and the external side of the hem fibre insulation) can reach high level of water content and RH 
in winter. As said previously, the main driving rain comes from south east in this case, therefore again the north 
facing façade performs in general better than the south one. 
• 
Total water content: varies constantly in time between 8 and 14 kg/m2 for the south facing wall, after 
the first year of simulation and between 8 and 12,5 kg/m2 for the south facing one 
• 
Water content in external hemp fibre insulation: the water content in the south facing insulation is 
still too high in winter as it reaches peaks of 37 mass percentage (the limit is set to 20-25%). Even 
though in summer the water content is acceptable (averagely under 20%) on the long term the winter 
conditions could affect the material and its properties. The north one instead is ok, as only mass 
percentage of 25% is reached in winter. 
• 
Water content in internal Hempcrete plate: also in this materials for both the north and south facing 
walls the water content is acceptable (peaks at 11%). 
• 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: In winter the RH reaches 100%  several  times but in overall 
it is very low fluctuating between 50%  and 95% for both south and north. The RH profile in general 
looks ok: the values enter in an acceptable range, as water probably does not accumulate excessively. 
• 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B and C: In this monitoring points, the relative humidity 
definitively acceptable as it was already in the simulation located in Lund,  in winter RH peaks at 65% 
in the south north facing wall.  
• 
Temperature-moisture diagrams with limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II, mould on internal 
surface: no risk of mould growth on the internal surface of the wall 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
201
==PAGE:212==
38 
 
FINAL PREFABRICATED WALL DESIGN 
This is the final designed layout of the wall, only the simulation for the south facing wall located in Lund will be 
presented. This because it is the closest simulation for a possible wall element installed in Copenhagen and 
furthermore it is the worst case scenario of the assessed one. Anyhow the results are very similar to the one of 
wall layout 4, therefore the same conclusions can be drawn. The final design was assessed to see if additional 
issues due to the optimization process would appear. 
 
 
 
Total water content: 
 
A 
B 
C 
 
-vPanel glue 
202
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:213==
39 
 
The average total water amount in this wall layout gets constant in time while decreasing, which is a good sign 
as the wall gets dryer. 
Water content in exterior plaster: 
 
This layer has a very similar water content compared to the other wall layouts. This because it is actually the 
same external finish, therefore it absorbs the same amount of water. 
Water content in external insulation panels: 
 
The water content in this layer is slightly higher compared to the one of wall layout 4. This is because the panel 
glue which was inserted in this simulation, blocks the moisture flow through out the wall as it has a very different 
vapour permeability compared both the hemp fibres and the hempcrete. As seen already in other assessments 
it is important to combine materials next to each other with a similar vapour permeability. Anyhow the insulation 
system offered by the company Calcecanapa is designed in this way and the assessed different does not make a 
big different on the final conclusions. The water content is slightly to high but the issue needs to be solved with 
a less water absorbing finishing layer. 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
203
==PAGE:214==
40 
 
Water content in the Hempcrete layer: 
 
The water content in the Hempcrete plate is definitively acceptable and is very similar to all the other assessed 
cases. This is a good sign especially because the bamboo load-bearing structure is not affected by moisture. 
Furthermore the hempcrete plate will not lose its insulating capacities.  
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point A: 
 
Relative humidity is similar to the one of wall layout 4, even though it has higher peaks in summer. In general a 
insulation panel with higher density could improve the moisture handling of this layer in the wall. 
 
 
 
204
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:215==
41 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point B: 
 
Relative humidity in this layer is considerably lower compared to the same monitoring point in wall layout 4. 
This is because of the panel glue layer which blocks the moisture in the outer hemp fibres (as seen previously) 
and does not allow the flow throughout the wall. The same applies for monitoring point C. 
 
Relative humidity in monitoring point C: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
205
==PAGE:216==
42 
 
Temperature-moisture diagrams with limiting curves LIM B I and LIM B II, mould on internal surface: 
 
No mould growth on the internal surface. 
 
206
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:217==
A.6
Detailed drawings of designed element
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
207
==PAGE:218==
Opening for window
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:219==
construction
Roof terrace
General ﬂoor slab
Window opening
External ground ﬂoor
General basement wall
Ground ﬂoor
First ﬂoor
Insulation system
(no thermal bridges)
Connection to
basement construction
Connection to ﬂoor
slab
Prefabricated wall
element
Connection to roof
element
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:220==
General
basement slab
Connection with slab
(bamboo beam 60x140 mm)
Hole in Hempcrete to access
connection (300x150 mm)
Water prooﬁng layer
Outside terrain with
drainage system
External insulation system
Mortar between element and
basement construction
General
basement wall
Additional water
protection plate
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:221==
General slab in
between ﬂoors
Mortar between
element and slab
Connection with slab
(bamboo beam 60x140 mm)
Hole in Hempcrete to
access connection
External insulation
panels
Attaching plastic
bolt system
Attaching pan glue
Mortar between
elements
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:222==
Terrace ﬂooring
Water disposal system
and waterproof sheet
Roof insulation
General roof
slab
Connection with slab
(bamboo beam 60x140 mm)
Hole in Hempcrete to
access connection
External insulation
system
Mortar between
elements
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:223==
Window frame
Glass pane
Window ﬂashing
Window sill
Window ﬂashing
Board to attach
window to structure
Bamboo beam
Insulation system
Rubber sealant
Rubber sealant
Board to attach window
and support sill
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:224==
Window frame
Glass pane
Window ﬂashing
Board to attach
window to structure
Bamboo column
Insulation system
Rubber sealant
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:225==
Mortar between
elements
Bolted connection
between elements
Hole in Hempcrete to
access connection
External insulation
panels
Attaching plastic
bolt system
Attaching pan glue
Plaster
Plaster
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:226==
Mortar between
elements
Connection
between elements
Hole in Hempcrete to
access connection
External insulation
panels
Attaching plastic
bolt system
Attaching pan glue
Prefabricated corner
element
Corner bamboo beam
(140  x 140 mm)
Design and assessment of a prefabricated
wall element made out of the sustainable
materials hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:227==
A.7
Life Cycle Assessment of designed prefabricated wall
element
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
217
==PAGE:228==
RAW MATERIALS
PRODUCTION
USE
DISPOSAL
Lime stone mining
Transport
Grinding of lime stone
Burn it into lime
Plant hemp
Harvest hemp
Seperate fibers from shivs
Chop shivs
PET fibers
Fiber panels
Transport
Glue production
Sand mining
Screw production
Laminated bamboo
Iron mining
Plant bamboo
Harvest bamboo
Manufacture strips  
Glue/press strips
Melt iron
Steel production
Screws & bolts
Sawing 
Beams & 
Columns
Bamboo structure
PET pellets
Hemp fibers
Hempcrete mixture
Plastering
Use for 100
years of energy
consumption
Transport
Transport
on site
Plaster
Lime binder
Mortar
Prefabricated
wall element
Installation on site
Decompose in 
landfill
Dismantelling
Reuse in other 
composites
Water
Plastic bolts
Carbon
Transport
Transport
==PAGE:229==
Volume of prefabricated wall element 
2.203 m^3
Of which bamboo
0.141 m^3
98.78 kg of bamboo (density 700 kg/m^3)
Of which hempcrete 
2.062 m^3
2062 L of hempcrete mixture
10.31
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Scaled 
quantity
Comment
Output:
Hemp shives
Hemp shives
9000 kg
1
Hemp fibers
Hemp fibers
2400 kg
0.267
Avoided 
products
Dust and leaves
Hay {RoW}| production | Conseq, U
600 kg
0.067
Seeds
Disregarded in this LCA
2000 kg
0.222
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Hectar of land for 
agriculture
Land use change, perennial crop {IT}| market for land use 
change, perennial crop | Conseq, U
1 ha
0.000111
Seeds (type delta 405)
Disregarded in this LCA
120 kg
0.0133
Seed are disregarded in this LCA as, no 
option was available in Sima Pro: The 
concept is that as the field produces 
2000 kg of seeds, 120 Kg of this can be 
used the year after for the next crop 
production.
Fertilizers
Ammonium nitrate
Ammonium nitrate, as N {RER}| ammonium nitrate 
production | Conseq, U
204 kg N
0.0227 Fertilizer
Triple superphosphate 
Phosphate fertiliser, as P2O5 {RER}| triple 
superphosphate production | Conseq, U
156 kg P2O5
0.0173 Fertilizer
Hempcrete prefabricated wall - Life Cycle Inventory
Required processes:
Dimensions of functional unit:
No need of pesticides and herbicides, no need of irrigating water. All products from the plant are used and while growing per hectar of produced hempcrete, 21.6 ton CO2 are 
absorbed. source: [Luca Zampori, Giovanni Dotelli, and Valeria Vernelli. “Life Cycle Assessment of Hemp Cultivation and Use of Hemp Based Thermal Insulator Materials in 
Buildings”. (2013).] and [S. González-García, A. Hospido, M.T. Moreira and G. Feijoo, Life Cycle Environmental Analysis of Hemp Production for Non-wood Pulp, (2007)] ). 
bags of hemp shives (1 bag 200 L of 
mixture)
Each of this tables is the inventory of one required porcess to complete the whole wall system taken as fucntional unit. This processes are then inserted in the 
software Sima Pro to calculate the Global warming potential of the whole functional unit, as well as for each process taken singularly.
==PAGE:230==
Potassium chloride
Potassium chloride, as K2O {RER}| potassium chloride 
production | Conseq, U
125 kg K2O
0.0139 Fertilizer
Diesel 
Diesel {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Conseq, 
U
178 kg
0.0198
Agricultural machinery 
Agricultural machinery, unspecified {CH}| production | 
Conseq, U
40 kg
0.0044
Transportation of ferilizers
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
217 t*km
0.0241
Electricity/heat
Electricity for scrutching 
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market for | Conseq, U
864 kWh
0.0960
CO2
Carbon dioxide
-21600 kg
-1.8
This is the CO2 that every kg of hemp 
absorbs while growing 
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Hemp shives to denmark
Hemp shives to denmark
1 bag
Avoided 
products
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Hemp shives
Hemp shives
20 kg
packaging plastic
Packaging film, low density polyethylene {RER}| 
production | Conseq, U
0.2 kg
pallet
EUR-flat pallet {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.17 p
Transport from Italy to 
Denmark
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
35.80 t km
Electricity/heat
Waste
Waste
Emissions to air
Packaging assumed based on observation in the 
lab of used material.
1543 km of transport
Comment
==PAGE:231==
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Hemp fiber panels to 
denmark
Hemp fiber panels to denmark
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Hemp fibers 
Hemp fibers 
7.36 kg
Polyester fibers 
Polyethylene terephthalate fibres (PET), via dimethyl 
terephthalate (DMT), prod. mix, EU-27 S System - Copied 
from ELCD
0.64 kg
transport from Italy to 
denmark
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
12.47 tkm
packaging of panels
Packaging film, low density polyethylene {RER}| 
production | Conseq, U
0.04 kg
Pallet 
EUR-flat pallet {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.05 p
transport to of Hemp fibers 
to panel factory 
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
1.84 t km
transport of polyester fibers 
from factory to harbour 
(China)
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO4 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO3 | Conseq, 
U
0.512 tkm
transport of polyester fibers 
from harbour to harbour (by 
sea)
Transport, freight, sea, transoceanic tanker {GLO}| 
processing | Conseq, U
12.16 tkm
transport of polyester fibers 
to panel factory in italy
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
0.19 t km 
Electricity/heat
electricity to process fibers 
into panel
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market for | Conseq, 
UElectricity, medium voltage {DK}| market for | Conseq, U
1.808 kWh
source: CalceCanapa
8% of the fibers are in polyester to keep the panel 
together (from CalceCanapa), could also be 
recycled PET fibers from old bottles and so on 
(source: [Intini, F., Kühtz, S. Recycling in buildings: 
an LCA case study of a thermal insulation panel 
made of polyester fiber, recycled from post-
consumer PET bottles.  (2011)]). For now worst 
case scenario is considered, where the fibers are 
new.
1543 km of transport
Packaging assumed based on observation in the 
lab of used material.
250 km of transport
800 km of transport
19000 km of transport
293 km of transport
 [Intini, F., Kühtz, S. Recycling in buildings: an LCA 
case study of a thermal insulation panel made of 
polyester fiber, recycled from post-consumer PET 
bottles.  (2011)]
Waste
Comment
==PAGE:232==
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Scaled 
quantity
Comment
Output:
Laminated bamboo 
beams
Laminated bamboo beams
1 p
CO2e/kg
Input materials
(FU from LCA: 0,059 m3)
Amount
Unit
2.392
Glue application
Melamine formaldehyde resin {RoW}| production | 
Conseq, U
3.33 kg/FU
0.0751
The amount required for one whole 
structure is considered, the source of all 
steps is [Van der Lugt and J. G. 
Vogtländer.The Environmental Impact of 
Industrial Bamboo Products Life Cycle 
Assessment and Carbon Sequestration.  
(2015)]
Cultivating and harvesting 
bamboo from plantation
Diesel, burned in agricultural machinery {GLO}| market for 
diesel, burned in agricultural machinery | Conseq, U
0.536 liter/FU
0.0156
Transport from plantation to 
strip manufacturing facility
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO3 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 metric ton, EURO3 | 
Conseq, U
3.528 km/truck
0.168 15 km of transport 
Transport from strip 
manufacturing facility to 
factory
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO3 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO3 | Conseq, 
U
30 ton.km/FU
0.0555 300 km of transport 
Transport from factory to 
habour
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO3 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO3 | Conseq, 
U
59 ton.km/FU
0.0555 600 km of transport 
Transport from habour to 
habour
Transport, freight, sea, transoceanic tanker {GLO}| 
processing | Conseq, U
1,897 ton.km/FU
0.1548 19208 km of transport (to Netherlands)
Transport from harbour to 
warehouse
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
11.36 ton.km/FU
0.0193 115 km of transport 
Tranport from the 
Netherlands to Denmark
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
90.58 ton.km/FU
917 km of transport 
Electricity/heat
Bamboo strip making
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
3.30 kWh/FU
0.0191
Rough planing
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
20.62 kWh/FU
0.1193
Strip selection
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
0.00 kWh/FU
==PAGE:233==
Carbonization
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
11.31 kWh/FU
0.0655
Drying strips
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
23.11 kWh/FU
0.1337
Fine planing
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
13.87 kWh/FU
0.0803
Pressing strips to 1-layer 
board
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
4.52 kWh/FU
0.0262
Sanding 1-layer board
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
3.87 kWh/FU
0.0224
Pressings layers to beam
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
3.95 kWh/FU
0.0228
Sawing
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
0.69 kWh/FU
0.004
Sanding beam
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
2.06 kWh/FU
0.0119
Dust absorption 
Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
20.74 kWh/FU
0.12
Total ammount of electricity Electricity, medium voltage {CN}| market for | Conseq, U
108.04
During all steps
CO2
Carbon dioxide
69.15
kg
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Screws
Screws
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Steel wire 
Wire drawing, steel {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.01 kg
Metal processing, required 
energy required machinery 
and so on
Metal working, average for steel product manufacturing 
{GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.01 kg
They could be made out of recycled steel, but worst 
case scenario is assessed: new screws. 
Furthermore transport is not considered as it is not 
given from where the screw come form. Screws 
weightened in the lab.
1 Kg of bamboo absorbs 0,7 kg of CO2 while 
growing. Source: MOSO bamboo LCA) source:  
[Van der Lugt and J. G. Vogtländer.The 
Environmental Impact of Industrial Bamboo 
Products Life Cycle Assessment and Carbon 
Sequestration.  (2015)].
Comment
Emissions to air
==PAGE:234==
Electricity/heat
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Pan glue for insulation (1 
bag) 
1 kg
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Silice sand
Silica sand {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.5 kg
hydraulic lime NHL 3.5
Lime {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.4 kg
Roman cement 
Cement, pozzolana and fly ash 11-35%, non-US {Europe 
without Switzerland}| market for cement, pozzolana and fly 
ash 11-35% | Conseq, U
0.1 kg
packaging paper 
Kraft paper, unbleached {RER}| production | Conseq, U
0.0056 kg
packaging plastic
Packaging film, low density polyethylene {RER}| 
production | Conseq, U
0.0056 kg
pallet
EUR-flat pallet {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.0025 p
transport to denmark
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
1.56 tkm
Electricity/heat
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Plastic bolts for insulation
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Process of creating the 
bolts 
Injection moulding {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.06 kg
Source: Würth Srl (https://eshop.wuerth.it/Categorie-
di-prodotti/Tassello-per-pannelli-isolanti-TFIX-
8S/31144503010407.cyid/3114.cgid/it/IT/EUR/?_ga
=2.185726122.2099648339.1591098320-
1589684766.1591098320)
1543 km of transport
Comment
40% in weight 
10% in weight 
Packaging assumed based on observation in the 
lab of used material.
50% in weight 
Comment
==PAGE:235==
Material to create bolts
Polypropylene, granulate {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.06 kg
transport of polyester fibers 
from factory to harbour 
(China)
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO4 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, 
U
0.048 tkm
transport of polyester fibers 
from harbour to harbour (by 
sea)
Transport, freight, sea, transoceanic tanker {GLO}| 
processing | Conseq, U
1.14 tkm
transport of polyester fibers 
to panel factory in italy
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
0.02 t km 
Electricity/heat
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Plaster 1 bag
1 kg
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Hydraulic lime NHL 5
Lime {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.4 kg
Sand
Silica sand {RoW}| production | Conseq, U
0.4 kg
Hemp shives
hemp shives
0.1 kg
Roman cement
Cement, pozzolana and fly ash 11-35%, non-US {Europe 
without Switzerland}| market for cement, pozzolana and fly 
ash 11-35% | Conseq, U
0.1 kg
packaging paper 
Kraft paper, unbleached {RER}| production | Conseq, U
0.005556 kg
packaging plastic
Packaging film, low density polyethylene {RER}| 
production | Conseq, U
0.005556 kg
pallet
EUR-flat pallet {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.003 p
transport to denmark
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
1.56 t km
Electricity/heat
Waste
19000 km of transport
293 km of transport
800 km of transport
1543 km of transport
40 % in weight
40 % in weight 
10 % in weight
10 % in weight
Packaging assumed based on observation in the 
lab of used material.
Comment
It is assumed that the plastic bolts are created in 
China. Again to assess the worst case scenario it is 
assumed that they are made out of new material. 
==PAGE:236==
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Metal trusses 
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Metal sheets 
Sheet rolling, steel {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
2.447 kg
Deep drawing of sheets
Deep drawing, steel, 10000 kN press, single stroke 
{GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
2.447 kg
Electricity/heat
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Bolts 
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Steel wire 
Wire drawing, steel {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.21 kg
Metal processing, required 
energy required machinery 
and so on
Metal working, average for steel product manufacturing 
{GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
0.21 kg
Electricity/heat
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Plastic net
Plastic net
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Process of creating the net
Extrusion, plastic pipes {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
1.11 kg
They could be made out of recycled steel, but worst 
case scenario is assessed: new screws. 
Furthermore transport is not considered as it is not 
given from where the screw come form.
Was weighted in the concrete lab
source: https://byg100.dk/shop/armeringsnet-145-g-
579p.html?gclid=Cj0KCQjwuJz3BRDTARIsAMg-
HxUPBjgkqwhj3tbpon98Fr573Zw9E7cIN3lPSfdOHP
xc-1GWhoUmQE0aAr6IEALw_wcB
Comment
Comment
They could be made out of recycled steel, but worst 
case scenario is assessed: new screws. 
Furthermore transport is not considered as it is not 
given from where the screw come form. Metal 
desity: 8.05 g/cm^3 to calculate the weight of the 
trusses.
Comment
==PAGE:237==
Material to create bolts
Polypropylene, granulate {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
1.11 kg
transport of polyester fibers 
from factory to harbour 
(China)
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO4 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, 
U
0.89 tkm
transport of polyester fibers 
from harbour to harbour (by 
sea)
Transport, freight, sea, transoceanic tanker {GLO}| 
processing | Conseq, U
21.09 tkm
transport of polyester fibers 
to panel factory in italy
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
0.33 t km 
Electricity/heat
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Prefabricated element 
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
Lime based binder 
Lime {GLO}| market for | Conseq, U
333.7 kg
Hemp shives
Hemp shives to denmark 
10.3 p
Water 
Tap water {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | 
Conseq, U
618.0 L
Bamboo structure
bambo structure
1 p
Cement 
Cement, pozzolana and fly ash 11-35%, non-US {Europe 
without Switzerland}| market for cement, pozzolana and fly 
ash 11-35% | Conseq, U
37.1 kg
Electricity/heat
Electricity for mixing
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| market for | Conseq, U
18.88333 kWh
Waste
Water for cleaning the tools 
Wastewater, average {Europe without Switzerland}| 
market for wastewater, average | Conseq, U
0.2 m^3
10% in weight
Power of mixing machine: 11 kW. Source: 
https://www.indiamart.com/proddetail/concrete-pan-
mixer-7236850248.html
Estimation compared to what was used in the 
concrete lab during the prototyping.
Amount of Hemp shives bags needed for the wall 
element 
Amount water needed for mixing
It is assumed that the plastic net is created in 
China. Again to assess the worst case scenario it is 
assumed that they are made out of new material. 
800 km of transport
19000 km of transport
293 km of transport
Comment
==PAGE:238==
waste packaging paper 
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | 
Conseq, U
1.854 kg
Waste packaging plastic
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | 
Conseq, U
2.054 kg
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Bamboo structure 
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
bamboo beams 
Laminated bambo beams
1 p
screws 
Screws
24 p
Metal trusses 
Metal trusses
1 p
Bolts
Bolts
11 p
Electricity/heat
Electricity for cutting
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| market for | Conseq, U
0.09 kWh
Waste
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Insulation system with 
plaster
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
hemp fiber panels 
Hemp fiber panels to denmark
10 p
pan glue for insulation 
Pan glue for insulation
174 kg
plastic bolts for insulation
Plastic bolts for insulation
44 p
Water
Tap water {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | 
Conseq, U
51 L
Plastic net 
Plastic ner 
1 p
Electricity/heat
electricity for mixing
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| market for | Conseq, U
1.083333 kWh
Waste
0.141 m^3
20 for structure and 8 half seize for the trusses
Comment
Power of sawing machine: 1.8 kW source: 
https://www.amazon.it/Makita-LF1000-240V-Sega-
Combinata-260/dp/B000UYWOXM
Comment
==PAGE:239==
Water for cleaning the tools 
Wastewater, average {Europe without Switzerland}| 
market for wastewater, average | Conseq, U
0.033 m^3
Waste packaging paper 
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | 
Conseq, U
0.96744 kg
Waste packaging plastic
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | 
Conseq, U
1.4144 kg
Process 
Process in Sima Pro
Quantity Unit
Output:
Plaster inner side
1 p
Input materials
Amount
Unit
plaster bags
Plaster 1 bag
121 kg
Water 
Tap water {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | 
Conseq, U
40 kg
Electricity/heat
Electricity for mixing 
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| market for | Conseq, U
0.108333 kWh
Waste
Water for cleaning the tools 
Wastewater, average {Europe without Switzerland}| 
market for wastewater, average | Conseq, U
0.033 m^3
Waste packaging paper 
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | 
Conseq, U
0.672222 kg
Waste packaging plastic
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | 
Conseq, U
0.672222 kg
is 400 l/h. source: 
http://www.maberg.it/betoniere?gclid=CjwKCAjw8df
2BRA3EiwAvfZWaOOfYtNFO_lENlBI11cQiQD1Nm
uNfOm9rac-
mdmwm9rrl9SlgSnEWxoCg5cQAvD_BwE
plastic
paper
Packaging of bolts, screws and plastic bolts is 
discarded.
Comment
==PAGE:240==
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Prefabricated 
element
Plaster inner side
Insulation System 
with plaster
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
761.00
502.00
70.00
189.00
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Lime {GLO}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
hemp shives 
(packed)
Tap water 
{Europe without 
Switzerland}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Bamboo structure
Cement, 
pozzolana and fly 
ash 11-35%, non-
US {Europe 
without 
Switzerland}| 
market for, | 
Conseq, U
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{DK}| market for | 
Conseq, U
Municipal solid 
waste {DK}| 
treatment of, 
incineration | 
Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
502.00
115.00
156.26
0.32
202.86
26.59
0.67
0.09
Impact 
category
Unit
Total Plaster (1 Kg)
Tap water {Europe 
without 
Switzerland}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{DK}| market for 
| Conseq, U
Wastewater, 
average {Europe 
without 
Switzerland}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Municipal solid 
waste {DK}| 
treatment of, 
incineration | 
Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
70.02
69.92
0.021
0.036
0.016
0.031
Wastewater, average {Europe 
without Switzerland}| market 
for wastewater, average | 
Conseq, U
0.10
Element Installed on site
GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIALS calculated with CML-IA baseline
Prefabricated element
Plastic inner side
The following tables show the resulting Global Warming potential calculated in the Sima Pro Simulation for the most important material production and manufacturing processes of 
the prefabricated wall element . Furthermore the calculation of the CO2 uptake as well as the three performed sensitivity analysis are presented.  
Results from Sima Pro
==PAGE:241==
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Hemp fiber 
panels (packed) Pan glue (1kg)
Plastic bolts for 
insulation
Tap water 
{Europe without 
Switzerland}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Plastic net
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{DK}| market for | 
Conseq, U
Municipal solid 
waste {DK}| 
treatment of, 
incineration | 
Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
188.75
81.028
94.360
10.124
0.027
3.107
0.034
0.055
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Laminated 
bamboo beams Screws
Metal Trusses
Bolts
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
202.86
193.38
0.73
2.14
6.75
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Lime {GLO}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Silica sand {GLO}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Cement, 
pozzolana and fly 
ash 11-35%, non-
US {RoW}| 
market for 
cement | Conseq, 
U
Hemp Shives
Kraft paper, 
unbleached 
{RER}| production 
| Conseq, U
Packaging film, 
low density 
polyethylene 
{RER}| production 
| Conseq, U
EUR-flat pallet 
{GLO}| market 
for | Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
0.58
0.14
0.0183
0.0757
0.0361
0.0034
0.0158
0.0160
Global 
Warming
kg CO2 
eq/FU
69.92
16.67
2.22
9.16
4.36
0.41
1.91
1.93
Wastewater, average {Europe 
without Switzerland}| market for | 
Conseq, U
0.016
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| 
market for | Conseq, U
Insulation System with plaster
Bamboo structure
Plaster (1 kg)
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 
metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 
metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, U
0.275
33.26
0.003
==PAGE:242==
Impact 
category
Unit
Total Hemp Fibers
Polyethylene 
terephthalate 
fibres (PET), via 
dimethyl 
terephthalate 
(DMT), prod. mix, 
EU-27 S System - 
Copied from ELCD
Transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, 
lorry 16-32 metric 
ton, EURO5 | 
Conseq, U
Packaging film, 
low density 
polyethylene 
{RER}| production 
| Conseq, U
EUR-flat pallet 
{GLO}| market for 
| Conseq, U
Transport, freight, 
lorry 16-32 metric 
ton, EURO5 
{RER}| transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 | Conseq, 
U
Transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO4 {RoW}| 
transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO4 | 
Conseq, U
Transport, 
freight, sea, 
transoceanic 
tanker {GLO}| 
processing | 
Conseq, U
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{IT}| market for | 
Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
8.10
1.76
2.87
2.20
0.11
0.32
0.36
0.090
0.072
0.33
Global 
Warming
kg CO2 
eq/FU
81.03
17.56
28.73
21.97
1.13
3.20
3.58
0.90
0.72
3.25
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Silica sand 
{GLO}| market 
for | Conseq, U
Lime {GLO}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Cement, 
pozzolana and fly 
ash 11-35%, non-
US {Europe 
without 
Switzerland}| 
market for| 
Conseq, U
Kraft paper, 
unbleached 
{RER}| production 
| Conseq, U
Packaging film, 
low density 
polyethylene 
{RER}| production 
| Conseq, U
EUR-flat pallet 
{GLO}| market for 
| Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
0.54
0.0229
0.1378
0.0717
0.0034
0.0158
0.0160
Global 
Warming
kg CO2 
eq/FU
94.36
3.98
23.97
12.47
0.59
2.74
2.78
0.2748
47.82
Hemp fiber panels (packed)
Pan glue (1kg)
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 
metric ton, EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, freight, lorry 16-32 
metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, U
==PAGE:243==
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Melamine 
formaldehyde 
resin {RoW}| 
production | 
Conseq, U
Diesel, burned in 
agricultural 
machinery {GLO}| 
market for diesel, 
burned in 
agricultural 
machinery | 
Conseq, U
Transport, 
freight, sea, 
transoceanic 
tanker {GLO}| 
processing | 
Conseq, U
Transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 | 
Conseq, U
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{CN}| market for 
| Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
193.38
17.29
4.35
11.18
17.96
124.90
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Land use 
change, annual 
crop {IT}| land 
use change, 
annual crop | 
Conseq, S
Ammonium 
nitrate, as N 
{RER}| ammonium 
nitrate production 
| Conseq, U
Phosphate 
fertiliser, as P2O5 
{RER}| triple 
superphosphate 
production | 
Conseq, U
Potassium 
chloride, as K2O 
{RER}| potassium 
chloride 
production | 
Conseq, U
Diesel {Europe 
without 
Switzerland}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Agricultural 
machinery, 
unspecified {CH}| 
production | 
Conseq, U
Transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, 
freight, | 
Conseq, U
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{IT}| market for 
| Conseq, U
Hay {RoW}| 
production | 
Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
0.3607
0.1486
0.1559
0.0251
0.0062
0.0131
0.0192
0.0036
0.0147
-0.0259
Impact 
category
Unit
Total Hemp Shives
Packaging film, 
low density 
polyethylene 
{RER}| production 
| Conseq, U
EUR-flat pallet 
{GLO}| market 
for | Conseq, U
lorry 16-32 metric 
ton, EURO5 
{RER}| transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 | Conseq, 
Global 
warming 
kg CO2 eq
15.17
7.21
0.563
1.09
6.31
Global 
Warming
kg CO2 
eq/FU
156.26
74.30
5.80
11.19
64.97
Hemp shives
Hemp shives (packed)
Laminated bamboo beams
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric 
ton, EURO3 {RoW}| transport, 
freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, 
EURO3 | Conseq, U
15.75
Transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 
metric ton, EURO3 {RoW}| 
transport, freight, lorry 3.5-7.5 
metric ton, EURO3 | Conseq, U
1.95
==PAGE:244==
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Land use 
change, annual 
crop {IT}| land 
use change, 
annual crop | 
Conseq, S
Ammonium 
nitrate, as N 
{RER}| ammonium 
nitrate production 
| Conseq, U
Phosphate 
fertiliser, as P2O5 
{RER}| triple 
superphosphate 
production | 
Conseq, U
Potassium 
chloride, as K2O 
{RER}| potassium 
chloride 
production | 
Conseq, U
Diesel {Europe 
without 
Switzerland}| 
market for | 
Conseq, U
Agricultural 
machinery, 
unspecified {CH}| 
production | 
Conseq, U
Transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 {RER}| 
transport, 
freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, 
EURO5 | 
Conseq, U
Electricity, 
medium voltage 
{IT}| market for 
| Conseq, U
Hay {RoW}| 
production | 
Conseq, U
Global 
warming 
(GWP100a) kg CO2 eq
0.239
0.0983
0.103
0.0166
0.0041
0.00869
0.0127
0.00239
0.00975
-0.0171
Impact 
category
Unit
Total Hemp shives 
Hemp fiber
Laminated 
bamboo
Absorbed 
carbon
kg CO2 
594.06
392.58
132.48
69
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Prefabricated 
element
Plaster inner side
Insulation System 
with plaster
Old impact
kg CO2 eq
761.00
502.00
70.00
189.00
New Impact kg CO2 eq
167.12
62.20
48.40
56.52
CO2 Uptake of organic material and adjusted impact calculation of element
Hemp fibers
==PAGE:245==
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Element 
installed on site
Prefabricated 
element
Plaster inner side
Insulation System 
with plaster
Climate 
Change
kg CO2 eq
706.00
0.0
475.00
62.90
167.00
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Element 
installed on site
Prefabricated 
element
Plaster inner side
Insulation System 
with plaster
Climate 
Change
kg CO2 eq
748.00
0.0
489.00
70.00
189.00
Relative 
change
-1.71%
-1.71%
Impact 
category
Unit
Total
Element 
installed on site
Prefabricated 
element
Plaster inner side
Insulation System 
with plaster
Climate 
Change
kg CO2 eq
618.00
0.0
439.00
44.90
133.00
Relative 
change
-18.79%
-8%
-3%
-7%
GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIALS calculated with CML-IA baseline, -10% of consumed electricity in China (beams production)
GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIALS calculated with CML-IA baseline, tansport in Europe is only happening by train
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACT calculated with ILCD 2011 Midpoint+
Sensitivity Analysis
==PAGE:246==
A.8
Cost estimation
236
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:247==
Comparisson of wall elements - Wooden facade
Wooden facade with mineral wool and wood cladding.
Values for costs, man hours and materials for 1 m2 wall element to be compared.
==PAGE:248==
Indhold
16. juni 2020
Indhold
1
Materials for wooden wall element
2
Sigma EstimatesTM
1
==PAGE:249==
Materials for wooden wall element
16. juni 2020
Materials for wooden wall element
List of the materials for constructing 1 m2 of wooden facade.
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
1.
Wood facade
4.741,45
1.1.
Træskeletvæg, 245 mm stolper/fyrretræ
fer/not
(21)35.10,03
m2
1
4.236,28
4.236,28
1.1.1.
45 x 245 mm CLT træ i træskelet
04.20.20,08
lbm
3
362,97
1.088,91
1.1.1.1.
45
x
245
mm
høvlet
tømmer
i
træskelet
materialer
lbm
1
180,00
243,78
1.1.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,2839
419,78
119,19
1.1.2.
Vinkelbeslag,
Simpson
type
ANP258880
04.21.45,05
stk
3,4
112,27
381,73
1.1.2.1.
Vinkelbeslag,
Simpson
type
ANP258880
materialer
stk
1
34,91
47,28
1.1.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,1548
419,78
65,00
1.1.3.
Vinkelbeslag
med
ribbe,
Simpson
ABR9020
04.21.45,06
stk
1,6
109,49
175,18
1.1.3.1.
Vinkelbeslag
med
ribbe,
Simpson
ABR9020
materialer
stk
1
24,99
33,85
1.1.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,1802
419,78
75,64
1.1.4.
Forankring af vindtrækbånd ved fun-
dament
04.21.53,01
stk
0,08
837,24
66,98
1.1.4.1.
Forankring af vindtrækbånd ved fun-
dament
materialer
stk
1
419,74
568,47
1.1.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,6403
419,78
268,77
1.1.5.
Vindtrækbånd, type BAN094025, 0,9
x 40 mm
04.21.53,04
lbm
0,15
102,30
15,35
1.1.5.1.
Vindtrækbånd, type BAN094025, 0,9
x 40 mm
materialer
lbm
1
28,31
38,34
Sigma EstimatesTM
2
==PAGE:250==
Materials for wooden wall element
16. juni 2020
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
1.1.5.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,1524
419,78
63,96
1.1.6.
Gevindstang,
varmforzinket M12 x
1.000 mm
04.21.65,08
stk
0,14
324,86
45,48
1.1.6.1.
Gevindstang,
varmforzinket M12 x
1.000 mm
materialer
stk
1
52,40
70,96
1.1.6.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,6048
419,78
253,90
1.1.7.
Murpap for radonspærre,
500 mm
træværk
04.22.01,13
lbm
0,42
155,18
65,18
1.1.7.1.
Murpap for radonspærre,
500 mm
træværk
materialer
lbm
1
37,40
50,65
1.1.7.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,249
419,78
104,53
1.1.8.
245 mm mineraluld kl.
37 trækon-
struktion
04.22.05,09
m2
0,87
358,20
311,64
1.1.8.1.
245 mm mineraluld kl.
37 trækon-
struktion
materialer
m2
1
95,92
129,91
1.1.8.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,5438
419,78
228,30
1.1.9.
45 mm mineraluld kl. 37, lægter c/c
600 mm
04.22.05,30
m2
1
184,33
184,33
1.1.9.1.
45 mm mineraluld kl. 37, lægter c/c
600 mm
materialer
m2
1
36,37
49,26
1.1.9.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,3218
419,78
135,07
1.1.10.
Membran, 0,2 mm PE-folie, klar
04.22.50,03
m2
1
49,88
49,88
1.1.10.1.
Membran, 0,2 mm PE-folie, klar
materialer
m2
1
7,32
9,92
1.1.10.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,0952
419,78
39,96
1.1.11.
Dampspærretape til indendørs sam-
linger
04.22.50,10
lbm
2
30,30
60,60
1.1.11.1.
Dampspærretape til indendørs sam-
linger
materialer
lbm
1
4,12
5,58
1.1.11.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,0589
419,78
24,72
1.1.12.
Vindspærre kalciumsilikat, Windpanel
Standard
04.22.55,03
m2
1
414,07
414,07
1.1.12.1.
Vindspærre kalciumsilikat, Windpanel
Standard
materialer
m2
1
103,98
140,83
Sigma EstimatesTM
3
==PAGE:251==
Materials for wooden wall element
16. juni 2020
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
1.1.12.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,5641
419,78
236,80
1.1.12.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Vindspærre kalciumsi-
likat, Windpanel Standard
leje
m2
1
18,12
36,44
1.1.13.
Afstandsliste til væg, 25 x 50 mm pr.
600 mm
04.23.12,01
m2
1
50,45
50,45
1.1.13.1.
Afstandsliste til væg, 25 x 50 mm pr.
600 mm
materialer
m2
1
10,04
13,59
1.1.13.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,0878
419,78
36,86
1.1.14.
Afstandslægte til væg, 47 x 50 mm pr.
600 mm
04.23.12,05
m2
1
64,32
64,32
1.1.14.1.
Afstandslægte til væg, 47 x 50 mm pr.
600 mm
materialer
m2
1
20,28
27,47
1.1.14.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,0878
419,78
36,86
1.1.15.
Sokkelsikring, skadedyrsstop, 30/50
mm sort alu
04.23.14,02
lbm
0,4
113,58
45,43
1.1.15.1.
Sokkelsikring, skadedyrsstop, 30/50
mm sort alu
materialer
lbm
1
55,28
74,87
1.1.15.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,0922
419,78
38,72
1.1.16.
Fer/not beklædn. 25 x 125 mm rupl.
fyr seksta
04.23.15,01
m2
1
713,59
713,59
1.1.16.1.
Fer/not beklædn. 25 x 125 mm rupl.
fyr seksta
materialer
m2
1
155,77
210,96
1.1.16.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1,1974
419,78
502,63
1.1.17.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
04.23.48,04
m2
1
234,57
234,57
1.1.17.1.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
materialer
m2
1
37,12
50,28
1.1.17.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,439
419,78
184,30
1.1.18.
Indv. beklædning, 12 mm krydsﬁner
04.23.54,01
m2
1
268,59
268,59
1.1.18.1.
Indv. beklædning, 12 mm krydsﬁner
materialer
m2
1
84,04
113,83
1.1.18.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,3687
419,78
154,77
1.2.
Udv. beklædning, 18 mm krydsﬁner på
træskelet
04.23.18,03
m2
1
505,17
505,17
Sigma EstimatesTM
4
==PAGE:252==
Materials for wooden wall element
16. juni 2020
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
1.2.1.
Udv. beklædning, 18 mm krydsﬁner på
træskelet
materialer
m2
1
133,93
202,32
1.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,7214
419,78
302,85
Sigma EstimatesTM
5
==PAGE:253==
Comparisson of wall elements - concrete & brick facade
Concrete/brick facade with mineral wool.
Values for costs, man hours and materials for 1 m2 wall element to be compared.
==PAGE:254==
Indhold
16. juni 2020
Indhold
1
Materials for concrete/ brick wall element
2
Sigma EstimatesTM
1
==PAGE:255==
Materials for concrete/ brick wall element
16. juni 2020
Materials for concrete/ brick wall element
List of the materials for constructing 1 m2 for a concrete / brick facade.
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
2.
Brick/concrete wall
4.557,92
2.1.
508
mm
hulmur,
tegl/250
mm
isol./betonelement
(21)32.28,01
m2
1
4.557,92
4.557,92
2.1.1.
Betonelement bærende, 150 mm x
24M x 28M
04.10.54,05
m2
1
1.964,95
1.964,95
2.1.1.1.
Betonelement bærende, 150 mm x
24M x 28M
materialer
m2
1
1.089,56
1.475,64
2.1.1.2.
Betonelementmontage
løn
timer
0,9223
393,69
363,11
2.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonelement bærende,
150 mm x 24M x 28M
leje
m2
1
62,75
126,20
2.1.2.
Hulmursisolering, 240 mm murbatts
kl. 34
04.15.05,09
m2
1
331,85
331,85
2.1.2.1.
Hulmursisolering, 240 mm murbatts
kl. 34
materialer
m2
1
133,37
180,62
2.1.2.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
0,34
419,78
142,75
2.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Hulmursisolering, 240
mm murbatts kl. 34
leje
m2
1
4,22
8,48
2.1.3.
30 mm kuldebroisolering, EPS 80
04.15.07,02
lbm
0,4
40,14
16,06
2.1.3.1.
30 mm kuldebroisolering, EPS 80
materialer
lbm
1
12,49
16,91
2.1.3.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
0,0553
419,78
23,23
2.1.4.
Murpap 518 mm mur 2 skifter, radon-
spærre
04.15.15,20
lbm
0,5
462,91
231,45
2.1.4.1.
Murpap 518 mm mur 2 skifter, radon-
spærre
materialer
lbm
1
109,62
148,47
2.1.4.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
0,7039
419,78
295,47
Sigma EstimatesTM
2
==PAGE:256==
Materials for concrete/ brick wall element
16. juni 2020
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
2.1.4.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Murpap 518 mm mur 2
skifter, radonspærre
leje
lbm
1
9,43
18,97
2.1.5.
Skalmur gule maskinsten/bindere i
bagmur
04.15.30,01
m2
1
1.927,05
1.927,05
2.1.5.1.
Skalmur gule maskinsten/bindere i
bagmur
materialer
m2
1
335,30
454,11
2.1.5.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
3,3162
419,78
1.392,07
2.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Skalmur gule maskin-
sten/bindere i bagmur
leje
m2
1
40,21
80,87
2.1.6.
Tillæg, gule blødstrøgne sten, mas-
sive
04.15.34,04
m2
1
32,38
32,38
2.1.6.1.
Tillæg, gule blødstrøgne sten, massive
materialer
m2
1
23,91
32,38
2.1.7.
Overligger blødstrøgne sten, 108 mm
04.17.01,01
lbm
0,14
387,05
54,19
2.1.7.1.
Overligger blødstrøgne sten, 108 mm
materialer
lbm
1
124,87
169,12
2.1.7.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
0,4929
419,78
206,90
2.1.7.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Overligger blødstrøgne
sten, 108 mm
leje
lbm
1
5,48
11,02
Sigma EstimatesTM
3
==PAGE:257==
Comparisson of wall elements - Hempcrete and laminated bamboo
wall element
Hempcrete and laminated bamboo wall element
Values for costs, man hours and materials for 1 m2 wall element to be compared.
==PAGE:258==
Indhold
18. juni 2020
Indhold
1
Materials for hempcrete and laminated bamboo wall element
2
Sigma EstimatesTM
1
==PAGE:259==
Materials for hempcrete and laminated bamboo wall element
18. juni 2020
Materials for hempcrete and laminated bamboo wall element
List of the materials for constructing 1 m2 for a hempcrete and laminated bamboo wall element
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
3.
Hempcrete/bamboo facade
4.293,33
3.1.
Hempcrete
m2
1
1.532,85
1.532,85
3.1.1.
Cast hempcrete
m2
1
1.532,85
1.532,85
3.1.1.1.
Hempcrete
Materialer
m3
0,29
2.817,00
816,93
3.1.1.2.
Vægforskalling m/træ, synlig over-
ﬂade
04.10.02,01
m2
1
120,15
120,15
3.1.1.2.1.
Vægforskalling m/træ, synlig over-
ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
61,54
101,48
3.1.1.2.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Vægforskalling
m/træ, synlig overﬂade
leje
m2
1
5,35
18,67
3.1.1.3.
Man hours for cast hempcrete
Løn
timer
1,5133
393,69
595,77
3.2.
Bamboo
m2
1
333,33
333,33
3.2.1.
Laminated bamboo
lbm
0,1389
2.399,94
333,33
3.2.1.1.
Manhours capentry
Løn
timer
0,18
419,00
75,42
3.2.1.2.
Laminated bamboo
Materialer
lbm
19,8
117,40
2.324,52
3.3.
Hempﬁber plates
m2
1
1.057,55
1.057,55
3.3.1.
PAN 80/06
Materialer
m2
1
360,00
360,00
3.3.1.1.
PAN 80/06
stk
2
180,00
360,00
3.3.2.
PAN 80/02
Materialer
m2
1
90,00
90,00
3.3.2.1.
PAN 80/02
stk
1
90,00
90,00
3.3.3.
Man hours work
m2
1
607,55
607,55
3.3.3.1.
Man hours
Løn
timer
1,45
419,00
607,55
3.4.
Other
m2
1
614,65
614,65
3.4.1.
Bolts
2
179,02
358,04
Sigma EstimatesTM
2
==PAGE:260==
Materials for hempcrete and laminated bamboo wall element
18. juni 2020
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Mængde
Enhedspris
Samlet KP
3.4.1.1.
Bolte M10 x 100 mm rustfri stål
04.10.19,07
stk
1
179,02
179,02
3.4.1.1.1.
Bolte M6 x 100 mm rustfri stål
materialer
stk
1
120,00
155,46
3.4.1.1.2.
Betonelementmontage
løn
timer
0,0598
393,69
23,55
3.4.2.
Nails
3
15,16
45,48
3.4.2.1.
Franske skruer 8 x 60 mm varmgalv.
stål
04.21.25,10
stk
1
15,16
15,16
3.4.2.1.1.
Franske skruer 8 x 60 mm varmgalv.
stål
materialer
stk
1
2,31
2,99
3.4.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,029
419,78
12,17
3.4.3.
Truss
0,1389
1.520,17
211,13
3.4.3.1.
Vindtrækbånd, type BAN204025, 2
x 40 mm
04.21.52,08
lbm
3,84
69,58
267,17
3.4.3.1.1.
Vindtrækbånd, type BAN204025, 2
x 40 mm
materialer
lbm
1
23,82
28,43
3.4.3.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,098
419,78
41,14
3.4.3.2.
Vinkelbeslag,
Simpson
type
ANP258880
04.21.45,05
stk
2
120,26
240,53
3.4.3.2.1.
Vinkelbeslag,
Simpson
type
ANP258880
materialer
stk
1
34,91
48,96
3.4.3.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,1699
419,78
71,30
3.4.3.3.
Forankring
af
vindtrækbånd
ved
fundament
04.21.53,01
stk
1
1.012,47
1.012,47
3.4.3.3.1.
Forankring
af
vindtrækbånd
ved
fundament
materialer
stk
1
419,74
640,46
3.4.3.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
0,8862
419,78
372,00
3.5.
Plaster
m2
1
754,96
754,96
3.5.1.
Plaster interior
1
396,82
396,82
3.5.1.1.
Finitura
sac
0,83
189,00
156,87
3.5.1.2.
Man hours for plastering
Løn
timer
0,5716
419,78
239,95
3.5.2.
Plaster exterior
1
358,15
358,15
3.5.2.1.
Pan Glue
Materialer
sac
1
118,20
118,20
3.5.2.2.
Man hours for plastering
Løn
timer
0,5716
419,78
239,95
Sigma EstimatesTM
3
==PAGE:261==
A.9
Costs of hempcrete, -fibers and finishing plaster
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
251
==PAGE:262==
La Banca della Calce Srl | www.bancadellacalce.it | +39 0514842426 | Via F. Albani 1/3 - 40129 Bologna, IT | P.IVA 02985571203
LISTINO PREZZI
ISOLANTI
RESA
CONF.
PREZZO  
€/CONF. 
PREZZO  
€/MC 
PREZZO  
€/MQ/CM 
SOTTOFONDO
1,07 mc/kit
kit predosato
240,78
225,03
2,25
GETTO
1,00 mc/bigbag
big-bag 
250,46
250,46
2,50
TETTO
1,00 mc/bigbag
big-bag 
250,46
250,46
2,50
INTERCAPEDINE
1,00 mc/bigbag
big-bag 
225,00
225,00
2,25
INTONACI  
E FINITURE
RESA
CONF.
PREZZO  
€/CONF.
PREZZO  
€/MQ/CM 
TERMOINTONACO
0,20 mc/kit
kit predosato
89,15
4,24
TERMOINTONACO EVO
3,7 kg/mq/cm
big-bag 
531,00
6,54
INTONACO
11,5 kg/mq/cm
sacco 25 Kg
12,25
FINITURA
1 kg/mq/mm
sacco 20 Kg
16,92
INTONACHINO
0,8 kg/mq/mm
secchio 20 Kg
94,00
TINTEGGIO
0,1 kg/mq/mano
secchio 15 Kg
46,70
BLOCCHI
DIMENS.
CONF. 
PEZZI/PALLET
CONSUMO  
PEZZI/MQ 
PREZZO  
€/PEZZO 
PREZZO  
€/MQ 
BLICK 
5x25x12
320
-
0,80
-
BLICK 8
8x50x22
100
9,1
2,98
27,12
BLICK 12
12x60x22
80
7,6
5,30
40,28
BLICK 20
20x55x22
48
8,3
8,25
68,47
BLICK 24
24x48X22
32
9,4
8,60
80,84
BLICK 30
30x55X22
24
8,3
12,50
103,75
BLICK 38
38x50x22
24
9,1
13,90
126,49
BLICK GLUE
sacco 25 kg
-
vedi scheda tecnica
10,50 (sacco)
-
==PAGE:263==
La Banca della Calce Srl | www.bancadellacalce.it | +39 0514842426 | Via F. Albani 1/3 - 40129 Bologna, IT | P.IVA 02985571203
LISTINO PREZZI
PANNELLI
SPESSORE
DENSITÀ
DIMENSIONE
PREZZO  
€/MQ 
MQ/ 
BANCALE
CANNAPAL 03 
Canna Palustre 
3 cm
100 kg/mc
3X100X200 cm
14,00
-
CANNAPAL 05 
Canna Palustre 
5 cm
100 kg/mc
5X100X200 cm
16,00
-
PAN 30/05  
Fibra di Canapa
5 cm
30 kg/mc
5X60X120 cm
7,80
69,12
PAN 30/08  
Fibra di Canapa
8 cm
30 kg/mc
8X60X120 cm
13,00
40,32
PAN 30/10  
Fibra di Canapa
10 cm
30 kg/mc
10X60X120 cm
15,80
34,56
PAN 30/12  
Fibra di Canapa
12 cm
30 kg/mc
12X60X120 cm
17,20
28,80
PAN 80/02 
Fibra di Canapa
2 cm
80 kg/mc
2X60X120 cm
8,00
172,80
PAN 80/04 
Fibra di Canapa
4 cm
80 kg/mc
4X60X120 cm
16,00
86,40
PAN 80/06 
Fibra di Canapa
6 cm
80 kg/mc
6X60X120 cm
24,00
57,60
PRODOTTO
CONFEZIONE
RESA TEORICA
PREZZO  
€/CONF.
PAN GLUE
sacco 25 kg
(scheda tecnica)
10,50
ULTIMO AGGIORNAMENTO 20/03/20
Note di Vendita
•
Prezzi IVA esclusa
•
Prezzi franco partenza dai nostri stabilimenti
•
Resa e prezzi €/mq/cm e €/mc sono calcolati su valori teorici
==PAGE:264==
A.10
Material properties
254
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:265==
GETTO
DESCRIZIONE
Calcecanapa® Getto è un biocomposto naturale, ecologico, di alta qualità a base di 
calce e canapa. E’ leggero, resistente ma ﬂessibile, naturalmente traspirante, capace 
di offrire elevato isolamento termo-acustico. Contribuisce efﬁcacemente a fornire un 
ambiente ad alto comfort abitativo, grazie alla sua leggerezza e soprattutto alle 
componenti di origine naturale. 
Calcecanapa® Getto determina uno sfasamento termico altamente efﬁciente: in 
estate il fresco accumulato dall’involucro nelle ore notturne è rilasciato all'interno 
degli ambienti con ritardo, attenuando il picco di calore. 
Calcecanapa® Getto non teme l’attacco di roditori ed insetti.
DESTINAZIONE 
D’USO
Calcecanapa® Getto si impiega sia nel recupero del costruito che nell’edilizia di 
nuova costruzione. 
E’ ideale per la realizzazione di contropareti isolanti su struttura esistente, da 
applicare con casseri (smontabili o a perdere), sia in interno sia in esterno. Si adatta 
perfettamente a tutte le superﬁci comunemente utilizzate in edilizia (laterizio, 
pietrame, cemento, legno, paglia, ecc.) svolgendo un’azione protettiva delle strutture.
Nelle nuove costruzioni viene utilizzato come tamponamento di chiusura nelle 
pareti perimetrali, per il miglioramento dell’efﬁcienza energetica e il naturale controllo 
dell'umidità.
COMPONENTI
•
Calce aerea magnesiaca  (DL 90-30 S-PL UNI EN 459-1:2010). Legante aereo 
che assicura lavorabilità e traspirabilità.
•
Canapulo mineralizzato. Aggregato leggero ad alto potere isolante.
MISCELAZIONE
Calcecanapa® Getto è un materiale pronto all’uso, non è necessaria alcuna 
miscelazione o aggiunta.
PREPARAZIONE 
DEL SUPPORTO
Nel caso in cui si operi su una struttura muraria esistente:
• Su superﬁci grezze (muratura in laterizio, pietra, ecc.), rimuovere l’intonaco pre-
esistente, parzialmente o totalmente, specie se tratta di intonaco cementizio, 
asportare polveri e parti fragili.
• Su superﬁcie lisce (murature cementizie, ecc.) applicare un rinzaffo a calce.
POSA IN OPERA
Per l’applicazione di Calcecanapa® Getto è necessario realizzare un’orditura lignea, 
capace di assicurare l’ancoraggio della miscela alla muratura, e un cassero di 
contenimento temporaneo o permanente.
Successivamente si applica a mano o a macchina in spessore da 10 a 40 cm.
Per dettagli consultare il Manuale di Posa.
Calcecanapa® Getto è ideale per contropareti e murature massive a 
base di calce e canapa 
ULTIMO AGGIORNAMENTO 17/04/2020
==PAGE:266==
GETTO
ULTIMO AGGIORNAMENTO 17/04/2020
INTONACI E 
FINITURE
In combinazione con Calcecanapa® Getto è consigliato l’utilizzo di Calcecanapa® 
Intonaco e Calcecanapa® Finitura, che costituisce una soluzione ad alte prestazioni 
termo-isolanti e ad alto valore estetico.
AVVERTENZE
Applicare con temperature comprese tra +5°C e +30°C.
Calcecanapa® Getto deve essere separato dai piani di calpestio (ove possano 
veriﬁcarsi ristagni d'acqua e dal contatto con il terreno (al ﬁne d’evitare l’innesco del 
fenomeno di risalita capillare d’acqua.
Tipo UNI EN 998-1
Malta per isolamento termico T1 
premescolata e pronta all’uso
Confezione
Big Bag da 1m3
Resa teorica
1m3 BigBag  - 5/10 % in relazione al 
tipo di costipazione/posa
Lavorabilità a 20 °C
120 minuti
Coefﬁciente di diffusione al vapore acqueo 
UNI EN 1015-18
μ = 6
Massa Volumica Apparente della malta indurita
240 kg/m3
Calore speciﬁco
1700 J/kg K
Conducibilità termica UNI EN 1745
λ = 0,065 W/mK
Resistenza a compressione UNI EN 998-1
Categoria CS I
Potere fonoisolante su parete UNI EN 13501
52 dB
Reazione al fuoco UNI EN13501
Classe A2
Assorbimento d’acqua per capillarità
Classe W1
CARATTERISTICHE 
TECNICHE
==PAGE:267==
PAN80
ULTIMO AGGIORNAMENTO 20/12/19
DESCRIZIONE
Calcecanapa® PAN 80 è una lastra d’isolamento in ﬁbra di canapa caratterizzata da 
un eccellente valore di conducibilità termica ed elevata resistenza meccanica. La sua 
capacità d’isolamento termico-acustico è la stessa dei più comuni materiali isolanti, 
con il vantaggio di un prodotto naturale e traspirante.
Calcecanapa® PAN80 ha una capacità termica doppia rispetto ai normali isolanti 
minerali (C= 1.700 J/Kg K) pertanto l’ediﬁcio isolato si raffredda-scalda molto meno 
intensamente, con vantaggi evidentissimi in termini di comfort estivo/invernale.
Oltre il potere termoisolante, la caratteristica principale della ﬁbra di canapa sono la 
traspirabilità e la capacità di assorbire e rilasciare l’umidità. 
Da ciò, un salutare microclima nell'ambiente domestico, senza formazione muffe e 
batteri, causa di allergie e altri disturbi respiratori. 
La canapa è un materiale isolante straordinario, anche elevata capacità di 
assorbimento di umidità e condensa. La canapa mantiene la propria forma anche in 
condizioni di elevata umidità: non s’imbarca e non perde le sue proprietà isolanti.
Le caratteristiche di Calcecanapa® PAN80 sono apprezzate da chi vive in vie 
frequentate o vicino a strade molto trafﬁcate. Il suo isolamento acustico offre, infatti, 
protezione su qualsiasi tipo di pareti, per tutti gli ediﬁci, sia moderni sia storici. 
Calcecanapa® PAN80 garantisce piena libertà in termini di design e colore: la 
facciata può essere ﬁnita anche con colori molto scuri e le superﬁcie 
signiﬁcativamente materiche e strutturate. 
DESTINAZIONE 
D’USO
Ideale per l’isolamento esterno ed interno dei muri perimetrali per costruzioni di 
nuova realizzazione e il restauro di ediﬁci esistenti in muratura, calcestruzzo e 
legno.
POSA IN OPERA
Le superﬁci del supporto devono essere pulite e coese, in caso contrario si dovrà 
procedere alla rimozione di polvere e sporco, parti sfarinanti ed in distacco, ecc. 
E’ consigliato realizzare uno zoccolo di partenza per non esporre i pannelli all’umidità 
del terreno e garantire una corretta tenuta inferiore dei pannelli isolanti.
Il ﬁssaggio avviene tramite colla/rasante Calcecanapa® PanGlue e tasselli ad 
espansione. Gli spessori disponibili e la possibilità di accoppiare tra lori i pannelli, 
permettono una scelta versatile, in base alle esigenze d’isolamento termico e in 
osservanza alla legislazione vigente.
Per dettagli consultare il Manuale di Posa.
Calcecanapa® PAN80 è una lastra da isolamento termo-acustico in 
ﬁbra di canapa, ideale per interni ed esterni.
==PAGE:268==
PAN80
ULTIMO AGGIORNAMENTO 20/12/19
Tipo UNI EN 998-1
Pannello isolante in canapa
Dimensioni
1200x600 mm
Resa teorica
1 pannello = 0,72 m2
Spessore PAN80
2 - 4 - 6  cm
Spessore PAN100
10 - 12 - 14 cm
Conducibilità termica -  UNI EN 1745
λ = 0,039 W/mK
Coefﬁciente di diffusione al vapore acqueo - 
UNI EN 12086
μ = 3,9
Densità - UNI EN1602
80 kg/m3
Calore speciﬁco - UNI EN ISO 10456 
1700 J/kg K
Inibitore di ﬁamma / Legante
Sali di ammonio
Resistenza al fuoco (solo pannello) - 
UNI EN13501-1
E
Resistenza al fuoco (sistema a cappotto) - 
UNI EN13501-1
B-s1, d0
CARATTERISTICHE 
TECNICHE
==PAGE:269==
A.11
Fire
Figure A.1: Standard fire for internal surface with ConFire.exe to calculate temperature
at point (x,y)
A.12
Adjusted project plan
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
259
==PAGE:270==
Elsa Maria Iuliano & Helena Brandt Rejndrup 
UPDATED MASTER THESIS PROJECT PLAN  
Thesis title 
Design and assessment of a prefabricated wall element made out of the sustainable 
materials hemp and bamboo 
Thesis description 
It is not very common to consider the building sector as one of the main actors in climate change, even 
though it emits 35% of the greenhouse gases in Europe. Although it is getting more popular to develop 
solutions with alternative low impacting materials to tackle this issue. Hemp and bamboo stand out 
due to their valuable properties, both are sustainable due to fast growth and low maintenance as well 
as having competitive structural and thermal properties. 
The aim of this Thesis is to design an alternative building solution which can compete with the existing 
ones, but have a smaller carbon footprint. A prefabricated element made out of bamboo and hemp is 
designed. The element is designed to be economically affordable, build-able and standardized, as well 
as fulfil the requirements of the building regulation. 
The project includes the assessment of how the materials can be used and the different ways to 
combine them, which leads to design phase where the prefabricated wall element is developed based 
on evaluations of the different combinations. Afterwards the build-ability of the element in a 
construction is studied, this phase is combined with the creation of prototype in the lab. Finally the 
technical properties and the sustainability parameters of the final design are assessed and compared 
to traditional construction ways. 
Learning objectives 
The process of this Master Thesis will follow Bloom’s Taxonomy pyramid, this means that theoretical knowledge 
will be the base of the work, its analysis and synthesis will be translated in a design, which finally will be tested 
and evaluated. The following learning objectives summarize both the process and the performance of the master 
Thesis: 
1. Collect enough knowledge about the researched materials and their properties, to be able to conclude 
which material use performs better than others. 
2. Collect enough knowledge about the construction industry, to analyse the possibility of substituting 
less sustainable materials with the developed prefabricated element. 
3. Defining the issues and needs in the construction industry. 
4. Design and evaluation of different design concepts to outline the best performing option 
5. Design of a prefabricated element based on the issues and needs of the construction industry. 
6. Create a prototype, to evaluate the cohesiveness of the materials and the practical aspects of the 
designed element. 
7. Analysis and interpretation of the developed results and knowledge. 
8. Evaluation of the design details, such as structural layout, joints and connections, as well as 
manufacturing, buildability, transportability, installation. 
9. Evaluation of final design, for its technical and economical performances as well as how it tackles the 
environmental  issues in the industry. 
10. Development of a state-of-the-art thesis report, which documents the design process as well as the 
results of the different research subjects. 
260
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:271==
Adjusted time schedule for Master Thesis 
 
 
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
261
==PAGE:272==
A.13
Author Statement
262
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
==PAGE:273==
s145492
s182746
1.1 Problem definition
x
1.2 The goal of this report
x
1.3 Why hemp and bamboo
x
x
s145492: Bamboo              
s182746: Hemp
1.4 The construction sector in Denmark
x
2.1 Methodology and integrated design process
x
2.2 Methodology and process for choosing the materials
x
2.3 Methodology and process for the prefabricated facade element design
x
2.4 Requirements for element design
x
x
s145492: Structure analysis, 
buildability                           
s182746: U-value & moisture, 
Sustainability
3.1 Introduction to the element design
x
x
3.2 Evaluation of structural concepts 
x
3.3 Evaluation of insulation concepts 
x
3.4 Buildability
x
4.1 Final design
x
4.2 Performance requirements
x
x
s145492: Structure, fire             
s182746: U-value & moisture, 
acoustic and daylight  
4.3 Aestetics requirements
x
4.4 Buildability requirements
x
4.5 Sustainability requirements
x
x
s145492: Costs                    
s182746: LCA
5.1 Limitations and future developments
x
x
5.2 Comparison with the competitors in the industry
x
x
5.3 Production potential
x
5.4 Sustainability goals
Auther statement
Section no.
Section name
Team member
Comment
In this autor statement the work subdivision between the team mates is only shown for what concerns the writing of the report. During the design process all the 
decision making or actual practical work was discussed and performed together. Each report section was proofread and checked by the other team component
==PAGE:274==
s145492
s182746
A.1 Initial concept design matrix
x
x
A.2 Structural Description
x
A.3 Structural hand calculations
x
A.4 U-value calculation
x
A.5 Moisture evaluation
x
A.6 Detailed drawings of designed element
x
A.7 Life Cycle Assessment of prefabricated wall element
x
A.8 Cost estimation
x
A.9 Costs of hempcrete-fibers and finishing plaster
A.10 Material properties
A.11 Fire
x
A.12 Adjusted project plan
x
x
Appendix name
Auther statement
Team member
Comment
Appendix no.
==PAGE:275==
Prefabricated wall element with hemp and bamboo
265
==PAGE:276==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
