==PAGE:1==
Durability of concrete with ﬂy ash
that does not comply with EN 450
- A study of bio-coal ﬂy ash
Lasse Brejdal Westh
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
LASSE BREJDAL WESTH
Durability of concrete with ﬂy ash that
does not comply with EN 450
- A study of bio-coal ﬂy ash
Supervisor:
Marianne Tange Hasholt, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Durability of concrete with ﬂy ash that does not comply with EN 450
This report was prepared by:
Lasse Brejdal Westh, s153775
Supervisor:
Marianne Tange Hasholt, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Materials and Durability
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2020- June 2020
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc Civil Engineering
Field:
Materials and Durability
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is accomplished as a partial fulﬁlment of the Master of Science programme in
Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work is credited to
30 ECTS points, and was conducted parallel to another MSc project prepared by Johannes
Olesen and Mathias S. Thorsen, who all concrete casting was performed together with.
I would like to thank my supervisor Marianne T. Hasholt for always keeping her door
open (and phone), ready to assist with guidance in any way. Thank you to Johannes
Olesen and Mathias S. Thorsen for collaboration in the workshop, and thank you to Dan-
ish Technological Institute and Mette Gressmann for letting me run the frost test in their
facilities, when DTU closed due to the Covid-19 lockdown.
Kgs. Lyngby June 25, 2020
Lasse Brejdal Westh
s153775
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
This thesis deals with the topic of durability of concrete containing bio-coal ﬂy ash, which
is based on combustion of biomass added ordinary coal ﬂy ash. Using ﬂy ash in concrete
is a way to reduce the carbon footprint, but if the durability of the concrete is worsened, it
could lead to faster replacement of the concrete, whereby the total CO2 emission has not
necessarily changed to the better.
Bio-coal ﬂy ash is new on the market, why the documentation of the product is limited.
The focus in this thesis is on durability with respect to chloride migration and salt frost
scaling, the latter often being a challenge for ordinary ﬂy ash. In addition to dealing
with the general durability of the concrete containing bio-coal ﬂy ash, this project also
examines the dependency of changing the temperature in the ﬁrst 7 days of curing, to see
if it could beneﬁt the durability. The concrete containing bio-coal ﬂy ash is thereby both
examined for its general durability regarding chloride migration and salt frost scaling as
well as the temperature dependency of the curing.
It turned out, by adding bio-coal ﬂy ash to the concrete, the chloride migration coefﬁ-
cient was lowered, making the concrete denser. Whether the frost resistance was best for
the concrete with or without ﬂy ash varied depending on the air content, expected to be
caused by different air void structures. By changing the curing temperature the strength
changed, as the cement had the largest strength contribution at the lowest temperature
(5 ◦C), while the ﬂy ash had the largest strength contribution at the highest temperature
(40 ◦C). The migration coefﬁcient was not found to change with the temperature, but for
the frost scaling it seemed like concrete with ﬂy ash was less susceptible to temperature
variations.
It was found that bio-coal ﬂy ash improves the resistance to chloride ingress, while
the frost resistance seems to be worsened. Though, for increased temperatures it appeared
like concrete with ﬂy ash is more stable regarding temperature variations.
iii
==PAGE:10==
Table of Content
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Hydration of Portland cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Fly ash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Alkalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Strength and temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Chloride transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Frost resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Materials and methods
27
3.1
Overview of tests and scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Concrete mixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Casting of concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Testing fresh concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.6
Air void analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.7
Compressive strength test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.8
Non-steady state chloride migration test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.9
Accelerated salt frost scaling test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Results and discussion
41
4.1
Properties of fresh concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
iv
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENT
v
4.2
Temperature measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Air void analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Compressive strength test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Non-steady state chloride migration test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.6
Accelerated salt frost scaling test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusion
61
Appendices
63
A Original test schedule
65
B
Changed test schedule
79
C Concrete mix design
89
D Air void analysis
93
E
Strength test results
101
F
Migration test results
103
G Frost test results
111
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years the rising CO2 emission and resulting increase in temperature, has become
a growing concern in the world society, where discussions on how to avoid or reduce the
climate changes have been many and various.
Within the building sector there is an expected grow in demand for cement in espe-
cially low-income countries undergoing a fast development in these years. If the building
activity continues as usual, the CO2 emission in the building sector is expected to increase
260 % from 1990 to 2050, but during that period the mitigating scenario from The Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change requires to lower the emission in the sector with
50 % to mitigate climate changes. If the cement industry does not undergo a change, it
will be responsible for about one third of the total aim for the sector in 2050 [6].
Opposite most other building materials, less than half of the CO2 emission related to ce-
ment production is caused by fuel and electricity, while the decarbonation of limestone
is responsible for the remaining ∼60 % of the emission. This makes it interesting to
examine, if the chemical emission can be reduced. The downside is that a change in
the chemistry of the cement will change the reactions and performance of the concrete,
making e.g. the durability of the concrete uncertain [22].
Fly ash is a residual product from coal combustion, where ﬁne particles in the smoke
is ﬁltered out, and in the 1930’s the amount of ﬂy ash in Europe and USA exploded, as
the energy sector reorganised much of its combustion from oil to coal [2]. The ﬂy ash
was found to be in good use as a supplementary cementitious material in concrete, either
added as extra binding material or as replacement for part of the cement.
When replacing the cement with ﬂy ash it is possible to reduce the CO2 emission, if the
strength and durability of the concrete is maintained, as halving the emission does not
help, if the concrete only last half the number of years. However, through the years ﬂy
ash has proved its qualities, and the conﬁdence in using the product has increased, to be
a product the building owners trust in.
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Now the energy sector is once again changing the combustion materials to accommo-
date the green transition, why the amount of ﬂy ash from coal combustion in Denmark
decreases. In 2019 the Danish supplier of ﬂy ash Emineral instead introduced a new type
of ﬂy ash, certiﬁed according to DS/EN 206 DK NA:2019, annex I [34]. It is based on
combustion of biomass, with addition of ﬂy ash from coal combustion in the kilns to bet-
ter control the combustion process.
The bio-coal ﬂy ash is new on the market, but in many ways, it resembles the well-known
coal ﬂy ash, and it is by default expected to act as ordinary coal ﬂy ash, even though the
chemical composition is not exactly the same. The product is certiﬁed after testing on
bio-coal ﬂy ash from two different Danish power plants, conducted by the Danish Tech-
nological Institute (TI) and documented in the public report Emiﬁller. Betonfremstilling -
Dokumentation af udvalgte egenskaber [12].
The two concrete recipes tested do not contain the fully allowed content of ﬂy ash (FA/C =
0.20), but in this report the product is tested to the allowed limit (FA/C = 0.33), and com-
pared to a reference concrete without ﬂy ash. The focus in this report is on the durability
of the concrete, and the ﬁrst of two research questions is as follows:
1. Does addition of bio-coal ﬂy ash to concrete have an impact on the durability com-
pared to concrete without bio-coal ﬂy ash and identical equivalent w/c-ratio?
When adding ﬂy ash to the concrete mix the pozzolan reaction induce an increased
amount of binder material in the concrete, but the reaction is highly dependent on the
temperature. A low temperature postpones the start of the reaction, and a higher tempera-
ture hasten the start of the reaction [7]. It is known that the pozzolan reaction is vulnerable
for temperature changes, but it is unclear, how it inﬂuences the durability of the concrete.
Thus, the second research question is as follows:
2. Is the durability of concrete containing bio-coal ﬂy ash depending on the tempera-
ture at curing?
The report is focused on two aspects of durability, chloride transport and frost resistance,
why the non-steady state chloride migration coefﬁcient and the salt frost scaling is deter-
mined. In addition, the compressive strength is tested to have a general impression of the
quality of the concrete, and an air void analysis is performed by TI, to better assess the
results related to the frost scaling.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Hydration of Portland cement
The main characteristics for concrete hydration are described well by Brunauer and Copeland,
when outlining what is the key issues of concrete technology:
"The chemistry of concrete is essentially the chemistry of the reaction between
Portland cement and water... In any chemical reaction the main features of interest are
the changes in matter, the changes in energy, and the speed of the reaction."
— Brunauer and Copeland, The Chemistry of Concrete 1964 [3]
The chemical reaction between Portland cement and water changes the feature of
cement from being anhydrous powder to be able to bind sand and stone. In this reaction,
as stated in the quote above, three features are of main interest:
1. Change in matter
2. Change in energy
3. Speed of the reaction
As the matter changes, the physical aspects changes as well. In other words, the concrete
stiffens, sets and hardens. During the reaction heat is released in an exothermic reaction,
when the compounds go from high-energy and unstable states to stable and low-energy
states. The speed of the reaction is of particularly interest at the building site when under
pressure by a tight schedule, and the concrete must be workable in the ﬁrst hours after
mixing but afterwards set quickly. Further, the speed of the reaction also tells about the
rate of heat with respect to time, as the heat liberation can happen fast and explosive or
over longer time with lower maximum heat rate.
3
==PAGE:16==
4
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Clinker minerals
In the process of producing cement the materials limestone, sand and clay are heated
in a rotary kiln and grinded to ﬁne particles. The particles consist of clinker minerals
combined of different oxides. The oxides are abbreviated as shown in table 2.1a and the
clinker minerals are written in the abbreviated form, with cement chemical notation, in
table 2.1b.
Table 2.1: Cement chemical notation and common clinker minerals [18].
(a) Cement chemical notation for
common oxides.
Oxide
Abbreviation
CaO
C
SiO2
S
Al2O3
A
Fe2O3
F
MgO
M
SO3
¯S
H2O
H
(b)
Clinker
minerals
and
their
names.
Clinker mineral
Name
C3S
Alite
C2S
Belite
C3A
Celite
C4AF
Ferrite
C4A3 ¯S
-
C3S2H3
-
C¯SH2
-
The four main compounds and some of their characteristics are as stated in table 2.2.
As the four clinkers have different characteristics, the composition of them in the cement
is of great impact on the ﬁnal concrete.
Table 2.2: The four principal clinkers of Portland cement and their characteristics [18].
Clinker mineral
C3S
C2S
C3A
C4AF
Approx. composition
3CaO·SiO2
2CaO·SiO2
3CaO·Al2O3
4CaO·Al2O3·FA2O3
Reaction with water
Fast
Slow
Fast
Moderate
Contribution to strength:
Early age
Good
Poor
Good
Good
Ultimate
Good
Excellent
Medium
Medium
Heat of hydration
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Typical [cal/g]
120
60
320
100
Proportion of compounds present [%]:
Range
35-65
10-40
0-15
5-15
Avg. in ord. cement
55
20
8
8
In table 2.2 it is seen, that the two main clinkers are C3S ("Alite") and C2S ("Belite"). The
following stoichiometric reactions are for fully hydrated Alite and Belite, respectively:
2 C3S + 6H →C3S2H3 + 3CH
(2.1)
2 C2S + 4H →C3S2H3 + CH
(2.2)
==PAGE:17==
2.1. HYDRATION OF PORTLAND CEMENT
5
The composition C3S2H3, as used in equation (2.1)-(2.2) is just an approximation, as the
chemical composition of calcium silicate hydrates varies a lot. The composition depends
on the w/c-ratio, temperature and age of hydration. In a more general term, they are sim-
ply referred to as C-S-H, and they are important as the silicates make up about 75 % of
ordinary Portland cement [18].
In general, the aluminates hydrate faster than the silicates, and for C3A it is necessary to
slow down the reaction by adding gypsum, as the reaction with water happens almost in-
stantly. During the ﬁrst hour of hydration the loss of consistency and start of setting is due
to the crystallisation into needles called ettringite. The formation of C3A into ettringite is
described in equation (2.3), but reactions for C4AF has similar crystal structures.
[Al(OH)4]−+ 3[SO4]2−+ 6[Ca]2+ + aq. →C6AS3H32
(2.3)
Later the ettringite becomes unstable and gradually converts into the ﬁnal state, named
monosulfate:
C6AS3H32 + 2C3A + 22H →3C4ASH18
(2.4)
It is the formation of ettringite which adds to the early stiffening and setting, but some
C3A also converts directly into the monosulfate phase:
[Al(OH)4]−+ [SO4]2−+ 4[Ca]2+ + aq. →C4ASH18
(2.5)
In ﬁgure 2.1 the typical rates of formation for hydration products are shown as a function
of the age of the concrete. As it is seen, at ﬁrst the ettringite is formed, but over time trans-
formed to monosulfate. Further it shows that C-S-H gel comprises the main compound
of the hydration products.
Figure 2.1: Typical relative amounts of hydration products with respect to time [2].
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.2
Fly ash
What is a pozzolan?
Pozzolans are often added to the concrete to reduce the cost and to improve the prop-
erties. The word pozzolan originates from the name of the Italian city Pozzuoli, from
where volcanic ash, a natural source of pozzolan, has been obtained since antiquity. A
pozzolan is not a cementitious material, but it is "latent hydraulic", as it under the right
circumstances has the latent property of creating binding material [2]. The most common
pozzolans today are all artiﬁcial by-products from the industry:
• Slag
• Silica fume
• Fly ash
They are all categorised as type II additions according to DS/EN 206-I [31], i.e. they
are all "latent hydraulic", and can be included with a k-factor in the equivalent w/c-ratio.
The converse applies to type I additions, which only has the purpose of ﬁlling up in the
concrete, to save the both environmental and economical expensive cement. In this cate-
gory exists primarily limestone ﬁller, but also e.g. pigments to colouring of the concrete,
as well as bioash from combustion of sludge from wastewater plants. Along with the
mineral admixtures having only pozzolan characteristics, some cementitious admixtures
also exist. Common to them is the higher content of calcium which gives them hydraulic
properties. Collectively the admixtures are named Supplementary Cementitious Materi-
als, CSM.
The silicium dioxide in the pozzolan reacts with the calcium hydroxide, formed when
the cement reacts with water. The general pozzolanic reaction is described below with
cement chemical notation, creating the product calcium silicate hydrate, C-S-H [18]:
2S + 3CH
slow
−−→C-S-H
(2.6)
The pozzolan increases the amount of cementitious binder material by especially react-
ing with the product calcium-silicate hydrate, but also, in a lesser extent, with calcium-
aluminate hydrates. It is the silica in the pozzolan which reacts with calcium hydroxide,
why the calcium/silica ratio is of great importance.
The reason for the reaction to happen at a late stage is among others due to the pozzolan
reacting with the products from the reaction between cement and water, as seen in equa-
tion (2.1)-(2.2), and on ﬁgure 2.1 where Ca(OH)2 must ﬁrst have been formed, before the
pozzolan reaction can take place.
==PAGE:19==
2.2. FLY ASH
7
In general, two features are linked up with the pozzolanic reaction [18]. First, the
slow reaction entails both slow heat liberation and slow strength development. Secondly,
the reaction products ﬁll up much of the capillary spaces, reducing the permeability and
improving the long-term strength [38].
Fly ash from coal combustion
History and production
In 1930’s there was a rising desire to get rid of the increasing amounts of ﬂy ash, which
the increasing combustion of coal induced. In Denmark especially the oil crisis in 1973
changed the Danish power plants from using oil to coal, why the amount of ﬂy ash in
Denmark drastically increased during the 70’s and 80’s. A partnership was established be-
tween the electric company Elsam/Elkraft and the cement manufacturer F.L.Smidt/Aalborg
Portland A/S, and they founded the company Danaske i/s with the purpose of collecting
and selling ﬂy ash in Denmark.
The collaboration caused that there was no conﬂict of interest between the rising use of
ﬂy ash and the manufacturing of cement. Consequently, the use of ﬂy ash in Denmark be-
came widespread, and the renamed company Emineral (former Danaske i/s) has in 2019
started sale of the new product bio-coal ﬂy ash ("Biokulﬂyveaske") to accommodate the
sustained demand for ﬂy ash, although the amount of ﬂy ash from the power plants de-
creases in these years [2].
When burning coal at the power plants a ﬁne powder is formed. Some of it falls to the
ground, but the ﬁnest particles stay in the smoke and is ﬁltered out in the chimney, as they
otherwise would ﬂy away (hence the name) with the smoke and pollute the environment
with the heavy metals, which the ﬂy ash contains. It is this collected powder, with particle
sizes corresponding to the size of cement grains, which is named ﬂy ash.
Chemical composition and requirements
The standard DS/EN 450-1 [28] describes ﬂy ash as a ﬁne powder mainly consisting of "...
spherical, glassy particles, derived from burning of pulverised coal, with or without co-
combustion materials, which has pozzolanic properties and consists essentially of SiO2
and Al2O3". Also, some of the coal after the ﬁring is still unburnt, which is undesired, as
it tends to increase the water demand and suppress the effect of air entrainment. Thus, a
requirement of maximum 5 % carbon is common for ﬂy ash used in concrete.
In general, the quality of the ﬂy ash deviates a lot depending on the fuel and oven
used, and the quality of the ﬂy ash must therefore be monitored carefully. Regular ﬂy
ash from coal combustion is certiﬁed according to DS/EN 450 [28], and the requirements
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
deals with both physical as well as chemical requirements.
Physical requirements are among other things the ﬁneness of the powder, the activity
index describing in which degree the compressive strength follows a similar concrete
without ﬂy ash, and soundness which depends a lot on the free calcium oxide (CaO)
being a slow but expansive reaction.
Chemical requirements revolve among other things around the content of chloride ions,
free calcium oxide, reactive silicon dioxide and, not least, the sum of silicon dioxide,
aluminium oxide and iron oxide, where the following is required:
SiO2 + Al2O3 + Fe2O3 ≥70 mass-%
(2.7)
In the European standard the sum of these three compounds stands as one of the main
requirements, and together with the calcium oxide they comprise the largest part of the
content in ﬂy ash. In Europe no separation is made between different types of ﬂy ash,
opposite e.g. USA and Canada [38].
In USA the sum of the three compounds in equation (2.7) is separated into two classes.
Type F is equivalent to the European ﬂy ash requirement in equation (2.7), and Type C
only requires ≥50 % for the sum of the three compounds. Further, Type C has cementi-
tious properties, as the content of calcium oxide is higher.
In Canada it is the total amount of calcium oxide which determines the class of the ﬂy
ash. The three classes are Type F, Type CI and Type CH, the latter with highest allowable
amount of CaO. The relationship between the total content of calcium oxide and the sum
of the three compounds in (2.7) is showed for 110 American ﬂy ashes in ﬁgure 2.2. The
European requirements resemble, as the sum of the three compounds in equation (2.7) is
consistent with the limit for the best American class, Type F, and the requirement for the
content of calcium oxide lies in the Canadian medium class, Type CI, as the content in
Europe must not exceed 10 %.
==PAGE:21==
2.2. FLY ASH
9
Figure 2.2: Comparison of 110 samples of ﬂy ash, with CSA being the Canadian standard
and ASTM being the American standard [38].
In Denmark the coal used as fuel causes the ﬂy ash to be very siliceous. The cement
standard DS/EN 197-1 [29] requires the content of reactive SiO2 to be at least 25 %, as
it is the silica which goes into the pozzolan reaction, as shown in equation (2.6). The
reactive silica is the part of SiO2 which is soluble in a solution of HCl or KOH.
In general, some of the essential requirements are listed in table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Essential requirements for coal ﬂy ash cf. DS/EN 450-1 [28].
Property
Requirement [%]
Sum, SiO2 + Al2O3 + Fe2O3
≥70
Reactive silicium dioxide, SiO2
≥25
Free calcium oxide, CaO
≤1.5
Calcium oxide, CaO
≤10
Magnesium oxide, MgO
≤4.0
Total alkali content, (Na2O)eq
≤5.0
Loss on ignition, category A/B/C
≤5 / 7 / 9
Chloride, Cl−
≤0.1
Fineness, category N/S
≤40 / 12 *
Activity index, 28/90 days
≥75 / 85
*Expressed as mass proportion retained when sieved on 0.045 mm mesh sieve.
Effect on properties of concrete
For regular ﬂy ash from coal combustion the effects on the concrete properties is profound
investigated through the years, and some of the essential effects are listed in table 2.4.
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Table 2.4: The effect of ﬂy ash (coal combustion) on concrete by replacing part of the
cement or adding as additional powder [38].
Property
Effect of ﬂy ash
Fresh concrete
Replacement 1:1 with cement increases workability
and cohesiveness.
Replacement by k-factor increases volume of powder
and thereby decreases workability.
Set time
The pozzolan reaction starts at a late stage, why the setting
time is extended.
Heat development
The slow pozzolan reaction entails reduced heat liberation,
when ﬂy ash replaces part of cement.
Can be both an advantage and disadvantage depending on
air temperature.
Concrete strength
When ﬂy ash replaces 1:1 with cement it reduces strength,
but when added as extra powder it increases strength.
Chloride ingress
Fly ash can bind chloride and thereby slow down the
chloride ingress.
Fly ash lowers the permeability, why chloride ingress is
reduced, especially at later age.
Carbonation resistance
Fly ash reacts with the calcium hydroxide, why the content
of the solid gel is lowered, and thereby the resistance to
carbonation is decreased, especially for high contents
of ﬂy ash.
Frost resistance
Resistance is decreased but can be prevented by complying
with regulations regarding air content.
Resistance is especially weakened for high contents of ﬂy
ash, e.g. above 50 % of binder mass.
Alkali-silica reaction
Expansion is reduced. Especially for concretes
with ﬂy ash with a low content of calcium oxide and
alkalies (< 20 % CaO and < 4 % NaOeq).
Fly ash from combustion of biomass
According to DS/EN 450-1 [28] it is already allowed to use ash from co-combustion of
coal and biomass, after a trial co-combustion has proved the ﬂy ash to fulﬁl the standards.
The amount of coal should be at least 60 % of the burned material, and minimum 50 %
if the co-combustion material is only green wood. The allowed co-combustion materials
are:
• Solid Biofuels, incl. animal husbandry residues and excluding waste wood
• Animal meal (meat and bone meal)
• Municipal sewage sludge
==PAGE:23==
2.2. FLY ASH
11
• Petroleum coke
• Virtually ash free liquid and gaseous fuels
In these years the Danish power plants are converted to a complete biomass combustion.
The change in fuel is a result of the desire to reduce the carbon footprint, and as it is
possible to burn biomass in the existing kilns, the conversion is cheap. The combustion
of biomass happens with some coal ﬂy ash added in the kilns, as it helps balance the heat
under combustion, and as it prevents corrosion and formation of slag.
By changing fuel from coal or co-combustion into a complete biomass combustion, it
is no longer possible to fulﬁl the requirements in DS/EN 450. Instead Annex I in DS/EN
206 DK NA:2019 [34] allows for combustion of biomass with addition of minimum 65
% coal ﬂy ash. In table 2.3 the requirements for coal ﬂy ash was listed, and for this new
ﬂy ash the same requirements applies, except for the content of chlorides (Cl−) which
is changed from ≤0.10 % to ≤0.20 %, and the content of calcium oxide (CaO) which
is changed from ≤10.0 % to ≤15.0 %. The reason for the changed requirements is not
known, but it is possible that the original requirements were simply not possible to follow.
In the test of bio-coal ﬂy ash performed by TI [12] it is also found, that one of the bio-coal
ﬂy ashes exceeds the requirement, as the content of calcium oxide is determined to 12.15
weight-%. This makes it probable, that the limit of 10 % was hard to comply with.
Possible inﬂuence of changed requirements
The increased allowable chloride content is not utilized for the two bio-coal ﬂy ashes
tested by TI [12], as the chloride content as weight-% of ﬂy ash is only < 0.01 % and
0.04 %. Though, an increase in chloride ions to the maximum allowable 0.2 % can
possibly entail a larger amount of chlorides being present for the corrosion process of
the reinforcement, as described in section 2.5. The total amount of chloride ions can be
divided into one part chemically or physically bound in the cement paste, and another part
which is free, and it is only the free chlorides which will take part in the corrosion process.
The chlorides present from start of the concrete hydration process affect the hydration of
cement and accelerate the hardening. Some of the chlorides react with the clinker mineral
C3A and form Friedel’s salt, making the chlorides chemically bound and reducing the
amount available to corrode the steel. A larger amount of chlorides can induce a larger
amount being chemically bound in the cement. Therefore, the additional chloride content
from bio-coal ﬂy ash can accelerate the hardening process of the concrete, but is not
necessarily present for the chloride induced corrosion [2, 4].
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
The increased amount of allowed calcium oxide can probably change some properties
of the ﬂy ash. High-calcium ﬂy ashes is found to have moderately cementitious behaviour,
and testing indicates that high-calcium ﬂy ash both have larger compressive strength, that
it reacts more rapidly with cement, and that the cementitious behaviour makes it possible
to have larger substitution rates than low-calcium ﬂy ash [38, 17]. But all these effects are
expected to be more distinct for higher amounts of calcium than what is found in bio-coal
ﬂy ash, as high-calcium ﬂy ash can contain calcium of up to or above 30 % [38].
Most of the lime is chemically bound in the oxides SiO2, Al2O3 and Fe2O3, but the part
which is not bound is called free calcium oxide. It is noticed that the allowable amount of
free calcium oxide is kept constant, as its reaction with water is expansive. Having large
amounts of free calcium oxide and magnesia (MgO) can cause unsoundness, which is the
reason for the limit [38, 21]. Though, the standard [34] also allows additional free lime,
if the soundness is just proved to be satisfactory.
==PAGE:25==
2.3. ALKALIES
13
2.3
Alkalies
By an alkali is meant a salt containing an alkali ion. Several alkali ions are found in
the periodic table, but in concrete only sodium oxide, Na2O, and potassium oxide, K2O,
are present. They are commonly expressed as the acid soluble sodium oxide equivalent,
based on the ratio in mole weight [30, 2].
(Na2O)eq = Na2O + 0.658K2O
(2.8)
In cement alkalies are found both as part of the clinker minerals, and as easily soluble
alkali sulfates. The soluble alkalies induce a pH in the concrete of 12-14, as they form
the alkali hydroxides NaOH and KOH, which together with calcium hydroxide, CaOH,
deﬁne the pH. In other words, a larger content of alkalies in the cement induce a larger
pH in the concrete.
The dissolution of silica, SiO2, is dependent on the pH of the concrete, as its solubility
depends on the concentration of OH−ions. The solid SiO2 is in equilibrium with aqueous
H4SiO4, and the equilibrium is inﬂuenced by the amount of OH−ions, as an increasing
amount OH−ions gives rise to an increasing amount of the solid silica being dissolved
[10].
In the report from TI on the investigation of bio-coal ﬂy ash [12], one of the two
tested bio-coal ﬂy ashes (EMI-AVV) is found to have a soluble sodium oxide equivalent
1.8 times larger than the reference ﬂy ash from coal combustion. Even though all the
tested ﬂy ashes are below the limit of 5.0 % Na2Oeq, the increase in alkali ions is big, and
it would be natural to conclude the increase in alkalies to affect the dissolution of silica.
Though, the alkalies in ﬂy ash are less soluble compared to the alkalies in cement, as the
structure of the alkalies in ﬂy ash are different. For cement most of the alkalies dissolve
within the ﬁrst 3 days, and all within the ﬁrst 28 days, but for ﬂy ash it takes longer, and
the solubility also varies a lot depending on the speciﬁc source of coal. The alkalies in ﬂy
ash is therefore not expected to contribute much to the initial concentration of OH−-ions
in the pore solution [23].
In other words, an increased alkali content raises the pH. This changes the equilibrium
balance of solid silica inducing an increased amount being dissolved in the pore solution,
which is then available for the pozzolan reaction, as stated in equation (2.6). But as the
dissolving of alkalies from the ﬂy ash is slow, it is not expected to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
the early age hydration. Instead the alkali-content is expected to be available for a possible
alkali-silica reaction.
The alkalies in cement inﬂuence the hydration rate, as additional alkalies increase the
early age strength. But they also reduce the ultimate strength, as shown on ﬁgure 2.3 [21,
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
11]. A slow dissolution of alkalies in ﬂy ash possibly hinders this from being applicable
to the alkali level in ﬂy ash, but in which degree it is the case is unknown.
Figure 2.3: Comparison of compressive strength depending on alkali content in the ce-
ment [11].
Alkali-silica reaction
Alkalies are one of four main conditions which all must be present for an alkali-silica
reaction (ASR) to happen. All four conditions are as follows [2].
• Reactive particles in the aggregates (silica)
• Alkalies (Na+ and K+)
• Water
• High pH
The alkalies in concrete originates mainly from the constituents of the concrete, especially
the cement but also e.g. aggregates and mixing water as well as ﬂy ash. Large amounts
of alkalies also come from outside, where both seawater, de-icing salts and water from
swimming pools can bring alkalies into the concrete.
The silica in the aggregates is dissolved in the high pH solution and reacts with the
alkalies in the pore water forming a gel, which is expansive when absorbing water. The
reaction is not always damaging, as the expansive gel, if possible, will move out in the
pores, and it is only if the expansion is prevented that potentially harmful stresses will
build up [18].
==PAGE:27==
2.3. ALKALIES
15
Previously the regulation of alkalies in concrete was only made through the equivalent
sodium oxide content, where approximately 0.6 % Na2Oeq was permitted. But as the
amount of cement in concrete may vary a lot, the requirement has been changed so it
today deals with the total equivalent sodium oxide content [2]. The requirement in the
European standard for all exposure classes is Na2Oeq ≤3.0 kg/m3 [34].
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.4
Strength and temperature
Strength development
The development of strength is dependent of the type of cement and curing temperature.
The mean compressive strength of concrete as described in equation (2.9) is based on a
curing temperature of 20 ◦C [33].
fcm(t) = exp
(
s
"
1 −
28
t
1/2#)
fcm
(2.9)
Where fcm(t) is the mean compressive strength after t days, fcm is the mean compressive
strength after 28 days, s is a coefﬁcient dependent on the type of cement and t is the
maturity of the concrete in days.
For the type of cement used in this project, CEM 52,5 N, the coefﬁcient s is 0.20, and
after t = 7 days at 20 ◦C, 82 % of the 28 days strength is already gained. As seen the
curing conditions in the ﬁrst days are found to be of great importance, as a large part
of the strength development happens during the period. Opposite it is also known, that
the hydration continues throughout the lifetime, why the 28 days strength is not a ﬁnal
strength. In ﬁgure 2.4 the development of strength is seen to continue after 28 days, and
after 100 days the concrete has a strength of 110 % fcm.
Figure 2.4: Relative strength development continuing after 28 days.
Heat sources and temperature variations
The rate of which the concrete cures is heavily dependent on the temperature of the con-
crete, which is inﬂuenced both by the external temperature as well as the internal heat
==PAGE:29==
2.4. STRENGTH AND TEMPERATURE
17
formation. The external temperature varies for outdoor constructions according to the
time of year and is difﬁcult to control. Opposite can the internal contributors be varied.
The following factors inﬂuences the amount of heat and the rate of hydration [2, 18]:
• Chemical composition and amount of cement
• Types and amounts of mineral admixtures
• The speciﬁc surface area and grain size distribution for the cement
• w/c-ratio
• Initial temperature of the concrete
The temperature varies through the depth of a structure, as the outer parts are more
sensitive to the external temperature, and the inner parts can’t release the heat to the
surroundings in the same manner as the outer parts. The temperature gradient must not be
too big, as this entails large internal stresses leading to thermal cracking. Thus, one must
both be aware of the temperature gradient through the structure to avoid thermal cracking
as well as the overall temperature of the concrete, which is clariﬁed in the section below.
Effect of temperature on hardening
In general, the concrete properties are described for a curing temperature at 20 ◦C. But in
practice the temperature may vary a lot, and the standard prescribes a concrete temper-
ature in the early age between 0 ◦C and 70 ◦C [27]. Below the freezing point the liquid
water transforms to ice, and the strength of the concrete is permanently reduced. Instead,
if the temperature increases above 70 ◦C, there is a risk of Delayed Ettringite Formation,
DEF. When temperatures are that high, the natural occurring product in concrete, ettrin-
gite, decomposes, and the sulfates are adsorbed by calcium silicate hydrates. Later, the
sulfates are once more released to form ettringite, leading to a ruined cement paste [18].
If the temperature is kept below approximately 70 ◦C, the concrete is in general as-
sumed not to take any harm [2]. Though, Klieger [15] has showed, that the hardening
process is accelerated at the expense of the ﬁnal strength, when the temperature is in-
creased. In ﬁgure 2.5 the compressive strength is shown for specimens cured at various
temperatures relative to a curing temperature at 23 ◦C, and Klieger found that an increased
temperature improves the early age strength but lowers the ﬁnal strength, and opposite for
temperatures below 23 ◦C. The decrease in ﬁnal strength is meant to be caused by a lack
of time for diffusion of the hydration products resulting in a coarse pore structure. Lower-
ing the curing temperature leads to a more uniform distribution of the hydration products
and a decreased porosity [14].
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.5: Compressive strength for specimens cured at various temperatures relative to
compressive strength when curing at 73 ◦F corresponding to 23 ◦C [15].
The pozzolan reaction, as described in equation (2.6), is in even higher degree than the
cement hydration heavily dependent of the curing temperature. It is found that a higher
temperature increases the reaction ratio of ﬂy ash, and a higher temperature also precipi-
tates the starting time of the pozzolanic reaction [7].
Furthermore, the pozzolan reaction ratio is found to be decreased with a lower wa-
ter/powder ratio as well as an increased substitution rate.
Maturity
From experience it is found, that the temperature development follows the Arrhenius
description:
H(T) = exp
Ea(T)
R
 1
293 −
1
T + 273

(2.10)
where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature in degree Celsius in the concrete, and
Ea(T) is the activation energy for cement hydration, which is determined to:
Ea(T) =



(33500 + 1470(20 −T)) J/mol
for T < 20◦C
33500 J/mol
for T ≥20◦C
(2.11)
The function H(T) describes the hydration rate relative to the hydration at 20◦C. It de-
scribes if the hydration happens faster or slower, why the following relation is also true:
H(T) =
hydration rate at T
hydration rate at 20◦C
(2.12)
==PAGE:31==
2.4. STRENGTH AND TEMPERATURE
19
In ﬁgure 2.6 a plot of the relative hydration rate H(T) is shown. It is seen, that if the tem-
perature is doubled H is more than doubled, whereas H behaves almost linearly between
20◦C and 0◦C. Below the freezing point the hydration is found to approach a complete
standstill.
Figure 2.6: Relation between temperature and curing rate [2].
The relative hydration rate integrated over time describes the maturity of the concrete,
which can be used to describe the concrete instead of using the age in time. It has already
been stated, that the hydration is heavily inﬂuenced by the temperature by which the
concrete has cured, thus, the degree of hydration can vary a lot for concrete at the same
age. The maturity can be described as:
M(t) =
Z t
0
H(T(x))dx ≈
n
X
i=1
H(Ti)∆ti
(2.13)
where t is the time and x is a parameter only used in the integration process. If the
temperature curve is simpliﬁed to a number of constant values in time periods ∆t, the
approximated sum to the right can be used instead.
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.5
Chloride transport
Chloride ingress in concrete can be severe for the durability of a structure. For the con-
crete the chlorides do no harm, but the ions can initiate corrosion of the reinforcement, as
they permeate the passivating layer. For that reason, the content of chloride ions is tried
reduced as much as possible in all constituents of the concrete mix, and a dense concrete
is needed, to withstand the ingress of the chloride ions. In Denmark the external sources
of chloride are the main cause of chloride induced steel corrosion, and a cover layer of
dense concrete is the common way of postponing it [2].
The ions are led into the concrete by either diffusion, migration or capillary suction.
In a diffusion process the ions move due to a concentration gradient, where the ions move
toward the area with lowest concentration. This makes the ions move further into the
structure, where the chloride is only present in very small amounts. In a migration process
the ions move due to an electrical potential gradient. The process occurs e.g. when there
is a stray current leakage on a railroad or metro, and it is also used in test setups to
force ions into the concrete to simulate diffusion of chloride ions. Capillary suction can
happen when the concrete is dry, and the capillary pores are empty. If the concrete then
suddenly gets in contact with water, the concrete takes up water by capillary suction,
which possibly contains chlorides. Though, capillary suction has only shown to be a
challenge for concrete of low quality and if cracks are present, why a structure designed
for aggressive or extra aggressive environment does normally not have problems with
capillary suction [4].
Fick’s second law is found to resemble the one-dimensional ingress of chloride in a
semi-inﬁnite medium. A simple solution to the second order differential equation is:
C(x, t) = Cs −(Cs −Ci) erf

x
2
√
Dt

(2.14)
Where Cs = C(0, t) is the surface concentration, Ci = C(x, 0) is the initial chloride
concentration and D is the diffusion/migration coefﬁcient with unit [m2/s], where a low
value of D is a slow mass transport. After measuring the chloride contents C(x, t) the
parameters Cs and D can be determined by minimising the sum-of-squares.
The solution in equation (2.14) is for a non-steady state situation. In that case some of the
chlorides are bound to the cement matrix when moving into the concrete. The binding
capacity relates to the amount of C3A in the cement, as the clinker mineral reacts with
the chloride ions forming Friedel’s salt. The total amount of chloride ions in the concrete
is the sum of the free and bound chlorides, but it is believed that only the free ions affect
the chloride induced corrosion process [4].
As the hydration process goes on through the whole life of the structure, the concrete
becomes more and more dense, inducing slower chloride ingress with time. An example is
==PAGE:33==
2.5. CHLORIDE TRANSPORT
21
seen in ﬁgure 2.7, which is a part of the results from a large test program in relation to the
coming Fehmarnbelt ﬁxed link. It is seen that the migration coefﬁcient decreases for both
concrete with pure Portland cement as well as for concrete with low and high volume
of ﬂy ash. As stated in section 2.2 the pozzolan reaction with ﬂy ash is slow, why the
concrete mixes with ﬂy ash are slower to develop a dense structure. But on the long term
the concrete with the highest content of ﬂy ash develops the lowest migration coefﬁcient.
The time of measuring the migration coefﬁcient is therefore of great signiﬁcance for the
determined material properties.
Figure 2.7: Chloride migration coefﬁcient changing with time [5].
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.6
Frost resistance
During winter concrete can be exposed to repeated freezing and thawing, which has
turned out to cause durability problems. The concrete can both suffer internal damage
leading to reduction in stiffness and strength, and it can suffer superﬁcial damage. In this
project the focus is on salt scaling causing superﬁcial damage. This can result in con-
crete with a more open surface susceptible to ingress of harmful ions, risking corrosion
of the reinforcement, and a higher degree of saturation of the concrete, which can result
in strength loss due to internal frost damage. Furthermore, the coarse surface is often
aesthetically unacceptable [40].
The scaling consists of small ﬂakes of binder material. For the scaling to happen the
concrete surface must in some extend be covered by a saline solution, where the pessimum
solute concentration has turned out to be approximately 3 %.
Quantiﬁcation of frost resistance
It is still discussed what exactly causes the frost resistance to improve, but it is in general
accepted that the amount and distribution of air has an inﬂuence. The air content is often
used to evaluate the frost resistance of a concrete mix, because it is easy to measure in
fresh concrete. The standard requires an air content in the fresh concrete of 4.5 % and in
the hardened concrete of 3.5 % [34].
Powers’ spacing factor is a way of quantifying the distribution, and a spacing factor less
than 0.20 mm is the requirement in DS/EN 206 DK NA:2019 [34]. The spacing factor
L is deﬁned as in equation (2.15) [25]. The most problems with frost scaling happen for
P/A > 4.342, as a lower paste/air volume ratio means a large air content, where frost
scaling normally not appears.
L =





3 [1.4(1 + P
A)1/3 −1]
α
for P
A > 4.342
P
400n
for P
A ≤4.342
(2.15)
Where α is the speciﬁc surface of the air, P is the volume of the paste, A is the total air
content and n is the void frequency.
It is, among others by Hasholt [9], proposed that the air void distribution described by
the total surface area of air voids, better correlates with the frost resistance than Powers’
spacing factor. Thus, it is still unclear what exactly is the link between frost resistance
and the air void characteristics, but the research indicates that the air void structure needs
to be examined, which can only be checked through a microscopic analysis.
==PAGE:35==
2.6. FROST RESISTANCE
23
To increase the air content an air entraining agent is often added. Concrete with larger
air content shows better frost resistance, even though the strength is reduced. As a rule
of thumb, the strength is lowered with about 5 % for each 1 % of increase in air content
[18]. The strength of the concrete is relevant for the resistance to salt scaling, and the
standard requires minimum strength class C35/45 for exposure class XS2 and XF2/XF3
[34]. But the strength can’t stand alone, as the air entraining agent lowers the strength
but still increases the durability regarding to salt scaling. If the fresh concrete is over-
vibrated, and thereby bleeds, the hardened concrete will often show worse resistance to
salt scaling. This is due to the larger w/c-ratio near the surface, which then lowers the
strength.
In general, the following requirements are valid for exposure class XF2 according to
DS/EN 206 DK NA:2019 [34].
• w/c-ratio: ≤0.45
• Strength class: ≥C35/45
• FA/C-ratio: ≤0.33
• Air content in fresh concrete: ≥4.5 %
• Air content in hardened concrete: ≥3.5 %
• Spacing factor: ≤0.20 mm
• Frost test: "Good"
To assess the concrete with respect to the amount of scaling in a frost test, the Swedish
standard has set up the limits for the amount of scaling as seen in table 2.5 [24]. It
is noticed, that an "Acceptable" concrete in the Swedish standard is not frost resistant
according to the Danish requirements, as the concrete in Denmark must be at least "Good"
to be accepted.
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Table 2.5: Requirements for assessment of frost resistance (28 days old specimens) [24].
Frost resistance
Requirement
Very good
Mean cumulated scaling at 56 cycles is less than 0.10 kg/m2
Good
Mean cumulated scaling at 56 cycles is less than 0.20 kg/m2
OR
If m56/m28 < 2:
Mean cumulated scaling at 56 cycles is less than 0.50 kg/m2
OR
Mean cumulated scaling at 112 cycles is less than 0.50 kg/m2
Acceptable
If m56/m28 < 2:
Mean cumulated scaling at 56 cycles is less than 1.00 kg/m2
OR
Mean cumulated scaling at 112 cycles is less than 1.00 kg/m2
Not acceptable
If the requirements related to acceptable frost resistance is
not fulﬁlled.
Theories of salt frost scaling
There are several theories of what is causing the scaling, and the ﬁeld is not yet fully
covered. This also explains some of the uncertainties regarding what exactly improves
the frost resistance. But two widespread theories are Microscopic ice lens growth and
Glue-spalling mechanism.
The theory of Microscopic ice lens growth describes the scaling as caused by formation of
ice crystals. The ﬁrst crystals are formed in the largest pores, and a difference in chemical
energy between the largest pores and the smaller ones can be a potential for the moisture
to be driven from the narrow pores to the ice crystals. The increasing ice crystals induce
stresses in the concrete, which in the end can lead to superﬁcial scaling according to the
theory of Microscopic ice lens growth [16].
The theory of Glue-spalling mechanism explains the damage as a thermo-mechanical
mismatch between the concrete and the frozen medium, forming cracks which penetrates
the concrete and causes spalling [41]. The expansion coefﬁcients of ice and concrete
varies with a ratio 5, which is why the crack occur according to the theory of Glue-
spalling mechanism [42].
Frost resistance and ﬂy ash concrete
Both concrete with and without ﬂy ash has shown to be able to withstand cyclic freez-
ing and thawing if having proper air void structure. But several studies have shown an
increase in salt scaling when adding ﬂy ash [38, 39]. Especially for very large volumes
of ﬂy ash, e.g. if ﬂy ash accounts for ≥50 % of binder mass [8]. Though, there still ex-
==PAGE:37==
2.6. FROST RESISTANCE
25
ist several examples of concrete with high volumes of ﬂy ash, which show excellent salt
scaling resistance. Thomas [39] has proposed concrete with ﬂy ash to be more sensitive
to poor ﬁnishing and curing conditions, which maybe then explains the cases of poor salt
scaling resistance.
Hasholt et al. [8] has stressed out that a poor frost resistance for ﬂy ash concrete can
be due to chemical degradation initiated by chloride ingress, increasing the permeability
as the reaction goes on. But the actual chemical reaction has not been determined yet
[43]. If the frost scaling is caused by ingress of water in the concrete surface, a more
permeable concrete is expected to cause more severe frost scaling.
The small amounts of unburnt carbon in ﬂy ash also seems to absorb and inactivate
the AEA, why larger amounts of AEA is needed for similar air content. Further, addition
of plasticizer can also disturb the air void structure. This entails a chance of having the
desired air content in the fresh concrete, but the hardened concrete turns out to have a
changed and reduced air void structure. This underlines the importance of making an air
void analysis of the concrete. However, a study by Hasholt et al. [8] has showed, that an
air void analysis based on black and white colour impregnation is disturbed by the hollow
ﬂy ash particles (cenospheres), as they look like air voids and risk being accounted as a
part of the air void structure. Thereby, the determined air content and spacing factor can
be misleading, and the error increases as the amount of ﬂy ash increases.
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Materials and methods
3.1
Overview of tests and scheduling
Concrete mixes and test methods
Three mixes were cast with Ordinary Portland Cement, referred with the abbreviation
"PC". The have the aimed air contents in the fresh concrete 1.0 %, 2.5 % and 5.0 %.
Three other mixes containing ﬂy ash were cast, referred with the abbreviation "FA", and
they were aimed to have the same air contents as for the PC mixes. The needed volume
of PC-1.0 and FA-1.0 were larger than the other mixes, why an additional casting of the
same size was made for these two recipes (e.g. PC-1.0-1 and PC-1.0-2), to comply with
the larger need without changing the volume of each casting. This was done to keep as
many parameters constant as possible, so only the desired parameters were changing.
Two main tests regarding concrete durability was performed for all types of specimens.
The ﬁrst was a non-steady state chloride migration test, and the second an accelerated salt
frost scaling test. Further, the compressive strength was as well tested for all specimens,
as an overall examination of the quality of the concrete.
The ﬁrst 7 days after mixing, the concrete cured at different temperatures: 5 ◦C, 23 ◦C and
40 ◦C, and the temperature was logged, to check whether the temperature in the concrete
was as planned. An air void analysis was also performed for four of the specimens, to
better know the air void structure with respect to the frost resistance of the concrete.
In table 3.1 an overview of the mentioned tests is found.
27
==PAGE:40==
28
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 3.1: Performed tests and additional examinations.
Abbreviation
Name of test
Standard
Strength test
Compressive strength test
DS/EN 12390-3:2012, [35]
after 28 days
Migration test
Non-steady state chloride
NT Build 492, [20]
migration test
Frost test
Accelerated salt frost
DS/CEN/TS 12390-9:2016, [32]
scaling test
Determination of air void
DS/EN 480-11, [26], and
Air void analysis
characteristics in hardened
ASTM 457, [13]
concrete
The tests were performed on the mixes as shown in table 3.2. A hollow circle, ◦,
indicates a mix exposed to strength, migration and frost test. A ﬁlled circle, •, indicates
a mix where also an air void analysis has been performed, in addition to the mentioned
three tests.
Table 3.2: Overview of tests performed at various temperatures.
PC-1.0-1
PC-1.0-2
PC-2.5
PC-5.0
FA-1.0-1
FA-1.0-2
FA-2.5
FA-5.0
5 ◦C
◦
◦
◦
◦
23 ◦C
◦
•
◦
•
◦
•
◦
•
40 ◦C
◦
◦
◦
◦
Schedule
A schedule was made, to be sure all tests were possible. This implies both tests for
Thorsen and Olesen’s project as well as the testing for this project. The schedule is seen
in appendix A, organised around the four casting days, having one row in the schedule
for each test in relation to that speciﬁc day.
An overview of the casting days is also seen in table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Casting days
PC-1.0-1
PC-1.0-2
PC-2.5
PC-5.0
FA-1.0-1
FA-1.0-2
FA-2.5
FA-5.0
24 Feb.
×
×
28 Feb.
×
×
2 Mar.
×
×
9 Mar.
×
×
==PAGE:41==
3.2. CONCRETE MIXES
29
3.2
Concrete mixes
Concrete materials
For the concrete mixes the materials in table 3.4 were used, where it among others was
prioritized to use air entraining agent and plasticizer from the same supplier, as additives
from different companies can interact inconveniently.
The adsorption for sand is in the data sheet from NCC found to 0.2 % and for crushed
granite to 0.7%.
Table 3.4: Materials used for the casting of concretes.
Material
Type
Supplier
Cement
Rapid Cement (CEM I 52,5 N (MS) (LA))
Aalborg Portland
Fly ash
"Biokulﬂyveaske"
Emineral
Fine agg.
Sea dredged sand, class E
NCC
Coarse agg., 4-8 mm
Crushed granite:
NCC
"Blå Rønne granit", class E
Coarse agg., 8-16 mm
Crushed granite:
NCC
"Blå Rønne granit", class E
Air entraining agent
MasterAir 22SB
BASF
Plasticizer
MasterPozzolith 120
BASF
Mix designs
All concrete mixes in the project were with an equivalent w/c-ratio of 0.45, taking the ﬂy
ash into account with the regular activity factor, k = 0.5, [34].
w
c

eq =
mw
mc + 0.5mFA
(3.1)
Where mw, mc and mFA refers to the masses of water, cement and ﬂy ash, respectively.
The w/c-ratio was chosen, so the concretes fulﬁl the requirement for concrete exposed to
chlorides in seawater exposure class XS2 as well as for frost resistant concrete exposure
class XF2. Though, an even lower w/c-ratio was avoided, as it was assumed to entail less
scaling and less chloride ingress, why the results in that case would be less distinct.
The aimed air content was varied as shown in table 3.5. The mixes PC-5.0 and FA-5.0
fulﬁl the requirements related to frost resistance, but also two reference mixes and two
mixes with ﬂy ash with lower air content is tested, to make the resistance to frost damage
more pronounced.
The exposure classes are elaborated in the Danish annex for DS/EN 206 [34], where the
exposure classes describe, in which extend the concrete is exposed to the speciﬁc deterio-
ration mechanism. For this project the exposure class XS2 was considered with respect to
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
chloride ingress, concerning a structure permanently under water, which could for exam-
ple be marine structures. For the frost test the exposure class XF2 was considered, which
is a structure exposed to moderate water saturation with salt.
Table 3.5: Aimed key numbers related to the six concrete mixes as well as requirements as
stated in DS/EN 206 DK NA:2019, [34].
PC-1.0
PC-2.5
PC-5.0
FA-1.0
FA-2.5
FA-5.0
Requirement
Eq. w/c-ratio [-]
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
max 0.45
FA/C [-]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.33
0.33
0.33
max 0.33
Air content (fresh
1.0
2.5
5.0
1.0
2.5
5.0
min 4.5
concrete) [vol-%]
The reference concrete mix PC-1.0 was based on a standard recipe and adjusted, as
the initial casting showed unwanted large slump. The adjustment was made by means of
Popovic’s guide to correction of water content.
V2
V1
=
S2
S2
0.1
(3.2)
Where V1 and V2 are the volumes of water in mix 1 and 2, respectively, and S1 and S2 are
the slump values for mix 1 and 2, respectively. A target slump of 120 mm was used, as it
seemed reasonable to have a slump, allowing other concrete mixes to have either a larger
or lower slump than the reference mix and still have a sufﬁcient workability. This could
be relevant as the concrete mix PC-1.0 should be used as reference for this project as well
as for another master’s thesis, and the concrete mixes for the other project were predicted
to vary a lot in workability.
The mixes with ﬂy ash was aimed to contain 33 weight-% ﬂy ash (FA) compared to
cement (C), as it is the maximum allowable amount of ﬂy ash in concrete cf. DS/EN 206
DK NA:2019, [34], and as listed in table 3.5. This results in the following ratio.
FA
C = 0.33
⇒
FA
C+FA = 0.25
(3.3)
The recipes with ﬂy ash was developed by keeping the content of aggregates constant, but
vary the content of water, cement and ﬂy ash, as the following three conditions should be
fulﬁlled.
1. Constant volume of paste
2. Constant (w/c)eq
3. Constant ratio between cement and ﬂy ash
==PAGE:43==
3.2. CONCRETE MIXES
31
The calculations are performed in appendix C.
The ﬁnal recipes are shown in table 3.6, where both the addition of air entraining agent
as well as plasticizer is taken into account when listing the water content, as the additives
contain 98.2 % and 78.5 % water, respectively. This explains the decrease in tap water in
the recipes, as more air entraining agent is added.
Fly ash is often acclaimed to increase the workability of concrete, but as the k-factor
for ﬂy ash is 0.5, the double amount of ﬂy ash is added when replacing cement. This
causes the volume of powder to increase, and thus the workability to decrease. This
explains the need for plasticizer in the mixes containing ﬂy ash. An increased workability
when adding ﬂy ash is only true when replacing cement and ﬂy ash 1:1, however, this
makes the equivalent w/c-ratio to increase.
Had the project period been longer, the 28 days strength could as well be tested before
the actual castings, as the Danish Annex to DS/EN 206 [34] prescribe a compressive
strength of minimum C35/45 for exposure class XS2 and XF2. Though, due to the limited
time the compressive strength was only checked afterwards. The concrete mixes are as
listed table 3.6, where PC is the abbreviation for concrete with Portland cement as only
binder material, and FA is the abbreviation for concrete containing ﬂy ash as stated in
equation (3.3). The following number refers to the aimed air content of the fresh concrete.
Table 3.6: Concrete recipes in unit [kg/m3].
Constituents
Density
PC
FA
-1.0
-2.5
-5.0
-1.0
-2.5
-5.0
Cement
3160
483
483
483
379
379
379
Bio-coal ﬂy ash
2400
0
0
0
125
125
125
Tap water
1000
217
216
213
198
195
192
Sand
2620
662
662
662
640
640
640
Fine agg., 4-8 mm
2710
170
170
170
164
164
164
Coarse agg., 8-16 mm
2720
852
852
852
824
824
824
Air entraining agent
1010
0
1.45
4.83
0
2.27
5.79
Plasticizer
1080
0
0
0
1.01
1.26
1.26
It must be added that the amounts of aggregates varied a little between the reference
mixes and the mixes with ﬂy ash, cf. table 3.6. This error was caused by the change of
the basic recipe with Popovich’s correction in equation 3.2. As the recipe was changed,
the volume of cement and water was updated when determining the amount of ﬂy ash
in appendix C, but the amount of aggregates was overlooked in the mixes with ﬂy ash,
why these masses of aggregates come from the old, initial recipe. The paste content was
therefore 37.1 % for the PC-mixes and 37.8 % for the FA-mixes.
==PAGE:44==
32
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.3
Equipment
Equipment for concrete casting
Figure 3.1 shows the mixer used for mixing the concrete. It uses the same principle as an
industrial mixer which forces the concrete together. This is preferred compared to a drum
mixer which drops the concrete, as this does not mix the constituents as good.
Figure 3.1: Concrete mixer.
Figure 3.2a shows the metal cone used for slump testing, and ﬁgure 3.2b shows the
container used to determine the air content in the fresh concrete by means of the Pressure
gauge method [36].
(a) Slump testing.
(b) Air test container.
Figure 3.2: Equipment for testing the properties of the fresh concrete.
==PAGE:45==
3.3. EQUIPMENT
33
Equipment for temperature logging
A type T thermocouple was used for the temperature measurements. It consists of two
wires of different materials soldered together in the end forming an electrical junction. A
temperature dependent voltage is formed between the two wires, which is measured and
converted to a temperature. Many types of thermocouples exist, e.g. Type E, K, T, R, and
the most common used for concrete is Type K (chromel-alumel) with a precision of about
1.0 ◦C and Type T (copper-constantan) with a precision of about 0.5 ◦C, the latter being
used in this project [2].
The soldered ends of the wires are covered with shrinking plastic, which is seen in ﬁgure
3.3a. The temperature was measured once every minute by a data logger as shown in
ﬁgure 3.3b, having several channels so more than one thermocouple could be used at a
time.
(a) Thermocouple with plastic cover.
(b) Data logger.
Figure 3.3: Thermocouple and data logger for temperature measurements in concrete
core.
The water temperature in the cold water was controlled by placing the specimens in
one of three water tubs, covered by a plastic sheet, which were all placed in a cold store
at 5 ◦C. As the water tubs were relatively small, it was sought to have the same number of
specimens in each tub, to make the water temperatures as identical as possible in the three
water tubs. For the water at 40 ◦C a large insulated tub was used. It automatically con-
trolled the water temperature, pumping new hot water into the tub when the temperature
decreased. Figure 3.4 shows the cold and hot water tubs.
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
(a) 5 ◦C water tubs.
(b) 40 ◦C water tub.
Figure 3.4: Cold and hot water tubs used for the ﬁrst week after curing.
Equipment for migration test
Figure 3.5a shows the pump used for vacuum suction. For the actual migration test the
setup in ﬁgure 3.5b was used. A power supply was connected to all three specimens
in the tub, why the output on the display showed the accumulated current for all three
specimens. Consequently, the three specimens in each tub had to be the same type of
specimen, so the current running through each specimen was the same.
(a) Vacuum pump.
(b) Setup for the migration test.
Figure 3.5: Equipment used for the migration test.
Equipment for freeze-thaw test
Figure 3.6 shows a freezing chamber with a dummy specimen in both top and bottom.
The dummy specimens each contained a thermocouple in the freezing medium, securing
the temperature to be within the time-temperature curve stated in the standard [32].
==PAGE:47==
3.3. EQUIPMENT
35
Figure 3.6: Freezing chamber.
The surface was rinsed off with a soft stream of water, as seen on ﬁgure 3.7a. This
was to avoid removing material which had not completely loosened the surface. When
dried in the oven, the scaled material was stored in a metal vessel, as shown on ﬁgure
3.7b, after which the material was weighed to the nearest 0.1 g, by carefully pour and
brush the material into an empty vessel on the balance.
(a) Soft water stream used to peel off scaled mate-
rial.
(b) Metal vessel for storing the scaled material in
the oven.
Figure 3.7: Equipment used for freeze-thaw test.
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.4
Casting of concrete
The approach for casting and demoulding of concrete had the following steps:
1. Water contents in aggregates were measured by 20 minutes of heating in microwave.
2. Amount of water were adjusted on account of water content in aggregates.
3. Constituents were weighed.
4. Stones, half of the sand, cement and if relevant bio-coal ﬂy ash was dry mixed in
the mixer for 1 minute.
5. Water and air entraining agent were added, which was ﬁrst mixed with ∼10 % of
water cf. the data sheet.
6. Mixed for 5 minutes (checked after both 3 and 4 minutes that no powder was stuck
at the edges).
7. Slump was measured cf. section 3.5.
8. Air content of fresh concrete was measured cf. section 3.5.
9. Moulds were ﬁlled halfway up with concrete and vibrated for approximately 30
seconds.
10. Moulds were ﬁlled completely and vibrated for another 30 seconds.
11. Moulds were closed with top plates.
12. Cylinders were placed horizontally for the ﬁrst 24±2 hours, immersed in water
saturated with Ca(OH)2 at the planned temperature.
Notice, this is not common practice, as described below.
13. After 24±2 hours the specimens were demoulded and put back into the water satu-
rated with Ca(OH)2 at the planned temperature.
The reason for the deviation in method in item 12 was due to the desire of controlling
the temperature for the ﬁrst week of curing. Normally the specimens are only immersed
in Ca(OH)2 saturated water after the ﬁrst day, but as a signiﬁcant curing happens in the
ﬁrst 24 hours, it was desired to control the temperature from start. At DTU no heating
chamber was available, but instead it was possible to procure basins at both 5, 23 and 40
◦C, why it was determined to immerse all specimens from start.
==PAGE:49==
3.5. TESTING FRESH CONCRETE
37
3.5
Testing fresh concrete
Slump
The slump was determined according to DS/EN 12350-2:2019, [37].
Air content
The air content in the fresh concrete was determined according to DS/EN 12350-7:2019,
[36], complying to the Pressure Gauge Method.
3.6
Air void analysis
The standard ASTM 457 [13] was followed in the analysis, and the results documented
as in DS/EN 480-11 [26].
The air void analysis was performed by Danish Technological Institute for the spec-
imens listed below, where two castings with and two without air entraining agent were
chosen, to give a wide impression of the state of the air voids. The analysis was performed
on excessive cylinder parts from the Ø150 cylinders for the frost test.
– PC-1.0-2, 20 ◦C
– PC-5.0
– FA-1.0-2, 20 ◦C
– FA-5.0
3.7
Compressive strength test
The compressive strength was determined according to DS/EN 12390-3:2019, [35].
3 specimens within each category were tested, giving a total of 30 specimens of size Ø100
mm.
Curing procedure
From casting until testing the cylinders was planned to follow the procedure as described
below:
1. From casting until day 7 the specimens were submerged in Ca(OH)2 saturated water
at 5, 23 and 40 ◦C, respectively.
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2. After 7 days all specimens were moved to the Ca(OH)2 saturated water at 23±2 ◦C.
3. After 28 days* the specimens were ready for being tested.
* Due to the Covid-19 crisis the duration of the curing was extended, so the time
between item 2 and 3 was not 21 days but 51-61 days. During that time the specimens
were submerged in the Ca(OH)2 saturated water. The age of each specimen at the time of
the testing is clariﬁed in section 4.4.
Testing of specimens
The specimens were tested on DTU’s machine TONI Technik-300Ton with the following
machine conﬁguration.
Table 3.7: Machine conﬁguration for compressive strength test.
Rate [kN/s]
Rate [MPa/s]
Fmax [kN]
Fracture detection [%]
4.71
0.6
1500
2
3.8
Non-steady state chloride migration test
The non-steady state migration coefﬁcient was determined according to the method NT
BUILD 492, [20]. 3 specimens within each category were tested, giving a total of 30
specimens of size Ø100 mm.
Curing procedure and preparation
From casting until testing the specimens were planned to follow the procedure as de-
scribed below:
1. From casting until day 7 the specimens were submerged in Ca(OH)2 saturated water
at 5, 23 and 40 ◦C, respectively.
2. After 7 days all specimens were moved to the Ca(OH)2 saturated water at 23±2 ◦C.
3. After 28 days* the specimens were halved and one of the parts cut with a thickness
of 50 mm. This were the specimens used for testing, and the surface towards the
middle of the cylinder was marked, as this was the surface which should be exposed
to the chloride solution.
After sawing the specimens were placed in vacuum for 3 hours before ﬁlling the
container with Ca(OH)2 solution, still with the vacuum pump running for another
hour.
==PAGE:51==
3.9. ACCELERATED SALT FROST SCALING TEST
39
4. The specimens were kept in the Ca(OH)2 solution for 18±2 hours before the testing
began.
* Due to the Covid-19 crisis the duration of the curing was extended, so the time
between item 2 and 3 was not 21 days but 70-80 days. During that time the specimens
were submerged in the Ca(OH)2 saturated water. The age of each specimen at the time of
the testing is clariﬁed in section 4.5.
Testing of specimens
The specimens were tested according to the method in NT BUILD 492, [20].
3.9
Accelerated salt frost scaling test
The frost resistance was determined according to the Danish standard DS/CEN/TS 12390-
9, [32], and evaluated according to the Swedish standard SS 137244, [24]. Due to limited
space in the freezing chamber it was planned to only test 2 instead of 3 cylinders within
each category, giving a total of 20 cylinders of size Ø150 mm. As the plans changed due
to Covid-19, it was possible to increase the number to a total of 30 specimens, why some
cylinders were cut into two specimens.
Curing procedure and preparation
The specimens were planned to follow the procedure until testing as described below:
1. From casting until day 7 the specimens were submerged in Ca(OH)2 saturated water
at 5, 23 and 40 ◦C, respectively.
2. After 7 days all specimens were moved to the climate chamber at 23±2 ◦C and RH
65 %.
3. After 21 days* the specimens were saw cut, so each cylinder resulted in one speci-
men with a thickness of 50 mm, from the middle of the cylinder. Due to the changed
plans, one cylinder within each category were cut into two specimens.
4. After 25 days* the specimens were coated, which is elaborated in ﬁgure 3.8.
5. After 28 days* the specimens were saturated from the top with demineralised water.
6. After 31 days* the specimens were removed from the climate chamber and were
ready for testing.
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
* Due to the Covid-19 crisis the duration of the curing was extended, so the time
between item 2 and 3 was not 14 days but 51-65 days. During that time the specimens
were stored in the climate chamber. The age of each specimen at the time of the testing
is clariﬁed in section 4.6.
The coating of the specimens is outlined in ﬁgure 3.8. The silicone was a regular
joint ﬁller for external use on buildings. The joint ﬁller was smeared tight to the edge
after application of the rubber sheet, as it is important to completely close any possible
holes or cracks at the sides, as this is what keeps the freezing medium in place. Step (a)
and (b) are to secure watertight joints, step (c) retains moisture and (d) are to insulate the
remaining sides, as only the surface should be exposed to frost attack. At last a plastic
sheet was put on top to prevent evaporation of the water.
(a) Silicone was applied along the upper edge.
(b) Adhesive tape was placed on top of the silicone.
(c) A rubber sheet covered the whole side and bot-
tom. Joint ﬁller was smeared at the internal edge.
(d) The specimen was placed in a thick insulation
with clear identiﬁcation on the side.
Figure 3.8: Procedure for preparation of specimens for frost test.
Testing of specimens
The testing of the frost resistance followed the procedure in DS/CEN/TS 12390-9:2016,
[32], and the results evaluated according to the Swedish standard SS 137244:2018, [24].
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Results and discussion
4.1
Properties of fresh concrete
The properties of the fresh concrete are found in table 4.1 and are satisfactory.
The slump was aimed to be at approximately 120 mm, but is inﬂuenced by the addition of
ﬂy ash as well as plasticizer and air entraining agent. Further, the result in the slump test
may vary, depending on how exactly the cone is pulled off. Most important in this project
regarding the workability was to be able to properly cast the concrete in the moulds.
The air content for FA-1.0-1 and FA-1.0-2 are a little above PC-1.0-1 and PC-1.0-2. This
can be due to the plasticizer used for the ﬂy ash mixes. The producer tries to avoid air
entraining by adding a defoamer to the plasticizer, but maybe it still adds a little to the air
content. Though, the variation is within what is acceptable.
Table 4.1: Measured properties of fresh concrete.
Slump [mm]
Air content [%]
PC-1.0-1
120
0.7
PC-1.0-2
120
0.7
PC-2.5
90
2.6
PC-5.0
120
5.4
FA-1.0-1
90
1.1
FA-1.0-2
90
1.0
FA-2.5
130
2.3
FA-5.0
110
5.4
41
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2
Temperature measurements
The temperature was intended to be measured for two castings, as stated in table 3.2, to be
sure the planned temperatures were followed. But in the end a total of three measurements
were performed.
First the temperature was logged at the casting of PC-1.0-1 and FA-1.0-1 in the hot water
tub. But the temperature regulation in the tub had an error, resulting in the temperature
varying between 10 and 75 degrees. The specimens in the tub were set aside and the
measurements rejected.
Second measurement was, as planned, in the cold water for casting PC-1.0-2 and FA-1.0-
2. The measurements are found in ﬁgure 4.1.
Third measurement was for the casting of FA-2.5 and FA-5.0 in the hot water tub, as a
second attempt to log temperatures in the hot water. In this case both measurements are
in concrete containing ﬂy ash. The results are found in ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Temperature measurements in the cold water tub.
At ﬁgure 4.1 the temperatures in the concretes are ﬁrst decreasing, as the specimens
are immersed in the cold water. After approximately 28 hours the specimens were moved
from the cold store to the concrete workshop for demoulding.
The temperature of the water only differs from the temperature in the specimen cores
about 1 ◦C, but the temperatures are in general 2-5 ◦C above the aimed temperature in the
tub at 5 ◦C. This is maybe due the heat of hydration in the cores, which can also affect the
temperature of the water, as the tubs were small compared to the number of specimens in
each tub.
==PAGE:55==
4.2. TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS
43
Figure 4.2: Temperature measurements in the hot water tub.
The temperature measurement of the hot water ﬂuctuated approximately 5 degrees,
which is assumed to be due to an error in the speciﬁc thermocouple. Thus, every single
water temperature listed in ﬁgure 4.2 is an average of the temperature as well as the
four previous and following measurements, making the temperature a mean of 9 minutes,
smoothing out any possible errors in the measurements.
There was approximately three hours between the two castings at ﬁgure 4.2, why
the measurement for mix FA-2.5 only starts about 4 hours after the mixing of concrete
FA-5.0 took place. At start the temperatures in the concretes are increasing after being
immersed in the hot water, and after approximately 16 hours the measurements for FA-
2.5 are ﬂuctuating. This happens at 3 o’clock in the night, and is expected to be an error
in the thermocouple. The demoulding took place after approximately 22 hours. After
25 hours a sudden increase in temperature is seen, which is maybe explained by a DTU
employee adjusting the temperature on the water tub closer to the normal 40 ◦C. The
actual explanation for the temperature rising is unknown.
The temperature in the hot water was planned to be at 40 ◦C, but the measurements
show the temperature in general to be much lower. All specimens in the hot tub were cast
at the same day (PC-1.0-2 and FA-1.0-2), why a deviation from the planned temperature
still makes it possible to compare the specimens, as they have been exposed to the same
conditions.
The temperature of the specimens does not seem to inﬂuence the water temperature in
the hot tub. After 4-10 hours the heat of hydration in the specimens makes the temperature
in the cores increase, but the water temperature remains steady. This can be due to the hot
water tub being a single large container, minimising the inﬂuence from the specimens, as
they take up a smaller part of the total volume.
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Overall the temperatures in the cold and hot water tubs are considered acceptable, as
the curing temperatures of the specimens differ at minimum 10 ◦C, and thereby, there
has been a signiﬁcantly difference in the ﬁrst week after mixing for the three curing
conditions.
==PAGE:57==
4.3. AIR VOID ANALYSIS
45
4.3
Air void analysis
An air void analysis was performed by TI on four concrete mixes. The specimens of
size 100x100 mm were saw cut, polished and colour impregnated, after which the actual
chord counting was performed mechanically. The results are seen in table 4.2, and the
full report is enclosed in appendix D.
The total surface area is found by using the air content of the hardened concrete and
determining the air void volume pr. cubic meter concrete, after which it is multiplied with
the speciﬁc surface. It is not the actual total surface area, but it is a value proportional
with it.
Table 4.2: Air void analysis. All specimens have cured at 20 ◦C.
PC-1.0
FA-1.0
PC-5.0
FA-5.0
Air content (fresh)
[%]
0.7
1.0
5.4
5.4
Air content (hardened)
[%]
0.6
1.7
4.8
4.9
Speciﬁc surface
[mm−1]
39.12
34.85
58.73
57.82
Total surface pr m3 concrete
[108·mm2]
2.347
5.925
28.19
28.33
Spacing factor
[mm]
0.348
0.259
0.096
0.097
The standard requirement for frost resistant concrete is a spacing factor lower than
0.2 mm, and according to that neither PC-1.0 or FA-1.0 have acceptable frost resistance,
while both PC-5.0 and FA-5.0 are acceptable. The spacing factor for FA-1.0 is better than
for PC-1.0, predicting the best frost resistance for the lowest value.
It has been proposed, that the total surface area is a better parameter than the spacing
factor to assess the frost resistance. The spacing factor expresses the probability of a
capillary pore being close to an air void, and the total surface area the probability of a
capillary pore being connected to an air void [9]. Judged by the total surface area, FA-1.0
is expected to have better frost resistance than PC-1.0, which is also the one of the two
having the highest air content and lowest spacing factor.
For PC-1.0 the air content in the fresh and hardened concrete is close to each other, while
for FA-1.0 the air content in the hardened concrete is measured higher than in the fresh
concrete. As the analysed areas are small, there can be uncertainties related to the results,
and a larger area would maybe show the values to be closer to each other. Moreover,
according to Hasholt et al. [8] the cenospheres in ﬂy ash can distort the air void analysis,
why the air content in the hardened concrete can be determined higher than it is.
When comparing the parameters for PC-5.0 and FA-5.0, the results are fairly close to each
other, indicating that the concretes have air void systems being much alike.
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The cenospheres in the ﬂy ash can easily be seen by mixing ﬂy ash with water. The
light hollow particles will ﬂoat on top, and the dense particles will fall to the bottom. An
example is made for both ordinary ﬂy ash from coal combustion and for bio-coal ﬂy ash,
and is seen in ﬁgure 4.3 and 4.4.
Figure 4.3: Hollow ﬂy ash particles ﬂoating at the water surface. Left: Ordinary coal ﬂy
ash. Right: Bio-coal ﬂy ash.
(a) Ordinary coal ﬂy ash.
(b) Bio-coal ﬂy ash.
Figure 4.4: Close-up of ﬂoating ﬂy ash particles.
On ﬁgure 4.4b it is seen how the bio-coal ﬂy ash consist of fewer but larger particles
ﬂoating on top, and it is not known whether these particles are hollow in the same manner
as the cenospheres in ordinary coal ﬂy ash, seen on ﬁgure 4.4a. An air void analysis
performed on cement pastes with varying ﬂy ash content could maybe clarify it. And
further, if looking in microscope on a polished saw cut surface, potential hollow particles
could maybe be seen. In general, the difference of the ﬂy ash seen at ﬁgure 4.4a and
4.4b can also be due to the large variations in the production of ﬂy ash, as it is heavily
dependent of the temperature, the fuel and the speciﬁc kiln used for combustion.
==PAGE:59==
4.4. COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH TEST
47
4.4
Compressive strength test
Dependence of age
Due to the Covid-19 crisis it was not possible to comply with the scheduled testing. In-
stead all 30 specimens were tested the same day. They were not the regular 28 days old,
but aged as listed in table 4.3. All results from the test are also seen in appendix E.
Table 4.3: Age of specimens when tested for compressive strength.
Age [days]
PC-1.0-1
72
FA-1.0-1
72
PC-1.0-2
65
FA-1.0-2
65
PC-2.5
68
FA-2.5
57
PC-5.0
68
FA-5.0
57
As the castings of PC-1.0 and FA-1.0 were both divided into two, with one week
between the castings, it is of interest to see, if the seven days of additional maturing have
changed the strength signiﬁcantly. In ﬁgure 4.5 the compressive strength is shown for the
mixes split in two castings, with 7 days between the ﬁrst and second casting.
Figure 4.5: Strength comparison for mixes with two castings, where the second castings
have cured 7 days less.
As the specimens from the second castings are 7 days younger, they should be the
weakest, if the difference in age had had signiﬁcantly inﬂuence on the strength. Such
==PAGE:60==
48
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
a systematic difference between the ﬁrst and second casting is not seen, nor would it
be expected due to the age of the specimens. As mentioned in section 2.4 the strength
development is fast in the beginning, but the curve ﬂattens asymptotically and after 60-70
days the strength development is expected to happen very slowly. Thus, the variation in
age for both the compressive strength test, migration test and frost test are expected to
only inﬂuence the results in a minor degree, as the specimens are much older than the
ordinary 28 days.
Dependence of air content
The compressive strengths are shown in ﬁgure 4.6 with respect to the measured air content
in the fresh concrete.
Figure 4.6: Compressive strength for varying air contents.
Linear tendency lines are drawn at ﬁgure 4.6, where the linear strength loss per percent
air content is found to be close to the same for the mixes with and without ﬂy ash. The
decrease in strength is determined to 5.0 % and 5.1 % for the reference mixes and ﬂy ash
mixes, respectively. As a rule of thumb, the strength is decreased with 5 % for every 1 %
increase in air content, as stated in section 2.6. Thus, the strength loss seems reasonable.
When comparing the strength of the concretes with and without ﬂy ash, they are very
much in the same level, indicating that the k-factor for ﬂy ash of 0.5 ﬁts with the results, as
the ﬂy ash seems to have pretty much the same strength as the cement it replaced. Though,
as listed in table 4.3, the specimens are older than the regular 28 days (57-72 days), why
the ﬂy ash concrete is expected to have gained more strength than the concrete without
==PAGE:61==
4.4. COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH TEST
49
ﬂy ash in the additional days, due to the pozzolan reaction still taking place after 28 days.
So, if tested at 28 days, the ﬂy ash concrete is assumed to have been weaker than the
concrete without ﬂy ash.
Dependence of temperature
For the mixes without air entraining agent, PC-1.0 and FA-1.0, the compressive strengths
are seen in ﬁgure 4.7 with respect to the temperature at ﬁrst week of curing. Lines are
drawn between each of the average compressive strengths for the three specimens in a
mix under same curing conditions.
Figure 4.7: Compressive strength for PC-1.0 and FA-1.0 for varying temperatures at ﬁrst
week of curing. The lines connect the average compressive strengths.
At ﬁgure 4.7 it is seen, that both concrete mixes have the highest strength at the lowest
temperature (5 ◦C), and the strengths for the two mixes are alike for both 5 and 20 ◦C. For
PC-1.0 the strength continues to decrease for an increased temperature, and the decrease
in strength seems to be almost linear between 5 and 35 ◦C. This indicates that the cement
has the best conditions for hydration at the lowest temperature. This agrees with section
2.4, where it was mentioned, how an increased temperature can accelerate the hardening
process at the expense of the ﬁnal strength. Had the specimens been tested after a short
time, e.g. 7 or 14 days, the specimens curing at 35 ◦C is expected to have had a larger
strength than the specimens curing at only 5 ◦C. Thus, the time of the test is crucial.
For FA-1.0 the strength increases between 20 and 35 ◦C, which is possibly due to the
pozzolan reaction, which is known to have a larger reaction ratio at higher temperatures,
==PAGE:62==
50
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
cf. section 2.4. The pozzolan seems to still be active at both 5 and 20 ◦C, as the strength
of FA-1.0 would otherwise be lower than the PC-1.0 concrete it is compared with. This is
because FA-1.0 contains less cement than PC-1.0, and if only the cement contributed to
the strength, the concrete with the lowest amount of cement would also have the lowest
strength. Therefore, the pozzolan reaction seems to be active at both 5, 20 as well as 35
◦C, but an increased temperature seems to beneﬁt the pozzolan reaction.
In that way, 20 ◦C appears to be the pessimum temperature for FA-1.0, as a lower tem-
perature beneﬁts the cement hydration, and a higher temperature beneﬁts the pozzolan
reaction.
==PAGE:63==
4.5. NON-STEADY STATE CHLORIDE MIGRATION TEST
51
4.5
Non-steady state chloride migration test
Changes in the test procedure
It was not possible to follow the original schedule due to the Covid-19 crisis, why the
actual age of the specimens were not 28 days, but instead as listed in table 4.4.
The specimens were cast at four different days but tested in only two groups, as the
allowed number of days in the laboratory as well as the remaining time to the project
deadline was limited. The ﬁrst group of specimens contained the ﬁrst four mixes listed in
table 4.4: PC-1.0-1, PC-1.0-2, FA-1.0-1 and FA-1.0-2. The second group contained the
remaining four mixes in table 4.4: PC-2.5, PC-5.0, FA-2.5 and FA-5.0.
The entire schedule can be found in appendix B.
Table 4.4: Age of specimens when the migration test was performed.
Age [days]
PC-1.0-1
84
FA-1.0-1
84
PC-1.0-2
77
FA-1.0-2
77
PC-2.5
87
FA-2.5
77
PC-5.0
87
FA-5.0
77
During the ﬁrst migration test a personal error caused the three specimens from FA-
1.0 curing at 40 ◦C to stand in the tub with the power on for 24 hours, but without the
anolyte solution in place. As the specimens were wet in the beginning, a current ran
through the specimens, so the error was not discovered at the start up. The specimens are
assumed to have dried out fast, so the current would stop. This was checked by splitting
one of the three specimens and measuring the chloride ingress, as seen on ﬁgure 4.8. As
the ingress was low, the migration test for the last two specimens was started at that point.
Thus, the results for FA-1.0 curing at 40 ◦C are based on only two specimens, and the
average penetration depth for the ﬁrst specimen (1.4 mm) has been subtracted the second
and third one, to minimise the inﬂuence of the ﬁrst day.
==PAGE:64==
52
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.8: Specimen (FA-1.0, 40deg) with AgNO3 checked for unwanted ingress at the
bottom.
Due to a breakdown of the test machine TONI Technik-300Ton, which should split the
specimens, the specimens in the second group lay to the following day, where the test
machine Instron 8508 were used instead.
A possible problem of this gap in time between the chloride migration and the measuring
of ingress, is the risk of an ongoing diffusion of the chloride ions further into the speci-
men. When spraying AgNO3 on the specimens, the clear line between the zones with and
without chloride ions risks to be blurred, and the ingress depth may be assessed larger
due to the additional ingress coming from the diffusion process.
A specimen with the risk of diffusion is seen at ﬁgure 4.9, which is from the casting
PC-2.5. The line between the zones with and without chloride is clear on this as well as
the other specimens, why diffusion is considered not to have taken place in a signiﬁcant
degree, during the 22 hours between the migration test and measuring of ingress.
Figure 4.9: Specimen (PC-2.5) with AgNO3 with risk of additional ingress due to diffu-
sion.
==PAGE:65==
4.5. NON-STEADY STATE CHLORIDE MIGRATION TEST
53
Chloride migration coefﬁcients
The non-steady state chloride migration coefﬁcient, Dnssm [·10−12 m2/s], is determined
as shown in equation (4.1).
Dnssm = 0.0239(273 + T)L
(U −2)t
 
xd −0.0238
r
(273 + T)Lxd
U −2
!
(4.1)
Where U [V] is the absolute value of applied voltage, T [◦C] is the average temperature,
L [mm] is the thickness of the specimen and t [hour] is the test duration.
The migration coefﬁcients with respect to the average compressive strength are shown
in ﬁgure 4.10, and the data is also listed in appendix F.
Figure 4.10: Non-steady state chloride migration coefﬁcient with respect to compressive
strength.
At ﬁgure 4.10 the migration coefﬁcient is clearly seen to be lowest for all types of con-
crete containing ﬂy ash. This is as expected, because the pozzolan reaction reduces the
permeability of the concrete, as it creates additional binder material by especially react-
ing with the product from the cement hydration, calcium-silicate. In the report by TI [12]
concerning concrete with bio-coal ﬂy ash, the migration coefﬁcient after 90 days is ap-
proximately 1/3 of the value determined after 28 days. This indicates, that the additional
days the specimens in this project have matured, has lowered the coefﬁcient signiﬁcantly,
and made the difference in permeability between the concrete with and without ﬂy ash
more distinct.
==PAGE:66==
54
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For both FA and PC concretes an increased air content seems to lower the migration
coefﬁcient a little. Though, the trend is not clear and can also just be deviations in the
results. All specimens were water saturated before the current was applied, why the chlo-
ride ions should be able to move freely through the pores in the concrete, and a larger
air is expected to make the path through the concrete easier for the ions. This is also
conﬁrmed by Naito et al. [19], who have found that the migration coefﬁcient tends to
increase with increasing air content. Thus, an explanation for having a lower migration
coefﬁcient at higher air content is not clear.
The varying temperatures at curing do not seem to have had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
migration coefﬁcient. Even though the strength of the concrete varies with the tempera-
ture, the permeability appears to be almost constant.
For FA-1.0 curing at 20 ◦C two of the specimens have a migration coefﬁcient at about
6 · 10−12 m2/s, while the coefﬁcient of the third specimen is only about 4 · 10−12 m2/s.
This is a large variation and can maybe be due to the rubber band not being tight. In
ﬁgure 4.11 the penetration depths are seen for the three specimens, and for "Front 1" a
large penetration is seen in the left side, and for "Front 3" a large penetration is seen in the
right side. If the rubber has not been completely tight, the chlorides can penetrate the con-
crete from the side, resulting in measured penetration depths larger than the actual depths.
Though, no particular ingress from the sides was observed during the measurements, why
it is not clear, if the increased penetration in this case is due to the rubber bands not being
tight. Another reason for the large variations can be inhomogeneities in the concrete. E.g.
micro cracks, air voids or porous stones, which can all induce unwanted ingress.
Figure 4.11: Penetration depth for the three specimens from mix FA-1.0, 20deg.
The measured penetration depths for all other specimens have been looked through,
==PAGE:67==
4.5. NON-STEADY STATE CHLORIDE MIGRATION TEST
55
but this seems like the most varying ingress. Though, the penetration depth seems to vary
more for the mixes with ﬂy ash than those without. If this is just a coincidence, or there
is some explanation behind is not known.
==PAGE:68==
56
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.6
Accelerated salt frost scaling test
Treatment until testing
The CO2 content in the climate chamber was measured for two days (5-6 March), and
the content was determined to 425-512 ppm, which is within the required 300-1000 ppm
[24].
Due to the Covid-19 crisis the frost test was moved from the facilities at DTU to Dan-
ish Technological Institute (TI), and the start of the test was postponed, so the specimens
instead of the ordinary 28 days had the age as listed in table 4.5. Due to the delay the test
only run for 28 days instead of 56 days, and the specimens should have been treated in
four groups, but were instead tested at the same time.
The whole test schedule is listed in appendix B.
Table 4.5: Age of specimens when the frost test was started.
Age [days]
PC-1.0-1
81
FA-1.0-1
81
PC-1.0-2
74
FA-1.0-2
74
PC-2.5
77
FA-2.5
67
PC-5.0
77
FA-5.0
67
The specimens are in the standard [32] prescribed to be cut 7 ±1 day before the water
saturation at day 28. In this case the specimens were cut 9 days before, due to practicali-
ties related to conducting the test at TI. The deviation is assessed to be acceptable, as all
specimens have had the same treatment, why they can still be compared with each other.
As the frost test was moved to TI, it became possible to increase the number of speci-
mens from two to three within each category. This was done by cutting one cylinder from
each category into two specimens, so two cylinders became three specimens. The possi-
bility to increase the testing area was preferred, as this makes the results more detailed.
But in general, it would be best to have three cylinders and only cut one specimen from
each cylinder, to minimise the inﬂuence of any possible errors in a cylinder.
==PAGE:69==
4.6. ACCELERATED SALT FROST SCALING TEST
57
Scaled material with varying air content
The cumulative mass per area of the scaled material after n cycles, Sn [kg/m3], is deter-
mined as in equation (4.2).
Sn = ms,n
A
· 103
(4.2)
Where ms,n [g] is the cumulative mass of the scaled material after n cycles and A [mm2]
is the effective area of the testing surface. The results for specimens with varying air
contents are shown in ﬁgure 4.12, and the results for each specimen is shown in appendix
G.
Figure 4.12: Cumulative mass of scaled material for concrete with various air content.
For PC-1.0 and FA-1.0 the results are seen to stop after only 14 cycles. The test was
stopped for those specimens, as the water had leaked from the specimens, which was
observed after 21 cycles. It is not known for how many cycles the specimens contained
water between 14 and 21 cycles, and thereby the results after 21 cycles were rejected in
those cases. Furthermore, the standard says to stop the test for those specimens [32]. The
leaking is assumed to be caused by an extensive amount of scaling, combined with the
method for coating the specimens, as shown in ﬁgure 3.8. Only the upper part of the side
was covered in silicone, and after some time the scaling had been so large, so the water
was able to leak under the silicone. The method for coating can without problems be used
at TI, as the specimens tested there normally have better frost resistance. But in this case
it had been better to cover the whole side in silicone, which is also common practice at
DTU. If the test once again should be performed at TI, the amount of scaling is expected
to be lower, if the w/c-ratio was decreased.
==PAGE:70==
58
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Concrete containing ﬂy ash is in general expected to have worse frost resistance com-
pared to concrete without ﬂy ash and similar air void structure. In this case the air void
analysis in section 4.3 showed FA-1.0 to have a better air void structure, so even though
none of the two mixes were air entrained, the resulting air void structures varied, and the
better air void structure of FA-1.0 is expected to cause the concrete to perform better. To
be able to work with the concrete mixes with ﬂy ash, some plasticizer was added in the
concrete recipes, and even though the manufacturer tries to avoid any air entraining effect,
it is still possible, that it has had some inﬂuence on the varying air void structure of the
two mixes.
The specimens were older than the ordinary 28 days, which previously has shown to re-
duce the scaling signiﬁcantly, especially for concrete with high amounts of ﬂy ash [1].
This is expected to be due to the pozzolan reaction, which has more time to develop, de-
creasing the permeability of the concrete. So the additional maturing is expected to have
beneﬁted FA-1.0 more than PC-1.0.
The results for all three specimens within each mix are consistent as they scale more or
less the same. This also suggests that FA-1.0 really has better frost resistance than PC-1.0.
The result for each specimen is outlined in appendix G.
Figure 4.13: Close-up of cumulative mass of scaled material for concrete with 2.5 % and
5.0 % air content.
A close-up of the scaling is seen at ﬁgure 4.13. The scaling can be assessed by means
of the guidelines listed in table 2.5, where it is seen, that the accepted amount of scaling
depends on whether the scaling is accelerating or decelerating, when comparing the scal-
ing in the ﬁrst and second month, m56/m28. As only results for the ﬁrst 28 days is seen,
==PAGE:71==
4.6. ACCELERATED SALT FROST SCALING TEST
59
it is not possible to make a ﬁnal assessment, but for PC-2.5 seems the curve to level off,
whereby m56/m28 < 2. According to table 2.5 the acceptance criteria in that case is 0.5
kg/m2 for "Good" concrete, and the scaling appears to stay below that limit. Though, the
concrete has cured for longer time, than what the standard prescribes, why the concrete
is expected to perform better in this test, than if it was tested after 28 days. It is noticed,
that even though it stayed below the limit, the concrete would still not be accepted as
frost resistant according to the Danish regulation, as the air content in the fresh concrete
is below the limit of 4.5 %, and an air void analysis is expected to also show insufﬁcient
air content in the hardened concrete and possibly also a spacing factor above 0.20 mm.
For FA-2.5 the scaling does not seem to level off, why a requirement of 0.2 kg/m2 should
be fulﬁlled. After 14 cycles the requirement was crossed, why the concrete is not frost
resistant according to the Danish requirements.
When comparing the mixes with 2.5 % air, PC-2.5 performs the best, which is also
what the theory predicted, as ﬂy ash in general is expected to worsen the frost resistance
due to chemical degradation initiated by the chlorides. This is opposite the results for
PC-1.0 and FA-1.0 seen in ﬁgure 4.12, where the large scaling for PC-1.0 was explained
by a worse air void structure compared to FA-1.0. In this case the air void system is not
known, but if the air void systems are more or less the same, the concrete with ﬂy ash is
expected to scale the most. The air content in the fresh concrete was 2.6 and 2.3 % for
PC-2.5 and FA-2.5, respectively. This small deviation in the air content can also indicate
a little variation in the air void structure, inducing the varying amounts of scaling.
For PC-5.0 and FA-5.0 "Very good" frost resistance is seen, according to table 2.5.
A little scaling was seen at each measurement, but it was less than 0.1 g, which is the
prescribed accuracy of the balance according to the standard [32]. As these mixes meet
all requirements for frost resistant concrete, they were expected to perform very well in
the test.
As mentioned in section 3.2 varies the paste content between the mixes with and
without ﬂy ash, as it is 37.1 vol-% for the PC-mixes and 37.8 vol-% for the FA-mixes.
The additional paste in the concrete with ﬂy ash can increase the scaling, as there is more
paste which can scale of. This is especially the case for concrete which only scales a
little, as concrete with a large scaling possibly also contains scaled aggregates, making
the weight vary more in these cases, and thereby making the error harder to measure. As
the paste content is a little larger for the ﬂy ash concrete, it could maybe induce a bit more
scaling, especially for FA-2.5. Though, the paste contents are close, so it would only be a
little difference.
==PAGE:72==
60
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Scaled material with varying curing temperature
The cumulative mass of scaled material for concrete cured at different temperatures at
the ﬁrst 7 days is determined as described in equation (4.2), and the results are shown in
ﬁgure 4.14. For FA-1.0, 20deg only two specimens were measured after 14 cycles, as the
third specimen was found dry at that time. The same for FA-1.0, 40deg where the third
specimen was not part of the measurements at 21 cycles.
Figure 4.14: Cumulative mass of scaled material for concrete cured at various tempera-
tures in the ﬁrst 7 days.
As the plan was to run the test for 56 cycles, the actual results are only a minor part
of what was intended. Though, there seems a clear difference between the PC-1.0 and
FA-1.0 mixes, as the concrete without ﬂy ash scales the most, just as the air void analysis
predicted. The increased temperature seems to worsen the frost resistance for PC-1.0,
just as the compressive strength decreased with an increasing temperature cf. ﬁgure 4.7.
For FA-1.0 it seems like the ﬂy ash compensates for the reduced quality of the cement
when increasing the temperature, as the three curing temperatures results in almost equal
amounts of scaling. This could indicate that the pozzolan reaction has been active in the
specimens cured at 40 ◦C, and that the concrete with ﬂy ash is more stable regarding frost
resistance, compared to concrete without ﬂy ash.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this project the new product bio-coal ﬂy ash has been examined with respect to the
durability of concrete containing the maximum allowable amount of bio-coal ﬂy ash.
The ﬁrst research question dealt with whether the durability of concrete was affected
by the addition of bio-coal ﬂy ash, keeping the equivalent w/c-ratio constant. The bio-
coal ﬂy ash was found to inﬂuence the durability of the concrete in a signiﬁcant degree,
as both the migration coefﬁcient as well as the frost resistance changed.
The migration coefﬁcient was lowest for concrete with ﬂy ash, indicating the concrete to
have a lower permeability, i.e. better resistance against chloride ingress.
The best frost resistance for the concrete mixes without air entrainment was found for
concrete with bio-coal ﬂy ash. And opposite for the concrete with 2.5 % air content,
where the concrete without ﬂy ash showed the best frost resistance. This difference is
expected to be caused by various air void structures for specimens with the same air
content in the fresh concrete, as this is expected to heavily inﬂuence the frost resistance.
The second research question revolved around the durability of concrete containing
bio-coal ﬂy ash, for concrete cured at different temperatures in the ﬁrst week after mixing.
It is known, that the start of the pozzolan reaction is hastened for an increased tempera-
ture, and it was therefore tested, whether the temperature inﬂuenced the durability.
Compressive strength is often used as an overall parameter of the quality of the concrete,
and thus also the durability. The strength test showed the temperature to inﬂuence the
strength, as a low temperature lead to the highest strength contribution for the cement,
and as ﬂy ash had the highest strength contribution at the highest temperature. Though,
the migration test did not show any changes in the permeability when changing the cur-
ing temperature, as the migration coefﬁcient remained almost constant regardless of the
curing temperature.
In the frost test the scaling did not vary signiﬁcantly between the various curing tem-
peratures for the concrete with ﬂy ash, indicating that the curing temperature does not
61
==PAGE:74==
62
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
inﬂuence the frost resistance in a signiﬁcant degree, when ﬂy ash is added to the con-
crete. For the concrete without bio-coal ﬂy ash an increased temperature worsened the
frost resistance, while concrete with ﬂy ash simply kept the frost resistance more or less
constant, regardless of the curing temperature.
Further work
Further research within the topics of this report is suggested to look into to some of the
following items:
• Testing different types of ﬂy ash under varying temperatures, to look further into
the temperature dependency of ﬂy ash in concrete. Varying contents of SiO2 and
CaO inﬂuence the degree of pozzolanic and cementitious behaviour, why the de-
pendency of the temperature is expected to vary along with the amounts.
• Repeat the freeze-thaw test for the specimens cured at different temperatures, with
a proper coating, to see how the specimens react over time. Do the concrete scaling
accelerate or decelerate?
• Perform an air void analysis of cement paste containing bio-coal ﬂy ash. The ceno-
spheres in ordinary coal ﬂy ash are determined to exist cf. [8], but the existence
of similar hollow particles in bio-coal ﬂy ash was not unambiguous in this project.
The analysis can give an impression of the presence of hollow particles disturbing
the results in the air void analysis.
• The alkalies in the ﬂy ash was only examined brieﬂy in this project, but the inﬂu-
ence on the concrete still has to be studied, as the research within the topic until
now is limited.
• The frost resistance of concrete containing ﬂy ash varies, as it has both been doc-
umented to perform good as well as bad. The reason for the varying results is still
incomprehensible, and it is proposed to examine it further, as the tests with varying
temperatures at curing in this project has not clariﬁed it.
==PAGE:75==
Appendices
63
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Original test schedule
Description:
By the start of the project a schedule was made, to keep the overview of all actions which
had the be performed. The mixes for this project were cast during the ﬁrst four casting
days, as the badges TB and BB badges (orange and light blue colour) were used for
another project.
It is noticed, that the reference mix PC-1.0 was shared between the two projects, why the
combined migration and frost test was planned in relation to Thorsen and Olesen’s project
and not used in this project.
65
==PAGE:78==
Badge
Type of tests
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
24-feb
25-feb
26-feb
27-feb
28-feb
29-feb
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Freeze/thaw test
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Migration + freeze thaw test (only R1.1)
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Migration
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Compressive strength
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Day 0
Day 1
Freeze/thaw test
Casting
Demoulding+in wa
Migration
Casting
Demoulding+in wa
Compressive strength
Casting
Demoulding+in wa
Freeze/thaw test
Migration + freeze thaw test (only R1.2)
Migration
Compressive strength
Freeze/thaw test
Migration
Compressive strength
Freeze/thaw test
Migration + freeze thaw test (only TB1)
Migration
Compressive strength
Freeze/thaw test
Migration
Compressive strength
TB
(TB2, TB3, TB4)
PC-1.0-1 + FA-1.0-1
PC-2.5 + PC-5.0
PC-1.0-2 + FA-1.0-2
FA-2.5 + FA-5.0
TB/BB 
(TB1, BB1, BB2)
66
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:79==
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
01-mar
02-mar
03-mar
04-mar
05-mar
06-mar
07-mar
08-mar
09-mar
10-mar
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Climate chamber
Cutting + migratioStop migration + Climate chamber
From cold/warm to 23 deg water
From cold/warm to 23 deg water
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
ater
Climate chamber
ater
ater
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Climate chamber
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Cutting + migratioStop migration + Climate chamber
Casting
Demoulding+in water
From cold/warm to 23 deg water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
From cold/warm to 23 deg water
Day 0
Day 1
Casting
Demoulding+in wa
Casting
Demoulding+in wa
Casting
Demoulding+in wa
67
==PAGE:80==
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
11-mar
12-mar
13-mar
14-mar
15-mar
16-mar
17-mar
18-mar
19-mar
20-mar
Day 16
Day 17
Day 18
Day 19
Day 20
Day 21
Day 22
Day 23
Day 24
Day 25
Cutting
Coating
Coating
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Day 16
Day 17
Day 18
Day 19
Day 20
Day 21
Cutting
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Day 16
Day 17
Day 18
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
ater
Climate chamber
ater
ater
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
68
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:81==
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
21-mar
22-mar
23-mar
24-mar
25-mar
26-mar
27-mar
28-mar
29-mar
30-mar
Day 26
Day 27
Day 28
Day 29
Day 30
Day 31
Day 32
Day 33
Day 34
Day 35
Capillary on top
F/T start
Capillary on top
F/T start
Cutting + vacuum Start migration
Stop migration
Testing strength
Day 22
Day 23
Day 24
Day 25
Day 26
Day 27
Day 28
Day 29
Day 30
Day 31
Coating
Capillary on top
F/T start
Cutting + vacuum Start migration
Stop migration
Testing strength
Day 19
Day 20
Day 21
Day 22
Day 23
Day 24
Day 25
Day 26
Day 27
Day 28
Cutting
Coating
Capillary on top
Coating
Capillary on top
Cutting + vacuum
Testing strength
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Day 16
Day 17
Day 18
Day 19
Day 20
Day 21
Cutting
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Climate chamber
Cutting + migratioStop migration + Climate chamber
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Climate chamber
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
69
==PAGE:82==
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
31-mar
01-apr
02-apr
03-apr
04-apr
05-apr
06-apr
07-apr
08-apr
09-apr
Day 36
Day 37
Day 38
Day 39
Day 40
Day 41
Day 42
Day 43
Day 44
Day 45
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Measure F/T 14 da
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Measure F/T 14 da
Day 32
Day 33
Day 34
Day 35
Day 36
Day 37
Day 38
Day 39
Day 40
Day 41
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Day 29
Day 30
Day 31
Day 32
Day 33
Day 34
Day 35
Day 36
Day 37
Day 38
F/T start
Measure F/T 7 day
F/T start
Measure F/T 7 day
Start migration
Stop migration
Day 22
Day 23
Day 24
Day 25
Day 26
Day 27
Day 28
Day 29
Day 30
Day 31
Coating
Capillary on top
F/T start
Cutting + vacuum Start migration
Stop migration
Testing strength
Day 15
Day 16
Day 17
Day 18
Day 19
Day 20
Day 21
Day 22
Day 23
Day 24
Cutting
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Day 16
Day 17
70
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:83==
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
10-apr
11-apr
12-apr
13-apr
14-apr
15-apr
16-apr
17-apr
18-apr
19-apr
Day 46
Day 47
Day 48
Day 49
Day 50
Day 51
Day 52
Day 53
Day 54
Day 55
Out of oven
Out of oven
Day 42
Day 43
Day 44
Day 45
Day 46
Day 47
Day 48
Day 49
Day 50
Day 51
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
Day 39
Day 40
Day 41
Day 42
Day 43
Day 44
Day 45
Day 46
Day 47
Day 48
Out of oven
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
Out of oven
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
Day 32
Day 33
Day 34
Day 35
Day 36
Day 37
Day 38
Day 39
Day 40
Day 41
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Day 25
Day 26
Day 27
Day 28
Day 29
Day 30
Day 31
Day 32
Day 33
Day 34
Coating
Capillary on top
F/T start
Coating
Capillary on top
F/T start
Cutting + vacuum Start migration
Stop migration
Testing strength
Day 18
Day 19
Day 20
Day 21
Day 22
Day 23
Day 24
Day 25
Day 26
Day 27
Cutting
Coating
71
==PAGE:84==
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
20-apr
21-apr
22-apr
23-apr
24-apr
25-apr
26-apr
27-apr
28-apr
29-apr
Day 56
Day 57
Day 58
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Day 65
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Day 52
Day 53
Day 54
Day 55
Day 56
Day 57
Day 58
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Day 49
Day 50
Day 51
Day 52
Day 53
Day 54
Day 55
Day 56
Day 57
Day 58
Day 42
Day 43
Day 44
Day 45
Day 46
Day 47
Day 48
Day 49
Day 50
Day 51
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
Day 35
Day 36
Day 37
Day 38
Day 39
Day 40
Day 41
Day 42
Day 43
Day 44
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Day 28
Day 29
Day 30
Day 31
Day 32
Day 33
Day 34
Day 35
Day 36
Day 37
Capillary on top
F/T start
Cutting + vacuum Start migration
Stop migration
Testing strength
72
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:85==
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
30-apr
01-maj
02-maj
03-maj
04-maj
05-maj
06-maj
07-maj
08-maj
09-maj
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Day 52
Day 53
Day 54
Day 55
Day 56
Day 57
Day 58
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Day 45
Day 46
Day 47
Day 48
Day 49
Day 50
Day 51
Day 52
Day 53
Day 54
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
Day 38
Day 39
Day 40
Day 41
Day 42
Day 43
Day 44
Day 45
Day 46
Day 47
Measure F/T 7 dayOut of oven
Measure F/T 14 daOut of oven
73
==PAGE:86==
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
10-maj
11-maj
12-maj
13-maj
14-maj
15-maj
16-maj
17-maj
18-maj
19-maj
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 55
Day 56
Day 57
Day 58
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
Day 48
Day 49
Day 50
Day 51
Day 52
Day 53
Day 54
Day 55
Day 56
Day 57
74
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:87==
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
20-maj
21-maj
22-maj
23-maj
24-maj
25-maj
26-maj
27-maj
28-maj
29-maj
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
Day 58
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Measure F/T 28 daOut of oven
75
==PAGE:88==
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
30-maj
31-maj
01-jun
02-jun
03-jun
04-jun
05-jun
06-jun
07-jun
08-jun
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Measure F/T 42 daOut of oven
76
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:89==
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
09-jun
10-jun
11-jun
12-jun
13-jun
14-jun
15-jun
16-jun
17-jun
18-jun
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Day 112
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Measure F/T 56 daOut of oven
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Measure F/T 56 da
77
==PAGE:90==
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
19-jun
20-jun
21-jun
22-jun
23-jun
24-jun
25-jun
26-jun
27-jun
Day 116
Day 117
Day 118
Day 119
Day 120
Day 121
Day 122
Day 123
Day 124
Day 112
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Day 116
Day 117
Day 118
Day 119
Day 120
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Day 112
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Day 116
Day 117
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 109
Day 110
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 102
Day 103
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Out of oven
78
APPENDIX A. ORIGINAL TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX B
Changed test schedule
Description:
The test schedule was changed signiﬁcantly due to the Covid-19 crisis closing DTU for
several weeks. The ﬁnal schedule for the project is found here.
79
==PAGE:92==
Badge
Type of tests
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
24-feb
25-feb
26-feb
27-feb
28-feb
29-feb
01-mar
02-mar
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Freeze/thaw test
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Climate chamb
Migration
Casting
Demoulding+in water
From cold/war
Compressive strength
Casting
Demoulding+in water
From cold/war
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Freeze/thaw test
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Migration
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Compressive strength
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Day 0
Freeze/thaw test
Casting
Migration
Casting
Compressive strength
Casting
Freeze/thaw test
Migration
Compressive strength
PC-1.0-1 + FA-1.0-1
PC-2.5 + PC-5.0
PC-1.0-2 + FA-1.0-2
FA-2.5 + FA-5.0
80
APPENDIX B. CHANGED TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:93==
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
03-mar
04-mar
05-mar
06-mar
07-mar
08-mar
09-mar
10-mar
11-mar
12-mar
13-mar
14-mar
15-mar
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Day 16
Day 17
Day 18
Day 19
Day 20
ber
m to 23 deg water
Grey area: DTU lock down due to Covid-19
m to 23 deg water
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Day 14
Day 15
Day 16
Climate chamber
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
Day 10
Day 11
Day 12
Day 13
Demoulding+in water
Climate chamber
Demoulding+in water
From cold/warm to 23 deg water
Demoulding+in water
From cold/warm to 23 deg water
Day 0
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
Casting
Demoulding+in water
81
==PAGE:94==
Monday
Tuesday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
16-mar
17-mar
02-maj
03-maj
04-maj
05-maj
06-maj
07-maj
08-maj
09-maj
10-maj
11-maj
12-maj
Day 21
Day 22
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Cutting (-2 days)
Coating
0 days
Testing strength ("28 days")
Day 17
Day 18
Day 64
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Cutting (-2 days)
Coating 
-4 days
Testing strength ("28 days")
Day 14
Day 15
Day 61
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Cutting (-2 days)
Coating 
-7 days
Testing strength ("28 days")
Day 7
Day 8
Day 54
Day 55
Day 56
Day 57
Day 58
Day 59
Day 60
Day 61
Day 62
Day 63
Day 64
Climate chamber
Cutting (-2 days)
Coating 
-14 days
Testing strength ("28 days")
82
APPENDIX B. CHANGED TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:95==
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
13-maj
14-maj
15-maj
16-maj
17-maj
18-maj
19-maj
20-maj
21-maj
22-maj
23-maj
24-maj
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
0 days
Capillary on top ("28 days")
F/T start
0 days
Cutting + vacuuStart migrationStop migration
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
-4 days
Capillary on top ("28 days")
F/T start
+3 days
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
-7 days
Capillary on top ("28 days")
F/T start
-7 days
Cutting + vacuuStart migrationStop migration
Day 65
Day 66
Day 67
Day 68
Day 69
Day 70
Day 71
Day 72
Day 73
Day 74
Day 75
Day 76
-14 days
Capillary on top ("28 days")
F/T start
-7 days
83
==PAGE:96==
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
25-maj
26-maj
27-maj
28-maj
29-maj
30-maj
31-maj
01-jun
02-jun
03-jun
04-jun
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Measure F/T 7 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 15 days
Out of oven
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Measure F/T 7 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 15 days
Out of oven
Cutting + vacuum ("28 daStart migrationStop migration
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Measure F/T 7 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 15 days
Out of oven
Day 77
Day 78
Day 79
Day 80
Day 81
Day 82
Day 83
Day 84
Day 85
Day 86
Day 87
Measure F/T 7 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 15 days
Out of oven
Cutting + vacuum ("28 daStart migrationStop migration
84
APPENDIX B. CHANGED TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:97==
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
05-jun
06-jun
07-jun
08-jun
09-jun
10-jun
11-jun
12-jun
13-jun
14-jun
15-jun
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Day 112
Measure F/T 21 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 28 days
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Measure F/T 21 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 28 days
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Measure F/T 21 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 28 days
Day 88
Day 89
Day 90
Day 91
Day 92
Day 93
Day 94
Day 95
Day 96
Day 97
Day 98
Measure F/T 21 days
Out of oven
Measure F/T 28 days
85
==PAGE:98==
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday 
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
16-jun
17-jun
18-jun
19-jun
20-jun
21-jun
22-jun
23-jun
24-jun
25-jun
26-jun
27-jun
28-jun
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Day 116
Day 117
Day 118
Day 119
Day 120
Day 121
Day 122
Day 123
Day 124
Day 125
Out of oven
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Day 112
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Day 116
Day 117
Day 118
Day 119
Day 120
Day 121
Out of oven
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Day 112
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Day 116
Day 117
Day 118
Out of oven
Day 99
Day 100
Day 101
Day 102
Day 103
Day 104
Day 105
Day 106
Day 107
Day 108
Day 109
Day 110
Day 111
Out of oven
Deadline
86
APPENDIX B. CHANGED TEST SCHEDULE
==PAGE:99==
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday
29-jun
30-jun
01-jul
02-jul
Day 126
Day 127
Day 128
Day 129
Measure F/T 42 days
Out of oven
Day 122
Day 123
Day 124
Day 125
Measure F/T 42 days
Out of oven
Day 119
Day 120
Day 121
Day 122
Measure F/T 42 days
Out of oven
Day 112
Day 113
Day 114
Day 115
Measure F/T 42 days
Out of oven
Oral exam
87
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Concrete mix design
Description:
From the concrete reference mix, PC-1.0, the amount of water, cement and ﬂy ash were
determined for mix design FA-1.0, as the following conditions were kept constant:
• Constant volume of paste
• Constant (w/c)eq
• Constant ratio between cement and ﬂy ash
89
==PAGE:102==
Concrete mix with fly ash
restart
Variables
mwater :
mcement :
mflyash :
Input
Choosing w/c-ratio and mass-% for FA:
wc d 0.45 :
mfly ash d 0.33$mcement :  cf. DS/EN 206 DK:NA
KCFA d
mfly ash
mcementCmfly ash
 = 0.2481203008
unassign 'mfly ash'
:
Densities [kg/m3]  
rcement d 3160 :
rfly ash d 2400 :
rwater d 1000 :
Volumes [m3] pr. 1 cubic meter, read off from the reference concrete mixes, R1-R3, in excel:
Vcement d 0.1529 :
Vwater d 0.2174 :
Mass of silica fume:
msilica fume d 0 :
Calculations
The following conditions should be true:
1. Unchanged volume of paste
2. Unchanged w/c-ratio
3. Constant ratio between cement og FA (named "KCFA : ")
From this three equations is set up:
eq1 d
mcement
rcement
C
mfly ash
rfly ash
C
mwater
rwater
= VwaterCVcement :
eq2 d
mwater
mcementC2$msilica fumeC0.5$mfly ash
= wc :
eq3 d
mfly ash
mfly ash C mcement
= KCFA :
90
APPENDIX C. CONCRETE MIX DESIGN
==PAGE:103==
(1)
(1)
The masses are determined:
solve
eq1, eq2, eq3 ,
mfly ash, mcement, mwater
: simplify %
mcement = 378.5502389, mfly ash = 124.9215789, mwater = 198.4549627
91
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX D
Air void analysis
Description:
An air void analysis was performed on the four mixes:
• PC-1.0, 20deg
• PC-5.0
• FA-1.0, 20deg
• FA-5.0
93
==PAGE:106==
Rapportnummer:
931220-1-LA
Gregersensvej1
DK-2630Taastrup
+4572202000
info@teknologisk.dk
www.teknologisk.dk
Side1af6
Init:MTG/MDI
Opgavenr.:931220
Antalbilag:2
DanmarksTekniskeUniversitet,AnkerEngelundsVej1,DK-2800Kgs.Lyngby
4støbtecylindre,Ø=ca.150mm.MærketFA1.2-20,FA3,R1.2-20ogR3.
Rekvirentenoplyserathaveudtagetproduktet.Produkteterfremsendtafrekvirentenog
modtagetpåTeknologiskInstitutden25.maj2020.
Prøvningenergennemførtfra8.juni2020til10.juni2020.
EN480-11:2005,Admixturesforconcrete,mortarandgrout-Testmethods-Determination
ofairvoidcharacteristicsinhardenedconcrete
Afvigelseframetoden:Analyserneerudførtpåprøveemnerderer100x100mm.
Traverslinjenerfordeltpåheleprøven.
YderligereoplysningerfremgårafbilagB.
ResultatetafprøvningenfremgårafbilagA.
Prøvningenerudførtakkrediteretihenholdtilinternationalekrav(ISO/IEC17025:2005)ogi
henholdtilTeknologiskInstitutsalmindeligevilkår.Prøveresultaternegælderudelukkende
fordetprøvedeemne.Prøvningsrapportenmåkungengivesiuddrag,hvisTeknologisk
Institutskriftligthargodkendtuddraget.
TeknologiskInstitut,Taastrup,ByggeriogAnlæg
DettedokumenterkungyldigtmeddigitalsignaturfraTeknologiskInstitut.Udstedelsesdato
fremgårafdendigitalesignatur.
MetteGressmann
Laborant
TESTReg.nr.2
		
94
APPENDIX D. AIR VOID ANALYSIS
==PAGE:107==
Bilag:A
931220-1-LA
BilagA,Side2af6
FA1.2-20;
Ikkeoplyst;
2020-06-10
Pastaindhold:37,8
Traverseretlængde:1250,9mm
Luftindhold:1,7
Speci cOverÓade:34,85mm
Afstandsfaktor:0,259mm
MikroluftA300:0,6
1
0-10
20
10,93
0,01
0,01
2
10-20
50
27,32
0,06
0,08
3
20-30
25
13,66
0,05
0,13
4
30-40
21
11,48
0,06
0,19
5
40-50
6
3,28
0,02
0,21
6
50-60
8
4,37
0,04
0,24
7
60-80
18
9,84
0,10
0,34
8
80-100
0
0,00
0,00
0,34
9
100-120
4
2,19
0,04
0,38
10
120-140
0
0,00
0,00
0,38
11
140-160
3
1,64
0,03
0,41
12
160-180
1
0,55
0,01
0,43
13
180-200
3
1,64
0,05
0,47
14
200-220
1
0,55
0,02
0,49
15
220-240
0
0,00
0,00
0,49
16
240-260
3
1,64
0,06
0,55
17
260-280
1
0,55
0,02
0,57
18
280-300
3
1,64
0,07
0,64
19
300-350
2
1,09
0,05
0,69
20
350-400
2
1,09
0,06
0,75
21
400-450
0
0,00
0,00
0,75
22
450-500
2
1,09
0,08
0,83
23
500-1000
7
3,83
0,34
0,91
24
1000-1500
1
0,55
0,10
1,27
25
1500-2000
1
0,55
0,15
1,42
26
2000-2500
0
0,00
0,00
1,42
27
2500-3000
0
0,00
0,00
1,42
28
3000-4000
1
0,55
0,26
1,68
-1
95
==PAGE:108==
931220-1-LA
BilagA,Side3af6
FA3.20;
Ikkeoplyst;
2020-06-10
Pastaindhold:37,8
Traverseretlængde:1250,9mm
Luftindhold:4,9
Speci cOverÓade:57,82mm
Afstandsfaktor:0,097mm
MikroluftA300:4,3
1
0-10
52
5,85
0,04
0,04
2
10-20
152
17,10
0,19
0,23
3
20-30
106
11,92
0,21
0,44
4
30-40
90
10,12
0,25
0,69
5
40-50
79
8,89
0,28
0,97
6
50-60
76
8,55
0,33
1,31
7
60-80
89
10,01
0,48
1,79
8
80-100
72
8,10
0,51
2,30
9
100-120
45
5,06
0,39
2,69
10
120-140
39
4,39
0,41
3,10
11
140-160
18
2,02
0,21
3,31
12
160-180
17
1,91
0,23
3,54
13
180-200
12
1,35
0,18
3,72
14
200-220
8
0,90
0,13
3,86
15
220-240
7
0,79
0,13
3,98
16
240-260
3
0,34
0,06
4,04
17
260-280
3
0,34
0,07
4,11
18
280-300
7
0,79
0,16
4,27
19
300-350
3
0,34
0,08
4,35
20
350-400
4
0,45
0,12
4,47
21
400-450
3
0,34
0,10
4,57
22
450-500
1
0,11
0,04
4,61
23
500-1000
2
0,22
0,12
4,61
24
1000-1500
0
0,00
0,00
4,72
25
1500-2000
0
0,00
0,00
4,72
26
2000-2500
1
0,11
0,19
4,92
27
2500-3000
0
0,00
0,00
4,92
28
3000-4000
0
0,00
0,00
4,92
-1
96
APPENDIX D. AIR VOID ANALYSIS
==PAGE:109==
931220-1-LA
BilagA,Side4af6
R1.2-20;
Ikkeoplyst;
2020-06-10
Pastaindhold:37,1
Traverseretlængde:1250,9mm
Luftindhold:0,6
Speci cOverÓade:39,12mm
Afstandsfaktor:0,348mm
MikroluftA300:0,3
1
0-10
6
8,00
0,00
0,00
2
10-20
15
20,00
0,02
0,02
3
20-30
11
14,67
0,02
0,05
4
30-40
5
6,67
0,01
0,06
5
40-50
9
12,00
0,03
0,09
6
50-60
4
5,33
0,02
0,11
7
60-80
3
4,00
0,02
0,12
8
80-100
5
6,67
0,03
0,16
9
100-120
3
4,00
0,03
0,18
10
120-140
0
0,00
0,00
0,18
11
140-160
1
1,33
0,01
0,20
12
160-180
1
1,33
0,01
0,21
13
180-200
0
0,00
0,00
0,21
14
200-220
0
0,00
0,00
0,21
15
220-240
3
4,00
0,06
0,27
16
240-260
0
0,00
0,00
0,27
17
260-280
2
2,67
0,04
0,31
18
280-300
0
0,00
0,00
0,31
19
300-350
0
0,00
0,00
0,31
20
350-400
1
1,33
0,03
0,34
21
400-450
2
2,67
0,07
0,41
22
450-500
0
0,00
0,00
0,41
23
500-1000
4
5,33
0,20
0,41
24
1000-1500
0
0,00
0,00
0,61
25
1500-2000
0
0,00
0,00
0,61
26
2000-2500
0
0,00
0,00
0,61
27
2500-3000
0
0,00
0,00
0,61
28
3000-4000
0
0,00
0,00
0,61
-1
97
==PAGE:110==
931220-1-LA
BilagA,Side5af6
R3;
Ikkeoplyst;
2020-06-10
Pastaindhold:37,1
Traverseretlængde:1250,9mm
Luftindhold:4,8
Speci cOverÓade:58,73mm
Afstandsfaktor:0,096mm
MikroluftA300:4,0
1
0-10
36
4,06
0,03
0,03
2
10-20
116
13,08
0,14
0,17
3
20-30
141
15,90
0,29
0,46
4
30-40
95
10,71
0,26
0,72
5
40-50
108
12,18
0,39
1,10
6
50-60
65
7,33
0,28
1,39
7
60-80
101
11,39
0,57
1,95
8
80-100
87
9,81
0,62
2,57
9
100-120
43
4,85
0,38
2,96
10
120-140
25
2,82
0,26
3,21
11
140-160
15
1,69
0,18
3,39
12
160-180
18
2,03
0,24
3,64
13
180-200
9
1,01
0,13
3,77
14
200-220
8
0,90
0,13
3,90
15
220-240
6
0,68
0,11
4,01
16
240-260
2
0,23
0,04
4,05
17
260-280
0
0,00
0,00
4,05
18
280-300
0
0,00
0,00
4,05
19
300-350
1
0,11
0,03
4,08
20
350-400
2
0,23
0,06
4,14
21
400-450
0
0,00
0,00
4,14
22
450-500
0
0,00
0,00
4,14
23
500-1000
5
0,56
0,24
4,22
24
1000-1500
2
0,23
0,18
4,56
25
1500-2000
2
0,23
0,27
4,83
26
2000-2500
0
0,00
0,00
4,83
27
2500-3000
0
0,00
0,00
4,83
28
3000-4000
0
0,00
0,00
4,83
-1
98
APPENDIX D. AIR VOID ANALYSIS
==PAGE:111==
Bilag:B
931220-1-LA
BilagB,Side6af6
BetonensmixdesignIkkeoplyst.varikkeoplyst,pastaindholdeteroplystafrekvirentenogopførtibilagA
DensitetmåltIdenfriskebeton:ikkeoplyst
LuftindholdmåltIdenfriskebeton:ikkeoplyst
Pastaindholdihverprøve:InformationenergivetibilagA.
Totaltluftindhold:InformationenergivetibilagA
Speci koverÓadeiluftporesystemet:InformationenergivetibilagA
Afstandsfaktoren:InformationenergivetibilagA
MikroluftindholdetihverprøveergivetibilagA
99
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX E
Strength test results
Description:
All 30 cylinders of size Ø100 were tested 6th May 2020 on the TONI Technik-300ton
machine at DTU.
The raw data from the test is listed in this appendix.
101
==PAGE:114==
Results from test of compressive strength
Date for testing
Geometry:
Diameter
100 mm
Area
7854 mm2
Cylinder name
Compr. strength 
kN
Compr. strength 
MPa
FA-1.0-1, 5deg
589
75.0
FA-1.0-2, 5deg
585
74.5
620
78.9
FA-1.0-1, 20deg
501
63.8
521
66.3
FA-1.0-2, 20deg
507
64.6
FA-1.0-2, 40deg
534
68.0
508
64.7
523
66.6
FA-2.5
466
59.3
457
58.2
496
63.2
FA-5.0
390
49.7
389
49.5
406
51.7
PC-1.0-1, 5deg
594
75.6
549
69.9
PC-1.0-2, 5deg
591
75.2
PC-1.0-1, 20deg
517
65.8
PC-1.0-2, 20deg
523
66.6
520
66.2
PC-1.0-2, 40deg
469
59.7
456
58.1
452
57.6
PC-2.5
474
60.4
499
63.5
489
62.3
PC-5.0
385
49.0
402
51.2
372
47.4
06-05-2020
102
APPENDIX E. STRENGTH TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX F
Migration test results
Description:
The cylinders were tested in two groups, and at the ﬁrst test an error in the setup was
found for the specimens FA-1.0, 40deg. The specimen with index number 7 was split and
the penetration depth was measured. The other two specimens (index no. 8-9) were tested
the following day.
The raw data from the test is listed in this appendix.
103
==PAGE:116==
Specimen number
Specimen name
FA-1.0-1, 5
FA-1.0-1, 5
FA-1.0-2, 5
Index number
1
2
3
Preconditioning
- date
[DD-MM-YY]
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
- start time
08:35
08:35
08:35
- end time
12:35
12:35
12:35
Thickness, average (L)
[mm]
50.80
49.42
49.83
Test start, migration experiment
- date
[DD-MM-YY]
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
- clock
09:49:00
09:49
09:49
Test end, migration experiment
- date
[DD-MM-YY]
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
- clock
09:49:00
09:49
09:49
Test duration (t)
[h]
24.0
24.0
24.0
Temperature, start
[°C]
21
21
21
Temperature, end
[°C]
21
21
21
Temperature, average (T)
[°C]
21
21
21
Settings during test
Initial current at 30 V, accumulated
[mA]
31.0
62.0
91.0
Initial current at 30 V, average
[mA]
30.3
30.3
30.3
Applied voltage (U)
[V]
35.0
35.0
35.0
Current start, average
[mA]
35.3
35.3
35.3
Current end, average
[mA]
46.7
46.7
46.7
Penetration depth (to nearest 0.1 mm)
x6
[mm]
11.03
10.14
11.32
x4
[mm]
9.70
9.47
12.72
x2
[mm]
10.39
10.34
13.13
x1
[mm]
11.05
11.54
11.07
x3
[mm]
11.63
9.40
7.78
x5
[mm]
8.42
7.78
8.98
x7
[mm]
9.61
10.13
7.66
average xd
[mm]
10.26
9.83
10.38
Non-steady state migration coefficient, Dnssm
10-12 m2/s
4.40
4.090
4.367
Avg:
4.285
Fly ash 5 degrees
104
APPENDIX F. MIGRATION TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:117==
FA-1.0-1, 20
FA-1.0-2, 20
FA-1.0-2, 20
FA-1.0-2, 40
FA-1.0-2, 40
FA-1.0-2, 40
4
5
6
7
8
9
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
08:35
08:35
08:35
12:45
12:45
12:45
12:35
12:35
12:35
16:45
16:45
16:45
50.02
49.72
50.53
50.11
50.92
51.98
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
09:53
09:53
09:53
11:15
11:15
11:15
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
09:53
09:53
09:53
10:05
10:05
10:05
24.0
24.0
24.0
22.8
22.8
22.8
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
20
21
21
21
20.5
21
21
25.0
51.0
73.0
18.0
41.0
51.0
24.3
24.3
24.3
17.0
17.0
17.0
40.0
40.0
40.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
32.3
32.3
32.3
28.7
28.7
28.7
45.7
45.7
45.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.43
16.51
13.68
0.50
20.23
11.43
12.09
0.92
16.99
9.29
16.24
1.77
14.04
8.90
14.20
0.68
14.17
9.97
16.23
2.08
12.83
11.60
19.02
1.81
11.83
8.77
22.23
1.30
16.22
10.92
16.24
1.29
6.069
4.006
6.139
0.281
Avg:
5.405
Fly ash 20 degrees
Fly ash 40 degrees
105
==PAGE:118==
FA-1.0-2, 40
FA-1.0-2, 40
FA-1.0-2, 40
FA-2.5
FA-2.5
FA-2.5
7
8
9
7
8
9
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
12:45
12:45
14:30
14:30
14:30
16:45
16:45
18:30
18:30
18:30
50.92
51.98
50.83
50.41
50.71
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
12:53
12:53
14:56
14:56
14:56
21-05-2020
21-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
12:49
12:49
14:55
14:55
14:55
23.9
23.9
24.0
24.0
24.0
20
20
21
21
21
21
21
22
22
22
20.5
20.5
21.5
21.5
21.5
26.0
47.0
23.0
46.0
70.0
15.7
15.7
23.3
23.3
23.3
50.0
50.0
40.0
40.0
40.0
39.5
39.5
31.3
31.3
31.3
44.0
44.0
36.7
36.7
36.7
14.94
16.53
10.61
8.31
11.16
17.33
13.56
10.21
9.74
12.23
13.49
13.19
7.74
12.00
9.46
14.80
12.19
6.98
13.28
8.10
16.36
9.52
10.26
11.68
12.32
13.82
11.33
9.22
10.54
14.08
14.15
15.00
9.43
11.51
12.35
14.98
13.05
9.21
11.01
11.39
13.69
11.75
4.126
3.595
3.429
4.103
4.274
Avg:
3.861
Avg:
3.935
Fly ash 40 degrees
Fly ash 2.5
106
APPENDIX F. MIGRATION TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:119==
FA-5.0
FA-5.0
FA-5.0
PC-1.0-1, 5
PC-1.0-2, 5
PC-1.0-2, 5
10
11
12
16
17
18
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
14:30
14:30
14:30
08:35
08:35
08:35
18:30
18:30
18:30
12:35
12:35
12:35
50.24
50.96
50.45
50.98
50.20
49.87
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
14:59
14:59
14:59
09:56
09:56
09:56
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
14:59
14:59
14:59
09:54
09:54
09:54
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
21
21
21
21
21
21
22
22
22
21
21
21
21.5
21.5
21.5
21
21
21
23.0
48.0
71.0
87.0
178.0
258.0
23.7
23.7
23.7
86.0
86.0
86.0
40.0
40.0
40.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
31.3
31.3
31.3
71.0
71.0
71.0
37.3
37.3
37.3
68.0
68.0
68.0
9.60
8.03
9.29
21.02
18.63
19.84
9.16
8.89
8.41
18.53
19.95
17.72
11.21
9.57
9.19
18.55
18.53
18.61
9.84
9.19
7.53
18.54
20.58
20.20
8.91
9.21
12.25
19.88
17.36
18.72
8.16
7.62
8.13
17.23
17.44
19.75
7.66
10.46
11.63
17.36
16.33
18.28
9.22
9.00
9.49
18.73
18.40
19.02
3.393
3.352
3.512
11.777
11.389
11.707
Avg:
3.419
Avg:
11.624
Reference 5 degrees
Fly ash 5.0
107
==PAGE:120==
PC-1.0-1, 20
PC-1.0-2, 20
PC-1.0-2, 20
PC-1.0-2, 40
PC-1.0-2, 40
PC-1.0-2, 40
19
20
21
22
23
24
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
18-05-2020
12:45
12:45
12:45
12:45
12:45
12:45
16:45
16:45
16:45
16:45
16:45
16:45
51.23
51.38
51.15
51.34
50.95
50.12
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
19-05-2020
11:18
11:18
11:18
11:22
11:22
11:22
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
20-05-2020
11:03
11:03
11:03
11:16
11:16
11:16
23.8
23.8
23.8
23.9
23.9
23.9
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
87.0
171.0
251.0
84.0
168.0
258.0
83.7
83.7
83.7
86.0
86.0
86.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
68.7
68.7
68.7
69.7
69.7
69.7
66.7
66.7
66.7
59.7
59.7
59.7
18.48
17.35
17.12
17.81
24.53
17.37
18.33
19.70
15.08
16.81
19.79
15.37
15.69
19.22
18.81
17.13
18.14
17.10
17.69
18.83
19.09
17.71
19.49
19.57
21.62
18.16
17.08
21.41
17.97
20.90
19.72
20.07
19.72
21.67
18.90
19.99
21.67
22.23
19.21
18.30
19.10
22.75
19.03
19.37
18.02
18.69
19.70
19.01
12.137
12.396
11.452
11.867
12.437
11.792
Avg:
11.995
Avg:
12.032
Reference 20 degrees
Reference 40 degrees
108
APPENDIX F. MIGRATION TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:121==
PC-2.5
PC-2.5
PC-2.5
PC-5.0
PC-5.0
PC-5.0
1
2
3
4
5
6
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
25-05-2020
14:30
14:30
14:30
14:30
14:30
14:30
18:30
18:30
18:30
18:30
18:30
18:30
51.7
50.7
50.3
50.5
51.6
51.4
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
26-05-2020
14:50
14:50
14:50
14:53
14:53
14:53
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
27-05-2020
14:28
14:28
14:28
14:45
14:45
14:45
23.6
23.6
23.6
23.9
23.9
23.9
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
22
22
22
21
21
21
21.5
21.5
21.5
57.0
122.0
186.0
58.0
120.0
179.0
62.0
62.0
62.0
59.7
59.7
59.7
25.0
25.0
25.0
30.0
30.0
30.0
50.7
50.7
50.7
59.7
59.7
59.7
49.3
49.3
49.3
55.0
55.0
55.0
14.30
19.17
15.35
17.29
17.41
16.23
12.57
14.78
13.28
16.98
17.51
15.68
11.70
14.35
11.71
17.66
16.64
12.44
13.85
12.98
18.75
18.36
16.62
13.15
14.02
16.91
16.98
15.76
12.21
13.49
12.90
15.56
17.74
15.02
13.45
15.69
14.67
16.92
16.88
14.94
12.83
15.05
13.48
17.15
17.36
15.71
8.172
9.460
8.378
8.836
9.128
8.198
Avg:
8.670
Avg:
8.721
Reference 2.5
Reference 5.0
109
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX G
Frost test results
The results from the frost test are ﬁrst showed in ﬁgures for each mixture under separate
curing conditions. Afterwards all results are listed in a table.
Cumulated scaled material per area for concrete mixtures without ﬂy ash
(a) PC-1.0, 5deg.
(b) PC-1.0, 20deg.
Figure G.1: Results for concrete mixtures without ﬂy ash (continued on next page).
111
==PAGE:124==
112
APPENDIX G. FROST TEST RESULTS
(c) PC-1.0, 40deg.
(d) PC-2.5.
(e) PC-5.0.
Figure G.1: Results for concrete mixtures without ﬂy ash (continued from last page).
==PAGE:125==
113
Cumulated scaled material per area for ﬂy ash concrete mixtures
(a) FA-1.0, 5deg.
(b) FA-1.0, 20deg.
(c) FA-1.0, 40deg.
(d) FA-2.5.
Figure G.2: Results for ﬂy ash concrete mixtures (continued on next page).
==PAGE:126==
114
APPENDIX G. FROST TEST RESULTS
(e) FA-5.0.
Figure G.2: Results for ﬂy ash concrete mixtures (continued from last page).
==PAGE:127==
Results from frost test
Specimen
0 cycles 
[kg/m2]
7 cycles 
[kg/m2]
15 cycles 
[kg/m2]
21 cycles 
[kg/m2]
28 cycles 
[kg/m2]
(1) FA-1.0-1, 5deg
0.000
0.681
1.828
(2) FA-1.0-1, 5deg
0.000
0.828
2.129
(3) FA-1.0-2, 5deg
0.000
0.813
2.050
(4) FA-1.0-1, 20deg
0.000
0.642
1.957
(5) FA-1.0-1, 20deg
0.000
0.795
1.932
(6) FA-1.0-2, 20deg
0.000
0.593
(7) FA-1.0-2, 40deg
0.000
0.555
1.652
2.909
(8) FA-1.0-2, 40deg
0.000
0.798
2.202
3.699
(9) FA-1.0-2, 40deg
0.000
0.604
1.598
(10) FA-2.5
0.000
0.154
0.253
0.302
0.352
(11) FA-2.5
0.000
0.131
0.244
0.331
0.438
(12) FA-2.5
0.000
0.136
0.247
0.296
0.414
(13) FA-5.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.006
(14) FA-5.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(15) FA-5.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(16) PC-1.0-1, 5deg
0.000
1.117
3.346
(17) PC-1.0-2, 5deg
0.000
1.248
3.348
(18) PC-1.0-2, 5deg
0.000
0.925
2.963
(19) PC-1.0-1, 20deg
0.000
1.112
3.410
(20) PC-1.0-1, 20deg
0.000
1.106
3.193
(21) PC-1.0-2, 20deg
0.000
1.261
3.124
(22) PC-1.0-2, 40deg
0.000
1.222
3.710
(23) PC-1.0-2, 40deg
0.000
1.447
4.379
(24) PC-1.0-2, 40deg
0.000
1.173
3.475
(25) PC-2.5
0.000
0.099
0.174
0.205
0.224
(26) PC-2.5
0.000
0.043
0.068
0.074
0.074
(27) PC-2.5
0.000
0.056
0.093
0.093
0.099
(28) PC-5.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(29) PC-5.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(30) PC-5.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
115
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
[1]
N. Bouzoubaâ et al. “Deicing salt scaling resistance of concrete incorporating sup-
plementary cementing materials: laboratory and ﬁeld test data”. In: Canadian Jour-
nal of Civil Engineering (2008).
[2]
Dansk Betonforening. Betonhåndbogen. Dansk Betonforening, 2016.
[3]
S. Brunauer and L. E. Copeland. “The Chemistry of Concrete”. In: Scientiﬁc Amer-
ican (1964).
[4]
Cement Concrete and Aggregates Australia. Chloride Resistance of Concrete. June
2009.
[5]
DTU Civil Engineering and Danish Technological Institute. Concrete Expert Cen-
tre. URL: www.concreteexpertcentre.dk. (accessed: 17.04.2020).
[6]
UN Environment et al. “Eco-efﬁcient cements: Potential economically viable so-
lutions for a low-CO2 cement-based materials industry”. In: Cement and Concrete
Research (2018).
[7]
S. Hanehara et al. “Effects of water/powder ratio, mixing ratio of ﬂy ash, and curing
temperature on pozzolanic reaction of ﬂy ash in cement paste”. In: Cement and
Concrete Research (1991).
[8]
M. T. Hasholt et al. “Frost resistance of concrete with high contents of ﬂy ash - A
study on how hollow ﬂy ash particles distort the air void analysis”. In: Cement and
Concrete Research 119 (Mar. 2019), pp. 102–112.
[9]
M. T. Hasholt. “Air void structure and frost resistance: A challenge to Powers’
spacing factor”. In: Materials and Structures 47 (2014), pp. 911–923.
[10]
A. Heisig et al. “Ingress of NaCl in concrete with alkali reactive aggregate: effect
on silicon solubility”. In: Materials and Structures 49 (2006).
117
==PAGE:130==
118
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11]
G. M. Idorn and D. M. Roy. “Opportunities with Alkalies in Concrete Testing,
Research, and Engineering Practice”. In: Alkalies in Concrete (1986).
[12]
Danish Technological Institute. Emiﬁller. Betonfremstilling - Dokumentation af ud-
valgte egenskaber. Apr. 2019.
[13]
ASTM International. ASTM C457/C457M - 16. Standard Test Method for Micro-
scopical Determination of Parameters of the Air-Void System in Hardened Con-
crete. ASTM International, 2016.
[14]
K. O. Kjellsen et al. “Development of microstructures in plain cement pastes hy-
drated at different temperatures”. In: Cement and Concrete Research (1991).
[15]
P. Klieger. “Effect of Mixing and Curing Temperature on Concrete Strength”. In:
Bulletin 103 (1958).
[16]
S. Lindmark. “Recapitulation of an old hypothesis on the mechanism(s) of salt frost
scaling”. In: Concrete in arctic conditions: Workshop proceedings from a Nordic
workshop 16 (June 2019).
[17]
R. M. Majko and M. F. Pistilli. “Optimizing the Amount of Class C Fly Ash in
Concrete Mixtures”. In: Cement, Concrete and Aggregates 6 (1984), pp. 105–119.
[18]
P. K. Mehta and P. J. M. Monteiro. Concrete. Microstructure, Properties, and Ma-
terials. Fourth Edition. McGraw Hill Education, 2014.
[19]
C. Naito et al. “Chloride migration characteristics and reliability of reinforced con-
crete highway structures in Pennsylvania”. In: Construction and Building Materi-
als (2020).
[20]
NORDTEST. NT Build 492. Concrete, mortar and cement-based repair materi-
als: Chloride migration coefﬁcient from non-steady-state migration experiments.
NORDTEST, 1999.
[21]
Aalborg Portland. “Portlandcementer”. In: Beton-Teknik (1983/1999).
[22]
K. L. Scrivener. “Options for the future of cement”. In: The Indian Concrete Jour-
nal (2014).
[23]
R. L. Smith and Jr. C. F. Raba. “Recent Developments in the Use of Fly Ash to
Reduce Alkali-Aggregate Reaction”. In: (1986).
[24]
Svenska Institutet för Standarder. SS 137244:2018. Concrete testing - Hardened
concrete - Scaling at freezing. Svenska Institutet för Standarder, 2018.
[25]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 480-11. Admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout - Test
methods - Part 11: Determination of air void characteristics in hardened concrete.
2nd. Danish Standards, 2005.
==PAGE:131==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
119
[26]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 480-11:2005. Admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout
- Test methods - Part 11: Determination of air void characteristics in hardened
concrete. Danish Standards, 2005.
[27]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 13670:2010. Execution of concrete structures. 2nd. Dan-
ish Standards, 2010.
[28]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 450-1. Fly ash for concrete - Part 1: Deﬁnition, speciﬁ-
cations and conformity criteria. 3rd. Danish Standards, 2012.
[29]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 197-1. Cement - Part 1: Composition, speciﬁcations and
conformity criteria for common cements. 4rd. Danish Standards, 2013.
[30]
Danish Standards. EN 196-2:2013. Method of testing cement - Part 2: Chemical
analysis of cement. Danish Standards, 2013.
[31]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 206:2013+A1:2016. Concrete - Speciﬁcation, perfor-
mance, production and conformity. Danish Standards, 2016.
[32]
Danish Standards. DS/CEN/TS 12390-9:2016. Testing hardened concrete - Part 9:
Freeze-thaw resistance with de-icing salts - Scaling. Danish Standards, 2016.
[33]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 1992-1-1 FU:2007. Forkorted udgave af Eurocode 2 -
Betonkonstruktioner. 4th. Danish Standards, 2017.
[34]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 206 DK NA:2019. Concrete - Speciﬁcation, performance,
production and conformity - Rules for application of EN 206 in Denmark. Danish
Standards, 2019.
[35]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 12390-3:2019. Testing hardened concrete - Part 3: Com-
pressive strength of test specimen. Danish Standards, 2019.
[36]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 12350-7:2019. Testing fresh concrete - Part 7: Air con-
tent - Pressure methods. Danish Standards, 2019.
[37]
Danish Standards. DS/EN 12350-2:2019. Testing fresh concrete - Part 2: Slump
test. Danish Standards, 2019.
[38]
M. Thomas. Optimizing the Use of Fly Ash in Concrete. Portland Cement Associ-
ation, 2007.
[39]
M. Thomas and H. Yi. “Deicer-salt scaling of concrete containing ﬂy ash”. In:
International RILEM Conference on Materials, Systems and Structures in Civil
Engineering (Aug. 2016).
[40]
J. J. Valenza and G. W. Scherer. “A review of salt scaling: I Phenomenology”. In:
Cement and Concrete Research 37 (2007).
==PAGE:132==
120
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[41]
J. J. Valenza and G. W. Scherer. “A review of salt scaling: II Mechanisms”. In:
Cement and Concrete Research 37 (2007).
[42]
J. J. Valenza and G. W. Scherer. “Mechanism for Salt Scaling”. In: Journal of the
American Ceramic Society 89 (4) (2006), pp. 1161–1179.
[43]
S. Wolter. Interaction between concrete and freezing medium during accelerated
freeze/thaw testing. Jan. 2020.
