==PAGE:1==
Synthesizing Morphologically
Varied Artiﬁcial Life using
Evolutionary Algorithms
Georgios H. Kavousanos
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The original Thesis plan is provided in the Appendix, as well as a short para-
graph discussing changes to it.
Two videos are provided as accompanying material to this document. Due to
the nature of this work, watching them prior or after reading this document
is advised. The larger video brieﬂy showcases the internal workings and mor-
phological results of this work. The smaller video showcases performance gains
through certain optimizations, for about which can be read in Section 3.3.
The source code and the accompanying assets (meshes, materials, terrains etc.)
can be found in this frozen, public GitHub repository. It was not uploaded to
DTU, as even the cleaned-up, simpliﬁed version was over 4GB large.
Lyngby, 30-June-2020
(Georgios H. Kavousanos)
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my supervisor, Prof. Jakob Andreas
Bærentzen, and Prof. Jeppe Revall Frisvad, for their feedback and guidance.
In loving memory of Georgios Kavousanos, the Senior.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
4
2.1
Agent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Body Genotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Actuator Genotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Sensor Genotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Decision-Making Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
The Genetic Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Genetic Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4
Mutation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.1
The Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Algorithmic Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4.1
Speciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4.2
Dimensionality Minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.4.3
Elitism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.4.4
Curriculum Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
iv
3
Results
31
3.1
The Fitness Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.1
The Eﬀect of Elitism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.2
The Eﬀects of Speciation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.3
The Eﬀect of Population Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.4
The Eﬀect of Curriculum Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.5
Morphological Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Technical Speciﬁcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A Appendix
47
A.1 Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 P-values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.3 Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.4 Thesis Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.4.1
Original Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.4.2
Revisions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
52
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The very ﬁrst virtual creatures "drew breath", so to say, in Karl Sims’ [Sims, 1994]
laboratory during the early 90s. His running, jumping and swimming agents,
which required a Connection Machine (CM-5) supercomputer to generate, marked
an important scientiﬁc moment: the birth of the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Life. In
2000, Lipson and Pollack [Lipson and Pollack, 2000] 3D printed robots that were
digitally evolved, expanding the meaning of the words ’robotic automation’. The
value of such development shortcuts could be tremendous for the industry, but
attention on this ﬁeld of Computational Intelligence has been disproportionately
low.
On the other hand, with Machine Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence coming
to prominence in recent years, there has been extensive research on reﬁning
the behavior of agents through optimizing their decision-making policy, us-
ing methods such as Reinforcement Learning and Genetic Algorithms
[Pathak et al., 2019], [Le et al., 2020], [Barros et al., 2020]. A typical study de-
ﬁnes one or more agents with simple and mostly static morphologies. The struc-
tural simplicity of the agents suﬃces, by design, to solve the problem at hand.
This allows attention to be shifted towards optimizing their decision-making
policies, which is typically the focal point of the study. One would presume
that relevant work of at least comparable volume would exist in the opposite
direction: Keeping the decision-making of the agents static, while using recent
advances in the ﬁeld of Computational Intelligence to optimize their morphol-
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Hypothesis
2
ogy. That is, surprisingly, not the case. In this work, we explore the possibility
of using Genetic Algorithms to optimize the structure of 3-dimensional agents,
allowing them to better adapt to their environment. The goal is to keep agent
abstraction low enough for forces such as friction to have an eﬀect on agent
morphology, while also including higher-complexity systems, such as sensors,
that are typically too complicated to model in lower levels of abstraction.
1.1
Hypothesis
The hypothesis to be explored in this study is that digital agents can morpho-
logically adapt to their environment given a static decision-making process.
Furthermore, we would like to show that modern techniques and algorithms of-
ten used to reﬁne the policies of Reinforcement Learning algorithms and the
structure of Neural Networks can be used in the context of Artiﬁcial Life to
enable the morphological adaptation of 3D agents. More speciﬁcally, it will be
shown that Curriculum Learning, Elitism, Speciation, Historic Mark-
ings and Dimensionality Minimization, when utilized alongside Genetic Al-
gorithms, can lead to better and faster adapted agent populations. Finally, by
achieving the above, we will demonstrate the fact that dedicated software, and
therefore large teams, are not a requirement for the implementation of Artiﬁcial
Life at present.
1.2
Related Work
Artiﬁcial Life is a ﬁeld that emerged more than 25 years ago, with the ground-
breaking work of Karl Sims [Sims, 1994]. His idea was simple: producing agents
composed from rigid blocks and primitive light sensors, interconnected via joints
and locally mobilized by controllers embedded within these blocks. The agents
obeyed the classical laws of mechanics and, using their inherent conﬁguration,
would attempt to solve a task within their environment by maximizing the ﬁt-
ness function associated with it. Tasks involved moving in various ways and
environments, and following light sources. Replacing the least ﬁt half of the
population of each generation and cross-breeding the rest lead to surprisingly
eﬀective agents with life-like behaviors and interesting morphologies, adapted
towards completing their assigned task.
Since then, despite vast increases in computational power and the availability
of knowledge and resources (the Open-Source Movement, Git, Game Engines
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Related Work
3
etc), the ﬁeld has largely stagnated. Two noteworthy exceptions are the work
of Cheney, MacCurdy, Clune and Lipson in 2013 [Cheney et al., 2014],
who drew inspiration from the human heart in an attempt to break the barrier
between an agent’s ’body’ (its physical morphology) and ’brain’ (its decision-
making module) using soft-bodied agents composed of voxels that could contract
when digital electric current stimulated them. These voxels had diﬀerent types
of conductivity levels associated with them and a ’pacemaker’ module, placed on
the agent, would provide the current. Voxel contraction would cause the agent
as a whole to move in various patterns depending on their structure and Ge-
netic Algorithms indirectly optimized that structure to provoke suitable types
of movement. A second breakthrough came about in 2019, as Pathak, Lu,
Darrell, Isola and Efros [Pathak et al., 2019] devised a way to transcend
the well known scalability issues of Reinforcement Learning through training
a swarm of simple agents to complete a diﬃcult task, instead of relying on a
single, well-trained neural network. Swarm intelligence succeeded where cen-
tralized intelligence failed, in a publication that could lead the ﬁeld down a very
interesting rabbit-hole.
In 2002, a brilliant study on another ﬁeld of Computational Intelligence was
published. Stanley and Miikkulainen, with their work on Evolving Neural
Networks through Augmenting Topologies (often referred to as NEAT),
demonstrated that the structure of neural networks could be generated and/or
optimized through Genetic Algorithms. They envisioned neural network struc-
ture as a phenotype, which they encoded into a genome with varying length.
That genome was composed of node genes (inputs, hidden nodes and out-
puts) and connection genes that speciﬁed which of the existing nodes are
connected, the weight of their connection and whether that connection would
be active when expressed. A number of interesting ideas were proposed in that
publication, including Speciation (protecting innovation within a population),
Dimensionality Minimization (ensuring minimally structured agents at ev-
ery step of the simulation) and Historical Markings (using shared genomic
ancestry to compare genotypes). It is not hard, in retrospective, to notice that
Sims’ approach to graph-based agents composed of blocks (nodes) and joints
(connections) resembles a developing NEAT neural network in structure and ge-
netic encoding. Could these same ideas, proven to be so eﬀective in optimizing
neural network structure, be of beneﬁt to a Sims-inspired Artiﬁcial Life system?
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Methodology
Agents could be deﬁned as autonomous entities that strive to achieve goals
within their environment, using environmental stimuli as input and responding
to that stimuli through various actuators. As such, most studies within Artiﬁ-
cial Life need to, at minimum, deﬁne three major components: the agent that
acts and observes, the environment that provides the stimuli and the rules of
interaction between the two. That set of rules is, typically, an amalgamation of
a physics system along with certain ad-hoc conventions and abstractions (agents
eat food when colliding with it, for example). In nature, physics play a major
role in the plethora of morphological wonder that consist the fauna and ﬂora
of our planet [Morey-Holton, 2003].
Think of the characteristically diﬀerent
shapes of aquatic as opposed to avian creatures, or the cardiopulmonary diﬀer-
ences snake species have depending on how much gravitational strain exists in
their environment [Lillywhite et al., 2012]. This physics-induced diversity is the
main reason why the majority of Artiﬁcial Life studies that revolve around mor-
phology have employed it to some degree. From Sims’ usage of Featherstone’s
[Featherstone, 1987] recursive method for calculating the velocities of the bodies
that composed his agents, to a model of the conduction system of the heart that
drove Cheney, MacCurdy, Clune and Lipson’s soft agents [Cheney et al., 2014],
physics has central stage in the ﬁeld. As such, we chose to model our agents
in a way that utilizes the shape-deﬁning eﬀects of physics, while retaining the
ability to increase the level of abstraction in any features that would not mor-
phologically beneﬁt as much from utilizing these forces, such as sensors.
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Agent
5
2.1
Agent
In this section, we will discuss the diﬀerent parts that compose an agent within
our system, namely Bodies, Actuators, Sensors and Decision-making Mod-
ules. They will be brieﬂy described, along with the genes that genotypically
represent them, with a more in-depth dive into the genome itself in the next
section.
In this study, each agent can be thought oﬀas a directed graph, with Body mod-
ules as nodes and Joints as vectors. Each Joint connects two Bodies together
in a certain, gene-deﬁned, physical relationship. Body modules can, in turn,
be genomically connected to any number of Sensors and Actuators (mus-
cles). Agents can be composed of, at minimum, a single starting Body (called
MainBody), while other modules can emerge through the genetic processes of
Mutation and Crossover, which are discussed in Section 2.2.
Figure 2.1: Muscle contraction is modeled as a force that can be applied on
the surface of a constrained body, at a certain position and with a
certain frequency. Using our system, a human arm can be modeled
as two Bodies connected by a constraint Joint with one degree of
freedom. A bicep can be modeled via an Actuator on one of those
bodies.
Note here that the Actuator models the force a bicep
would apply and needs to be part of the receiver of that force, the
forearm in this case. Image Source : VisibleBody.
2.1.1
Body Genotype
Body modules are the prevalent physical representation of the agent in space
and the part of the agent that is mostly aﬀected and driven by the physics sim-
ulation. The genes expressed by a Body genotype are Shape, Scale, Color,
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Agent
6
HostVertex, HostID, JointLimits and Historic Marking. Historic Mark-
ings are special genes that can optimize Crossover. This gene exists in all
phenotypes and will be further discussed in Subsection 2.2.3.
The most deﬁning characteristic of a Body is the static collection of vertices,
edges and triangles that deﬁne its digital Shape and therefore most of its physi-
cal properties (e.g. center of mass). A mesh will be used to store this information
in practise. At the time a Body module is mutated into existence, a mesh is ran-
domly selected from a user-deﬁned pool of meshes to physically represent that
body. Whenever that Body is genotypically expressed, a convex mesh-speciﬁc
collider is automatically generated and assigned to it, as presented in Figure
2.2. For optimization reasons, meshes are represented as single, static genes
within the genome and undergo no vertex-level mutations. In order for bodies
to morphologically adapt, they depend on Scale instead.
Figure 2.2: An example of how variations in the Scale- and Color-associated
genes can diﬀerentiate two agents.
Scale and Shape deﬁne the
physical footprint of the agent through the generated colliders and
assigned mass.
Scale is a collection of three genes that deﬁne the size of the Body in world-
space. They correspond to scaling in the x,y and z axis, respectively, and they
aﬀect the spacial footprint and the physical properties of the Body, since each
Body’s mass is calculated as the square magnitude of its scale.
This is, of
course, a simpliﬁcation that assumes Body modules are composed of a single,
homogeneously dense material. It also means that two Shapes generated using
diﬀerent units of measurement will be treated as having the same mass if their
Scale genes are identical, therefore implicitly changing their relative density.
As such, Bodies with diﬀerent densities can be simulated by modifying their
Shape. In practise, a single Shape was more than enough to generate practically
unlimited diversity.
Color is represented within the genome by four genes, which correspond to the
red, green, blue and alpha values of the RGB system. Color is applied on
the expressed Body’s material and aﬀects how the agent responds to higher or
lower temperatures within the environment. In short, environmental heat
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Agent
7
is deﬁned between -1 and 1, with 0 disabling the system. A cold environment
would be represented as close to -1, with values close to 1 denoting a hot en-
vironment instead. More on information on environments and heat in Section
2.3. This system was inspired by the behavior or melanin in the human skin.
Melanin regulates the radiation that penetrates the skin. High melanin levels
absorb most of the visible light and prevent harmful radiation from reaching
deeper, more sensitive parts of the body. On the other hand, lower melanin
levels allow more of the light through, leading to increased vitamin D absorp-
tion, amongst other beneﬁts. This is one of the reasons why humans living near
the Equator have darker skins than those who live up North. Body Color is
an abstraction of that system, with darker agents being more resistant to heat
while brighter agents more resistant to cold. Energy is lost every second by
agents not perfectly adapted to their environment, using Function 1, where H
is the environmental heat and C the brightness of the average color of the agent.
Average color is calculated as C =
Pn
j=1 Cj · ∥Sj∥
Pn
j=1∥Sj∥
, where S is the scale of the
body bearing that color. As an interesting note, a positive reinforcement system
was also attempted (energy gain instead of loss), but it had the side-eﬀect of
encouraging passive agent behavior as agents demonstrated a tendency of pas-
sively evolving color and keeping movement to a minimum (photosynthesizing)
instead of developing interesting movement-centric morphologies.
Function 1: From heat and color to energy loss.
Eloss =
 ||H|| · C,
for H ≥0
||H|| · (1 −C),
for H < 0

Body genotypes incorporate exactly one Joint, represented by a collection of
four genes within the genome. Those four genes are used by the newly expressed
Body to aﬃx itself to another Body called the host. The host is determined by
the HostID gene and the location of attachment by the HostVertex gene.
This type of joint encoding in the genome allows up to three degrees of freedom
relative to the host, as demonstrated in Figure 2.3, which are rotations around
the X, Y and/or Z axis. Gene one and two correspond to the absolute maximum
and minimum rotational limits around the X-axis and genes three and four
regulate the degrees of rotation allowed around the Y and Z axis. Rotation
limits range from 0◦to 360◦, with 0◦removing that degree of freedom altogether
and 360◦removing the limit itself. Practically, a threshold h is applied to clamp
very low and high rotational limits to 0◦and 360◦respectively, for performance
reasons.
The combination of Joint, Shape and Scale genes provide the bedrock for a
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Agent
8
wide range of possible agent morphologies and types of motion, but there is one
last puzzle piece missing to achieve the latter: Actuators.
Figure 2.3: A typical joint connecting two Bodies, that are part of an agent.
This reptile-inspired agent was purposefully generated in order to
better illustrate parts of this work and in order to visually conﬁrm
our results with the use of familiar shapes.
2.1.2
Actuator Genotype
Actuators are the primary source of motion in our system. They are inspired
by the myoskeletal system of vertebrates, where motion emerges from muscles
applying forces to constraint parts of the body, as demonstrated in Figure 2.1.
Actuators are genetically deﬁned, ﬁrst and foremost, by the Strength and
Frequency genes. The Strength gene is a scalar that deﬁnes the magnitude
of the maximum force the actuator may exert, while the Frequency gene deﬁnes
how many times per second the muscle may apply that force. The HostVertex
and HostID genes deﬁne the host-Body and the exact location on that host
where the force will be applied to, respectively. The direction this force will be
applied towards is decided by the static Decision-making module, more on which
will be discussed in Subsection 2.1.4. Actuators are visually represented on our
agents as small red cubes (with size that linearly depends on their Strength and
Frequency). This may be observed in the showcased material, but it is little more
than a widget used for debug purposes. Actuators themselves are considered
to be embedded within the host and morphologically invisible. Finally, it is
important to note here that Actuators expend energy when applying force.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Agent
9
Each time an Actuator discharges its force, the current energy levels of the agent
are reduced by an amount that equals to ke = 1
20 ∗m ∗v2, with m being the
mass of the containing Body and v its resulting speed. That is, essentially, the
Kinetic Energy equation reduced by a factor of 10, for numeric convenience.
2.1.3
Sensor Genotype
Sensor expressions are the primary means of input from the environment to the
agent. Sensor genotypes are deﬁned by the ViewDistance and ViewRadius
genes, containing two scalars that deﬁne the maximum distance and maximum
angle within which the expressed Sensor may perceive its environment. They
are further deﬁned by the HostVertex and the HostID genes, which jointly
deﬁne where exactly the Sensor will be expressed on the agent. Sensors are
always expressed with their forward axis pointing in the direction of the nor-
mal of the hosts’ Shape at the location speciﬁed by the HostVertex gene, as
demonstrated in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: An expressed Sensor phenotype on an agent during runtime. Vari-
ous tools were implemented in Unity to ensure that the Genetic Al-
gorithm, including gene expression, are operating correctly. Some
of these tools, including rays, widgets and Editor Tools are demon-
strated above.
The means by which Sensors perceive their environment is by detecting, at a
predeﬁned frequency, all physical actors within ViewDistance units. Then, for
every actor detected, the Sensor checks whether they are within ViewRadius de-
grees from its forward direction. Finally, the Sensor notiﬁes the Decision-making
module of the targets’ existence by adding these entities to a dictionary of de-
tected targets. This decentralized, modular structure means that any number
of Sensors can be expressed on an agent, with each possibly facing in diﬀerent
directions and having diﬀerent parameters, but with all of them asynchronously
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Agent
10
notifying the agent of the world around it. If no Sensors are expressed at all,
the Decision-making module simply assumes no entities are in the vicinity. De-
tectable entities would be anything in our environment that takes part in the
physics simulation (has at least a collider), including the Terrain, Flora, Edibles
and other agents.
Finally, Sensors do expend energy to operate. In early experiments, when Sen-
sors were not penalized through energy expenditure, genomes tended to get
littered with countless of them since more sensors could only increase ﬁtness.
While the actual chemical and muscular energy expenditure of Sensors in real
life (e.g. human eyes) is usually negligible, they typically require a large, ded-
icated part of the brain to process their input. As such, in this work Sensors
receive a complexity-based, input processing penalization of p = N 2, where N
is the number of Sensors expressed on the agent.
2.1.4
Decision-Making Module
As per the objectives of this work, a static decision-making module is needed on
each agent that oﬀers a simple, viable solution at each step of the simulation.
That module, given a suﬃciently adapted morphology, should suﬃce to solve
any problem our agent is presented with.
Each agent contains exactly one
Decision-making module, which is represented by a single gene within the
genome: MaximumEnergy. MaximumEnergy is the capacity of the energy
reserves of the agent.
Actuators and Sensors deplete those reserves, while
eating food replenishes them. If the energy reserves are depleted, the agent
is disabled until the next generation (and could also have its ﬁtness penalized,
depending on the environment).
The input of the decision module are the
positions and nature of any perceived entities around it, which are provided by
the Sensors, if any. The output of the system is the heading of the agent in
world space. An overview of the decision-making process can be seen in Process
1.
As such, an agent will keep moving towards its current heading by discharg-
ing Actuators, to the best of its morphological ability.
The key to complex
movement patterns here, despite the simplistic decision-making process, is the
distinct activation frequency and location of each Actuator.
By ﬁne-tuning
their position, frequency and strength throughout the generations, Actuators
can eventually produce movement patterns such as jumping, rolling, crawling
as well as more unique types of movement, an example of which is demonstrated
in Figure 3.7. The takeaway here is that any complex and elegant movement pat-
terns and/or any improvement in the behavior of the agents within our system
would be a product of morphological adaptation rather than decision-making
==PAGE:17==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
11
Process 1: The Decision-making Sequence.
1. If a Body Phenotype is reporting a collision with an Edible, consume it
2. If edible entities are being perceived, set the heading to be the closest
edible’s position.
3. If no edible entities are being perceived and no heading has been set, set
the heading to a random nearby position on the Terrain.
4. If a heading has been set and has not been reached yet, discharge the
force of any actuator that is available to attempt to rotate the main
body (HistoricMark = 0) towards the heading.
5. If the angle between the forward axis of the agent in world space and the
heading is less than a threshold (1◦in our case), discharge the force of
any actuator that is available towards the heading but only if some part
of the agent is touching the Terrain (static props used, such as Trees, are
treated as "Terrain" by the physics system).
policy optimization, which is a key requirement to our hypothesis.
To sum-up, our static decision-making policy would provide our agents with
the innate behavior of consuming entities marked as ’Edible’ on contact, spa-
cial awareness of their position relative to detected entities, knowledge of the
identities of detected entities (agent, terrain, edible etc) and the innate need
to turn and face the direction at which they are heading for. That last feature
was not mandatory, or even helpful, for the Genetic Algorithm to converge, but
it did produce movement patterns that appeared more natural. In the next
section, we will discuss the modules described so far can be automatically and
meaningfully generated, destroyed and parameterized by utilizing the power of
natural selection.
2.2
The Genetic Algorithm
Genetic Algorithms are solution space search heuristics, inspired by the pro-
cess of natural selection, where the ﬁttest individuals of a population are selected
for passing on their genes to the next generation. Each individual is character-
ized by a set of parameters, called genes, with the entire sequence of genes that
compose an agent referred to as their genome. Parts of a genome that fulﬁll
(express) a certain functionality are referred to as genotypes, with the expres-
==PAGE:18==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
12
sion itself called a phenotype. Genetic Algorithms include four major steps:
Genetic Expression (decoding genotypes to phenotypes, also called Popula-
tion Initialization), Selection (evaluating these phenotypes and selecting the
ﬁttest), Crossover (re-combining the genes of those selected) and Mutation
(generating new genes or changing existing genes in new ways).
A genetic algorithm operates on the genome level. Each candidate, or agent
in our case, is represented by their genome and a collection of genomes is called
a population. In order for the population as a whole to grow ﬁtter over the
generations, the best genomes should reproduce more frequently than weaker
genomes. This implies the need for measuring the ﬁtness of each individual,
which is exactly what a Fitness Function does.
But ﬁtness functions are
usually unable to directly measure the genome itself. Typically, the genome is
the encoding to something measurable, the instructions on how to generate a
collection of phenotypes called the agent, the ﬁtness of which can be measured.
That encoding from genotype to phenotype can be done in two major ways:
Direct and Indirect Encoding.
2.2.1
Genetic Expression
2.2.1.1
Direct and Indirect Encoding
When using Direct Encoding, each phenotype of an individual has a direct and
explicit representation within the genome, making the genotype proportional
to the phenotype. In other words, for a directly encoded agent to mutate an
eye into existence, that mutation would increase the agent’s genome by the an
amount x equal to the length of that eye’s genotype. If another ten eyes mutate
into existence over several generations, that same genome would have further
increased by another 10x.
Indirect encoding, on the other hand, encodes genetic information in a way
that accounts for repeated structure, with each gene being potentially responsi-
ble for a certain trait shared by many phenotypes. In the example above, all
eyes could be decoded from the same collection of genotypes. A beneﬁt of en-
coding indirectly is the centralized phenotypes themselves. A directly encoded
set of eyes on an agent that needs to adapt to see better in the dark would need
to independently adapt this trait on both eye genotypes. If indirectly encoded,
on the other hand, there could be a gene that controls photopigment generation
in every single eye. Should that gene adapt, all eyes would be able to see in the
dark at once.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
13
In nature, most genomes are indirectly encoded, which is why the entire hu-
man genome of less than 30.000 genes can contain information on generating an
individual, despite the fact that our brains alone contain an estimated 100bil-
lion neurons. Directly encoding this much (repeated) information would not
have been feasible. Yet, this study, as well as most Genetic Algorithm-related
publications [Le et al., 2020] [Sims, 1994] [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002] still
employee direct encoding in their projects, and with good reason. Indirect en-
coding is much more complicated to implement, while not producing consistently
better results [Gillespie et al., 2017]. The use of Indirect Encoding might be,
generally, warranted in studies that make use of symmetrical structure and/or
require massive amounts of repeating phenotypes [Cheney et al., 2014].
2.2.1.2
Encoding Agents
Agents in this work are directly encoded.
As such, each gene within the
genome of our agents corresponds to exactly one phenotype, which can be a
Body, Sensor, Actuator or Decision-making module, as described in the previ-
ous section. In this Subsection, the genome will be discussed: how genes are
arranged, how they are separated into genotypes and how these genotypes get
decoded into a population of agents. But let’s get ahead of ourselves by starting
with an example of the system, as illustrated in Figure 2.5.
The ﬁrst thing to note in this ﬁgure are the Marker Genes that denote the
start and end of a genotype.
Practically speaking, such annotations can be
implicitly implemented through using relevant data structures, such as Jagged
Arrays, in order to avoid adding extra genes. Conceptually though, these genes
act as markers that contain information on whether the genotype should be
expressed or not. These markers are activated and deactivated through extreme
mutations in the rest of the genes of that genotype.
Body genotypes can be mutated out of existence if any of their Scale genes
mutates to zero. The same holds for Actuator genotypes and their Strength
and Frequency genes. Should the Strength gene mutate to zero or should the
Frequency gene increase above a threshold, empirically set as half the duration of
an Epoch, the corresponding genotype would be deactivated. Finally, the same
process repeats for Sensor phenotypes and their ViewRadius and ViewRange
genes. Whenever any of them is set to zero, the Sensor will deactivate in the
genome. Practically, all these genes have their values automatically be rounded
down to zero if the values approach a small, pre-set threshold. This is done
mostly for performance reasons, as a deactivated genotype will not be decoded,
and thus will not be instantiated in the scene. On populations of hundreds or
even thousands of agents, this simple optimization alone could massively reduce
==PAGE:20==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
14
the computational overhead.
Figure 2.5: An example of how phenotypes are decoded from genotypes. A
direct encoding system was used. Note that Shape is not depicted
here for brevity as the same shape was used for all Body genotypes
above: a beveled cube.
The genome itself consists of a linear collection of one or more of the aforemen-
tioned phenotypes. In Figure 2.5, an encoded genome can be observed. Note
here that the true order of the phenotypes in the genome is actually based on
their Historic Marking (more on that in Subsection 2.2.3). Furthermore, the
order of the genes within each genotype is also static and predeﬁned.
Of note here is that our genetic model is encoded in a way that allows for the
occurrence of a natural process called Atavism, where an ancestral genetic
trait reappears after having been lost through evolutionary change in previous
generations [Hall, 1984]. Should an oﬀspring mutate one of these dormant, an-
cestral genotypes back to existence, that genotype would be atavistic. For exam-
ple, an inactive Sensor that disappeared on a population could later re-emerge
when, by random Mutation, an oﬀspring mutates the Sensor’s ViewRadius
and ViewRange genes to above zero.
In the next section, the process of expressing a genome to an agent will be
presented.
2.2.1.3
Population Initialization
Population Initiatization, also called Genomic Expression, is the ﬁrst step
of a Genetic Algorithm. Genomes are decoded to agents through each genotype
being sequentially read and decoded. This is done in two passes. The ﬁrst pass
expresses all genes that are unique to each phenotype. The second pass decodes
==PAGE:21==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
15
the two universal, genes: HostID and HostVertex. The type of phenotype that
is being decoded is denoted by the Marker Gene and the nuances for decoding
each phenotype can be seen in the Processes 2 to 6.
Process 2: The Body Phenotype Decoding Process - First Pass.
1. Instantiate a pre-constructed, default Body.
2. Read the ﬁrst, second and third genes and replace the X, Y and Z values
of the scale of that default Body with their contents, in order.
3. Read the fourth to seventh genes in the sequence and replace the R, G,
B and alpha values of the color of the material of that Body.
4. Read the next four genes and apply them to the Low Angular X Limit,
High Angular X Limit, Angular Y Limit and Angular Z Limit rotational
constraints of the Conﬁgurable Joint on the default Body.
5. Read the next gene (Historic Marking) and replace the default body’s
unique ID with its contents.
Process 3: The Sensor Phenotype Decoding Process - First Pass.
1. Instantiate a pre-constructed, default Sensor that contains a spherical
mesh, a basic material and all parameters initialized to zero.
2. Read the ﬁrst gene and replace the default Sensor’s _viewDistance
paremeter with the gene’s value.
3. Read the second gene and replace the default Sensor’s _viewRadius
paremeter with the gene’s value.
4. Change the scale of the default sensor to be
s = [_viewRadius/180, _viewRadius/180, _viewDistance/10], in order
to morphologically reﬂect the changes to its functionality. These
numbers are implementation-speciﬁc and the idea is that we associate
view distance with a scale in the Z-axis, much like how a telescope would
be used. Then we keep the scale around the X and Y-axis symmetrical
to maintain the roundness of the sensor while morphologically
connecting it to ViewRadius.
5. Read the next gene (Historic Marking), replace the default Sensor’s
unique ID with its contents.
As such, two passes will result to a fully expressed genome and an agent ready
==PAGE:22==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
16
to take part in the simulation in order for its ﬁtness to be assessed. After the
agent crawls, hops or tumbles it’s way through the environment for one Epoch,
the Selection process begins.
Process 4: The Actuator Phenotype Decoding Process - First Pass.
1. Instantiate a pre-constructed, default Actuator.
2. Read the ﬁrst gene and replace the default Actuator’s _strength
paremeter with the gene’s value.
3. Read the second gene and replace the default Actuator’s _frequency
paremeter with the gene’s value.
4. Read the next gene (Historic Marking), replace the default Actuator’s
unique ID with its contents.
2.2.2
Selection
Selection is the second step in most Genetic Algorithms. After a population
of genomes has been decoded to agents, their ﬁtness is calculated by the en-
vironment. Then, a subset of the population has to be selected for producing
oﬀspring in a way that would maximize the ﬁtness of the next generation. Ever
since the introduction of Genetic Algorithms 60 years ago, quite a few Selection
algorithms have been proposed. Similarly to Crossover, there exist no such thing
as a universally better method. Some of the most popular Selection algorithms
are:
• Truncation Selection is one of the simplest methods, widely used by
animal and plant breeders worldwide. The idea is sorting the population
based on ﬁtness, then selecting a percentage of the best agents and have
them reproduce to generate the next generation.
• Tournament Selection, in which k samples of n agents are being drawn
from the population and participate in a "tournament" from which only m
of the best agents are allowed to produce oﬀspring. Several tournaments
can take place on parallel, which makes this a thread-friendly option. Fur-
thermore, the tournament size n is shown [Miller and Goldberg, 1995] to
correlate with the selection pressure on the population, as larger tourna-
ments mean a higher probability that stronger individuals will be sampled
in every tournament and therefore weaker genomes cannot hope to be
selected.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
17
• Fitness-Proportionate Selection, also called Roulette Wheel Se-
lection, is a process of sampling candidates for reproduction by giving
them a probability to be sampled equal to pi = fi/ PN
j=1 fj, with fi being
the ﬁtness of agent i, and then drawing N samples for reproduction. This
solution increases the probability of stronger individuals to be selected,
which is desirable, without eliminating the probability of weaker individ-
uals to be selected as well.
The beneﬁt of avoiding the elimination of
weaker individuals is that they could possess traits that stronger members
of the population do not. These traits could, if combined with traits from
stronger individuals, hold the key for the algorithm to converge to a better
solution (morphology in our case).
• Stochastic Universal Sampling, proposed by James Baker [Baker, 1987]
in 1987, expands upon Fitness-Proportionate Selection. The problem of
FPS is that when an individual within a population is extremely successful,
its relatively large ﬁtness could translate to an overwhelming probability
of being sampled, overshadowing less ﬁt members of the population and
removing the beneﬁts of FPS altogether. Stochastic Universal Sampling
addresses this problem by sampling using random, evenly spaced inter-
vals rather than repeated random sampling, as illustrated in Figure 2.6.
As such, SUS was used in this work as the main Selection method, with
Elitism, an optimization to be explained in Subsection 2.4.3, being the
secondary.
Process 5: Decoding Process - Second Pass. This process is common
to all mutable phenotypes.
1. Read the second to last gene, ﬁnd the Body with an ID equal to the
gene’s contents. Assign that body as the host.
2. Read the last gene, place this phenotype at the location of the host’s
vertex speciﬁed by the contents of the gene.
3. If the expression being decoded is a Body, connect its conﬁgurable Joint
with the host. If it is a Sensor or Actuator parent it under that host, with
their Z-axis aligned with the normal of the host’s mesh at that point.
Process 6: The Decision-making Phenotype Decoding Process.
1. Instantiate the pre-constructed, default Decision-making module.
2. Read the ﬁrst and only gene and replace the default module’s
_maximumEndurance parameter with its value.
==PAGE:24==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
18
Figure 2.6: The sampling process of the Stochastic Universal Sampling
Selection algorithm. In this example, Agent 1 will produce three
oﬀspring, Agent 2 two and Agents 3, 4 and 6 one each. Notice
here that Agent 6 was selected for reproduction despite the fact
that it is the least ﬁt individual of the population.
2.2.3
Crossover
Crossover is the recombination of existing genes within a population, in an
attempt to produce ﬁtter oﬀspring. Like Selection, it is a convergence operation,
a genetic force that strives to pull the population towards a local (or hopefully
global) minimum or maximum. In two-parent crossover, genes are recombined
by extracting a percentage of one candidate’s genome, with the rest provided
by the second candidate. That percentage is, essentially, what diﬀerentiates the
various Crossover techniques, with the choice between them usually being quite
problem-dependant.
In this case, a major problem we are facing when trying to Crossover the genome
of our agents is how to eﬃciently compare two uneven, ever changing and
directly encoded genomes. An initial approach was using distance measures
between compatible genotypes. That demanded an O(n2) complexity operation
as well as deﬁning arbitrary distance thresholds which proved error-prone and
troublesome, with occasional failures of that system being quite spectacular. As
an example, imagine an agent that has mutated Sensors on one of its Bodies
and let’s call that Body the agent’s "head". Assume the agent has oﬀspring,
with both inheriting the "head" trait, but one of them mutating one of the Scale
genes to be much smaller. If that change of scale reduced the distance between
these "heads" enough to fail the threshold, they would be deemed unrelated and
a crossover of the two agents could produce an oﬀspring with two heads.
A more elegant solution to this problem was provided by Stanley and Mi-
ikkulainen [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002], as they faced the exact same issue
when attempting to crossover the genomes of their neural networks: Historic
Markings. They are a unique identiﬁer that all genotypes possess, assigned to
them when they are ﬁrst mutated into existence. That unique identiﬁer persists
throughout the generations, over mutations and crossovers. The beneﬁt of such
==PAGE:25==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
19
an identiﬁer, as Stanley and Miikkulainen demonstrated, is that it enables us
to track individual components throughout the generations, over any mutation
and crossover-induced changes, while reducing cross-genotype comparisons to
an O(1) computational complexity operation. Furthermore, this technique triv-
ializes notoriously diﬃcult tasks, such as estimating Speciation distances, with
more on Speciation in Subsection 2.4.1. Historic Markings were implemented in
our system as a global integer that, every time a new genotype mutates into exis-
tence, assigns itself as that genotypes marking and increments by one. As such,
each new generative mutation is uniquely identiﬁed and, furthermore, all traits
within a population can be chronologically ordered in a very straightforward
manner.
While Historic Markings are great at solving our genome compatibility woes, a
suitable crossover operator that can facilitate these markings has to be discov-
ered. Uniform Crossover was found to fulﬁll just that criteria due to the fact that
it allows gene-level granularity when comparing genomes, as displayed in Figure
2.7. In other words, N-point Crossovers, also displayed, would require us to ﬁrst
discover a suitable N and then design and implement a dedicated algorithm to
enable it to reliably select and compare our historically marked genotypes. Since
there are no clear documented beneﬁts of N-point over Uniform Crossovers, the
later was selected for being more practical.
When using unbiased Uniform Crossover, each parent has a 50% chance of
passing each of their genes to their oﬀspring. Alternatively, that selection prob-
ability could be biased to beneﬁt one of the two parents, with the ﬁtter parent
passing-on more of their genes. While biased crossover sounds good in theory,
a lot of bias is already introduced to the Genetic Algorithm during the Selec-
tion process, where the ﬁttest are selected to reproduce. As such, adding more
during crossover could lead to an overly-biased algorithm that could stagnate
whenever a mildly successful genome is discovered. As an example, envision a
state where a single agent, due to merit or happenstance, is deemed much ﬁtter
than the population average. Adding reproductive bias during both Selection
and Crossover could mean that its genome would pass on to the next generation
with an overwhelmingly high probability, erasing a plethora of potentially useful
genes found in the rest of the population. That could limit the Genetic Algo-
rithm on the local maximum of that successful agent and prevent it to further
explore potentially better solutions.
2.2.4
Mutation
Mutation is a divergence operation, intended to occasionally move the Ge-
netic Algorithm out of a local maximum, allowing it to potentially do better.
==PAGE:26==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
20
Figure 2.7: From the top: Single-point, Two-point and Uniform Crossover.
Image Source: Tutorialspoint.
Of note, here, is that Crossover, unlike Mutation, is not mandatory for the
convergence of a Genetic Algorithm. This is reﬂected by the fact that in the
very study that introduced Genetic Algorithms by John Holland [Holland, 1992],
only Selection and Mutation were used, with Crossover to be added later as an
optimization step.
While Selection and Crossover occur frequently in the population, with Mu-
tation that should typically not be the case. This is due to the fact that the
end goal of the algorithm is to converge to a maximum/minimum and an over-
applied divergence operator could prevent that from occurring. The empirical
consensus of the community on the rate of mutation is in the ballpark of 1%.
In this work, the Mutation step is taken after the Crossover step. The typical
1% mutation rate is used in most cases, including in any results presented,
unless otherwise speciﬁed. Two types of mutations are deﬁned: Generative
and Transformative. During the mutation process, each oﬀspring has a chance
to develop a novel genotype. A Marker Gene is added on the genome and the
rest of the genes are initialized with random values within a range.
These
values are typically close to the minimum accepted threshold for each gene.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 The Genetic Algorithm
21
Process 7: The Crossover process.
1. Sort the parent-genomes, by their Historic Marking, in ascending order.
2. Pick a parent at random. The oﬀspring becomes a copy of that parent.
3. Loop through the second parent’s genome:
• If the i-th gene’s Historic Markings in both parents are equal,
replace the oﬀspring’s gene with 50% probability.
• If the Historic Markings are not equal, add the gene of the parent.
4. Remove non-viable conﬁgurations: If two or more genotypes share
HostID and HostVertex genes it would mean that they are too close to
each-other in space and could produce artifacts if allowed to enter the
physics simulation. As such, we randomly prune all these phenotypes but
one. This is a softer approach when compared to the work of Karl Sims,
who settled on removing the entire agent from the population.
When, for example, a Sensor marker gene mutates into existence, all sensor
genes are also generated with small, default values. In this case, they could
have unit ViewDistance and unit ViewRadius. This process is called a
Generative mutation and any of the possible phenotypes can be generated bar
the Decision-making module. Note here that since novel phenotypes start-oﬀ
with random but small parameters, their morphology will also reﬂect that. A
new Body that extends the morphology of the agent will initially appear small.
If nevertheless beneﬁcial to the agent, more oﬀspring will inherit it and mutate
it to be, potently, larger.
This is heavily inspired by Nature, where novel,
beneﬁcial traits grow slowly within the population over the generations while
older, detrimental traits slowly fade away.
After Generative mutations are performed, the agent has a chance to further
subject themselves to one or more Transformative mutations.
Each exist-
ing gene can increment or decrement their value by a small amount, with a
probability equal to the mutation rate. The exact amount depends on the phe-
notype. Body phenotypes, for example, can only change the Scale genes by no
more than 30% of their existing value, to avoid explosive growth and maintain a
more naturally-looking adaptation. All these limits are, of course, empirical and
parametrized, meant to be adapted to the experiment we’re trying to perform.
Finally, the genome proceeds to be decoded to a phenotype and have its ﬁtness
measured within the environment. The environment, along with the rest of the
features that are used in-between the Population Initialization and Selection
steps of a Genetic Algorithm, are called a simulation and will be discussed in
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Simulation
22
the next section.
2.3
Simulation
The term simulation is used to refer to the digital environment a population
of genomes is subjected to after being decoded into agents, in order to measure
their ﬁtness. The ideal scenario would be to, almost literally, throw a population
of agents into an environment and observe them adapt to it generation after
generation. As an example, envision an environment that contains a hazard,
such as high levels of heat. Such an environment should be able to take into
account the brightness of the color of each agent (denoted by the four color
genes within each Body genotype) when calculating their ﬁtness. After allowing
a number of generations to pass, with the agents turning darker generation after
generation, it should be possible to cast them into another environment, say
one where food is scarce. Now the ﬁtness function should change alongside the
environment, the color should no longer be as important to the ﬁtness function
and the population should start adapting to the new status quo. To achieve that,
instead of having ﬁtness being inherent to the agents, it was made a part of the
environment. Each environment is designed to contain a function that takes as
input any agent within it and outputs its current ﬁtness level, as measured by
that environment’s standards. This design allows the decoupling of agents and
environments, enabling us to create self-contained environments and challenges.
2.3.1
The Environment
One of the implicit goals of this work is generating agents that can adapt
to various environments. As such, multiple environments were created to
test the system, as showcased in Figure 2.8.
From scorching-hot deserts to
freezing-cold forests, all of them had survival through energy acquisition at
their core.
Edibles would be spawned at strategic or random places within
each environment. Whenever an agent would collide with an edible, they would
gain energy, adjust their ﬁtness and disable that edible for a certain period
of time. The exact parameters of the most important of these environments
are presented in the Appendix A.1. The predominant way of generating them
was using Unity’s Terrain Sculpting system to design speciﬁc challenges for the
agents by hand.
As heavily implied so far, this work utilizes Unity’s physics engine, which has
grown to be quite powerful in recent years. Since physics was utilized as one of
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Simulation
23
Figure 2.8: A sample of environments used in this work. The left, referred to
as "Uphill" [Appendix A.1] and was utilized to experiment with
agent morphology on diﬃcult, uneven terrain. Edibles in this en-
vironment were typically placed on higher altitudes while agents
spawned within the pits. The environment on the right, referred to
as "Basic - Hot" [Appendix A.1] has a temperature setting set to
the maximum. The color of the light in the environment depends
on heat, with hot environments having a distinctive red tint and
cold environments a blue one. The tint becomes more prominent
as the heat becomes more extreme.
the driving forces of evolution in this work, massive changes to the environment
and the populations within it could be achieved by simply tuning some physical
parameters. Reducing gravity, adding a ’bounciness’ factor to the ground and
increasing friction are just three of a multitude of simple to adjust factors within
an environment that could have a dramatic eﬀect on the resulting morphology of
the agents. Furthermore, eﬀects as detailed as agent surface reduction to avoid
extensive friction cannot realistically be included in a system with a higher level
of agent abstraction. Finally, keeping the abstraction level of the agents low
means that they can operate in a wider range of environments. As a matter
of fact, the only requirement for a new environment to be generated that its
Terrain has colliders, the edible objects within are denoted as such and have
colliders, and the entity that handles the Genetic Algorithm to be added to the
scene.
Due to the ﬂexibility of this system, one could rapidly prototype and test new
setups. Furthermore, any ready-made environment can easily be adapted to
accommodate this system and have agents adapt within it in a matter of minutes.
Last but not least, the fact that the ﬁtness function is part of the environment
means that features can be added or removed from each environment at will,
without aﬀecting other environments. For example, envision adding a "wind"
feature in an environment that could be mitigated by agents having an increased
mass. That feature, along with the corresponding ﬁtness function that takes it
into account, would both be part of this environment and would not necessarily
aﬀect any other experiment performed so far.
==PAGE:30==
2.3 Simulation
24
Figure 2.9: Two agents(bottom) that share a common ancestor (top), but
adapted in an extremely hot and cold environment, respectively.
To showcase this system, a feature called the "Sun" was created. Normally,
environments allow a deviation in temperature of -1 to 1.
Adding a Sun to
the environment further penalizes ﬁtness depending on the Brightness of the
agents by expanding the temperature deviation to range from -10 to +10, and
therefore potentially increases the importance of color by up to tenfold. This
leads to rapid, amusing color adaptations in agents and was created mostly as
a tool for testing the Genetic Algorithm and optimizations on it.
2.3.1.1
Time Management
Another important feature of each simulation is time management. The digi-
tal world of the agents and our world initially operate synchronously, with each
real second roughly corresponding to one simulated second. Digital environ-
ments, though, give us the beneﬁt of being able to adjust the ﬂow of time. The
internal clock of the simulation can be made to tick faster or slower, at whim,
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Simulation
25
which is one of the major beneﬁts of simulating life instead of growing it in
the lab, as is the case with the ongoing E. coli Long-term Bacterial Evolution
Experiment of Richard Lenski [Lenski, 2010]. In this work, time can operate at
any scale relative to the real world. Operating at twice the normal speed should
double the computational overhead, as the same amount of data has to be pro-
cessed twice as fast. In practice, though, the overhead is more than doubled as
not all internal features of Unity scale at the same rate with time, especially
the physics engine. Furthermore, the problem with framerate loss in a simu-
lation that includes physics is that it could aﬀect the results themselves. With
a low framerate, for example, certain collisions in the system would not register.
And since a Genetic Algorithm cannot distinguish abnormal from normal be-
havior, an interesting problem emerged right after the accelerating time feature
was implemented in our system. Agents would adapt to take advantage of per-
formance issues by, for example, adapting tiny (and therefore lightweight) but
complicated morphologies and powerful Actuators. The increased complexity
would cause the simulation to drop to under 10 frames per second and, given
how fast the agents were moving due to the Actuators and their reduced mass,
they were able to completely ignore collisions with obstacles such as trees, walls
and each-other. Not only that, but there was an energy leak in the system since
multiple agents could consume and beneﬁt from the same edible before it would
be designated as "eaten" and become disabled in the next frame.
Clearly, a tool was needed to make sure that performance never dropped below
a certain threshold while also allowing time in the simulation to pass as fast as
possible. After all, many of the experiments presented in this document could
take hours or days to complete, even with the simulation running at 10 times
the normal speed, especially since the same experiment was performed multiple
times in order to generate robust results. To fulﬁll these needs, the Time Man-
ager was implemented, a system that dynamically modiﬁes the time scale of the
simulation, based on the current framerate and a desired framerate, in order to
reduce the diﬀerence between them as much as possible. The process is simple:
Reduce the timescale of the system by 0.1 whenever the current framerate is
under the speciﬁed one minus a threshold ts. If the current framerate is over
the desired one plus the same threshold, increase the timescale by the same
amount instead. The threshold is applied around the desired framerate to
discourage the constant modiﬁcation of the time scale, as it can have a negative
eﬀect on the physics simulation, and it is empirically set to ts = frd/10, where
frd is the desired framerate.
==PAGE:32==
2.4 Algorithmic Optimization
26
2.3.1.2
Epochs
Epochs and Epoch Duration are two quite important parameters of the sim-
ulation. An Epoch refers to the time period between one generation of
agents is decoded into existence until their ﬁtness is evaluated. Epoch Du-
ration simply refers to the maximum allowed duration of each Epoch. If the
maximum duration of the epoch is reached, all agents are disabled and the later
phase of the Selection process is initiated. Furthermore, if all agents are dis-
abled (due to energy loss, for example), the epoch ends immediately and the next
generation of agents is unleashed in the environment. In the next section, the
methods that were used to optimize the basic, aforementioned implementation
of the system will be discussed.
2.4
Algorithmic Optimization
In previous sections, the basic blocks that compose this work were described.
Genomes were deﬁned, which can be decoded to agents. These agents survive
in the environment they ﬁnd themselves in to the best of their morphologi-
cal ability. That performance is translated by the environment’s Fitness
function to a ﬁtness score. Selection will then choose the ﬁttest individuals
and have them produce oﬀspring through Crossover and Mutation. Then
genomes are decoded back into the environment to produce the next generation
of agents, which should be better than its ancestors.
The question now is: Could techniques from other ﬁelds of Computational In-
telligence be used to optimize this process? Four techniques are going to be
explored: Speciation and Dimensionality Minimization, inspired from the
initial paper of NEAT [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002], Curriculum Learn-
ing, a technique often used in Reinforcement Learning to teach agents advanced
behaviors and Elitism, an improvement to the Selection process that, together
with Dimensionality Minimization, could reduce unnecessary complexity in our
populations.
2.4.1
Speciation
A well-known issue with Genetic Algorithms is that Crossover has a high rate
of failure. In other words, it often produces oﬀspring that are worse-oﬀthan
either of their parents.
This is usually the case when two very ﬁt solutions
to a problem might be exploring a very diﬀerent, distant niche of the solution
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Algorithmic Optimization
27
space. If that is the case, a crossover of these individually ﬁt solutions might
have very disappointing, unﬁt results. As an example, consider an attempt to
breed the fastest animal on earth. A speed-based ﬁtness function is speciﬁed and
during Selection two of the fastest animals on earth, the cheetah and the shark,
are randomly selected as great potential candidates for passing on their genes.
Both of these animals are amongst the speediest on earth, but a cheetah with
ﬂippers would be hilariously incompetent at moving fast in either of the parents’
habitats. This is due to the cheetah and the shark having found distant solutions
to the same problem of moving fast. To overcome this problem, Speciation
could be introduced as a way to discourage crossover between very dissimilar
candidates.
The very ﬁrst step towards Speciation is deﬁning a way to measure distance be-
tween genomes. As Stanley and Miikkulainen [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002]
pointed out, Historic Markings are a great, performant and very natural way of
deﬁning that distance, as two genotypes that share a common origin will have
the same marking. Inspired by their work, we deﬁne the distance d between two
genomes as the number of diﬀerent Historic Markings within their genome. As
such, if there exist two identical agents and one of them mutates a new Sensor,
the diﬀerence between their genomes will be 1. If the other agent mutates a
new Sensor as well, the diﬀerence will be 2, as novel mutations receive diﬀerent
Historic Markings. In this case, the markings assigned to these sensors would
be m+1 and m+2, where m is the last marking assigned before the ﬁrst Sensor
was mutated.
Now that a distance between two genomes has been deﬁned, genomes need to
be assigned to species. During the Population Initialization step, a random
agent a0 is sampled from the population, the ﬁrst species is generated and a0
in assigned to it and set as its representative.
Next, a second agent, a1,
is sampled and the distance to the representative of the ﬁrst species, da01, is
computed. If that distance is under a (problem-dependant) threshold t, a1 is
compared to the next available species. If there exist no more species, a new
species is created, a1 is assigned to it and set as its representative. This process
is repeated until all agents have been assigned to a species.
Finally, the problem of a species becoming too prevalent and taking over the
population has to be addressed, as such an event could diminish or eliminate the
eﬀects of Speciation. Explicit ﬁtness sharing [Deb and Goldberg, 1989] was
used to address that problem, where each agent receives an adjusted ﬁtness score
according to the size of its species, as shown in Figure 2.10. During Selection,
each species is assigned a total number of oﬀspring that it can produce, which
is proportional to the sum of the ﬁtness of the agents within them. Stochastic
Universal Sampling is, again, used to assign the number of oﬀspring, but
now at a species-level. Then, SUS is used again, within each species this time,
==PAGE:34==
2.4 Algorithmic Optimization
28
to determine the ﬁnal candidates, which then reproduce. Note here that only
candidates from the same species are allowed to interbreed.
An interesting eﬀect of speciation is that it protects innovation. A new, weaker
mutation that is beneﬁcial to the population may emerge only for it to disappear
due to older, more established traits overshadowing it. Speciation ensures that
mutation will have more time to "prove itself", so to say, by ensuring only
agents that belong to the same species will be directly compared to each-other.
As such, if an agent within a species mutates a new trait and is slightly better-oﬀ
that its peers due to that trait, the trait has a high chance of surviving to the
next generation. If that agent was compared to all agents within the population
instead, chances are that older traits that have further adapted will be providing
more beneﬁt and so the chances of the new trait persevering are lower. This can
be further conﬁrmed in our experimental results presented in Subsection 3.2.2.
fi′ =
fi
Pn
j=1 sh(δ(i, j))
Figure 2.10: The
sharing
function
sh
[Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002]
[Spears, 2007], in a speciated population, is set to 1 when agent
j belongs to the same species as i, else it is 0.
2.4.2
Dimensionality Minimization
Dimensionality Minimization(DM) [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002] is the
simple notion of starting each simulation with a genome simpler than what is
required for the task at hand, or ideally, the absolute minimal genome possible
for evolution to apply. The term also encapsulates further ensuring that new
mutations are beneﬁcial through ﬁtness evaluations. Whenever these mandates
hold, it should be the case that most mutations are justiﬁed and greedy searches
of the solution space are avoided. DM is achieved in two ways: First of all, when
potential parents are selected for reproduction, it is ensured that whenever two
or more agents have similar ﬁtness scores (distance under a threshold tdm), the
simpler agent is always selected. This is especially useful at the start of the
simulation, where ﬁtness could stay at 0 for a number of generations until the
bare-minimum phenotypes for the task-at-hand have mutated. Even later in
the simulation, tdm can be utilized to maintain the eﬀects of DM. Empirically,
tdm could be set to one-sixth of a standard deviation of the current generation’s
ﬁtness. The second way DM is achieved is by ensuring that generation 0 consists
of either the simplest agent possible (a single Body), or that the provided agent
contains morphology that is not detrimental to the ﬁtness of the population and
is of lower complexity than the estimated complexity of the adapted population.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Algorithmic Optimization
29
The measure of complexity used in this work is simply the sum of phenotypes
in the genome of each agent.
2.4.3
Elitism
Elitism is a technique used to improve the performance of Genetic Algo-
rithms by preserving some of the very best candidates of the current generation
to the next. The main diﬀerence from Truncation is that Elitism requires
that these agents be cloned to the next generation, rather than going through
Crossover and Mutation. As such, Elitism is a supportive technique that can-
not, typically, be utilized by itself. Beneﬁts of this method include ensuring
that the Genetic Algorithm does not waste time trying to re-discover previous
solutions and that, when used alongside the NEAT-proposed idea of Dimension-
ality Minimization [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002], it discourages unnecessary
complexity in the population. The fact that the agents always start with a rel-
atively simple form means that any agent kept from a previous generation has
a very high chance to be simpler than agents that went through Mutation and
Crossover. If the cloned agent matches or exceeds the current generation in
ﬁtness, it could be selected for reproduction with priority and could also be
cloned into the next generation by the Elitism algorithm again. As such, the
simpler genome of this agent will grow more and more predominant in the pop-
ulation, enforcing its simplicity, until eventually surpassed through meaningful
mutations. More information on the eﬀects of Elitism on agent complexity and
ﬁtness can be seen in Results, Subsection 3.2.1.
2.4.4
Curriculum Learning
Consider how humans learn. In order to learn how to play chess, one ﬁrst needs
to understand how the pieces move. A chess teacher will sit with a new stu-
dent and explain how each piece moves, presenting them with problems and
board-states that involve each piece individually. Only when the student has
demonstrated they mastery over the basics will the teacher start presenting them
with more advanced problems. The proposition that one could learn chess from
scratch just by playing against the world champion over and over would seem
absurd to most people.
Yet, this is exactly what is frequently expected out
of modern intelligent systems, including when training Reinforcement Learn-
ing policies, Genetic Algorithm populations etc.
In recent years, Curricu-
lum Learning has emerged as a way of applying this gradual-type of learning
as an optimization step to ML and AI algorithms. Gomez and Miikkulainen
coined the term Incremental Evolution [Gomez and Miikkulainen, 1996] to re-
==PAGE:36==
2.4 Algorithmic Optimization
30
fer to a process of trying to use Genetic Algorithms to evolve complex agent
behaviors by starting with simpliﬁed versions of those behaviors/goals, which
they dubbed "evaluation tasks".
Bengio, Louradour, Collobert and Weston
[Bengio et al., 2009] showed that applying Curriculum Learning may improve
the speed of converging to a solution, in addition to the quality of the local
maxima/minima which the model converges towards, especially in the case of
non-convex optimization problems. Since most problems in Artiﬁcial Life are
non-convex, this technique is quite promising in this context. In this work, a
Curriculum Learning algorithm was implemented and applied within the simu-
lation. It is most eﬀective when the task is demanding, which can be deﬁned
as a situation where the diﬀerence between the starting genome of the popu-
lation and an estimated well adapted genome is large. Practically speaking,
when the average ﬁtness of the population is close to zero during the ﬁrst N
generations, that is an indication that Curriculum Learning should be utilized.
N is a problem-speciﬁc variable, but it is recommended to set it to a tenth of
the maximum number of epochs the system will be allowed to run as a good
starting point.
For Curriculum Learning to be implemented, the environments it will be
used on have to be parameterised. Envision an environment where food ex-
ists only high up on trees. The height at which food may emerge at could be
a great parameter to describe our problem with, as it can be easily modiﬁed to
adjust the diﬃculty of the problem. When the parameters have been speciﬁed,
selecting the correct curriculum at each step could be as simple as incrementing
the current index on a (sorted by diﬃculty) collection of environmental param-
eters when k consecutive generations demonstrated an absolute average ﬁtness
gradient under a threshold t, which typically means that the population has
reached a performance plateau. An alternative to ﬁtness gradients would be
providing ﬁxed-time checkpoints for curriculumns to complete. When the sim-
ulation reaches a checkpoint, the next curriculum will be initiated. After the
curriculum is decided upon, the environment updates with the value speciﬁed
within that curriculum. In the aforementioned example, food would start on the
ground and slowly increase in height, appearing perhaps on bushes and short
trees before, ﬁnally, the last curriculum elevates them to the maximum, desir-
able height. A simple version of the algorithm can be found in the Appendix
[11]. More on the speciﬁcs of the implemented curriculumns and their eﬀect on
evolution are presented in Subsection 3.2.4.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Results
In this Chapter, three main questions will be answered: Has Artiﬁcial Life
been successfully simulated? Has Speciation, Dimensionality Minimiza-
tion, Curriculum Learning and Elitism been successfully applied? Is their
eﬀect positive and statistically signiﬁcant? Can the simulation be technically
optimized and could that have an eﬀect on the quality of the genetic algorithm
itself?
3.1
The Fitness Function
The ﬁtness function used the following experiments is deﬁned in Function 2,
where Ei is the total energy gained by an agent i and Li the total energy lost
by said agent. Zero energy consumption would practically mean that the agent
had no expressed Actuators or Sensors, which justiﬁes the zero ﬁtness score
assigned. There are three reasons behind this deﬁnition of ﬁtness: First of all,
it rewards the agents for gaining energy, in-line with how our environments
are built. Secondly, it indirectly punishes complexity as expressed Actuators
and Sensors always expend energy, as demonstrated in Section 2.1. Finally, it
is a meaningful metric in all stages of evolution. A unit ﬁtness means that the
agent received exactly as much energy as it spent and therefore the agent has
obtained a morphological toolkit that could allow it to perpetually survive in
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Data
32
this environment. The sub-unit values could be used in the early stages of a
simulation as a completion rate towards minimum viable adaptation. Finally,
in the later stages of evolution, the ﬁtness score would be an intuitive metric
that explains "how much better an agent’s morphological solution is to their
environment than the minimum viable for that environment".
During experimentation, three ﬁtness-related metrics were obtained: Highest,
Lowest and Average Fitness. These metrics were sampled at the end of each
epoch (generation), right before Selection would take place. Lowest ﬁtness
was not deemed as meaningful as the other two, since it was usually zero due
to the fact that, no matter the morphological success of the average population,
there will almost always be an unlucky agent that completely fails to produce
results.
Average Fitness was calculated as Pn
i=1 f(i)/n, where f(i) is the
ﬁtness function for agent i and n is the total number of agents in the population
that did not fail. Failure is undeﬁned behavior, such as glitches in the physics
system causing collisions to fail and agents to enter unintended states (such as
exiting the deﬁned environment, or being having parts of them permanently
stuck inside geometry). How such states were detected is outside the scope of
this work, but it revolves around setting dynamic world boundaries, maximum
thresholds on the frequency of acceptable collisions between the same physical
entities and continuously overlapping colliders. For reference, the failure rate is
∼1%.
Function 2: The Fitness function.
fi =



Ei
Li
,
for Li > 0
0,
for Li ≤0



3.2
Data
Data was collected during the development circle of this project, usually right
after a new concept was implemented. Due to that fact, while all direct compar-
isons within each subsection below were performed with all implicit parameters
being identical, the same is not guaranteed for results across these diﬀerent
subsections. These experiments were performed in diﬀerent points in time and
certain optimizations performed could have changed the absolute values ob-
served. Despite the above, a lot of attention was put in keeping the tunable
variables exactly the same. Furthermore, each result presented in this section
is the average of at least 10 identical experiments that were repeated as
demonstrated in Process 8. The statistical signiﬁcance of the experiments are
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Data
33
rounded to 4 decimal places and they are included in the visualizations, along
with the total number of experiments performed. Note that the ’Average Agent
Complexity’ metric showcased below is calculated as the average number of
phenotypes expressed by the population.
Process 8: The Experimentation process.
1. Repeat each experiment N times.
2. Test for statistical signiﬁcance with a p-value threshold of 5%, while
accounting for the familiwise error rate (FWER) through the
Holm–Bonferroni procedure [Holm, 1979].
3. If not statistically signiﬁcant, repeat the process until a maximum
number of experiments is reached, usually set to 10N.
4. The experiments presented below were performed with N = 10.
3.2.1
The Eﬀect of Elitism
A typical eﬀect of Elitism in the early epochs of a simulation is discouraging
greedy, ineﬀective mutations, as discussed in Subsection 2.4.3. This eﬀect can
be observed in Figure 3.1, as Elitism slightly boosts early performance by dis-
couraging mutations that do not provide an immediate beneﬁt. It then causes a
small drop in performance, with the most likely reason being that it caused the
algorithm to be more conservative in its search of the solution space. As such,
the baseline system was able to ﬁnd better solutions in the mid-term. But the
true beneﬁt of this careful search of the solution space is the selection of fewer,
more robust features. That process pays-oﬀin the later stages of evolution,
with agents aﬀected by Elitism being more morphologically eﬃcient than
the baseline. In a sense, slow and steady does beat fast and bold in this case.
Note here that for Elitism to have this minimization eﬀect on the population,
Dimensionality Minimization has to be in eﬀect as discussed in Subsection 2.4.3.
From these results, it can be established that the combination of Elitism and
Dimensionality Minimization acts, indeed, as a soft-limit to agent com-
plexity. Karl Sims’ approach [Sims, 1994] was to simply set an upper com-
plexity threshold to his system and discard agents that surpassed it. We believe
that a softer approach such as the one proposed is better for reining-in complex-
ity, although in practise these approaches are not mutually exclusive. On the
contrary, they quite complementary as hardware has limitations and as such,
calculating the limits of the hardware that runs our experiments and translating
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Data
34
Figure 3.1: The eﬀects of Elitism on the population. Dimensionality Mini-
mization is in eﬀect during the experiment. Lower average com-
plexity is achieved while average ﬁtness is clearly increased on the
later stages of evolution. This test was performed in the "Uphill
Environment". More information about this environment in the
Appendix [A.3].
those limits to an upper threshold of complexity is advised.
3.2.2
The Eﬀects of Speciation
Speciation has the role of safeguarding genetic innovation within a popula-
tion, while minimizing the probability for failed crossovers between the innova-
tors. This is conﬁrmed to be the case in Figure 3.2, as there is a statistically
signiﬁcant change in the genetic complexity of the population when speciation
is enabled. This eﬀect is more prevalent when Dimensionality Minimization
is applied, as simple agents that often cannot fulﬁll even basic functionality (like
moving) can get stuck in the global minimum for many generations if they fail
to innovate. In a way, Speciation encourages the opposite of Elitism, exploring
more of the solution space, which in turn leads to more detrimental mutations
to emerge early on. But in later stages of evolution, safeguarding innovation and
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Data
35
discouraging incompatible crossovers often leads to better solutions. As such,
combining the eﬀects of Elitism and Speciation could combine the strengths
of the two while limiting their individual weaknesses. This seems to be the case,
at least in the context of this work, as demonstrated in Figure 3.3. As expected,
Speciation and Elitism individually beneﬁt the simulation in almost oppo-
site ways. Their combination, though, seems to result in retaining the early
advantage of Elitism’s conservative trait selection while also taking advantage
of Speciation’s medium- and long-term performance gains due to protecting in-
novation. An example of how this would work in practise is considering how
Elitism would discourage selecting "greedy innovators", more complex than av-
erage genomes with slightly negative or equal performance to the average. Spe-
ciation, on the other hand, would encourage preserving "wise innovators", or
more complex than average genomes with beneﬁcial mutations. Thus, the
combined result is essentially double-dipping in the performance pools of both
these algorithms.
Figure 3.2: The eﬀects of Speciation on the population. Dimensionality Min-
imization is in eﬀect during the experiment. The tests were per-
formed in the "Basic Environment". More information about this
environment in the Appendix [A.1]
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Data
36
Figure 3.3: Exploring the eﬀects of Speciation and Elitism on genetic inno-
vation and population ﬁtness. Note that these results obtained
completely separate experiments than the individual Speciation
and Elitism assessments above and within diﬀerent environments.
Despite that, the similarities are evident. The test was performed
in the "Elevated Food Environment". Relevant information on the
environment, the p-values and the number of tests can be found
in the Appendix [A.1, A.3, A.4].
3.2.3
The Eﬀect of Population Size
The eﬀect of population size in Genetic Algorithms is not straightforward and
seems to be quite problem speciﬁc [an Zhang et al., 2008] [Chen et al., 2012].
A recommendation when training Machine Learning algorithms is having the
samples of the training dataset (population size in this case) be larger than the
dimensionality of the problem. In fact, for most problems it should be much
larger. As such, most problems within Artiﬁcial Life can be very sensitive to
changes in the size of the population, since their dimensionality tends to be quite
large. As visualized in Figure 3.4, this seems to be the case in our experiments
as well, with population having a clear eﬀect on both the speed at which the
population adapts and the quality of the adaptation. The clear trend we see here
is that an increased population leads to faster adaptation and better solutions in
the short- and mid-term. In the long-term, it seems that the beneﬁts even-out,
but only above a certain "critical mass" of population size. Both maximum
and average ﬁtness seem to be aﬀected. No agent seems to be able to reach
minimum viable adaptation in smaller populations, which is quite signiﬁcant.
As such, increasing the performance of the simulation in order to accommodate
more agents should be viewed as optimizing the genetic algorithm itself, up to
a point. Diminishing returns are, of course, expected but the system could not
be tested for them given the current hardware limitations. These results were
exactly what motivated us to go to great lengths in order to optimize the system,
as discussed in Section 3.3.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Data
37
Figure 3.4: The eﬀects of Population Size on evolution. The "Basic" envi-
ronment was used. Relevant information on the environment, the
p-values and the number of tests can be found in the Appendix
[A.1, A.1, A.2].
3.2.4
The Eﬀect of Curriculum Learning
The ﬁnal optimization to be evaluated is Curriculum Learning. Curriculum
Learning was the last optimization to be implemented to address the important
issue of the population struggling or, in some cases, being unable to adapt to
tough environments when Dimensionality Minimization was employed by having
starting agents be morphologically simple. As such, we will compare its eﬀect
when all other optimizations are enabled. The alternative would not make for an
interesting graph as the baseline Genetic Algorithm dramatically failed in many
cases to achieve any level of adaptation. The parameter we will be using to in-
crement the diﬃculty of the environment with and generate the curriculums will
be the height at which the food spawns within it, h. The goal is to have agents
adapt to an environment where food only exists on trees, approximately three
times as high as the highest point the agents can reach on generation 0. The
Base approach is to create this environment and allow them to stumble upon
a useful mutation using every optimization available to us. The Curriculum
Learning approach is to generate a number of curriculums that slowly increase
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Data
38
the diﬃculty of the level, until the goal of 3 units high is reached in the ﬁnal
curriculum. In this case, 5 time-constraint curriculums were generated, with the
ﬁrst lasting 5 epochs and the rest lasting approximately three time as much as
the previous one. The last curriculum, which contained the target-height, lasts
until the end of the simulation. In Figure 3.5, the diﬀerent moments at which
curriculums were applied and how they aﬀected ﬁtness can be observed. Note
that only the later parts of the graph are directly comparable, since only those
parts have the same h parameter. The result is clearly agents that are able to
converge to a better solution. Even if a breaking point exists (such as Epoch 45
in Figure 3.5) that the population is not genetically ready for, it can recover and
adapt much faster than the baseline. This is probably due to the fact that their
genome is in a much better area of the solution space. Of important note is
the fact that when using Curriculum Learning, our populations consistently
reached the most important milestone, a unit average population ﬁtness,
which indicates that the population has successfully adapted to this tough en-
vironment and could inhibit it in its current form indeﬁnitely. That is clearly
not the case with the baseline populations. As such, Curriculum learning seems
to have an important eﬀect in the convergence of our Genetic Algorithm.
Figure 3.5: The eﬀects of Curriculum Learning on evolution. The "Elevated
Food Environment - Hard" environment was used. The directly
comparable parts of the graph are visualized in solid lines. Rele-
vant information on the environment can be found in the Appendix
[A.1].
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Data
39
Figure 3.6: Adapting to stressful environments. Here our populations manage
to repeatedly and almost perfectly adapt to their extreme environ-
ment. The environment used was the "Basic - Cold" and "Basic
- Hot", modiﬁcations of the Basic (Appendix [A.1]) environment
with temperatures of -10 and +10 respectively.
3.2.5
Morphological Adaptation
Morphological adaptation in this work is tightly connected to movement,
making a static presentation of these adaptations quite challenging. To address
that, color adaptation was implemented as an easy to understand, replicate
and present way of showcasing the morphological adaptation of our populations
to their environment over several generations. In Figure 3.6, the adaptation
of several populations of agents to both an extremely hot and extremely cold
environment can be observed, which happened within 35 generations, on aver-
age. A morphological example sampled from these tests is presented in Figure
2.9. Furthermore, Figures 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9 showcase morphological adaptations
sampled from the presented experiments in the previous sections, namely the
Curriculum Learning and the Speciation-Elitism experiments. Figure
3.10 showcases the process of evolution through snapshots taken every 10 gen-
erations. Finally, the reader is encouraged to watch the associated video accom-
panying this document, as fully appreciating the morphological results of this
work without seeing them move would be quite hard.
==PAGE:46==
3.2 Data
40
Figure 3.7: Morphological adaptation example: The comparative ability of the
starting and the adapted agents to reach food.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Data
41
(a) A closer look at the starting and adapted agent presented in Figure 3.7.
(b) Representatives of two species that co-evolved in the same environment, and from
the same ancestor, as the above agents.
Figure 3.8: Morphological adaptation example.
The movement of the co-
evolved species is showcased in Figure 3.9.
==PAGE:48==
3.2 Data
42
(a) Crawling around in the environment, the agent tries to detect food with its sensors.
(b) The agent uses Actuators to propel to propel itself.
(c) When the agent successfully acquires food, energy is
added to her energy pool. The environment increases
her ﬁtness value and, thus, her chances for reproduction
at the end of the epoch. Note that agents are not pun-
ished or damaged by falling from large heights in our
system.
Figure 3.9: An example of how the co-evolved species in Figure 3.8 moves.
Two sets of actuators were adapted. While the "crawling" Actua-
tors have a high Frequency-low Strength phenotype, secondary
Actuators were developed that provided low Frequency - high
Strength movement and allowed the agent to reach elevated food,
while limiting unnecessary energy expenditure.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Technical Speciﬁcations
43
Figure 3.10: The results of our showcased snake agent adapting for 40 gen-
erations in the "Elevated Food" environment.
The maximum
height h was set to 2 for this experiment and no heat-related
environmental stress was applied.
3.3
Technical Speciﬁcations
In this section, the technical aspect of the project will be brieﬂy touched
upon. The environment, agent design, code-base and most of the assets
were designed and implemented, grounds-up, for the purposes of this project
using Unity and Blender. Trees and apples were externally imported, with a
link to the source in referenced in [fau, ]. Python and the Anaconda distribution
were used to automatically generate plots and data-driven insights in order to
monitor the experiments. All-in-all, the core project required just below 7000
lines of code to be realised. Every algorithm and idea in the project had to be
read, understood and implemented in either C-sharp or Python in the context
of this implementation, as work within Artiﬁcial Life is sparsely made public,
and even if it is [Cheney et al., 2014], the code is too problem-speciﬁc to be of
any help.
==PAGE:50==
3.4 Discussion
44
A very important technical achievement reached was in terms of performance
optimization. By utilizing data-driven programming, the performance of
the simulation was increased ﬁve-fold, from 20-40 concurrent agents simulated
to 100-200.
Data-driven programming is a programming paradigm that re-
volves around storing the data and the functionality of a program separably,
and in meaningful ways, rather than within objects as in the Object-Oriented
paradigm. This type of data storage enables parallel processing and allows max-
imum utilization of the ultra-fast caches in the hardware, since random memory
access is minimized. The project was not fully re-written in DOP, as the beneﬁts
of the population on the agents was proven later in the development circle of the
project. Numerous smaller, easier to convert, more self-contained parts of the
implementation were converted instead. Before the eﬀects of increasing the pop-
ulation were made apparent through testing, utilizing this system would have
been an unnecessary risk, as Unity still does not fully support the infrastructure
that allows it. As of the moment of writing, this system is still quite unstable,
although several important improvements have just been released. Still, even
through partial utilization, a ﬁve-fold upgrade was easy to obtain. When testing
the full capabilities of the system (in a test-environment), agents were created
with full mobility and a complete physical footprint, resembling the conditions
in a typical experiment of the main project. Within that test, the concurrent
simulation of 2000 agents was achieved. That a ﬁfty-fold increase on the per-
formance of the baseline system at that moment. As already demonstrated in
Figure 3.4, population size acts as a major catalyst to our simulation. As such,
transitioning the entire project to DOTS [DOT, ], when stable, should be of
major beneﬁt to the quality of the results produced. Furthermore, it will pro-
vide an immense speed-up to the simulation, allowing for more repeats of the
experiments and, therefore, more robust data.
3.4
Discussion
Ever since the inspiring work of Karl Sims [Sims, 1994] was published, more
than two decades ago, agents that morphologically adapt to their environment
have been an appealing and thought-provoking idea that captures the imag-
ination of the on-looker. In this work, we are revisiting some of these ideas
under the light of recent developments in the ﬁeld of Computational Intelli-
gence. The goal was to simulate Artiﬁcial Life and prove that populations of
agents can adapt to their environment when decision-making is kept constant
and morphology is optimized instead. These goals were achieved and then iter-
ated upon using ideas from better explored ﬁelds of Computational Intelligence.
More speciﬁcally, Evolving Neural Networks through Augmenting Topologies
[Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002], a paper about automatically generating the
==PAGE:51==
3.5 Future Work
45
structure of neural networks, was a major inspiration and contained a plethora
of ideas that could be of beneﬁt to the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Life. Dimensionality
Minimization and Speciation improved the quality and quantity of the solu-
tions discovered by our evolving agents, and the time it took to discover them.
Curriculum Learning, a technique often used in a Reinforcement Learning con-
text, provided further beneﬁts in those areas, especially when our population
faced tougher environments. Historic Markings proved an elegant way to han-
dle Crossover between the incompatible genomes of ever adapting agent popu-
lations, just like it did in its original application on neural networks. Finally,
Elitism proved eﬀective at reducing greedy complexity in our population and
showed great promise when utilized alongside Stochastic Universal Sampling as
a hybrid Selection method. All these methods were extensively tested and the
statistical signiﬁcance of the ﬁndings were ensured by taking the familiwise error
rate into account and compensating for it. Despite the infamous strictness of
FWER compensation algorithms, these results were deemed statistically signif-
icant. This further solidiﬁes our ﬁndings and allows us to answer the questions
posed in the beginning of this study: Morphologically adaptive Artiﬁcial
Life was, indeed, successfully simulated using Genetic Algorithms. Speciation,
Dimensionality Minimization, Curriculum Learning and Elitism were
implemented, applied and their eﬀect was found to be both positive and sta-
tistically signiﬁcant to our system. It was also proven that our implementation
can be further optimized by at least an order of magnitude and that could have
a dramatic eﬀect on its performance, as demonstrated in Subsection 3.2.3. A
method for such a performance gain was discovered, tested and partially imple-
mented, but a full implementation was deemed to be outside the scope of this
work.
3.5
Future Work
The ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Life is plagued by performance constraints. As such, op-
timization would be of immense importance to the ﬁeld, both to enable the
implementation of new ideas and, perhaps more importantly, to potentially in-
crease the quality of the results of existing implementations. Data-oriented
programming was explored as a possible means of performance gains in the
ﬁeld, which is particularly suited to beneﬁt the type of implementation that an
Artiﬁcial Life often requires: numerous, similar, self-suﬃcient entities interact-
ing with each-other and their environment. As such, exploring this possibility
further could be of major importance to this work and to the ﬁeld as a whole.
Furthermore, one important side-eﬀect of how our system was designed is its
compatibility to co-operational and/or competitive evolution, as it allows agent
==PAGE:52==
3.5 Future Work
46
interaction by default. It could be that agents would acquire co-dependant
morphologies if group ﬁtness rewards were utilized alongside Speciation. On
the other hand, we could try to co-evolve predator and pray in a competitive,
co-evolutionary experiment as competition has been shown [Yaeger, 1995] to
facilitate genome diversity and genetic specialization.
Finally, while this work explored adaptive morphologies given static decision-
making, the decisions of the agents do not need to remain static. As a matter
of fact, it could be that dynamic behavior within our system could allow it to
reach new heights of performance. Beneﬁts from utilizing data-oriented pro-
gramming could enable training such a system, performance-wise. That would,
in turn, allow behavior-oriented evolutionary forces, such as the Baldwin eﬀect
[Lee and Rhee, 2001], to aﬀect the population.
The ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial life is slowly expanding, with the low rate of expansion
being mostly attributed to limited computational resources and an unclear mar-
ket application. As 3D printing and simulations become more and more vital to
the industry, the ﬁeld could experience a surge in popularity which would make
existing advances in it all the more important. Furthermore, the Video Game
industry is pushing towards scalability now more than ever, as proﬁt margins
for generating game content by hand is diminishing. As such, procedural envi-
ronments and assets are gaining in popularity, with procedural inhabitants to
these worlds being a logical next step. Artiﬁcial Life is a ﬁeld that could heavily
inﬂuence that part of the industry.
Finally, in Sag Kriegman’s words [Kriegman, 2019], virtual creatures do not have
to be constrained by applicability. They are interesting objects of scientiﬁc in-
vestigation in their own right and they have the potential to be as beautiful as
life itself.
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Algorithms
Process 9: Curriculum Learning.
Result: Cnew : The next curriculum to be applied.
Data:
E : Collection of environment parameters,
df : The ﬁtness gradient (the last two generations are considered).
t : Fitness gradient threshold
E_Sorted = sort(E);
if df < t then
i = i + 1;
Cnew = E_Sorted[i];
==PAGE:54==
A.1 Algorithms
48
10
20
50
100
150
10
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.000
20
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.000
50
0.000
0.000
0.019
0.000
100
0.000
0.000
0.019
0.001
150
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
Table A.1: The p-values of the eﬀects of the cross-population number compar-
ison against ﬁtness. 10 tests were performed.
10
20
50
100
150
10
0.009
0.000
0.000
0.000
20
0.009
0.000
0.000
0.000
50
0.000
0.000
0.014
0.000
100
0.000
0.000
0.014
0.001
150
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
Table A.2: The p-values of the eﬀects of the cross-population number compar-
ison on the maximum ﬁtness. 10 tests were performed.
Elitism
Speciation
Default
Both
Elitism
0.033
0.041
0.000
Speciation
0.033
0.024
0.001
Default
0.041
0.024
0.014
Both
0.000
0.001
0.014
Table A.3: The p-values of the Elitism-Speciation comparison on population
ﬁtness. 20 tests were performed.
==PAGE:55==
A.2 P-values
49
Elitism
Speciation
Default
Both
Elitism
0.000
0.037
0.002
Speciation
0.000
0.003
0.028
Default
0.037
0.003
0.024
Both
0.002
0.028
0.024
Table A.4: The p-values of the Elitism-Speciation comparison on population
complexity. 20 tests were performed.
A.2
P-values
A.3
Environments
A.4
Thesis Planning
A.4.1
Original Plan
This work attempts to use elements of evolution, along with recent advances in
reinforcement learning, to generate digital agents who are capable of overcoming
problems and/or solve problems in their environment through a combination of
evolutionary and cognitive adaptation.
Methods:
Unity3D is going to be utilized towards creating digital environments and agents.
Reinforcement learning, PPO(Procimal Policy Optimization) and/or SAC(Soft
Actor-Critic) written in Python will provide the decision making of these agents,
with the ML-Agents Unity plugin used to connect the two back-ends.
Pre-existing Work:
Several attempts have been made to simulate evolution within Unity. Work
such as Lebastian Lague’s served as major inspirational forces to conceiving
this project. That being said, all current work known to me at this moment
use scripted/static behaviors and evolutionary ﬁtness measures/algorithms to
observe population growth and adaptation.
Utilizing AI techniques, such as
Reinforcement Learning, to produce emergent behaviors on agents inﬂuenced
by evolution is novel to the extent of my knowledge.
==PAGE:56==
A.4 Thesis Planning
50
Figure A.1: Details of the environments used.
Units are in Unity internal
units, which roughly correspond to 1unit = 1m.
Possible Outcomes/Goals:
• Agents physically adapting through successive generations to better sur-
vive any environment.
• Agents physically adapting through successive generations to solve any
(reasonable) problem within any environment
• Agents physically adapting themselves during their lifetime to better sur-
vive any environment and/or solve any reasonable problem within it.
These goals will be further tuned and reﬁned during the project by me
and the project supervisors.
A.4.2
Revisions
A quite unique element of this work, as compared to other Thesis projects I’ve
had the pleasure of being privy to or assisting with over the years, was that, in
retrospective, the original plan (achieving morphological adaptation) was quite
abstract. Originally, I considered the option of using Reinforcement Learning,
==PAGE:57==
A.4 Thesis Planning
51
an algorithm with which I had alot of experience, to produce such changes. Af-
ter some initial testing, that idea was discarded as too computationally heavy.
While reading through the literature, it became increasingly clear to me that
alot of emphasis was being put on optimizing the decision-making process of
agents, but morphological adaptation was scarce. As such, the original hypoth-
esis of this work was formed: Could artiﬁcial life adapt to its environment while
optimizing morphology rather than decision-making? After implementing the
system, it was discovered that it was indeed possible.
At that moment, I had shifted through much more of the Artiﬁcial Life-related
bibliography and, given my experience with more classical machine learning
and AI, I could see alot of room for optimization through techniques utilized in
these ﬁelds which seemed to be ignored in existing Artiﬁcial Life publications.
As such, I added a secondary goal to the thesis, utilizing some of these algo-
rithms to optimize the results of my existing implementation.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that while the hypothesis itself changed during
the project, the goals set at the beginning of the thesis, creating morphologi-
cal adaptation in Artiﬁcial Life agents, were successfully completed. I believe
that this project was more research-oriented than a typical Thesis, which was
reﬂected in both its theoretical and implementational diﬃculty, and as such it
resembled more an actual research project in the way it unfolded than a more
streamlined study. If I could change one thing, it would be to do the pre-work
required to formulate the exact hypothesis before the start of the actual thesis,
in order to better focus on the goal from the start and to be able to beneﬁt
more from external assistance.
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[fau, ] Fauna assets : https://assetstore.unity.com/packages/3d/vegetation/trees/polygon-
nature-pack-120152.
[DOT, ] The unity data-oriented technology stack : https://unity.com/dots.
[an Zhang et al., 2008] an Zhang, Y., Sakamoto, M., and Furutani, H. (2008).
Eﬀects of population size and mutation rate on results of genetic algorithm.
2008 Fourth International Conference on Natural Computation, 1:70–75.
[Baker, 1987] Baker, J. E. (1987). Reducing bias and ineﬃcienry in the selection
algorithm. In ICGA.
[Barros et al., 2020] Barros, P., Tanevska, A., and Sciutti, A. (2020). Learning
from learners: Adapting reinforcement learning agents to be competitive in a
card game.
[Bengio et al., 2009] Bengio, Y., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., and Weston, J.
(2009). Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’09, page 41–48, New York, NY,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Chen et al., 2012] Chen, T., Tang, K., Chen, G., and Yao, X. (2012).
A
large population size can be unhelpful in evolutionary algorithms. CoRR,
abs/1208.2345.
[Cheney et al., 2014] Cheney, N., Clune, J., and Lipson, H. (2014). Evolved
electrophysiological soft robots.
[Deb and Goldberg, 1989] Deb, K. and Goldberg, D. E. (1989). An investigation
of niche and species formation in genetic function optimization. In ICGA.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[Featherstone, 1987] Featherstone, R. (1987). Robot Dynamics Algorithms.
[Gillespie et al., 2017] Gillespie, L. E., Gonzalez, G. R., and Schrum, J. (2017).
Comparing direct and indirect encodings using both raw and hand-designed
features in tetris. Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference.
[Gomez and Miikkulainen, 1996] Gomez, F. and Miikkulainen, R. (1996). In-
cremental evolution of complex general behavior. Adaptive Behavior, 5.
[Hall, 1984] Hall, B. K. (1984). Development mechanisms underlying the forma-
tion of atavisms. Biological reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society,
59 1:89–124.
[Holland, 1992] Holland, J. H. (1992).
Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial
Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
[Holm, 1979] Holm, S. (1979).
A simple sequentially rejective multiple test
procedure.
[Kriegman, 2019] Kriegman, S. (2019). Why virtual creatures matter. Nature
Machine Intelligence, 1:492–492.
[Le et al., 2020] Le, N., Brabazon, A., and O’Neill, M. (2020). Social learn-
ing vs self-teaching in a multi-agent neural network system.
In Castillo,
P. A., Jiménez Laredo, J. L., and Fernández de Vega, F., editors, Applications
of Evolutionary Computation, pages 354–368, Cham. Springer International
Publishing.
[Lee and Rhee, 2001] Lee, M.-R. and Rhee, H. (2001). The eﬀect of evolution
in artiﬁcial life learning behavior. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems,
30:399–414.
[Lenski, 2010] Lenski, R. E. (2010). Phenotypic and genomic evolution during
a 20,000-generation experiment with the bacterium escherichia coli.
[Lillywhite et al., 2012] Lillywhite, H. B., Albert, J. S., Sheehy, C. M., and Sey-
mour, R. S. (2012). Gravity and the evolution of cardiopulmonary morphol-
ogy in snakes. Comparative biochemistry and physiology. Part A, Molecular
& integrative physiology, 161 2:230–42.
[Lipson and Pollack, 2000] Lipson, H. and Pollack, J. (2000). Automatic design
and manufacture of robotic lifeforms. Nature, 406:974–8.
[Miller and Goldberg, 1995] Miller, B. L. and Goldberg, D. E. (1995). Genetic
algorithms, tournament selection, and the eﬀects of noise. Complex Systems,
9.
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
54
[Morey-Holton, 2003] Morey-Holton, E. R. (2003). 9 the impact of gravity on
life.
[Pathak et al., 2019] Pathak, D., Lu, C., Darrell, T., Isola, P., and Efros, A.
(2019). Learning to control self-assembling morphologies: A study of gener-
alization via modularity.
[Sims, 1994] Sims, K. (1994). Evolving 3d morphology and behavior by compe-
tition. Artiﬁcial Life, 1:353–372.
[Spears, 2007] Spears, W. M. (2007). Speciation using tag bits.
[Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002] Stanley, K. O. and Miikkulainen, R. (2002).
Evolving neural networks through augmenting topologies. Evolutionary Com-
putation, 10(2):99–127.
[Yaeger, 1995] Yaeger,
L.
(1995).
Computational
genetics,
physiology,
metabolism, neural systems, learning, vision, and behavior or polyworld: Life
in a new context.
