==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices:
The effect of individual parameters on the
user’s experience
Jónína Þóra Einarsdóttir (s181776)
Reykjavík, Iceland 2020
==PAGE:2==
Acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices: The effect of individual parameters on the user’s experience
This report was prepared by:
Jónína Þóra Einarsdóttir
Supervisors:
Cheol-Ho Jeong, Associate Professor at Acoustical Technology, DTU Elektro
Ólafur Daníelsson, Civil Engineer at Efla Consulting Engineers
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
Date of publication: June 27th 2020
Class: 1 (Public)
Edition: 1. edition
Remarks: This master’s thesis was conducted in collaboration with Efla Consulting Engineers in Reykjavík, Ice-
land along with The Department of Electrical Engineering in compliance with the requiements to achieve
a degreee of Master of Science in Architectural Engineering at The Department of Civil Engineering at The
Technical University of Denmark.
ECTS: 30 ECTS points
Copyright: © Jónína Þóra Einarsdóttir, 2020
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Prior studies suggest that acoustic conditions in open-plan offices are, in many cases,
problematic and affect workers performance at work as well as their well-being. The
ISO 3382-3 standard presents parameters that are specifically considered critical for
open-plan offices as the reverberation time alone as a global parameter does not
provide sufficient information about the quality of acoustic conditions in an open-
plan office. Some of the prior work has indeed assessed certain acoustic parameters
and their effect on certain subjective feelings. However, the relation between each ISO
3382-3 parameter and overall acoustic satisfaction has not been established in a field
study. The aim of this study was to assess five different offices and to conduct room
acoustic measurements as well as assign a questionnaire to the employees at each
office. Following this, a comparative statistical analysis was performed to identify if
any of the measured acoustic parameters could predict overall acoustic satisfaction.
Additionally, the effect of adding human activity noise as additional background noise
was assessed. The results show that no ISO 3382-3 parameter has significant power
to predict overall acoustic satisfaction whatsoever.
Furthermore, the results also
indicated unexpected behaviour of the regression lines for some of the parameters.
The parameter which came closest to significantly predicting acoustic satisfaction
was the privacy distance, rP . However, the predicted probabilities indicated that
increased rP and distraction distance, rD, yields increased acoustic satisfaction which
is the opposite to what is suggested in ISO 3382-3 where good acoustical conditions
are said to be when rD ≤5 m. A target value for rP is not given in the standard, but
it follows the same principle as rD, and thus, increasing rP should hypothetically not
show an increase in acoustic satisfaction. Therefore, it is concluded that the study
does not provide enough evidence to say that any of the ISO 3382-3 parameters can
predict overall acoustic satisfaction. Further studies for this would need more variety
in offices and normal operating conditions in the offices, but this was not the case for
this study due to COVID19.
However, the results indicated that additional background noise or the human
activity noise lowered the STI values leading to lower rD and rP values. Therefore,
measurements on human activity noise should be included in the evaluation of acous-
tic conditions in open-plan offices.
Keywords: Open-plan Office | ISO 3382-3 | ÍST 45 | Acoustic Parameters | Acous-
tic Satisfaction | Acoustic Conditions | Subjective | Objective
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared in collaboration with Efla Consulting Engineers
and the Acoustic Technology group at the Department of Electrical Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of requirements of acquiring a
degree of Master of Science in Architectural Engineering. The project is a mix of
studies on room acoustic parameters and the subjective experience of acoustics, or
psychoacoustics.
The report is structured in a traditional way where an introduction starts by
briefly introducing the motivation for the project followed by a presentation of related
similar prior work where from a research question is then formulated. From there,
a comprehensive theoretical chapter starts. The methodology chapter presents the
companies being studied, followed by a thorough description of every step of the
assessment’s process. The result chapter is divided into two sections, one presenting
the results from the objective measurements and the other presenting the results
from the subjective assessment. From there, the statistical analysis chapter takes on
the analysis of statistically comparing objective and subjective results. Finally, the
results are discussed, and a conclusion is made.
Reykjavík, Iceland, June 27, 2020
Jónína Þóra Einarsdóttir (s181776)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank Cheol-Ho Jeong and Ólafur Daníelsson
for their supervision during this project and for all the support they provided when
questions arose. I would especially like to thank Cheol-Ho for the tolerance, under-
standing and all the motivation he gave me when things did not look hopeful due
to COVID19. Additionally, I would like to thank Ólafur Daníelsson for providing
me with the project in the first place and allowing me to do a project in cooperation
with Efla Consulting Engineers. Furthermore, I would like to thank all the great
employees from the Department of Acoustics at Efla who assisted me in any way,
Guðrún Jónsdóttir, Kristrún Gunnarsdóttir and Kristín Ómarsdóttir. I would also
like to thank NMÍ for allowing me to use their reverberation chamber for calibrating
the measurement equipment. Finally, I would like to thank all the companies who
participated in the study and last but not least, my husband, for assisting me with
all the measurement sessions.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Objective Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Reverberation Time, T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Speech Transmission Index, STI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Distraction Distance, rD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Privacy Distance, rP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Spatial Decay Rate of A-weighted SPL of Speech, D2,S
. . . .
9
2.1.6
A-weighted SPL of Speech at 4 m, Lp,A,S,4m
. . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.7
Average A-weighted Background Noise Level, Lp,A,B . . . . . .
10
2.1.8
Acoustic Classification for Open-plan Offices
. . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Subjective Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Formulation of Noise-reaction Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Answering Scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Prior Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
General Knowledge about Acoustic Conditions in Open-plan
Offices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Subjective Reaction to Noise in Open-plan Offices
. . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Human Activity Noise Effects in Open-plan Offices . . . . . . .
21
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Overview of Offices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.1.1
Non-acoustical Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Source-receiver Positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Objective Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Subjective Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
Formulation of Noise-reaction Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.2
Answering Scale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.1
Pearson-correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.2
Linear Mixed Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
31
4.1
Objective Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Reverberation Time, T20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.2
Speech Transmission Index, STI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.3
Distraction Distance, rD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.4
Privacy Distance, rP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.5
A-weighted SPL of Speech, Lp,A,S
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.6
Average A-weighted Background Noise Level, Lp,A,B . . . . . .
38
4.1.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Subjective Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
Response Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
General Information Answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.3
Distribution of Answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.4
Combined Subjective Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2.5
Key Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Statistical Analysis
51
5.1
Correlation among the Subjective Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.1
Correlation Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.2
Linear relationship with the Key Question . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.2
Correlation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.3
Linear Mixed Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Discussion
62
6.1
Main Variables of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2
The Room Acoustic Parameters related to the Design of the Offices . .
63
6.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.4
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusion
66
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
Bibliography
67
A Measurement Setup
70
B Source-receiver Positions
71
C Questionnaire
74
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
An increasing worldwide trend is to build open-plan offices instead of private room of-
fices. Several reasons support the open-plan office idea such as better space economy
due to fewer wall partitions, higher worker density leading to lower rent costs, and bet-
ter access of daylight. Open-plan offices provide more flexibility and are also thought
for more excellent teamwork and information sharing. Many architects favour the
idea of an open-plan office due to aesthetics in terms of spaciousness and brightness.
However, there is no strong scientific evidence supporting these reasons when one also
needs to include considerations in terms of different job types within the office space
[1]. In order for working conditions to be fulfilled in such spaces, special attention
towards acoustic design is required to obtain satisfactory speech intelligibility along
with reasonable sound attenuation [2]. Noise is declared to be the biggest problematic
factor in open-plan offices, caused by too high speech intelligibility [3].
Guidelines on room acoustics in open-plan offices are given in the standard ISO
3382-3 [4]. For general room acoustic measurements, the reverberation time is the
main parameter to measure. However, for open-plan offices, the reverberation time
alone as a global parameter does not provide sufficient information about the quality
of acoustic conditions in the office [5]. Therefore, ISO 3382-3 presents parameters
that are considered even more critical for such spaces where the focus lies in damping
of the sound propagation and the effect on amplification and speech intelligibility [2].
This research is conducted in five offices in Iceland. The Icelandic building code,
ÍST 45 [6], emphasises on requirements in terms of reverberation time along with
service equipment noise level. Requirements for the parameters from ISO 3382-3 are
only stated in the code’s appendix (Appendix B). Acoustic consultants in Iceland have,
as suggested in the literature, experienced in several of their open-plan office projects,
that even if the requirement for reverberation time is fulfilled, good quality acoustic
conditions are not guaranteed. Therefore, there is a need for updated requirements
in the building code where the real critical parameters for open-plan office acoustics
are not just kept in the appendix as if they are not as important as other parameters.
With that said, it is relevant to assess the effect of individual parameters on the
users’ experience and identify the real problematic factors, and thus, come closer to
solve the obvious problem of noise in open-plan offices which is claimed to affect
workers’ performance at work as well as their well-being [7].
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Prior Work
2
1.2
Prior Work
Through literature research, it was evident that an extensive amount of studies has
been conducted on open-plan offices as the problem concerning noise is well recognised
in these spaces. Studies on open-plan offices go back to the 1960s, where researchers
started assessing problematic factors in terms of acoustic conditions. Overall, assess-
ments on subjective satisfaction in open-plan offices very often result in low scores.
It is not necessarily the sound pressure level of the noise itself, causing a disturbance
but rather high speech intelligibility in most cases. Speech tends to be heard too
clearly between workstations causing workers to lose focus more easily as well as ex-
periencing a lack of privacy. This emphasises the importance of the main goal of ISO
3382-3, to obtain good speech privacy between workstations [4].
Prior work conducted on acoustic conditions in open-plan offices varies between
studies depending on if they are only informative articles of general acoustic condi-
tions within open-plan offices or if certain issues are being assessed specifically. Most
of the previous studies on acoustic conditions in open-plan offices are cross-sectional
studies comparing open-plan offices with private room offices [1], [8]. Much of the
work also emphasises on acoustic conditions in general within open-plan offices and
their correlation to the worker’s well-being or their work performance [7], [8], [9],
[10]. The majority of these studies are conducted with both objective and subjective
measurements. Furthermore, some of the prior studies have assessed certain acous-
tic parameters and their effect on certain subjective feelings, such as disturbance by
noise. These kinds of studies indeed come close to similar research as this particular
thesis is all about. Haapakangas et al. [3] have recognised that the main cause for
noise in open-plan offices is too high background speech intelligibility.
Therefore,
they investigated the distraction distance, rD, more thoroughly and concluded that
it is an important parameter as with increased distraction distance comes increased
noise disturbance. Hongisto [7] proposed a model predicting the effect of speech intel-
ligibility on work performance on cognitively demanding tasks. Several later studies
have supported the fact that Hongisto’s model [9] can indeed quantify performance
loss.
Additionally, newer studies have pointed out that in order for a more reliable
evaluation of acoustic conditions in open-plan offices, human activity noise needs
to be included.
Strong evidence has been presented, showing a decrease in STI-
values when human activity noise in the office is included compared to including
only the technical background noise as the standard [4] recommends [11].
For a
more accurate evaluation, it is, therefore, strongly recommended to ”normalise” the
distraction distance to a reasonable background noise level in which takes into account
the noise from human activities [12].
Rindel [13] studied prediction of acoustical parameters for open-plan offices ac-
cording to ISO 3382-3 and rightfully noted that ”an obvious continuation of this
work will be to examine possible correlations between the new objective parameters
and findings from such investigations on perception, comfort and office work perfor-
mance”.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Research Question
3
1.3
Research Question
The purpose of this research is to analyse acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices
and the effect of individual acoustical parameters on the user’s experience. The pa-
rameters assessed are the ones stated in ISO 3382-3 [4] along with reverberation time.
Noise is a widely known problem within open-plan offices, and it does affect workers’
performance at work as well as their overall well-being. None of the prior work has
been able to pinpoint the correlation between individual parameters of the ISO 3382-3
and the acoustic satisfaction of the open-plan office occupants. Therefore, it is quite
urgent to analyse the relevant parameters thoroughly, along with their effect on the
user’s experience, and recognise that reverberation time alone does not provide suf-
ficient information about acoustical conditions within open-plan offices. To address
this analysis, the following research question has been formulated:
Which ISO 3382-3 parameter best explains acoustical satisfaction of
open-plan offices?
Prior work where individual parameters have been assessed with their effects on
certain subjective feelings is indeed related to this specific research question and can,
therefore, come of good use in this particular research.
This research will be carried out in three phases. Like prior work, there will be
conducted both subjective and objective measurements. The subjective measurement
consists of a questionnaire assigned for the workers at each office investigated. Ob-
jective room acoustic measurements on the relevant parameters will be performed
at every office as well according to the standard ISO 3382-3 [4] and ISO 3382-2 [14].
Following these two measurement phases, a comparative study on the results between
the objective and subjective measurements is carried out.
==PAGE:12==
1.4 Abbreviations
4
1.4
Abbreviations
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
SPL
Sound Pressure Level
dB(A)
A-weighted decibel
T or T20 Reverberation Time
STI
Speech Transmission Index
rD
Distraction Distance
rP
Privacy Distance
D2,S
Spatial Decay Rate of A-weighted SPL of Speech
Lp,A,S,4m A-weighted SPL of Speech at 4 m
Lp,A,B
Average A-weighted Background Noise Level
B&K
Brüel & Kjær
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In this chapter, the theoretical aspects of this research are presented.
First, the
acoustical parameters relevant to this particular research are defined thoroughly. Fur-
thermore, the theory behind the making of a proper questionnaire is introduced to
demonstrate how a relevant survey for this particular study is structured and why it
is structured like this. Additionally, a literature review on prior studies conducted in
open-plan offices is presented. Along with general information about what is known
already about acoustical conditions in open-plan offices, the correlation between prior
work and the presented research question is discussed.
2.1
Objective Measurements
When it comes to acoustical properties of a room, the reverberation time has for a long
time been considered a predominant parameter [15]. However, for open-plan offices,
it is recognised that the reverberation time alone as a comprehensive parameter does
not provide sufficient information about the acoustical conditions of a room [5]. There
is evidence that other acoustical parameters, such as spatial decay of sound pressure
level, speech transmission index and background noise level, are crucial for fulfilling
evaluation of open-plan offices [4]. Studies have shown that noise complaints in open-
plan offices are often related to high speech intelligibility [3]. ISO 3382-3 [4] presents a
”measurement method which results in single number quantities indicating the general
acoustical performance of an open plan office”. The main goal of ISO 3382-3 [4] is to
obtain good speech privacy between workstations. The single number quantities are
to represent a situation where a single person is talking, and the rest is silent [4].
At each measurement position, four parameters are to be measured. This is sound
pressure level in octave bands of pink noise, Lp,Ls, speech transmission index, STI,
background noise level in octave bands, Lp,B, and distance to the sound source, r.
The measurement data shall then be used to determine the single number quantities:
• Distraction distance, rD
• Privacy distance, rP
• Spatial decay of A-weighted SPL of speech, D2,S
• A-weighted SPL of speech at 4 m, Lp,A,S,4m
• Average A-weighted background noise level, Lp,A,B
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Objective Measurements
6
Additionally, STI in the nearest workstation is determined [4]. STI shall be deter-
mined in accordance with the full method specified in IEC 60268-16 [16].
In this particular research, reverberation time, T20, is also measured. Reverber-
ation time is measured in accordance with ISO 3382-2 [14]. Following sub-chapters
discuss further the parameters of interest.
2.1.1
Reverberation Time, T
Reverberance is a subjective room acoustic aspect and demonstrates the persistence
of sound, after the source responsible for the sound has been shut off. This happens
due to the reflection of different surfaces in the room, such as walls, floors and ceilings.
With much reverberance, speech loses intelligibility but music, however, gains attrac-
tive fullness to the sound. The reverberation time is the traditional objective measure
of reverberance in a room. It is defined as the time for a sound level decay of 60 dB
after a continuous sound source has stopped producing the sound. The reverberation
time was invented one hundred years ago by W.C. Sabine, who presented the Sabine
equation to calculate T:
T = 0.16 · V
A
(2.1)
where T is the reverberation time in seconds, V is the volume of the room in m3 and
A is the absorption area of the room in m2 [17].
In practice, the evaluation on T can be based on a smaller dynamic range than
60 dB, from -5 dB to -35 dB or -5 dB to -25 dB below the initial value [17]. If the
decay values of 5 dB to 25 dB below the initial level are used, T is labelled as T20.
With values 5 dB to 35 dB, it is labelled as T30 [14].
T60 = (t−65dB −t−5dB)
T30 = (t−35dB −t−5dB)
T20 = (t−25dB −t−5dB)
(2.2)
where tx represents the time of X dB decay below the start value [17].
Figure 2.1 illustrates how the reverberation time is defined.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Objective Measurements
7
Figure 2.1: Reverberation time definition [17].
When T is evaluated, it is recommended to compare the differences in values
with the smallest possible change that can be identified subjectively. This is called
the just noticeable difference (JND) and equals 5% of the reverberation time, T [17].
The evaluation of T surely depends on what type of room is being assessed. Thus,
how T should be controlled also depends on the room of interest. The use of sound-
absorbing panels may control reverberation time. By doubling the total absorption
in the room, the reverberation time can be decreased by half [18].
Requirements for reverberation time in open-plan offices among the Nordic coun-
tries is approximately T ≤0.50 s [2].
2.1.2
Speech Transmission Index, STI
The speech transmission index is an objective descriptor of speech intelligibility repre-
senting the transmission quality of speech by a speech transmission channel [4]. STI
varies from 0 to 1 with 0 representing when speech is absent, total speech unintelligi-
bility, and 1 representing when speech is perfectly heard, or more specifically, 100%
of speech intelligibility, respectively. Table 2.1 indicates the reference values of STI
stated in the standard IEC 60268-16 [16].
Table 2.1: Reference values of STI according to IEC 60268-16 [16].
Intelligibility
Bad
Poor
Fair
Good
Excellent
STI
<0.3
0.3-0.45
0.45-0.6
0.6-0.75
>0.75
There are two methods to measure STI, either direct methods using modulated
test signals or indirect methods based on the system’s impulse response using the
Schroeder equation [16]. The FULL STI method presented in IEC 60268-16 [16] is
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Objective Measurements
8
an ”objective method for the prediction and measurement of the STI that uses 14
modulation frequencies over a range of 7 octave bands”. The FULL STI, therefore,
consists of 98 separate test signals. Each test signal contains only one modulation
frequency. The direct FULL STI method is generally now only used for background
STI research which is the case in open-plan offices [16]. As mentioned in the intro-
duction of chapter 2.1, studies have shown that noise complaints in open-plan offices
are often linked with high speech intelligibility [3]. It is, therefore, not the ideal con-
dition to have high STI in open-plan offices in terms of background STI while STI
for direct interactions between co-workers should, however, be high in order for clear
speech to be heard. This emphasises the importance of STI as a critical parameter
in open-plan office studies.
With bad speech intelligibility in open-plan offices, speech privacy is good. It
becomes reasonable with poor speech intelligibility, and when the intelligibility be-
comes fair, the speech privacy starts becoming poor and then in excellent conditions
for speech intelligibility, there is absolutely no speech privacy [7]. It is, therefore, the
aspect of speech privacy that needs to be kept in mind when open-plan offices are
examined.
According to ISO 3382-3 [4], the STI shall be measured in octave bands from 125
Hz to 8000 Hz in order to obtain an accurate prediction. The determination for STI in
open-plan offices shall either be done with the FULL STI method in accordance with
IEC 60268-16 for each source-receiver combination on the measurement path or be
determined from the measured impulse response and then adjusted for the influence
of the background noise level [4]. The background noise level is a large determinant
of the STI value. It is, therefore, utmost important that heating, ventilation and
air conditioning (HVAC) devices and other noise sources are operating on the same
power as during typical working hours. If those noise sources are operating at lower
power, STI values are too high, which leads to an overestimation of rD and rP [4].
2.1.3
Distraction Distance, rD
The distraction distance is the distance from a speaker where the STI falls below
0.50 [4]. As the literature suggests, noise complaints in open-plan offices are mostly
related to high intelligibility of speech. Distraction distance is based on STI as it
takes into account all room acoustic factors and their effect on speech intelligibility
between source and receiver. It can, therefore, objectively describe the acoustical
quality in an open-plan office and is determined by using a linear regression line
determined from the STI values as a function of the distance. The determination
of distraction distance, rD, is illustrated in Figure 2.2 where the y-axis represents
the speech transmission index, r is the distance to the speaker, and rP is the privacy
distance.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Objective Measurements
9
Figure 2.2: Determination of distraction distance [4].
Higher speech privacy is obtained by lower speech intelligibility, and this happens
with a smaller value of distraction distance, rD. Disturbance by noise tends to in-
crease with an increase in distraction distance. A small value of rD is obtained when
Lp,A,S,4m is low and D2,S and Lp,A,B are high [3]. Example of an open-plan office
with good acoustic conditions would have rD ≤5 m whereas an open-plan office with
poor acoustic conditions would have rD > 10 m [4].
2.1.4
Privacy Distance, rP
Privacy distance is the distance from the speaker or the sound source where the STI
falls below 0.20. In open-plan offices, a STI value of 0.20 is difficult to achieve and
rather rare to happen. Above the privacy distance, both privacy and concentration,
along with work performance, are experienced as if occupants were working in sepa-
rated office rooms [4].
2.1.5
Spatial Decay Rate of A-weighted SPL of Speech, D2,S
This parameter is the rate of spatial decay of A-weighted sound pressure level of
speech per doubling distance [4]. D2,S considers the spatial attenuation of sound and
can, therefore, be preferred to reverberation time. The D2,S is given by a regression
line of SPL over a domain which varies between offices [19]. Following an acoustic
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Objective Measurements
10
treatment in an open-plan office, where speech intelligibility is lowered with smaller
rD, D2,S is increased [19].
According to ISO 3382-3 [4], D2,S is determined from the results at measurement
positions at distances within the range 2 m to 16 m from the sound source. The
determination requires linear regression and a logarithmic distance axis.
D2,S is
determined using the least square method:
D2,S = −lg(2)
N
N
∑
n=1
[
Lp,A,S,nlg
(
rn
r0
)]
−
N
∑
n=1
Lp,A,S,n
N
∑
n=1
lg
(
rn
r0
)
N
N
∑
n=1
[
lg
(
rn
r0
)]2
−
[
N
∑
n=1
lg
(
rn
r0
)]2
(2.3)
where
Lp,A,S,n is the A-weighted speech level in position n,
n is the index number of the single measurement position,
N is the total number of measurement positions,
rn is the distance to measurement position n,
r0 is the reference distance, 1 m.
Typically, an open-plan office with D2,S < 5 dB is considered to have poor acoustic
conditions whereas an open-plan office with D2,S ≥7 dB is considered to have good
acoustic conditions [4].
2.1.6
A-weighted SPL of Speech at 4 m, Lp,A,S,4m
The A-weighted SPL of speech at 4 m represents the nominal A-weighted SPL of
normal speech at a distance of 4 m from the source [4]. It indicates how well speech
is attenuated at 4 m when leaving the workstation [3]. Linear regression line from
the spatial sound distribution of the A-weighted SPL of speech is used to obtain
Lp,A,S,4m.
The reason for the specific 4 m is because this is the typical distance
between workstations.
As mentioned in section 2.1.3, a low value of Lp,A,S,4m is
desirable to reach good acoustic conditions as this indicates efficient attenuation of
speech with a source-receiver distance of 4 m [19]. According to ISO 3382-3 [4], an
open-plan office with poor acoustic conditions has Lp,A,S,4m > 50 dB whereas an
open-plan office with good acoustic conditions has Lp,A,S,4m ≤48 dB.
2.1.7
Average A-weighted Background Noise Level, Lp,A,B
This parameter represents the A-weighted sound pressure level in octave bands present
at each workstation during working hours while no people are present to affect the
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Subjective Assessment
11
sound. Background noise is the continuous sound, not caused by people, originated
from, for example, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, envi-
ronmental traffic noise, office equipment etc. [4]. The background noise can have a
masking role in open-plan offices and increase speech privacy by decreasing the speech
intelligibility. If background noise is too high, however, it can have disturbing influ-
ences on itself. How an open-plan office is designed, where it is located, distribution
of workstations, as well as the kind of HVAC systems it utilises, can have a massive
influence on the sound pressure level, respectively. The typical values of background
noise in open-plan offices are somewhere between 30 to 60 dB. However, the level can
vary tremendously between offices depending on the size of the office, distribution of
workstations, type of air conditioning system etc. [19].
2.1.8
Acoustic Classification for Open-plan Offices
According to the building code in Iceland, Norway and Sweden, acoustic conditions
are to fulfil requirements for class C [2]. According to ÍST 45 [6], there are four classes
declared to rate the quality of acoustic conditions in an open-plan office. The classes
range from A to D with A being the best option and D being the worst class. Table
2.2 indicates the values for each class.
Table 2.2: Acoustic classification for open-plan offices according to ÍST 45:2016 [6].
Class
D2,S
Lp,A,S,4m
rD
STI*
STI**
Class A
≥11 dB
≤46 dB
≤5 m
0.10
0.80
Class B
≥9 dB
≤49 dB
≤8 m
0.15
0.70
Class C
≥7 dB
≤52 dB
≤11 m
0.20
0.60
Class D
< 7 dB
> 52 dB
> 11 m
0.30
0.50
* Background speech intelligibility.
** Speech intelligibility for interaction between co-workers.
As this research is conducted in Iceland, the Icelandic standard will be a focal
point.
ÍST 45 [6] refers, as earlier mentioned to the fulfilment of class C for the
quality of acoustic conditions. A required reverberation time for open-plan offices is
T ≤0.50 s. As for the sound pressure level of service equipment, the standard refers
to a requirement of a total A-weighted equivalent SPL, Lp,Aeq,T ≤35 dB and a peak
level, Lp,Ceq,T ≤55 dB.
2.2
Subjective Assessment
In order to assess the user’s experience towards the work environment, a survey must
be conducted. A survey can be done through a personal interview, via telephone,
online or in ways that are considered suitable for each particular research. In this
particular research, a questionnaire was designed where the structure is based on the
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Subjective Assessment
12
findings from Fields et al. [20] along with the basis of questionnaires designed by
Kaarlela-Tuomaala et al. [1], Haapakangas, Hongisto and Keskinen [8], and Pierrette
et al. [21].
In [20], high-quality survey questions are presented in which provide reliable mea-
sures of overall reactions to noise sources and are comparable internationally. The
article also suggests an interval-level measurement scale where the reaction answers
are equally spaced, allowing for linear regression analysis and many other analysis
techniques. In [1] and [8], a questionnaire method where an extensive range of noise-
related problematic factors in an open-plan office is addressed along with the effect
they have on employees. In [21], a similar concept is followed, with a thorough as-
sessment of the noise environment and the effect it has on the worker’s well-being in
their daily working environment.
2.2.1
Formulation of Noise-reaction Questions
The findings from Fields et al. [20] present two recommended noise reaction questions
differing in the way they should be answered, either on a verbal scale or on a numerical
scale.
The 5-point verbal scale question is:
• ”Thinking about the last (..12 months or so..), when you are here at home,
how much does noise from (..noise source..)
bother, disturb, or annoy you;
Extremely, Very, Moderately, Slightly or Not at all?”
The (0-10) point numeric scale question is:
• ”Next is a zero to ten opinion scale for how much (..source..) noise bothers,
disturbs or annoys you when you are here at home. If you are not at all annoyed
choose zero, if you are extremely annoyed, choose ten, if you are somewhere in
between choose a number between zero and ten. Thinking about the last (..12
months or so..), what number from zero to ten best shows how much you are
bothered, disturbed, or annoyed by (..source..) noise?”
Both questions suggest a limited time frame to think of for the respondent for
him/her to evaluate and narrow down how he/she has been feeling about a certain
type of noise within this time frame. The words in the parentheses, are only examples
and are to be changed to the time period and noise source which are relevant for the
particular research being studied.
The recommended questions are direct and short. They ask for the respondents’
feelings, over a certain time frame, towards a specific noise source mentioned, and
give only a choice between a limited number of answers. Researches have implied
that such direct rating questions give more precise answers than indirect questions
or comparison questions. The questions ask about neutral or negative reactions to-
wards the noise source and use unipolar scales that range from ”extremely” to the
neutral position ”not at all”. This is considered relevant given the fact that noise
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Subjective Assessment
13
is usually considered as a negative influence. Therefore, this allows the respondents
to acknowledge that the purpose of the survey is to assess if noise is causing any
annoyance/disturbance in the area being studied. Additionally, a question about the
negative concept is assumed to be more easily understood than a question about the
positive concept. Questions about the positive reactions can, of course, be asked as
additional questions in order not to exclude if an employee is very satisfied with the
acoustic conditions [20].
Even if these two questions are favoured in terms of easy comparison between sur-
veys, some surveys require further analysis and more reaction questions. This varies
between the purpose of each particular survey, whether these two questions should
be the primary reaction questions or only supplementary questions [20]. It has been
accepted through a great amount of literature that noise is one of the most critical
annoyance factors in open-plan offices. However, in general, noise levels measured
in open-plan offices rarely exceed 65 dB(A). Therefore, it is not only necessary to
assess if there is any annoyance at all, but to analyse the noise environment as a
whole further, and to identify the parameters that need to be taken into account
when analysing the noise annoyance [21].
As seen in [1], [8] and [21], the questionnaires are designed specifically for open-
plan offices and are, therefore, detailed for this specific type of an area. The ques-
tionnaires are divided into several sub-sections in which differ slightly among the
articles but follow the same concept overall. The first section of the questionnaires
is background information about the employee and his/her workstation followed by
several sections focusing on different matters in terms of the employee’s experience
of acoustic conditions at his/her workstation.
The questionnaires demonstrated in [8] and [1] are divided into the following sec-
tions; indoor environment and noise sources, noise effects, well-being, psychosocial
environment, office layout performance, and work-space preference. These articles
also take into considerations typical stress-inducing factors and noise sensitivity in
general. The structure of these questionnaires follows a similar concept as demon-
strated in [20] in terms of giving the respondents a certain time frame to think of
when they are evaluating their annoyance/disturbance towards specific noise sources
while also having the choice of a limited number of answers. Pierrette et al. [21] struc-
ture their questionnaire into four sections with a focus on assessing the employee’s
physical working environment followed by a particular approach of the acoustic envi-
ronment as a whole along with the consequence of this specific environment on the
employee’s health. This is because research has shown that in some cases, there are
factors, that may not even be related to sound in the office, but are however perceived
as noise annoyance by the employees [21].
2.2.2
Answering Scale
As mentioned in section 2.2.1, Fields et al. [20] present both a 5-point verbal scale, as
well as a 0-10 numerical scale, suggested for asking the two recommended questions
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Subjective Assessment
14
mentioned.
The two presented answering scales are illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Answer cards for recommended noise annoyance questions [20].
The answering scale, in both cases, is unipolar where the scale extends from a neg-
ative pole, extremely annoyed/disturbed, to a neutral point, not at all annoyed/dis-
turbed. The verbal scale presents five strongly descriptive words for the respondent
to choose from. In contrast, the numeric scale allows the respondent to rate the an-
noyance/disturbance on a continuous numerical scale. For as clear communication
as possible, the verbal scale is recommended. Choosing a word is considered a rather
simple task which can easily be done by any respondent regardless of their education
or culture. With a numerical scale, the scale points are equally distributed and, there-
fore, convenient for linear regression and similar powerful analysis techniques. The
reason for a 5-point verbal scale is that researches suggest that respondents tend to
give more exact answers than if it were a 4-point scale. As for a 0-10-point numerical
scale, this is considered to be easily understood by respondents from all over the world
with zero representing ”not at all” and ten representing ”extremely” [20].
It is evident in [1], [8] and [21] that a similar answering scale is followed among
these three articles. A 1-5 numerical scale is used with strong descriptive words at
the two opposing poles of the continuous numerical scale. They do, however, use
both a unipolar scale as well as a bipolar scale, differing between questions. In some
cases, it is relevant to identify positive reactions as this may give significant input
on a certain issue. The words on the opposite poles differ slightly between questions
depending on what kind of a question is being asked. However, they all describe a
certain reaction precisely. One is representing the neutral state such as ”not at all”
or ”never” for example, on the unipolar scale but represents the negative reactions on
the bipolar scale. Five then represents the ”very much” or ”extremely” for example,
on the unipolar scale and represents the positive reactions on the bipolar scale.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Prior Work
15
2.3
Prior Work
Open-plan offices or landscape offices have become a worldwide trend throughout the
years, and the trend is only increasing. Open-plan offices are claimed to have many
benefits for many project developers. The space requirement per person is claimed to
be 50% smaller than in traditional offices consisting of single-person offices leading to
substantial economic savings. Modifications on the layout are also easier to execute,
and architects emphasise on the aesthetics and spaciousness of open-plan offices [7].
However, there is a debate on open-plan offices, and the biggest one concerns noise,
annoyance and acoustics in general [2]. Many studies have been conducted on acoustic
conditions in open-plan offices.
It differs between studies whether they are only
informative about the acoustic conditions in general or if certain issues are being
assessed specifically. Most of the prior studies are cross-sectional studies comparing
open-plan offices with private room offices. Many of the studies also emphasise on
the employee’s subjective experience in terms of general acoustic conditions within
open-plan offices. Focal points have, for instance, been the worker’s well-being as
well as his/her overall work performance. The majority of the studies indeed cover
both objective and subjective measurements. None of them, however, have been able
to answer the research question of this research about which ISO 3382-3 parameter
best explains the acoustical satisfaction of open-plan offices. Nevertheless, some of
the studies have assessed certain acoustical parameters and their effect on certain
subjective feelings, such as disturbance by noise. This information is indeed related
to the earlier mentioned research question. It can, therefore, come of good use in
the study on each ISO 3382-3 parameter and their correlation to overall acoustical
satisfaction in open-plan offices.
2.3.1
General Knowledge about Acoustic Conditions in
Open-plan Offices
Noise is among the most frequently reported issues in open-plan offices. However,
noise levels are not particularly high in open-plan offices compared to many other in-
stitutions. The average noise level in a contemporary office is said to range between
46 to 58 dB(A). Early studies imply that already from the start, employees started
complaining about open-plan offices. Those complaints mainly concerned about the
loss of privacy, aural distractions and frequent interruptions by other employees. Re-
searchers have been assessing acoustic conditions in open-plan offices since the 1960s
with the hope of identifying the main acoustic problem. At that time, the noise pro-
duced by co-workers’ conversations, the ringing of telephones and other machinery
were all considered critical contributors to employees annoyance and dissatisfaction.
However, during this time, there have been significant changes in, for example, office
equipment which has changed in terms of the nature of sounds as well as the sound
pressure level. As an example is a change from the typewriter to computers [22].
Nevertheless, through a comprehensive literature review, it is evident that distrac-
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Prior Work
16
tions due to speech from neighbouring workstations are the most significant prob-
lematic factor in open-plan offices.
Speech is the source that causes the biggest
distraction due to its unpredictability, the intensity is variable, and it includes the
highest amount of information content among the sounds that occur in the office [23].
Studies have also shown that higher frequencies are linked with lower acoustic satis-
faction. Additionally, in most cases, occupants tend to experience reduced acoustical
satisfaction when the ambient noise level exceeds 45 dB(A) [22], [19].
In open-plan offices, it should be guaranteed to obtain silence and concentration
[19]. How much silence and concentration is required indeed varies depending on the
type of the company. Not all irrelevant sounds are equally annoying or disturbing.
The human voice tends to be more disturbing than other noise sources and partic-
ularly hard to ignore [24]. Macchie, Secchi and Cellai [19] supported earlier studies
where irrelevant speech is stated to be the most annoying element in open-plan offices.
However, the noise due to speech is not a simple one-dimensional noise problem that
can easily be solved by adding higher damping in the room, for example. With a very
short reverberation time, speech intelligibility becomes very high, and speech is heard
very clearly, leading to more distractions among employees. In contrast, with a long
reverberation time, the noise level in the environment increases, which also causes a
disturbance. Too much absorption has also shown to possibly have a negative impact
on the employee’s perception of noise [12].
Acoustic conditions and the sound environment in open-plan offices can be im-
proved through the use of sound masking as well as the right room acoustic design. It
is possible to obtain acceptable speech privacy with simultaneous control of absorp-
tion, isolation and masking sound [25]. Masking sound is when an additional sound
is produced into the environment to mask an unwanted sound. The method is not
an active noise cancellation technique, but it reduces or eliminates the perception of
sound, and the purpose is to improve acoustical satisfaction through increased speech
privacy [26]. Speech privacy is a term often used in room acoustic studies and refers
to acoustic conditions enabling conversations that are not overheard [27]. Zannin [28]
claims that there is a higher demand for speech privacy than for speech intelligibility.
Speech privacy may be defined as the opposite of speech intelligibility and can be
shown on the basis of the Privacy Index:
PrivacyIndex = 1 −STI(−)
(2.4)
The relationship between these variables was vaguely described in chapter 2.1.2
and may be seen in Table 2.3 where the reference values from Table 2.1 are also
included.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Prior Work
17
Table 2.3: The relationship between speech intelligibility and speech privacy [9].
STI
Intelligibility
Speech Privacy
0.00-0.30
Bad
Good
0.30-0.45
Poor
Reasonable
0.45-0.60
Fair
Bad
0.60-0.75
Good
Very bad
0.75-1.00
Excellent
No
According to Zannin and Passero [29], an open-plan office with good acoustic
conditions requires acoustic divider panels between workstations, and the surface of
the ceiling shall be coated with high sound-absorbing material.
Sufficient isolation between workstations can increase speech privacy. Screens of
height 1.3-2.0 m between workstations are considered the right height to use in open-
plan offices [7]. A study carried out by Larm et al. [30] showed that speech level
between two adjacent workstations separated by 2.4 m could be reduced at most by
10-15 dB when high screens were used along with effective ceiling and wall absorbers.
2.3.1.1
The Role of Individual Open-plan Office Parameters
Haapakangas et al. [3] supported the evidence from literature that background speech
or speech from neighbouring workstations remains as the main noise problem in open-
plan offices. It is not the sound pressure level of the speech itself but rather the high
speech intelligibility that is the problem.
It should, therefore, be a goal to focus
on reducing the intelligibility of background speech while maintaining intelligibility
great in the part of the office where workers interact. Haapakangas et al. [3] also
claimed that increased distraction distance, rD, yields an increase in perceived noise
disturbance by speech which supports the use of rD as an indicator of acoustic quality
in open-plan offices. The speech level at 4 m, Lp,A,S,4m, was associated with noise
disturbance in some cases along with the average background noise level, Lp,A,B.
Higher background noise resulted in lower disturbance by noise which suggests that
background noise is not really perceived as a source of noise [3]. This is supported
by earlier studies concerning predictable sounds and sound masking [22]. The speech
level at 4 m, Lp,A,S,4m was associated in a way that for every one decibel increase, the
odds of high disturbance increased by 20% for noise and by 27% for speech [3]. How-
ever, it was noted that the models involving Lp,A,S,4m include several uncertainties
and thus, its relation to noise disturbance would require further research.
On the contrary, Haapakangas et al. [3] concluded that the spatial decay rate of
speech, D2,S was not associated with disturbance by speech or by noise in any of their
models. However, this does not imply that Lp,A,S,4m and D2,S are not important for
noise disturbance assessment in open-plan offices. Rather, perceived noise disturbance
may not be predicted by these two parameters only without taking the background
noise level and STI into account. The effect of background speech, the problematic
factor, is not decreased by only a decrease in speech level or an increase in absorption
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Prior Work
18
if the speech intelligibility is not decreased simultaneously [3]. Rindel [13] rightfully
noted that none of the parameters in ISO 3382-3 could stand alone when evaluating
the acoustic quality of an open-plan office, but a combination of the parameters is
needed for sufficient and reliable characterisation of the acoustical conditions.
In [23], D2,S and rD are concluded to be adequate parameters to determine the
quality of acoustic conditions in open-plan offices. D2,S may be controlled by the
presence of acoustic screens between workstations as well as high-absorbing ceiling
material. rD is sensitive to changes in the background noise. The design of the office
itself, of course, has a lot to say about the acoustic conditions but there are three
main factors in which can be controlled in order to improve acoustical conditions in
open-plan offices. The room’s absorption plays a key role in reducing reverberation
and thus, sound pressure level, the barriers control direct sound, and the artificial
sound masking can reduce the distraction distance with their uniform sound [23].
Usually, the background noise level caused by ventilation is too low (rarely exceeds
35 dB(A)) in offices and, therefore, masking sound is needed in order to decrease
speech intelligibility which in most cases is higher than 0.5 [27]. Sound masking is
claimed to lead to lower stress, less distraction, higher arousal and better performance.
Masking level should, however, never exceed 46 dB(A) [7].
2.3.2
Subjective Reaction to Noise in Open-plan Offices
Acoustic satisfaction may be defined as a ”state of contentment with acoustic con-
ditions, with it being inclusive of annoyance, loudness and distractions” [22]. The
perception of sound as noise is a psychological phenomenon as an annoyance by noise
is due to its unpredictability, uncontrollability and uselessness of the sound [27]. An-
noyance with noise is also correlated with perceived lack of privacy [21]. Noise or
unwanted sound is declared to affect people’s health and well-being, mental state
and work performance [10]. Open-plan offices are claimed to have significant acous-
tic problems when it comes to the worker’s well-being as well as work performance
[8], [10]. Four key non-physical factors are claimed to affect noise perception and
performance in office environments [10]:
• Task and work activity
• Context and attitude
• Perceived control and predictability
• Personality and mood
Regulations and standards mainly focus on objective measurements on acoustic condi-
tions to fulfil requirements. Kim et al. [31] performed a case study in which the results
emphasised that even if objective measurements and industry guidelines for designing
satisfactory acoustic environment is important, changes to the physical environment
as well as on the acoustical systems, require iterating subjective assessments within
the retrofit process in order to fulfil the occupant’s satisfaction [31].
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Prior Work
19
There is plenty of things to bear in mind when assessing perceptions of noise in
open-plan offices. First and foremost is the noise source(s), the task to be performed,
personal sensitivity to noise and the working environment. These are all factors that
are large contributors to the experience of noise [21]. Pierrette et al. [21] also claimed
that the less employees are in control of their working environment and have less
privacy, the more they complain about annoyance due to ambient noise.
It has been studied and shown that worker’s psychological privacy and job sat-
isfaction tends to decrease when workers are moved from a private room office to
an open-plan office [32]. Overall environmental dissatisfaction has been shown to be
more significant in open-plan offices than in private offices in general. The sound
level tends to increase on a large scale and, as earlier mentioned, employees often
experience reduced privacy along with concentration difficulties [1]. According to a
study conducted by Kaarlela-Tuomaala et al. [1], where employees were relocated
from private office space to an open-plan office, the negative effects of the acoustic
environment increased significantly. Employees experienced the need for increased
use of coping strategies and their self-rated loss of work performance doubled. The
relocation indicated that workers were more likely to change their strategies of doing
tasks as well as behave differently to compensate for the environmental factors that
were possibly affecting their work performance [1].
Haapakangas [27] presented strong evidence of the correlation between disturbing
background speech and general perception of office distractions and disturbing noise.
With an increase in distractions within the office comes decreased environmental
satisfaction which in some cases has shown negative changes in collaboration and
stress symptoms. The study presented in [27] is similar research as conducted for this
thesis. The findings from [27] also supported the use of sound masking in order to
increase acoustic satisfaction within open-plan offices.
Furthermore, employee’s satisfaction in terms of acoustic conditions may rely on
the physical environment of the open-plan office. Perceived noise disturbance has
shown to be reduced in open-plan offices by holistic room acoustic design [27]. A
study conducted by Hongisto et al. [33] on a refurbishment of an open-plan office
showed a clear relationship between an employee’s satisfaction and the quality of the
physical environment. The study consisted of a quasi-field experiment conducted in
an office of 135 employees. The results provided a clear link between environmental
quality and job satisfaction.
The quality of acoustic conditions in the office was
significantly improved after the refurbishment [33].
Additionally, providing employees with the possibility to use quiet work-spaces
yields a decrease in the negative effects of office distractions in modern open-plan
offices [27]. Studies have shown a correlation between a low number of quiet work-
spaces and an increase in negative effects on environmental satisfaction, perceived
collaboration and stress. By having easy access to quiet work-spaces, and thus, the
possibility for privacy, employees experience higher control over access to oneself or
one’s group. Perceived control over the work environment has shown to be strongly
correlated with increased environmental satisfaction and job satisfaction [34]
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Prior Work
20
2.3.2.1
Performance Loss due to Noise in Open-plan Offices
According to Hongisto, ”well-being should intuitively, be associated with work per-
formance” [7].
Several studies have shown strong evidence of correlation between
noise by speech and performance loss in open-plan offices [7], [27], [9]. Studies show
that speech intelligibility can be a predictor of particular subjective perceptions of
acoustic disturbance but also work performance and memory performance [27]. This
is compatible with Hongisto’s study conducted on the effect of speech intelligibility
on work performance [7]. With a STI value of 1.00, 100% speech intelligibility, work
performance tends to decrease significantly [4].
Hongisto [7] proposed a model predicting the effect of speech intelligibility on
work performance on cognitively demanding tasks. The article declares that when
STI exceeds 0.2, work performance starts to decrease and the highest performance
decrease is reached when STI exceeds 0.6.
More specifically, the performance of
complex tasks can decrease by 7% when unattended speech has a STI value >0.6 and
is highly intelligible [7]. Figure 2.4 demonstrates the prediction model by Hongisto.
Figure 2.4: Hongisto’s prediction model indicating the decrease in work performance
as a function of STI [7]. A version presented in [27].
The mathematical expression of the prediction model, where DP is ”decrease in
performance”, is presented as follows:
DP =
−7
1 + exp[(STI −0.4)/0.06] + 7
(2.5)
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Prior Work
21
The reason why the mathematical expression is presented is that the graphical
expression is not always absolutely valid for all task types. The formula can facilitate
the implementation of the prediction model for all types of tasks. The absolute decline
in performance is task sensitive and may vary between studies [7]. Robust evidence
from [8] and [1] support Hongisto’s findings and declare that irrelevant speech does
indeed yield reduction in cognitive work performance in open-plan offices. STI values
should be below 0.50 in order for work performance to be affected positively. Hongisto
suggests the simultaneous use of high room absorption, high screens and appropriate
speech masking in order for STI to be lower than 0.5. By using a speech masking
system which is set to 44 dB(A), the predicted change in STI is from 0.7 to 0.5 [7].
Roelofsen [9] supported earlier mentioned findings regarding that disturbance by
noise is in most cases due to high speech intelligibility or over-hearing a conversation,
which is distracting. Studies have also shown that when a person has been distracted,
it will take the person at least ten minutes to return to the same concentration level
as he/she was before the distractions [9]. If this happens on multiple occasions during
the same day, there is a lot of ”10 minutes” wasted.
Roelofsen [9] used Hongisto’s prediction model [7] and supported that the perfor-
mance loss can be quantified by the model. He claimed that the deviation formula
produces better speech intelligibility index to the intelligibility qualifications [9]. He
also concluded as others have as well, that an increase in the background noise level
leads to worse speech intelligibility and thus, a decrease in performance loss. For
good condition, an open-plan office requires a background noise level of 45 dB(A) [9].
2.3.3
Human Activity Noise Effects in Open-plan Offices
According to several specialists [11], [12], a critical factor that has not been taken into
account in the evaluation of acoustic quality in open-plan offices is human activity
noise.
The ISO 3382-3 standard [4] has no recommendations or requirements to
take into account the influence that human activity noise might have on the acoustic
quality in the open-plan office. As earlier mentioned, high speech intelligibility is
claimed to be the most significant problematic factor in open-plan offices leading to
distractions among employees. Dehlbæk et al. [11] presented an empirical model for
human activity noise, and their study showed strong evidence of a decrease in STI-
values when human activity noise in the office was included, compared to including
only the technical background noise as is recommended in the standard [4]. Human
activity noise levels vary significantly between office types given the different types
of activities conducted in the office, whether it is an engineering consulting company
or a call centre. However, it is clear that background noise which is measured in
unoccupied offices as the standard requires is different from the actual background
noise during working hours. Furthermore, the higher the reverberation time is in the
office, the higher human activity noise [11].
According to [12], the evaluation of acoustic quality in open-plan offices in accor-
dance with the ISO 3382-3 standard [4] could be optimised by including the human
==PAGE:30==
2.3 Prior Work
22
activity noise. The French standard has divided open-plan offices into four categories
depending on different activities within the office in order to give examples of noise
levels from human activities[12]:
• Mainly telephone, LA,eq = 48 dB to 52 dB
• Collaborative work, LA,eq = 45 dB to 50 dB
• Individual work, LA,eq = 40 dB to 45 dB
• Receiving the public, LA,eq < 55 dB
Rindel [12], therefore, strongly recommends to ”normalise” the distraction dis-
tance to a reasonable background noise level in which takes into account the noise
from human activities. This is considered better to reflect the actual acoustic quality
of an open-plan office.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter demonstrates the methodology and procedures used in this research. It
starts by presenting the offices being studied along with their non-acoustical param-
eters. From there, the process of the objective on-site measurements is thoroughly
described, followed by the process of the subjective assessment. Finally, statistical
methods used for comparison between objective and subjective parameters are pre-
sented.
3.1
Overview of Offices
In order to assess the relationship between objective and subjective parameters within
open-plan offices, several open-plan offices willing to participate in the experiment
were found. In total, five offices were investigated. The offices varied in size, capacity
as well as the type of work conducted in the office. All offices are located in Reykjavík,
Iceland. The design in terms of material choice varied between offices as well, but
all the offices are designed in a modern way where materials such as concrete, wood
and glass are dominant. Whether the offices had carpet on the floor and if they had
acoustic screens between workstations also varied. Evaluation of different types of
open-plan offices takes into account different aspects changing between offices leading
to a thorough analysis of different types of experience within the open-plan offices.
This evaluation should give a good idea of what to think of when developing the
acoustic design of an open-plan office.
3.1.1
Non-acoustical Parameters
The non-acoustical parameters for each of the investigated offices are presented in Ta-
ble 3.1. Efla Consulting Engineers is, as the name implies, an engineering consulting
company. It was decided to examine two offices within Efla as the operations vary
between those offices and the employees have different job titles. The office on the
3rd floor consists of mainly civil engineers. The office on the 2nd floor consists of the
management team, including the human resources department. Garri is a company
which specialises in the import and sale of a quality good and food packaging to
professional chefs and clients in the food preparation industry in Iceland. Krónan
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Objective Measurements
24
is a supermarket chain in Iceland, and its headquarter office was examined for this
project. Arkís is a leading architectural firm in Iceland.
Table 3.1: Non-acoustical parameters of the offices being studied.
Office
Area
[m2]
Height
[m]
Capacity
[seats]
Seat Density
[seats/m2]
Critical
Materials
Efla 2nd
472.96
2.7
64
0.14
Wood, glass
Efla 3rd
244.85
2.7
18
0.07
Wood, glass
Garri
565.9
2.8
44
0.08
Carpet, wood, glass
Krónan
272.79
2.8
38
0.14
Carpet, wood
Arkís
189.4
3.5
28
0.15
Linoleum, wool, plexiglass
It must be noted that due to COVID19, Arkís had placed plexiglass between every
two opposing workstations. Under normal circumstances within the Arkís office, there
is no plexiglass between workstations.
3.1.2
Source-receiver Positions
Measurement positions were placed according to requirements in ISO 3382-3 [4]. The
standard recommends locating measurement positions along a line which crosses over
workstations. This was followed as much as possible, but some layouts do not provide
the possibility for a straight line. The preferred number of measurement positions in
the line is 6-10 in order to obtain precise results, but the minimum number is 4. At
least two sound source positions shall be used [4]. In Efla 3rd, Garri and Krónan six
measurement positions were possible but in Efla 2nd, only four measurement positions
were possible. In Arkís, however, the measurement positions were in total nine.
Floor plans with marked source-receiver positions within each office are demon-
strated in Appendix B.
3.2
Objective Measurements
Measurements on the objective parameters were conducted by using an omnidirec-
tional sound source producing a pink MLS signal while recording the impulse re-
sponse at several different locations with the DIRAC software. The measurements
were performed according to ISO 3382-3 [4] and ISO 3382-2 [14].
3.2.1
Equipment
Measurement equipment used for the process of on-site objective measurements were
as follows:
• Brüel & Kjær Omnidirectional Loudspeaker Type OmniPower 4292-L
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Objective Measurements
25
• Brüel & Kjær Power Amplifier Type 2734
• Brüel & Kjær DIRAC 6.0 software
• Laptop with the DIRAC software
• Brüel & Kjær USB Audio Interface Sound Device Type ZE 0948
• G.R.A.S. Sound & Vibration Power Module Type 12AR
• Norsonic Omnidirectional Microphone Type 1201/30285
• Norsonic Sound Calibrator Type 1251
• Relevant cables and tripods
• Tape measure
The laptop is used to produce the output signals and then process the input
signals. The input consists of the microphone, power module and the sound device.
The output would be the amplifier and the omnidirectional loudspeaker. Illustration
of the measurement setup is demonstrated in Appendix A.
3.2.2
Procedure
The measurement procedure was carried out according to ISO 3382-3 [4] with guidance
from the Brüel & Kjær DIRAC Product Data guide [35].
In all measurements, an omnidirectional sound source producing a pink MLS signal
was used. The frequency range of interest for measurements in open-plan offices is
125 Hz to 8000 Hz in every measurement position. For ISO 3382-3 parameters, four
quantities were measured at each measurement position:
• Sound pressure level in octave bands of pink noise, Lp,Ls
• Speech transmission index, STI
• Background noise level in octave bands, Lp,B
• Source-receiver distance, r
Additionally, the reverberation time was also measured.
In DIRAC 6.0, all these
quantities can be measured simultaneously by using an intermittent stimulus. The
measurement is a 10 s pink MLS followed by a 10 s silence to capture the background
noise.
Before being able to do the ISO 3382-3 measurements in DIRAC, a system cali-
bration was needed, and this was done in a reverberation chamber. The calibration
consisted of 6 different source-receiver positions within the chamber.
The micro-
phone was also calibrated before each office measurement. ISO 3382-3 measurements
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Objective Measurements
26
in DIRAC 6.0 are not possible to conduct without system calibration. After all office
measurements had been performed, it was possible to obtain results straight from
DIRAC as the program computes all the ISO 3382-3 parameters from these measure-
ments.
Measurements were conducted in twelve different source-receiver location compo-
sitions in Efla 3rd, Garri and Krónan. In Efla 2nd, only eight different source-receiver
positions were possible to obtain whereas eighteen different source-receiver positions
were measured in Arkís. The standard requires, as stated in chapter 3.1.2, at least
two source positions and preferably 6-10 receiver positions in order to obtain pre-
cise results. However, four microphone positions are allowed, but it is the absolute
minimum [4]. Determination of these locations was done in accordance with ISO
3382-3, respectively. The height of the acoustic centre of the loudspeaker and the
microphone’s height was kept at 1.2 m. This is due to the position of the person’s
head in the workstation while sitting. Working positions where people are standing
are not included in this part of ISO 3382. Both the loudspeaker and the microphone
were kept at least 0.5 m from tables and at least 2 m from walls and other reflecting
surfaces. Microphone positions were aimed to be approximately 2 m apart when pos-
sible and measurements were carried out along a line which crosses over workstations
where the loudspeaker was placed at each end of the measurement line for the two
required source positions. Thus, the same line of receivers was used twice with a
sound source at each end of the line. The measurements were conducted in furnished
offices, respectively, but after regular working hours without the presence of people
[4].
3.2.2.1
Including Human Activity Noise
Additional work on the measured parameters would be to take into account earlier
mentioned human activity noise and see the effect it has on the measured results.
DIRAC has a function for this. By using the function ”Mix Noise” in the software, it
is possible to assess how much the STI and the rD decrease if additional background
noise is added. In this particular research, the human activity noise in each office
was not particularly measured like it was done in [11]. This is due to the COVID19
situation in the world. None of the offices were operating normally as most employees
were working from home.
So, to take into account the human activity noise, an
evaluation was done on the human activity noise measured by Dehlbæk et al. [11].
Additionally, considerations on ”normal” background noise level in an office in
Iceland need to be taken into account, whether Icelanders are generally loud people
or not. It was decided that additional background noise should aim for a total back-
ground noise level of approximately 35 dB. However, several factors vary between
offices in which need to be taken into account for the background noise to be realis-
tically evaluated. The number of employees, as well as the type of work conducted
in the office, are considered affecting factors. Dehlbæk et al. [11] presented several
types of offices which were used as inspiration for the additional background noise
added to the technical background noise in this particular research. Dehlbaek et al.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Subjective Assessment
27
[11] also present an empirical prediction model to calculate the human activity noise
level at 500 Hz and 1000 Hz.
LHN,500Hz = 33.1 + 14.3 log(T20) + 15.0d1
(3.1)
LHN,1kHz = 14.8 + 0.3LBN,1kHz + 18.6 log(T20) + 13.5 log(Asab) + 9.4d1
(3.2)
d1 refers to the room being a call center or not, d1 = 1 if it is a call center and if not,
d1 = 0 [11]. Those equations were used as guidance to see if the chosen noise level to
add in the ”Mix Noise” function was relevant or not for each office.
This way, it was possible to evaluate how much the human activity noise would
affect the STI and the rD. Then, it was possible to reflect on the argument that
perhaps, the acoustic parameters only, measured in the office without the presence
of people, do not describe realistic conditions in which the employees experience in
terms of acoustic conditions.
3.3
Subjective Assessment
The subjective assessment was conducted via an online questionnaire form named
SurveyHero. Each office received a link to the online survey, consisting of 21 questions,
via e-mail. The same questionnaire was created for all companies but duplicated in
different folders with the name of each company to make sure that results were saved
separately, making it more convenient to administer the answers. The questionnaire
was designed specifically for open-plan office workers to reflect and evaluate how they
experience their working environment in an open-plan office.
The employees were introduced to the survey and the research topic with an
introduction letter. The message was sent to all companies when they were asked
to participate in the research. Participation meant answering a questionnaire and
allowing measurements in their open-plan office. The introduction letter presents the
motivation for the project and emphasises on how beneficial it is for companies to
provide their employees with sufficient acoustical conditions within the office space.
3.3.1
Formulation of Noise-reaction Questions
When designing a questionnaire, one must be careful of the wording of the questions
as it is essential to capture the main factor affecting the respondent. Each question
must be clear and phrased in a way that it should be easy for a respondent to answer
in order to obtain significant results.
This questionnaire is designed in four sections: general information about the
employee and his/her workstation, work environment, noise effects, and well-being.
The questions are formulated according to questionnaires that have already been
assigned for open-plan office workers [1], [8], [21]. The wording of the questions also
takes inspiration from Fields et al. [20].
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Subjective Assessment
28
The first section consists of eight general questions about the employee and his/her
workstation such as gender, age, working hours at the office per week and number
of people working in the area of the workstation. The respondents are also asked if
they have the possibility of changing the working environment if they wish to and if
there is any access to quiet work-spaces. Additionally, they are asked if workstation
arrangement depends on the stimuli that employees experience depending on their
job type, and lastly if they experience any hearing difficulties.
The second section concerns the working environment, and it starts by asking the
employee about his/her experience towards several indoor environmental factors at
his/her workstation. This first question is only for the informative purpose to see if
noise is among the most disturbing environmental factors in the office. From there, the
section includes questions concerning acoustic conditions. The second question in this
section; ”How satisfied are you with the acoustical conditions at your workstation?”,
is considered a key question in the whole questionnaire. This question is the one that
reflects on acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices and is, therefore, the one that is
primarily used in the correlation analysis with the objective parameters. This section
also takes on how different sounds affect the employee at his/her workstation.
The third section takes on noise effects. The employee is asked if he/she experi-
ences a high noise level in the working environment, followed by a question concerning
the effect noise has on different activities in the office. The initial questions in this
section are mainly asked to see the correlation between them and the earlier men-
tioned key question. Furthermore, through a literature review, it is evident that one
of the main problems in open-plan offices is too high speech intelligibility. Thus, this
section includes several questions concerning this matter to identify if the employee
experiences any disturbance related to this.
The fourth section is well-being as studies have shown significant effects the acous-
tic conditions can have on one’s well-being.
The first question is if the employee
experiences any health problems in general. Next issue is about health-related symp-
toms and feelings. The employee is asked if he/she has experienced any of those in
his/her working environment. Finally, the employee is asked about if the working
environment awakens stressful feelings or if it has a calming effect.
3.3.2
Answering Scale
All questions are based on an interval level measurement scale where reaction answers
are equally spaced, allowing for the use of many statistical analysis methods such as
variance, mean, linear regression and other techniques. With scaled data, it is also
more convenient to see a correlation between subjective and objective measured data.
Three of the questions have bipolar scaling with complete satisfaction on one end and
complete dissatisfaction on the other end. The rest of the question, despite the gen-
eral questions about the employee and his/her workstation (first section), ask about
neutral or negative reactions towards the noise source and use unipolar scales that
range from ”extremely” to the neutral position ”not at all”. The chosen words on
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Statistical Analysis
29
the unipolar scale are words strongly recommended by Fields et al. [20]. Figure 3.1
demonstrates one question from the questionnaire with bipolar scaling whereas Fig-
ure 3.2 indicates the unipolar scaling.
The full questionnaire is demonstrated in
Appendix C.
Figure 3.1: The key question from the questionnaire has a bipolar answering scale.
Figure 3.2: An example of a noise effect question with a unipolar answering scale.
3.4
Statistical Analysis
In this section, the statistical analysis methods used for the obtained results are
presented. To be able to answer the earlier mentioned research question, statistical
analysis is needed to assess the relationship between measured objective parameters
and the subjective feeling of acoustic satisfaction. Many statistical analysis methods
are available, and one needs to be careful to choose the right method relevant for each
particular case. With questionnaire data, it is crucial to know which information is
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Statistical Analysis
30
wanted to be able to interpret the results in the right way. For the interpretation of
a relationship between objective parameters and subjective feelings, linear regression
would be the primary tool to think of in the beginning as there is a predictor variable
and a response variable. For this particular research, the aim is for acoustic parame-
ters to predict a subjective feeling. If the data contains any random effects, a linear
mixed model should be used.
3.4.1
Pearson-correlation
The questionnaire consists of a total of 21 questions. The questions concerning general
information about the employee and his/her workstation are mainly for the informa-
tive purpose, and only age is used for the statistical analysis models.
Questions
concerning the work environment with the acoustic conditions as a focal point are in
total 13. Thus, it is relevant to analyse the correlation among those questions and try
to condense the information as well as see if any of the questions would be redundant
in further analysis.
A Pearson correlation analysis allows for identifying if there is a significant cor-
relation between questions. As mentioned in chapter 3.3.1, the key question; ”How
satisfied are you with the acoustical conditions at your workstation?”, will mainly be
used in the analysis on correlation with certain acoustic parameters. However, it is
only relevant to perform correlation analysis on this key question and its connection
with other questions in the questionnaire. For this, Pearson analysis is used to test
the strength of the statistical relationship between the two questions of interest.
Furthermore, a Pearson analysis is also used for the correlation analysis between
the key question and the measured acoustic parameters.
3.4.2
Linear Mixed Models
The analysis on an acoustic parameter predicting acoustic satisfaction is reported by
using a random intercept linear mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA). The
room acoustic quantities are workplace variables and examined as predictor variables,
and a random intercept for workplaces covers this. Separate models are fitted for
each acoustic parameter predicting the outcome variable, and the final models are
adjusted for age. All models were fitted by REML, and t-tests use Satterthwate’s
method [lmerModLmerTest]. F-values and p-values are reported through type III
ANOVA, and AIC values are obtained through ordinary likelihoods. The p-values
are used to identify if the association between the response variable and the predictor
is statistically significant. The F-values with overall significance indicates whether
the linear regression model provides a better fit to the data than if the model would
contain no independent variables. The F-value, however, can be ignored if the p-value
does not indicate significance (p ≤0.05). AIC values indicate how well the models
are predicting acoustic satisfaction. All statistical analysis is performed in R studio
[36] using the lme4 package [37].
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter demonstrates the results of the objective measurements and the sub-
jective assessment. The objective measures include measurement results of all the
seven acoustic parameters for each of the five different offices. The subjective mea-
surements include the response rate in the questionnaire, distribution of answers, and
overall evaluation of the earlier mentioned key question in which is a focal point in
the analysis section.
4.1
Objective Measurements
The objective measurements were carried out in the software DIRAC where the im-
pulse response was recorded through a pink MLS signal at several different locations
according to ISO 3382-3 [4] and ISO 3382-2 [14]. The seven acoustic parameters were
all measured simultaneously by using an intermittent stimulus in DIRAC 6.0. Follow-
ing sub-chapters will present the measurement results for each acoustic parameter.
4.1.1
Reverberation Time, T20
The reverberation time, T20 was measured in frequency bands from 125 Hz to 8000
Hz as these are the frequency bands of interest for measurements in open-plan offices.
Requirements in accordance with the procedure in ISO 3382-2 [14] were followed.
Figure 4.1 demonstrates the measured T20 in the five different offices. It is worth
noticing that Garri has the highest T20 overall and yet, this is one of the offices with
carpet flooring. Same goes for Krónan, carpet flooring, but higher T20 than in some
of the non-carpet offices. The office on the 3rd floor in Efla has the overall lowest
T20 values, but in this office, the flooring is wood. Some might think that carpet
would reduce the reverberation time, but in fact, it reduces noise from people walking
on the floor, but it does not necessarily reduce the reverberation time. Figure 4.2
demonstrates the measured T20 for the offices separately in order to show the standard
deviation. The large standard deviation in the low frequencies was expected. The
reverberation time is generally higher in the low-frequency field than in the high-
frequency field.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Objective Measurements
32
Figure 4.1: Measured T20 in the five different offices.
Figure 4.2: Measured T20 in the offices along with the standard deviation.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Objective Measurements
33
As seen in literature [13], the T20 measurements in the frequency bands from 500
to 1000 Hz are of most interest in open-plan office measurements. Therefore, the
measured mean values for 500-1000 Hz are presented in Table 4.1 along with the
standard deviation, the 95% confidence level and the just noticeable difference (JND)
which is the 5% of T20.
Table 4.1: T20 in 500-1000 Hz, standard deviation, 95% confidence level and JND.
Office
T20 [s]
(500-1000 Hz)
Standard
Deviation
Confidence Level
95%
JND
5%
Efla 2nd
0.42
0.06
0.051
0.021
Efla 3rd
0.37
0.05
0.032
0.019
Garri
0.48
0.09
0.056
0.024
Krónan
0.42
0.06
0.041
0.021
Arkís
0.47
0.09
0.043
0.024
Results indicate that all offices are below the requirement of T≤0.50 s [2], for
reverberation time in open-plan offices in 500-1000 Hz. Both Garri and Krónan are
much higher in the lower frequencies while the other three companies are already
below 0.50 s in 250 Hz. In the higher frequencies, Garri is still above the 0.50 s while
the other offices are all slightly above or slightly below. The office at 3rd floor in
Efla maintains the lowest values of T20 in all frequencies but 125 Hz. It is also worth
noticing the difference between the offices within Efla. They are furnished in the same
way, but the layout is quite different, and the office at 2nd floor is much smaller than
the one on 3rd floor.
4.1.2
Speech Transmission Index, STI
The STI was measured in octave bands from 125 Hz to 8000 Hz as required in
ISO 3382-3 [4]. Figure 4.3 shows the measured STI values over the different source-
receiver positions. None of the offices exceeded a length of 18 m between the source
and the receiver. All offices but Arkís, have very high STI values indicating ”Good”
and even in some locations ”Excellent” intelligibility according to the IEC 60268 [16].
All these four offices never show a STI value below 0.5 in any of the measurements.
Thus, there seems to be very poor or even absolutely no speech privacy within these
offices whatsoever.
Arkís, however, never, in any of the source-receiver positions,
has a STI value exceeding 0.5, which is the exact opposite to the other four offices.
Therefore, this indicates poor speech intelligibility but reasonable speech privacy. Im-
mediately at the beginning of the measurement session at Arkís, it was subjectively
noticeable that the ventilation system was quite loud in comparison to the other
places. Thus, this difference was, somewhat, expected.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Objective Measurements
34
Figure 4.3: Measured STI values in the five different offices.
The mean values of STI over positions per office are presented in Table 4.2 along
with the standard deviation and the 95% confidence level.
Table 4.2: Mean STI values, standard deviation and 95% confidence level.
Office
STI
Standard
Deviation
Confidence Level
95%
Efla 2nd
0.80
0.06
0.051
Efla 3rd
0.75
0.07
0.042
Garri
0.68
0.06
0.041
Krónan
0.74
0.05
0.032
Arkís
0.33
0.06
0.030
As discussed in chapter 2, the speech intelligibility for open-plan office measure-
ments is divided into two categories, the background speech intelligibility and the
speech intelligibility for interactions between co-workers. In order to fulfil class C
in ÍST 45 [6], the background STI should be 0.20 and the speech intelligibility for
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Objective Measurements
35
interactions should be ”Good” or at least a value of 0.60. The top four offices in
Table 4.2 all meet the requirement for clear intelligibility for co-workers to interact.
However, the results indicate this intelligibility everywhere in the offices, leading to
no speech privacy at all. Thus, the requirement for background speech intelligibility
is not fulfilled for these offices. Arkís, however, comes close to fulfilling the require-
ment of background speech intelligibility for class C, but never manages to obtain
STI values for ”Good” speech intelligibility for interaction between co-workers. This
may very well be explained by the plexiglass placed between opposing workstations
due to COVID19.
4.1.2.1
Including Human Activity Noise
Additional work on the measured parameters was to take into account earlier men-
tioned human activity noise and see the effect it has on the measured results. By
adding additional background noise, it was possible to assess the decrease of STI
if human activity noise would be included in the evaluation. Table 4.3 shows these
values for STI along with the standard deviation and the 95% confidence level. The
results on the STI values with additional background noise for human activity noise
does indeed show a reduction in the values. Even if the decrease is not massive with
the human activity noise used for this experiment, the point has still been proven,
and human activity noise does affect the STI values measured in open-plan offices.
Table 4.3: Mean STIHN values, standard deviation and 95% confidence level.
Office
STIHN
Standard
Deviation
Confidence Level
95%
Efla 2nd
0.77
0.08
0.063
Efla 3rd
0.68
0.11
0.072
Garri
0.64
0.08
0.054
Krónan
0.68
0.08
0.052
Arkís
0.32
0.07
0.033
4.1.3
Distraction Distance, rD
In order to see where the STI values shall be considered background speech intel-
ligibility or speech intelligibility for interaction between co-workers, it is important
to evaluate rD. ISO 3382-3 [4] indicates that an open-plan office with poor acoustic
conditions is an office with rD > 10 m and an open-plan office with good acoustic
conditions shall have rD ≤5 m. ÍST 45 [6] however, allows for a value of rD ≤11 m
to fulfill class C. The rD is obtained in the distance where the STI value falls below
0.50 [4]. With the very high STI values in all the offices but Arkís, the rD becomes
way too high, which emphasises the no privacy in one’s workstation in these particular
offices. The measured values for rD in these offices even exceed the total distances in
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Objective Measurements
36
which the measurements were conducted. For Arkís, however, the STI values never
exceed 0.50, leading to an rD value of 0. With including the human activity noise,
the rD values are very much affected as background noise has a masking effect on
the rD values. Thus, the rD values are immediately lowered with the experimental
additional background noise used in this research. Table 4.4 shows the measured rD
values for each office along with the rD values where the human activity noise has
been added to the background noise. It is evident that none of the offices but Arkís,
meet requirements for class C in ÍST 45 [6], in terms of rD, both with and without
additional background noise for human activity noise.
Table 4.4: Measured rD and rD with human activity noise included.
Office
rD
rD,HN
Efla 2nd
23.8
18.6
Efla 3rd
33.8
19.3
Garri
28.5
20.6
Krónan
31.7
19.1
Arkís
0.0
0.0
4.1.4
Privacy Distance, rP
The privacy distance, rP , is the distance where STI values fall below 0.20. As said
in chapter 2, this is difficult to achieve and somewhat rare to happen in open-plan
offices. Thus, the rP values from the measurements in this research are extremely
high. Table 4.5 shows the measured rP values for each office along with the rP values
where the human activity noise has been added to the background noise.
Table 4.5: Measured rP and rP with human activity noise included.
Office
rP
rP,HN
Efla 2nd
42.8
33.1
Efla 3rd
62.2
34.3
Garri
56.6
40.2
Krónan
61.4
36.4
Arkís
23.9
21.0
It is worth noting that most of the offices measured are not even this big, that
this distance would be possible to obtain. None of the offices reach a STI value of
0.2 in the measured data, and thus, the rP values show these high numbers.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Objective Measurements
37
4.1.5
A-weighted SPL of Speech, Lp,A,S
The A-weighted SPL of speech was plotted as a function of distance, r, in order to
graphically determine Lp,A,S,4m and D2,S. Figure 4.4 shows the results of Lp,A,S. For
all offices, the Lp,A,S is within the range 35-60 dB.
Figure 4.4: Measured Lp,A,S values in the five different offices.
4.1.5.1
Spatial Decay Rate of A-weighted SPL of Speech, D2,S
According to ISO 3382-3 [4], an office with D2,S < 5 dB is considered to have poor
acoustic conditions whereas an open-plan office with D2,S ≥7 dB is considered to
have good acoustic conditions. Furthermore, in ÍST 45 [6], D2,S ≥7 dB is required
for class C. Table 4.6 shows the results of D2,S for each office. Arkís and Efla 3rd are
both above 7 dB and thus, providing good acoustic conditions in terms of D2,S. The
other three are all below and Efla 2nd has the worst outcome in terms of D2,S.
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Objective Measurements
38
Table 4.6: Measured D2,S.
Office
D2,S
Efla 2nd
5.3
Efla 3rd
7.2
Garri
6.4
Krónan
5.9
Arkís
7.0
4.1.5.2
A-weighted SPL of Speech at 4 m, Lp,A,S,4m
According to ISO 3382-3 [4], an open-plan office with poor acoustic conditions has
Lp,A,S,4m > 50 dB whereas an open-plan office with good acoustic conditions has
Lp,A,S,4m ≤48 dB. ÍST 45 [6] requires Lp,A,S,4m ≤52 dB to meet class C. Table 4.7
shows the results for Lp,A,S,4m for each office. It is only Arkís which is below 52 dB
and thus, meeting the requirements for class C in ÍST 45. The other four offices are
all above the required value and Garri has the worst outcome in terms of Lp,A,S,4m.
Table 4.7: Measured Lp,A,S,4m.
Office
Lp,A,S,4m
Efla 2nd
54.3
Efla 3rd
53.6
Garri
55.4
Krónan
52.4
Arkís
51.4
4.1.6
Average A-weighted Background Noise Level, Lp,A,B
The background noise level in open-plan offices can vary tremendously between offices
depending on the size of the office, distribution of workstation as well as the type of
HVAC system used within each particular office. According to ÍST 45 [6], the total A-
weighted equivalent SPL of service equipment shall be Lp,Aeq,T ≤35 dB in open-plan
offices. All offices but Arkís manage to maintain the Lp,A,B, averaged over positions,
under 35 dB but, as stated in section 4.1.2, the ventilation system in Arkís was quite
loud in comparison to the other offices where it was barely noticeable. The values for
Lp,A,B even become higher than Lp,A,S in some locations with increased distance at
Arkís. The HVAC systems in Efla, Garri and Krónan are so-called VAV (variable air
volume) systems where airflow is varied at a constant temperature. The advantages
of these systems over constant air volume systems which supply a constant airflow at
a variable temperature are, for example, lower energy consumption and less fan noise.
The lower values of Lp,A,B in these offices in comparison to Arkís, where a constant
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Objective Measurements
39
air volume system, or a more traditional system, is used may, thus, be explained by
this.
Including human activity noise has a significant effect on low background noise.
Thus, the results for Lp,A,B are presented along with the results for Lp,A,B with
added human activity noise. Table 4.8 shows the results of the averaged Lp,A,B over
positions for each office along with the Lp,A,B mean values where human activity
noise has been added. The increase in Lp,A,B is quite big in all offices but Arkís,
but this is because the background noise is already so high in Arkís that the human
activity noise will not make a difference. This is also evident in Figure 4.5 where
Lp,A,B as a function of the distance, r, is presented.
Table 4.8: Measured Lp,A,B and Lp,A,B with human activity noise included.
Office
Lp,A,B
Lp,A,BHN
Efla 2nd
30.3
33.7
Efla 3rd
26.8
32.1
Garri
27.6
32.9
Krónan
26.5
32.0
Arkís
47.2
47.3
Figure 4.5 also indicates that the distribution of Lp,A,B in all offices is quite
unstable over measurement positions, especially at Garri.
However, after activity
noise has been added, the distribution is within a smaller range of noise level.
==PAGE:48==
4.1 Objective Measurements
40
Figure 4.5: Measured Lp,A,B values in the five different offices as well as the Lp,A,B
values with added human activity noise.
4.1.7
Summary
All five offices have measured reverberation time within the standard’s requirement
[6]. However, for the ISO 3382-3 parameters, four of the offices behave quite similar,
whereas Arkís is the office in which is very different from the others. All offices but
Arkís have high STI values, which is good in locations where co-workers need to
interact. However, for speech privacy and for work performance not to be affected
negatively, the STI values are recommended to be below 0.50. Arkís is the only office
where this happens since all measured STI values are below 0.50. Thus, Arkís still
lacks some ”Good” speech intelligibility for interactions between co-workers. Class C
in ÍST 45 [6] is not fully met in any of the offices in terms of STI. The high values
of STI in all offices but Arkís then lead to very long distraction distance, rD and
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
41
even longer privacy distance, rP in these particular offices. These values for rD and
rP are quite extreme. For both offices in Efla, the office in Garri and Krónan, the
values are very high, way above recommended values. In contrast, the rD value for
Arkís is equal to 0.0 m, indicating good acoustic conditions in Arkís nevertheless. In
terms of D2,S, only Arkís and Efla 3rd meet the requirement for class C in ÍST 45.
The other offices are still above 5 dB, but values below 5 dB indicate poor acoustic
conditions according to ISO 3382-3 [4]. Thus, even if they do not meet class C in ÍST
45, they do not have bad values for D2,S. For Lp,A,S,4m, again, only Arkís meets the
requirement for class C in ÍST 45. However, the background noise in Arkís is way
above the accepted limit stated in ÍST 45 for the average SPL of service equipment. It
most certainly is the high background noise in Arkís, though, that is a crucial factor
causing the low STI values and the very low distraction distance, rD.
Therefore, it is worth evaluating which is more important in an open-plan office;
the very low background noise where speech is heard very clearly everywhere in the
office or a high background noise with masking abilities towards disturbing noise such
as speech. As stated in the literature, background noise from HVAC systems are not
perceived as noise or annoying sound as much as speech is in open-plan offices [3].
Table 4.9 presents all the acoustic parameters measured for each office.
Table 4.9: Measured acoustic parameters in all five offices.
Acoustic Parameter
Efla 2nd
Efla 3rd
Garri
Krónan
Arkís
T20 (500-1000 Hz) [s]
0.42
0.37
0.48
0.42
0.47
STI
0.80
0.75
0.68
0.74
0.33
rD [m]
23.8
33.8
28.5
31.7
0.0
rP [m]
42.8
62.2
56.6
61.4
23.9
D2,S [dB]
5.3
7.2
6.4
5.9
7.0
Lp,A,S,4m [dB]
54.3
53.6
55.4
52.4
51.4
Lp,A,B [dB]
30.3
26.8
27.6
26.5
47.2
4.2
Subjective Ratings
The subjective assessment was conducted through an online survey form called Survey-
Hero. The questionnaire starts with questions concerning general information about
the employee and his/her workstation. From there, questions concerning acoustic sat-
isfaction within the open-plan office are asked. Following sub-chapters will present
the results from the questionnaire.
4.2.1
Response Rate
Table 4.10 shows the descriptive results for the samples used in the analysis phase.
The highest mean age is in Efla 2nd, and the only office which has a higher percentage
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
42
of women as respondents is Arkís. Overall acoustic satisfaction among all the offices
is, in fact, excellent and does not vary a lot between the offices. The employees at
Garri seem to be the most satisfied, whereas the employees at Efla 2nd are least sat-
isfied among the five offices. Acoustic satisfaction is here represented as the answer
to the question ”How satisfied are you with the acoustical conditions at your worksta-
tion?”. The answers were re-coded into a binary variable where answers < 6 equal
”dissatisfied” and answers ≥6 equal ”satisfied”.
Table 4.10: Descriptive statistics for the samples used in the analysis.
Office
n
Age, M
Age Range
Female %
Acoustic Satisfaction %
Efla 2nd
13
51.4
25-67
38.5%
61.53
Efla 3rd
25
39.3
23-67
36.0%
83.34
Garri
18
42.6
23-67
38.9%
88.89
Krónan
20
38.5
23-67
40.0%
85.00
Arkís
15
44.5
25-67
60.0%
71.43
Total
91
43.3
23-67
41.8%
-
The response rate per office was, on average, 65%.
4.2.2
General Information Answers
The questionnaire has several general information questions concerning the employee
to understand the type of participant group being examined. Figure 4.6 shows the
results from these initial questions from the survey. Males are a larger group within
participants, but as seen in Table 4.10, the females are 41.8% of the respondents.
Most respondents are within the age range of 25-45. In terms of working hours at
the office per week, most employees work a regular working week which is usually
38 hours in Iceland. The most common answer for the number of employees in the
area where the workstation is located is 16-49. For the possibility to change seats if
an employee wishes to do to, it is almost 50/50 whether the respondents answered
”YES” or ”NO”. All offices do have some quiet work-spaces, so almost all employees
say they have access to such spaces. As for arranging workstations in terms of the
stimuli employees experience depending on their type of work, most answer ”NO”.
Only 6 out of 91 respondents have hearing difficulties.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
43
Figure 4.6: Results from general information questions.
4.2.3
Distribution of Answers
The questionnaire consists of three types of questions; the unipolar answering scale
questions, the bipolar answering scale questions and the Likert-type scale in which
the unipolar scale is used within.
In order to evaluate the Likert scale questions
and identify the most critical category, the analysis on the Likert scale questions
was performed individually before general distribution of answers in the form of a
histogram was made. With the knowledge of the most critical factor in each Likert
scale question, a histogram was made of only this factor. This section will divide the
evaluation into the same chapters as the questionnaire is structured.
4.2.3.1
Work Environment
The first question of the Work Environment section is a Likert scale question, and the
results are demonstrated in Figure 4.7. It is immediately evident that noise, thermal
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
44
conditions and air quality are considered the most disturbing environmental factors.
By looking at the ratings for moderately, very and extremely summed up, or ≥3
which is identified as the high end, it is evident that noise has the highest percentage,
or approximately 51% to be specific. Thus, noise is, as expected, the most critical
factor in this first question.
Figure 4.7: How much have the following indoor environmental factors disturbed you
at your workstation during the last 3 months?
Question 3 in this section is also a Likert scale question where different types of
sounds are evaluated in terms of disturbance. Figure 4.8 shows the results for this
question. The results support earlier findings from the literature that the most dis-
turbing sound in open-plan offices is background speech or speech from neighbouring
workstations. About 45% of the respondents respond with ≥3, whereas all the other
categories are below 40%.
Almost none of the respondents consider sounds from
HVAC systems disturbing, which also supports the earlier findings that background
noise is not perceived as a source of noise [3].
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
45
Figure 4.8: How much do the following sounds disturb your concentration on your
work at your workstation?
The rest of the questions in this section are not Likert scale questions, and thus,
the distribution of answers are presented with histograms in Figure 4.9. It is evident
that the bipolar questions have a skewed distribution towards the positive end, full
satisfaction. Zero on the unipolar rating scale represents when respondents left the
answer for a question blank.
Figure 4.9: Histogram with the distribution of answers.
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
46
4.2.3.2
Noise Effects
The Noise Effects section in the questionnaire has only one Likert scale question. The
results are shown in Figure 4.10. Mathematical tasks are the ones most affected by
noise disturbance.
Figure 4.10: How much does noise disturb the following types of work?
The distribution of answers in all questions in the Noise Effects section are then
presented in Figure 4.11. WP is an abbreviation for Work Performance.
Figure 4.11: Histogram with the distribution of answers.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
47
4.2.3.3
Well-being
The Well-being section also includes one Likert scale question. The results are shown
in Figure 4.12. The most common symptoms or feelings that people have been expe-
riencing at work are concentration problems and stress. By looking at the ratings for
moderately, very and extremely summed up, it is evident that the stress and strain
choice has the highest percentage, or approximately 49% to be specific. Concentra-
tion has a little lower summary of these three categories or 46%. Thus, stress and
strain is the most critical factor in this Likert scale question.
Figure 4.12: How much of the following symptoms or feelings have you experienced
during the last 3 months?
The distribution of answers in all questions in the Well-being section are then
presented in Figure 4.13.
Again, it is noticeable that the bipolar question has a
skewed distribution towards the positive end.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
48
Figure 4.13: Histogram with the distribution of answers.
4.2.3.4
Combined Distribution of Answers
In Figure 4.14, the results from the questionnaire in the form of a boxplot are pre-
sented. However, the two different answering scales are separated into two plots to
avoid misunderstanding. The questions are represented with the abbreviations of the
section from the questionnaire they belong to; WE = Work Environment, NE = Noise
Effects and WB = Well-being. The unipolar scale questions (Figure 4.14a) show that
the answers for question NE2c and NE3 are closer to the negative end than the others.
NE3 however, ”How well can you hear speech from neighbouring workstations at your
workstation?”, varies much less than NE2c, ”How much does noise disturb the work
of mathematical tasks?”. The more consistency in answers as in NE3 should make the
results more dependable. The median line is low for WB2f but high for WB3. The
most valuable information taken from this plot is the most significant disturbance
with little speech privacy, NE3.
As for the bipolar scale questions (Figure 4.14b), the results show rather positive
answers, as indicated in the earlier presented histograms. Here, a 10 represents ”very
satisfied” and thus, the acoustic satisfaction overall, WE2, implies high ratings and
happy employees as also noted in Table 4.10.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
49
(a) Unipolar answer scale questions.
(b) Bipolar answer scale questions.
Figure 4.14: Boxplots indicating the ratings of all questions from the survey.
4.2.4
Combined Subjective Evaluation
The mean ratings for each question were evaluated per office in order to see overall
satisfaction and perceived disturbance ratings between offices. Figure 4.15 presents
these results. As in the earlier presented boxplots (Figure 4.14), the two different
answering scales are separated into two plots. It seems that Efla 2nd has the most
overall negative answers for both the unipolar answering scale as well as the bipolar
scale. All curves in the unipolar scale show similar behaviour. The difference between
offices in the bipolar answering scale looks more aggressive than in the unipolar an-
swering scale due to the fewer questions within the bipolar one. It is worth noticing,
however, that all the offices have mean ratings > 5 in the bipolar answering scale, but
the rating scale ranges from 0 to 10. Again, general satisfaction with acoustic condi-
tions is here highlighted. WE2 is considered the key question in this whole research
and will, therefore, be thoroughly evaluated in the next section.
(a) Unipolar answer scale questions.
(b) Bipolar answer scale questions.
Figure 4.15: Mean ratings for all questions per office.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Subjective Ratings
50
4.2.5
Key Question
The purpose of this thesis is to assess acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices. There-
fore, a key question from the questionnaire is the one here called WE2 or ”How sat-
isfied are you with the acoustical conditions at your workstation?”. The answering
scale is a bipolar answering scale in a range from 0 to 10 or from ”very dissatisfied”
to ”very satisfied” As seen in the histogram in Figure 4.9, the answer distribution is
skewed towards the positive end, indicating quite high satisfaction. Table 4.11 shows
descriptive statistics for the key question.
Table 4.11: Descriptive statistics for the key question.
Min
Max
Mean
Standard
Deviation
Confidence Level
95%
1st Quartile
Q1
3rd Quartile
Q3
0.0
10.0
7.08
2.37
0.49
6.0
9.0
The 95% confidence level shows that it is possible to be 95% confident that the
population mean is in the interval 7.08 +/- 0.49. With a larger sample of respondents,
the confidence interval would be much more narrow, but the sample in this research
is not very big. The first quartile (Q1) represents that 25% observations are below
this quantity. The third quartile (Q3) means that 75% observations are below this
quantity.
Figure 4.16 shows the overall ratings for the key question per office. Answers 7,8
and 9 are the most common ratings.
Figure 4.16: Overall ratings for the key question per office.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Statistical Analysis
This chapter presents the analysis performed on all the measured data, both objective
and subjective. A Pearson correlation analysis is performed on the subjective ratings
from the questionnaire in order to evaluate how correlated the questions are with the
key question. Furthermore, the correlation between the measured acoustic parameters
and overall acoustic satisfaction is presented where it is then possible to identify
which acoustic parameter is the most critical one for overall acoustic satisfaction. Is
it possible to predict acoustic satisfaction by a particular acoustic parameter?
5.1
Correlation among the Subjective Ratings
The questionnaire includes 13 different questions concerning the work environment
with the acoustic conditions as a focal point. Thus, it is only relevant to evaluate the
correlation among questions to see if some of the questions would be redundant in
further analysis. With a Pearson correlation analysis, it was possible to see if there
was a significant correlation between the questions and specifically, the correlation
between the key question and all the other questions.
5.1.1
Correlation Matrix
Table 5.1 shows the correlation matrix with Pearson’s correlation coefficients.
A
negative correlation does not mean poor correlation. A strong negative correlation
indicates a strong connection between the two variables, but that one goes up when-
ever the other one goes down. This particular case is the reason for the negative
numbers seen for the questions in which have a bipolar answering scale. Most of the
questions have a unipolar answering scale where the highest rating (5) is a negative
reaction. However, for the bipolar questions, the highest rating (10) is a positive re-
action. A strong relationship between two variables is generally when their r value is
larger than 0.7. A value between 0.5 and 0.7 is a moderate correlation, and anything
below 0.4 is considered weak or no correlation.
When looking at the column for WE2, it is noticeable that question WE4, ”How
satisfied are you with the furniture at your workstation?”, has the highest correlation
coefficient, which is almost high enough to be considered a strong relationship. This is
interesting, as Hongisto et al. [33] presented a study which showed a clear relationship
==PAGE:60==
5.1 Correlation among the Subjective Ratings
52
between an employee’s satisfaction and the quality of the physical environment. In
terms of a correlation with question WE2, most of the questions are moderately
correlated except WB1, WB2f and WB3. Thus, most of the Well-being questions
are not correlated with overall acoustic satisfaction. It is evident that question WB1,
”Do you experience any health problems in general?”, almost shows no significance in
terms of a correlation to any of the questions. This is due to the little variety in the
answers to this question. Most respondents answer with ”not at all” for question WB1.
WB2f also shows weak or no correlation with all questions. WB4, ”How satisfied are
you with your work environment in terms of its calming effect on you?”, however, is
almost strongly correlated with WE2. Thus, how employees perceive their working
environment seems to correlate somewhat strongly with acoustic satisfaction.
What was unexpected was a rather low correlation for question NE1, ”Generally
speaking, would you say that the level of noise in your work environment is high?”.
The question is still moderately correlated with WE2, but, a strong relationship
was expected. This may be explained by the fact that all of the offices do provide
employees access to quiet work-spaces. This feature has shown to reduce perceived
disturbance by noise [3]. It makes sense to expect low acoustic satisfaction, where
the noise level is perceived as high. The questions concerning speech, WE3b, NE3,
NE4 and NE5 were also less correlated with WE2 than expected.
Table 5.1: Questionnaire correlation matrix with Pearson’s correlation coefficients.
WE1a
WE2
WE3b
WE4
NE1
NE2c
NE3
NE4
NE5
WB1
WB2f
WB3
WB4
WE1a
1
-0.61***
0.65***
-0.46***
0.70***
0.63***
0.54***
0.63***
0.61***
-0.04
0.23*
0.47***
-0.54***
WE2
-0.61***
1
-0.53***
0.69***
-0.58***
-0.51***
-0.52***
-0.50***
-0.55***
-0.06
-0.19
-0.42***
0.68***
WE3b
0.65***
-0.53***
1
-0.41***
0.65***
0.64***
0.44***
0.68***
0.70***
0.08
0.30**
0.48***
-0.49***
WE4
-0.46***
0.69***
-0.41***
1
-0.45***
-0.34***
-0.31**
-0.39***
-0.41***
-0.13
-0.24*
-0.36***
0.61***
NE1
0.70***
-0.58***
0.65***
-0.45***
1
0.63***
0.48***
0.58***
0.62***
0.02
0.16
0.44***
-0.53***
NE2c
0.63***
-0.51***
0.64***
-0.34***
0.63***
1
0.37***
0.57***
0.64***
0.00
0.29**
0.46***
-0.50***
NE3
0.54***
-0.52***
0.44***
-0.31**
0.48***
0.37***
1
0.52***
0.51***
0.03
0.12
0.31**
-0.37***
NE4
0.63***
-0.50***
0.68***
-0.39***
0.58***
0.57***
0.52***
1
0.72***
-0.03
0.28**
0.50***
-0.49***
NE5
0.61***
-0.55***
0.70***
-0.41***
0.62***
0.64***
0.51***
0.72***
1
0.09
0.33**
0.56***
-0.56***
WB1
-0.04
-0.06
0.08
-0.13
0.02
0.00
0.03
-0.03
0.09
1
0.30**
0.30**
-0.20
WB2f
0.23*
-0.19
0.30**
-0.24*
0.16
0.29**
0.12
0.28**
0.33**
0.30**
1
0.49***
-0.39***
WB3
0.47***
-0.42***
0.48***
-0.36***
0.44***
0.46***
0.31**
0.50***
0.56***
0.30**
0.49***
1
-0.48***
WB4
-0.54***
0.68***
-0.49***
0.61***
-0.53***
-0.50***
-0.37***
-0.49***
-0.56***
-0.20
-0.39***
-0.48***
1
* p < 0.05
** p < 0.01
*** p < 0.001
Graphical visualisation of the correlation matrix is shown in Figure 5.1 where it
is again visible that WB1 does not correlate whatsoever with any of the questions.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Correlation among the Subjective Ratings
53
Figure 5.1: Visualisation of a correlation matrix.
5.1.2
Linear relationship with the Key Question
In order to better understand the linear relationship between some of the questions
with the highest correlation coefficient and the key question, linear regression plots
were made. Figure 5.2-5.4 demonstrates those linear relationships. It was interesting
to look at the different type of questions which are divided into the categories noise,
perceived work environment and speech. Among these three categories, the questions
concerning the perceived work environment, Figure 5.3, show the highest correlation,
as mentioned in section 5.1.1.
(a) WE1a
(b) NE1
Figure 5.2: Noise questions.
==PAGE:62==
5.1 Correlation among the Subjective Ratings
54
(a) WE4
(b) WB4
Figure 5.3: Perceived work environment questions.
Surprisingly, given what has been stated in previous studies, the speech questions
did not show as high correlation as expected, Figure 5.4. Still, the speech questions are
considered moderately correlated with acoustic satisfaction as the graphs in Figure 5.2
and Figure 5.3.
(a) NE3
(b) NE4
Figure 5.4: Speech questions.
Since the results for most of the questions from the questionnaire are moderately
correlated with the key question, WE2 will remain as the main question to use for the
analysis on the relationship between acoustic parameters and acoustic satisfaction. It
is relevant to analyse it separately with each acoustic parameter to see the individual
effect of each parameter on the overall acoustic satisfaction.
Overall, the results from the key question do not vary tremendously between the
offices, and as seen in Table 4.10, the satisfaction is quite high in general. Thus, a
strong relationship with the measured acoustic parameters is not expected.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
55
5.2
Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
The main goal of this study is to analyse the relationship between the open-plan office
acoustic parameters and the worker’s subjective experience of acoustic conditions in
their workplace. This section takes all the above-discussed results and evaluates the
relationship between the main variables of the study.
5.2.1
Overview
The measured acoustic parameters for each office were shown in Table 4.9. The overall
acoustic satisfaction per office was shown in Table 4.10. The results from question
WE2 had been re-coded into a binary variable where answers < 6 equal ”dissatisfied”
and answers ≥6 equal ”satisfied”. Table 5.2 shows these results combined as these
are all the results for the main variables of this study. The WE2 binary variable was
used for this purpose only to show the general acoustic satisfaction among employees
in the summary table. For all the statistical analysis, the full WE2 variable is used,
and not the binary one.
Table 5.2: Results for the main variables of the study.
Variables
Efla 2nd
Efla 3rd
Garri
Krónan
Arkís
T20 (500-1000 Hz) [s]
0.42
0.37
0.48
0.42
0.47
STI
0.80
0.75
0.68
0.74
0.33
rD [m]
23.8
33.8
28.5
31.7
0.0
rP [m]
42.8
62.2
56.6
61.4
23.9
D2,S [dB]
5.3
7.2
6.4
5.9
7.0
Lp,A,S,4m [dB]
54.3
53.6
55.4
52.4
51.4
Lp,A,B [dB]
30.3
26.8
27.6
26.5
47.2
Acoustic Satisfaction [%]
61.53
83.34
88.89
85.00
71.43
5.2.2
Correlation Analysis
Correlations between the main variables of the study are reported in Table 5.3. The
correlation between the acoustic parameters and overall acoustic satisfaction is the
correlation of interest. Pearson’s correlation coefficients for this relationship all in-
dicate weak or no correlation at all. The only parameters which show significant
correlation are rD, rP and Lp,A,B. These three parameters are also closely related.
None of the other parameters shows a significant Pearson correlation to acoustic
satisfaction whatsoever.
==PAGE:64==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
56
Table 5.3: Pearson’s correlation coefficients for the associations between the main
variables of the study.
WE2
T20
STI
rD
rP
D2,S
Lp,A,S,4m
Lp,A,B
WE2
1
-0.05
0.19
0.26*
0.29**
0.01
0.18
-0.26*
T20
-0.05
1
-0.58***
-0.58***
-0.54***
-0.22*
0.06
0.49***
STI
0.19
-0.58***
1
0.92***
0.82***
-0.42***
0.59***
-0.94***
rD
0.26*
-0.58***
0.92***
1
0.98***
-0.14
0.56***
-0.99***
rP
0.29**
-0.54***
0.82***
0.98***
1
-0.01
0.47***
-0.95***
D2,S
0.01
-0.22*
-0.42***
-0.14
-0.01
1
-0.20
0.26*
Lp,A,S,4m
0.18
0.06
0.59***
0.56***
0.47***
-0.20
1
-0.62***
Lp,A,B
-0.26*
0.49***
-0.94***
-0.99***
-0.95***
0.26*
-0.62***
1
* p < 0.05
** p < 0.01
*** p < 0.001
Graphical visualisation of the correlation matrix is shown in Figure 5.5 where the
weak correlation between measured acoustic parameters and the results from question
WE2 is evident. The correlation suggests that STI, rD, rP , Lp,A,S,4m and Lp,A,B
have some, though weak, relation with acoustic satisfaction whereas T20 and D2,S
have absolutely no relation at all. STI and Lp,A,S,4m have quite a similar relation
with WE2, which is slightly below the highest ones, yet not significant.
Figure 5.5: Visualisation of a correlation between the main variables of the study.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
57
5.2.3
Linear Mixed Models
The analysis of the data is reported by using a random intercept linear mixed model
analysis of variance (ANOVA). Separate models are fitted for each acoustic variable
as a predictor for overall acoustic satisfaction. Each model is adjusted for age. Thus,
fixed effects in each model are age and an acoustic variable. A random effect is the
offices as the room acoustic variables do not vary within offices, so a random intercept
for workplaces is used. Table 5.4 shows the linear mixed model variables.
Table 5.4: The linear mixed model variables.
Outcome Variable
Fixed Effects
Random Effects
Acoustic Satisfaction
Age + Acoustic Parameter
Office
The final linear mixed models are fit by REML. t-tests use Satterthwaite’s method
[lmerModLmerTest]. F-values and p-values are reported through type III ANOVA.
AIC values are based on ordinary likelihoods. Initially, the linearity and normality of
residuals were checked on the linear models to confirm that there is no violation of the
normality assumption. Figure 5.6 shows the histograms for each linear model. The
histograms show almost all identical distribution of residuals. Here it is concluded
that there are no obvious violations of the normality assumption.
Figure 5.6: Histograms showing the normality of residuals for each acoustic parameter
model. From top left: T20, STI, rD, rP , D2,S, Lp,A,S,4m and Lp,A,B.
The models are evaluated and reported with F-values and p-values as well as the
AIC to indicate how well the models are predicting acoustic satisfaction. Table 5.5
shows the summary results from the linear mixed model ANOVA. The results indicate
that no parameter shows significant power to predict acoustic satisfaction. However,
the parameter closest to being significant is rP with the lowest p-value and the highest
F-value. Additionally, the AIC for the rP model is the lowest, indicating the best
fit among all the models. Thus, the rP model comes closest to being significant in
predicting acoustic satisfaction. Following the rP model, rD and Lp,A,B are the second
closest to being significant, and their models have quite similar results. The results
also indicate that T20 and D2,S are the parameters that are furthest away from being
==PAGE:66==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
58
significant, and their models have the worst fit among all the models.
Therefore,
it is safe to say that T20 does not provide sufficient information about acoustical
conditions, in terms of acoustic satisfaction, in open-plan offices. The fact that STI
has no association with acoustic satisfaction is rather surprising given earlier findings
concerning STI in literature [7]. Additionally, STI is closely related to rD and rP ,
which are the parameters here closest to significantly predicting acoustic satisfaction.
These findings immediately raise doubts about the reliability of the results.
Table 5.5: Summary results of the linear mixed model analysis of variance.
Parameter
F-value
p-value
AIC
T20
0.031
0.873
422.53
STI
0.657
0.481
421.50
rD
3.786
0.167
418.11
rP
9.218
0.076
415.32
D2,S
0.126
0.746
422.40
Lp,A,S,4m
0.643
0.486
421.52
Lp,A,B
3.351
0.186
418.44
Figure 5.7 shows the acoustic satisfaction as a function of each acoustic parameter.
The plot shows very little difference between the output of the models, indicating that
including the acoustic parameters is not critical for the models. The first quartile (Q1)
represents that 25% observations are below this quantity. The third quartile (Q3)
means that 75% observations are below this quantity. The upper and lower whiskers
represent scores outside the middle 50%, that is, the ranges for the bottom 25% and
the top 25% of the data value, excluding the outliers.
All the boxplots for each
acoustic parameters are comparatively short, indicating little variation in the scores
for acoustic satisfaction. The median line in all the boxes is quite similarly placed in
all the boxes, approximately at a score of 7. The reference, which represents only the
answers of WE2 in the questionnaire, shows that the middle 50% of the answering
for WE2 range from 6-9, which is the high end of the answering scale or indicating
general high acoustic satisfaction, as earlier noted.
The results show that all the
acoustic parameters are not significantly different from the reference. Hence, none of
the acoustic parameters indicates a significant power to predict acoustic satisfaction.
An unadjusted model for age, however, shows significant association with acoustic
satisfaction and respondents under 25 years of age. The rD models and the Lp,A,B
model also show this significance in association with acoustic satisfaction and respon-
dents under 25 years. However, the respondents who are under 25 years are very few,
and thus, this is not considered reliable.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
59
Figure 5.7: Acoustic satisfaction as a function of each acoustic parameter.
The
whiskers in the plot indicate the minimum and the maximum data points of the
distribution. The bottom edge of the boxes represents the 25th percentile (Q1) and
the top edge represents the 75th percentile (Q3) whereas the black horizontal line in
each box is the median.
Even though none of the parameters can significantly predict acoustic satisfaction,
it is worth assessing the predicted probabilities of each acoustic parameter. Figure 5.8
shows the results for this. The results indicate that lower T20 has a higher expected
probability of acoustic satisfaction than higher T20. The difference is, however, not
extreme at all. Larger STI values have a higher expected probability of acoustic satis-
faction than lower ones. Again, not a very steep line. Longer rD and rP have a higher
expected probability of acoustic satisfaction than the shorter ones. Increased D2,S
yields an increase in the expected probability of acoustic satisfaction. For Lp,A,S,4m,
there is a slight increase in the expected probability of acoustic satisfaction with in-
creased Lp,A,S,4m. On the contrary, an increase in Lp,A,B yields a decrease in the
expected probability of acoustic satisfaction.
What is odd, but can be explained, about these plots in Figure 5.8 is the behaviour
of some of the regression lines. First and foremost, as seen in Table 5.2, three of the
companies have more than 80% of the respondents satisfied with acoustic conditions
and even the other two are above 60% of satisfied respondents with acoustic conditions.
With this little variety in the ratings of acoustic conditions, the relationship between
measured parameters and the subjective experience becomes less clear.
Only one
office, Arkís, stood out with very different acoustic parameter values from the others
while the acoustic conditions in the other four offices seemed quite similar.
==PAGE:68==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
60
(a) T20
(b) STI
(c) rD
(d) rP
(e) D2,S
(f) Lp,A,S,4m
(g) Lp,A,B
Figure 5.8: Predicted probabilities of acoustic satisfaction by each measured acoustic
parameter.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Objective Parameters vs. Subjective Ratings
61
The regression lines indicate that an increase in rD and rP is associated with
increased acoustic satisfaction, which is not really realistic as in open-plan offices,
it is considered good acoustic conditions to have lower values for these parameters.
However, the graph ((c) and (d) in Figure 5.8), shows increased satisfaction with
increased distances. Arkís was the only office with a low rD value and with 71.43%
respondents satisfied with acoustic conditions.
All the other offices but one have
higher acoustic satisfaction percentages and way higher values for rD. These results
underline the need for a bigger sample of offices and more variety in the ratings on
acoustic satisfaction.
Furthermore, if significant, an increase in Lp,A,B is associated with decreased
acoustic satisfaction, most likely explained by the too-high background noise in Arkís.
With more variety in the Lp,A,B values, it could have been expected to see higher
satisfaction with higher Lp,A,B as, for instance in [3], higher background noise resulted
in lower disturbance by noise.
This is where the background noise is working as
a masking sound, but a masking level should never exceed 46 dB(A) [7], but in
Arkís, the mean Lp,A,B is 47.2 dB. Thus, this may explain the lowered satisfaction
with increasing Lp,A,B since only Arkís had this high Lp,A,B. This also explains the
behaviour of the regression lines for rD and rP .
Additionally, in reality, one would also think that lower Lp,A,S,4m would yield
higher acoustic satisfaction. ISO 3382-3 [4], for instance, requires Lp,A,S,4m ≤48
dB in order to obtain good acoustic conditions. Thus, increased acoustic satisfaction
with increased Lp,A,S,4m does not make sense.
As mentioned before, the measured values for T20 are all below the maximum
allowed value according to ÍST 45 [6]. Thus, it is reasonable to see almost no relation
to acoustic satisfaction whatsoever. D2,S seems to have no relationship with acoustic
satisfaction, but this is supported by literature, for instance, results from [3] suggest
that D2,S is not associated with noise disturbance in any way.
Overall, the results seem quite off given the little variety among acoustic satisfac-
tion ratings as well as the measured acoustic parameters. The results highlight the
need for further studies on this topic.
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The aim of this study was to analyse acoustic conditions in five different open-plan of-
fices and assess the effect of individual acoustic parameters on the worker’s experience.
The results did not support the hypothesis that one or more of the measured acoustic
parameters could predict acoustic satisfaction. The models indicated no significant
power for the acoustic parameters to predict overall acoustic satisfaction. The param-
eter that came closest to being significant was rP . However, predicted probabilities
showed odd behaviour of some of the parameters’ regression lines, including rP , which
raised doubts about the reliability of the results. Thus, the results are possibly not
giving the right image of the correlation between acoustic satisfaction and open-plan
office acoustic parameters.
6.1
Main Variables of the Study
T20 results indicate no significant association with acoustic satisfaction.
However,
the results show that T20 must have been the primary variable thought of when the
acoustic design was made in the offices as all offices are below the maximum allowed
value for fulfilling class C in ÍST 45 [6]. The predicted probabilities make sense in
a way that higher reverberation time yields lower satisfaction in an open-plan office.
STI results do not show evidence of significant association with acoustic satisfaction
either which is not compatible with much prior work where STI is claimed to be a
critical parameter for employees to experience acoustic conditions positively [7], [3].
Newsham et al. [38] did, however, not find any evidence of an association between
acoustic satisfaction and STI. The results in terms of distraction distance, rD, are
not compatible with the literature where increased distraction distance is said to
yield increased disturbance by noise [3].
The results indicate that with increased
distraction distance, acoustic satisfaction is increased. Same goes for privacy distance,
rP .
Increased privacy distance is related to increased acoustic satisfaction which
indicates that employees do not need any privacy around their workstation, which
is most certainly not true. D2,S does not show significant association with acoustic
satisfaction and does, therefore, not predict acoustic satisfaction. This is compatible
with earlier studies [3]. Same goes for Lp,A,S,4m, no significant association whatsoever.
However, the predicted probabilities show that increased Lp,A,S,4m yields increased
acoustic satisfaction which, if significant, would generally be weird results out of
common sense as this means that higher sound level at 4 m distance yields higher
==PAGE:71==
6.2 The Room Acoustic Parameters related to the Design of the Offices
63
acoustic satisfaction.
This is opposed to the findings of Haapakangas et al.
[3].
The results of Lp,A,B do not show significant association with acoustic satisfaction
either.
However, if significant, the results indicate that an increase in Lp,A,B is
associated with decreased acoustic satisfaction.
This, again, is opposed to earlier
findings of Haapakangas et al. [3] where higher Lp,A,B is associated with lower odds of
disturbance by noise. An explanation for this could be that the measured background
noise in Arkís has reached a level where it is perceived as noise and is not functioning
with masking abilities.
The results from the questionnaire in terms of overall acoustic satisfaction were
very positive. It might be that employees are, in reality, quite satisfied with the acous-
tic conditions in their offices. However, during the questionnaire phase, COVID19
had hit the world, and many employees were working from home. Thus, it might
affect answers that employees were answering the questionnaire from home, and not
while they were experiencing the acoustic conditions first hand. Therefore, certain
acoustic condition characteristics might be forgotten while not experienced first hand.
Furthermore, all offices are activity-based offices where workers can use alternative
work-spaces such as quiet work-spaces. Results from Haapakangas et al. [3] show
that the activity-based feature may reduce perceived disturbance by noise because
the workers are able to ”escape” to a silent room if they wish to. The overall high
satisfaction could very well be affected by this.
An additional feature for discussion which could indeed be a whole research topic
on its own is the coping strategies in open-plan offices. For most measurement sessions
in this particular study, employees had already left the office when measurements were
to take place. However, in Efla and Arkís, few employees were still present just before
the measurement session. They left before the session started as no people should be
present during measurements. Nevertheless, it was noticeable that all these employees
were wearing headphones while working at their workstation. It is worth wondering
if this is the case for most of the employees within the offices. Thus, the complete
acoustic satisfaction within the offices may very well be explained by this as obviously,
employees are less disturbed by their environment if they are wearing headphones
while working.
6.2
The Room Acoustic Parameters related to the
Design of the Offices
In terms of materials in the offices, some critical materials were noted in each office.
The two offices in Efla had the same design in terms of furniture and materials.
However, Efla 2nd is much smaller than Efla 3rd, and this explains the difference in
measured acoustic parameters among these two offices. The flooring is wood, and
each workstation has cabinets on each side which also create a bit of privacy at one’s
workstation. However, this does not create any speech privacy whatsoever as the
STI values are very high in these offices leading to very high rD and rP values as
==PAGE:72==
6.3 Limitations
64
well which is also due to the very low Lp,A,B. Both Garri and Krónan have carpet
flooring, and Krónan has no acoustic screens between workstations. Garri, however,
has acoustic screens between workstations as well as cabinets in the height of 1.2
m between every other workstation which seems to lower STI values a little bit in
comparison to Krónan. Thus, rD and rP values are also lowered in Garri. Arkís is the
office in which the measured acoustic parameters were very different from the other
four offices. The flooring in Arkís is linoleum, and their ceiling is painted mineral
wool, creating much absorption in the ceiling. The plexiglass between every opposing
workstation in Arkís most certainly affects the results of acoustic parameters and likely
plays a vital role in the low STI values between workstations, but this is also affected
by the very high Lp,A,B. The very high Lp,A,B in Arkís is most likely the leading
cause for the different values for all the ISO 3382-3 [4] parameters in comparison to
all the other offices.
Arkís did renovations and redesigned their interior in 2017. Garri opened their
brand new headquarters in 2017, and Krónan got their offices redesigned the same
year.
Efla just moved into new headquarters at the end of 2018.
Whether this
plays a vital role in acoustic satisfaction among all of the respondents may well be
justified. As mentioned in chapter 2, Hongisto et al. [33] performed a study on a
refurbishment of an open-plan office which showed a clear relationship between an
employee’s satisfaction and the quality of the physical environment. Thus, it might
affect the answers that all of the respondents are working in a newly designed office
space.
6.3
Limitations
This study includes several uncertainties and primarily due to unforeseen circum-
stances in the world while the study was conducted. COVID19 has had a significant
influence on the results, both for the objective measurements as well as the subjective
assessments. The subjective assessment has already been discussed above concerning
employees answering the questionnaire while working from home. Regarding objective
measurements, the limitations are mainly due to the usage of the office spaces during
COVID19. The HVAC systems in Efla, Garri and Krónan are so-called VAV (variable
air volume) systems where airflow is varied at a constant temperature. The advan-
tages of these systems over constant air volume systems which supply a constant
airflow at a variable temperature are, for example, lower energy consumption and
less fan noise. Due to COVID19, the employees were mostly working from home, and
therefore, the HVAC systems were most likely not operating as they would normally
do when the offices are filled with employees during working hours. Therefore, the
much lower values of Lp,A,B in these offices in comparison to Arkís, may be explained
by this.
Furthermore, the study only includes measured room acoustic quantities in con-
ditions when people are absent, leaving the effect of noise caused by employees out.
The experiment within the study of including human activity noise as additional back-
==PAGE:73==
6.4 Further Work
65
ground noise proofed the effect it has on STI specifically and thus, rD and rP . In
order to use real values for additional background noise caused by human activities,
measurements needed to be conducted for this value while employees were present.
However, this was not possible, again due to COVID19, since most employees were
working from home, and therefore, measurements would provide unrealistic values for
additional background noise.
Finally, the reliability of the statistical estimates may have been affected by the
small sample of offices. Additionally, the variability is not significant and thus, not
possible to get clear associations between acoustic satisfaction and measured acous-
tic parameters. In general, the employees are overall very satisfied. It would have
been good to get an office in the sample where dissatisfaction with acoustic condi-
tions is known and possibly where complaints have been made regarding the acoustic
conditions.
6.4
Further Work
Ideally, this study should be replicated with a larger number of offices and with
more variety among offices. Further studies should also include measurements on
human activity noise in order to get accurate evaluations on acoustic conditions in
open-plan offices. An important matter in future work is also to include a section
on coping strategies in subjective assessments, whether or not employees are used to
working with headphones on or not as this most certainly affects answers in terms of
how an employee experiences his/her working environment. To take it even further
would be to include thoughts on the noise-cancelling headphones as this blocks all
the environmental sounds that would possibly lower acoustic satisfaction.
Furthermore, the priority in ÍST45 should be clear in terms of ISO 3382-3 param-
eters. The standard has a requirement of an A-weighted SPL for service equipment,
Lp,Aeq,T ≤35 dB. The required values for ISO 3382-3 parameters are stated in the
code’s appendix. However, with this low background noise, the values for, for example,
STI are almost impossible to reach if no masking sound is used. In order to obtain
good conditions in terms of ISO 3382-3 parameters, an open-plan office requires a
background noise level of 45 dB(A) [9]. The ambient noise level may, however, not
exceed 45 dB(A) as this can lead to occupants experiencing reduced acoustical satis-
faction [22], [19]. The results indicate that almost none of the respondents consider
sounds from HVAC systems disturbing. Thus, ÍST45 might have to reconsider where
the real focus lies in order to reach the required values for the ISO 3382-3 parameters.
One can, however, argue for if this is necessary, given the satisfied employees in the
offices assessed for this study.
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The main goal of this study was to investigate whether open-plan office acoustic pa-
rameters could predict acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices. Following research
question was formulated:
Which ISO 3382-3 parameter best explains acoustical satisfaction of
open-plan offices?
Additionally, whether human activity noise affects the measured parameters in
open-plan offices was assessed. The following conclusions have been gathered from
the analysis of the data collected for this study.
In a comparative statistical study on the obtained data, no ISO 3382-3 parameter
showed significant power to predict overall acoustic satisfaction. Privacy distance,
rP , came closest to the significant power.
However, predicted probabilities of rP
indicated odd behaviour of the regression line. The regression line suggests increased
acoustic satisfaction with increased rP , which means that employees are satisfied with
not having any speech privacy at all whatsoever. Thus, the results do not provide
enough evidence to say that rP is a parameter that could possibly predict acoustic
satisfaction. The study needs more variety of offices as well as more variety in acoustic
satisfaction ratings.
However, regarding adding human activity noise as additional background noise,
shows clear evidence of lower STI values, hence, lower rD and rP . It is, therefore,
concluded that in order to evaluate acoustic conditions in open-plan offices, the noise
caused by occupants of the room should not be ignored. The employees are answering
a questionnaire about how they experience acoustic conditions while they are at work,
while other employees are present as well. Thus, the effect of noise caused by other
employees is essential in the whole evaluation.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Kaarlela-Tuomaala, R. Helenius, E. Keskinen, and V. Hongisto, “Effects
of acoustic environment on work in private office rooms and open-plan offices
- longitudinal study during relocation,” Ergonomics, volume 52, number 11,
pages 1423–1444, 2009.
[2]
C. M. Petersen and B. Rasmussen, “Acoustic design of open-plan offices and
comparison of requirements in the Nordic countries,” in Baltic-Nordic Acoustics
Meeting 2018, Nordic Acoustic Association, 2018, pages 1–8.
[3]
A. Haapakangas, V. Hongisto, M. Eerola, and T. Kuusisto, “Distraction dis-
tance and perceived disturbance by noise — An analysis of 21 open-plan of-
fices,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, volume 141, number 1,
pages 127–136, 2017.
[4]
DS/EN ISO 3382 Acoustics – Measurement of room acoustic parameters – Part
3: Open plan offices, eng, 2012.
[5]
E. Nilsson and B. Hellström, “Room Acoustic Design in Open-Plan Offices,”
January 2009.
[6]
ÍST 45:2016 Hljóðvist - Flokkun íbúðar- og atvinnuhúsnæðis (Acoustic condi-
tions in buildings - Sound classification of various types of buildings), Icelandic
Standards, Iceland, 2016.
[7]
V. Hongisto, “A model predicting the effect of speech of varying intelligibility
on work performance,” Indoor air, volume 15, pages 458–68, August 2005.
[8]
A. Haapakangas, R. Helenius, E. Keskinen, and V. Hongisto, “Perceived acous-
tic environment, work performance and well-being - survey results from Finnish
offices,” in 9th International congress on noise as a public health problem
(ICBEN), volume 18, 2008.
[9]
P. Roelofsen, “Performance loss in open-plan offices due to noise by speech,”
Journal of Facilities Management, 2008.
[10]
N. Oseland and P. Hodsman, “Planning for psychoacoustics: A psychological
approach to resolving office noise distraction,” Saint-Gobain Ecophon Research
Report, 2015.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
68
[11]
T. S. Dehlbæk, C.-H. Jeong, J. Brunskog, C. M. Petersen, and P. Marie, “The
effect of human activity noise on the acoustic quality in open plan offices,” in
INTER-NOISE and NOISE-CON Congress and Conference Proceedings, Insti-
tute of Noise Control Engineering, volume 253, 2016, pages 4117–4126.
[12]
J. H. Rindel, “Open plan office acoustics–a multidimensional optimization prob-
lem,” Proceedings of DAGA2018, Munich, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Akustik,
2018.
[13]
——, “Prediction of acoustical parameters for open plan offices according to
ISO 3382-3,” in Proceedings of the Acoustics, 2012, pages 13–18.
[14]
DS/EN ISO 3382 Acoustics – Measurement of room acoustic parameters – Part
2: Reverberation time in ordinary rooms, 2008.
[15]
DS/EN ISO 3382 Acoustics – Measurement of room acoustic parameters – Part
1: Performance spaces, eng, 2009.
[16]
DS/EN IEC 60268-16 Sound system equipment - Part 16: Objective rating of
speech intelligibility by speech transmission index, 2011.
[17]
A. C. Gade and C. Jeong (correction), “Room acoustic Engineering - Course
No. 31240: Architectural Acoustics - Note 4213,” 2007.
[18]
L. M. Dudley, “The principles of architectural acoustics applied to community
theatres,” PhD thesis, Texas Tech University, 1998.
[19]
S. Delle Macchie, S. Secchi, and G. Cellai, “Acoustic Issues in Open Plan Offices:
A Typological Analysis,” Buildings, volume 8, number 11, page 161, 2018.
[20]
J. Fields, R. De Jong, T. Gjestland, I. Flindell, R. Job, S. Kurra, P. Lercher,
M. Vallet, T. Yano, R. T. A. R. UNIVERSITY, et al., “Standardized general-
purpose noise reaction questions for community noise surveys: Research and
a recommendation,” Journal of sound and vibration, volume 242, number 4,
pages 641–679, 2001.
[21]
M. Pierrette, E. Parizet, P. Chevret, and J. Chatillon, “Noise effect on comfort
in open-space offices: development of an assessment questionnaire,” Ergonomics,
volume 58, number 1, pages 96–106, 2015.
[22]
M. Navai and J. A. Veitch, “Acoustic satisfaction in open-plan offices: review
and recommendations,” 2003.
[23]
C. R. M. Passero and P. H. T. Zannin, “Study of the acoustic suitability of
an open plan office based on STI and DL2 simulations,” Archives of Acoustics,
volume 37, number 2, pages 237–243, 2012.
[24]
A. Dickschen, R. Bertazzoni, and A. Liebl, “Evaluating room acoustic quality
in open-plan offices by adding the distribution of possible source and receiver
positions to the simulation,” Proceedings Euronoise 2018, pages 27–31, 2018.
[25]
J. Keränen et al., “Measurement and Prediction of the Spatial Decay of Speech
in Open-Plan Offices,” 2015.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
69
[26]
V. Hongisto and A. Haapakangas, “Effect of sound masking on workers in an
open office,” in Proceedings of Acoustics, volume 8, 2008, pages 537–542.
[27]
A. Haapakangas, “Subjective reactions to noise in open-plan offices and the ef-
fects of noise on cognitive performance,” Problems and solutions. Turun yliopisto.
Sarja-ser. B osa, volume 436, 2017.
[28]
P. Zannin, Noise and ergonomics in the workplace. February 2013, pages 1–246.
[29]
C. R. M. Passero and P. H. T. Zannin, “Acoustic evaluation and adjustment
of an open-plan office through architectural design and noise control,” Applied
Ergonomics, volume 43, number 6, pages 1066–1071, 2012.
[30]
P. Larm, J. Keränen, R. Helenius, J. Hakala, and V. Hongisto, “Acoustics in
open-plan offices-A laboratory study,” in Forum Acusticum, 2005, pages 14–18.
[31]
A. Kim, S. Wang, L. McCunn, A. Prozuments, T. Swanson, and K. Lokan,
“Commissioning the Acoustical Performance of an Open Office Space Following
the Latest Healthy Building Standard: A Case Study,” in Acoustics, Multidis-
ciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, volume 1, 2019, pages 473–492.
[32]
E. De Croon, J. Sluiter, P. P. Kuijer, and M. Frings-Dresen, “The effect of
office concepts on worker health and performance: a systematic review of the
literature,” Ergonomics, volume 48, number 2, pages 119–134, 2005.
[33]
V. Hongisto, A. Haapakangas, J. Varjo, R. Helenius, and H. Koskela, “Refur-
bishment of an open-plan office - environmental and job satisfaction,” Journal
of Environmental Psychology, volume 45, pages 176–191, 2016.
[34]
A. Haapakangas, V. Hongisto, J. Varjo, and M. Lahtinen, “Benefits of quiet
workspaces in open-plan offices - Evidence from two office relocations,” Journal
of Environmental Psychology, volume 56, pages 63–75, 2018.
[35]
B. &. K, “Product Data - DIRAC Room Acoustic Software Type 7841,”
[36]
R Core Team, R: A language and environment for statistical computing, R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.R-project.org/.
[37]
D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker, “Fitting linear mixed-effects
models using lme4,” Journal of Statistical Software, volume 67, number 1,
pages 1–48, 2015. doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01.
[38]
G. Newsham, J. Veitch, and K. Charles, “Risk factors for dissatisfaction with
the indoor environment in open-plan offices: An analysis of cope field study
data.,” Indoor Air, volume 18, number 4, pages 271–282, 2008.
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A
Measurement Setup
Figure A.1: Measurement setup. The input is the microphone, power module and
sound device. The output is the amplifier and the omnidirectional loudspeaker. The
laptop is used to produce the output signals and then process the input signals.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Source-receiver
Positions
EFLA 2nd
S1
S2
R1
R2
R3
R4
Figure B.1: Source- and receiver positions in Efla 2nd.
==PAGE:80==
B Source-receiver Positions
72
EFLA 3rd
S1
S2
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
Figure B.2: Source- and receiver positions in Efla 3rd.
GARRI
S1
S2
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
Figure B.3: Source- and receiver positions in Garri.
==PAGE:81==
B Source-receiver Positions
73
KRÓNAN
S2
S1
R6
R5
R4
R3
R2
R1
Figure B.4: Source- and receiver positions in Krónan.
ARKÍS
S2
S1
R6
R5
R4
R3
R2
R1
R7
R8
R9
Figure B.5: Source- and receiver positions in Arkís.
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX C
Questionnaire
==PAGE:83==
C Questionnaire
75
==PAGE:84==
C Questionnaire
76
==PAGE:85==
C Questionnaire
77
==PAGE:86==
C Questionnaire
78
==PAGE:87==
C Questionnaire
79
==PAGE:88==
C Questionnaire
80
==PAGE:89==
C Questionnaire
81
