==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning Methods
for Sea Ice Mapping
Master Thesis
DTU Space & DTU Compute
National Space Institute & Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
Master Thesis
July, 2020
Author:
Tore Wulf
Supervisors:
Henning Skriver
Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen
David Malmgren-Hansen
Technical University of Denmark,
National Space Institute & Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Greenland is highly dependent on ships for the import and export of goods, for transporta-
tion and for various economic activities. Greenland is also partially surrounded by sea ice
year-round, and the economy of Greenland relies on sea ice mapping services in order
to ensure safe and efficient navigation in Greenland waters. The Danish Meteorlogical
Institute has the public obligation to operate the Greenland Ice Service and provide regu-
lar maps of the sea ice conditions. Manual sea ice charting is, however, a laborious and
time-consuming task.
In this thesis, two methodologies that aim to automate the task of sea ice detection and sea
ice concentration estimation are presented. At the core of the methodologies lie super-
vised learning algorithms, which are trained using Sentinel-1 SAR imagery and digitized
ice charts. The first methodology is based on a traditional machine learning approach in
which a Random Forest algorithm is fed multi-scale texture features derived from grey-
level co-occurence matrices. The second methodology is based on a deep learning ap-
proach in which the convolutional neural network architecture, U-Net, is applied to the
task of sea ice mapping.
It is shown that, when segmenting sea ice and open water in previously unseen test data,
the Random Forest algorithm achieves an F1-score of 88.2%, while the U-Net algorithm
achieves an F1-score of 95.4%. When estimating the sea ice concentration, the Random
Forest algorithm achieves an R2-score of 87.6% when comparing polygon-wise mean
predictions to the sea ice concentrations given in the ice charts, while the U-Net algorithm
achieves an R2-score of 96.3%.
ii
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like express my gratitude to my supervisors Henning Skriver,
Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen and David Malmgren-Hansen for their invaluable guidance dur-
ing our weekly meetings. The first half of 2020 has been a tumultuous time, and I am
lucky to have had a dedicated team of supervisors, who were quick to adapt to the new
circumstances and continue the unabated supervision of my project.
I would also like extend my thanks to DTU Compute for letting me conduct my experiments
on their GPU Cluster, and to Ejner Fergo for his support and patience when GPU-related
issues arose.
Lastly, a huge thanks to the Danish Meteorlogical Institute, and specifically to Matilde
Brandt Kreiner for sharing her knowledge on the remote sensing of sea ice and the inner
workings of the DMI Ice Service, and for being open and kind whenever I approached her
with questions.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Automated downstream Sea Ice Products Project . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Sea Ice
4
2.1
Sea Ice Extent and Sea Ice Concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Sea Ice Charts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Radar Monitoring of Sea Ice
7
3.1
Radar Remote Sensing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
SAR Scattering from Sea Ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
The Sentinel-1 Mission Specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
The ASIP Dataset
14
5
Algorithm Design & Performance Metrics
17
5.1
Flat vs. Hierarchical Algorithmic Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2
Random Forest & Manual Feature Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
U-Net & Automatic Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.4
Performance Metrics & Algorithm Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Implementation & Validation
37
6.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Random Forest & Manual Feature Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.3
U-Net & Automatic Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7
Results & Comparisons
60
7.1
Algorithm Performance Evaluation on the Testing Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.2
Qualitative Assessment of the Algorithm Performances
. . . . . . . . . . . 63
8
A Proposed Methodology For Improving the Sea Ice Edge Accuracy of U-Net 69
9
Various Considerations & Future Work
73
10 Conclusions
77
Bibliography
79
A Formulae for the GLCM-based Texture Features
83
B GLCM-based Texture Features for the HV channel
86
C Random Forest: A Look into Features Importances
89
D Random Forest & U-Net Probability Maps
93
iv
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The Artic sea ice cover is an essential part of the Arctic environment, and the extent of
the sea ice cover has a direct impact on the global climate due to various feedback mech-
anisms. Furthermore, sea ice has a big impact on human activities in the Artic region,
such as maritime navigation and offshore operations. The worlds largest non-continental
island, Greenland, is partially surrounded by sea ice (and icebergs) year-round. Green-
land’s cities and towns are predominantly located along the coast, and fishing is one of
the nation’s most important industries [1]. Additionally, most of the goods and passen-
ger transport is by ship, and virtually all import and export is by sea [2]. Sea ice and
icebergs are major hazards that can severely damage and/or slow vessels or ships, and
thus negatively impact the economy of Greenland. It is therefore of primary importance to
operationally monitor the sea ice on a daily basis and produce sea ice forecasts to assist
ship traffic, fisheries and other marine operations in Greenland.
Since industry and trade in the Arctic countries are dependent on sea transportation, the
Arctic countries have all initiated ice services to caretake the operational monitoring of sea
ice in the region in order to bring about safe navigation in ice-covered seas [3]. The Danish
Meteorlogical Institute (DMI) is one of a handful of national institutes that provide regular
sea ice mapping services. DMI has had the public obligation to operate the Greenland
Ice Service for more than half a century in support of safe navigation along the coasts of
Greenland [4] .
The monitoring of sea ice in the Artic is one of the many domains in which remote sensing
by satellite has been heavily exploited. A plethora of geophysical sea ice parameters can
be derived from the combined use of passive and active spaceborne sensors operating
in the visible, infrared and microwave ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum. Of all of
these sea ice parameters, knowledge of the extent of the sea ice is particularly important
to the industries of Greenland, as well as knowledge of the concentration of the sea ice,
which aids nautical navigators in the determination of potentially passable regions.
In visible images acquired by satellite instruments operating in the optical spectral range,
open water and sea ice are often easily discriminable due to contrasts in albedo [3]. Gen-
erally, the albedo of sea ice is much higher than that of open water, making sea ice appear
much brighter than open water in optical satellite images. However, since optical sensors
measure radiation from the Sun reflected from the surface of the Earth, visible data can
only be collected during daytime. Furthermore, visible light is reflected off of clouds ob-
scuring the sea ice below, and ice-covered regions in the Arctic are obscured by clouds up
to 70−90 percent of the time [5]. Satellite sensors that measure thermal infrared radiation
can also easily detect sea ice due to the difference in surface temperature of sea water
and sea ice [6]. Such sensors are, however, also limited by the reflection and emission
of thermal radiation by clouds.
Radar systems, on the other hand, operate in the microwave range of the electromagnetic
spectrum, and the longer wavelengths of such systems allow for the penetration of clouds
and precipitation in the atmosphere, rendering radar remote sensing more reliable than
its aforementioned counterparts - particularly in the Arctic region, where the lack of solar
illumination during the polar night significantly limits the use of passive optical instruments
for a large portion of the year. Passive microwave instruments measure the microwave
radiation emitted from the surface of the Earth, and while the microwave signatures for
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
1
==PAGE:7==
open water and sea ice generally are easily distinguishable, the passive microwave foot-
prints are rather large, typically 10 −60 km depending on the frequency [3]. The coarse
resolution limits the use of passive microwave radiometers in the monitoring of sea ice on
a regional or local scale.
The synthetic aperture radar (SAR) system is an imaging radar system that combines
the ability to penetrate clouds with high spatial resolution, often between 1 −1000 m [7].
Due to the moderately narrow swaths of SAR systems, they are most efficiently used on
regional or local scales, where detailed mapping is important. High resolution SAR images
therefore enable the mapping of coastal regions in Greenland as well as the detection of
smaller sea ice features or areas of open water in those regions.
In 2014 the Copernicus Programme was initiated by the European Commission in partner-
ship with the European Space Agency (ESA), and since then an unprecedented volume
of SAR data has become readily availiable. The free and open data policy has paved
the way for countless downstream applications and services, as well as research, in a
vast range of fields, including Arctic sea ice monitoring. However, with the drastically
increasing amount of available data, the visual intepretation of these images by sea ice
analysts becomes laborious. The automatic generation of sea ice charts has thus been a
long-standing goal for various sea ice communities - operational and scientific.
With the availability of large amounts of remote sensing data covering the Arctic region as
well as corresponding analyst-produced sea ice charts, the application of sophisticated
supervised machine learning and deep learning algorithms, such as Random Forest (RF)
and Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), becomes feasible. A particular type of neural net-
work, namely the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), has received a lot of attention in
recent years for various image intepretation tasks due to its ability to approximate complex
relationships between an input image and an output image as long as a sufficient number
of representative samples are available during the training of the network. Deep learning
algorithms also have the advantage that a set of discriminative features is automatically
extracted from the training samples, whereas the traditional machine learning approach
often requires complex manual feature engineering.
The potential benefits on the economy of Greenland of the automation of sea ice chart-
ing are substantial. An improvement in the regularity of sea ice charts will improve the
optimization of maritime route planning, as well as reduce exceptional expenses linked
to accidents, such as sea ice collisions, or incidents, such as the entrapment of vessels
within the sea ice. Furthermore, fuel expenses will be reduced, and the reliability and
security of supply, import and export, and thus the financial stability of Greenland as a
whole could improve.
2
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:8==
1.1
The Automated downstream Sea Ice Products Project
In 2017, the Automated downstream Sea Ice Products (ASIP) project was initiated as
a collaborative endeavour carried out between the Danish Meteorlogical Institute (DMI),
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and Harnvig Artic and Maritime. The aim of
the project is to partially or fully automate the retrieval of sea ice information from radar
and radiometry data using CNNs in order to meet the demands for more timely sea ice
products and thus to improve the safety and efficiency of maritime operations in Green-
land waters [4]. The use of an automatic ice service has the potential of reducing the
time delay between the acquisition of the remote sensing data and the availability of the
corresponding ice chart.
One of the many tasks of DMI has been to produce a dataset comprising Sentinel-1 SAR
images and corresponding sea ice charts manually produced by the DMI Ice Service. This
dataset is at the foundation of this thesis.
1.2
Thesis Objectives
The aim of this thesis is to study, develop and apply methodologies to accurately detect
sea ice and estimate sea ice concentration along the coasts of Greenland based solely on
synthetic aperture radar imagery from the Sentinel-1 mission. Part of the objective is to
apply and compare traditional machine learning algorithms, which involve manual feature
engineering, to novel deep learning algorithms for which the extraction of discriminative
features is inherent to the algorithm.
The algorithms are evaluated on their ability to accurately distinguish sea ice from open
water, as well as on their ability to accurately estimate the concentration of the sea ice. A
focal point of the thesis will be an examination of whether any improvements in algorithm
performance can be achieved by separating the binary segmentation of sea ice and open
water and the sea ice concentration estimation into two steps, thus creating a hierarchical
algorithmic structure, in which the first step of the algorithm is to segment sea ice and
open water, and the second step of the algorithm is to assign a concentration to the sea
ice areas.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Sea Ice
This chapter offers a brief overview of the physical phenomenom that is at the center of
this project - namely, the Arctic sea ice - as well as quick introduction to the concept of
sea ice concentration and how it is represented digitally in ice charts.
Sea ice is primarily formed in the Arctic and Antarctic regions, and the sea ice formed in
those regions have different characteristics introduced by the dynamic environment and
geographical setting in which it exists. In the Northern Hemisphere the sea ice cover
reaches its peak extent in March and its minimum extent in September. Figure 2.1 shows
the mean extent of the Arctic sea ice for the month of April 2020 derived by the National
Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) from passive microwave radiometry data [8].
Figure 2.1: The figure shows the expanse in the Arctic covered by sea ice at greater than
15 percent mean concentration for the month of April 2020 derived by the National Snow
and Ice Data Center from passive microwave radiometry data. Additionally, the median
line (in pink) illustrates the typical sea ice extent based on April measurements from 1981
to 2010.
The Arctic Ocean and many of its adjacent seas are - at least seasonally - either fully
or partially covered by sea ice. The coasts of Greenland are severely affected by sea
ice (and icebergs), restricting human activities and ship traffic, which in turn affects the
economy of Greenland. As figure 2.1 clearly suggests, satellite remote sensing is an
oppportune platform for the retrieval of geophysical parameters in the Arctic as the spatial
scales are vast, the transportation is hazardous and the climate is hostile.
4
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:10==
2.1
Sea Ice Extent and Sea Ice Concentration
Naturally, one of the primary variables in the monitoring of the Arctic sea ice is the sea ice
extent. Satellite microwave missions have been successful in generating an exceptionally
complete record of the sea ice extent over the past many decades as spaceborne multi-
channel microwave radiometers have been monitoring sea ice daily since the 1970’s [9].
In comparison to the typical size of sea ice floes, the coarse resolution imagery obtained
by means of passive microwave radiometry implies that the determination of the sea ice
extent must neccesarily be approached statistically rather than as the delineation of in-
dividual ice floes. One must recognize that wide-swath measurements of sea ice - while
good at obtaining synoptic measurements over large regions - often does not have the
spatial resolution to resolve the fine structure and smaller features of the sea ice cover,
such as individual ice floes, leads, polynyas etc. This limitation introduces the concept of
sea ice concentration (SIC) as the spatially averaged proportion of sea ice within a reso-
lution cell of the measuring instrument. As such, the SIC describes the area of the ocean
surface covered by sea ice as a fraction of the total area,
SIC = Aice
Atot
= 1 −Aow
Atot
(2.1)
In eq. 2.1 Aice is the area of sea ice cover within the total area Atot, and Aow is the area of
open water within the total area. The SIC can thus be expressed either as a fraction or a
percentage - the latter will be used in majority of this project. Due to the scale-dependent
definition of the SIC in eq. 2.1, SIC estimates are dependent on the coarseness of the
data on which the estimates are made. Essentially, on a very fine scale the SIC is always
either 0%, ie. open water, or 100%, ie. sea ice.
2.2
Sea Ice Charts
The SIGRID3 format is the format currently adopted by the World Meteorological Organi-
zation (WMO) as the international standard for sea ice chart data in digital form [10]. In
accordance with the WMO nomenclature, the SIC information in sea ice charts are given
as fractions of 10, and often given as intervals. A polygon in an ice chart might therefore
contain a code, such as 57, referencing the SIC interval 5/10 −7/10.
As an example, a DMI-produced ice chart from December 2019 of a stretch of coast in
eastern Greenland is shown in figure 2.2.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: The figure exemplifies a typical SIGRID3 formatted ice chart from the eastern
coast of Greenland [11].
In figure 2.2 the SICs of the specific polygons are colour coded; red being 9/10 −10/10,
orange being 7/10 −8/10, yellow being 4/10 −6/10, green being 1/10 −3/10 and white
being ice-free. The SIC, stage of sea ice development and ice form (floe size) of specific
polygons are elaborated on further in the additional information contained within the egg
codes, although that information is not of significant importance in this project.
6
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:12==
3
Radar Monitoring of Sea Ice
Today, one of the most important sources for sea ice monitoring data is satellite-borne
radar remote sensing, partially due to its ability to observe sea ice on regional scale inde-
pendently of solar illumination and unobscured by clouds or precipitation. Radar remote
sensing systems are generally divided into imaging and non-imaging systems - the most
extensively used for operational sea ice mapping being the imaging radar system, and -
more specifically - the Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) system.
This chapter introduces the main means of data acquisition relevant to this project, which
is the acquisition of radar imagery of sea ice by means of SAR systems. Sea ice is diverse
and complex with a wide range of scattering behaviours depending on the developmen-
tal stage and concentration of the ice. In order to illustrate the diversity of sea ice in
SAR imagery, various sea ice types and their associated scattering properties are briefly
presented. Lastly, the specifications of the ESA-led Copernicus radar imaging mission,
Sentinel-1, and their relation to sea ice monitoring are explored.
3.1
Radar Remote Sensing
An imaging radar system operates in the microwave range of the electromagnetic spec-
trum and provides its own source of illumination, rendering the instrument ideal for sea
ice mapping the Arctic, where the prolonged period of winter darkness severely limits the
use of passive optical instruments. Additionally, the longer wavelengths of a radar system
makes it largely independent of clouds and atmospheric propogation effects, although the
influence of such factors is frequency-dependent [3]. The purpose of imaging radars sys-
tems is the detection and ranging of features on the surface of the Earth. Imaging radar
systems use an antenna to transmit a pulse of microwave radiation toward the Earth’s
surface and, in the monostatic case, use the same antenna to collect the backscattered
radiation, which is then used to compose a two-dimensional image of the surface.
The images produced by an imaging radar system differ from visible imagery in a number
of fundamental ways. Firstly, radar systems are sensitive to the dielectric properties of the
surface, and - due to the wavelength of the radar signal - it is sensitive to the roughness
of the surface on which it is scattered. Secondly, radar systems utilize the polarization
of the electromagnetic waves emitted by the radar antenna. A common polarimetric con-
figuration of radar systems is one, where a linearly polarized signal is transmitted and
two orthogonal polarizations of the return signal are measured. Such a dual-polarized
system is said to have two channels. A vertically or horizontally polarized signal can be
obtained by aligning a linear antenna with the surface of the Earth. In a case, where a
horizontally polarized signal is transmitted, and the horizontal and vertical components
of the backscattered signal are measured, the two channels are called HH and HV ,
respectively. The measured backscatter depends on the combination of transmit and
receive polarizations, and therefore the use of different transmit/receive polarization com-
binations has the potential of increasing the separability of the features of interest on the
Earth’s surface.
Furthermore, the fundamental radar image is complex containing both amplitude and
phase information for every pixel, and an inevitable drawback of such an image is the
presence of a granular noise-like phenomena called speckle. The speckle phenomena
occurs due to the interference of the backscattered waves from many individual scat-
terers within a resolution cell [3]. Speckle is multiplicative in nature, and there can be
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
7
==PAGE:13==
need to reduce the amount of speckle in the acquired imagery depending on the applica-
tion. Speckle can be reduced by spatially averaging the image pixel intensities using an
averaging filter, however, the speckle reduction comes at the cost of spatial resolution.
There is therefore a trade-off between the amount of speckle in the image and the spatial
resolution, which has to be weighed and determined on an application-wise basis.
A simplification of the typical imaging radar geometry is depicted in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The figure illustrates the typical imaging radar geometry [3].
The look-direction of the antenna, which is called the slant-range direction, is tilted to one
side, away from nadir (which is the ground projection of the orbit of the satellite), while
being perpendicular to the azimuth direction, which is the direction along the satellite orbit.
The ground range direction, which is often just called the range direction, is the direction
from nadir to the radar footprint.
The spatial resolution of an imaging radar system refers to system’s ability to discriminate
between two point targets appearing as bright spots in an image. The spatial resolution
in the azimuth direction ρazi for a side-looking system as the one depicted in 3.1 is deter-
mined by the width of the antenna beam β, which in turn is determined by the physical
length of the antenna D [3],
ρazi = Rβ = R λ
D
(3.1)
In eq. 3.1 λ denotes the wavelength of the radar signal and R denotes the distance be-
8
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:14==
tween the measuring instrument and target in the slant-range direction. In order to obtain
a high spatial resolution in the azimuth-direction the distance between the instrument and
the target has to be reduced or the physical size of the antenna has to be increased,
rendering real aperture side-looking system radar systems unideal as a space-borne in-
strument.
This problem can be overcome by using the along-track motion of the platform to synthet-
ically produce a very large antenna. This is done by utilizing that the same features on the
surface are measured from several viewing angles as the platform moves forward. This
concept is called Synthetic Aperture Radar. The azimuth resolution of the SAR system is
given as [3],
ρazi = D
2
(3.2)
and is thus independent of the range R. The slant-range resolution ρr of the SAR system
is determined by the duration of the transmitted radar pulse tp, which in turn is given as
the reciprocal of the bandwidth of the pulse B,
ρr = ctp
2 =
c
2B
(3.3)
In eq. 3.3 c is the speed of light. In order to obtain the ground-range resolution, the
slant-range resolution has to be projected on to the ground-range. Due to the varying
incidence angle, this projection results in a worsening of the ground-range resolution in
the near-range as compared to far-range.
SAR sensors are highly sensitive to surface roughness, as illustrated in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the dependence of the roughness of the surface (relative to
the wavelength of the radar signal) on the amount of the incident energy reflected back
towards the radar sensor [12].
If the radar waves are incident on a smooth surface (relative to the wavelength of the
signal), there is a specular direction of the scattered waves and little - if any - energy is
reflected back to the radar sensor. As the surface becomes rougher, the scattering of
the radar waves becomes more diffuse, and thus a larger part of the incident energy is
reflected back towards the radar sensor.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
9
==PAGE:15==
For radar imagery of extended surfaces a reflection coefficient, the Radar Backscatter
Coefficient σ0, is defined, which is a measure of the scattering behaviour of the features
on the surface. The radar backscatter coefficient (often shortened to backscatter) is a
function of frequency, incidence angle, polarisation combination, and the scattering char-
acteristics of the illuminated area [12].
3.2
SAR Scattering from Sea Ice
Sea ice is a complex composite of pure ice, brine and air pockets. The scattering of
microwaves by sea ice is markedly sensitive to even small variations in physical structure
and composition of the ice. Sea ice is very diverse, and therefore so is its microwave
scattering characteristics. Furthermore, backscatter ambiguities can occur between sea
ice and open water under certain conditions, which can complicate the automatic mapping
of sea ice from SAR imagery. The following is a brief introduction to the diversity of the
microwave scattering characteristics of sea ice.
The SAR backscatter from sea ice is largely determined by the stage of development of
the sea ice, the form of the ice (ie. the presence of deformations, ridges, etc.) as well as
the concentration of the sea ice [3]. The stage of development of sea ice can serve as a
general proxy for several sea ice charactistics pertaining to the (C-band) scattering prop-
erties of the sea ice, such as surface roughness and salinity. The term new ice denotes
several subtypes of sea ice in the first stages of sea ice formation, such as grease ice.
Usually, new ice is easily detectable in SAR imagery due to very low backscatter, as new
ice has been observed to dampen the short capillary waves of the ocean creating a very
smooth surface (even smoother than the surrounding ice-free water surface), and thus
resulting in almost purely specular reflection [12] (see figure 3.2).
In wave-agitated conditions, grease ice might develop into the characteristically circulally
or elliptically shaped ice pieces called pancake ice. The individual ice pieces bump into
each other forming raised rims on the edges, thus roughening the surface of the sea ice,
which substantially increases backscatter. In calm waters, grease ice develops into a thin,
elastic and continous sheet of ice called nilas. The backscatter from nilas is very low due
to the smoothness of the surface. However, as the ice grows thicker and less elastic,
it becomes susceptible to ice rafting due to currents or wind, which results in a higher
backscatter.
As the ice develops and thickens further, it loses elasticity and becomes young ice. Young
ice will raft, break and form ridges on its edges due to pressure, wave-action and collisions.
This deformation of the ice increases the backscatter, and the more deformed the ice
becomes, the larger the backscatter increase.
When young ice reaches a thickness larger than 30 cm, it becomes first-year (FY) ice,
which is defined as sea ice formed during the present winter with a thickness larger than
30 cm [12]. FY ice exhibits a relatively large range of SAR backscatter intensities; level,
undeformed and smooth FY ice generates a low SAR backscatter, while rough and de-
formed FY ice generates a high SAR backscatter. As mentioned, the deformation of the
sea ice is dependent on weather conditions and sea ice drift.
The sea ice that survives the yearly melt season is denoted multi-year (MY) ice. During
the melt season meltwater accumulates into ponds on the sea ice surface and percolates
through the ice, flushing out brine and desalinating especially the top layer of the sea ice,
leaving behind pockets of air.
10
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:16==
The penetration depth of radar waves into the sea ice is determined by the complex di-
electric constant. When large, the transmission into the material is very limited, and thus
little to no volume scattering occurs. The dielectic properties of the ice is strongly linked
to the distribution of brine and air pockets within the ice, and by proxy therefore linked to
the developmental stage of the ice. FY ice retains a considerable amount of brine, limiting
the penetration depth of C-band radar waves to only a few centimeters. On the contrary,
due to the desalination of the upper layers of MY ice during the melt season, the penetra-
tion depth of C-band radar waves is increased to a few tens of centimeters, allowing for
volume scattering to occur, which increases the measured SAR backscatter [7].
Of course, all of the above mentioned scattering properties assume the absence of melt
ponds or moist snow on top of the sea ice. While dry snow is mainly transparent to radar
waves, moist or wet snow has a considerable effect on SAR backscatter, which might
complicate the automation of SAR-based sea ice mapping even further. The backscatter
intensity of MY ice decreases considerably at the onset of melting conditions, as the radar
penetration depth is reduced, and thus reducing the volume scattering from air pockets
within the ice. The backscatter intensity of FY ice, on the other hand, has been shown to
increase slightly at the onset of the melt season [7].
Depending on incidence angle, the SAR backscatter of open water is usually lower than
that of sea ice - with the exception of new ice and smooth nilas. The near-vertical (ie.
for low incidence angles) backscatter response of water is often larger than that of sea
ice, and the backscatter response decreases quickly as the incidence angle increases.
In addition, open water has a very variable backscatter signature, increasing rapidly with
increasing wind speed. Even a slight breeze is sufficient in roughening the water surface
enough to produce a significant backscatter enhancement [12].
In addition to the developmental stage of the sea ice, the size of individual ice floes is a
determining factor in the appearence of sea ice in SAR imagery. In the packice, ice floes
of all shapes and sizes can be formed. When the individual ice floes cannot be resolved
by the SAR instrument, the radar backscatter will typically increase with decreasing floe
size [12].
3.3
The Sentinel-1 Mission Specifications
The Copernicus radar imaging mission, Sentinel-1, comprises a constellation of two polar-
orbiting satellites: Sentinel-1A, which was launched on April 3rd 2014, and Sentinel-1B,
which followed on April 25th 2016. The satellites share the same orbital plane with a
180◦orbital phase difference in a sun-synchronous orbit. Both Sentinel-1 satellites carry
C-band SAR systems operating at a frequency of 5.405 GHz [13].
The Sentinel-1 mission has several operational modes with differing spatial resolutions,
ground coverage and dual-polarisation combinations. In the polar regions the main opera-
tional mode is the Extra Wide (EW) swath mode, which employs the TOPSAR processing
technique in order to achieve a 400 km swath width by combining five sub-swaths. This
mode provides relatively large spatial coverage and enables the operational production
of sea ice charts with a wide expanse.
In the polar regions, the Sentinel-1 satellites employ dual-polarisation using an HH/HV
combination. The HH polarisation combination is preferred to the VV combination due
to the former being less sensitive ocean clutter under limited circumstances of low wind
speeds and thus more suitable for sea ice/open water discrimination [7]. However, at high
wind speeds the ocean surface might appear as bright or even brighter than sea ice in the
co-polarized channel, whereas it remains relatively dark in the cross-polarized channel.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
11
==PAGE:17==
Also, the contrast between sea ice and open water is more pronounced in the cross-
polarized channel due the cross-polarized channel being less sensitive to sea surface
roughness. However, smooth sea ice with low backscatter is not easily detectable in the
cross-polarized channel [14].
The greater coverage of the EW mode TOPSAR processing technique unfortunately in-
troduces a few noise-induced problems. Firstly, the overlap between sub-swaths result
in discontinuous sharp changes in the backscatter intensity at the interswath boundaries.
Secondly, there are significant radiometric variations between the sub-swaths - especially
the first sub-swath (the sub-swath closest to the measuring instrument) exhibits large
backscatter intensities compared to the remaining four sub-swaths [15].
Another important issue related to wide-swath SAR images is the progressive decrease of
radar backscatter intensity from near range to far range due to incidence angle variation.
The side-looking geometry of the SAR system (see figure 3.1) and the use of the TOP-
SAR processing technique means that the imaged pixels are viewed over a large range
of incidence angles, specifically from 18.90 - 47.00 [13]. The variation in incidence angle
directly affects the microwave interaction with the surface, producing varying backscat-
ter intensities from near range to far range, which in turn complicates automatuc image
interpretation - especially if the backscatter brightness variations are larger than the inter-
class brightness differences. Usually, incidence angle correction is considered as a pre-
processing step to facilitate automatic interpretation of SAR imagery. However, due to
that fact that the backscatter brightness incidence angle dependence differs for different
features on the surface (open water, sea ice or even different types of sea ice), the cor-
rection of incidence angle variation is quite complicated and not within the scope of this
project.
Figure 3.3 exemplifies a Sentinel-1 SAR dual-polarisation image of a coastal area in South
East Greenland. The land has been masked out. The scene is part of a larger dataset
produced by DMI in conjunction with the ASIP Project containing Sentinel-1 SAR scenes
with corresponding ice charts. The dataset will be elaborated on in the following chapter.
The lower half of the scene is part of the eastern coastline of Greenland and has thus been
masked out. Along the contour of the coastline is a quite wide stretch of sea ice bordered
by open ocean in the top of the scene. The aforementioned TOPSAR-related issues are
clearly visible in this scene; the discontinuous sharp changes in the backscatter intensity
at the interswath boundaries are quite pronounced, especially in the HV channel, whereas
the incidence angle dependent backscatter variation is most prominent in the HH channel.
An additional source of noise present in the scene is the effect of scalloping, which is seen
clearly in the HV-channel as horizontal ripples in the image.
12
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: The figure exemplifies a Sentinel-1 SAR dual-polarisation image of a coastal
area in South East Greenland. The image is part of the ASIP dataset. Top: The HH
channel is clearly affected by the incidence angle dependent backscatter variation. Bot-
tom: The HV channel clearly illustrates the issue of the discontinuous sharp changes in
the backscatter intensity at the interswath boundaries as well as the horizontal scalloping
effect.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
13
==PAGE:19==
4
The ASIP Dataset
This project utilizes the ASIP dataset. The ASIP dataset comprises a total of 915 Sentinel-
1 HH/HV dual-polarisation SAR images acquired between 2015 and 2017 as well as the
corresponding sea ice charts based on those Sentinel-1 SAR images, produced by DMI’s
ice analysts.
The Sentinel-1 products provided in the ASIP dataset are the EW Mode Level-1 Ground
Range Detected Medium Resolution (GRDM) products, which consist of focused SAR
data that have been detected and projected to ground range. A Sentinel-1 GRDM scene
is thus composed of square pixels representing only the amplitude information, as the
phase information is discarded during the detection process. The Sentinel-1 EW mode
GRDM products cover roughly 400x400 km2 areas. The spatial resolution in the range
direction is 93 m, whereas the spatial resolution in the azimuth direction is 87 m. The
products are provided with a pixel spacing of 40x40 m [13].
The HH and HV radar backscatter coefficients have been normalized such that a backscat-
ter range of [−30 : 10] dB is packed within the range [−1 : 1], so as to be better suited for
machine learning/deep learning algorithms whose learning process is often sensitive to
the scale of the input. Additionally, incidence angle information is included in the auxillary
Sentinel-1 data in order to enable the modelling of incidence angle dependent radiometric
variation in the range direction of the SAR images.
As presented in the previous chapter, the EW operational mode introduces noise-induced
problems related to radiometric variations between sub-swaths. The first sub-swath, es-
pecially, exhibits problematic backscatter behaviour compared to the remaining four sub-
swaths. As Sentinel-1 EW mode noise-reduction is not within the scope of this thesis, the
first sub-swath has been systematically removed from all 915 scenes in the ASIP dataset.
Figure 4.1 shows the temporal distribution of the Sentinel-1 images comprising the ASIP
dataset.
14
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: Temporal distribution of the Sentinel-1 SAR scenes comprising the ASIP
dataset with blue, green and red bars representing the years 2015, 2016 and 2017, re-
spectively. The purple bars are the total monthly Sentinel-1 SAR scene acuisitions in the
timeframe from 2015 to 2017.
The Sentinel-1 SAR images comprising the ASIP dataset were acquired during a time-
frame from 2015 to 2017. As is evident in figure 4.1, all of the year’s 12 months are
represented in the ASIP dataset, meaning that sea ice in the SAR imagery might take
differing appearances depending on the season.
The spatial distribution of the Sentinel-1 SAR images comprising the ASIP dataset is il-
lustrated in figure 4.2. Note that only the mean latitudinal and longitudinal point of each
Sentinel-1 image is shown.
DMI is primarily concerned with the areas in which the most sea traffic occurs, which
oftentimes coincides with areas close to coastal settlements. There is therefore an abun-
dance of ice charts produced along the western and eastern coasts of Greenland, and
especially near the southern tip of the island, Cape Farewell, which is an important area
for navigation.
The DMI-produced ice charts, as was exemplified in figure 2.2, are produced by the DMI
ice analysts primarily on the basis of the accompanying Sentinel-1 images, although aux-
iliary remote sensing data is used in support when available, such as optical, thermal-
infrared and passive microwave radiometry data. The estimates of sea ice concentration
in the charts are based on the judgement of the analyst, and due to the associated subjec-
tivity the level of accuracy varies. Studies show sea ice concentration discrepencies of up
to 20% when comparing ice charts of the same geographical region produced by different
sea ice services, eg. [16] and [17]. Intra-analyst variation might also be a contributing
factor to the discrepancies.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.2: Spatial distribution of the Sentinel-1 SAR scene acquisitions. Note that only
the mean latitudinal and longitudinal point of each Sentinel-1 image is shown.
The ice charts are rasterized to match the resolution of the Sentinel-1 SAR scene. The
SIC information in the ice chart is given as fractions of 10 in accordance with the WMO
SIGRID3 format. If the SIC of a particular polygon in the ice chart is given as an interval, it
is converted to a fixed mean value in the rasterized grid, and as result the SIC information
covers a range from 0% to 100% in steps of 5%. Please note that the SICs provided in the
ice chart are not necessarily homogenously distributed in the respective polygons. While
the SIC estimate made by the analyst might be correct as an average within the poly-
gon, the individual post-rasterization pixels might deviate substantially from this average
estimate.
Land in the ice charts has been masked out using a land-mask of Greenland with an
additional bufferzone of 10 km. Furthermore, areas without ice chart information have
been masked out in the Sentinel-1 scenes.
A large proportion of the users of operationally provided sea ice maps are primarily inter-
ested in avoiding sea ice all together, while a minority uses sea ice concentration infor-
mation to determine potentially passable regions of the ice. One of the most important
aspects of sea ice mapping is therefore the accurate determination of the location of the
ice edge, that is, the boundary between the sea ice and open water. The concept of an
ice edge is, of course, rather fuzzy in regions of low sea ice concentration. At DMI, the ice
edge is defined as the boundary between regions of no sea ice altogether (SIC = 0%)
and regions of any sea ice at all (SIC > 0%), which is the same definition adopted in this
thesis.
16
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:22==
5
Algorithm Design & Performance
Metrics
The design of automatic sea ice detection and concentration estimation schemes have
been studied for several decades. The initiation of the Sentinel-1 mission ensures the
regular acquisition of SAR imagery with high temporal resolution in the Arctic region. Ad-
vancements in deep learning image intepretation technology over the last decade com-
bined with the free and open data policy of the Copernicus Programme have sparked
renewed enthusiasm within the sea ice communities - operational and scientific - as signif-
icant attention has been paid to the development of automatic sea ice information retrival
algorithms to generate more timely and cheaper SAR-based sea ice end products.
Generally, traditional machine learning algorithms, such as Random Forests or Support-
vector Machines, face a few obstacles when applied in the field of image intepretation
- most notably, the fact that these types of supervised learning algorithms have been
developed to deal with one-dimensional data, while image data by nature is comprised
of two-dimensional matrices of numbers. Naturally, this issue is bypassed by taking the
matrix apart - row by row or column by column - and concatenating the parts into a one-
dimensional vector. In doing so, however, the spatial relations between neighbouring
pixels are lost. Since SAR sea ice imagery contains spatially dependent characteristics
of different surface features, the loss of contextual information is a severely limiting dis-
advantage.
In order to retain the spatial inter-pixel information, additional features must be manually
engineered to encode the contextual information that would otherwise be lost. Several
feature-extraction methods have been proposed and studied within the field of SAR-based
sea ice mapping, such as GLCM-based texture features, as well as texture features de-
rived using Gabor filters and Markov random fields [18].
Such feature-based approaches do, however, have a common bottleneck in that they
depend on the quality of the engineered features. In general, humans are bound to miss
latent or abstract features, and the inclusion of a large number of contextual features might
result in redundancy due to correlation between features. Furthermore, the use of an un-
necessarily large feature set is computationally inefficient. The design, computation and
selection of optimal contextual features is therefore a serious limiting factor in traditional
machine learning approaches for SAR-based sea ice mapping.
Automatic feature learning is an attractive alternative approach to this problem. Recent
advances in computing technology has allowed for the application of deep learning al-
gorithms - and specifically convolutional neural networks (CNNs) - to the task of satellite
image interpretation. The application of CNNs to the task of SAR-based sea ice map-
ping bypasses the aforementioned task of manual feature engineering due to the ability
of CNNs to automatically extract features relevant to the task at hand.
This chapter outlines the appoaches to the task of sea ice detection and concentration
estimation taken in this project. Both flat and hierarchical algorithmic structures will be
employed. The models at the basis of these structures are derived using 1) a traditional
machine learning approach with manual feature engineering, and 2) a deep learning ap-
proach with automatic feature extraction. The traditional machine learning approach will
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
17
==PAGE:23==
be based on the Random Forest algorithm with multi-scale GLCM-based texture fea-
tures as inputs in addition to the HH/HV backscatter intensities and the incidence angle.
The popular encoder-decoder segmentation architecture, U-Net, is employed as a deep
learning alternative to the traditional machine learning approach. Lastly, several means
of model characterization, comparison and performance evaluation will be presented.
5.1
Flat vs. Hierarchical Algorithmic Structure
The SIC, as given in the ice charts from the ASIP dataset, is a discrete variable (ranging
from 0 −100% in steps of 5%), and not quite ordinal, as the numerical distances between
values are meaningful. The distances between values do, however, seem somewhat
abitrary when a polygon given an estimated average concentration interval of 4/10−6/10,
for example, is converted to a fixed concentration of 50% in the rasterized grid. In essence,
the estimation of the sea ice concentration resembles a regression problem more so than
a classification problem, but both classification and regression techniques will be tested.
Both flat and hierarchical classification/regression structures will be employed. The ra-
tionale behind the decision to investigate the hierarchical approach is that the SIC vari-
able might be inherently hierarchical in the sense that it can be divided into open water
(SIC = 0%) and sea ice (SIC > 0%), after which the concentration of the latter can
be estimated. The patterns learned by the machine learning or deep learning algorithms
might be fundamentally different depending on whether the task at hand is to discrimi-
nate sea ice from open water, or to discriminate between different sea ice concentrations.
Furthermore, the primary task of the operational sea ice services is the accurate identifi-
cation of the boundary between the sea ice and open water - ie. the localization of the ice
edge - and therefore special attention should be paid to ability of the models to accurately
distinguish ice-free waters from sea ice ridden waters.
Below is a summary of the two overarching approaches:
1. Flat Algorithmic Structure
– In the flat approach a single classifier is trained to discriminate between a num-
ber of discrete sea ice concentrations ranging from 0-100%. Thus, the tasks of
sea ice detection and sea ice concentration estimation is handled by a single
classifier.
2. Hierarchical Algorithmic Structure
– In the hierarchical approach the tasks of sea ice detection and sea ice concen-
tration estimation are separated. One classifier is trained to distinguish sea ice
from open water, and another classifier or regressor is trained to a assign a
non-zero sea ice concentration to the already classified sea ice pixels.
Thoughout the report, there will therefore be a distinction between binary classifiers,
whose sole purpose is the binary segmentation of sea ice (SIC > 0%) and open wa-
ter (SIC = 0%), and SIC classifiers or SIC regressors trained for the task of assigning a
sea ice concentration. It follows naturally, that if a binary classifier outperforms the SIC
classifier in the task of segmenting sea ice and open water, the hierarchical approach is
deemed superior to the flat approach, and vice versa.
18
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:24==
5.2
Random Forest & Manual Feature Engineering
As is evident in the Sentinel-1 SAR scene presented in figure 3.3, the radar backscatter
intensities alone provide a very limited amount of information on which to base a super-
vised learning classification or regression scheme. The human visual perception system
is very efficient in the use of spatial information - such as texture and tonal changes -
to delineate objects or segments in an image and to help the intepretation of said image.
Even in SAR images - in which several water/ice backscatter ambiguities might be present
- a layman is likely to feel somewhat confident in delineating open water and sea ice. If,
however, one was presented with only the radar backscatter intensities of a stand-alone
pixel, the classification of said pixel as either water or sea ice would prove arduous.
As a consequence, sea ice parameter retrieval algorithms based entirely on radar backscat-
ter intensities at different polarizations produce relatively modest results - even algorithms
based on several polarimetric SAR features, eg. [19]. A common approach is therefore
to use the available SAR features combined with a number of derived textural image fea-
tures to improve the accuracy of the algorithm. Manual feature engineering - that is, the
design, computation and selection of optimal image features - is thus a very important part
of the traditional machine learning approach for sea ice information retrieval algorithms.
The backbone of the traditional machine approach employed in this project is the Random
Forest algorithm fed with multi-scale GLCM-based texture features.
5.2.1
The Random Forest Algorithm
Random Forest (RF) is an ensemble learning algorithm introduced by Leo Breiman in
2001 [20]. The idea of ensemble learning is to build a predictive model by combining the
strengths of a collection of simpler models. Ensemble learning is thus the task of using a
training dataset to develop a population of simpler models, and then combining them to
form as composite predictor [21].
The main building blocks of the RF ensemble are decision trees. The algorithmic details
of decision trees are fairly simple. It involves recursively partitioning the input space X
into subspaces, and once a set of terminal subspaces have been reached, the data points
belonging to these terminal subspaces are assigned a class label (or some other discrete
category) in the classification case, or a numeric prediction in the regression case.
Decision trees consist of nodes. The top node is called the root node, which is where the
partitioning of the input space X begins. The bottom nodes are called leaf or terminal
nodes. They each form a partition of X and they are each designated with a class label or
numeric value. The nodes that are neither root nor terminal nodes are called internal/in-
terior or split nodes. Any two nodes are connected by exactly one path. If every node
apart from the terminal nodes splits into two subsequent nodes (has two children), the
tree is said to be binary, which is the only type of tree considered in this project. In these
terms, a decision tree is a model that maps from the input space X to an output space
Y, with every node representing a subspace of X and with the root node corresponding
to X itself. The binary splits are formed by conditions on the features of X. A data point
x is considered to belong to a particular subspace x ∈Xa if the features of x adheres to
the conditions defining the subspace Xa [22]. A new data point x propogates through the
tree structure by node-by-node comparison of the features of x to the conditions placed
at the nodes. Once the data point reaches a terminal node, the tree classifier assigns a
class label or a numeric value to the data point.
Classification Trees
The main idea in the construction of tree-structured models is to use a training set to select
the optimal splits of a subset of the training set such that the data in the descendent nodes
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
19
==PAGE:25==
are purer than the data in the parent nodes. A node is considered to be the most impure
when all classes are equally represented in it, and the most pure when the node contains
only one class. The quality or goodness of a particular split is thus defined as the impurity
decrease of the split [23].
For any node t, consider a candidate split s into children nodes tR and tL. The impurity
decrease of the split is defined as [22]:
∆i(s, t) = i(t) −pLi(tL) −pRi(tR)
(5.1)
Here i(t) is a measure of the impurity of node t, ∆i(s, t) is the impurity decrease given
the candidate split s of node t, and pz is the proportion of samples going from node t to
node tz. Several functions have been proposed as measures of impurity. In this project
the Gini Impurity is employed:
iG(t) =
C
∑
k=1
p(k|t)(1 −p(k|t))
(5.2)
In eq. 5.2, p(k|t) is the proportion of the data points in node t belonging to class k. C is
the total number of classes.
Regression Trees
The induction of a regression tree is very similar to that of a classification tree. However,
when the response variable is quantitative, an often used impurity function is the mean
squared error (MSE) [22]:
iR(t) = 1
Nt
Nt
∑
i=1
(yi −¯yt)2
(5.3)
In eq. 5.3, ¯yt is the mean response for the samples in node t, whereas yi is the actual
response of the ith sample. That is, at a given node t, the best split is chosen such that
the MSE at node t is minimized, which in turn maximizes the impurity decrease (eq. 5.1).
Decision Tree Pruning & Stopping Criteria
The more complex the decision tree, that is, the deeper the decision tree, the higher
the risk of over-fitting. Essentially, one could grow a decision tree where the number
of terminal nodes equal the number of training samples. In that case, the decision tree
would be able to perfectly predict the response variable of every sample in the training
set, however, it would fail to adequately generalize to other datasets. Therefore, certain
stopping criteria must be defined to indicate whether to declare a node terminal or to
continue splitting in order to prevent the decision tree from becoming neither too shallow
nor too deep.
To achieve this, several heuristic stopping criteria have been proposed [22]. A few of
these criteria are presented here:
1. A node t is set as terminal if its depth is greater than or equal to a predefined maxi-
mum depth max_depth of the decision tree.
2. A node t is set as terminal if it contains less then a predefined number of samples
Nmin.
20
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:26==
3. A node t is set as terminal if the impurity decrease (eq. 5.1) of the best possible split
is less than a predefined threshold β.
Ideally, all of the hyperparameters max_depth, Nmin, and β would have to be tuned in
order to find the most satisfactory tree-based model, although only max_depth will be
investigated in this project. The process of applying early stopping techniques is also
called pre-pruning, as opposed to post-pruning, where all nodes of the tree-structure are
fully developed, potentially resulting in an over-fitting model, whereafter terminal nodes
are sequentially removed in order to increase the generalizability of the model.
Assuming that none of the stopping criteria have been met, the best split s (or an ap-
proximation thereof) is the split that maximizes ∆i(s, t) in eq. 5.1. The set of all possible
splits is infinitely large if the predictor variable can take infinitely many values. Consider
a dataset in which each data point has the form x = (x1, x2, x3, ..., xM), where M is the
fixed dimensionality of the data set. Only splits that result in non-empty subsets are con-
sidered, and for this project all features are numeric. The condition at each split depends
on the value of only one feature and such a condition has the form ”is xm ≤c” for all c
within the range of values of that particular feature xm. The c values are chosen as the
midpoints between consecutive distinct values of xm. If Nt is the number of data points
in a node t, then Nt is also the maximum number of univariate splits at that node.
Bootstrap Aggregation
The bias-variance dilemma is a trade-off that has to be adressed in most machine learning
applications. A model is said to be biased if it systematically under - or over-predicts
some target variable. If not due to an underlying bias in the training data, this is typically a
problem for oversimplified models. A biased model is unable to fully capture trends in the
data. Model variance, on the other hand, is a measure of how much the prediction would
change if the model was trained on another dataset. A high-variance model is overfitting
the dataset it was trained on and is capturing ”patterns” that are products of noise or
randomness. Generally, a very complex and flexible model is prone to overfitting, while it
is likely to have a low bias. In the general case, model bias is thus a decreasing function
of model complexity, while model variance is an increasing function of model complexity.
There is therefore a trade-of between model bias and model variance.
A deep decision tree is intrinsically a high-variance classifier, while a shallow decision
tree is a high-bias classifier. The idea behind growing randomized forests of deep de-
cision trees is to average the predictions of a large ensemble of low-bias high-variance
decision tree classifiers to obtain a low-bias low-variance ensemble model [21]. Different
Random Forest algorithms mostly differ in the way they add random pertubations into the
construction of individual decision trees.
Aggregating several versions of a tree-based model into an ensemble can substantially
improve prediction accuracy [22]. Bootstrap aggregation or bagging exploits the insight
that the errors of a large number of uncorrelated decision trees will average to zero, and
thus reduce model variance and proneness to overfitting [20]. Given a dataset D of size
N, bagging is the process of generating m new datasets of size N - so-called bootstrap
samples - by uniformly sampling from D with replacement. Consequently, it follows from
the fact that the sampling is done with replacement that a significant proportion of the data
points in D will be missing in the bootstrap samples on average. Therefore decision trees
built on the bootstrap samples that differ slightly from sample to sample will likely benefit
from averaging.
Another technique used to introduce random pertubations into the construction of the
decision trees is random feature selection, where the search for the best split at each node
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
21
==PAGE:27==
is restricted to a random subset of the input features. As a result, the generated trees
become structurally different. In the Random Forest algorithm randomness is injected
into the construction of the individual trees by combining bagging and random feature
selection.
In many ensemble methods, such as the Random Forest algorithm, the models in the
ensemble are considered as a committee, and for classification problems the process of
majority voting is used to form the final prediction. Alternatively, one can skip the final
step of majority voting, and use the class probabilities as output from the model, which
will be the case in this project. For regression problems the final prediction is given as the
mean of the predictions from the individual trees.
Feature Importances
A useful feature of randomized forests is the possibility of estimating relative importances
of the input features. At each split in every decision tree in the forest, the reduction of the
split-criterion (Gini for classification and MSE for regression) can be used as an impor-
tance measure attributed to the splitting feature, and is accumulated over all the trees in
the forest separately for each feature.
The importance of a feature is evaluated by summing the impurity decreases for all nodes,
where the feature is used to split, and then averaging over the number of trees in the forest
[22].
Of course, this kind of measure of feature importance is to be used cautiously - especially
if the input features are correlated, which is not unlikely when using GLCM-based texture
features.
5.2.2
Grey-level Co-occurence Matrices
Recent SAR-based sea ice mapping studies have reported decent classification results
encoding spatial information into texture features based on grey-level co-occurence matri-
ces, eg. [24], and one study found GLCM-based texture features to be superior to features
derived from Gabor filters or Markov random fields for the task of sea ice mapping using
SAR imagery [18].
Let N be the total number of grey-levels in a SAR image. The GLCM of a sub-window of
that image is a square NxN matrix in which the (i, j)th element represents the number
of occasions that a pixel with intensity i is adjacent to a pixel with intensity j given a
predefined orientation ϕ and inter-pixel distance d [25]. GLCMs are often normalized by
dividing each element by the total number of co-occurence pairs in the matrix in order
to obtain the co-occurence probabilities. The grey-level co-occurence probabilities are
thus the joint conditional probabilities of all pair-wise combinations of a discrete number
of grey-levels in a sub-window of an image given some spatial relation defined by an
orientation and an off-set [18].
22
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:28==
The adjacency of two pixels is given by an orientation and an inter-pixel distance, as
illustrated in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of inter-pixel adjacency given orientations ϕ = 0◦, 45◦, 90◦and 135◦
and an inter-pixel distance d of 1 [26].
In figure 5.1 four orientations ϕ = 0◦, 45◦, 90◦and 135◦and an inter-pixel distance d of 1
is illustrated. There is no rigorous method for selecting the optimal ϕ and d, but the use
of the four orientations and the inter-pixel distance of 1, as shown in figure 5.1, seems
to be generally preferred in sea ice information retrieval schemes [18]. Additionally, it is
common to take the directional average for orientations ϕ = 0◦, 45◦, 90◦and 135◦in order
to reduce the dimensionality of the GLCM [24].
Haralick Texture Features
In 1973, Robert Haralick proposed 14 texture features derived from GLCMs for automatic
image classification tasks [25]. The texture features are generated by applying statistics
to the co-occurence probabilities in the GLCMs. The purpose of these statistics is to iden-
tify some texture-related structural arrangement of the probabilities within the matrix. A
few studies advocate using only a subset of the texture features in order to avoid unnesse-
cary redundancy as the features tend to be heavily correlated [18], although for the sake
of completeness, and due to a general interest in the relative feature importance estima-
tion possible when using the Random Forest algorithm, 13 texture features will be utilized
in this project (the 14th feature proposed by Haralick has a risk of being numerically un-
stable). These are called: Angular Second Moment (ASM), Contrast (CON), Correlation
(COR), Sum of Squares: Variance (VAR), Inverse Difference Moment (IDM), Sum Aver-
age (SAV), Sum Variance (SVA), Sum Entropy (SEN), Entropy (ENT), Difference Variance
(DVA), Difference Entropy (DEN), Information Measure of Correlation 1 (INF1) and Infor-
mation Measure of Correlation 2 (INF2). The formulae for all 13 GLCM-based texture
features can be found in Appendix A (eqs. A.1-A.13).
In addition to the 13 GLCM-based texture features, the Variance-to-Mean Ratio (VMR)
will be used as an input feature, as one study reported its usefulness in sea ice mapping
using Sentinel-1 SAR imagery [24].
Gaussian Pyramid Decomposition
Scale is of vital importance in the understanding and analysis of images. The information
contained in an image depends on the spatial scale of said image. The surface features
visible in the SAR imagery that occur at scales larger than the spatial resolution of the
instrument, such as ice floes, ridges, leads etc., may reveal homogenous or inhomoge-
nous areas that can be characterized by the GLCM-based texture features. Such surface
characteristics exist across various spatial scales, and therefore the inclusion of texture
descriptors derived from different scale-space representations of the image might improve
the combined discriminative power of the feature set, and thus improve the overall accu-
racy of the algorithm.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
23
==PAGE:29==
In order to capture sea ice texture information present at different spatial scales in the
SAR imagery, the GLCM-based texture features will be derived from different scale-space
representations of the original SAR image, and these representations are obtained using
gaussian pyramid decomposition [27]. The concept of gaussian pyramid decomposition
is illustrated in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the concept of gaussian pyramid decomposition in which a num-
ber of scale-space representations are obtained by succeedingly smoothing and sub-
sampling the image [28].
The pyramid, as exemplified in figure 5.2, is created by succeedingly smoothing and sub-
sampling the image to obtain the next level in the pyramid. The smoothing is achieved
by convolution with a gaussian filter, and the smoothing is necessary in order to filter out
high spatial frequencies, and suppress small-scale features in the imagery.
An orientation-averaged GLCM is calculated from each spatial scale present in the pyra-
mid, and from these GLCMs the 13 Haralick textures features as well as VMR are derived.
When dealing with HH/HV dual-polarisation SAR imagery, and if a 4-layer gaussian pyra-
mid is used, this amounts to a total of 112 manually engineered features in addition to the
two SAR channels and the incidence angle to be fed to Random Forest algorithm.
24
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:30==
5.3
U-Net & Automatic Feature Extraction
Traditional machine learning algorithms work very well for a wide variety of problems.
However, the design, computation and selection of manually engineered domain-specific
features is a difficult and cumbersome task. In deep learning, the issue of manual feature
engineering can be bypassed as artificial neural networks are able to automatically extract
features of high abstraction relevant to the task at hand.
Before dwelving into the architecture of U-Net, which is the architecture used for sea ice
detection and concentration estimation in this project, it is important familiarize oneself
with the general concept of neural networks, and in particular CNNs and the different
building blocks that make up CNNs.
5.3.1
The Multi-layer Perceptron
Most of the concepts in deep learning can be readily explained using a simpler model than
CNNs, namely the regular feedforward neural network (or Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP)),
which is the quintessential deep learning model. An MLP is made up of neurons, and a
neuron, in terms of mathematics, is a non-linearity applied to an affine function [29]. An
artificial neuron with input features x = (x1, x2, ..., xn) is illustrated in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: A schematic illustration of an artificial neuron [30].
The inputs x are passed through an affine function with given weights W and biases b
before a non-linearity g is applied to obtain the neuron output h. A neural network consists
of a multitude of neurons arranged acyclically, such that the outputs of some neurons
become the inputs of other neurons. The neurons are organized in layers, as illustrated
in figure 5.4, with an input layer consisting of the input data, a number of hidden layers
and an output layer containing the prediction of the network.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.4: A schematic illustration of shallow neural network consisting of an input layer,
two hidden layers, and an output layer [30].
Most networks arrange these layers in a chain structure, with each layer being a function
of the layer that preceeded it. In this type of structure, the output of the first layer is given
by [29],
h(1) = g
(
W (1)x + b(1)
)
(5.4)
The output of the first layer is then the input to the second layer. The output of the second
layer is therefore given as,
h(2) = g
(
W (2)h(1) + b(2)
)
(5.5)
and so the information propagation continues throughout the network. In order for the net-
work to give meaningful predictions, the weight and bias parameters have to be tuned to
proper values given the task, and they are called the trainable parameters of the network.
In the case of a supervised learning problem with inputs x and targets y, the goal of such
a model is to approximate a mapping f, such that y = f(x; θ), and learn the trainable
parameters θ (the weights and biases) that result in the best approximation according to
some cost function [29]. In addition to the trainable parameters, external hyperparame-
ters, like the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in each hidden layer,
should be tuned, such that the model capacity is aligned with the complexity of the prob-
lem. As the number of layers and neurons increase, the number of trainable parameters
increase manyfold in comparison. Many modern deep learning architectures have millions
of trainable parameters.
26
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:32==
Gradient Based Learning & Backpropagation
The network is fed an input xi, which propagates through the network to produce an
output ˆyi. This is called forward propagation. The quality of the prediction, or inversely,
the loss, is measured using some loss function L(ˆyi, yi). Often the cost J(θ) is given as
a loss average over the training set,
J(θ) = 1
m
m
∑
i=1
L(f(xi; θ), yi)
(5.6)
In eq. 5.6, f(xi; θ) = ˆyi is the predicted output from the network given the input xi and
network parameters θ, and m is the number of training samples over which the losses
are averaged to obtain the cost. Of course, the ultimate goal of any machine learning
algorithm is to reduce the cost for a dataset sampled independently of the training set.
The choice of loss function L depends on problem the network is supposed to solve -
a common loss measure for classification tasks is the cross-entropy between the target
y and the predictions of the model ˆy, whereas the MSE is a common loss measure for
regression tasks.
Neural networks are usually trained using iterative, gradient descent based optimizers,
whose purpose is to drive the cost to a very low value. If the parameters of the network
are randomly initialized, the output obtained by means of forward propagation is almost
definitely a very poor approximation of the target, i.e. the cost J(θ) is high. The principle
of gradient based learning is to use the cost gradient ∇θJ(θ) with respect to the network
parameters θ to change the parameters ever so slightly, so as to nudge the network to-
ward a minimum on the multi-dimensional ’cost surface’ spanned by θ. This is known as
gradient descent [29]. The step taken is thus in the opposite direction of the cost gradient,
θ′ = θ −ϵ∇θJ(θ)
(5.7)
where ϵ is the learning rate, ie. a positive scalar determining the size of the step taken,
and θ′ are the updated network parameters.
The gradient ∇θJ(θ) is optained by means of backpropagation, which is an algorithm that
recursively applies the chain rule of calculus to obtain gradients. The training of a neural
network is thus composed of 1) forward propagation to obtain to network prediction and
compute the cost, 2) the backpropagation though the network to obtain ∇θJ(θ), and lastly
3) the gradient descent method, as presented in eq. 5.7, to update the parameters of the
network.
Stochastic Gradient Decent
A recurring problem in deep learning is that good generalization often requires large
datasets, but dealing with large datasets is computationally inefficient. Generally, the cost
functions used in deep learning are additive sums of per-example losses, as denoted in
eq. 5.6. In this case, the gradient descent method requires the computing of,
∇θJ(θ) = 1
m
m
∑
i=1
∇θL(f(xi; θ), yi)
(5.8)
which is a computationally expensive operation. The insight of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is that the gradient can be approximated using a smaller subset, ie. a batch (or
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
27
==PAGE:33==
mini-batch), of the terms in the full cost function [29]. That is, for each iteration of the
training of the model, a batch of samples are randomly sampled from the training set, and
used to estimate the gradient in order to complete the SGD step in eq 5.7.
The Adam optimizer is a slightly more sophisticated gradient descent based optimizer as
compared to vanilla SGD, and will be utilized in this project. The details of the Adam
optimizer is not within the scope of the project.
5.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
A CNN is a specialized type of feedforward neural network primarily designed to recognize
visual patterns in images. CNNs are very similar to MLPs in that they consist of a large
number of learnable parameters, but in contrast to MLPs, CNNs are designed with the
explicit assumption that the inputs to the network are images.
The main building blocks of CNNs are convolutional layers, which in turn generally are
made up of three separate stages; the convolution operation, the application of a non-
linearity and a pooling operation.
The Convolution Operation
As the name implies, CNNs employ convolutions in place of the general matrix multipli-
cations employed in MLPs. The convolution operation employed in CNNs is exemplified
in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Illustration of the convolutional operation utilized in the CNNs. The boxes are
drawn to indicate that the upper-left element of the output is computed by applying the
kernel to the upper-left part of the input [29].
The input is usually a multi-dimensional array of data, such as a multi-channel SAR image,
28
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:34==
while the kernel (or sometimes called the filter) is a multi-dimensional array of learnable
parameters. The output of a convolutional layer is obtained by means of convolution
between the kernel and the input image. A CNN is able to capture spatially important
information in an image through the applications of many different kernels.
While MLPs have a separate parameter describing the interaction between each input
and output neuron - that is, each neuron in a layer is connected to every neuron is the
preceding layer (see figure 5.4) - CNNs have sparse connections [29]. This is due to the
fact that the kernel is smaller than the input. The input might contain several thousand
pixels, while the kernel usually only occupies a few or a few tens of pixels. This effectively
reduces the memory requirements of CNN models. Another important distinction between
MLPs and CNNs is the fact that the parameters are shared - in CNNs, each element of a
kernel is used at every position in the input (apart from exceptions along the boundaries
of the input). This sharing of parameters results in the detection of similar features, such
as edges, at all the locations in which the feature is present in the input, which is a very
practical property. The convolution operation between an input and a specific kernel cre-
ates a two-dimensional output, often called a feature map, of the features captured by the
specific kernel.
Non-linearities
A number of non-linear activation functions have been proposed for use in deep learning
architectures. Non-linear activation functions are used in deep learning to allow the neural
networks to approximate non-linear functions as well as linear functions. The main non-
linearity employed in U-Net is the rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function, which is
given as,
g(z) = max{0, z}
(5.9)
where z = W x+b. The ReLU activation function is thus a piece-wise linear function. The
ReLU activation function has been shown to have several advantages over other widely
used activation functions, such as the sigmoid activation function [29].
Max-Pooling
A pooling function summarizes a region of a feature map with a summary statistic. In the
case of max-pooling, this statistic is the maximum pixel intensity of that particular region
of the feature map. In addition to reducing the overall dimensionality of the convolved
feature map, the pooling operation also introduces an invariance to small translations,
meaning that if one were to translate the feature map by a small amount, the maximum
value in a local region of the feature map would remain unchanged as compared to the
non-translated feature map.
5.3.3
U-Net: An Encoder-Decoder Architecture for Image Segmentation
U-Net was proposed in 2015 as a CNN architecture for biomedical image segmentation
(ie. pixel-wise classification), but it has since been applied to a vast variety of image seg-
mentation problems. U-Net employs an encoder-decoder type of CNN architecture that
draws inspiration from autoencoders [31]. U-Net consists of an encoder that encodes the
input representations from a raw input to an intermediate lower dimensional representa-
tion through a number of convolution and max-pooling operations, and a decoder that
attempts to upsample and reconstruct the lower dimensional representations through a
mirrored sequence of transposed convolution and regular convolution operations to output
a segmentation map that matches the resolution of the original input image [32]. During
training the loss is thus computed in terms of the difference between the output segmenta-
tion map and a desired segmentation map. The encoder is essentially a feature extractor,
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
29
==PAGE:35==
and similarly to how different spatial scales are considered when extracting the GLCM-
based texture features in the traditional machine learning approach, U-Net employs skip
connections to transfer and concatenate feature maps of varying levels of abstraction,
ie. at different stages in the encoder, to the corresponding stages of the decoder. The
inclusion of features of different abstraction levels has been shown to improve the quality
of the generated segmentation map [31]. The CNN architecture proposed in the U-Net
paper is presented in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Illustration of original the U-Net architecture as presented in [32]. The blue
boxes represent multi-channel feature maps and the numbers on top of the blue boxes
denote number of filters. The white boxes represent the feature maps transferred from
the different stages of the encoder network to the corresponding stages of the decoder
network. The numbers next to each box denotes the dimentionality of that layer. The
arrows represent different operations.
The encoder network (the left half of the U-Net architecture in figure 5.6) consists of the
repeated application of two 3x3 convolutions - both of which are passed through the ReLU
activation function - followed by a 2x2 max-pooling operation with a stride of 2, which
effectively downsamples the input by a factor of 2. At each max-pooling step the number
of filters/kernels is doubled. At the ’bottom’ of the U-Net architecture is the bottleneck,
which consists of two 3x3 convolutions (+ ReLUs).
The decoder network (the right half of the U-Net architecture) mirrors the encoder network.
The upsampling of the lower dimensional representations is achieved differently depend-
ing on the specific implementation of U-Net, however, this project utilizes 2x2 transposed
convolutions with a stride of 2, which - inversely to the max-pooling operations in the en-
coder - effectively upsamples the input by a factor of two. At each transposed convolution
step the number of filters/kernels is halved. After the transposed convolution, the features
maps from the corresponding encoder stage is concatenated to the features maps at the
30
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:36==
decoder stage. Then two 3x3 convolutionals (+ReLUs) are applied before the steps are
repeated at the next decoder stage.
The final convolutional layer performs a 1x1 convolution to map the feature vectors of
the preceding layer to a C-channel segmentation map, where C is the desired number
of classes. In the original U-Net paper the desired number of classes was 2, hence the
depth of 2 of the last layer in the archictecture.
Batch normalization
Although batch normalization is not mentioned in the original U-Net paper - likely due to
the paper proposing batch normalization being released at roughly the time as the U-Net
paper - batch normalization is used in many contemporary implementations of U-Net.
Batch normalization is a per-layer technique whose core concept when applied to a layer
is to normalize the layer output by subtraction of the batch mean and division by the batch
standard deviation. In addition, the batch normalization technique introduces two new
learnable parameters that controls the normalization of the layer output. When applied,
this technique has been shown to improve speed and stability during the training process
of deep learning models [33].
Dropout
Dropout was proposed as a regularization technique for deep learning algorithms in 2014
[34]. In CNNs the technique provides a regularization effect by randomly zeroing out
feature maps according to a dropout probability assigned to that specific convolutional
layer. The intuition behind the dropout technique is that the model cannot rely solely on
a single feature map (or a few feature maps), and thus the model is forced to spread its
weights more evenly. For example, if a convolutional layer outputs 64 feature maps and
a dropout probability of 20% has been assigned to that particular layer, an average of
roughly 13 feature maps will be randomly zeroed out during each iteration of the training
loop.
The application of dropout in deep learning algorithms is somewhat analogous to the bag-
ging technique employed in the Random Forest algorithm, in which a bagged ensemble
of tree-based models are trained and combined when used for prediction. Recall that in
bagging m different datasets are sampled from the training set with replacement to train
m models. The dropout technique is similar to bagging in that a different sub-model is
trained with a new mini-batch sampled from the training set each iteration of the training
loop, and the model is restricted to a subset of the features. The dropout technique dif-
fers from bagging in that each sub-model is trained for only one iteration and all of the
sub-models share parameters [29].
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
31
==PAGE:37==
5.4
Performance Metrics & Algorithm Evaluation
The performances of the traditional machine learning and the deep learning algorithms
will be evaluated separately and compared subsequently. This entails the evaluation of
the flat and hierarchical algorithmic structures. As the binary segmentation of sea ice
and open water and the estimation of sea ice concentration are inherently different tasks
(the former being a binary classification problem and the latter being a multi-class classi-
fication/regression problem), the measures by which to quantify the performances of the
binary classifiers and the SIC classifiers/regressors will also be inherently different. The
quality of predictive models is usually evaluated by how well they perform on a previously
unseen testing set - as opposed to the training set used to train the models and the val-
idation set used to tune the hyperparameters of the algorithms, and therefore the ASIP
dataset will be split into 3 constituent parts.
This section presents the measures used to quantify the performances of the Random
Forest and U-Net algorithms for the task of sea ice detection and concentration estimation,
as well as the reasoning behind the choice of those performance measures.
5.4.1
Segmentation of Sea Ice and Open Water
Recall that in the flat classification structure the SIC classifiers generate sea ice concen-
tration maps of a SAR scene by assigning each pixel a SIC between 0% and 100%. In
the hierarchical structure a binary classifier distinguishes sea ice pixels from open water
pixels prior to the assignment of non-zero SICs by a SIC classifier or regressor to the sea
ice pixels.
The output of the Random Forest classifiers and the softmaxed output from the U-Net
classifiers correspond to C-channel probability maps, where C is equal to a pre-defined
number of classes. For the SIC classifiers C is equal to the number of discrete SIC values
in the data, which depends on how the SIC variable in the ice charts are discretized
between 0% and 100%. In the flat classification structure, a SIC classifier generates a
sea ice concentration map by assigning each pixel the class label of the class with the
highest probability (ie. applying an argmax function).
In the binary classification case, the algorithms generate 2-channel probability maps with
the channels corresponding to the open water and the sea ice class probabilities, re-
spectively. The sea ice class channel is a sea ice probability map in which each pixel
in the particular scene is assigned a probability of belonging to the sea ice class. These
probabilistic algorithm outputs introduce a level of granularity, and allow us to think proba-
bilistically, adding a degree of confidence to the prediction. In the hierarchical approach a
probability threshold has to be determined in order to binarize the sea ice probability maps
predicted by the binary classifiers. The choice of threshold will obviously have an impact
on the trade-offs between positive and negative errors (the sea ice class is considered
the positive class).
32
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:38==
A convenient way of summarizing the performance of a classifier is to do a cross-tabulation
between true and predicted classes. The confusion matrix provides an insightful look into
not only the performance of a predictive model, but the types of errors made by the model
[35]. A confusion matrix for a binary classification problem is exemplified in table 5.1.
Predicted positive class
Predicted negative class
True positive class
True Positive
False Negative
True negative class
False Positive
True Negative
Table 5.1: The table illustrates the structure of a Confusion Matrix of a two-class classifi-
cation problem.
In the confusion matrix in table 5.1, the true positives (TP) and true negatives (TN) in-
dicate pixels correctly classified as the positive and negative classes, respectively. The
off-diagonal elements, false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN), indicate pixels be-
longing to the positive or negative class misclassified as the positive or negative class,
respectively.
The choice of threshold with which to binarize the sea ice probability maps predicted by
the binary classifiers has a direct impact on the elements of the confusion matrix. A higher
threshold will reduce the false positive rate, ie. the ratio of open water pixels misclassified
as sea ice pixels to all open water pixels, as fewer pixels will be classified as sea ice.
As a counterpoint, the false negative rate, ie. the ratio of sea ice pixels misclassified
as open water pixels to all sea ice pixels, would increase. Naturally, the opposite effect
would occur if the threshold was decreased rather than increased. Additionally, binarizing
the sea ice probability maps discards the level of granularity, as it is no longer possible
to differentiate between more or less likely sea ice predictions. In order to avoid this,
a threshold-independent measure will be employed in the evaluation and comparison of
binary models - namely, the ROC AUC measure.
A ROC graph is a plot of the false positive rate (FPR) versus the true positive rate (TPR).
A graph is drawn by varying the threshold from the most restrictive probability (ie. 100%)
to the least restrictive probability (0%). For each threshold, there exists a point in the
ROC-space based on the FPR and TRP values resulting from binarizing at that particular
threshold [35]. An illustrative example of a ROC graph is available in figure 5.7.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.7: Illustrative example of a ROC graph [35]. The ROC curve is drawn by connect-
ing the individual (FPR, TPR)-points in the ROC space. The upward diagonal indicates a
completely random performance.
The closer the ROC curve is to the upper left corner in the ROC space, the better the
classifier. The ROC AUC measure is given as the area under the ROC curve. The ROC
AUC measure can be intepreted as the probability that a binary classifier will assign a
higher sea ice probability to a randomly chosen sea ice pixel than a randomly chosen
open water pixel [35]. The ROC AUC measure therefore allows for the evaluation and
comparison of binary classifiers regardless of chosen binarization threshold.
After the best binary classifier has been identified using the ROC AUC measure, the
probability maps predicted by said binary classifier are still to be binarized in order to
produce a final segmentation map, and thus an optimal threshold has to be determined
using some performance measure. A large number of different performance measures
based on the confusion matrix elements have been proposed in attempts to summarize
the information into a single number. The most obvious way of determining an optimal
threshold might be to choose the threshold that maximizes the pixel-wise accuracy, which
is given as the ratio of correctly classified pixels to total number of pixels in an image,
acc =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(5.10)
The pixel-wise accuracy can, however, be misleading in imbalanced classification prob-
lems, where the data has a non-uniform class distribution. In the case of an imbalanced
binary dataset the classifier might achieve a high pixel-wise accuracy even if the model
is not able to correctly predict the minority class. Thus, the prevalence of a more fre-
quent class may mask a poor classification performance in the infrequent class when the
34
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:40==
pixel-wise accuracy is used a performance measure.
The F1-score is a metric commonly used as a performance measure in imbalanced seg-
mentation problems. The F1-score is defined as the harmonic mean of precision P and
recall R, which in turn are defined as P =
TP
TP+FP and R =
TP
TP+FN , respectively [36]. The
F1-score is thus given as,
F1 = 2 · P · R
P + R
(5.11)
The optimal threshold will be determined as the threshold that maximizes the F1-score.
The F1-score focuses on the analysis of the positive class, that is, the sea ice class as
opposed to the open water class. The precision evaluates the number of correctly clas-
sified pixels belonging to the positive class among all pixels classified as positive (this is
equivalent to the TPR). The recall, on the other hand, evaluates the number of correctly
classified pixels belonging to the positive class among all positive pixels. The objective of
the F1-score is thus to find an equal balance between the precision, which is a measure
of the correctness of the classification, and recall, which is a measure of the coverage of
the classification [35].
A common criticism of the use of the F1-score as a performance measure is that the
F1-score by its definition in eq. 5.11 gives equal weight to precision and recall - and by
extension therefore equal weight to the two types of errors FP and FN -, when in many
cases the relative importance assigned to precision and recall should be an aspect of
the particular problem. This aspect is, however, not considered, as in this thesis the
misclassification of an open water pixel as sea ice (FP) and the misclassification of a
sea ice pixel as open water (FN) are weighted equally, and therefore the F1-score is
reasonable as a performance metric. This choice has been made due to the assumption
that ice analysts, in general, are conservative when drawing the polygons that delineate
sea ice and open water - ice services would rather draw too much sea ice, than risk
providing sea ice maps that result in unfortunate and costly incidents due to unmapped
sea ice. It is therefore assumed that such a bias already exists in the data, and does not
need introduction by means of adding weight to certain types of errors.
The performance of the flat and hierarchical algorithmic structures in the task of segment-
ing sea ice from open water will thus be evaluated using the F1-score as a performance
measure. In the flat classification approach a binary segmentation map is obtained by
binarizing the sea ice concentration map such as to only contain sea ice (SIC > 0%) and
open water (SIC = 0%) pixels before the F1-score is computed. The F1-scores of the
flat and hierarchical approaches are then compared to determine whether one approach
is superior to the other.
5.4.2
Sea Ice Concentration Estimation
The ability of the SIC classifiers and the SIC regressors to accurately estimate the sea ice
concentration cannot be satisfactorily evaluated using the pixel-wise accuracy or the F1-
score, as the discrepancies between the ’true’ sea ice concentrations and the estimated
sea ice concentrations are not meaningless - eg. if a pixel has a true sea ice concentration
of 50%, an estimated sea ice concentration of 60% is a better prediction than an estimated
sea ice concentration of 70%. If the pixel-wise accuracy or the F1-score was used as a
performance measure the two sea ice concentration estimates would be deemed equally
wrong, which is clearly not true - one is a better prediction than the other. Therefore other
performance measures must be considered. Also, in order to be able to directly com-
pare the performance of a SIC classifier and a SIC regressor in their ability to accurately
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
35
==PAGE:41==
estimate the sea ice concentration, the continuous output from a SIC regressor must be
discretized to match the output from the SIC classifiers.
An important point is that the sea ice concentrations assigned by the DMI ice analyst
to a drawn polygon is an average concentration within that polygon - the sea ice is not
necessarily homogenously distributed within the polygon. For this reason, the predictive
capabilities of the SIC classifiers and SIC regressors should not be evaluated at pixel-
level, but rather as average estimates over polygons. Say, a testing set has been sampled
from the ASIP dataset, then a SIC classifier/regressor will be evaluated on how closely
the mean estimate of all pixels belonging to, for example, the SIC = 50% polygons in the
testing set approximates a sea ice concentration of 50%, and likewise for the remaining
discrete sea ice concentrations.
Since the estimation of the sea ice concentration resembles a regression problem more
so than a classification problem, a regression performance measure will be employed in
the evaluation of the SIC classifiers and SIC regressors. The R2-statistic, which is also
called the coefficient of determination, is a statistical measure of goodness-of-fit, and it is
often used in linear regression analysis. The R2-statistic represents the extent to which
the variation in one variable is explained by another variable [37]. Given a dataset of size
N with true values y1, y2, ..., yN and corresponding predicted values f1, f2, ..., fN, then the
total variation in the true values is given by,
SStot =
N
∑
i=1
(yi −¯y)2
(5.12)
in which ¯y is the arithmetic mean of the true values. The variation of the true values, which
is not explained by the predictive model is given by the sum of squared residuals,
SSres =
N
∑
i=1
(yi −fi)2
(5.13)
The amount of variation in the true values described by the predictive model, ie. the
R2-statistic, is thus given as,
R2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
(5.14)
Say, a testing set sampled from the ASIP dataset has been discretized to 11 discrete sea
ice concentrations, ie. SIC = 0%, 10%, 20%, ..., 100%, and SICtrue denotes a vector
of these 11 discrete sea ice concentrations. Then, if SICest is a vector in which the
ith element is the mean sea ice concentration estimate of the pixels of the testing set
belonging to the ith discrete value in SICtrue, then the R2-statistic evaluated between
SICtrue and SICest quantifies the degree of linear correlation between the true sea ice
concentrations and the class-wise mean sea ice concentration estimates made by the SIC
classifer or SIC regressor.
In these terms, the SIC classifier or SIC regressor with the highest measure of the R2-
statistic will be deemed the most accurate estimator of the sea ice concentration.
36
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:42==
6
Implementation & Validation
In this chapter the ASIP dataset is prepared and pre-processed, and the algorithms pre-
sented in chapter 5 are implemented. The implementations are carried out exclusively
in Python using an extensive selection of libraries and frameworks to ease the workflow.
A number of Random Forest and U-Net models are trained and subsequently validated
against a validation set in order to identify the best performing models.
6.1
Data Preparation
Prior to the implementation of the algorithms presented in chapter 5, the ASIP dataset has
to be pre-processed and prepared in various ways. The dataset comprises 915 HH/HV
dual-polarisation Sentinel-1 SAR scenes and corresponding DMI ice charts. The SAR
scenes are scattered along the coasts of Greenland and they each cover an area of ap-
proximately 400x400 km, corresponding to roughly 10000x10000 pixels at a pixel spacing
of 40 m. However, in most of the SAR scenes only a smaller subset of the 400x400 km
area has an accompanying ice chart - either due to the application of a land mask, or due
to fact that often only a subset of the SAR scene is relevant for navigational purposes.
The areas of the 915 SAR scenes that overlap with the corresponding ice charts has
been cropped into 300x300 pixel tiles, so as to prepare the data for CNN ingestion. This
amounts to a total of roughly 200000 tiles.
All the SAR data and the corresponding ice charts are sub-sampled by 2x2 block averag-
ing, thus obtaining 150x150 pixel tiles with a pixel spacing of 80x80 m, which more closely
matches the 93x87 m spatial resolution of the Sentinel-1 sensor, while also reducing im-
age noise and data volume.
Addressing the Issue of Class Imbalance
The sea ice concentration variable in the ASIP dataset covers a range from 0% to 100%
in steps of 5% with the rare appearance of 1% polygons for areas where the ice analyst
is not absolutely confident of ice-free conditions. The ASIP dataset has an unequal dis-
tribution of sea ice concentrations, and severely disproportionately so, as more than half
of all pixels are assigned a sea ice concentration of 0%. When class imbalance exists in
the training set, the learning algorithm generally tends to over-classify the majority class
due to its increased prior probability. Consequently, the minority classes are more often
misclassified. The issue of class imbalance can be adressed in several different ways;
data-level techniques usually involve a resampling of the dataset to obtain a new dataset
with a less skewed class distribution, whereas algorithm-level techniques usually involve
the implementation of cost-sensitive learning, which penalizes the misclassification of mi-
nority classes more than the misclassification of majority classes.
In order to simplify the task of alleviating the class imbalance, the sea ice concentration
variable is divided into 11 classes. The details of the class division is presented in table
6.1.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
37
==PAGE:43==
Class label
SIC interval
0
0% ≤SIC < 5%
1
5% ≤SIC < 15%
2
15% ≤SIC < 25%
3
25% ≤SIC < 35%
4
35% ≤SIC < 45%
5
45% ≤SIC < 55%
6
55% ≤SIC < 65%
7
65% ≤SIC < 75%
8
75% ≤SIC < 85%
9
85% ≤SIC < 95%
10
95% ≤SIC ≤100%
Table 6.1: The table presents the details of the division of the sea ice concentration vari-
able into 11 classes.
The encoding of spatial information into GLCM-based features is a tile-level operation,
however, the subsequent training of Random Forest algorithm uses pixel-level samples,
which facillitates a completely uniform class distribution to be fed to the Random Forest
algorithm. U-Net, on the other hand, is trained purely on tile-level samples, and thus
requires a training set balanced at tile-level, which is difficult to obtain.
Figure 6.1 illustrates the tile-level class balance of the ASIP dataset. For each tile in the
ASIP dataset, the mean of all pixels with a non-zero sea ice concentration (SIC > 0%) is
computed, and then the tile is assigned a class label in accordance with table 6.1 based
on this mean. If a tile consists only of open water pixels (SIC = 0%), the tile is counted
as belonging to class 0. While inaccurate class assignments are still likely to occur, the
reason for not including the open water pixels when computing the SIC mean of each
tile, is to avoid situations where one half of the tile is open water (SIC = 0%) and the
other half is compact sea ice (SIC = 100%), and then the tile is assigned class label 5,
due to the mean being 50%. Instead, only the non-zero sea ice concentration pixels are
considered when computing the mean. Simultaneously, the average per-tile fraction of
open water pixels is computed for all tiles containing non-zero sea ice concentrations, so
as to deduct tiles from the 0th class when balancing the dataset. The assumption is then
that the tile-level class distribution to some extent reflects the underlying pixel-wise class
distribution.
38
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.1: The figure illustrates the tile-level class distribution of the ASIP dataset.
As is evident in figure 6.1, the 0th class is disproportionately frequent in the ASIP dataset
compared to the remaining 10 classes. Prior to the rebalancing of the ASIP dataset, the
entire data pool is split into training, testing and validation data pools using a 75%/15%/10%-
split. The ASIP dataset is split such that tiles from a particular SAR scene is only present
in one of the splits. The tile-wise class distributions of the three splits are presented in
table 6.2.
No. of tiles
Class label
Training data
Testing data
Validation data
0
103644
19839
13577
1
1588
422
253
2
5217
1304
530
3
3622
662
365
4
3602
601
617
5
2525
766
522
6
2640
829
706
7
3133
441
637
8
4579
688
691
9
10220
1920
919
10
16792
2366
2229
Table 6.2: Table of the tile-wise class distribution of the training, testing and validation
data pools. The training, testing and validation sets are sampled from these data pools.
The data-level techniques for addressing class imbalance include under-sampling and
over-sampling. These techniques modify the class distribution by either randomly discard-
ing samples from the majority classes, or by randomly over-sampling the minority classes.
Over-sampling increases the computational load due to the increased size of the dataset,
and the technique has also been shown to cause overfitting [38]. Under-sampling, on the
other hand, has the disadvantage of reducing the total amount of information available
for the algorithm to learn from. Due to the class distribution of the ASIP dataset being as
severely skewed as it is, purely relying on over-sampling to balance the data is impracti-
cal. Instead, a hybrid of under-sampling and over-sampling will be employed in an effort
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
39
==PAGE:45==
to balance the training, testing and validation sets.
Deep learning models generally require much more data to match or exceed the per-
formance of its traditional machine learning counterpart. The training of deep learning
models are, however, extremely accelerated due to the use of highly-parallel Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs). On the contrary, traditional machine learning algorithms of-
ten suffer from large computational loads and memory requirements when working with
large datasets, which is further exacerbated by the necessary computation of many hand-
engineered features. Therefore the sizes of the datasets sampled for the Random Forest
and U-Net algorithms, respectively, differ significantly.
The resampling of the ASIP dataset for the traditional machine learning approach is done
exclusively with under-sampling due to the cumbersome computation of the GLCM-based
texture features. The training, testing and validation sets will consist of 100, 10 and 10
tiles, respectively, per class.
The resampling of the ASIP dataset for the deep learning approach is done using a hybrid
between under-sampling and over-sampling. The training, testing and validation sets of
the SIC classifiers/regressors will consist of 3000, 300 and 300 tiles, respectively, per
class. As is then evident in table 6.2, the classes 1, 5 and 6 will be over-sampled in the
training set, and class 1 will be over-sampled in the validation set.
In both approaches, the binary classifiers are trained to discriminate between open water
and any non-zero sea ice concentration, and will thus require 10 times as many samples
from the 0th class as compared to the other classes in order to be balanced. This is
easily acommodated in the traditional machine learning approach as the Random Forest
algorithm is trained on individual pixels. However, in the deep learning approach this
is accommodated by sampled two training sets - one with equal representiation of each
class and one with 10 times as many samples from the 0th class as compared to the
other classes. Furthermore, it was found that approximately 10% of the pixels in the tiles
assigned to classes 1-10 have a sea ice concentration of 0%, and therefore 10% of the
total number of tiles sampled from the 0th class are deducted from all the splits.
6.2
Random Forest & Manual Feature Engineering
In this section the methodology and implementation of the traditional machine learning ap-
proach is presented. This includes the derivation of the multi-scale GLCM-based texture
features, as well as the hyperparameter tuning of the Random Forest algorithm. A number
of binary classifiers and SIC classifiers/regressors are trained, evaluated and compared.
Grey-level quantization
A necessary step prior to the derivation of the GLCM-based texture features is the quan-
tization of the grey-levels in the training, validation and testing sets, meaning that the
backscatter intensities have to be quantized in order to compute the grey-level co-occurrence
matrices from which the texture features proposed by Haralick are derived. Therefore, a
method of quantization and the number of quantization levels have to be decided upon.
A smaller number of quantization levels accelerates the computation of the GLCM-based
features, however, this computational gain is offset by a loss of information. A 2002 study
on the influence of the number of quantization levels on the derived GLCM-based features
used sea ice classification as its case study [39]. The paper concludes that the use of less
than 24 quantization levels produces unreliable results, whereas the use of more than 64
quantization levels did not increase the classifcation accuracy. Unfortunately, the study
focuses on a smaller subset of the 13 GLCM features used in this project. Other studies
within the field of sea ice mapping, eg. [40] and [18], suggest somewhere between 16
40
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:46==
and 32 quantization levels. 32 quantization levels will be used in this project.
The method of quantization refers to the method by which the backscatter intensities are
packed into the 32 quantization levels. Histogram equalization is utilized in this project.
Histogram equalization is a quantization method that maps the backscatter intensity dis-
tribution into a uniform grey level distribution, such that each grey level is equally repre-
sented in the data. This quantization method is applied on the training set, and the specific
mapping used to quantize the training data is stored, such that the same mapping can be
used on the validation and testing sets as well to ensure that the SIC classes look similar
across the datasets.
Gaussian pyramid decomposition
A total of four different spatial scales will be considered when deriving the GLCM-based
texture features, and thus each tile in the training, validation and testing sets is to be
represented at four different spatial scales - that is, a four-layered gaussian pyramid. For
each tile, each level of the gaussian pyramid is obtained by the repeated sequence of
gaussian blurring and downsampling. The tile is blurred by convolvning the tile with a 5x5
gaussian filter. After the blurring operation, the tile is downsampled by a factor of two.
At the lowest level of the pyramid, which corresponds to the spatial scale of the original
imagery, the pixel spacing is 80 m. In the next three levels the pixel spacing increases to
160 m, 320 m and 640 m, respectively.
Derivation of the GLCM-based texture features
The computation of the directionally averaged GLCMs and the subsequent derivation of
the 13 GLCM-based texture features is carried out using the Computer Vision library ma-
hotas [41] in Python. The 13 GLCM features, as well as the VMR, is derived for every tile
in the training, testing and validation sets, and for each scale-space representation. The
size of the sub-window from which the GLCMs are computed is 25x25 pixels at the lowest
level of the gaussian pyramid representation of the data, which at a pixel spacing of 80 m
corresponds to a 2x2 km area. This area is kept roughly the same for each spatial scale,
and thus the window size is adapted to the spatial scale of the data being processed. Due
to the per-window computation of the GLCMs, the GLCM-based features of a 150x150 tile
only cover the 126x126 inner-most pixels of the tile. The raw HH/HV backscatter and
incidence angle features are trimmed accordingly.
As the Sentinel-1 SAR data is dual-polarised, this results in a total of 112 manually en-
gineered features. Along with the raw HH/HV backscatter intensities and the incidence
angle, these are concatenated into a 115 element feature vector for each pixel in the
training, testing and validation sets, thus creating a high-dimensional feature space for
the Random Forest algorithm to learn from.
A visual inspection of the 13 GLCM-based texture features and the VMR of all four spatial
scales for the HH channel of a Sentinel-1 SAR scene is available in figures 6.3 and 6.4.
These visualizations are based on a scene from the testing set, which can seen in figure
6.2.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.2: The figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH and HV channels, as well as the corre-
sponding DMI-produced ice chart for a scene from the testing set.
The color scale is set individually for each GLCM feature across the four spatial scales.
Additionally, the contrast of each feature is enhanced. While this might seem misleading
in regards to the relative intensities of the features, it makes the fine structure of each
feature as well as the changes across spatial scales more clearly visible to the viewer.
42
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.3: Visualization of the first 7 GLCM-based texture features based on the HH
channel of the Sentinel-1 scene presented in figure 6.2. Each row represents a specific
Haralick feature, while the columns represent the spatial scales 0-3.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.4: Visualization of the last 7 GLCM-based texture features as well as the VMR
feature based on the HH channel of the Sentinel-1 scene presented in figure 6.2. Each
row represents a specific Haralick feature, while the columns represent the spatial scales
0-3.
44
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:50==
As is obvious from figures 6.3 and 6.4, many of the GLCM features are highly correlated.
The issue of redundancy is further worsened by the fact that some of the features do
not exhibit much change across spatial scales. In general, the GLCM features tend to
become more noisy as one moves up the gaussian pyramid representation of the data,
which might be due to the loss of information at higher spacial scales, and the fact that
the sparsity of the co-occurence matrices increases as well. It is important to note that
the GLCM-based texture features computed for the HV-channel are notably different than
those computed for the HH-channel. A visual inspection of the 13 GLCM-based texture
features and the VMR of all four spatial scales for the HV backscatter of the Sentinel-1
SAR scene is available in Appendix B.
Feature correlation is not inherently an issue for the predictive capabilities of the Random
Forest algorithm, as the algorithm only ever uses a single predictor at each node. Feature
correlation does, however, reduce the interpretability of the individual decision trees as
well as the usefulness of feature importance measures. This is due to the fact that any
one of the correlated features can be used as the predictor at a particular node with no
substantial preference over the others. Once one of the correlated features has been
used in a split, the importances of the other correlated features are significantly reduced
as the impurity they are able to remove has already been removed. This is an issue
when it comes to the intepretation of the individual decision trees or when computing
the relative feature importances, as it can lead to the incorrect conclusion that a certain
feature is a very strong predictor of the response variable, while other correlated features
are unimportant, when in reality they might be close to equally as informative in terms of
their relationship with the response variable. While this effect is somewhat mitigated by
the process of random feature selection, it is most likely not completely removed. A look
into the importances of the various GLCM-based texture features for the trained Random
Forest models is available in Appendix C.
6.2.1
Random Forest Model Training & Validation
All Random Forest models are trained using the Random Forest implementation available
in the scikit-learn [42] machine learning library in Python. The models are trained on the
GPU Cluster at DTU Compute, which houses machines with powerful CPUs as well as
GPUs.
Two hyperparameters are considered during the training of the Random Forest models;
the number of trees in the forest, n_estimators, as well as the pre-pruning parameter
max_depth. The max_depth parameter controls the maximum depth of the individual
decision trees in the forest. Deep decision trees can approximate complex patterns, but
are at the same time prone to overfitting. The generalization variance is reduced as more
trees are added to the ensemble, though with diminishing returns beyond a certain point.
The addition of more trees to the ensemble also increases the computional load during
training. There is thus a trade-off between the maximum tree depth and the number of
trees in the ensemble that has to be balanced in order to maximise model performance
on the validation set, while keeping the number of trees as low as possible. The number
of features considered at each split is kept constant as the square root of the total number
of features. As such, 11 randomly chosen features are considered at each split.
The pixel-level class distribution of the training set sampled for the Random Forest algo-
rithm is shown in figure 6.5. The class labels are assigned to the pixels in accordance
with table 6.1.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.5: The figure illustrates the pixel-level class distribution of the training set sam-
pled for the Random Forest algorithm.
The tile-level resampling and rebalancing scheme presented in section 6.1 has clearly had
a balancing effect on the pixel-level class distribution of the training data. The Random
Forest algorithm uses pixel-level samples during training, and thus it is possible to feed a
completely uniform class distribution to the algorithm.
The binary classifiers are trained using 350000 samples per class, except for the 0th
class from which 3.5M samples are sampled from the training set. The SIC classifiers
are trained using 700000 samples per class. The SIC regressors are trained on the same
samples as the SIC classifiers, although the raw sea ice concentrations are used as op-
posed to the class labels in table 6.1.
Binary Segmentation of Sea Ice and Open Water
As explained in chapter 5, the hierarchical algorithmic structure is tested against the flat
algorithmic structure by evaluating each approach on its ability to accurately discriminate
between sea ice and open water, which is measured using the F1-score. In the hierarchi-
cal approach the binary classifiers are evaluated and compared - independently of how
the output sea ice probability maps are thresholded - using the ROC AUC measure com-
puted on the validation set. Afterwards, the highest scoring model is binarized using the
threshold that maximizes the F1-score during model inference on the validation set.
The hyperparameters considered when training the binary classifiers are: n_estimators =
{8, 16, 32, 64} and max_depth = {4, 8, 16, 32, 64}. Figure 6.6 shows the performance of
the binary classifiers as measured using ROC AUC as a performance metric.
46
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.6: The plot shows the performances of the binary classifiers when the hyper-
parameters n_estimators and max_depth are varied, using the ROC AUC score as a
performance measure. The model containing 32 trees with a maximum tree depth of 8
achieves the highest ROC AUC score.
The best performing binary classifier - as determined using the ROC AUC score as a
performance measure - scores 86.6% on the validation set. This binary classifier achieves
an optimal F1-score of 87.2% on the validation set at a threshold of 55%.
The hyperparameters considered when training the SIC classifiers are the same as those
considered when training the binary classifiers. For the flat classification approach the
F1-scores of the SIC classifiers are shown in figure 6.7.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.7: The plot shows the performances of the SIC classifiers when the hyperparam-
eters n_estimators and max_depth are varied using the F1-score score as a performance
measure. The model containing 16 trees with a maximum tree depth of 32 achieves the
highest F1-score.
The SIC classifier with 16 trees and a maximum tree depth of 32 achieves an F1-score of
86.6% on the validation set, which is the highest score of the SIC classifiers. Even though
the margin is small, the binary classifier does outperform the SIC classifier in the task
segmenting sea ice and open water in SAR imagery, and thus the hierarchical approach
is deemed superior.
Estimation of Sea Ice Concentration
As the hierarchical approach is deemed superior to the flat approach, the ability of the
SIC classifiers and the SIC regressors to accurately predict the sea ice concentration is
evaluated only on the pixels from the validation set with a non-zero sea ice concentration,
as the discrimination between sea ice and open water is handled by the binary classifier.
The R2-scores between the sea ice concentrations assigned by DMI and the per-class
means of the sea ice concentration estimates by the models are chosen as the measure
of model performance. According to table 6.1, class 1 encompasses the sea ice concen-
trations from 5% up to - but not including - 15%, and thus class 1 is assumed to represent a
sea ice concentration of 10%. Similarly, class 2 is assumed to represent a sea ice concen-
tration of 20%, and so on. Class 10, however, encompasses the sea ice concentrations
from 95% −100%, and is thus assumed to represent a sea ice concentration of 97.5%.
48
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:54==
The R2-scores for the SIC classifiers and the SIC regressors are presented in figures 6.8
and 6.9.
Figure 6.8: The plot shows the performances of the SIC classifiers using the R2-score
score as a performance measure. The model containing 32 trees with a maximum tree
depth of 8 achieves the highest R2-score.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
49
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.9: The plot shows the performances of the SIC regressors using the R2-score
score as a performance measure. The model containing 32 trees with a maximum tree
depth of 32 achieves the highest R2-score.
The SIC classifiers outperform the SIC regressors by a large margin, and thus SIC re-
gressors with ensembles larger than 32 trees have not been pursued. The SIC classifier
consisting of 32 trees with a maximum tree depth of 8 achieves the highest R2-score of
92.6% on the validation set. The performance of this specific model is illustrated in figure
6.10, which shows the class-wise mean sea ice concentration estimates along with the re-
spective errorbars corresponding to the standard deviations of the class-wise estimates.
The red line indicates the perfect model performance, ie. the line on which the points
would lie if the SIC classifier perfectly predicted the sea ice concentrations assigned by
the DMI analysts.
50
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.10: This plot visualizes the class-wise performance of the best SIC classifier.
The red line indicates the sea ice concentrations assigned by the DMI analysts. The black
squares indicate the class-wise mean SIC estimates, and the errorsbars correspond to
the standard deviations of the class-wise estimates.
It appears that the model tends to over-shoot the lower sea ice concentrations, while
under-shooting the higher sea ice concentrations. It is especially concerning that the
mean prediction of pixels with a sea ice concentration of 20% is higher than the mean
prediction of pixels with a sea ice concentration of 30%. The mean standard deviation of
the class-wise sea ice concentration estimates is 28.7%, which is unfavorable, but com-
parable to the 20% discrepencies found between ice charts from different ice services.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
51
==PAGE:57==
6.3
U-Net & Automatic Feature Extraction
In this section the methodology and implementation of the deep learning approach for
sea ice detection and sea ice concentration estimation is presented. Only one variation
of the U-Net architecture will be employed. U-Net models trained using three different loss
functions are evaluated and compared using a validation set. For classification the cross-
entropy and the F1-score/Dice losses are employed, while the MSE loss is employed for
regression. In an attempt to mitigate the imbalance of the pixel-level class distribution, a
cost-sensitive learning technique known as median frequency balancing is implemented
and used in the cross-entropy loss function.
6.3.1
Model Architecture
A schematic of the U-Net architecture employed in this project is shown in figure 6.11.
Figure 6.11: The schematic illustrates the variation of the U-Net architecture that is em-
ployed in this project. The schematic is based on the schematic presented in the U-Net
paper [32].
This implementation of the U-Net architecture is analagous to the original architecture in
all, but a few areas. The number of filters in each encoder and decoder block has been
reduced as compared to the original architecture in order to reduce the overall number of
trainable parameters in the architecture. In the first encoder block each of the two convo-
lutional layers contain 16 filters, which is repeatedly doubled in the succeeding blocks of
contracting path of the network, finally reaching 256 filters in the bottleneck of the architec-
ture. The dropout regularization technique is applied between convolutional layers, and
the dropout probability is gradually increased as the number of filters increase, such that
the dropout probability of first two encoder blocks is 10%, 20% for the next two blocks,
and 30% in the botteneck of the network. The gradual change in dropout probability is
mirrored in the decoder network. Furthermore, batch normalization is applied between all
convolutional layers. Zero-padding is added where needed in order to retain the image
size during the convolution operations.
52
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:58==
The input layer is a 150x150 pixel dual-polarisation (ie. 2-channel) Sentinel-1 SAR tile.
The final layer performs a 1x1 convolution to map each feature vector - containing 16
features - to the desired number of classes, which is 2 for the binary classifier trained to
discriminate sea ice from open water, and 11 for the SIC classifiers trained to assign a
sea ice concentration to each pixel in the Sentinel-1 SAR image. For the classification
models the output of the network is thus a 2- or 11-channel map of class scores. For the
SIC regressor the final layer maps the 16-component feature vector of each pixel to a
specific sea ice concentration estimate.
6.3.2
Loss Functions
The choice of activation function in the last layer of the U-Net architecture in figure 6.11 is
tightly coupled with the choice of loss function. Arguably, the most commonly used loss
function for image segmentation problems is the pixel-wise cross-entropy loss [29]. The
softmax function is applied to the output layer of the network to ensure that the C class
scores sum to 1 for each pixel and can thus be intepreted as probabilities. If s is a vector
of the class scores for a given pixel, the cross-entropy loss of that pixel is computed as,
CE = −log
(
exp(st)
∑C
k exp(sk)
)
(6.1)
In eq. 6.1, st is the class score inferred by the network of the true class. Since the cross-
entropy loss evaluates the class scores for each pixel individually, and then averages over
all pixels, equal learning is essentially asserted to each pixel in the image. If the training
set suffers from class imbalance, the training will therefore be dominated by the most
frequent class(es). Median frequency balancing (MFB) is implemented in an attempt to
mitigate the pixel-level class imbalance in the training set. Each pixel in weighted by wk =
median_freq/freq(k), where freq(k) is the number of pixels belonging to class k divided
by the total number of pixels in the tiles in which class k is present, and median_freq is
the median of these frequencies [43]. This particular cost-effective learning technique
was employed in SegNet [44], which is an encoder-decoder segmentation architecture
very similar to U-Net.
Two other loss functions are considered in addition to the pixel-wise cross entropy loss.
Firstly, the F1-score loss (or equivalently, the Dice loss), which is natural choice for this
type of segmentation task as the F1-score (see eq. 5.11) is used as performance metric.
As the optimizers implemented in deep learning frameworks typically minimize losses,
the F1-score loss is given as the negated F1-score. Secondly, the MSE loss is used for
the regression model, which is analogous to impurity criterion employed in the regression
trees (see eq. 5.3).
The F1-score and the MSE losses are both computed using the raw logits from the output
layer of the U-Net architecture, and thus no activation function is applied in the last layer.
All losses are averaged for each mini-batch during training.
6.3.3
U-Net Model Training & Validation
The U-Net architecture, as presented in figure 6.11, is implemented in PyTorch [45], which
is a deep learning framework in Python primarily developed by Facebook’s AI Research
Lab. The cross-entropy and MSE loss functions are built into the PyTorch framework,
whereas a PyTorch compatible F1-score loss has been implemented seperately by a third
party [46].
A total of 7 U-Net models are trained; 3 binary classifiers and 3 SIC classifiers using the
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
53
==PAGE:59==
CE, CE-MFB (weighted CE) and F1-score loss functions, and 1 SIC regressor using the
MSE loss function. All models are trained using the GPU Cluster at DTU Compute.
As mentioned in section 6.1, two training sets are sampled from the entire pool of training
data (see table 6.2); one training set for the binary classifiers and one training set for
SIC classifiers/regressors. The pixel-level class distribution of the training set sampled
for the SIC classifiers/regressors is illustrated in figure 6.12. Evidently, class 0 is still
overrepresented in the training data, although to lesser extent than prior to the application
of tile-level resampling scheme.
Figure 6.12: The figure illustrates the pixel-level class distribution of the training set sam-
pled for the U-Net SIC classifiers/regressor.
The pixel-level class distribution of the training set sampled for the binary classifiers differs
from the distribution in figure 6.12 only in that number of pixels belonging to 0th class is
increased (by adding more class 0 tiles) in an attempt to balance the number of open
water pixels (SIC = 0%) and the number of sea ice pixels (SIC > 0%).
Preliminary training sessions found that a batch size of 50 tiles combined with a learning
rate of ϵ = 1e−4 consistently yielded well-mannered training processes and decent re-
sults. All models are trained for 200 epochs. However, when training models with large
representational capacity, it is common that the training loss decreases steadily as the
model trains, whereas the validation loss decreases initially, but stagnates and starts to
rise again at some point. In order to obtain the model with the lowest validation loss it
is necessary to return to the parameter settings at the epoch with the lowest validation
loss. This process is called early stopping, and acts as a form of regularization [29]. The
validation loss is thus computed after every epoch, and a copy of the model parameters
is stored every time the validation loss improves.
The loss curves for the 3 binary classifiers are shown in figure 6.13, the loss curves for the
3 SIC classifiers are shown in figure 6.14, and finally, the loss curve for the SIC regressor
is shown in figure 6.15.
54
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.13: Plots of the loss curves computed on the training and validation sets for the
binary classifiers. Top: CE loss curves. Middle: MFB-weighted CE loss curves. Bottom:
F1-score loss curves.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.14: Plots of the loss curves computed on the training and validation sets for the
SIC classifiers. Top: CE loss curves. Middle: MFB-weighted CE loss curves. Bottom:
F1-score loss curves.
56
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.15: Plot of the MSE loss curve computed on the training and validation sets for
the SIC regressor.
All 3 binary models start to overfit the training set after a certain number of epochs. Af-
ter this point the losses evaluated on the validation set stagnate and cease to improve.
Similarly to the binary classifiers, the SIC classifiers overfit the training data, however, the
SIC classifiers do so more severely. Generally, the lowest validation losses for all models
are achieved around the 80th −120th epoch. The tendency of the models to overfit the
training data substantiates the need for an early stopping mechanism.
Binary Segmentation of Sea Ice and Open Water
As was the case for the binary Random Forest classifiers, the binary U-Net classifiers are
evaluated on their ability to accurately discriminate between sea ice and open water using
the ROC AUC measure as a performance metric, which is independent of the threshold
used to binarize the output probability maps. Table 6.3 summarizes the ROC AUC scores
for the 3 binary classifiers.
Model
ROC AUC [%]
Binary CE
98.7
Binary CE-MFB
98.6
Binary F1-score/Dice
95.0
Table 6.3: The table summarizes the ROC AUC scores achieved by the binary classifiers.
Based on the ROC AUC measure the binary classifier trained using the pixel-wise cross-
entropy loss function outperforms the classifiers trained of the weighted pixel-wise cross-
entropy and the F1-score/Dice loss functions.
The binary CE classifier achieves a ROC AUC score of 98.7% on the validation set, and
thus greatly outperforms the corresponding highest scoring binary Random Forest clas-
sifer, which achieved a ROC AUC score of 86.6%. The binary CE classifier has an optimal
F1-score of 94.7% at a threshold of 36%, which is also a significant increase compared to
the F1-score of 87.2% achieved by the binary Random Forest classifer.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
57
==PAGE:63==
The F1-scores of the SIC classifiers are summarized in table 6.4.
Model
F1-score [%]
SIC CE
92.8
SIC CE-MFB
93.0
SIC F1-score/Dice
91.4
Table 6.4: The table summarizes the F1-scores achieved by the SIC classifiers.
The SIC classifier trained using the weighted pixel-wise cross-entropy loss function achieves
the highest F1-score of 93.0% on the validation set. Comparing this result to the F1-score
of 94.7% achieved by the binary CE classifier, it is the evident that the hierachical algo-
rithmic structure is superior to the flat structure in this case.
Sea Ice Concentration Estimation
Again, as the hierarchical approach is deemed superior to the flat classification approach,
the ability of the SIC classifiers and SIC regressors to accurately predict the sea ice con-
centration is evaluated only on the pixels from the validation set with a non-zero sea ice
concentration, as the discrimination between sea ice from open water is handled by the
binary CE classifier.
The R2-scores for the three SIC classifiers and the SIC regressor are summarized in table
6.5.
Model
R2-score [%]
SIC CE
95.5
SIC CE-MFB
92.7
SIC F1-score/Dice
92.9
SIC MSE
88.0
Table 6.5: The table summarizes the R2-scores achieved by the three SIC classifiers and
the SIC regressor.
The SIC CE classifier achieves the highest R2-score of 95.5%. The performance of the
SIC CE classifier is illustrated in figure 6.16, which shows the class-wise mean sea ice
concentration estimates along with the respective errorbars corresponding to the standard
deviations of the class-wise estimates.
58
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.16: This plot visualizes the class-wise performance of the SIC CE classifier. The
red line indicates the sea ice concentrations assigned by the DMI analysts. The black
squares indicate the class-wise mean SIC estimates, and the errorsbars correspond to
the standard deviations of the class-wise estimates.
The mean standard deviation of the class-wise sea ice concentration estimates is 23.2%,
which is a notable improvement over the mean standard deviation of 28.7% achieved by
the Random Forest algorithm. Similarly to the Random Forest algorithm, the SIC CE
classifier tends to over-estimate the lower sea ice concentrations and under-estimate the
higher sea ice concentrations.
The use of MFB-based class weights does not seem to have a consistently positive or
negative impact on model performance; in the case of the segmentation of sea ice and
open water, the binary CE-MFB classifier performs marginally poorer than the un-weighted
binary CE classifier, while the SIC CE-MFB classifier performs marginally better than the
un-weighted SIC CE classifier. In the case of sea ice concentration estimation the SIC
CE-MFB classifier performs notably worse than the SIC CE classifier based on the R2-
measure.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
59
==PAGE:65==
7
Results & Comparisons
In this chapter the best performing models determined in the previous chapter are tested
quantitatively on dedicated testing sets and qualitatively on 5 selected Sentinel-1 SAR
scenes. Both the testing sets and the 5 Sentinel-1 SAR scenes have not previously been
seen by the models. In both the traditional machine learning approach and the deep
learning approach a hierarchical algorithmic structure was found to be superior to a flat
algorithmic structure - although only by a small margin in the traditional machine learning
approach. In the hierarchical algorithmic structure the predictions from the binary clas-
sifiers and the SIC classifiers are combined in the following way. Firstly, the probability
map, which is the output from the binary classifier, is binarized using the threshold that
was found to maximize the F1-score in order to obtain a segmentation map of sea ice
and open water. Subsequently, the pixels that have been classified as sea ice pixels are
assigned a non-zero sea ice concentration by the SIC classifier.
In section 6.2 it was found that a hierarchical classification approach comprised of a binary
classifier consisting of 32 trees with a maximum depth of 8 and a SIC classifier consisting
of 32 trees with a maximum depth of 8 scored highest on the performance metrics eval-
uated on the validation set. In section 6.3 it was found that a hierarchical classification
approach comprised of a binary classifier and a SIC classifier, both trained using the pixel-
wise cross-entropy loss function, scored highest on the performance metrics evaluated
on the validation set. These scores are summarised in table 7.1.
Algorithm
F1-score [%]
R2-score [%]
Random Forest
87.2
92.6
U-Net
94.7
95.5
Table 7.1: The table contains the F1-score and R2-score achieved by the Random Forest
and U-Net algorithms evaluated on the validation set.
7.1
Algorithm Performance Evaluation on the Testing Sets
The final performance evaluation of the algorithms is carried out on dedicated testing sets,
which are sampled using the tile-level resampling scheme presented in section 6.1. Table
7.2 summarises the F1-scores and the R2-scores achieved by Random Forest and U-Net
algorithms when evaluated on the dedicated testing sets.
Algorithm
F1-score [%]
R2-score [%]
Random Forest
88.2
87.6
U-Net
95.4
96.3
Table 7.2: The table summarises the F1-scores and R2-scores achieved by the Random
Forest and U-Net algorithms during inference on the dedicated testing sets.
In figures 7.1 and 7.2 the per-class mean sea ice concentration estimates along with the
respective errorbars corresponding to the standard deviations of the class-wise estimates
of the algorithms are presented. The mean standard deviation of the class-wise estimates
predicted by the Random Forest algorithm is 30.1%, and 21.6% for the U-Net algorithm.
60
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:66==
Figure 7.1: This plot visualizes the class-wise performance of the Random Forest al-
gorithm on the dedicated testing set. The red line indicates the sea ice concentrations
assigned by the DMI analysts. The black squares indicate the per-class mean SIC esti-
mation, and the errorsbars correspond to the standard deviations of the class-wise esti-
mates.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
61
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.2: This plot visualizes the class-wise performance of the U-Net algorithm on the
dedicated testing set. The red line indicates the sea ice concentrations assigned by the
DMI analysts. The black squarer indicate the per-class mean SIC estimation, and the
errorsbars correspond to the standard deviations of the class-wise estimates.
The U-Net algorithm performs slightly better on the dedicated testing set as compared to
the validation set on both performance measures. The Random Forest algorithm achieves
a slightly higher F1-score on the testing set than on the validation set, however, the R2-
score is considerably lower on the testing set compared to the validation set. This dis-
crepency between the measures achieved on the validation set and on the testing set
alludes to the possibility that the validation and/or testing sets are not entirely represen-
tative samples of the ASIP dataset. The generalizability of the Random Forest algorithm
might have been improved by increasing the sizes of the validation and testing sets, or by
taking other measures to ensure that the samples are more representative of the under-
lying dataset.
62
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:68==
7.2
Qualitative Assessment of the Algorithm Performances
The performances of the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms are qualitatively assessed
through the visual inspection of 5 selected Sentinel-1 SAR scenes from the testing set.
The HH and HV channels as well as the corresponding DMI-produced ice charts of the
selected scenes are shown in figure 7.3. These 5 scenes were specifically chosen to
expose the algorithms to different types of SAR scenes, and to showcase situations in
which the algorithms perform well or poorly, and situations in which where one algorithm
outperforms the other.
Scene 1 was chosen primarily for its large SIC = 60% polygon, which appears to be dom-
inated by relatively young sea ice with a particularly low SAR backscatter, which causes
the polygon to appear darker than the surrounding water. In scene 2 the delineation be-
tween sea ice and open water is particularly indistinct and unclear in the HH channel.
Scenes 3 and 4 both have a high level of detail along the sea ice edge, which it is im-
portant that the algorithms are able to map accurately. Lastly, the HV channel in scene
5 is subject to very pronounced and sharp changes in the backscatter intensities at two
interswath boundaries, which might cause problems for the algorithms.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
63
==PAGE:69==
Figure 7.3: Presentation of the 5 Sentinel-1 SAR scenes, which have been selected in or-
der to qualitatively assess the performances of the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms.
The two first columns show the HH and HV channels, while the third column shows the
corresponding DMI-produced ice charts.
64
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:70==
7.2.1
Qualitative Assessment of the Binary Segmentation of Sea Ice and
Open Water
The ability of the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms to accurately segment and de-
lineate sea ice and open water is qualitatively assessed for 5 scenes in figure 7.4. The
figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH channel, the binarized DMI ice chart and the segmenta-
tion maps predicted by the Random Forest and the U-Net algorithms, respectively. The
raw probability maps are available in Appendix D.
Figure 7.4: The figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH channels, the binarized DMI ice charts
and the segmentation maps predicted by the Random Forest and the U-Net algorithms,
respectively, for the 5 carefully selected Sentinel-1 SAR scenes. The yellow color de-
picts the pixels assigned a sea ice probability higher than the pre-determined thresholds,
while the purple color depicts the pixels assigned a sea ice probability lower than those
thresholds.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
65
==PAGE:71==
The F1-scores achieved on each scene by the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms,
respectively, are found in table 7.3.
F1-score [%]
Scene
Random Forest
U-Net
1
92.4
95.3
2
80.8
89.8
3
95.2
96.6
4
72.5
94.4
5
94.7
96.3
Table 7.3: The table summarises the F1-scores achieved on the 5 test scenes by the
Random Forest and U-Net algorithms.
The U-Net algorithm consistently outperforms the Random Forest algorithm based on the
F1-score as a performance measure on all 5 scenes. The most significant discrepancy in
the achieved F1-scores occurs in the segmentation of scene 4. Here, the Random Forest
algorithm is severely affected by the radiometric noise along the interswath boundary that
is present as a vertical line down the middle of the scene. However, the Random Forest
algorithm is not affected by the two prominent interswath boundaries present in scene 5,
which leads to the possibility that the large number of false positives in scene 4 are not only
a result of the Sentinel-1 EW mode TOPSAR-induced noise, but might be a combination
of the EW mode TOPSAR-induced noise as well as other factors, such as certain weather
conditions.
Another quite notable difference in performance occurs in scene 2. Here, the Random
Forest algorithm predicts two clusters of false positives in the upper part of the scene - both
of which happen to coincide with the interswath boundaries. The U-Net algorithm seems
to also be affected by the presence of the interswath noise in the rightmost part of the
scene, as the sea ice edge here deviates significantly from the DMI-produced ice chart.
Furthermore, scene 2 is the only scene in which the U-Net algorithm exhibits notable
difficulties with false negatives. Of course, due to the manner in which the ice analysts
draw the ice charts, it is a possibility that smaller regions within the sea ice polygons might
actually be ice free. Though, this does not seem to be the case in the U-Net segmentation
of scene 2.
While the U-Net algorithm performs well in the aforementioned scene 1 polygon that con-
tains low-backscatter sea ice, the Random Forest algorithm struggles with false negatives.
Generally, it is notable that the sea ice edges in the segmentation maps produced by the
U-Net algorithm appear fuzzy or smudged, and lacks the level of detail present in the ice
charts and - in some cases - also present in the segmentation maps produced by the
Random Forest algorithm. The low level of ice edge detail in the U-Net predictions is
especially noticeable in scenes 1, 3 and 4. This concern is further addressed in chapter
8.
7.2.2
Qualitative Assessment of the Sea Ice Concentration Estimation
The ability of the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms to accurately assign specific non-
zero sea ice concentrations is qualitatively assesed for the 5 SAR scenes in figure 7.5. The
figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH channel, the DMI ice chart and the sea ice concentration
maps predicted by the Random Forest and the U-Net algorithms, respectively.
66
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:72==
Figure 7.5: The figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH channels, the DMI ice charts and the
sea ice concentration maps predicted by the Random Forest and the U-Net algorithms,
respectively, for 5 carefully selected Sentinel-1 SAR scenes.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
67
==PAGE:73==
Similarly to the binary segmentation maps, the sea ice concentration maps generated by
the Random Forest algorithm appear to generally exhibit a finer level of detail than those
produced by the U-Net algorithm. The U-Net algorithm is, however, more succesful in the
imitation of the DMI-produced ice charts in which the ice analysts draw relatively large
homogenouous polygons. The Random Forest algorithm, on the other hand, responds
strongly to small-scale inhomogeneities in the sea ice. In this way, it appears as though
the U-Net algorithm recognizes a slightly larger field of view and adapts the prediction to
encompass the average sea ice concentration within a certain area - that is, more similarly
to how the ice analyst approaches the task - whereas the Random Forest algorithm is
fixated on the small-scale sea ice concentration variations.
In scene 1 neither the Random Forest nor the U-Net algorithm is able to accurately predict
the polygon containing the low-backscatter sea ice. In the remaining polygons the U-Net
algorithm largely performs well. When comparing the sea ice concentration map predicted
by the Random Forest algorithm to the HH channel of the Sentinel-1 SAR image, it is clear
that the Random Forest algorithm is very sensitive to any inhomogeneities in the sea ice,
and while the prediction might not visually resemble the DMI-produced ice chart, it is still
possible that the polygon-wise mean sea ice concentration estimates roughly match the
sea ice concentrations assigned to the polygons in the DMI ice chart.
In much of scene 2 the Random Forest algorithm severely over-estimates the sea ice
concentration. The U-Net algorithm also struggles with this particular scene, although to
a lesser extent than the Random Forest algorithm.
In scenes 3 and 5 both algorithms perform reasonably well, although it is notable how the
lower concentration polygons situated along the ice edge in both scenes are either over-
estimated or not detected at all by the Random Forest algorithm, while U-Net algorithm is
relatively succesful in the estimation of the lower concentrations - this is also exemplified
in scene 4. This observation is largely in accordance with figure 7.1, in which it is quanti-
tatively shown that the Random Forest algorithm tends to over-estimate the lower sea ice
concentrations by a relatively large margin.
68
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:74==
8
A Proposed Methodology For Improving
the Sea Ice Edge Accuracy of U-Net
This chapter outlines a proposed methodology that aims to increase the accuracy of the
U-Net algorithm along the boundary between sea ice and open water. A significant pro-
portion of the users of operationally provided sea ice maps are primarily interested in
avoiding sea ice all together - only a minority uses sea ice concentration information to
determine potentially passable regions of the ice. It is therefore of paramount importance
to map the sea ice edge accurately and to increase the level of detail along the sea ice
edge as much as possible.
The U-Net algorithm has a strong tendency to assign either a very high probabilty of a
pixel belonging to the sea ice class or a very low probability of belonging to the sea ice
class in most areas except in the zones adjacent to the sea ice edge. This tendency is
evident in the probability map of scene 4, which is shown in figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: The figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH channel, the binarized DMI ice chart and
the sea ice probability map predicted by the U-Net algorithm of scene 4.
In cases, such as the one presented in figure 8.1, it is clear that the probability threshold
that maximizes the overall F1-score of the entire SAR scene is not necessarily equal to
the probability threshold that maximizes the F1-score along the sea ice edge. Under
the assumption that this is a general tendency, the sea ice edges in 5 scenes from the
validation set are analyzed to derive the optimal probability threshold along the sea ice
edge. An illustration the proposed methodology is presented in figure 8.2.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
69
==PAGE:75==
Figure 8.2: The figure illustrates the methodology to extract the pixels of what corresponds
to 10 km on either side of the sea ice edge in order to determine the probability threshold
that maximizes the F1-score in regions adjacent to a sea ice edge.
First, the U-Net algorithm generates a probability map of the particular Sentinel-1 SAR
scene. The probability map is then convolved with a gaussian filter in order to smooth
the sea ice edge, which is later derived using a primitive edge detector. Prior to the
derivation of the sea ice edge, the smoothed probability map is thresholded using the
optimal threshold determined in section 6.3. The edge detector is then used to detect
edges in the binarized segmentation map. The edge detector creates a mask of the sea
ice edge, which is then used to extract what corresponds to 10 km on either side of the
detected sea ice edge from the raw probability map.
Employing this methodology, the sea ice edge adjacent pixels in the U-Net generated
probability maps based on 5 Sentinel-1 SAR scenes from the validation set are extracted.
The threshold that maximizes the F1-score of the ice edge adjacent pixels was found to
be 56%, which is a substantial increase from the overall optimal threshold of 36%.
The same edge detection scheme is applied to locate the sea ice edges (and 10 km on
either side of the detected edges) in the probability maps of the 5 test scenes. The sea
70
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:76==
ice edge adjacent pixels are then binarized using a threshold of 56%, while the rest of the
scene binarized using a threshold of 36%. A visual comparison of the U-Net segmentation
maps and the edge improved segmentation maps is available in figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3: The figure shows the Sentinel-1 HH channel, the binarized DMI ice chart and
the segmentation maps predicted by the U-Net algorithm as well as the edge improved
segmentation maps.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
71
==PAGE:77==
The F1-scores of the edge-improved U-Net predictions are presented in table 8.1.
F1-score [%]
Scene
U-Net
U-Net + Edge Improvement
1
95.3
96.1
2
89.9
88.5
3
96.6
97.4
4
94.4
96.8
5
96.3
96.4
Table 8.1: The table compares the F1-scores achieved by the U-Net algorithm on the 5
Sentinel-1 SAR scenes to the F1-scores of the edge improved U-Net predictions.
The proposed methodology increases the F1-score of the U-Net predictions in 4 out of the
5 test scenes. The improved level of detail along the sea ice edge is especially evident in
scenes 1, 3 and 4. Of course, the merit of this methodology is highly dependent on the
overall accuracy of the U-Net algorithm. If the U-Net algorithm predicts a cluster of false
negatives within the sea ice, as is the case in scene 2, then this cluster is detected as
an ice edge and the cluster is potentially enlarged, which worsens the prediction. On the
contrary, if the U-Net algorithm predicts a cluster of false positives, which is then detected
as an ice edge, the number of false positives is potentially reduced - this occurs in scene
4.
72
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:78==
9
Various Considerations & Future Work
This chapter outlines several previously not mentioned considerations about the imple-
mented algorithms as well as topics or ideas for further work within the field of automatic
sea ice detection and concentration estimation.
About the Sentinel-1 EW Mode & TOPSAR Processing
The two primary issues that arise from the use of the EW mode of the Sentinel-1 satel-
lites are the sharp changes in backscatter intensity at the interswath boundaries as well
as the progressive decrease in backscatter intensity from near range to far range due to
incidence angle variation. Both of these issues complicate the automatic interpretation
of the SAR images - especially if the backscatter intensity variations are larger than the
inter-class brightness differences. There are, however, studies that aim to develop pre-
processing schemes that reduce the severity of these issues. One such study reports
being able to drastically reduce the severity of the backscatter intensity step at the inter-
swath boundaries in the HV-channel by altering and improving the ESA-provided noise
vectors that are available with Sentinel-1 products [15]. Implementing this technique, or
a similar technique, as a pre-processing step could potentially increase the accuracy of
the algorithms.
The backscatter intensity variation related to the varying incidence angle in the range
direction was incorporated into the Random Forest algorithm by including the incidence
angle as a feature. The incidence angle was excluded from the U-Net algorithm, and due
to the fact that the U-Net algorithm was trained on 150x150 pixel tiles at a pixel spacing of
80 m, in which the incidence angle related backscatter variation is minimal, it is unlikely
that the algorithm was able to learn and model this variation. It would thus be interesting
to test whether or not including the incidence angle as an input to the U-Net algorithm
would increase the achieved performance.
About Class Balancing
The class distribution of the ASIP dataset was shown to be severely skewed (see table
6.2). The imbalance of the tile-level class distribution of the ASIP dataset is clearly illus-
trated by the fact that the most frequent class in the training split of the dataset contains
over 100000 samples, while the most infrequent class in the training split contains roughly
1600 samples. The severe class imbalance complicates the task of sampling a training
set, as it is preferable to use as much of the available data as possible, while still feeding
a balanced training set to the algorithm. Of course, this issue primilarly applies to the U-
Net algorithm, as deep learning algorithms are much less restricted in terms of large data
amounts, and also requires a larger amount of data to converge on a decent solution.
The issue of class imbalance resulted in the discardment of a large amount of valuable
information, as relying entirely on over-sampling the most infrequent classes likely would
have resulted in overfitting the infrequent classes. In future studies a more sophisticated
re-balancing approach that retains more of the available information could be employed.
A possible solution is the combination of over-sampling and data augmentation. In deep
learning algorithms, data augmentation is often applied in order to artificially inflate the
training set. Data augmentation techniques for image datasets include geometric trans-
formations, such as vertical or horizontal flipping, rotation, cropping and translation, etc. If
geometric transformations were to be applied to the samples belonging to the infrequent
classes as they are over-sampled, the risk of overfitting the infrequent classes is reduced,
thus facilitating the use of a larger amount of the available data.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
73
==PAGE:79==
Furthermore, increasing the total number of samples available for the U-Net algorithm
to learn from could potentially reduce the overall tendency to overfit that was observed
during training.
About the GLCM-based texture features
It is uncertain whether histogram equalization is the optimal method of quantizing the
Sentinel-1 SAR image data prior to the derivation of the GLCM-based texture features.
In the litterature, histogram equalization and uniform quantization seem to be the most
regularly applied quantization methods. Whereas histogram equalization ensures a com-
pletely uniform grey level distribution, uniform quantization linearly scales the data into
the desired range without considering the distribution of the grey levels. One study as-
sumes that uniform quantization is superior to histogram equalization for SAR-based tex-
ture analysis of sea ice, but does not provide any quantitative evidence [40]. Another
study found that applying uniform quantization prior to the derivation of the GLCM-based
features produced a more discriminative set of texture features as compared to using his-
togram equalization as the quantization technique [18]. It would therefore be interesting
to try uniform quantization and compare the results with those achieved using histogram
equalization.
Another aspect worth considering is how the quantization technique is applied. In this
project histogram equalization was applied over the entire training set. The rationale
behind the decision to apply the quantization technique over the entire training set as
opposed applying it once per scene or tile was to ensure that classes looked roughly the
same in all scenes/tiles. A consequence of this approach is that tiles, in certain cases,
will result in very sparse co-occurrence matrices. As an example, a tile containing only
open water pixels quantized to 32 levels potentially results in very sparse co-occurence
matrices, as the tile only contains low intensity grey levels. It is uncertain whether it is
possible to find an approach that ensures that the individual classes look similar in all
scenes/tiles, while still avoiding sparse co-occurence matrices.
A hyperparameter in the derivation of the co-occurence matrices is the size of the window
containing the pixels on which to base the co-occurence matrices. In this project the
spatial size of the window was kept roughly the same across the spatial scales in gaussian
pyramid representation of the data. This is contradictory to the U-Net architecture, in
which the receptive field, ie. the field of view, gets larger and larger as the data propagates
through the encoder network. The traditional machine learning approach would therefore
have been more analogues to the deep learning approach if the pixel-wise window size
was not adapted, but was kept the same across spatial scales.
The use of 13 GLCM-based texture features across 4 different spatial scales derived for
2 Sentinel-1 SAR channels resulted in a very high-dimensional feature space with a large
amount of feature redundancy. The high dimensionality of the feature space might have
had an inhibiting effect on the learning of the Random Forest algorithm [39]. Several
studies advocate the use of a smaller subset of the GLCM-based features in order to
reduce the redundancy and the dimensionality of the feature space, although there is
disagreement as to which features to retain, eg. [18] and [24]. A reduction of the feature
space dimensionality would also increase the speed at which new predictions can be
obtained as fewer features require computation prior to the prediction. It would therefore
be interesting to initiate a more exhaustive study of the relative importance of the features.
Traditional Machine Learning vs. Deep Learning
Algorithm performance is not the only measure by which the traditional machine learning
and the deep learning approaches should be compared - there are other important aspects
to consider.
74
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:80==
Generally, the traditional machine learning approach is more difficult to implement due
to the rather complex and cumbersome nature of manual feature engineering, which in
most cases requires domain-specific expertise. Additionally, apart from the hyperparam-
eters intrinsic to the Random Forest algorithm, there are many parameters to choose and
adjust in the derivation of the GLCM-based texture features, which ultimately makes it
more difficult to reproduce the results obtained using the traditional machine learning ap-
proach. Conversely, the advent of high-level object-oriented deep learning frameworks,
like Pytorch, has significantly eased the workflow of deep learning model development
and model testing, making it straightforward to implement and apply deep learning algo-
rithms. Maybe even more importantly, the enthusiasm around deep learning in recent
years has born with it a vast body of knowledge in the form of research papers, books
and online resources, which are readily available.
As deep learning algorithms do not require manual feature engineering, they are less
restricted by requirements of domain-specific expertise, which facilitates the application
of succesful deep learning architectures in several, seemingly unrelated fields of study.
Naturally, a case in point is the U-Net architecture, which was developed for biomedical
image segmentation, but has been applied in many different fields - now including SAR-
based sea ice detection and concentration estimation. Of course, the complexity of deep
learning models, as well as the disentanglement of deep learning algorithms from the
domain-specific expertise, reduce the intepretability of the trained models, whereas one
of the advantages of tree-based models is that they are very easily interpreted.
A disadvantage of deep learning models is that they generally start off in poor initial state
and the process of converging to an optimum and achieving a performance that matches
or exceeds that of the traditional machine learning models requires a large amount of train-
ing data. For a task with a very limited number of training samples, a traditional machine
learning approach would therefore often be preferred over a deep learning approach -
unless sophisticated data augmentation techniques were feasible to artificially inflate the
training set.
Inference time is also very important if the implemented Random Forest and U-Net algo-
rithms were to be put in an operational context. Say, a new 400x400 km Sentinel-1 SAR
image is acquired; using the DTU Compute GPU Cluster system, the U-Net algorithm is
able to process the image and make a prediction in a matter of minutes, whereas the Ran-
dom Forest algorithm requires the computation of the 13 GLCM-based texture features
for each polarisation channel and in 4 different spatial scales - a process which can take
several hours. Thus, in terms of inference time, the deep learning approach is superior,
as it is able to deliver a new product in near-real time.
Also, it would be interesting to study the features learned by the U-Net algorithm and
compare them to the GLCM-based texture features.
Lastly, it is possible that the addition of more trees to the Random Forest models could
increase the model performances at maximum tree depths larger than 8, but the 10+ hour
training time of the complex Random Forest models makes the process of pedantically
thorough hyperparameter tuning impractical.
Data Fusion of Sentinel-1 SAR Imagery and Passive Microwave Radiometry Data
Perhaps the most promising future work is the development of machine learning/deep
learning algorithms that utilize data fusion between SAR data and other types of remote
sensing data. The most pressing issue regarding SAR-based sea ice classification seems
to be the sea ice/open water ambigiuties that occur in SAR images in wind-roughened
seas which can appear as bright as sea ice, and - to a lesser extent - areas with very
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
75
==PAGE:81==
smooth sea ice surfaces which can appear as dark as open water. As mentioned in the
introduction of the thesis, many remote sensing techniques can be applied for sea ice
mapping. A number of these techniques can aid in the resolvement of the SAR ambigui-
ties.
Passive microwave radiometry (PMR) systems share many of the same advantages as
SAR systems, such as cloud penetration capabilities and the independence from solar
illumination. Sea ice and open water is generally clearly distinguished in PMR data, but at
a much coarser resolution. Including PMR data as input to the algorithms might result in a
more robust sea ice classification scheme, which exploits the complementary capabilities
of the two synergetic data types; that is, the high spatial resolution of the SAR data and
the reliable sea ice/open water discrimination of the PMR data.
Data fusion efforts are already being pursued at DMI (the ASIP project), and the Norwe-
gian Meteorlogical Institute recently initiated a similar R&D endeavour [47]. The poten-
tial of data fusion with PMR data is further cemented by the initiation of the Copernicus
Imaging Microwave Radiometer (CIMR) Mission - set to launch in the near future - which
relieves the uncertainty of continuity of the PMR data flow.
76
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:82==
10
Conclusions
This thesis presented a comprehensive study of the detection and concentration estima-
tion of sea ice along the coasts of Greenland using supervised learning algorithms based
solely on SAR imagery from the ESA-led Sentinel-1 mission and digitized sea ice charts.
The employed dataset, comprising Sentinel-1 SAR scenes and corresponding ice charts
from the DMI Ice Service, was produced as part of the ASIP Project. It was found that
SAR-based sea ice mapping requires the encoding of spatial information into contextual
features, as classification schemes in the litterature based entirely on polarimetric SAR
features report only modest results. Two overarching methodologies that accomodates
this requirement were studied, implemented and compared.
The first methodology was based on a traditional machine learning approach, which in-
volved manual feature engineering. The spatial relationships between neighbouring SAR
pixels were encoded into texture features based on grey-level co-occurence matrices. In
order to capture spatial information present at different spatial scales, the texture features
were derived from a scale-space representation of the SAR imagery, which was obtained
using gaussian pyramid decomposition. Finally, the resulting high-dimensional feature
set was fed to a Random Forest algorithm.
The second methodology was based on deep learning, which bypasses the need for
manually engineered contextual features due to the ability of deep learning algorithms
to automatically extract discriminative features. Specifically, the encoder-decoder CNN
architecture, U-Net, was implemented and applied to the task of SAR-based sea ice map-
ping.
A focal point of the thesis was an examination of whether any improvements in algorithm
performance could be achieved by separating task of sea ice detection and the task of
sea ice concentration estimation into two steps, thus creating a hierarchical algorithmic
structure, in which the first step of the algorithm was to segment sea ice and open wa-
ter, and the second step of the algorithm was to assign a non-zero concentration to the
detected sea ice areas. As these tasks are inherently different, they were evaluated us-
ing different performance measures. The ability of the algorithms to accurately segment
sea ice and open water was evaluated using the F1-score. The ability of the algorithms
to accurately predict sea ice concentrations was evaluated using the R2-score between
the discrete values of the sea ice concentration classes and the means of the class-wise
estimates made by the algorithms.
For the task of segmenting sea ice and open water, the Random Forest algorithm achieved
an F1-score of 87.2% utilizing a hierarchical classification structure, as opposed to 86.6%
using a flat classification structure when evaluated on a validation set. In comparison,
the U-Net algorithm achieved an F1-score of 94.7% utilizing a hierarchical classification
structure, as opposed to 93.0% using a flat classification structure. Thus, the hierarchical
classification structure was found to be superior to the flat classification structure in both
the traditional machine learning approach and the deep learning approach.
Evaluated on dedicated testing sets, the Random Forest algorithm achieved an F1-score
of 88.2% in the task of segmenting sea ice and open water, while the U-Net algorithm
achieved an F1-score of 95.4%. For the task of sea ice concentration estimation, the Ran-
dom Forest algorithm achieved an R2-score of 87.6%, while the U-Net algorithm achieved
an R2-score of 96.3%.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
77
==PAGE:83==
A qualitative assessment of the performances of the algorithms revealed that the sea ice
concentration maps generated by the Random Forest algorithm exhibited a finer level of
detail than those generated by the U-Net algorithm, and that the Random Forest algorithm
was sensitive to small-scale inhomogeneities in the sea ice. The Random Forest algorithm
was, however, also sensitive to noise in the SAR imagery that results from the Sentinel-1
acquisition mode. The U-Net algorithm, on the other hand, was not overly responsive
to image noise. The U-Net algorithm was relatively succesful in imitation of how the ice
analysts draw the ice charts - that is, as larger homogeneous polygons.
A qualitative assessment of the binary sea ice/open water segmentation capabilities of
the algorithms revealed that the U-Net algorithm - while outperforming the Random Forest
algorithm in the overall accuracy - did not exhibit a satisfactory level of detail along the
boundaries between the sea ice and open water. A methodology was therefore proposed
in order to improve the sea ice edge accuracy of the segmentation maps generated by
the U-Net algorithm. The proposed methodology improved the overall F1-scores in 4 out
of 5 selected Sentinel-1 SAR scenes.
78
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
Economy and Industry in Greenland. 2013. URL: https://naalakkersuisut.gl/en/
About - government - of - greenland / About - Greenland / Economy - and - Industry - in -
Greenland.
[2]
(Danish) Bedre overvågning af havis skal fremme Grønlands økonomi. 2017. URL:
https://www.space.dtu.dk/nyheder/2017/12/overvaagningstjeneste-til-havis-skal-
fremme-groenlands-handel.
[3]
Ola M. Johanneson et al. Remote Sensing of Sea Ice in the Northern Sea Route.
Springer International Publishing, 2007.
[4]
The ASIP Project. 2020. URL: https://asip.dk/about-1.html.
[5]
Visible Remote Sensing. 2020. URL: https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/seaice/study/
visible_remote_sensing.html.
[6]
Infrared Remote Sensing. 2020. URL: https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/seaice/study/
infrared_remote_sensing.html.
[7]
Wolfgang Dierking. “Sea Ice Monitoring by Synthetic Aperture Radar”. In: Oceanog-
raphy 26.2 (2013), pp. 100–111.
[8]
Monthly Sea Ice Extent. 2020. URL: https://nsidc.org/data/seaice_index.
[9]
Lars-Anders Breivik et al. “Remote Sensing of Sea Ice”. In: OceanObs’09: Sus-
tained Ocean Observations and Information for Society (2009).
[10]
SIGRID-3: a vector archive format for sea ice charts. 2004. URL: https://library.
wmo.int/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=11295#.XvpR42gzZyw.
[11]
DMI-produced Ice Charts. 2020. URL: http://ocean.dmi.dk/arctic/icecharts_gl_
northcentraleast.uk.php.
[12]
Ola M. Johanneson et al. Sea Ice in the Arctic. Springer International Publishing,
2019.
[13]
ESA: Sentinel-1 Mission Description. 2020. URL: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/
sentinel/missions/sentinel-1.
[14]
Dan-Bee Hong & Chan-Su Yang. “Automatic discrimination approach of sea ice in
the Arctic Ocean using Sentinel-1 Extra Wide Swath dual-polarized SAR data”. In:
International Journal of Remote Sensing 39.13 (2018), pp. 4469–4483.
[15]
Jeong-Won Park et al. “Efficient Thermal Noise Removal for Sentinel-1 TOPSAR
Cross-Polarization Channel”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 56.3 (2018), pp. 1555–1565.
[16]
CMEMS: Quality Information Document (Appendix VI - Ice Chart Uncertainty Es-
timates). 2020. URL: https://resources.marine.copernicus.eu/documents/QUID/
CMEMS-SI-QUID-011-001to007-009to014.pdf.
[17]
Rasmus T. Tonboe et al. “The EUMETSAT sea ice concentration climate data record”.
In: The Cryosphere 10 (2016), pp. 2275–2290.
[18]
David A. Clausi. “Comparison and fusion of co-occurrence, Gabor and MRF tex-
ture features for classification of SAR sea-ice imagery”. In: Atmosphere-Ocean 39.3
(2001), pp. 183–194.
[19]
Ane S. Fors et al. “Late-summer sea ice segmentation with multi-polarisation SAR
features in C and Xband”. In: Cryosphere 10.1 (2016), pp. 401–415.
[20]
Leo Breiman. “Random Forests”. In: Machine Learning 45 (2001), pp. 5–32.
[21]
Trevor Hastie et al. The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2009.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
79
==PAGE:85==
[22]
Gille Louppe. “Understanding Random Forests: From Theory to Practice”. PhD the-
sis. University of Liége, 2015.
[23]
Leo Breiman et. al. Classification And Regression Trees. Taylor Francis Group,
LLC, 1984.
[24]
Jeong-Won Park et al. “Classification of Sea Ice Types in Sentinel-1 SAR images”.
In: The Cryosphere Discuss (2019).
[25]
Robert Haralick. “Textural Features for Image Classification”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 3 (1973), pp. 610–621.
[26]
Bino Sebastian V et al. “Grey Level Co-occurence Matrices: Generalization and
Some New Features”. In: International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering
and Information Technology 2 (2012).
[27]
Fernando Roberti de Siqueira et al. “Multi-scale gray level co-occurrence matrices
for texture description”. In: Neurocomputing 120 (2013), pp. 336–345.
[28]
Gaussian Pyramid Decomposition Figure. 2020. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Pyramid_(image_processing).
[29]
Ian Goodfellow et al. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2017.
[30]
Jonas Teuwenab & Nikita Moriakova. Handbook of Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention. Academic Press, 2020.
[31]
Swarnendu Ghosh et al. “Understanding Deep Learning Techniques for Image Seg-
mentation”. In: arXiv (2019).
[32]
Olaf Ronneberger et al. “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Seg-
mentation”. In: arXiv (2015).
[33]
Sergey Ioffe & Christian Szegedy. “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Net-
work Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. In: 32nd International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning 1 (2015), pp. 448–456.
[34]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overfitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15 (2014), pp. 1929–1958.
[35]
Alberto Fernández et al. Learning from Imbalanced Data Sets. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2018.
[36]
George Forman & Martin Scholz. “Apples-to-Apples in Cross-Validation Studies:
Pitfalls in Classifier Performance Measurement”. In: ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter 12 (2010).
[37]
Michael H. Kutner et al. Applied Linear Statistical Models. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2004.
[38]
Justin M. Johnson & Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar. “Survey on deep learning with class
imbalance”. In: Journal of Big Data 6 (2019).
[39]
David A. Clausi. “An analysis of co-occurrence texture statistics as a function of grey
level quantization”. In: Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing 28 (2002), pp. 45–62.
[40]
Leen-Kiat Soh & Costas Tsatsoulis. “Texture Analysis of SAR Sea Ice Imagery Using
Gray Level Co-Occurrence Matrices”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sesning 37 (1999), pp. 780–795.
[41]
LP Coelho: ESA: Mahotas: Open source software for scriptable computer vision.
Journal of Open Research Software 1(1):e3. 2013. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
5334/jors.ac.
[42]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[43]
David Eigen & Rob Fergus. “Predicting Depth, Surface Normals and Semantic La-
bels with a Common Multi-Scale Convolutional Architecture”. In: 15th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (2019).
80
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:86==
[44]
Vijay Badrinarayanan et al. “SegNet: A Deep Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Ar-
chitecture for Image Segmentation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 39 (2017).
[45]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Ed. by H.
Wallach et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. URL: http://papers.
neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-
library.pdf.
[46]
Kevin Zakka. PyTorch Losses. https://github.com/kevinzakka/pytorch- goodies/
blob/master/losses.py. 2018.
[47]
SIRANO: Sea Ice Retrievals and data Assimilation in Norway. 2020. URL: https:
//cryo.met.no/en/sirano.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
81
==PAGE:87==
82
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:88==
A
Formulae for the GLCM-based Texture
Features
Haralick proposed 14 textural features based on grey-level co-occurrence matrices. 13
of these features are utilized in this project.
Given a total of Ng distinct grey levels in a quantized image, let R be the sum of all ele-
ments of the NgxNg co-occurence frequency matrix P(i, j) (ie. non-normalized GLCM).
Then p(i, j) = P(i,j)
R
is the co-occurence probability matrix (ie. normalized GLCM).
From the co-occurence probability matrix p(i, j) Haralick defines the following in order to
simplify the derivation of the 13 features [25].
px(i) =
Ng
∑
j=1
p(j, i)
py(j) =
Ng
∑
i=1
p(j, i)
px+y(k) =
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
p(i, j),
k = 2, 3, ..., 2Ng
where k = i + j.
px−y(k) =
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
p(i, j),
k = 0, 1, ..., Ng −1
where k = |i −j|.
HX = −
Ng
∑
i=1
px(i)log(px(i))
HY = −
Ng
∑
j=1
py(j)log(py(j))
HXY = −
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
p(i, j)log(p(i, j))
HXY 1 = −
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
p(i, j)log(px(i)py(j))
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
83
==PAGE:89==
HXY 2 = −
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
px(i)py(j)log(px(i)py(j))
The 13 texture descriptors are defined below.
1. Angular Second Moment (ASM)
ASM =
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
p(i, j)2
(A.1)
2. Contrast (CON)
CON =
Ng−1
∑
k=0
k2px−y(k)
(A.2)
3. Correlation (COR)
COR =
∑Ng
i=1
∑Ng
j=1(ij)p(i, j) −µxµy
σxσy
(A.3)
where µx, µy, σx and σy are the means and standard deviations of px and py.
4. Sum of Squares: Variance (VAR)
V AR =
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
(i −µ)2p(i, j)
(A.4)
5. Inverse Difference Moment (IDM)
IDM =
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
1
1 + (i −j)2 p(i, j)
(A.5)
6. Sum Average (SAV)
SAV =
2Ng
∑
i=2
ipx+y(i)
(A.6)
7. Sum Variance (SVA)
SV A =
2Ng
∑
i=2
(i −SEN)2px+y(i)
(A.7)
8. Sum Entropy (SEN)
SEN = −
2Ng
∑
i=2
px+y(i)log(px+y(i))
(A.8)
9. Entropy (ENT)
ENT = −
Ng
∑
i=1
Ng
∑
j=1
p(i, j)log(p(i, j))
(A.9)
84
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:90==
10. Difference Variance (DVA)
DV A = variance of px−y
(A.10)
11. Difference Entropy (DEN)
DEN = −
Ng−1
∑
i=0
px−y(i)log(px−y(i))
(A.11)
12. Information Measure of Correlation 1 (INF1)
INF1 = HXY −HXY 1
max(HX, HY )
(A.12)
13. Information Measure of Correlation 2 (INF2)
INF2 =
[
1 −e−2(HXY 2−HXY )
]1/2
(A.13)
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
85
==PAGE:91==
B
GLCM-based Texture Features for the
HV channel
A visual inspection of the 13 GLCM-based texture features and the VMR of all four spatial
scales for the HV channel of a Sentinel-1 SAR scene available in figures B.1 and B.2.
These visualizations are based on a scene from the testing set, which can seen in figure
6.2.
86
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:92==
Figure B.1: Visualization of the first 7 GLCM-based texture features based on the HV
channel of the Sentinel-1 scene presented in figure 6.2. Each row represents a specific
Haralick feature, while the columns represent the spatial scales 0-3.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
87
==PAGE:93==
Figure B.2: Visualization of the last 7 GLCM-based texture features as well as the VMR
feature based on the HV channel of the Sentinel-1 scene presented in figure 6.2. Each
row represents a specific Haralick feature, while the columns represent the spatial scales
0-3.
88
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:94==
C
Random Forest: A Look into Features
Importances
In figures C.1 and C.2 the relative feature importances of the GLCM features based on the
HH and HV channels, respectively, are shown for the best Random Forest binary classifer.
Recall that the importance of a feature is computed as the normalized total reduction of
the pre-defined criterion brought on by that particular feature, and therefore the relative
feature importances computed by the Random Forest algorithm are related more so to the
usage of specific features by the algorithm, rather than to the actual discrimitative abilities
of the features.
Figure C.1: The bar plot presents the relative feature importances of the raw HH backscat-
ter (HH), the incidence angle (INC), the 13 GLCM-based texture features and the VMR
based on the HH channel for all 4 spatial scales (denoted 0, 1, 2 and 3).
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
89
==PAGE:95==
Figure C.2: The bar plot presents the relative feature importances of the raw HV backscat-
ter (HV), the incidence angle (INC), the 13 GLCM-based texture features and the VMR
based on the HV channel for all 4 spatial scales (denoted 0, 1, 2 and 3).
Of the HH-based GLCM features, the difference entropy (DEN), sum variance (SVA) and
- to a lesser extent - the contrast (CON) seem to be consistently important for the first
three levels of the gaussian pyramid representation of the training data, while the GLCM
features based on the last layer of the gausssian pyramid are barely used at all.
On the contrary, the Random Forest algorithm makes use of several of the HV-based
GLCM features of the last layer of gaussian pyramid. Of the HV-based GLCM features,
the correlation (COR) feature at the lowest level of the pyramid is particularly important.
In figures C.3 and C.4 the relative feature importances of the GLCM features based on
the HH and HV channels, respectively, are shown for the SIC classifer with 32 trees of
maximum depth 8.
90
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:96==
Figure C.3: The bar plot presents the relative feature importances of the raw HH backscat-
ter (HH), the incidence angle (INC), the 13 GLCM-based texture features and the VMR
based on the HH channel for all 4 spatial scales (denoted 0, 1, 2 and 3).
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
91
==PAGE:97==
Figure C.4: The bar plot presents the relative feature importances of the raw HV backscat-
ter (HV), the incidence angle (INC), the 13 GLCM-based texture features and the VMR
based on the HV channel for all 4 spatial scales (denoted 0, 1, 2 and 3).
The relative feature importances of the SIC classifier is slightly more spread out among
the features as compared to the feature importances of the binary classifier. All of the
GLCM-based features derived from the first layer in the gaussian pyramid representa-
tion are in use, while the features derived from the last layer are hardly in use except for
the SAV (sum average) feature, which does not exhibit much change across the spatial
scales. Generally, the sum average (SAV), variance-to-mean ratio (VMR) and the dif-
ference entropy (DEN) of the HH channel appear to reduce the Gini criterion quite well,
and the sum average (SAV) and variance-to-mean ratio (VMR) are also important in the
HV-channel. Most notably, it is interesting how the incidence angle as a feature appear to
be very important when discriminating between different sea ice concentrations. Please
note that, while the incidence angle is represented in both figure C.3 and C.4, it is the
one and same feature in both figures. SAR images from the EW mode of the Sentinel-1
mission exhibit significant incidence angle related variation in backscatter intensity due to
the wide swath. It is thus logical that if the incidence angle related backscatter intensity
variations are similar to or larger than the inter-class brightness differences, the algorithm
would indeed need to include the incidence angle to discriminate between different sea
ice concentrations. On the contrary, the incidence angle related variation in backscatter
intensity might be insignificant compared to the brightness variation between sea ice and
open water, which would explain the lack of use of the incidence angle as a feature in the
binary classification of sea ice and open water.
92
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
==PAGE:98==
D
Random Forest & U-Net Probability
Maps
Figure D.1 shows the HH channel, the DMI-produced ice charts and probability maps
predicted by the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms for each of the 5 testing scenes.
Figure D.1: The figure shows the HH channel, the DMI-produced ice charts and probability
maps predicted by the Random Forest and U-Net algorithms for each of the 5 testing
scenes.
Machine Learning Methods for Sea Ice Mapping
93
==PAGE:99==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
