==PAGE:1==
Generating High-Quality Morphs
using Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN)
Haoyu Zhang
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNN) have led to breakthrough im-
provement in face recognition systems (FRS). The high generalizability of DNN
and deep FRS has signiﬁcantly enhanced their performance in unconstrained
environments and has promoted the widespread deployment.
However, re-
searchers have also revealed that it also increases their vulnerability against
attacks [FFM14]. Morphing attacks is one of the popular topics among them
in the last few years and have posed a severe threat to FRS. Normally, these
morphs are generated from traditional methods based on facial key-points, where
face images are aligned by their landmarks and then combined [Ope17]. Some
researchers have also worked on using generative adversarial networks (GAN)
to generate morphing attacks [DSBK18], however, their morph attacks were not
that powerful due to the limited performance of their generative model. Mean-
while, with the recent advancements of GAN, it becomes possible to generate
face images with high image quality.
Motivated by these, in this thesis we carry out the research of using state-of-the-
art image generation model StyleGAN [KLA19a] and StyleGAN2 [KLA+19b]
to generate high-quality morphed face images.
We will ﬁrst introduce rele-
vant backgrounds and summarize the previous methods as a morph generation
framework and apply it with the advanced models. This approach achieved a
much better image quality and generalizability on the open-set morph generation
(training data are not used in morph generation). However, its performance in
attacking FRS is not as satisfying as landmark-based algorithms (LMA). Then,
we will analyze the old framework and propose an improved one to increase
the threat of generated morphs toward FRS. We also ﬁne-tuned the StyleGAN2
model with our dataset of conditioned face images and achieved the best result
==PAGE:4==
ii
which is close to LMA. Finally, we will benchmark these methods by carrying
out vulnerability analysis to a commercial oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS) FRS using the
generated morphing databases and give a conclusion to our work.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
I de senere år har dybe neurale netværk (DNN) ført til gennembrudsforbedring
i ansigtsgenkendelsessystemer (FRS). Den høje generaliserbarhed af DNN og
dyb FRS har forbedret deres ydeevne markant i ubegrænsede miljøer og har
fremmet den udbredte implementering. Forskere har imidlertid også afsløret, at
det også øger deres sårbarhed overfor angreb [FFM14]. Morphing-angreb er et af
de populære emner blandt dem i de sidste par år og har udgjort en alvorlig trussel
mod FRS. Normalt genereres disse morfer fra traditionelle metoder baseret på
ansigtsnøglepunkter, hvor ansigtsbilleder justeres efter deres vartegn og derefter
kombineres [Ope17]. Nogle forskere har også arbejdet på at bruge generative
adversarial netværk (GAN) til at generere morphing-angreb [DSBK18], men
deres morph-angreb var ikke så kraftige på grund af den begrænsede ydelse af
deres generative model. I mellemtiden, med de nylige fremskridt med GAN,
bliver det muligt at generere ansigtsbilleder med høj kvalitet.
Motiveret af disse udfører vi i denne afhandling forskningen om at bruge avan-
ceret billedgenereringsmodel StyleGAN [KLA19a] og StyleGAN2 [KLA+19b] til
at generere morfede ansigtsbilleder i høj kvalitet. Vi introducerer først relevante
baggrunde og opsummerer de tidligere metoder som rammer og anvender dem
med de avancerede modeller. Denne tilgang opnåede en meget bedre billedkvali-
tet og generaliserbarhed på den åbne morfgenerering (træningsdata bruges ikke
i morfgenerering). Dets ydeevne med at angribe FRS er imidlertid ikke så til-
fredsstillende som milepælbaserede algoritmer (LMA). Derefter vil vi analysere
den gamle ramme og foreslå en forbedret ramme for at øge truslen om genere-
rede morfer over for FRS. Vi ﬁnjusterede også StyleGAN2-modellen med vores
datasæt med konditionerede ansigtsbilleder og opnåede det bedste resultat, der
ligger tæt på LMA. Endelig vil vi benchmark disse metoder ved at bære sår-
==PAGE:6==
iv
barhedsanalyse til en kommerciel oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS) FRS ved hjælp af de
genererede morphing-databaser og give en konklusion på vores arbejde.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute and collaborated with Norwegian
Biometrics Laboratory (NBL), NTNU in fulﬁlment of the requirements for ac-
quiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The thesis was supervised by Prof. Dr. Raghavendra Ramachandra, Prof. Dr.
Christoph Busch and Dr. Christian Damsgaard Jensen.
The thesis explores the methods of generating high-quality morphed face im-
ages with advanced generative adversarial networks and also benchmarks their
performance of attacking face recognition networks by vulnerability analysis.
Lyngby, 02-June-2020
Haoyu Zhang
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors: Prof. Dr. Raghavendra Ramachandra,
Prof. Dr. Christoph Busch, and Dr. Christian Damsgaard Jensen for orga-
nizing this project and giving me the opportunity to carry out the research
in Norwegian Biometrics Laboratory (NBL), NTNU. They have given patient
guidance both in academic research and in oﬃcial procedures. I especially want
to thank Prof. Dr. Raghavendra for his day-to-day supervision and helpful feed-
back. Also thanks to Prof. Dr. Christoph Busch and Hochschule Darmstadt
for providing the ﬁnancial grant for my stay in Norway.
Meanwhile, I want to thank Dr. Kiran Raja and Ph.D. candidate Jag Mohan
Singh from NBL for giving advice on the thesis project and relevant research
works. Thanks to Naser Damer from Fraunhofer IGD for sharing his imple-
mentation of MorGAN model. Especially, I’d like to thank Sushma Venkatesh,
the Ph.D. candidate from NBL, for collaborating and discussing with relevant
research works, preparing for databases and helping with the evaluation works.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Face Recognition System and Generalizability . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Morphing Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Why Use GAN to Generate Morphing Attacks
. . . . . .
3
1.2
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Road Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Backgrounds
7
2.1
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Feed-forward Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Gradient Descent Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Generative Adversarial Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
GAN Loss Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
GAN Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Relevant Improvements of GAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Wasserstein GAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
GAN and Auto-encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
StyleGAN and StyleGAN2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Morph Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.1
Landmark Based Morph Generation (LMA) . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
2.4.2
GAN Based Morph Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Proposed Morph Generation Methods
23
3.1
Morph Generation Using StyleGAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.1
Projecting Images into Latent Space . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2
Disentanglement and Choice of Latent Space
. . . . . . .
26
3.1.3
Initialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.4
Loss Function and Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Proposed New Framework: Joint Optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
Initialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Loss Function and Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Dataset and Implementation Details
33
4.1
Dataset of Reference Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Experiments and Result Evaluation
37
5.1
Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Performance of Reconstructed Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Performance of Generated Morphing Attack . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Details of Generated Morphed Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion and Future Works
47
6.1
Discussion and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A Appendix
49
A.1 Derivation of GAN Loss Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.1.1
Discriminator Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.1.2
Generator Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.1.3
Discriminator Update Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.1.4
Generator Update Rule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this section, we introduce the motivation of this thesis along with a brief
review of related works.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
1.1.1
Face Recognition System and Generalizability
Face recognition system (FRS) is the biometric system that can verify or identify
the data subjects based on their face characteristics. Since it is non-intrusive
and can be captured in a covert manner without contact, it has been widely ap-
plied in access control and forensic scenarios [JL11]. Similar to other modalities
of biometric systems, the performance of face recognition systems can be easily
inﬂuenced by the conditions of the captured data. In real cases, many diﬀerent
conditions such as pose, expression, and illumination can easily lead to diﬀer-
ent image representations from the same subject. Hence, the generalizability
becomes a crucial challenge of FRS.
To enhance the generalizability of FRS, many researchers have started to work-
ing on subspace or low-dimensional manifold of the face images instead of di-
rectly applying image processing techniques in the pixel space [KS90] [TP91].
In recent years, deep learning and deep convolutional neural networks(DCNN)
[LBD+89] [KSH12] have achieved breakthrough improvement in the ﬁeld of com-
puter vision and pattern recognition.
As for face recognition, relevant deep
learning techniques have signiﬁcantly boosted the accuracy and performance of
FRS in unconstrained environments [MWHN18].
However, the improvement of generalizability also increases the vulnerability
against various attacks [MBM17], which is fatal to a security system. Morphing
attack, which is introduced by Ferrara et al. [FFM14], is one of the attacks
among them.
1.1.2
Morphing Attack
Morphing Attack is a novel and popular topic in the ﬁeld of biometrics and face
recognition. One of the most common scenarios is the automatic border control
with electronic passports (ePass). In most countries, the face data in passports
are collected from the submitted photo of the applicants. Some countries even
use online uploading systems, which leads to the risk of enrolling manipulated
face images [SRM+19].
As shown in Figure 1.1, if a subject enrolled a face
image that is morphed with another subject, the unenrolled subject may also
be recognized as the enrolled subject and get access from the system.
Many researchers have shown the vulnerability of current face recognition sys-
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Motivation
3
Figure 1.1: An example of morphing attack, the morph is generated by Style-
GAN2 and our proposed new framework.
tems [SRR+17] and have been working on the detection of face morphing attacks
[RRVB17]. Similar to other topics in information security, it is also necessary
to explore the method of generating morphing attacks in order to ﬁnd eﬀective
solutions of detection.
1.1.3
Why Use GAN to Generate Morphing Attacks
The morphing of two images can be very simple : calculate the mean value
of each corresponding pair of pixels in the two images. However, the face of
diﬀerent people has a diﬀerent layout so the pixel-wise blending usually ends up
with an image of two overlapped faces. One solution of this might be detecting
points of face landmarks and blend the pixels after aﬃne transformation based
on the correspondence of these points. Previously, most of the morphing attacks
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
are generated by these landmark-based algorithms (LMA) but the not aligned
area still has severe artifacts and several minutiae artifacts are unavoidable.
Some researchers are also interested in using generative models to generate
morph attacks.
As we mentioned above, many FRS have tried to improve
the generalizability by working on the subspace or low-dimensional manifold
of face images. The similar idea is also common in generative models such as
the latent space of GAN or auto-encoders.
The variants of GAN have also
achieved tremendous improvement in the performance of image generation in
recent years. Hence, by using advanced GAN, ideally we can get the morphed
face image between the two reference faces with high quality less artifacts.
1.2
Related Works
Original image morphing can be traced back to the 80s as a topic of image pro-
cessing [Wol98]. The idea of using point or mesh based on facial landmarks have
been proposed at that time but is mostly applied as a tool in ﬁlm or television
industry. In recent years, with the widespread deployment of FRS applications
and researches revealing their vulnerability against morphing attacks, morphing
attacks became an important and popular topic. Correspondingly, relevant face
morphing tools are developed for generating attacks [FFM19].
As for GAN-based morph generation, it is sometimes brieﬂy mentioned as an
experiment of latent space traversal in the works of generative models [KLA19a].
Damer et al. proposed MorGAN [DSBK18] based on DCGAN [RMC15], ALI
[DBP+16], and BiGAN [DKD16]. The model is trained on CELEB-A dataset
and supports the generation of morphs with a 642 resolution.
Later, as an
improvement of MorGAN, EMorGAN is introduced in [DBMS+19]. The au-
thor proposed a model based on cascaded reﬁnement network to apply post-
enhancement on the generated morphs from MorGAN. As a result, the image
resolution can be extended to 1282 with increased quality. However, poor perfor-
mance of backbone GAN models in MorGAN strictly limited the generalizability
and image quality of the morph generation, which correspondingly lead to in-
eﬃciency and lack of threaten to FRS in real cases. Though EmorGAN can
slightly improve its image quality, it directly based on the result of MorGAN
and cannot enhance the morphing performance, which might be already limited
in the result of MorGAN.
Recently, the generation performance of GAN has also achieved signiﬁcant im-
provement. By using a progressively growing architecture, PGGAN [KALL17]
proposed to be able to generate images of high resolution 10242 with decent
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Road Map
5
quality. Based on the architecture of PGGAN, Tarras et al. designed Style-
GAN [KLA19a], which applied adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) from
style transfer to achieve direct control on image generation. StyleGAN proposed
to have a well-disentangled latent space, high generalizability and impressive
image quality. In the improved version StyleGAN2 [KLA+19b], the author re-
designed the normalization and architecture of the generator to reduce artifacts
and achieved a better image quality. Motivated by these improvements, we de-
cided to research on high-quality morph generation using the advanced GAN
techniques.
1.3
Road Map
In this work, we will ﬁrst introduce the relevant knowledge about GAN and sum-
marize the previous methods of morph generation using GAN into a framework.
Based on this old framework, we introduce our baseline model with advanced
generative model StyleGAN and propose a new framework to improve the base-
line model. After discussing our dataset and implementation details in chapter
4, we’ll benchmark the models and evaluate the results. Finally, we’ll discuss
our work and make a conclusion in general.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Backgrounds
In this section, we will introduce the relevant background knowledge of our work.
We start from artiﬁcial neural networks and gradient descent, which is the base
of deep learning techniques and directly related to our later optimization in image
reconstruction. Then we introduce generative adversarial networks, which is the
model in our topic of morph generation. Some of the introduction here is based
on the author’s previous report [NND19]. Finally, we introduce the knowledge
about morph generation and summarize the previous morph generation method
using GAN to lead to our work in the next chapter.
2.1
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Artiﬁcial neural network is the base of deep learning techniques. The origin of its
name comes from the inspiration for modeling information processing in biolog-
ical systems. The artiﬁcial neural network consists of a set of artiﬁcial neurons
and the neurons are connected by diﬀerent edges. Similar as how the signals are
passing in the nervous system, the signal values are passing to diﬀerent artiﬁcial
neurons through the corresponding edges.
==PAGE:20==
8
Backgrounds
2.1.1
Feed-forward Neural Network
Here we introduce the feed-forward neural network as an example. Feed-forward
neural network is a common and basic neural network with directed edges, which
can be considered as a directed and weighted computational graph. Because the
graph is directed, the process of computing the output of the network given an
input is also called forward propagation. As shown in ﬁgure 2.1, input x0, ..., xi
are the real numbers that go through edges with diﬀerent weights w. Deﬁne a
to be the linear output of a neuron, in the ﬁrst layer between hidden units and
inputs, the computation can be summarized as:
a(1)
j
=
X
i
w(1)
ji xi.
(2.1)
It is obvious that the model now is just a linear combination of input x with
diﬀerent values of the weights w. By assigning diﬀerent values of the weights w,
the model can represent diﬀerent linear functions. To give neural network the
ability of to approximate a biased function, we introduced bias term x0 = z0 = 1
and merged them with the computation of real inputs for convenience. In order
to achieve a more powerful model, an activation function h is introduced, then
the ﬁnal output z of a hidden unit is:
z(1)
j
= h1(a(1)
j ).
(2.2)
Similarly, in the layer between hidden units and outputs, we have:
a(2)
k
=
X
j
w(2)
kj z(1)
j
= h2(
X
j=0
w(2)
kj h1(
X
i=0
w(1)
ji xi)),
(2.3)
yk = z(2)
k
= h2(a(2)
k ).
(2.4)
The activation function can be diﬀerent non-linear functions. Along with the
linear combination, this non-linearity makes the neural network able to approx-
imate diﬀerent non-linear functions by changing the network architecture and
the value of weights. Following the Universal Approximation Theorem and other
research works [Cyb89][HS17], it has been proven that the neural networks have
very powerful approximation ability.
2.1.2
Gradient Descent Algorithm
Though the neural network is powerful, its approximation ability is based on
a set of weight parameters w and other hyper-parameters such as the number
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
9
Figure 2.1: Example of an fully-connected feed-forward neural network with
one hidden layer
of neurons. Given speciﬁc hyper-parameters, the neural network still needs an
algorithm to learn the massive number of parameters instead of setting them
manually.
The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd a goal of learning. A loss function E(y, t) is introduced
to measure the error between the estimated result, the outputs y of our neural
network, and target value t. By using the famous technique back-propagation
[RHW86], we can distribute the error back to speciﬁc neurons by calculating
the partial derivative w.r.t. corresponding weights and apply the chain-rule of
diﬀerentiation:
∂f(g(w))
∂w
= ∂f(g)
∂g

g=g(w)
∂g(w)
∂w .
(2.5)
As an example in ﬁgure 2.1, the back propagation can be represented as:
∂E(w)
∂w(2)
kj
=
X
k
∂E(w)
∂a(2)
k
∂a(2)
k
∂w(2)
kj
,
(2.6)
∂E(w)
∂w(1)
ji
=
X
j
X
k
∂E(w)
∂a(2)
k
∂a(2)
k
∂a(1)
j
∂a(1)
j
∂w(1)
ji
.
(2.7)
==PAGE:22==
10
Backgrounds
The next step is to update the weights. Since our loss function is chosen to be
diﬀerentiable, we can use the gradient information to guide our optimization. As
the example shown in ﬁgure 2.2, assume we have two weight parameters w1, w2
and the loss function E(⃗w) determined by the weight vector ⃗w. The gradient
∇E is calculated by:
∇E(⃗w) = ∂E(⃗w)
∂⃗w
.
(2.8)
In the case of minimizing loss function, the opposite direction of the gradient
leads to a minimum. The algorithm of updating ⃗w based on the gradient by
small steps is called gradient descent:
⃗wnew = ⃗w −η∇E(⃗w).
(2.9)
Hyper-parameter η here denotes the step size of each updating, which is also
called the learning rate. Because the gradient will become zero at a minimum
point and there might be more than one local minimum points, the algorithm
might converge at a local minimum due to the zero gradient instead of reaching
a global minimum.
Combining the back-propagation and the gradient descent algorithm, for each
input data we can calculate the gradient with respect to each weight by back-
propagation and update the weight based on the gradient information. Consid-
ering we have a set of input data, we can iteratively randomly sample one or
a small batch of input data, update the weight after forward-propagation and
back-propagation. By doing this, the network can learn from the training data
and can approximate an unknown function to ﬁt our data.
Figure 2.2: Example of gradient descent [Bis06]
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Generative Adversarial Networks
11
2.2
Generative Adversarial Networks
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) is an unsupervised framework proposed
by Ian Goodfellow et al. [GPAM+14]. In nutshell, GAN consists of two main
components, a discriminator and a generator. The discriminator is a neural
network that classify whether an image is real or fake (generated by generator).
It takes an image as input and outputs an scalar representing the discriminat-
ing result. Correspondingly, the generator is a neural network that attempts to
generate fake images with the same statistical properties as the real images in
order to deceive the discriminator so it classiﬁes them as real images. Theoret-
ically, GAN is trying to learn a low-dimensional latent representation of high-
dimensional pixel space by minimizing the divergence between distributions of
generated images and real images in an adversarial training framework.
Figure 2.3: Example of the architecture and training process of GAN
2.2.1
GAN Loss Function
Discriminator’s responsibility is to distinguish between real and fake images,
and the generator’s responsibility is to generate fake images that look like real.
Given that the distribution of real images pdata(x) and the distribution of fake
images pz(z), our objective is to make the distribution of pz(z) to be as close as
possible to pdata(x)
In GAN, both the discriminator and the generator compete in the two-player
game. The discriminator aims to maximize the log probability of real image
==PAGE:24==
12
Backgrounds
classiﬁed as real and the inverse probability for fake images classiﬁed as fake,
whereas the generator to minimize the log of inverse probability of the fake
image predicted by the discriminator. This loss function is also known as the
min-max Loss.
In the following section we brieﬂy show the loss function for both of the dis-
criminator and the generator:
maxD{log(D(x)) + log(1 −D(G(z)))},
(2.10)
minG{log(1 −D(G(z)))}.
(2.11)
Finally, the objective function can be written as following:
minGmaxDV (G, D) = min
G max
D {Ex∈pdata(x) log D(x)
+ Ez∈pZ(z) log(1 −D(G(z)))}.
(2.12)
A complete derivation of the loss functions for both the discriminator and gen-
erator and the associated update rules is attached in Appendix A.1.
2.2.2
GAN Training
Figure 2.3 illustrates the architecture and training process of GAN and we give
the detailed algorithm as below:
• Sample m positive samples {x1, x2, .., xm)} from data
• Sample m noise samples {z1, z2, ..., zm} from prior distribution
• Obtaining m generated data {˜x1, ˜x2, ..., ˜xm} = G(zi)
• Update discriminator parameter θd to maximize
arg maxD = 1
m
P log D(xi) + 1
m
P log(1 −D(˜xi))
• Sample another m noise samples {z1, z2, ..., zm} from distribution
• Update generator parameters θg to minimize
minG = 1
m
P log(1 −D(G(zi)))
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Relevant Improvements of GAN
13
A question here is why this adversarial learning framework of GAN is needed.
Is it possible to train the generator alone or use the discriminator for the gen-
eration?
For the generator, the discriminator provides the gradient during the training.
As we’ve mentioned in section 1.1.3, similar to many other generative models,
GAN is trying to use a low-dimensional manifold to represent the training images
and train the generator to map from the low-dimensional space to the high
dimensional pixel space. As a generative model, the auto-encoders has a similar
architecture 2.4 and the generator in GAN is similar to the decoder. Hence, the
training of auto-encoder might be considered as a way to train the generator
without the adversarial framework. However, one of the biggest problem of this
naive auto-encoder architecture is the poor image quality. Since the encoder
and decoder (generator) is trained by a pixel-wise reconstruction loss, it is hard
to learn the overall structure of the image and the connection between pixels.
Figure 2.4: Example of the architecture and training process of Auto-encoder
For the discriminator, its classiﬁcation problem is easier than the generation
problem of the generator and easier to be trained. Given a well-trained discrim-
inator, theoretically it can be used to generate images by inference:
˜x = arg max
x∈X
D(˜x),
(2.13)
however, it is hard to enumerate every or sample suﬃcient x to solve this prob-
lem. Meanwhile, a very intuitive advantage of including the generator is to pro-
vide negative examples with good quality. Following our derivation, we know
that this further helps the generator to minimize the divergence between pdata(x)
and pg(x).
2.3
Relevant Improvements of GAN
The adversarial training also causes instability and makes GAN notoriously
hard to be trained. Intuitively, because the discriminator as a binary classiﬁer
==PAGE:26==
14
Backgrounds
Figure 2.5: An approximate visualization of the manifold analysis [yL18]
Figure 2.6: An intuitive example of why the training stuck [yL18]
is much easier to be trained than the generator, in practice it usually becomes
too strong. Assuming the discriminator is strong enough to clearly discriminate
between Pdata and PG, the gradient that discriminator provides to the generator
will almost vanish due to the Sigmoid function in the output layer.
Another explanation can be given from the perspective of divergence. If we con-
sider the distribution of our image dataset Pdata and the distribution of the gen-
erated data PG are low-dimensional manifolds in a high-dimensional space since
we only draw some samples from each of them, they can easily be considered
as two manifolds without overlapping (Fig.2.5). Following our derivation - see
A.1, the overall framework of GAN can be considered as using Jensen-Shannon
divergence to approach the true distribution. However, from equations (A.23-
A.26 ), we can also see that when the two distributions are not overlapped,
one of the probability distribution must be zero w.r.t the another, hence, the
Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD) will be always log2 and the gradient will be-
come 0. As the example that is shown in ﬁgure(2.6), when the two distribution
are not overlapped, they will be considered as equally bad and PG cannot lead
to Pdata.
Many researchers have been working on making improvements to solve these
problems.
Here we introduce some important model that is relevant to our
work.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Relevant Improvements of GAN
15
2.3.1
Wasserstein GAN
Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) is a well-known technique which use Wasserstein dis-
tance(earth mover’s distance) to measure the diﬀerence between PG and Pdata:
V (G, D) =
max
D∈1−Lipschitz Ex Pdata[D(x)] −Ex PG[D(x)].
(2.14)
The 1-Lipschitz function ||D(x1) −D(x2)|| ≤||x1 −x2|| constrains the discrim-
inator to be smooth and ensure its convergence (otherwise D(xi) may goes to
inﬁnity for some xi and thus never convergence).
In the original paper [ACB17], the author proposed to use weight clipping to
restrict the discriminator to be smooth: setting an upper bound w∗and an lower
bound w∗for weights of the discriminator. If w > w∗, w = w∗and similarly if
w < w∗, w = w∗.
Later, the improved WGAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) was introduced
in [GAA+17]. In this paper, the author use || ▽x D(x) ≤1|| to replace the
1 −Lipschitz constrain and then include penalty term λ
R
x max(0, || ▽x D(x) −
1||)dx to the optimization problem V (G, D). However, this penalty term has
a integral to every x and hard to implement in practice. Hence, the author
deﬁned a distribution Ppenalty between PG and Pdata. Then they state that
only penalizing sampled points in Ppenalty shows a suﬃcient constraint in their
experiment.
In other researches such as CTGAN [WGL+18] and DRAGAN [KAHK17], they
proposed that applying the gradient penalty on x ∈Pdata may achieve a better
performance.
2.3.2
GAN and Auto-encoder
Because both auto-encoders and GAN are generative models with a similar
network structure, many researchers have worked on combining them.
In [ZML16], the author proposed to use a pre-trained auto-encoder as the dis-
criminator and use the reconstruction loss to determine the quality of an image
and thus discriminate whether an image is real or fake. The advantage of this
EBGAN is that the discriminator can be pre-trained so the training process will
be easier. As for their experiment result, they state that EBGAN can generate
images with descent quality within a few epochs.
==PAGE:28==
16
Backgrounds
In [LSLW16], the author proposed to combine VAE and GAN by using the de-
coder also as the generator in GAN. If we consider the framework as a GAN,
the introduced reconstruction loss helps the training process of the generator to
be more stable. Similarly, if we consider the framework as a VAE, the gradi-
ent provided from the discriminator can enhance the generative quality of the
decoder.
In [DKD16], a bidirectional GAN is proposed. The model can be considered as
using a GAN structure and the discriminator to enhance the generative quality
of bidirectional auto-encoder. Similar idea of ALI [DBP+16] is also published at
the same time. BiGAN includes an auto-encoder architecture, where the encoder
maps from real images to latent vectors and the decoder maps from sampled
latent vector to generated images. By using the discriminator to discriminate the
pair of image and latent vector is from encoder or decoder, the model eventually
can approximate a joint distribution of the pairs. Recently, Donahue et al. also
published a improvement of the above framework called BigBiGAN [DS19] and
achieved a generation result with high-level details.
2.3.3
StyleGAN and StyleGAN2
Early GAN models are mainly based on DCGAN [RMC15] with a limited image
resolution and quality of the generated images. In [KALL17], PGGAN applied a
progressively growing architecture. The model progressively learns to generate
images with the resolution from low to high. By doing this, the training process
is stabilized and the model is proposed to be able to generate images of high
resolution 10242 with descent quality.
Based on the architecture of PGGAN, StyleGAN is proposed in [KLA19a].
StyleGAN is motivated by style transfer and try to design a GAN with control-
lable image synthesis. It is proposed to have a well-disentangled intermediate
latent space, high generalizability and impressive image quality.
Here we should introduce a concept of disentanglement.
Disentanglement is
a concept in representation learning that denotes the separability of semantic
factors in the latent space. For example, in face generation the disentanglement
means that diﬀerent sets of dimensions in the latent space represent diﬀerent
face attributes. As we mentioned earlier, most deep generative models are trying
to learn a latent space to represent the real images in pixel space. The idea is
that the human’s visual perceptual on images is based on some latent structure
instead of each pixel.
However, the machine-learned latent space might be
still extremely diﬀerent from human vision and makes it diﬃcult to control
the generation. In our case of face morphing, if a set of dimensions represents
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Relevant Improvements of GAN
17
more than one attributes, encoding speciﬁc images will become more challenging
because adjusting the generation of some attributes may lead to the unnecessary
change in others.
To achieve the disentanglement property, StyleGAN ﬁrst applies a non-liner
mapping network to map the traditional latent space to an intermediate la-
tent space. Then, it uses the intermediate latent space to control the image
synthesis network through adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) after aﬃne
transformed into styles y = (ys, yb):
AdaIN(xi, y) = ys,i
xi −µ(xi)
σ(xi)
+ yb,i,
(2.15)
where where each feature map xi is normalized separately, and then scaled and
biased based on style y.
Because StyleGAN is based on ProGAN, the resolution of generation grows
progressively. In our model, we choose the resolution of generated images to be
10242 so there are 9 (log1024 −log4 −1) times of growing and 2 AdaIN blocks
for each time of it. Both the original and the intermediate latent space are 512
dimension so the input of AdaIN consists an extended latent space with (18, 512)
2.7. Because this special latent space directly controls the image generation, the
author states that it is well disentangled and linear separable. In [AQW19b], it
is also proposed to use this W+ space for image projection and reconstruction.
In the improved version StyleGAN2 [KLA+19b], the author analyzed some com-
mon artifacts in StyleGAN and redesigned the normalization and architecture
of the generator.
One of the typical artifacts in StyleGAN is the waterdrop artifact (Fig. 2.8).
Based on the author’s analysis, this is because the generator tries to generate
a strong localized spike to control the statistics and fraud AdaIN. To solve this
problem, they changed the architecture of the generator, moved bias and noise
input out of the style block, and only control standard deviation instead of
both mean and standard deviation. To reduce the strictness of AdaIN without
losing its advantage of controlling feature maps, StyleGAN2 changed AdaIN by
scaling the convolutional weights based on the feature map from the last layer
as a prediction.
Another problem comes from the progressively growing architecture. This ar-
chitecture can successfully extend the resolution that the generator is able to
generate but also causes a strong location preference of the generated features.
Figure 2.9 shows an example in our experiment of reconstructing real images.
In the real image, the subject is in a condition of overlooking the camera, the
==PAGE:30==
18
Backgrounds
Figure 2.7: Architecture and diﬀerent latent space of StyleGAN [KLA19a]
Figure 2.8: Example of the waterdrop artifact in images generated by Style-
GAN
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Morph Generation
19
Figure 2.9: Example of geometry preference of StyleGAN generator
location his mouth is high than normal face images. Because the reconstruction
initializes from random noise in the latent space which represents a common
face in the training data the location of the mouth exists a diﬀerence. However,
the generator failed to minimize this diﬀerence during optimization and remains
the initialized location of the mouth. To solve this, the author proposed to use
skip-connection architecture or residual-connection architecture instead of the
progressive growing one in StyleGAN.
2.4
Morph Generation
Image morphing, as a classic problem in digital image processing, has been
researched for many years [Wol98]. One of the most intuitive approach is nu-
merically interpolating the corresponding pixel values of two RGB images I1
and I2:
M(x, y) = αI1(x, y) + (1 −α)I2(x, y),
(2.16)
where M denotes the morphed image, α is the interpolating factor and x, y
represents the coordinates of each pixel. In our case of morphing face images
from two subjects, we set α = 0.5.
However, diﬀerent images are normally not pixel-wise corresponded by their
coordinates. In our case of face morphing, face images from the same subject
may even have diﬀerent positions or locations, and directly applying pixel-wise
interpolating can end up with a image with stacked faces, not to speak of face
images from diﬀerent subjects.
Hence, if we want to use equation (2.16) to
generate morphs, a sub-problem is the alignment of the faces.
==PAGE:32==
20
Backgrounds
2.4.1
Landmark Based Morph Generation (LMA)
One of the most common techniques is the mesh warping with landmarks. For
most people, the overall structure of face landmarks are the same (e.g. two eyes
are located at a diﬀerent side of the nose). Hence, if we generate a mesh by
using detected landmark points as nodes, the mesh of diﬀerent face images will
have the same overall structure. Then, for pixels in each block of the mesh, we
project the coordinates of theses pixels to the corresponding block of the other
image. In this way, the alignment between two images can be established and
then we can apply pixel-wise interpolation:
M(x, y, ) = αI1(x, y) + (1 −α)I2(x′, y′),
(2.17)
where x′, y′ denotes the coordinates of corresponding pixel after projection.
Figure 2.10 shows an example of landmark-based morph generation with De-
launay triangulation [Ope17] and directly pixel-wise morphing. The same set of
landmark points are ﬁrst detected from each of the reference images and then is
used for applying Delauney triangulation and alignment. It is obvious that the
morphed image that aligned based on landmarks has much fewer artifacts.
2.4.2
GAN Based Morph Generation
As for GAN, similar to most of the generative models, it learns to use a low-
dimensional manifold to represent the high-dimensional image data. The idea
is to learn the latent structure of the images instead of considering each pixel
as a dimension. The morphing happens at the latent space:
LM = αL1 + (1 −α)L2,
(2.18)
where LM denotes the latent vector of the morph and L1, L2 denote the latent
vector of referenced images. In the top of Figure 2.11, it shows the workﬂow
of morph generation in MorGAN. Though the quality of the result is not very
satisfying, it still can be considered as a typical morph generation framework
using GAN. Here we divide the problem of morph generation into three sub-
problems: image projection, morphing in latent space, and synthesis morphed
image. Synthesizing the morphed image given a morphed latent vector is simply
forward passing through the pretrained generator so the remaining sub-problems
are the other two.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Morph Generation
21
Figure 2.10: Example of landmark-based morph generation [Ope17]
Figure 2.11: Block diagram of morph generation using MorGAN and summa-
rized framework
==PAGE:34==
22
Backgrounds
In auto-encoder models, an encoder that can map pixel space to the latent space
in included in the training process. Hence, for GAN that has referenced auto-
encoder models like MorGAN or has similar encoder architecture, the projection
can be simply done by the encoder model.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Proposed Morph Generation
Methods
In this chapter, we present the StyleGAN-based morphed face image generation.
We ﬁrst present the oﬀ-the-shelf pre-trained StyleGAN. We then introduce a new
framework to enable the generation of high quality face images.
==PAGE:36==
24
Proposed Morph Generation Methods
3.1
Morph Generation Using StyleGAN
The main defects of previous GAN-based morph generation methods introduced
in section 2.4.2 are the poor quality and generalizability due to the limited
performance of their generative models. Applying post-enhancement or super-
resolution techniques may improve the image quality, however, bias still can
be caused during the latent space projection and then reduce the threat to
FRS systems (e.g. the reconstructed face image is already not similar to the
original subject anymore before morphing). The low generalizability also leads
to unsatisfying performances on open-set tests, which means it always needs to
train a whole model from scratch to generate morphs. Though it is reasonable
to assume that the morphing attacker has suﬃcient time to re-train their own
close-set model, using a generalized model can achieve a better eﬃciency.
Motivated by these, we decided to use the state-of-the-art generative model
StyleGAN to generate high-quality morphs. Applying StyleGAN enables our
method to improve the resolutions and there by enable the high quality gener-
ated images from less than 2562 [DSBK18] [DBMS+19] to 10242. The StyleGAN
model is trained on FFHQ dataset with high-quality images and tested on the
disjoint ICAO dataset to show its generalizability on open-set morph gener-
ation. The ICAO dataset is only preprocessed (aligned and cropped) as the
same standard as FFHQ dataset. As shown in Figure 3.1, the morph genera-
tion framework is following the traditional one, where the face image of the two
subjects I1, I2 are ﬁrst encoded into latent vectors L′
1, L′
2 respectively and then
get morphed in the latent space. Then L′
1, L′
2 will be morphed using weighted
average interpolation with the same weight w1 = w2 = 1:
LM = w1 ∗L′
1 + w2 ∗L′
2
2
,
(3.1)
which is then similar to equation (2.18). Finally, the generator of GANs will
take the morphed latent vector LM as input and synthesis the morphed image.
3.1.1
Projecting Images into Latent Space
For most generative models, it is assumed that the latent space follows a prior
distribution and the generator can map the latent space to real images. Hence,
it is common that the research works about generative models focus more on
the performance of mapping and they usually only sample prior noises as input
to generate images. However, in our case, we need to morph speciﬁc real face
images so it is necessary to encode images to latent vectors.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Morph Generation Using StyleGAN
25
𝑳𝟐
𝑳𝟏′
𝑳𝟐′
Synthesis 
network
𝑰𝑴
𝑳𝑴
𝑰𝟏
𝑰𝟐
Updated
latent
Updated
latent
update
𝑳𝟏
update
StyleGAN
𝑳𝑴ൌ𝒘𝟏∗𝑳𝟏
ᇱ൅𝒘𝟐∗𝑳𝟐′
𝟐
Loss
𝑰෠𝑳𝟏
StyleGAN
Reconstructed
image
Reconstructed
image
𝑰෠𝑳𝟏
Loss
Figure 3.1: Block diagram of the morphed face image using StyleGAN [VZR+]
In MorGAN the image projection is simply done by its encoder model. As for
other GANs that don’t have an encoder architecture like StyleGAN, three types
of projecting approaches can be summarized:
• Additionally train an inverse model of the generator as encoder after the
GANs models are trained. Then use the encoder to encode real images.
• Initialize a latent vector, generate the corresponding image via the gen-
erator and calculate the loss between generated image and the original
image. Then minimize the loss by applying a gradient descent algorithm
to optimize the latent vector.
• Combine the previous two methods, use the additionally trained encoder
as an approximate initialization and then optimize the latent vector by
gradient descent.
Training an additional encoder seems to be a more eﬃcient solution, however,
the training itself might be more expensive than encoding each of them unless
the dataset is massive. Also, the generalizability of the encoder is limited so
the accuracy is worse than gradient descent based optimization. Ideally, the
combined method can achieve the best result but in practice, it mainly con-
tributes to reduce the converging time and doesn’t improve much the quality
of reconstruction. Hence, we choose the second method as our baseline model,
which is simple and stable.
==PAGE:38==
26
Proposed Morph Generation Methods
3.1.2
Disentanglement and Choice of Latent Space
In the previous chapter, we have introduced how disentanglement of the latent
space can improve the generalizability of the generative model and also beneﬁts
the performance of morph generation. StyleGAN is proposed to have a well
disentangled latent space by applying a mapping network and directly control
the synthesis network via AdaIN. The 18 inputs of each AdaIN block consists a
extended latent space W+ space. Inspired by the experiments from [AQW19b],
we choose W+ space as the latent space to project, in order to achieve a better
generalizability and reconstruction performance.
3.1.3
Initialization
Initialization has been proven to be important to the training result of deep
learning models and gradient descent algorithms [SMDH13]. Here are several
initialization methods:
• Random Initialization: Initialize with random Gaussian noise.
• Zero Initialization: Initialize with a vector of zeros, it can also be consid-
ered as the mean of standard Gaussian.
• Previous Result: Use previous latent vector (face of another subject) or
their mean as initialization.
• Mean Initialization: Initialize with the mean value of the trained latent
space, which is originally used for truncation experiments in StyleGAN.
• Encoder Prediction: Use an additionally trained encoder model to get an
approximated prediction of the latent vector as initialization.
Because an unstable initialization technique may also do harm to the optimiza-
tion result, we decided to use zero initialization among these techniques for its
simplicity and stability. It achieves a similar result as initializing with random
or previous latent vectors but is more stable. Similar to the idea of the trunca-
tion technique, the mean initialization can achieve a better image quality but
not much in practice. It is also sensitive when the constitution of the training
dataset is biased to our target (the target subject might be away from the mean
of the training set). The encoder prediction can mainly reduce the required
iterations in optimization but training but the encoder itself also takes time.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Proposed New Framework: Joint Optimization
27
3.1.4
Loss Function and Optimization
In this baseline model, we use styleloss [AQW19b], a simple perceptual loss
[JAFF16] which measures the mean squared error between extracted features in
layer conv32 from a pretrained VGG-16 model [SZ14]:
LossStyle = 1
N ||F(I) −F(I′)||2
2,
(3.2)
where N denotes the number of features in layer conv32 and F denotes the
features.
As for the optimization part, we use the Adam optimizer [KB14] to adaptive
stabilize the optimization and exponential learning rate decay [LH17] to improve
the convergence.
3.2
Proposed New Framework: Joint Optimiza-
tion
In our framework, we can found out that the morphing of latent vectors is hard to
control. Our goal is to generate a morphed image with averaged facial attributes
by linear averaging the latent vectors but the latent subspace is not completely
linear even in advance models like StyleGAN [KLA19a]. This is also proven
in our experiment in section 5.3, where the morphs generated by our baseline
model have decent perceptual quality but don’t threaten the face recognition
network. The morphed images in many cases are not similar to both of the
subjects or biased to one of them, which can’t eﬀectively attack the recognition
systems. These problems are mainly caused by uncontrollable changes such as
landmark geometry and non-toned structure due to noisy texture generation
during and improving the projection process can’t relieve these problems.
One possible solution might be training another additional model to control the
morphing of latent vectors. However, similar to training an additional encoder,
the accuracy is also limited. Hence, we decided to design a joint framework that
directly refer the face images from both subjects and optimizes the morphed
latent vector LM. To enhance the threat to face recognition systems, we propose
a new loss function based on face recognition network Arcface [DGXZ19] to
control the morph generation.
In our new framework, we still work on the extended w+ space and the same
type of projecting method as before. Instead of projecting referenced images in
==PAGE:40==
28
Proposed Morph Generation Methods
the old framework, now we initialize and end-to-end optimize the latent vector
of the morphed image LM as shown in Figure 3.2. The synthesized morphed
image ˆIM is compared with both referenced image I1 and I2 and updated by
gradient descent algorithm to minimize the loss functions. Finally, the updated
latent vector LM
′ will be used to generate the morphed image IM.
Figure 3.2: Block diagram of New Morph Generation Framework
3.2.1
Initialization
In our new framework, since we have introduced a new loss function based on a
face recognition network that needs to align on the face region, it is important
to ﬁnd a suitable initialization that has approximated similar face region to the
unknown morphed image. Hence, we decided to use an additional pre-trained
encoder based on ResNet50 and calculate the predicted initialized latent vector
˜LM by linear averaging the predicted referenced images ˜L1 and ˜L2:
˜LM =
˜L1 + ˜L2
2
.
(3.3)
This initialization is still not accurate on the detailed face attributes but is
enough to provide an approximated face region to stabilize the further opti-
mization.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Proposed New Framework: Joint Optimization
29
3.2.2
Loss Function and Optimization
Since the joint optimization is referencing two images, it is harder and more
unstable to converge.
Hence, we decided to apply various loss functions to
achieve a more comprehensive optimization.
Traditional pixel-wise loss functions such as mean squared error are not suitable
in this new framework. Though the referenced images are pre-processed and
aligned following the standard of FFHQ dataset, using pixel-wise loss is still
similar to the pixel-wise interpolating, which will cause severe ghost artifacts or
blurred results. Because of this, we use perceptual loss with multiple layers:
LossP erceptual = 1
2
X
i
1
Ni
||Fi(I1) −Fi(IM)||2
2 + 1
2
X
i
1
Ni
||Fi(I2) −Fi(IM)||2
2,
(3.4)
where Ni denotes the number of features in layer i and F denotes features in layer
i of the perceptual network, which is still VGG-16 here. As for the combination
of perceptual layers, we choose conv11, conv12, conv22, conv33 inspired by
[AQW19a]. Compared with the original combination of layers conv12, conv22,
conv33, conv43 [JAFF16], it measures more on low-level features instead of
high-level features like style of an image and is closer to our goal of morphing
faces. It is also able to use a pretrained perceptual model [ZIE+18] to directly
predict perceptual similarity but doesn’t perform well in practice.
Another
perspective of the perceptual loss in our framework is a method to avoid direct
pixel-wise morphing by projecting and measuring the diﬀerences in the feature
space instead of pixel space.
Since our goal is to generate face morphing attacks, the ability of threatening
FRS is the most important metric in our framework. In order to enhance this
ability and add control to the morphing process, we introduce an identity loss
based on the feedback of FRS. Based on of the state-of-the-art face recognition
model Arcface, we use a pre-trained embedding extractor with ResNet50 as
the backbone to extract the unit embedding vectors and deﬁne the identity loss
by their cosine distance:
LossIdentity =
(1 −
⃗v1·⃗vM
|⃗v1||⃗vM|) + (1 −
⃗v2·⃗vM
|⃗v2||⃗vM|)
2
,
(3.5)
where ⃗v1, ⃗v2, ⃗vM respectively denotes the embedding vectors which are extracted
from image I1, I2, IM after the alignment by MTCNN [ZZLQ16].
An block
diagram of identity loss is shown as Figure 3.3. To prove the loss function is
diﬀerential for the morphed embedding vector ⃗vM, we deﬁne xd, yd, zd to be
the value of vector ⃗v1, ⃗v2, ⃗vM in dimension d respectively and d′ ̸= d to be
==PAGE:42==
30
Proposed Morph Generation Methods
Figure 3.3: Block diagram of Identity Loss
other dimensions except d. The expanded identity loss function and its partial
derivative are:
LossIdentity =
(1 −
P
d xdzd
|⃗v1||⃗vM| ) + (1 −
P
d ydzd
|⃗v2||⃗vM| )
2
,
(3.6)
∂LossIdentity
∂zd
= 1−xd
2|⃗v1|
∂
∂zd
(
zd
q
z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′
)−yd
2|⃗v2|
∂
∂zd
(
zd
q
z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′
),
(3.7)
∂
∂zd
(
zd
q
x2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′
) =
1
q
z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′
+
2z2
d
−2(z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′)−3
2
=
P
d′̸=d z2
d′
(z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′)−3
2 ,
∂LossIdentity
∂zd
= 1 −( xd
2|⃗v1| +
yd
2|⃗v2|)
P
d′̸=d z2
d′
(z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′)−3
2 .
(3.8)
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Proposed New Framework: Joint Optimization
31
For any value zd = z′
d, it is obvious that:
lim
∆zd→0
∂LossIdentity
∂zd
(z′
d + ∆zd)
=
lim
∆zd→0(1 −( xd
2|⃗v1| +
yd
2|⃗v2|)
P
d′̸=d z2
d′
((z′
d + ∆zd)2 + P
d′̸=d z2
d′)−3
2 )
=
lim
∆zd→0(1 −( xd
2|⃗v1| +
yd
2|⃗v2|)
P
d′̸=d z2
d′
(z
′2
d + 2z′
d∆zd + ∆z2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′)−3
2 )
= 1 −( xd
2|⃗v1| +
yd
2|⃗v2|)
P
d′̸=d z2
d′
(z
′2
d + P
d′̸=d z2
d′)−3
2
=
lim
∆zd→0
∂LossIdentity
∂zd
(z′
d).
Hence, for any dimension of d, the partial derivative of the identity loss function
is continuous. Because the partial derivative with respect to each dimension is
continuous, the identity loss function is diﬀerentiable for the morphed embed-
ding vector. In our model, since we’ve preprocessed the embedding vectors to
be unit vectors, it is even simple to make the proof.
The embedding extractor model can be also viewed as a perceptual model in
perceptual loss. However, since the extractor model is trained to maximize the
face class separability, it is not as general as VGG-16 and more sensitive to
the face attributes. Hence, only optimizing the identity loss cannot achieve the
same reconstruction performance as the perceptual loss but applying it on the
face region can eﬀectively control the generated attributes to be recognized as
both subjects.
To solve the unbalance between diﬀerent subjects, we introduce an identity
diﬀerence loss:
LossID−Diff = |(1 −
⃗v1⃗vM
|⃗v1||⃗vM|) −(1 −
⃗v2⃗vM
|⃗v2||⃗vM|)|.
(3.9)
With the idea of Lagrange multiplier, it adds a constraint to the optimization
process to force the cosine distance between morph embedding and each of the
two reference embeddings to be the same. Since LossID−Diff usually small
with value less than 1, we apply L1 loss on the diﬀerence of two cosine distance
terms to avoid gradient vanishing. The L1 loss also makes it indiﬀerentiable,
however, it can be easily solved by using L2 loss if the diﬀerentiability is needed.
We also included MS-SSIM loss LMS−SSIM to measure the structure similar-
ity [WSB03] and get a better visual eﬀect. Finally, our total loss function is
==PAGE:44==
32
Proposed Morph Generation Methods
constituted as:
Loss = λ1LossP erceptual +λ2LossIdentity +λ3LossMS−SSIM +λ4LossID−Diff.
(3.10)
In the four loss terms, LossP erceptual is the most stable one and converges
quickly. LossIdentity is less stable to converge due to the less generalizability
of using the feature extractor network as the perceptual model but can eﬀectively
control the generation of morphed attributes. LMS−SSIM and LossID−Difference
can be considered as supplementary constraints because they cannot be isolated
to guide the image reconstruction. Hence, we suggest to make λ1LossP erceptual ≥
λ2LossIdentity > λ3LossMS−SSIM, λ4LossID−Diff by setting diﬀerent hyper-
parameter λi.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Dataset and
Implementation Details
Data is crucial for deep learning models. In this chapter, we will ﬁrst introduce
the constitution of our dataset and pre-processing techniques then represent other
details about implementation.
==PAGE:46==
34
Dataset and Implementation Details
4.1
Dataset of Reference Images
Our morphed face database is generated from 140 diﬀerent data subjects includ-
ing 47 females and 93 males. Pre-trained StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 models are
trained using FFHQ dataset. To test the generalizability of our morph gener-
ation methods, the facial images in our database are from disjoint FRGC-V2
face database [PFS+05].
Though StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 are relatively tolerant to the poses and il-
lumination compared with earlier generative models, the referenced images are
chosen to have illumination with good quality and no poses, glasses, or expres-
sions. Using conditioned face images is also compliant to the ICAO guidelines
on passport photos, which suits the goal of morphing attack.
Since attackers can always choose similar reference faces to increase the accep-
tance rate, in our work the pairs of reference subjects are also selected to have
a similar appearance and the same gender. As a ﬁnal result, the morphed face
database consists of 490 female morphs and 2031 male morphs with the image
resolution of 1024 × 1024.
4.2
Pre-processing
In our frameworks, we have combined diﬀerent sub-models and they might have
diﬀerent requirements. Hence, the pre-processing here not only indicates pro-
cessing raw data before running the whole framework but also includes coordi-
nating the data stream between diﬀerent sub-models during the optimization.
For the pretrained StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 models, since they are originally
trained using FFHQ dataset, we use the same tool and standard to preprocess
the raw images.
First, it uses landmark predictor model from dlib [DLI19]
to detect 68 landmarks of the face image and calculate the averaged position
of eyes and mouth by calculating the means of their corresponding landmark
points. Then, it uses the center of the eyes and the distance between eyes and
the mouth to get the center of the face. Based on the eye-to-eye distance or
the eye-to-mouth distance as a scalar, it determines a rectangle centralized at
the central point of the face. In case the rectangle exceeds the original image,
it will be padded and applied with Gaussian ﬁltering. By doing these, even the
face is oblique in the raw image we can still ﬁnd a rectangle where the face is
well-aligned at the center of it. Finally, the rectangle is cropped and resized
after transformed into the normal coordinate.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Implementation
35
The pretrained VGG-16 and ResNet50 models, we also use the corresponding
preprocessing tools. They mainly adjust the channels and resize the image data.
More speciﬁcally for the Arcface feature extractor, the input face images are
required to have a diﬀerent alignment requirement. As a face recognition model,
its input face images need to be cropped into a tighter face region. Hence, we
apply MTCNN model to the synthesized face image and make segmentation.
4.3
Implementation
Our implementation based on the open-source code of StyleGAN [@tk19a] and
StyleGAN2 [@tk19b] and also the relevant repositories in the open-source com-
munity researching image encoders [@Pu19] [@pb19] [@ro19].
In order to use the pretrained models, our work is also implemented in Tensor-
ﬂow platform. Because the Arcface model is implemented in MXNET platform,
we choose the pre-trained model from a third party implementation in Tensor-
ﬂow [@lu19].
One restriction of Tensorﬂow platform is the static graph architecture of Tensor-
ﬂow, which means the ﬂow of the tensor should be determined as a computing
graph with nodes before the model running. In our new framework, we intro-
duced the Arcface model to dynamically control the optimization of the morphed
latent vector. Since the morphed latent vector and the corresponding synthe-
sized image is changing during the optimization, we need to dynamically process
and align the synthesized image to ﬁt the Arcface model. However, it is hard
to implement in Tensorﬂow with the static graph architecture when outputs of
one sub-model is the hyperparameters of another sub-model.To solve this, we
applied the ResNet50 initialization to give a predicted morphed face region for
Arcface.
Our implementation and experiments is running on a PC with 16 GB RAM,
Intel i5-8400 CPU, and Nvidia GTX 1070 graphic card with 8 GB memory. As
an example, for generating each image using our proposed new framework, it
takes around 90 seconds computation time.
==PAGE:48==
36
Dataset and Implementation Details
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Experiments and Result
Evaluation
In this Chapter, we represent several experiments on our proposed methods and
their result. We also benchmark diﬀerent models and evaluate whether they have
achieved the improvement as we wished.
==PAGE:50==
38
Experiments and Result Evaluation
5.1
Fine-tuning
Though our method of using pretrained model can achieve better generalizability
and eﬃciency, we also make an experiment on ﬁne-tuning the pretrained Style-
GAN2 model (which is proposed to be an improvement of StyleGAN) on our
dataset to test the best possible morph generation performance of our method.
Our dataset contains 140 face images and the StyleGAN2 model pretrained on
FFHQ dataset is ﬁne-tuned for 300 epochs. The morphed result is shown in Fig-
ure 5.2 (h) and the performace of threatening FRS will be illustrated in section
5.3.
To visualize the result of ﬁne-tuning, we sample some random latent vectors
from Gaussian noise and compare their corresponding synthesized images before
and after ﬁne-tuning. As shown in ﬁgure 5.1, after ﬁne-tuning the generated
images tend to have a better condition in pose, expression, illumination, and
background, which is more similar to our dataset and the ICAO standard.
5.2
Performance of Reconstructed Images
As we’ve discussed earlier, the accuracy of projecting face images into the la-
tent space is an important step in the traditional morph generation framework.
The bias or loss of face information during the projection will be directly accu-
mulated to the morphing process and reduce the threat of generated morphing
attack. This accuracy can be evaluated by the performance of reconstruction.
In this experiment, we test the reconstruction ability of previous work Mor-
GAN based on BiGAN and our baseline approach based on StyleGAN to show
the improvement both in image quality and identity consistency compared with
previous models.
To evaluate the reconstruction performance, we apply below metrics:
• PSNR(Peak Signal to Noise Ratio): The ratio between maximum peak
signal and the noise.
• MSE(Mean Squared Error): Measuring the diﬀerence between correspond-
ing pixel values.
• FID(Fréchet Inception Distance)[HRU+17]: Calculating the Ferchet dis-
tance between the distributions of generated images and original images
in the feature space of Inception v3 model.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Performance of Reconstructed Images
39
(a) Original StyleGAN2 model (FFHQ, conﬁguration f)
(b) Our ﬁne-tuned StyleGAN2 model
Figure 5.1: Generated samples from diﬀerent pretrained StyleGAN2 models
==PAGE:52==
40
Experiments and Result Evaluation
• Identity Loss: The loss function we proposed in section 3.2.2 to measure
the cosine distance of two vectors in the feature space of an Arcface feature
extractor network. For the reconstruction case here, two reference images
are the same.
Table 5.1: Reconstruction Quality Assessment
Model
PSNR
MSE (per pixel)
FID
Identity Loss
MorGAN [DBMS+19]
17.34
1.02 × 10−1
63.42
6.05 × 10−1
Old framework with StyleGAN
25.26
6.75 × 10−6
35.88
1.11 × 10−1
In the example in Figure 5.2 (a)-(i), it is obvious that the reconstructed images
using MorGAN is not similar to the original reference images.
This is also
illustrated by Table 5.1. As a reference, the mean identity loss between diﬀerent
subjects in our dataset is 8.96 × 10−1. Hence, most of the reconstructed images
from MorGAN cannot be recognized as their original identities in our open-set
morph generation.
5.3
Performance of Generated Morphing Attack
In this experiment, we benchmark the previous work MorGAN and our methods
with diﬀerent frameworks and conﬁgurations. Because our original motivation
is to the generated morphing attacks to test the vulnerability of FRS, the most
important metrics to evaluate the quality of the morphs and the performance of
the morph generation method is the threat of the generated morphs. To eval-
uate the performance of the generated morphing attacks, we use Fully Mated
Morphed Presentation Match Rate (FMMPMR) [VZR+] and Mated Morph Pre-
sentation Match Rate (MMPMR) [SNR+17] to test the vulnerability that our
morphs caused to a COTS (Commercial-Oﬀ-The-Shelf) FRS.
Let m = 1, . . . , M denotes the m-th morphed image, and n = 1, . . . , Nm repre-
sents the n-th mated subjects (in our case N = 2) of morph m, the MMPMR is
calculated as:
MMPMR = 1
M
M
X
m=1
[
min
n=1,...,Nm Sn
m] > τ,
(5.1)
where Sn
m is the similarity score of verifying morph m to subject n and τ is
the veriﬁcation threshold. In our experiment τ is set to be 0.5 based on the
recommendation of its provider. MMPMR comes from the idea that only the
minimum similarity contributes to the performance when every mated subject
can be successfully veriﬁed. FMMPMR takes considers number of attempts of
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Details of Generated Morphed Images
41
jointly veriﬁcation into consideration, which can better reﬂect the vulnerability
of FRS against morphing attacks. Given p = 1, . . . , P probe images as attempts,
FFMPMR is deﬁned as:
FMMPMR =
1
PM
M
X
m=1
P
X
p=1
(Sp1
m > τ)AND(Sp2
m > τ) . . . AND(Spn
m > τ).
(5.2)
Table 5.2: Vulnerability analysis FMMPMR(%) and MMPMR(%)
Morphing Type
FMMPMR(%)
MMPMR(%)
Landmark-based morph [FFM19]
98.91
100
MorGAN [DBMS+19]
0
0
Old Framework with StyleGAN
41.49
64.68
New Framework with StyleGAN
62
82
New Framework with StyleGAN2
62.89
81.63
New Framework with
Finetuned StyleGAN2
81.59
93.47
As shown in Table 5.2, landmark-based morphs achieve the best result.
As
we estimated, MorGAN cannot threaten the FRS at all due to the limited
image quality and poor generalizability. Compared with MorGAN, the result
of StyleGAN with similar old framework is much better but overall still not
satisfying. As we discussed, this is mainly because lacking of control during the
morphing in latent space. The increased 20% in the analysis of new framework
with StyleGAN shows that our new framework achieved eﬀective improvement.
Though the result new framework with StyleGAN2 shows a similar performance
as StyleGAN, the ﬁne-tune StyleGAN2 achieved a best performance except for
LMA.
5.4
Details of Generated Morphed Images
The new framework controls the morph generation by jointly referencing both
subjects during the optimization. However, this will unavoidably makes it more
sensitive to the diﬀerence in the reference images. Here we show another ex-
ample of the morphed results that our new framework doesn’t work very well
perceptually as Figure 5.3. The problem is caused by the slightly rotated pose
of subject 1.
==PAGE:54==
42
Experiments and Result Evaluation
Figure 5.2: Example of the morph generation results from diﬀerent methods
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Details of Generated Morphed Images
43
Figure 5.3: Another example of the morph generation results from diﬀerent
methods
==PAGE:56==
44
Experiments and Result Evaluation
Figure 5.4: Details of the morph generated by LMA
Figure 5.4 presents the details of landmark-based morph, we can see that the
quality of face attributes are very high due to the alignment based on landmark
points. However, since the number and types of land-mark points are limited,
some areas like the pupil still have an obvious ghost artifact. The other areas
that are not aligned such as ear, jaw, hair, and background have severe artifact
but they are not the main region of interest.
Figure 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8 show the details of morphs generated by the new frame-
work. Compared with Landmark-based morphs, the background artifacts are
much less. Also, most details of the face attributes are ﬁne but the head shape
and jawline is a little bit unnatural due to the condition of the reference. This
problem is released in ﬁne-tuned StyleGAN2 because after the ﬁne-tuning ﬁts
better to generate images in condition as we’ve shown in section 5.1. As for the
morphs generated by StyleGAN and old framework in ﬁgure 5.5, the outlines are
in relatively good quality, however, it doesn’t threaten the FRS. For all of the G
AN-generated morphs, a severe problem is the texture of the skin. During the
optimization, it generates many unnatural low-frequency artifacts to synthesize
the texture. We consider these artifacts as a main drawback of the GAN-based
morph generation in an image quality point of view.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Details of Generated Morphed Images
45
Figure 5.5: Details of the morph generated by StyleGAN and old framework
Figure 5.6: Details of the morph generated by StyleGAN and new framework
==PAGE:58==
46
Experiments and Result Evaluation
Figure 5.7: Details of the morph generated by StyleGAN2 and new framework
Figure 5.8: Details of the morph generated by ﬁne-tuned StyleGAN2 and new
framework
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Future
Works
In this chapter, we give a conclusion about our overall work and also discuss
future research works.
6.1
Discussion and Conclusion
In this work, we proposed a novel method tailored using GAN to generate
high qulaity face morphing images.
Starting from the previous model Mor-
GAN [DSBK18] as the baseline, we summarized a traditional morph generation
framework and tried to apply the state-of-the-art GAN model to enhance the
generated image quality. As a result, the morphs generated by StyleGAN and
old framework achieved a much better quality than MorGAN [DSBK18] but
still less eﬀective than landmark-based morphs when attacking FRS. Based on
our analysis and the experiments, we designed a new framework with joint
optimization and introduced loss functions based on an FRS to control the mor-
phed face image generation, which ﬁts the motivation of morphing attack. As
we expected, the new framework successfully increases the vulnerability to FRS.
Compared with MorGAN, our work achieves a signiﬁcant improvement in the
open-set morph generation. We also tried to ﬁne-tune the StyleGAN2 model
==PAGE:60==
48
Conclusion and Future Works
and made a close-set morph generation. It improved the vulnerability closer to
the traditional landmark-based algorithms which still achieves the best result
in our experiment.
6.2
Future Works
Based on our above result and discussion, a possible work later might be apply-
ing post-enhancement to the generated morphs or rendering the skin texture.
Also, it is reasonable to test with relevant morphing attacks detection techniques
and research on corresponding adversarial attacks to counter the detection.
In our work, we control the morph generation by optimizing jointly and adding
constraints. It is also able to do it by directly modifying the architecture of the
GAN. Designing a conditional StyleGAN based on the condition of landmark
points might be a possible solution.
Meanwhile, we have seen the signiﬁcant improvement between StyleGAN, Style-
GAN2 and the techniques in MorGAN. With the quick development of genera-
tive models, GAN-based morph generation may also beneﬁt from applying the
improved models in the future.
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Derivation of GAN Loss Function
A.1.1
Discriminator Loss
Here, we derive the loss function for the discriminator [GPAM+14].
The discriminator’s goal is to classify the real images as true, D(x) = 1, and the
generated images as fake, D(x) = 0. For this purpose, we use the cross-entropy
function:
(ˆy, y) = [y log(ˆy) + (1 −y) log(1 −ˆy)].
(A.1)
For real data, y = 1 and ˆy = D(x). We replace them in equation A.1:
(D(x), 1) = [1 log(D(x)) + (1 −1) log(1 −D(x))],
(A.2)
(D(x), 1) = log(D(x)).
(A.3)
==PAGE:62==
50
Appendix
The loss function for generated data is labeled as y = 0 and ˆy = D(G(z)):
(D(G(z)), 0) = [0 log(D(G(z))) + (1 −0) log(1 −D(G(z)))],
(A.4)
(D(G(z)), 0) = log(1 −D(G(z))).
(A.5)
The goal of the discriminator is to maximize equations A.3 and A.5. Hence, the
loss for discriminator can be written as:
max
D [log(D(x)) + log(1 −D(G(z)))].
(A.6)
A.1.2
Generator Loss
The objective of the generator is to deceive the discriminator to obtain the
probability D(G(z)) = 1, which means making the discriminator to classify a
fake image as real. Hence, the generator should minimize loss function of the
discriminator, and we can write the generator loss function as follow:
min
G [log(D(x)) + log(1 −D(G(z)))].
(A.7)
The loss function for both the discriminator and generator can be accordingly
combined as follow:
min
G max
D V (G, D) = [log(D(x)) + log(1 −D(G(z)))].
(A.8)
A.1.3
Discriminator Update Rule
Here we derive the update rule for the discriminator:
V (G, D) = Ex Pdata[log D(x)] + Ex PG[1 −log D(x)],
(A.9)
V (G, D) =
Z
x
Pdata(x) log D(x)dx
+
Z
x
PG(x) log(1 −D(x))dx.
(A.10)
==PAGE:63==
A.1 Derivation of GAN Loss Function
51
In order to ﬁnd the optimal D∗for ﬁxed generator, we take the derivative of
the above equation w.r.t. D(x) and set it to zero:
∂
∂D(x)[Pdata(x) log D(x) + PG(x) log(1 −D(x))] = 0,
(A.11)
Pdata(x)
D(x)
−
PG(x)
1 −D(x) = 0,
(A.12)
Pdata(x)
D(x)
=
PG(x)
1 −D(x).
(A.13)
By re-arranging the terms and isolating D(x), we obtain the update rule for the
optimal D∗:
D∗
G(x) =
Pdata(x)
Pdate(x) + PG(x).
(A.14)
A.1.4
Generator Update Rule
Now we ﬁx D∗
G(x) and optimize the generator such that:
G∗= arg min
G
(D∗
G, G),
(A.15)
V (D∗
G, G) = min
G {
Z
x
(Pdata(x) log D∗
G(x)
+ PG(x) log(1 −D∗
G(x)))dx}.
(A.16)
Replace D∗
G(x) with equation A.14:
V (D∗
G, G) = min
G {
Z
x
(Pdata(x) log
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)
+ PG(x) log(1 −
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)))dx}.
(A.17)
==PAGE:64==
52
Appendix
Applying linear algebra and re-arranging the last term in equation A.17:
V (D∗
G, G) = min
G {
Z
x
(Pdata(x) log
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)
+ PG(x) log(
PG(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)))dx}.
(A.18)
Now we add and subtract log 2Pdata(x) and log 2PG(x):
V (D∗
G, G) = min
G {
Z
x
((log 2 −log 2)Pdata(x)
+ Pdata(x) log
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)
+ (log 2 −log 2)PG(x)
+ PG(x) log(
PG(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)))dx}.
(A.19)
Apply linear algebra and split the integral:
G∗= arg min
G
{
Z
x
(−log(2)(Pdata(x) + PG(x)))dx+
Z
x
Pdata(x)(log(2) + log
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x))dx
+
Z
x
PG(x)(log(2) + log
PG(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x))dx}.
(A.20)
The Pdata(x) and PG(x) in equation A.20 are PDFs, hence
R
x Pdata(x) = 1 and
R
x PG(x) = 1.
For second and third terms in equation A.20 we apply the logarithm rule
log(a.b) = log(a) + log(b).
Then we apply linear algebra and re-arrange the terms. For the second term:
log(2) + log
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x) = log(2
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x))
= log(
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x)+PG(x)
2
).
(A.21)
==PAGE:65==
A.1 Derivation of GAN Loss Function
53
Similar to the third term, we get:
log(2)
+
log
PG(x)
Pdata(x) + PG(x)
=
log(
PG(x)
Pdata(x)+PG(x)
2
).
(A.22)
Now we replace A.21 and A.22 in A.20:
G∗= arg min
G
{−log(4)
+
Z
x
Pdata(x) log(
Pdata(x)
Pdata(x)+PG(x)
2
)dx
+
Z
x
PG(x) log(
PG(x)
Pdata(x)+PG(x)
2
)dx},
(A.23)
G∗= arg min
G
(−log(4) + KL(Pdata||Pdata + PG
2
)
+ KL(PG||Pdata + PG
2
)).
(A.24)
By applying Jensen-Shannon divergence, we have:
JSD(P||Q) = 1
2D(P||M) + 1
2D(Q||M).
(A.25)
Writing the update rule in more compact form:
G∗= −2 log(2) + 2JSD(Pdata||PG).
(A.26)
==PAGE:66==
54
Appendix
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[ACB17]
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein
gan. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875, 2017.
[AQW19a]
Rameen
Abdal,
Yipeng
Qin,
and
Peter
Wonka.
Im-
age2stylegan++:
How to edit the embedded images?
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.11544, 2019.
[AQW19b]
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan:
How to embed images into the stylegan latent space? In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 4432–4441, 2019.
[Bis06]
Christopher M Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning.
springer, 2006.
[Cyb89]
George Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal
function. Mathematics of control, signals and systems, 2(4):303–
314, 1989.
[DBMS+19] Naser Damer, Fadi Boutros, Alexa Moseguí Saladié, Florian Kirch-
buchner, and Arjan Kuijper. Realistic dreams: Cascaded enhance-
ment of gan-generated images with an example in face morphing
attacks. 10 2019.
[DBP+16]
Vincent Dumoulin, Ishmael Belghazi, Ben Poole, Olivier Mastropi-
etro, Alex Lamb, Martin Arjovsky, and Aaron Courville. Adver-
sarially learned inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00704, 2016.
==PAGE:68==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[DGXZ19]
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 4690–4699, 2019.
[DKD16]
JeﬀDonahue, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Trevor Darrell. Adversarial
feature learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09782, 2016.
[DLI19]
Dlib c++ library. http://dlib.net/, 2019.
[DS19]
JeﬀDonahue and Karen Simonyan. Large scale adversarial repre-
sentation learning. pages 10541–10551, 2019.
[DSBK18]
Naser Damer, Alexandra Moseguí Saladié, Andreas Braun, and
Arjan Kuijper. Morgan: Recognition vulnerability and attack de-
tectability of face morphing attacks created by generative adver-
sarial network.
In 2018 IEEE 9th International Conference on
Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems (BTAS), pages 1–
10. IEEE, 2018.
[FFM14]
Matteo Ferrara, Annalisa Franco, and Davide Maltoni. The magic
passport. In IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics,
pages 1–7. IEEE, 2014.
[FFM19]
Matteo Ferrara, Annalisa Franco, and Davide Maltoni. Decoupling
texture blending and shape warping in face morphing. In 2019
International Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group
(BIOSIG), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2019.
[GAA+17]
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Du-
moulin, and Aaron C Courville. Improved training of wasserstein
gans. pages 5767–5777, 2017.
[GPAM+14] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu,
David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua
Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[HRU+17]
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard
Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale
update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 6626–6637, 2017.
[HS17]
Boris Hanin and Mark Sellke. Approximating continuous functions
by relu nets of minimal width. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11278,
2017.
[JAFF16]
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses
for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In European con-
ference on computer vision, pages 694–711. Springer, 2016.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[JL11]
Anil K Jain and Stan Z Li. Handbook of face recognition, volume 1.
Springer, 2011.
[KAHK17]
Naveen
Kodali,
Jacob
Abernethy,
James
Hays,
and
Zsolt
Kira.
On convergence and stability of gans.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.07215, 2017.
[KALL17]
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Pro-
gressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and varia-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196, 2017.
[KB14]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[KLA19a]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based genera-
tor architecture for generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pages 4401–4410, 2019.
[KLA+19b]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko
Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
Analyzing and improving the image
quality of stylegan. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04958, 2019.
[KS90]
Michael Kirby and Lawrence Sirovich.
Application of the
karhunen-loeve procedure for the characterization of human faces.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern analysis and Machine intelligence,
12(1):103–108, 1990.
[KSH12]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoﬀrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[LBD+89]
Yann LeCun, Bernhard Boser, John S Denker, Donnie Hender-
son, Richard E Howard, Wayne Hubbard, and Lawrence D Jackel.
Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition.
Neural computation, 1(4):541–551, 1989.
[LH17]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regu-
larization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[LSLW16]
Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Hugo
Larochelle, and Ole Winther. Autoencoding beyond pixels using
a learned similarity metric. Proceedings of the 33rd International
Conference on Machine Learning (icml 2016), 4:2341–2349, 2016.
[@lu19]
@luckycallor.
Insightface-tensorﬂow.
https://github.com/
luckycallor/InsightFace-tensorflow, 2019.
==PAGE:70==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[MBM17]
Amir Mohammadi, Sushil Bhattacharjee, and Sébastien Marcel.
Deeply vulnerable: a study of the robustness of face recognition to
presentation attacks. IET Biometrics, 7(1):15–26, 2017.
[MWHN18] Iacopo Masi, Yue Wu, Tal Hassner, and Prem Natarajan. Deep
face recognition: A survey. In 2018 31st SIBGRAPI conference on
graphics, patterns and images (SIBGRAPI), pages 471–478. IEEE,
2018.
[NND19]
Ayman Zaki Nikolay Nikolaev Dobrev, Haoyu Zhang.
Genera-
tive adversarial networks (gans)- deep fashion. DTU-02456-Deep
Learning, 2019.
[Ope17]
Face morph using opencv.
http://www.learnopencv.com/
face-morph-using-opencv-cpp-python/, 2017. Accessed: 2017-
04-10.
[@pb19]
Peter Baylies @pbaylies. stylegan-encoder. https://github.com/
pbaylies/stylegan-encoder, 2019.
[PFS+05]
P. J. Phillips, P. J. Flynn, T. Scruggs, K. W. Bowyer, Jin Chang,
K. Hoﬀman, J. Marques, Jaesik Min, and W. Worek. Overview
of the face recognition grand challenge. In 2005 IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’05), pages 947–954 vol. 1, June 2005.
[@Pu19]
Dmitry Nikitko @Puzer. stylegan-encoder. https://github.com/
Puzer/stylegan-encoder, 2019.
[RHW86]
David E Rumelhart, Geoﬀrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams.
Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
nature,
323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[RMC15]
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised
representation learning with deep convolutional generative adver-
sarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
[@ro19]
Robert Luxemburg @robertluxemburg. stylegan2-encoder. https:
//github.com/robertluxemburg/stylegan2encoder, 2019.
[RRVB17]
R Raghavendra, KiranB Raja, Sushma Venkatesh, and Christoph
Busch. Face morphing versus face averaging: Vulnerability and
detection. In 2017 IEEE International Joint Conference on Bio-
metrics (IJCB), pages 555–563. IEEE, 2017.
[SMDH13]
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Geoﬀrey Hin-
ton. On the importance of initialization and momentum in deep
learning. In International conference on machine learning, pages
1139–1147, 2013.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[SNR+17]
Ulrich Scherhag, Andreas Nautsch, Christian Rathgeb, Marta
Gomez-Barrero, Raymond NJ Veldhuis, Luuk Spreeuwers, Maikel
Schils, Davide Maltoni, Patrick Grother, Sebastien Marcel, Brei-
thaupt Ralph, Ramachandra Raghavendra, and Christoph Busch.
Biometric systems under morphing attacks: Assessment of morph-
ing techniques and vulnerability reporting. In 2017 International
Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG),
pages 1–7. IEEE, 2017.
[SRM+19]
Ulrich Scherhag, Christian Rathgeb, Johannes Merkle, Ralph Bre-
ithaupt, and Christoph Busch.
Face recognition systems under
morphing attacks: A survey. IEEE Access, 7:23012–23026, 2019.
[SRR+17]
Ulrich Scherhag, R Raghavendra, Kiran B Raja, Marta Gomez-
Barrero, Christian Rathgeb, and Christoph Busch. On the vulner-
ability of face recognition systems towards morphed face attacks.
In 2017 5th International Workshop on Biometrics and Forensics
(IWBF), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
[SZ14]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
Very deep convolu-
tional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[@tk19a]
Tero Karras @tkarras. stylegan. https://github.com/NVlabs/
stylegan, 2019.
[@tk19b]
Tero Karras @tkarras. stylegan2. https://github.com/NVlabs/
stylegan2, 2019.
[TP91]
Matthew Turk and Alex Pentland.
Eigenfaces for recognition.
Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 3(1):71–86, 1991.
[VZR+]
Sushma Venkatesh, Haoyu Zhang, Raghavendra Ramachandra, Ki-
ran Raja, Naser Damer, and Christoph Busch. Can gan gener-
ated morphs threaten face recognition systems equally as landmark
based morphs?
[WGL+18]
Xiang Wei, Boqing Gong, Zixia Liu, Wei Lu, and Liqiang Wang.
Improving the improved training of wasserstein gans: A consis-
tency term and its dual eﬀect. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01541,
2018.
[Wol98]
George Wolberg. Image morphing: a survey. The visual computer,
14(8-9):360–372, 1998.
[WSB03]
Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik.
Multiscale
structural similarity for image quality assessment. In The Thrity-
Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers,
2003, volume 2, pages 1398–1402. Ieee, 2003.
==PAGE:72==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[yL18]
Hung yi Lee. Machine learning and having it deep and structured.
National Taiwan University (NTU), 2018.
[ZIE+18]
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and
Oliver Wang. The unreasonable eﬀectiveness of deep features as
a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 586–595, 2018.
[ZML16]
Junbo Zhao, Michael Mathieu, and Yann LeCun. Energy-based
generative adversarial network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03126,
2016.
[ZZLQ16]
Kaipeng Zhang, Zhanpeng Zhang, Zhifeng Li, and Yu Qiao. Joint
face detection and alignment using multitask cascaded convolu-
tional networks.
IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 23(10):1499–
1503, 2016.
