==PAGE:1==
Characterization of The eps Cluster
From Lactococcus lactis AH1
A Master Thesis by David Faurdal, S144523
==PAGE:2==
Danish title
Karakterisering af eps clusteret fra Lactococcus lactis AH1
English title
Characterization of the eps gene cluster from Lactococcus lactis AH1
Author
David Lokjær Faurdal
Student number
s144523
ECTS points
30
Time period
02/01-2020 to 01/07-2020
Institution
Technical University of Denmark
Department
DTU Bioengineering
Collaborator
Chr. Hansen
Research group
Metabolic Signaling & Regulation
Supervisor
Jan Martinussen
External supervisor
Paula Gaspar
DTU Bioengineering
Søltofts Plads Bygning 221
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Date
Signature
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project was carried out at the Metabolic Signaling and Regulation Group, part of
DTU Bioengineering, in the six months between 02/01/2020 and 01/07/2020. While
some prepatory experiments were performed at DTU, the spread of COVID-19 cut this
work short. In light of this obstacle, the thesis is centered around bioinformatic analysis
and proposals for future experiments.
I would like to thank my supervisor Jan Martinussen for his guidance through these
confusing times. This project would not have been completed in time without his advice,
good mood and humorous Zoom backgrounds. On the same note, I would like to thank
my external supervisor Paula Gaspar for her insightful counsel and feedback.
I would also like to thank my friends and family for their support, both emotional and
technical. In particular, I would like to thank Joen Jensen and Jacob Mejlsted for pro-
viding constructive criticism throughout the project. My family also have my warmest
thanks for letting me use all of their printer ink, drink all of their Pepsi Max and giv-
ing me a space away from home to work. Finally, I would to thank my girlfriend, Lina
Nielsen, for her patience, understanding and support.
Writing this project has been a weird, confusing and at times stressful experience under
the 2020 lockdown, but the people in my life has also made it a meaningful experience of
camaraderie.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The exopolysaccharides produced by Lactococcus lactis are important to the texture of
fermented dairy products and can exhibit beneﬁcial health eﬀects. These polymers are all
synthesized by the same machinery, which provides an opportunity for engineering novel
exopolysaccharides. In this thesis, I review the current knowledge of exopolysaccharide
biosynthesis and its relationship to engineering eﬀorts.
A bioinformatic analysis of the eps cluster found in the texturing strain L. lactis AH1
is also described. The plasmid harboring the eps cluster were found to encode proteins
involved with mobilization and transposition. In the eps cluster several regions of non-
lactococcal origin were identiﬁed using BLASTn comparison. The previously unidentiﬁed
Wzy polymerase of cluster were also identiﬁed using similarity searching and topology
prediction.
Finally, analysis of the relatedness of EpsR and LytR with the proteins
involved with attachment or release of polysaccharides in Streptococcus thermophilus and
Streptococcus pneumoniae were performed using PSI-BLAST. It was found that LytR,
contrary to prior literature, is a homolog of these proteins rather than EpsR.
==PAGE:5==
Dansk Resumé
Lactococcus lactis producerer exopolysakkarider, der giver syrnerede mælkeprodukter
deres karakteristiske tekstur og kan have sundhesfremmende eﬀekter. Disse polymerer
syntetiseres alle via det samme maskineri, som dermed præsenterer en oplagt mulighed
for at designe nye exopolysakkarider. I dette masterprojekt giver jeg et overblik over
den nuværende viden om exopolysakkariders biosyntese, og hvordan det kan informerer
genteknologiske strategier.
Bioinformatisk analyse af eps clusteret fra den teksturgivende stamme L. lactis AH1 er
også beskrevet. Det er indkodet på et plasmid, der også indeholder proteiner involveret i
horisontal genoverførsel. Flere regioner i eps clusteret, der ikke oprinder fra L. lactis blev
identiﬁceret, via BLASTN. Derudover, blev den hidtil uidentiﬁcerede Wzy-polymerase
i eps clusteret identiﬁceret vha. similarity-searching og toplogi forudsigelse. Endeligt
blev EpsR og LytRs slægtskab til de proteiner der frigiver eller fastgører polysakkarider i
Streptococcus thermophilus og Streptococcus pneumoniae undersøgt. Her blev det fundet,
at LytR er homologt til disse protein fremfor EpsR.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Promise Of Synthetic Exopolysaccharides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The Aim of This Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Exopolysaccharide Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Biosynthesis of Exopolysaccharides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
The Organization Of An eps Cluster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
The Wzx/Wzy-dependent Pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Engineering Of The Wzx/Wzy-dependent Pathway
. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Tailor-Made Polymers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Increasing Yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Materials and Methods
14
3.1
Bioinformatic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results
15
4.1
Plasmid pAH3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
The eps cluster of L. lactis AH1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:7==
4.3
Conservation of the AH1 EPS Cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
EpsR and LytR in Attachment and Release
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Discussion
22
5.1
Useful Features of pAH3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
EpsR and LytR In Cell-Wall Attachment and Release . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
EpsR and LytR in Transcriptional Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
The Evolution Of The AH1 eps Cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Future Studies
25
6.1
The Polysaccharide Machinery in L. lactis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1.1
Essential Parts Of The Machinery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1.2
Regulation Of The EPS Cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.3
Substrate Preference In the Machinery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
The structure of AH1 EPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Conclusion
27
8
Appendix A - A primer on polysaccharide structure
36
9
Appendix B - Supporting Information For Bioinformatics
38
==PAGE:8==
1
|
Introduction
Lactococcus lactis is a homofermentative lactic acid bacterium (LAB), which is used in
a variety of ﬁelds. For centuries is has been used in the fermentation of dairy products,
such as buttermilk, cheese, and sour cream [1]. It provides these products with both taste
and texture, while also increasing their shelf-life through its lactic acid production [1].
More recently, it has gained traction as a delivery vehicle for therapeutic proteins [2] and
as a probiotic [3]. Given the probiotic nature of L. lactis, it is reasonable to suspect that
it can act as a reservoir of bioactive compounds yet to be discovered.
A link between the texturing properties of L. lactis and its health-beneﬁts can be found
in its polysaccharide production. The exopolysaccharides (EPSs) it produces – that is,
polysaccharides that are secreted from the cell – play a large role in its ability to provide
texture [4], but also display a range of useful bioactivities, such as anti-inﬂammatory [5],
antioxidant [6], antimicrobial [7], and immunomodulatory eﬀects [8].
At large, EPSs are used for the way they change the ﬂow and consistency of a material,
known as their rheological properties [9]. They can act as thickeners, stabilizers, emul-
siﬁers, gelling agents, and water-binding agents, which have uses from cosmetics to oil
drilling [10]. Despite such diverse applications, only a few bacterial EPSs are currently
used industrially and Donot et al. have argued they represent an untapped market [11].
The texture of products is particularly important in food production, where it is key to
consumer preference [12, 13]. As LAB are already used for the fermentation of dairy
products, utilizing EPS-producing strains can lead to both improved texture [12] and
a cleaner label, another customer preference [12, 14]. By combining the texturing and
health-promoting eﬀects of EPS, diﬀerent functional foods can be created [12, 14, 15].
Altogether these biopolymers are interesting for their industrial applications, particularly
in food production, and for their versatile and beneﬁcial bioactivities.
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1
The Promise Of Synthetic Exopolysaccharides
As we shall see later, most lactococcal EPS are synthesized through the Wzx/Wzy-
dependent pathway and encoded in distinct eps gene clusters [14].
In this pathway,
a repeating unit is constructed by glycosyltransferases and then polymerized into a poly-
mer. By changing the composition of the repeating unit, the nature of the polymer can
be changed. It has been proposed that novel EPSs can be produced by crafting syn-
thetic eps clusters using strategies like the combinatorial approaches used in secondary
metabolite engineering [14, 16]. This idea, the engineering of EPS biosynthesis, provides
a conceptual framework, which this thesis can be viewed through. As such, a summary
of prior eﬀorts and potential avenues towards this goal is included in the thesis.
1.2
The Aim of This Project
Prior to this project, the texturing strain L. lactis susp. cremoris AH1 was isolated from
viili and sequenced. It harbors a plasmid-carried eps cluster with a novel organization
and genes seemingly derived from Streptococcus thermophilus [17]. Prior work at the
Metabolic Signaling and Regulation (MetSig) Group have dealt with the transcriptional
regulation of the cluster and its relationship to acidity. The original intent for this thesis
was to investigate the structure of the EPS produced by L. lactis AH1 and establish the
eps cluster in L. lactis MG1363s to provide a foundation for later engineering eﬀorts.
With the spread of COVID-19 and the ensuing lockdown it became clear that these ex-
perimental goals were not attainable. Instead, a bioinformatic approach to characterizing
the eps cluster and the plasmid carrying it was adopted. Speciﬁcally, identiﬁcation of the
unknown wzy gene and reannotation of the cluster to current nomenclature was performed
by similarity searching and topology prediction. The relatedness of this cluster to those
found in other LAB will also be examined to consider the evolutionary history of the clus-
ter. Finally, the proteins potentially involved in attachment will be compared to those
found in other LAB to determine their potential function in the Wzx/Wzy-dependent
pathway.
2
==PAGE:10==
2
|
Theory
Polysaccharides are ubiquitous in nature and participate in many important biological
functions. In bacteria, they can store energy [18], provide structure to the cell-wall [19],
help form bioﬁlm [20], and mediate interaction with hosts and other microbes [21]. The
bacterial polysaccharides are classiﬁed by their relative position to the cell, as either in-
tracellular polysaccharides, cell-wall polysaccharides or exocellular polysaccharides [9]. In
Gram-Positive bacteria, the exocellular polysaccharides are then divided by their degree
of attachment to the cell; A capsular polysaccharide (CPS) is covalently bound to the
cell-wall, while an EPS is secreted by the cell into its environment [9].
2.1
Exopolysaccharide Structure
The exocellular polysaccharides are synthesized through only a few biosynthetic path-
ways and are often composed of a small number of monosaccharides. Nonetheless, they
display a huge structural and functional diversity [22, 14], which is made possible by the
biochemistry of carbohydrates and the pathways that synthesized them. In Appendix A,
a short primer on the biochemistry of polysaccharide structure is provided.
A given exocellular polysaccharide is organized as a long chain of repeating units (RUs),
which can range in size from a single monosaccharide to a oligosaccharide of multiple
diﬀerent sugars. The EPSs produced by L. lactis are hetereopolysaccharides synthesized
through the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway, where the RU is an oligosaccharide made from
diﬀerent sugars [14]. A single polygalactan - a homopolysaccharide - have been identiﬁed
in L. lactis, but this also seems to be the product of the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway,
which is usually reserved for the biosynthesis of hetereopolysaccharides [12].
Only a handful of lactococcal EPSs have had their structures elucidated, but some pat-
terns seems to emerge. The RU range in size from 5 to 7 sugar residues and is usually
a branched structure composed of galactose, glucose, and rhamnose as exempliﬁed in
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1. Structures featuring the more exotic sugars fucose and levan have recently
been reported [7, 23]. The RU can also be decorate with other functional groups, such
as acetates and phosphates, which can impact the physiological function and texturing
properties of the EPS [24, 25].
Figure 2.1: Repeating units found in various lactococcal exopolysaccharides shown in
SNFG format. All structures were identiﬁed in the Exopolysaccharide Properties and
Structures Database [26].
As only a few lactococcal EPSs have had their structure reported, exceptions to the
trends outlined above are bound to occur, but we may look to the other LAB for hints
to such structures. A larger interval of RU sizes can be expected, as it ranges from 3 to
10 in Lactobacillus and 4 to 8 in Streptococcus currently, while the composition of mainly
glucose, galactose, and rhamnose is likely to stand, as only a few structures featuring
other sugars have been reported [14].
The molecular mass of EPS produced by LAB range from 8 ∗103 to 5 ∗106 Da. This can
be used to understand the degree of polymerization in an EPS, for instance the molecular
mass of the L. lactis SBT 0495 EPS is 2.5 ∗105 Da [27], which represents 256 RUs of 975
Da joined together. Both the composition of the RU and the molecular mass is known
to impact the rheological properties an EPS [14, 22].
2.2
The Biosynthesis of Exopolysaccharides
In L. lactis, EPSs are synthesized through the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. Preceding
this dedicated assembly, the precursors for polysaccharides – nucleotide sugars - must ﬁrst
be derived from the central carbon metabolism [28, 16]. This can be thought of as an
4
==PAGE:12==
initial and uncommitted step in the process, as the nucleotide sugars may be utilized for
other purposes [28, 29]. The dedicated assembly starts at the membrane, where a RU is
assembled by glycosyltransferases (GTs) before being transported across the membrane
for polymerization on the outside. The genes needed for each step of this process are
co-localized into eps clusters with a particular organization, which is described in section
2.2.1.
In contrast to the nucleotide metabolism, which is well described in L. lactis and other
LAB [30, 28, 22], the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway has gone largely unexplored at the
functional level. As such, parts of the process are inferred from more well studied systems.
A current model of Wzx/Wzy-dependent biosynthesis in L. lactis is presented in section
2.2.2.
2.2.1
The Organization Of An eps Cluster
The genes encoding the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway are arranged into distinct eps clus-
ters that are often transcribed as a single mRNA [31, 32]. It is usually located on the
chromosome in L. lactis susp. lactis, while it is found on plasmids in L. lactis susp.
cremoris [4]. The eps cluster found in LAB resemble each other with a highly conserved
part responsible for modulation and initialization of the pathway, while a variable part
is responsible for RU assembly, transport, and polymerization [14]. Despite this resem-
blance, the order and number of genes vary between clusters, which have yielded an
unhelpful naming convention, where genes encoding similar functions are named diﬀer-
ently between species and strains. To alleviate this confusion all gene names used follow
the nomenclature proposed by Zeidan et al. [14] and an example of conversion from the
old nomenclature is indicated in Figure 2.2.
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: The eps cluster of L. lactis NIZO B40. The highly conserved region found in L.
lactis eps clusters are highlighted for reference. The nomenclature used by Zeidan et al. [14] is
indicated in blue over the coding sequences, while the old nomenclature prevalent in L. lactis
literature is indicated below in red. The coding sequences are colored according to their putative
function as indicated in the ﬁgure.
As illustrated in Figure 2.2, six conserved genes, epsR-epsE are found in the 5’-end of a
lactococcal eps cluster, while two conserved genes, epsL and lytR are found at the 3’-end.
Most of these genes are conserved in all LAB, but the conservation of two clusters, rather
than one, is unique to Lactococcus [14]. In fact the genes epsX, epsL and lytR are unique
to the genus and as a consequence, neither epsX nor epsL currently have any putative
functions.
Both epsR and lytR encode putative transcriptional regulators, which have also been
linked to the release of EPS from the cell [4, 14, 33, 34]. epsCDB encodes a phosphoregu-
latory module made up of a tyrosine-kinase (epsC and epsD) and a phosphatase (epsB),
which controls the production of EPS through the pathway [35]. Finally, the priming
GT, which initiates RU synthesis, is encoded by epsE [36].
In between the two conserved regions a variable region is found, where GTs and decorative
enzymes involved in RU-assembly is located together with the genes for RU transport
(wzx) and polymerization (wzy). Together, epsR epsE, wzx, wzy, and lytR forms the
polysaccharide assembly machinery, which is thought to mediate each essential step of
the pathway. While the organization of an eps cluster seem attractive from an engineering
standpoint at ﬁrst glance, the lack of conservation in wzx and wzy seem troubling. In fact,
this lack of conservation have been taken as evidence of a substrate preference towards
6
==PAGE:14==
their cognate RU [37, 38], which may pose problems for plug-and-play-like approaches.
The eps Cluster of L. lactis AH1
The focus of this thesis, the eps cluster of L. lactis susp. cremoris AH1, is located on the
49 kb plasmid, pAH3, which encodes several proteins involved in mobilization, replication,
and transposition (see results). At 24 kb, the eps cluster is among the largest identiﬁed
in L. lactis and features a novel gene organization. The conserved 5’- and 3’-ends are
still found in the cluster but are located at the 5’-end with only two genes separating
them. A large variable region encoded in the opposite direction of the conserved genes
can be found at the 3’-end.
As shown in Figure 2.3 they are interrupted by several
transposases with proteins that seem to originate from Lactobacillus and Streptococcus
[17]. Together with the mobile nature of pAH3 and the many transposases, this points
towards a complex origin through diﬀerent species. A few eps clusters characterized by
horizontal gene transfer events between LAB have previously been observed in both S.
thermophilus [39] and L. lactis [40, 4]. As such, the relationship of the AH1 L. lactis
cluster to those in other LAB and L. lactis were examined.
Figure 2.3: The eps cluster of L. lactis AH1. Each gene is colored according to the origin
of the best hit found by BLASTp as indicated in the ﬁgure. Transposases found in the
cluster are colored black and have not been assigned an origin.
Prior to this thesis, the genes were annotated using the old and inconsistent nomenclature
used in L. lactis, as shown in Fig 2.3 and the gene encoding the Wzy polymerase were not
identiﬁed. As such part of this thesis is the reannotation of the cluster and identiﬁcation
of the Wzy polymerase.
7
==PAGE:15==
2.2.2
The Wzx/Wzy-dependent Pathway
The biosynthesis of an EPS via the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway is performed at the
membrane as illustrated in Figure 2.4. At the cytoplasmic face, the RU is assembled on
a lipid-linked carrier, undecaprenyl phosphate (undP). First the priming GTs transfer an
initial sugar residue to undP, and the RU is then assembled by sequential glycosylation
of this initial sugar [36]. Upon completion, the Wzx ﬂipase transports the RU across
the membrane, where the Wzy polymerase adds it to the growing EPS [14]. Finally,
the polymer can be released as an EPS or attach to the cell wall as a CPS. This entire
process is governed by the phosphoregulatory system, which regulates the amount and
potentially the length of the polymer produced [14].
Figure 2.4: EPS biosynthesis through the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway in L. lactis.
EpsE, the priming GT, transfers a phosphosugar to undecaprenyl phoshpate and sub-
sequent glycosylation of this complex then leads to the formation of a repeating unit.
The repeating unit is then transported across the membrane by Wzx and added to the
reducing end of the polymer by Wzy. As the polymer is completed, EpsR may either
attach it to the cell-wall or release from the cell. The entire process is modulated by au-
tophosphorylation of the EpsC:EpsD complex and its dephosphorylation by EpsB. The
model is adapted from Zeidan et al. [14].
8
==PAGE:16==
Repeating Unit Assembly
Assembly of a RU is initiated by the Priming GT, EpsE, a membrane-linked phospho-
glycosyltransferase (PGT), which links a phosphosugar to undP [36]. Bacterial PGTs are
currently classiﬁed into two superfamilies, which can be subdivided into ﬁve diﬀerent sub-
families by sequence and membrane topology [41]. Members of the WecA-superfamily and
the WbaP-superfamily have both been found in LAB eps clusters, but only those from
the WbaP-superfamily have been found in L. lactis [4, 14]. This family usually exhibits
5 transmembrane segments (TMSs), but are known to function without the ﬁrst 4 [41].
This is the case for those in L. lactis (see Uniprot:A0A2R4AKN7 as an example) making
it similar to the PglC-subfamily. The WbaP-family transfers hexose-1-phosphates, while
the WecA-family transfers hexosamine-1-phosphates [41]. In both families the bacterial
sugar transferase domain (PF02397) is conserved, which provides a useful method for
identiﬁcation of priming GTs [14].
After priming, the GTs encoded in the cluster sequentially glycosylate the undP-P-sugar
complex. All GTs use sugar phosphates as donors, but those found in eps clusters specif-
ically use nucleotide sugars, which makes them Leloir GTs. These GTs are found in two
distinct folds, the GT-A fold or the GT-B fold [42]. Both of these folds feature sepa-
rate donor and acceptor sites, which have proven useful for rational engineering of their
speciﬁcity [43]. When a sugar is transferred, a retaining or inverting mechanism can be
used, which either maintains or inverts the conﬁguration of the anomeric carbon [43].
Currently, GTs can be classiﬁed into 94 diﬀerent families based on sequence similarity
and both fold and mechanism of transfer is maintained within a family [43, 44]. Unfortu-
nately, many families are currently polyspeciﬁc and cases of GTs being promiscuous are
common [45], which obscures in silico prediction of polysaccharide structure.
Transport and Polymerization
The RU is transported across the membrane by the Wzx ﬂipase for its eventual polymer-
ization. The ﬂipase is part of the polysaccharide transporter (PST) family, which consists
of integral membrane proteins, which feature many TMSs with 12 being the mean [38].
The mechanism of transport is currently unclear, but it has been proposed to function
as a H+-antiporter, as it is part of the multidrug-oligosaccharide lipid-polysaccharide ex-
porter (MOP) superfamily [38]. After transport across the membrane, the RU is added
to the reducing end of a growing polysaccharide by the Wzy polymerase. Like Wzx, Wzy
is an integral membrane protein with 10-14 putative TMSs [37].
9
==PAGE:17==
The substrate preference of Wzx and Wzy is important to our understanding of EPS
biosynthesis and to inform engineering eﬀorts.
Unfortunately, neither Wzx nor Wzy
have been experimentally characterized in LAB. Instead, most experimental evidence
regarding their function comes from Gram-negative bacteria, where they mediate O-
antigen assembly [46].
As previously noted, wzx and wzy are not conserved between clusters and this is also
true for O-antigen clusters [37]. In fact, they often represent the most diverse parts of
the genome in a given species [37]. This has been hypothesized as a necessity for Wzx
function, where the large structural diversity of RUs requires an equal variety in Wzx,
for it to accommodate its native RU [37, 47]. Several studies in Escherichia coli and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa have shown that Wzx ﬂipases prefer their native RU, but that
overexpression can mask this substrate preference [47, 48]. Furthermore, speciﬁc terminal
sugar residues on the RU seem to be important for a given Wzx, such that changes to
other residues does not seem to aﬀect translocation eﬃciency [47, 48]. Recently, this
has led to the proposal of the Structure-Speciﬁc Triggering model [48]. In this model a
RU is passed into the central cavity of the Wzx-protein, where interaction with certain
sugar residues on the RU will then lead to translocation. In this manner, incomplete or
non-cognate RUs will rarely be translocated. That is, unless the cell does not produce
the ﬁnished cognate RU, in which case the other RUs will occasionally induce ﬂipping
using other sugar residues than those preferred by the Wzx.
The substrate preference of the Wzy polymerase has not been studied to nearly the same
degree as Wzx. Recently, a Wzy-polymerase which is non-permissive to changes in the
initial sugar of the RU was described in E. coli [49]. Similarly, 3 Wzy-polymerases, which
discriminates two otherwise identical RUs by their use of an internal alpha or beta bond,
were described in Salmonella enterica [50]. This shows that Wzy-polymerases can exhibit
quite complex substrate preferences.
In summary, both Wzx and Wzy can exhibit complex substrate preference, but Wzx is
known to translocate many non-cognate RUs at a low eﬃciency. Whether this is true for
the Wzy polymerase remains to be shown.
Modulation Of The Pathway
The biosynthesis of EPS is regulated by the phosphoregulatory system encoded by ep-
sCDB. EpsC is a transmembrane activation protein, which interacts with EpsD in the
cytoplasm. Here the two proteins act together as an autophosphorylating tyrosine kinase
10
==PAGE:18==
[14]. The phosphorylation of EpsD, which carries the tyrosine kinase domain, is believed
to control EPS biosynthesis. EpsB, a tyrosine phosphatase, then acts to dephosphorylate
EpsD.
In S. thermophilus, phosphorylation of a conserved tyrosine residue in EpsE by EpsD
was shown to activate priming activity [51]. Similar results were recently found in an
unpublished master thesis for L. lactis [52] JFR1. In L. lactis Nizo B40, the unphospho-
rylated form of EpsD drives EPS biosynthesis [35] and it is tempting to propose that this
is achieved mainly by controlling the priming activity of EpsE.
The length of the polymer produced through the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway is also
believed to be regulated by the phosphoregulatory system [14]. A conserved chain-length
regulation domain, which is derived from ExoP-proteins, are found in EpsC [33]. Simi-
larly, deletion of their homologs cpsC and cpsD in Streptococcus pneumoniae and Strep-
tococcus agalactiae results in the production of short polymers instead of the long chains
usually observed [53, 54]. In contrast, deletion of either gene simply abolishes EPS biosyn-
thesis in L. lactis Nizo B40 [35]. Additionally, exchanging epsCDBE with their homologs
from Lb. delbrueckii rr, did not change the length of the EPS produce, but did reduce
the titer [35]. As Lactobacillus delbrueckii rr produces a polymer of a diﬀerent length
it seems L. lactis does not regulate its polymer length through the phosphoregulatory
system.
Attachment, Release and Transcriptional Regulation
The critical step that determines whether a polymer becomes a CPS or an EPS is at-
tachment or release to/from the cell-wall.
In S. thermophilus and S. agalactiae this
attachment is performed by EpsA and CpsA, respectively [54, 14]. Both are members of
the lytR-cpsA-psr (LCP) family of proteins, which are broadly involved with the attach-
ment of polysaccharides to the cell wall [55]. In L. lactis, EpsR is considered the homolog
of EpsA and CpsA and have therefore been proposed to perform the same action [33,
14]. It is worth noting that EpsR is not a LCP-protein, but instead consists of a single
helix-turn-helix motif. In the 5’-end of the cluster the LCP-protein LytR can be found
and with the general role of LCP-proteins with the attachment to the cell-wall it may
facilitate the release or attachment of the polymer.
Both EpsR and LytR have also been proposed to function in transcriptional regulation
of the eps cluster. EpsR contains a helix-turn-helix motif and preliminary evidence in
the Metabolic Signalling and Regulation Group have indicated a function as a repressor
11
==PAGE:19==
[34]. LytR resembles the LytR-protein found in Bacillus subtilis, which was believed to
be involved with transcriptional regulation of lytRABC operon [33]. This protein has
since been reclassiﬁed as a glycopolymer transferase as part of the LCP-family [56].
2.3
Engineering Of The Wzx/Wzy-dependent Pathway
The Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway can produce polysaccharides with diverse structures
and functional properties. Given the modular-like organization of the eps clusters, the
potential for generating novel EPSs have previously been noted [16, 57, 14]. Additionally,
the hetereopolysaccharides produced through the pathway are often produced in quanti-
ties too small for industrial puriﬁcation [22]. As such, two major reasons for engineering
can be identiﬁed: 1) Engineering to change structure or 2) Engineering to increase yield.
Below a short overview of current approaches takes in L. lactis and other organisms are
presented. It is important to note that these engineering eﬀorts might be performed in a
better characterized B. subtilis, which have more tools for genetic engineering avaiable.
2.3.1
Tailor-Made Polymers
In L. lactis Nizo B40 and L. lactis B891 glucose limitation leads to the production of EPS
with a reduced molecular mass, without altering the sugar composition of the polymer
[58]. Controlling the production conditions thereby provide a relatively simple way of
controlling the degree of polymerization. Expression of the S. thermophilus Sﬁ6 in L.
lactis MG1363 lead to the production of an EPS with an altered composition which
was hypothesized to be caused by diﬀerences in available nucleotide sugars found in the
cells [59]. Manipulating the pool of nucleotide sugars thus provides a way of changing
the sugar composition of an EPS. However, as the speciﬁcity of most GTs are not well
characterized it does not provide a predictable way of changing the sugar composition.
In Xanthomonas campestris knock-out in the decorative enzymes acetylase and pyruvate
transferase resulted with various degrees of acetate and pyruvate [60]. So, changes in
decorative enzymes also provide a simple means of changing the RU composition, which
is particularly true for clusters. This is also true for the inactivation of GTs as exempliﬁed
by work in Acetobacter xylinum, where the inactivation of the GT gene aceP2 lead to a
RU with a composition lacking the sugar transferred by AceP2 [61].
Currently, synthetic eps gene clusters have not been attempted to the best of my knowl-
12
==PAGE:20==
edge. As presented earlier, the substrate speciﬁcity of Wzx and Wzy may present road-
blocks to such engineering and clarifying this preference and their precise function is thus
important.
2.3.2
Increasing Yield
A simple approach to increasing the yield is simply increasing the expression of the eps
cluster. In L. lactis NIZO B40 increasing the copy-number of the cluster 9-fold lead to a
3-fold increase in EPS biosynthesis [62]. This also indicates that the nucleotide sugar pool
is not the limiting factor in L. lactis. It may come as no surprise then that increasing the
intracellular UDP-glucose and UDP-galactose concentrations did not lead to increased
EPS biosynthesis in L. lactis NIZO B40 [63], when grown on glucose. However, growth
of L. lactis NIZO B40 on fructose exhibited decreased EPS biosynthesis and nucleotide
sugar levels [29]. Overexpression of the fbp, a fructosebisphosphatase (FBPase), which
converts fructose-1,6-diphosphate to fructose-6-phosphate, increased EPS biosynthesis to
the levels observed for growth on glucose [63]. The conversion catalyzed by FBPase is an
essential step in the synthesis of nucleotide sugars from fructose. Thus, the nucleotide
sugar pool can certainly be a limiting factor for EPS biosynthesis. Moreover, we can
apply the underlying strategy used by Boels et al. [63] to increase EPS yield. This was
done by analyzing the activity of enzymes involved with precursor-formation and then
overexpress those with the lowest activity. This idea may also be extended to the genes
found in the eps clusters, especially the GTs.
In summary, various approaches of increasing either gene expression or the concentrations
of the nucleotide sugar pool can work to increase expression. Whether gene expression,
the nucleotide sugar pool or other available substrates is the limiting factor in EPS
biosynthesis is likely dependent on the speciﬁc strain.
13
==PAGE:21==
3
|
Materials and Methods
3.1
Bioinformatic Analysis
Prodigal 2.6 [64] were used to predict the placement of genes on pAH3 utilizing the normal
mode and pAH3 as input. The in silico translation of genes provided by Prodigal were
used for similarity searching and topology prediction. All methods were performed using
default parameters unless otherwise stated.
Homologous genes and proteins were identiﬁed by searching the NCBI non-redundant
nucleotide/protein (NR) databases using BLASTn and BLASTp [65]. An E-value cut-oﬀ
of 1 were used, while all other parameters were left to default. PSI-BLAST [65] were
used to generate a position-speciﬁc-scoring matrix (PSSM) from the NR-database, when
investigating distantly related genes. The 3rd iteration of the PSSM were then used to
search the NR-database ﬁltered to the species of interest.
Conserved domains within the predicted protein were identiﬁed using HMMER 3.3 [66] to
search the pfam database. The family of all putative glycosyltransferases were assigned
using the DBcan2 [67] server as previously described [68]. The membrane topology of
proteins were investigated by TMHMM 2.0 [69] and the presence of signal peptides were
predicted using SignalP 3.0 [70].
OriTﬁnder were used to search pAH3 for an origin of transfer [71].
14
==PAGE:22==
4
|
Results
4.1
Plasmid pAH3
The 49 kb plasmid pAH3 has a CG-content of 33% and is predicted to encode 49 diﬀerent
proteins. The function of each gene was assigned by BLASTp (See Appendix B). As illus-
trated in ﬁgure 4.1, 22 genes encode exopolysaccharide biosynthesis proteins, 11 encode
transposes, 7 encode replication and mobilization proteins, 3 encode other functions such
as ATPases and the ﬁnal 6 are hypothetical proteins. The eps cluster is described further
in section 4.2.
The replication and partitioning proteins, repA and parA, are both identical to those
found in pCI2000, which is part of the pLS32-family of replicons that replicate by theta
replication [72, 73]. Despite encoding the mobilization proteins, mobC and mobD, no
origin of transfer was identiﬁed by OriTﬁnder. The many transposases found in pAH3
are all part of or similar to the IS3- and IS6-families, which are found in a wide variety
of genera [74].
Two resistance factors were encoded on the plasmid, namely a VanZ-like protein, which
is likely to be associated with glycopeptide resistance [75], such as teicoplanin, and a
Cu-translocation P-type ATPase, which may provide resistance to copper [76].
Finally, a LysM-domain protein were identiﬁed. The LysM-domain is used to bind pep-
tidoglycan and other polysaccharides [77], which could point towards an interaction with
the EPS produced by L. lactis AH1.
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: Plasmid Map of pAH3: Genes are colored according to predicted function as either: Blue, Exopolysaccharide protein;
Tacao, replication or mobilization protein; Grey, transposase; green, various proteins; black, hypothetical protein.
16
==PAGE:24==
4.2
The eps cluster of L. lactis AH1
The 24 kb eps cluster of L. lactis should consist of the commonly conserved genes and
at least a single Wzx ﬂipase and Wzy polymerase. The conserved L. lactis genes were
easily identiﬁed by BLASTp as shown in table R1. However, no hits clearly annotated as
a Wzy polymerase were found.
Table R1: Hits used to identify the conserved region of the AH1 eps cluster.
Protein
Accession
Description
Query Coverage
Identity
E-Value
EpsR
WP_003131262
helix-turn-helix transcriptional regulator
100%
100%
1.56e-70
EpsX
AZY91851.1
EpsX [Lactococcus lactis]
100%
98%
0
EpsC
AAX19700
EpsA [Lactococcus lactis]
100%
97%
5.09e-179
EpsB
WP_081144434
tyrosine autokinase
100%
100%
8.38e-166
EpsD
WP_039114425
tyrosine protein phosphatase
100%
99%
0
EpsE
WP_021216448
sugar transferase [Lactococcus lactis]
100%
98%
7.98e-162
EpsL
AAX19712
EpsL [Lactococcus lactis]
99%
90%
0
LytR
AVR65321
LytR family transcriptional regulator
100%
99%
0
To identify the Wzx ﬂippase and the Wzy polymerase, the topology of the EPS biosynthesis
proteins were investigated. Only two proteins with several putative transmembrane segments
(TMSs) were identiﬁed and are shown in Figure 4.2. Wzx have 11 putative TMSs and feature two
polysaccharide biosynthesis domains (PF13440 and pf14667), all belonging to the MATE-like
superfamily (CL0222).
This is consistent with the MATE-proteins being part of the MOP-
superfamily. Wzy have 9 putative TMS and is part of the EpsG-family (PF14897), which is
derived from the Wzy-polymerase identiﬁed in Bacillus subtilis (Uniprot: P71056).
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.2: Putative transmembrane segments and predicted pfam-families in Wzx and
Wzy. A) The transmembrane proﬁle of Wzx. B) The transmembrane proﬁle of Wzy. C)
The predicted Pfam-families of Wzx. D) The predicted Pfam-families of Wzy
The families of the GTs encoded in the AH1 eps cluster were identiﬁed using the DBcan 2 server
and is provided in Table R2. Additionally, EpsF and EpsS, which were not assigned a GT-family
by DBcan 2, were identiﬁed as GTs by BLASTp. Finally, EpsK were identiﬁed as a decorative
enzyme, a pyruvyltransferase from the pfam-domain (PF04230). As such, the EPS produced by
AH1 might contain pyruvonic acid.
Table R2: GT-family membership by DBcan server.
Protein
GT family
Region
Fold
Mechanism
EpsG
GT4
56-167
GT-B
Retaining
EpsH
GT4
218-383
GT-B
Retaining
EpsI
GT2
8-109
GT-A
Inverting
EpsJ
GT2
5-158
GT-A
Inverting
EpsM
GT14
140-325
GT-A
Inverting
EpsN
GT14
10-195
GT-A
Inverting
EpsP
GT2
8-136
GT-A
Inverting
EpsQ
GT4
207-346
GT-B
Retaining
18
==PAGE:26==
The ﬁnal annotation of the AH1 eps cluster is depicted in Figure 4.3 and is provided as part of
pAH3 in GenBank-format in Appendix B.
Figure 4.3: The eps cluster of L. lactis susp.
cremoris AH1: All genes are colored
according to their putative function and named in accordance with nomenclature pro-
posed by Zeidan et al. [14]. Green: Assembly of the EPS. Yellow: Modulation of EPS-
production. Tacao: Glycosyltransferase. Grey: Unknown function. White: Decorative
enzyme. Black: Transposase
4.3
Conservation of the AH1 EPS Cluster
The relatedness of the L. lactis eps cluster to those found in other LAB were investigated by
BLASTn. Inspecting the distribution of hits, four regions with seemingly diﬀerent origin can be
identiﬁed, as shown in Figure 4.4. An initial region of about 9000 bases of lactococcal origin can
be found. Then a region containing wzx and epsH, which seem to stem from Lactobacillus reuteri
ZL003. Around position 13500 a region, containing a single GT, is found, which are ambiguous
in origin. Finally, a long segment containing wzy and several GTs can be found, which is found in
many diﬀerent strains of S. thermophilus. The majority of the variable region can be accounted
for using the best non-identical hits from Lb. reuteri ZLR003 and S. thermophilus CS8 (a ﬁgure
illustrating this is provided in Appendix B).
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.4: The distribution of signiﬁcant hits across the length of the AH1 eps cluster.
Only alignments with a bit score above 200 are depicted.
Each alignment is colored
according to genus, as either red: Lactococcus, blue: Streptococcus or black: Lactobacillus.
.
20
==PAGE:28==
4.4
EpsR and LytR in Attachment and Release
In S. thermophilus and S. pneumoniae the LCP proteins CpsA or EpsA is responsible for at-
tachment or release of the CPS/EPS produced. This role has been proposed for either EpsR
and LytR in L. lactis and their relationship to these proteins were thus examined.
A simple BLASTp-search in the NR-database identiﬁed no hits annotated as EpsA. To search
for EpsA as a distant homolog of either protein PSI-BLAST was employed. A PSSM was build
from the NR-database for each protein and used to search the S. thermophilus proteins in the
NR-database. 16 signiﬁcant hits annotated as EpsA were identiﬁed for LytR, while none were
identiﬁed for EpsR. Using the same PSSM to search the S. pneumoniae proteins in the NR-
database, 105 hits annotated as CpsA were identiﬁed for LytR, while none were identiﬁed for
EpsR. This indicates that LytR, rather than EpsR, is a homolog for EpsA and CpsA.
Like CpsA and EpsA, LytR is a transmembrane protein with the LCP domain placed on the
outside of the membrane, while EpsR display no putative TMSs as shown in Figure 4.4. No
signal peptide were predicted in either protein.
Figure 4.5: Putative transmembrane helices and predicted pfam-families in EpsR and
LytR. A) The transmembrane proﬁle of EpsR. B) The transmembrane proﬁle of LytR.
C) The predicted Pfam-families of EpsR. D) The predicted Pfam-families of LytR.
21
==PAGE:29==
5
|
Discussion
5.1
Useful Features of pAH3
The stability of pAH3 has never been formally investigated at the MetSig group, but prior
experience with L. lactis AH1 indicates that loss of the plasmid can occur, when grown in non-
milk media [Jan Martinussen, Personal Communication]. As such, it is interesting to note that
pAH3 encodes the partitioning-gene parA. Now, given the informal nature of the observation
this may in fact not be a common occurrence, but may also be caused by ineﬃcient expression
of parA or the activity of transposases. One potential way of guarding against the loss of pAH3
is by supplementing the media with a glycopeptide, such as teicoplanin, or toxic concentrations
of copper as pAH3 is predicted to encode resistance genes against both.
The LysM-domain of proteins are used to bind glycans and have especially been associated with
interaction with the cell wall [77]. The legume Lotus japonicus uses a LysM-domain protein to
recognize the EPS produced by some strains of Mesorhizobium loti [78]. Thus, a similar role,
binding to EPS, can be imagined for the LysM-protein encoded on pAH3. Should it exhibit such
a function it would be very helpful in elucidating the function of the polysaccharide machinery
by construction of a tagged variant.
5.2
EpsR and LytR In Cell-Wall Attachment and Re-
lease
The LCP-protein CpsA is known to function in the attachment of heteropolymers to the cell-wall
in S. pneumoniae. A similar function have been assigned to its homologs in S. thermophilus,
EpsA, and L. lactis, EpsR. Interestingly, EpsR does not contain the conserved LCP-domain
and thus seems an unlikely homolog for CpsA/EpsA. The idea of EpsR as a homolog of EpsA
originates with Jolly and Stingele [33] based on a BLAST alignment of EpsA from S. thermophilus
Sﬁ6 and EpsR from L. lactis Nizo B40 showing a 95% identity. Neither the E-value nor coverage
22
==PAGE:30==
of this alignment is reported in the paper. Repeating this alignment using BLASTp yields no
signiﬁcant similarities.
In this thesis I show that mining the NR-database for homologs of
EpsR does not yield any hits annotated as EpsA or CpsA, while the LCP-protein LytR does.
Additionally, no TMSs or signal peptides are predicted to occur in EpsR and a function on the
outside of the cell is thus unlikely.
Instead, I propose that LytR is the conserved homolog of CpsA/EpsA as it is a LCP protein
capable of recovering CpsA and EpsA hits in similarity-searches. It also exhibits a putative
TMS placed such that the LCP-protein is exposed on the outside of membrane, where it can
presumably interact with the rest of the polysaccharide machinery.
However, it is not clear that a LCP-protein is necessarily needed for release of an EPS. The eps
cluster of L. lactis Ropy352 does not contain a LCP-protein, but is still capable of releasing
EPS [40]. Likewise, the CPS from S. pneumoniae serotype 14 could be expressed as an EPS in
L. lactis without the use of LytR or another LCP-protein [79]. In contrast, ∆epsA mutants in
Lb. johnsonii lose the ability to synthesize EPS [80]. The contrary and indirect nature of much
of this evidence warrants further investigation of the LytR function in EPS release.
5.3
EpsR and LytR in Transcriptional Regulation
Both EpsR and LytR have been implicated in the transcriptional regulation of the eps cluster.
Preliminary evidence in the MetSig Group show that EpsR acts as repressor involved with
ﬁnetuning expression of the cluster [34]. The involvement of LytR in transcriptional regulation
was originally based on its similarity to LytR/TagU from B. subtilis which have since been
reclassiﬁed [14, 56]. However, the intracellular domain of CpsA in S. agalactiae have been shown
to function as a transcriptional regulator [81]. This intracellular domain does not resemble the
one found in LytR, but it is not clear that a similar function could not be assigned to it.
However, it provides an evolutionary rationale for having both a transcriptional regulator and
a LCP-protein should LytR not be able to regulate the expression of the cluster. Since EpsR is
unique to the eps cluster in L. lactis and lytR is 100-200 amino acids shorter EpsA and CpsA,
this function might instead be located with EpsR.
5.4
The Evolution Of The AH1 eps Cluster
Several regions of the AH1 eps cluster, which seem to originate from other LAB were identiﬁed
by BLASTn. The plasmid pAH3 itself seems to be of lactococcal origin; it similar to other
lactococcal plasmids and has a CG content within the 34-36% usually found in L. lactis [82].
Nonetheless, the distribution of BLAST hits points towards a complex origin of the AH1 eps
23
==PAGE:31==
cluster with parts from several species. We can observe that the transposase elements ﬂanking
the regions that match the eps clusters of other species are in fact not found in these clusters.
This points to a direction of transfer from these species towards L. lactis. Horizontal gene trans-
fer through both conjugation and transduction have previously been observed been observed
between Lactobacillus, Streptocccus thermophilus and L. lactis [83, 84, 85]. Additionally, some
strains of L. lactis are known to be naturally competent [86]. Together with L. lactis, Leuconos-
toc mesenteroide, S. thermophilus, Lactobacillus parascei, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus
lactis, and Bacillus cereus have all been observed as part of the viili microbiome [87]. This may
provide ample opportunity for horizontal gene transfer between all of these strains.
24
==PAGE:32==
6
|
Future Studies
6.1
The Polysaccharide Machinery in L. lactis
To this date, only a few select genes involved in the exopolysaccharide machinery of L. lactis
have been functionally characterized. The phosphoregulatory system, epsCDB the Priming GT,
epsE and a few GT have been investigated in L. lactis NIZO B40 [36, 88, 35]. As such large
parts of the process is inferred from related LAB and pathogenic streptococci. Notably, the
L. lactis eps cluster contain several genes not found in other LAB and high priority should be
given to determining their function together with the precise role of the Wzx ﬂipase and the
Wzy polymerase.
6.1.1
Essential Parts Of The Machinery
An initial way of approaching this problem would be systematically deleting each of the conserved
genes in a well-characterized and simple eps cluster like the one found in L. lactis NIZO B40 as
well as wzx and wzy. This will provide evidence for the current Wzx/Wzy-model by examining
the results. For instance, a ∆wzx strain should accumulate undP-linked RUs on the inside of the
cell, while ∆wzy should accumulate them on the outside of the cell. By examining the location
of RUs, the molecular weight and amount of polymers produced, the mechanism of chain-length
control, transport, and polymerization might be elucidated.
In this manner, several genes might prove non-essential for biosynthesis like epsB and epsL
[88]. As such, a minimal eps cluster can be established, which would form a useful basis for
engineering approaches.
The robustness of these ﬁndings can be secured by establishing these deletions in several diﬀerent
eps cluster and by complementation of the deletions. Finally evidence of complex-formation
between the various proteins, which is already observed for the phosphoregulatory system, can
inform the models and may be investigated using a bacterial two-hybrid system [89].
25
==PAGE:33==
6.1.2
Regulation Of The EPS Cluster
It is generally accepted that eps clusters are regulated at the transcriptional and functional level.
The function of epsR in L. lactis seems to be as repressor, which ﬁnetunes expression of the
eps cluster. Other modes of transcriptional regulation, such as pH-responsiveness, have been
hypothesized at the MetSig group [90]. Transcriptional fusions, as well as RNA-sequencing can
be used to investigate the expression under controlled conditions.
Recently, the phoshporegulatory system found in B. subtilis were proposed to respond to EPS
itself produced by way of EpsC sensing. As such, examining the response of the phosphosreg-
ulatory system on the the puriﬁed EPS is of some interest. Measuring the amount of polymer
produced and the phosphorylation EpsE would provide information on possible regulation.
6.1.3
Substrate Preference In the Machinery
After determining which components of the polysaccharide machinery are essential, understand-
ing their substrate preference and ways of changing or circumventing them would be useful.
Studies of Wzx and Wzy in Gram-Negative bacteria indicate that they can show quite complex
substrate preferences, which can present roadblocks to crafting synthetic eps clusters. Estab-
lishing whether this preference can be circumvented by overexpression, as may be for Wzx in
O-antigen clusters, would provide useful information. This can be investigated by the substi-
tution of wzx genes with those from other clusters and overexpression of said genes from a
high-copy plasmid. Should they exhibit substrate preference this could be examined using an
approach similar to that of Liu et al. [48], where residue that are suspected to be important can
be removed by inactivation of the GT adding it.
6.2
The structure of AH1 EPS
To continue studying the eps cluster of L. lactis AH1, the EPS should be determined. Initially,
the ratio of diﬀerent monosaccharides in the RU can be investigated using HPAE-PAD [91],
while the molecular mass can be determined by size exclusion chromatography. To accurately
determine the sugar composition of the RU, NMR should be applied [92]. Moving the cluster
to a laboratory strain, such as L. lactis MG1363, preferably with the transposases excised, will
ensure stability and ease further study. The cluster could be assembled on the chromosome
using an integration approach as described by Petersen et al. [93].
26
==PAGE:34==
7
|
Conclusion
In this thesis bioinformatic analysis of the L. lactis AH1 eps cluster and the plasmid pAH3
carrying it were performed. The Wzy polymerase of the cluster was identiﬁed and the rest of the
cluster was annotated in accordance with new nomenclature. Several regions of non-lactococcal
origin were identiﬁed in the AH1 eps cluster and a direction of transfer from Streptococcus and
Lactobacillus to L. lactis AH1 were proposed. Finally, it was shown than LytR is likely to be a
homolog of CpsA and EpsA from S. pneumoniae and S. thermophilus, respectively. From this
it was proposed that LytR rather than EpsR acts in attachment and release of polysaccharides
synthesized by the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway in L. lactis.
27
==PAGE:35==
Bibliography
[1]
Bintsis T. “Lactic acid bacteria: their applications in foods”. In: Journal of Bacte-
riology & Mycology: Open Access 6.2 (Mar. 2018).
[2]
Adelene Ai Lian Song et al. “A review on Lactococcus lactis: From food to factory”.
In: Microbial Cell Factories 16.1 (Dec. 2017), p. 139.
[3]
L. A. Gurien, K. Stallings-Archer, and S. D. Smith. “Probiotic Lactococcus lactis
decreases incidence and severity of necrotizing enterocolitis in a preterm animal
model”. In: Journal of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine 11.1 (2018), pp. 65–69.
[4]
Vera Kuzina Poulsen, Patrick Derkx, and Gunnar Oregaard. “High-throughput
screening for texturing Lactococcus strains”. In: FEMS Microbiology Letters 366.2
(2019), pp. 1–7.
[5]
Tessalia Luerce et al. “Anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects of Lactococcus lactis NCDO 2118
during the remission period of chemically induced colitis”. In: Gut Pathogens 6.1
(2014), p. 33.
[6]
Daodong Pan and Xiuming Mei. “Antioxidant activity of an exopolysaccharide
puriﬁed from Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis 12”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 80.3
(2010), pp. 908–914.
[7]
Fatima Nehal et al. “Characterization, high production and antimicrobial activity
of exopolysaccharides from Lactococcus lactis F-mou”. In: Microbial Pathogenesis
132.April (2019), pp. 10–19.
[8]
Daodong Pan et al. “Immunomodulatory activity of selenium exopolysaccharide
produced by Lactococcus lactis subsp. Lactis”. In: Food and Agricultural Immunol-
ogy 26.2 (2015), pp. 248–259.
[9]
Uchechukwu U. Nwodo, Ezekiel Green, and Anthony I. Okoh. “Bacterial exopolysac-
charides: Functionality and prospects”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sci-
ences 13.11 (2012), pp. 14002–14015.
28
==PAGE:36==
[10]
Anita Suresh Kumar, Kalpana Mody, and Bhavanath Jha. “Bacterial exopolysac-
charides - A perception”. In: Journal of Basic Microbiology 47.2 (2007), pp. 103–
117.
[11]
F. Donot et al. “Microbial exopolysaccharides: Main examples of synthesis, excre-
tion, genetics and extraction”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers 87.2 (2012), pp. 951–962.
[12]
P. M. Ryan et al. “Sugar-coated: Exopolysaccharide producing lactic acid bacteria
for food and human health applications”. In: Food and Function 6.3 (2015), pp. 679–
693.
[13]
Philippe Duboc and Beat Mollet. “Applications of exopolysaccharides in the dairy
industry”. In: International Dairy Journal 11.9 (2001), pp. 759–768.
[14]
Ahmad A. Zeidan et al. Polysaccharide production by lactic acid bacteria: from
genes to industrial applications. Aug. 2017.
[15]
Graziano Caggianiello, Michiel Kleerebezem, and Giuseppe Spano. Exopolysaccha-
rides produced by lactic acid bacteria: from health-promoting beneﬁts to stress tol-
erance mechanisms. May 2016.
[16]
Anke Becker. “Challenges and perspectives in combinatorial assembly of novel ex-
opolysaccharide biosynthesis pathways”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 6.JUL (2015),
pp. 1–8.
[17]
Simone Andrea Warncke and Sussie Hjorth Hansen. “Cloning and characterization
of the eps gene cluster from an exopolysaccharide producing Lactococcus lactis”.
Bachelor. Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[18]
M T Madigan, J M Martinko, and J Parker. Brock biology of micro-organisms.
Pearson Education, 2015, p. 1041.
[19]
Joachim-Volker Höltje. “Growth of the Stress-Bearing and Shape-Maintaining Murein
Sacculus of Escherichia coli”. In: Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 62.1
(1998), pp. 181–203.
[20]
Eve Maunders and Martin Welch. “Matrix exopolysaccharides; the sticky side of
bioﬁlm formation”. In: FEMS Microbiology Letters 364.13 (July 2017).
[21]
Christopher W. Reid, Kelly M. Fulton, and Susan M. Twine. “Never take candy
from a stranger: The role of the bacterial glycome in host-pathogen interactions”.
In: Future Microbiology 5.2 (Feb. 2010), pp. 267–288.
[22]
L. De Vuyst and F. De Vin. “Exopolysaccharides from Lactic Acid Bacteria”.
In: Comprehensive Glycoscience: From Chemistry to Systems Biology 2-4 (2007),
pp. 477–519.
29
==PAGE:37==
[23]
Chise Suzuki, Miho Kobayashi, and Hiromi Kimoto-Nira. “Novel exopolysaccharides
produced by lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis, and the diversity of epsE genes in the
exopolysaccharide biosynthesis gene clusters”. In: Bioscience, Biotechnology and
Biochemistry 77.10 (2013), pp. 2013–2018.
[24]
Petronella J. Looijesteijn et al. “Physiological function of exopolysaccharides pro-
duced by Lactococcus lactis”. In: International Journal of Food Microbiology 64.1-2
(2001), pp. 71–80.
[25]
Marie Claude Gentès, Daniel St-Gelais, and Sylvie L. Turgeon. “Gel formation and
rheological properties of fermented milk with in situ exopolysaccharide production
by lactic acid bacteria”. In: Dairy Science and Technology 91.5 (2011), pp. 645–661.
[26]
Johnny Birch et al. “The exopolysaccharide properties and structures database:
EPS-DB. Application to bacterial exopolysaccharides”. In: Carbohydrate Polymers
205 (Feb. 2019), pp. 565–570.
[27]
Hajime Nakajima et al. “Structure of the extracellular polysaccharide from slime-
forming Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris SBT 0495”. In: Carbohydrate Research
224.C (Feb. 1992), pp. 245–253.
[28]
Alan D. Welman and Ian S. Maddox. “Exopolysaccharides from lactic acid bacteria:
Perspectives and challenges”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 21.6 (2003), pp. 269–274.
[29]
Petronella J Looijesteijn et al. “Regulation of exopolysaccharide production by Lac-
tococcus lactis subsp. cremoris by the sugar source”. In: Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 65.11 (1999), pp. 5003–5008.
[30]
Mogens Kilstrup et al. “Nucleotide metabolism and its control in lactic acid bacte-
ria”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews 29.3 SPEC. ISS. (2005), pp. 555–590.
[31]
Richard van Kranenburg et al. “ Molecular characterization of the plasmid-encoded
eps gene cluster essential for exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Lactococcus lactis
”. In: Molecular Microbiology 24.2 (1997), pp. 387–397.
[32]
Francesca Stingele, Jean Richard Neeser, and Beat Mollet. “Identiﬁcation and char-
acterization of the eps (exopolysaccharide) gene cluster from Streptococcus ther-
mophilus Sﬁ6”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 178.6 (1996), pp. 1680–1690.
[33]
Laure Jolly and Francesca Stingele. “Molecular organization and functionality of
exopolysaccharide gene clusters in lactic acid bacteria”. In: International Dairy
Journal 11.9 (2001), pp. 733–745.
[34]
Jonas Munkesø Loft. “Regulation of Gene Expression in Lactococcus lactis”. PhD
thesis. 2017.
30
==PAGE:38==
[35]
M. N. Nierop Groot and M. Kleerebezem. “Mutational analysis of the Lactococcus
lactis NIZO B40 exopolysaccharide (EPS) gene cluster: EPS biosynthesis correlates
with unphosphorylated EpsB”. In: Journal of Applied Microbiology 103.6 (2007),
pp. 2645–2656.
[36]
Richard Van Kranenburg et al. “Functional analysis of glycosyltransferase genes
from Lactococcus lactis and other gram-positive cocci: Complementation, expres-
sion, and diversity”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 181.20 (1999), pp. 6347–6353.
[37]
Salim T Islam and Joseph S Lam. “Synthesis of bacterial polysaccharides via the
Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway”. In: 716.June 2013 (2014), pp. 697–716.
[38]
Yaoqin Hong, Michael A. Liu, and Peter R. Reeves. “Progress in our understanding
of Wzx ﬂippase for translocation of bacterial membrane lipid-linked oligosaccha-
ride”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 200.1 (2018), pp. 1–14.
[39]
F. Bourgoin et al. “Are horizontal transfers involved in the evolution of the Strep-
tococcus thermophilus exopolysaccharide synthesis loci?” In: Gene 233.1-2 (1999),
pp. 151–161.
[40]
Eric P. Knoshaug, JeﬀA. Ahlgren, and Janine E. Trempy. “Exopolysaccharide
expression in Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris Ropy352: Evidence for novel gene
organization”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73.3 (2007), pp. 897–
905.
[41]
Vinita Lukose, Marthe T.C. Walvoort, and Barbara Imperiali. “Bacterial phospho-
glycosyl transferases: Initiators of glycan biosynthesis at the membrane interface”.
In: Glycobiology 27.9 (2017), pp. 820–823.
[42]
Luuk Mestrom et al. “Leloir Glycosyltransferases in Applied Biocatalysis: A Multi-
disciplinary Approach”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 20.21 (Oct.
2019), p. 5263.
[43]
John B. McArthur and Xi Chen. “Glycosyltransferase engineering for carbohydrate
synthesis”. In: Biochemical Society Transactions 44.1 (Feb. 2016), pp. 129–142.
[44]
Pedro M. Coutinho et al. “An evolving hierarchical family classiﬁcation for glyco-
syltransferases”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 328.2 (2003), pp. 307–317.
[45]
Ramesh P. Pandey. “Diversifying Natural Products with Promiscuous Glycosyl-
transferase Enzymes via a Sustainable Microbial Fermentation Approach”. In: Fron-
tiers in Chemistry 5 (Dec. 2017).
[46]
Sergei Kalynych, Renato Morona, and Miroslaw Cygler. “Progress in understanding
the assembly process of bacterial O-antigen”. In: FEMS Microbiology Reviews 38.5
(Sept. 2014), pp. 1048–1065.
31
==PAGE:39==
[47]
Y. Hong and P. R. Reeves. “Diversity of O-Antigen Repeat Unit Structures Can
Account for the Substantial Sequence Variation of Wzx Translocases”. In: Journal
of Bacteriology 196.9 (May 2014), pp. 1713–1722.
[48]
Michael A. Liu, Paraskevi Morris, and Peter R. Reeves. “Wzx ﬂippases exhibiting
complex O-unit preferences require a new model for Wzx–substrate interactions”.
In: MicrobiologyOpen 8.3 (2019), pp. 1–15.
[49]
Susana Merino, Victor Gonzalez, and Juan M Tomás. “The ﬁrst sugar of the repeat
units is essential for the Wzy polymerase activity and elongation of the O-antigen
lipopolysaccharide”. In: Future Microbiology 11.7 (July 2016), pp. 903–918.
[50]
Yaoqin Hong et al. “Three Wzy polymerases are speciﬁc for particular forms of an
internal linkage in otherwise identical O units”. In: Microbiology (United Kingdom)
161.8 (Aug. 2015), pp. 1639–1647.
[51]
Zoran Minic et al. “Control of EpsE, the phosphoglycosyltransferase initiating ex-
opolysaccharide synthesis in Streptococcus thermophilus, by EpsD tyrosine kinase”.
In: Journal of Bacteriology 189.4 (2007), pp. 1351–1357.
[52]
Huasong Xu. “Using gene editing to investigate the function of epsD gene in ex-
opolysaccharide ( EPS ) biosynthesis of Lactococcus lactis subsp . cremoris JFR1”.
PhD thesis. The University of Guelph, 2019.
[53]
Matthew H. Bender, Robert T. Cartee, and Janet Yother. “Positive correlation
between tyrosine phosphorylation of CpsD and capsular polysaccharide produc-
tion in Streptococcus pneumoniae”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 185.20 (Oct. 2003),
pp. 6057–6066.
[54]
Chiara Toniolo et al. “Streptococcus agalactiae capsule polymer length and attach-
ment is determined by the proteins CpsABCD”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry
290.15 (2015), pp. 9521–9532.
[55]
Yoshikazu Kawai et al. “A widespread family of bacterial cell wall assembly pro-
teins”. In: EMBO Journal 30.24 (Dec. 2011), pp. 4931–4941.
[56]
Raphael H. Michna et al. “SubtiWiki-A database for the model organism Bacillus
subtilis that links pathway, interaction and expression information”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 42.D1 (Jan. 2014), pp. D692–D698.
[57]
Jochen Schmid, Volker Sieber, and Bernd Rehm. Bacterial exopolysaccharides:
Biosynthesis pathways and engineering strategies. May 2015.
[58]
P. J. Looijesteijn et al. “Inﬂuence of diﬀerent substrate limitations on the yield,
composition and molecular mass of exopolysaccharides produced by Lactococcus
lactis subsp. cremoris in continuous cultures”. In: Journal of Applied Microbiology
89.1 (July 2000), pp. 116–122.
32
==PAGE:40==
[59]
Francesca Stingele et al. In: Molecular Microbiology 6 ().
[60]
Randal A. Hassler and Daniel H. Doherty. “Genetic Engineering of Polysaccharide
Structure: Production of Variants of Xanthan Gum in Xanthomonas campestris”.
In: Biotechnology Progress 6.3 (May 1990), pp. 182–187.
[61]
Ian J. Colquhoun et al. “Structure and conformation of a novel genetically engi-
neered polysaccharide P2”. In: Carbohydrate Research 330.3 (Feb. 2001), pp. 325–
333.
[62]
Ingeborg C. Boels et al. “Increased Exopolysaccharide Production in Lactococcus
lactis due to Increased Levels of Expression of the NIZO B40 eps Gene Cluster”.
In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 69.8 (Aug. 2003), pp. 5029–5031.
[63]
Ingeborg C. Boels et al. “Functional Analysis of the Lactococcus lactis galU and
galE Genes and Their Impact on Sugar Nucleotide and Exopolysaccharide Biosyn-
thesis”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 67.7 (2001), pp. 3033–3040.
[64]
Doug Hyatt et al. “Prodigal: Prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation
site identiﬁcation”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 11.1 (Dec. 2010), p. 119.
[65]
Stephen F. Altschul et al. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation of
protein database search programs. Sept. 1997.
[66]
Robert D. Finn, Jody Clements, and Sean R. Eddy. “HMMER web server: Interac-
tive sequence similarity searching”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 39.SUPPL. 2 (July
2011), W29–W37.
[67]
Han Zhang et al. “DbCAN2: A meta server for automated carbohydrate-active
enzyme annotation”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46.W1 (July 2018), W95–W101.
[68]
Dipti Deo, Dimple Davray, and Ram Kulkarni. “A diverse repertoire of exopolysac-
charide biosynthesis gene clusters in Lactobacillus revealed by comparative analysis
in 106 sequenced genomes”. In: Microorganisms 7.10 (2019).
[69]
Anders Krogh et al. “Predicting transmembrane protein topology with a hidden
Markov model: Application to complete genomes”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology
305.3 (2001), pp. 567–580.
[70]
Jannick Dyrløv Bendtsen et al. “Improved prediction of signal peptides: SignalP
3.0”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 340.4 (July 2004), pp. 783–795.
[71]
Xiaobin Li et al. “OriTﬁnder: A web-based tool for the identiﬁcation of origin of
transfers in DNA sequences of bacterial mobile genetic elements”. In: Nucleic Acids
Research 46.W1 (July 2018), W229–W234.
33
==PAGE:41==
[72]
Karen Kearney, Gerald F. Fitzgerald, and Jos F.M.L. Seegers. “Identiﬁcation and
characterization of an active plasmid partition mechanism for the novel Lactococcus
lactis plasmid pCI2000”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 182.1 (2000), pp. 30–37.
[73]
Teruo Tanaka, Hirofumi Ishida, and Tomoko Maehara. “Characterization of the
Replication Region of Plasmid pLS32 from the Natto Strain of Bacillus subtilis”.
In: Journal of Bacteriology 187.13 (July 2005), pp. 4315–4326.
[74]
M. Chandler and P. Siguier. “Insertion Sequences”. In: Brenner’s Encyclopedia of
Genetics: Second Edition 62.3 (2013), pp. 86–94.
[75]
Liying Lai et al. “Streptococcus suis serotype 9 strain GZ0565 contains a type
VII secretion system putative substrate EsxA that contributes to bacterial viru-
lence and a vanZ-like gene that confers resistance to teicoplanin and dalbavancin
in Streptococcus agalactiae”. In: Veterinary Microbiology 205.1 (2017), pp. 26–33.
[76]
C. Rensing et al. “CopA: An Escherichia coli Cu(I)-translocating P-type ATPase”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97.2 (Jan. 2000), pp. 652–656.
[77]
Girbe Buist et al. LysM, a widely distributed protein motif for binding to (pep-
tido)glycans. May 2008.
[78]
Luis Buendia et al. LysM receptor-like kinase and lysM receptor-like protein fami-
lies: An update on phylogeny and functional characterization. Oct. 2018.
[79]
Masja N. Nierop Groot, Jeroen Godefrooij, and Michiel Kleerebezem. “Heterologous
Expression of the Pneumococcal Serotype 14 Polysaccharide in Lactococcus lactis
Requires Lactococcal epsABC Regulatory Genes”. In: Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 74.3 (Feb. 2008), pp. 912–915.
[80]
Enes Dertli et al. “EpsA is an essential gene in exopolysaccharide production in Lac-
tobacillus johnsonii FI9785”. In: Microbial Biotechnology 9.4 (July 2016), pp. 496–
501.
[81]
Brett R. Hanson et al. “Functional analysis of the CpsA protein of Streptococcus
agalactiae”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 194.7 (Apr. 2012), pp. 1668–1678.
[82]
Philip Kelleher et al. “The Lactococcus lactis Pan-Plasmidome”. In: Frontiers in
Microbiology 10 (Apr. 2019).
[83]
P Langella. “Conjugal transfer of plasmid pIP501 from Lactococcus lactis to Lac-
tobacillus delbruckii subsp. bulgaricus and Lactobacillus helveticus”. In: FEMS Mi-
crobiology Letters 60.2 (July 1989), pp. 149–152.
[84]
Andreas Ammann et al. “Plasmid transfer via transduction from Streptococcus
thermophilus to Lactococcus lactis”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 190.8 (Apr. 2008),
pp. 3083–3087.
34
==PAGE:42==
[85]
Yanhua Cui et al. Plasmids from food lactic acid bacteria: Diversity, similarity, and
new developments. June 2015.
[86]
Blandine David et al. “Natural DNA transformation is functional in Lactococcus
lactis subsp. Cremoris KW2”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 83.16
(Aug. 2017). Ed. by Claire Vieille.
[87]
Amr M. Bakry and Pedro H . Campelo. “Mini-Review on Functional Characteristics
of Viili and Manufacturing Process”. In: Journal of Food Biotechnology Research 2.1
(2018), pp. 3–8.
[88]
Richard van Kranenburg et al. “Functional Analysis of Glycosyltransferase Genes
from Lactococcus lactis and Other Gram-Positive Cocci: Complementation, Ex-
pression, and Diversity”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 181.20 (Oct. 1999), pp. 6347–
6353.
[89]
J. Mehla et al. “A Comparison of Two-Hybrid Approaches for Detecting Pro-
tein–Protein Interactions”. In: Methods in Enzymology. Vol. 586. 2017, pp. 333–
358.
[90]
Kasper Stadel Nielsen. “Transcriptional regulation of the eps gene cluster in Lac-
tococcus lactis”. Bachelor. The Technical Univeristy of Denmark, 2019.
[91]
JeﬀRohrer. “Analysis of carbohydrates by High Performance Anion Exchange
Chromatography with Pulsed Amperometric Detection (HPAE-PAD)”. In: Tech-
nical Note 20 (2013), pp. 1–12.
[92]
Germond Jacques-Edouard et al. “Heterologous expression and characterization of
the exopolysaccharide from Streptococcus thermophilus Sﬁ39”. In: European Jour-
nal of Biochemistry 268.19 (Oct. 2001), pp. 5149–5156.
[93]
Kia Vest Petersen et al. “Repetitive, marker-free, site-speciﬁc integration as a novel
tool for multiple chromosomal integration of DNA”. In: Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 79.12 (2013), pp. 3563–3569.
[94]
Roger A. Laine. “Invited commentary: A calculation of all possible oligosaccharide
isomers both branched and linear yields 1.05 10 structures for a reducing hexasac-
charide: The Isomer Barrier to development of single-method saccharide sequencing
or synthesis systems”. In: Glycobiology 4.6 (1994), pp. 759–767.
[95]
Stephan Herget et al. “Statistical analysis of the bacterial carbohydrate structure
data base (BCSDB): Characteristics and diversity of bacterial carbohydrates in
comparison with mammalian glycans”. In: BMC Structural Biology 8 (2008).
35
==PAGE:43==
8
|
Appendix A - A primer on polysac-
charide structure
It is instructive to compare to the structure of polysaccharide to that of proteins, to understand
the diversity with which polysaccharide can be created. Both can be understood as polymers of
a monomer, either of monosaccharides or amino acids, but the way their monomers are joined
are diﬀerent. Proteins are linear polymers, where each amino acid is linked to the next in the
same fashion through a peptide bond. In contrast, a glycosidic bond be formed as either an α-
or β-bond depending on the conﬁguration of the anomeric carbon. Furthermore, the glycosidic
bond can be formed between the anomeric carbon of one monosaccharide and any available
hydroxyl group on the next, providing multiple ways of joining them together.
Just through these options for bonding, a linear hexose trisaccharide with no repeats can form
6144 diﬀerent isomers [94] compared to the 6 potential tripeptides formed from 3 diﬀerent amino
acids. However, polysaccharides are not limited to forming linear polymers, but may also form
branches by having monosaccharides participate in more than two bonds. By leveraging this
diversity of binding many diﬀerent molecules can be formed from just a few monosaccharides.
There are, however, more than a few monosaccharides available for the construction of polysac-
charides. Currently, 551 diﬀerent monosaccharides have been identiﬁed in bacteria [95], which
can be utilize for further diversity. Luckily, there is some system to the madness. Most polysac-
charides are made from a single repeating unit, often an oligosaccharide. They can then be
thought of as polymers of said repeating unit and may be understood through its structure and
number of repetitions.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 8.1: The basis for polysaccharide diversity is found in the way monosaccharides
can be joined.
37
==PAGE:45==
9
|
Appendix B - Supporting Informa-
tion For Bioinformatics
Appendix B is provide as a ZIP-compressed ﬁle due to its number of pages.
Within it the
following materials can be found:
- pAH3 fully annotated (this includes the eps cluster) in Genbank format. A note for each gene
provides the basis for annotation in the ﬁle.
- A linear gene comparison between eps clusters in L. lactis AH1, Lb. reuteri ZLR003 and S.
thermophilus CS8 to.
- A collection of all hits from BLASTp, BLASTn and HMMER3.3 used to assign genes in the
eps cluster
- A collection of all predicted transmembrane segments.
38
