==PAGE:1==
Investigation of the backside irradiance distri-
bution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Pho-
tovoltaic plant
Master Thesis
DTU FOTONIK
Department of Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis
Tracker Photovoltaic plant
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Manon Petit
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Bifacial PV array, Risø facility, May 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Photonics Engineering, Frederiksborgvej 399, Build-
ing 130, 4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.solar.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Solar Energy Group, Department of
Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, in Sustainable energy, study
line Solar energy.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of solar energy.
Manon Petit - s181906
Signature : M. PETIT
Date : 06/13/2020
ii
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Bifacial Photovoltaics (PV) is the last breakthrough in the PV technology. Harvesting solar
irradiance from its front and rear side, it increases significantly the PV energy output at
a very low cost. The major part of the energy captured in the backside comes from the
ground reflectivity or albedo, causing the rear side irradiance to be more nonuniform than
the front side. This specific irradiance distribution results in additional mismatch losses,
which may not be captured accurately in PV energy production estimation softwares.
In this thesis, the rear side irradiance distribution is measured with a high resolution using
40 sensors placed on 4 different modules rear side of an outdoor large-scale Horizontal
Single Axis Tracker (HSAT) bifacial PV plant in Denmark over grass during 4 months and
a half, and over a 0.60 albedo cover during a short period. The measurements uncertainty
is estimated at ±9.3%. Aside from the measurements, two open source tools, bifacialvf
and bifacial_radiance, are used to replicate the same scene.
To replicate the inner modules rear irradiance over grass, the models perform with a nor-
malised Mean Average Error (nMAE) of 14.5% and 10.3%, respectively. bifacial_radiance
is then significantly more accurate than the view-factor based model, which is moreover
not able to capture edge effects. The Radiance model estimates the edge modules back-
side irradiance within 12.4% of nMAE. Also, bifacial_radiance estimates the module-level
bifacial gain within a 7.7% nMAE and the power mismatch losses with a nMAE of 23.5%.
Eventually, the RT Model is validated over an albedo of 0.60 using four days of data.
Using the measurements data again, the effect of weather on the bifacial gain and power
mismatch loss is analysed. It is found that both the bifacial gain and power mismatch
losses increase significantly with cloudy conditions and in autumn compared to summer
months. Even more, the bifacial gain can be predicted using a multilinear regression of
the weather variables with a precision of 15.2%.
Using the RT Model previously validated, the effect of ground albedo was studied with
albedos up to 0.80. The bifacial gain average increases following an affine dependency
on the albedo, from about 20% over grass albedo to more than 60% over an albedo of
0.80. The power mismatch loss average increases with the albedo with an exponential
coefficient of 1.6, between the linear and the quadratic relationship.
Lastly, the power mismatch loss is studied as a function of the spatial variation of irradi-
ance, here the total irradiance relative standard deviation. An experimental exponential
relationship is fitted using the inner module data. It is found that this empirical relationship
is strikingly different according to the time of the day. It is significantly steeper around solar
noon, i.e. when the tilt is low, compared to moments of the day when the tilt is remarkably
higher.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my main supervisor, Nicholas Riedel, for his content support through-
out my thesis, for sharing with me his deep expertise and help me accomplish all this
work.
I would also like to thank my other supervisors, Michael Linde Jakobsen and Sune Thorsteins-
son, for being always supportive and critical at the same time, so that I could improve the
scientific approach of my analysis.
I would like to thank the all solar energy team of the Photonics Engineering Department.
Those weekly meetings were a real opportunity to get challenged by pairs working on other
PV topics, sharing fruitful ideas and helping the project get as far as possible. Amongst
this group, a particular acknowledgment to Martynas Ribaconka for achieving the experi-
mental work with Nicholas and me, and a profitable synergy between our projects giving
me more accuracy on the ground albedos assumptions.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Danish Energy Technology Development and Demonstra-
tion Program (EUDP) for their funding, and European Energy A/S for the access to the
bifacial PV plant in DTU Risø Campus, making all this project possible.
iv Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Technical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
State-of-the-art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Scope of the work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2
Method
11
2.1
Weather data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Rear irradiance measurement data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
Backside irradiance simulation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Indicators of bifacial PV performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.5
Comparison of the models with the measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.6
Weather effect analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.7
Albedo effect analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3
Analysis of typical sunny vs. cloudy days - comparison of the models with
the outdoor measurements, validation of conclusions from the literature
25
3.1
Visual rendering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
Front irradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Rear irradiance spatial distribution over grass albedo . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Influence of albedo on the backside irradiance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.5
Power mismatch losses over different ground albedos . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4
Validation of the models on a large dataset
36
4.1
Dataset preparation - data filtering and outliers detection . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
Analysis of the Ray-Trace (RT) and View Factor (VF) models performance
at the cell-level over grass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Analysis of the model at the module- and array-level over grass and effect
of the weather conditions on the model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4
Validation of the model over a different albedo condition . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.5
Conclusion on the performance and validity of the models . . . . . . . . . . 50
5
Effect of weather conditions on the bifacial PV performance
51
5.1
Effect of weather on the module-level bifacial gain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2
Effect of weather on the module-level mismatch losses . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3
Quantification of the weather impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
6
Effect of albedo on the bifacial PV performance
57
6.1
Bifacial gain over different albedo conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.2
Effect of albedo on the power mismatch losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7
Conclusions and perspectives
63
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
67
A 47th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC) article
71
B Weather analysis of the second measurement series in May 2020
79
C Albedo on-site measurements
80
D Detailed calculation of the individual uncertainty components
81
E
Input parameters for the irradiance simulation models
83
F
Cells parameters as input of PV Mismatch to compute to power mismatch
loss
85
G Timestamps intervals to be ignored for analysis of the data set from July 10th
to November 13th 2019
86
vi Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
With the increasing global demand for energy and the consequent increase of climate
problems, the focus is shifting towards solutions where renewable energy sources are
exploited at their maximum potential. More specifically, the situation results in exciting
advancements in the solar power sector, illustrated in Figure 1.1. From 2010 when its
installed capacity was negligible, it has become the technology with the highest growth
rate. In 2018, it has reached a 500 GW total installed capacity, and is in the good path to
reach over 1500 GW by 2030 according to the current Stated Policies Scenario [1].
Figure 1.1: Global power capacity by source in the Stated Policies Scenario [1]
Research and Development (R&D) initiatives in the photovoltaic (PV) industry aim to in-
crease the power output of PV arrays while decreasing the cost of production. In this
optimization perspective, PV modules based on Silicon wafer currently dominate the PV
market: it is a very mature technology that has almost reached the Shockley-Queisser
limit of the efficiency. Over the last decades, solar PV became competitive in the energy
market thanks to the low price of Silicon - an earth-abundant material -, to the significant
improvement in conversion efficiency and to the cost reductions due to the learning curve
of PV project with the cumulative installed capacity. This trend is observed in Figure 1.2.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Value-adjusted levelised cost of electricity by technology in the European
Union in the Stated Policies Scenario [1]
The new breakthrough in the solar energy industry is the bifacial PV technology. Unlike the
monofacial modules, bifacial panels can convert incident light on the front and rear sides
of the module into electrical power. Few optimization processes are needed to make a
bifacial PV module. At the cell level, the rear side becomes sunlight-receptive by printing
a rear metallization pattern similar to the front side. At the module scale, the key task is
to replace the opaque backsheet of monofacial modules with a transparent backsheet or
with glass [2]. Hence, this new technology fits well within the trend to increase the power
output while decreasing the production costs [3].
In order to develop reliable PV plant projects based on the bifacial technology, project
developers and investors need to have an accurate estimate of the rear side energy output.
Different models and softwares have already been built to calculate this additional energy
depending on various parameters.
One remaining source of uncertainty is the inherent non-uniformity of the rear side incident
irradiance. Indeed, the major part of the light reaching the module rear side has been
reflected beforehand on the ground - uneven itself - or on surrounding objects. This non-
uniformity results in power losses called mismatch losses. This cascade of phenomena
is thoroughly explained in Section 1.2 of this report.
The mismatch losses characteristic of the bifacial panels need to be studied in details so
as to optimize further the energy yield improvement facilitated by the bifacial technology.
2 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Technical background
1.2.1
Solar geometry
In the context of bifacial PV scenes simulation, solar geometry plays a major role. The
main concepts and notations are defined in this section.
The main solar angles, used to analyse the simulations and measurement outcomes later
in the report, are illustrated by a schematic in Figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Schematic of the main solar angles in the case of a tilted PV panel
The PV panel tilt (0° ≤β ≤90°) is the angle between the plane of the PV surface and the
horizontal. In the configuration of a Horizontal Single-Axis Tracker (HSAT), the tilt varies
as a function of the time.
The panel azimuth γP represents the deviation of the projection on a horizontal plane of
the normal to the surface from the local meridian, with a North reference. In the HSAT
configuration, γP is equal to 90° in the morning (facing East) and 270° in the afternoon.
The angle between the solar radiation on the module and the normal n to that module
surface is called the angle of incidence, θ.
The solar elevation angle (0° ≤αS ≤90°) is the angle between the horizontal and the line
to the sun. It starts at 0° every day and its amplitude varies with the season.
The solar azimuth angle γS is the compass direction from which the sunlight is coming,
with a North reference. At solar noon, the sun is on the South so γS = 180°. Its amplitude
also varies with the season.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 3
==PAGE:12==
1.2.2
Bifacial PV optics
The bifacial PV plant optics is studied here in the configuration of a horizontal single-axis
tracking (HSAT) plant, which is the configurations used in all the thesis.
The different incident light paths on the bifacial PV module are illustrated in Figure 1.4.
The incident light reaching the front side, GPOA,front, is similar to the monofacial case
- the sum of the direct normal irradiation (DNI) coming directly from the sun, the diffuse
horizontal irradiation (DHI) and the reflected diffuse irradiance adjusted for the plane-of-
array (POA).
The irradiance reaching the rear side of the bifacial module, GPOA,rear, can originate from:
• diffuse sunlight, since diffuse light scattered by the clouds can go in any directions;
• diffuse light previously reflected on the ground - its reflective coefficient is character-
ized by the albedo coefficient ρ;
• direct sunlight previously reflected on the ground (ρ);
• the diffuse and direct sunlight can also be reflected on another panel or other sur-
rounding objects.
In the HSAT configuration that we are working on, the sun is always in front of the array,
so no DNI reaches the rear side of the bifacial array directly.
Figure 1.4: Schematic of the light paths in a bifacial PV plant
GPOA,front = DNIPOA + DHIPOA + (ρ · DHI)POA
(1.1)
GPOA,rear = DHIPOA,r + (ρ · DHI)POA,r + (ρ · DNI)POA,r
(1.2)
Equation (1.1) and Equation (1.2) summarize the optical processes in equations. Mainly,
the light reaching the rear side of the bifacial module is lower than the front incident irra-
diance.
4 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:13==
1.2.3
Bifacial PV electrical characteristics
A good understanding of solar cells in general relies on the photo-diode, which is repre-
sented in the simplest case as a p-n junction that is illuminated. Let’s first consider the
case of a monofacial cell [4].
Figure 1.5: Schematic of a photo-diode as a lighted p-n junction [4]
Incident photons are absorbed and generate free electron-hole pairs which are separated
by the electrical field prevailing in the space charge region. The electrons are then lead to
the n-side and the holes to the p-side, and the generated power is drawn off at the contacts.
As it is generated by photons, the electrical current generated is called photocurrent Iph
[4].
If every absorbed photon leads to an electron-hole pair, it therefore contributes to the pho-
tocurrent, thus the photocurrent IPh would be proportional to the front irradiance GPOA,front.
If also considering the collection efficiency η, we get Equation (1.3) characterizing the front
photo current.
Iph,front ∝η × GPOA,front
(1.3)
In the case of bifacial PV cells, the absorption of photons is possible from both sides.
However, during the rear absorption process, most of the charge carriers are generated
away from the junction, which is located in the top of the cell [5] for the PERC technology
used. Hence, the collection efficiency is lower than the front one by a ratio called the
bifaciality coefficient ϕ defined as:
ϕ = ηrear
η
(1.4)
In this Master thesis, the bifacial PV technology PERC is considered, characterized by
ϕ = 0.7. The PERC technology is the bifacial technology with the lowest bifaciality coef-
ficient but it is the predominant one in the market since it is the most spread and almost
has become a standard in the p-type monocrystalline industry. Moreover, in terms of pro-
duction, there is no additional cost to turn monofacial-PERC cell into a bifacial-PERC cell
- it mainly requires to replace the aluminium back surface field with a rear contact grid [2].
In a similar way that we estimated the monofacial photocurrent output, the bifacial module
output current is described in Equation (1.5).
Iph,rear ∝η × (GPOA,front + ϕ · GPOA,rear)
(1.5)
The bifacial gain BG is then generically described as the additional energy received by
the bifacial module compared to a monofacial counterpart. Then, from Equation (1.3) and
Equation (1.5) I obtain: BG ≈ϕ · GP OA,rear
GP OA,front .
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 5
==PAGE:14==
1.2.4
Mismatch losses
According to Kirchhoff’s current law, the current is the same in every point of a series circuit
and the current of two parallel strings sums up. On the other side, according to Kirchhoff’s
voltage law, the voltage of 2 components in series are added together, whereas the voltage
between the terminals of 2 components in parallel is the same.
In the case of solar modules circuit, several cells are connected in series in order to
achieve acceptable voltages. Indeed, the voltage needs to be high enough to be easily
converted to the grid voltage level, and the current should not be too high to avoid using
very thick cables [4]. Indeed, according to Kirchhoff’s current and voltage laws, in a series
connection of solar cells, the current in all cells is the same and the overall voltage is the
sum of the individual voltages, as illustrated in Figure 1.6.
Figure 1.6: IV curve of a series connection of solar cells [4]
If one cell receives less irradiance, here three quarters less than the others, then its output
current is decreased. The two fully irradiated cells attempt to press their current through
the shaded cell, which causes a negative voltage at the shaded cell. The current is almost
completely determined by the one of the lower irradiance cell. This situation is illustrated
in Figure 1.7. The MPP power of the module has been reduced by approximately three
quarters compared to the unshaded case, although just one single cell was shaded by
three-quarters [4].
Figure 1.7: Schematic of partial shading loss of a cell in a series string of solar cell [4]
The resulting losses from a different incident irradiance level on the cells are called mis-
match losses. In the case of bifacial modules, additional mismatch losses stem from the
non-uniformity of the ground and of the surrounding objects, since most of the rear-side ir-
radiation is reflected on this heterogeneous ground before reaching the module backside.
This Master thesis focuses on the characterization of the rear side irradiance non-uniform
spatial distribution and the resulting mismatch losses.
6 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:15==
1.3
State-of-the-art
The rear side irradiance nonuniformity and the resulting power mismatch losses have
already been studied in details in the literature, and the major conclusions are displayed
in this section.
1.3.1
Rear irradiance distribution and bifacial gain
The rear side irradiance has been studied mainly through simulations, and sometimes
using spatial rear plane-of-array irradiance measurements, typically on static tilt systems
using between two and ten irradiance sensors, or using indoor measurements.
The importance of the single-axis tracker to improve the bifacial gain of the bifacial PV
array is observed in the literature. Riley et al. [6] study a fixed-tilt system, and show that
the bifacial PV performances are much reduced when the angle of incidence is higher
than 55° -i.e. the bifacial gain decreases and the mismatch losses are greater. The good
thing with HSAT is that such angles of incidence are never reached. Furthermore, Pelaez
et al. estimate that opting for a HSAT configurations yields 15% to 25% higher energy
outputs [7], which is also observed by Shoukry et al. [8].
Pelaez et al. in [7], based on simulations using the same models as we are, and comparing
the results with small-scale bifacial PV arrays, estimate that the bifacial PV HSAT can
achieve a bifacial gain of 4% to 15% depending on ground albedo, with a global average of
9%. Regarding rear-side irradiance, their ray-tracing simulations show that edge modules
are brighter than inner modules, with 15% to 25% increase in rear irradiance [7]. Moreover,
on each module, the closer a cell is to the tracker torque tube, the more shade loss it will
experience [7, 9, 8, 10], and the lower light it will receive on the rear side.
Interestingly, studying a fixed-tilt system, Asgharzadeh et al. [11] found that if the tilt
angle increases, nonuniformity decreases because the modules receive more uniform ir-
radiance from the sky than from the ground. They also find that the bifacial gain increases
linearly with the ground albedo, in their system configuration. Shoukry et al. [8] establish
for a stand-alone south-facing module, and Lindsay et al. [10] for a HSAT, that the bifacial
gain increases with the ground alebdo but also with the diffuse ratio. Studying experimen-
tally bifacial panels on a tilted roof, Kreinin et al. [12] also show that the bifacial gain
improves with the diffuse ratio.
The irradiance nonuniformity is studied through simulations by Janssen et al. in 2017
[13] considering a landscape oriented freestanding panel. Under their configuration, the
inhomogeneity of the total irradiance is smallest at a high fraction of direct light i.e. during
a clear sky day. Their simulations indicate that the relative standard deviation of the total
irradiance never exceeds 5% even at high albedo of 0.80, and is usually much smaller.
1.3.2
Rear irradiance heterogeneity-induced power mismatch losses
Now focusing on the power mismatch losses, Zhang et al. in [14] stress that bifacial PV
experiences two kinds of mismatch losses, stemming either from the front-side partial
shading or from the rear-side irradiance inhomogeneity. I only target the latter, hence
only the findings related to the latter case are described here.
McIntosh et al. studied two different cases: a one-high and a two-high module configu-
ration - only the results about the two-high configuration are reported here, since that is
the configuration studied in the thesis. Their results are obtained through simulations and
consider a bifacial HSAT over a ground albedo corresponding to light sand. They study
the mismatch losses during specific days and found that the module-level mismatch is
greatest in the middle of the day during a sunny day, and quite constant over time when
it is cloudy [15].
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 7
==PAGE:16==
At the module level, K.R. McIntosh et al. [15] found out that the module the nearest to the
ground experiences greatest module-level mismatch losses. On the two-high configura-
tions of McIntosh et al., the yearly mismatch losses average is lower than 0.1%. Deline
et al. find that it is lower than 0.5% yearly in average [9].
Importantly, albedo is a factor influencing the power mismatch: the higher it is, the more
losses occur, with a very strong dependency [15]. On the other hand, the distance of
the torque-tube above the module, module separation and the ground-coverage ratio has
little dependence on mismatch losses [15]. Deline et al. also studied the effect of climate
and module orientation on mismatch losses and their impact was low [9].
In their study, Deline et al. [9] fit a relationship between the hourly rear irradiance relative
standard deviation and the hourly power mismatch losses, in order to be able to estimate
it more easily when using hourly simulation softwares such as PVSyst. The fit detailed
in Equation (1.6) concerns a fixed-tilt system high albedo reflective roofs with different
ground clearance, with M[%] the mismatch and σtot[%] the relative standard deviation
of the total irradiance distribution. Janssen et al. [13] fitted a polynomial curve on their
mismatch vs. standard deviation results corresponding to a simulated stand-alone fixed-
tilt bifacial panel, and is given for comparison in Equation (1.7).
M[%]Fit#1 = e−2 · σtot[%]1.57
(1.6)
M[%]Fit#2 = 0.33 · σtot[%] + 0.075 · σtot[%]2
(1.7)
Finally, some authors stand back from the detail to estimate how critical those mismatch
loses could potentially be. Janssen et al. [13] mention that one should be careful with low-
light conditions, which could lead to misleading high mismatch values, not representative
of high power losses in absolute terms. Last but not least, several authors conclude that
the current heterogeneity characteristic of the bifacial rear side nonuniform irradiance is
typically low and will not lead to cells going into reverse bias and the risk for hot-spots due
to bifacial-specific mismatch losses is also very small [13, 14].
8 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:17==
1.4
Scope of the work
Until today, the literature has studied the spatial heterogeneity of the rear-side irradiance
and the resulting power mismatch losses through simulations,indoor measurements and
small-scale PV arrays.
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partnership with European Energy A/S
operates a bifacial PV plant at a utility scale. Hence, the simulations performed during this
Master thesis are compared with on-field measurement data of a real Horizontal Single-
Axis Tracker (HSAT) bifacial PV plant over two different albedo conditions, pictured in
Figure 1.8a and Figure 1.8b. The existing literature outcomes on spatial distribution of
the backside irradiance and the resulting power mismatch will be validated in the context
of outdoor operation in the Nordics. Also, lots of results concern fixed-tilt bifacial PV, so
this study analyses how those findings differ in the case of a HSAT PV plant.
(a) Bifacial PV array over grass albedo
(b) Bifacial PV array over a white polymer sheet
Figure 1.8: Illustration of the solar PV cost reduction with increasing installed capacity
[16]
The first objective of this Master thesis is to validate experimentally two simulation models,
bifacial_radiance [17] and bifacialvf [18] described in Section 2.3. This validation is made
thanks to the very high-resolution irradiance measurements on the back of a large-scale
outdoor bifacial HSAT PV plant modules.
The effect of weather conditions on bifacial performance - bifacial gain and mismatch
losses - is commonly described as very complex especially in the case of mismatch losses
which have never been thoroughly studied as a function of the weather. Some authors
try to find simpler ways to predict those performances [9]. The data acquisition in the
scope of this project led to a large amount of data points with various weather conditions
enabling to go deeper into the weather effect analysis. A major objective of this thesis
is then to understand better and quantify the complex relationship between bifacial gain
or power mismatch with the weather conditions, using experimental data of a large-scale
bifacial PV plant.
The last objective of this thesis is to quantify the strong albedo-dependency of bifacial-
specific power mismatch both experimentally and using simulations.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 9
==PAGE:18==
1.5
Outline
This thesis report is divided into 5 main chapters. The methodology is fully described in
Chapter 2, and the Results and Discussions are developed under Chapter 3 to 6. Even-
tually, Chapter 7 concludes the thesis.
The Chapter 2 first specifies the methods of weather data acquisition, and the process
of measuring the rear-side irradiance of the bifacial panels on DTU test PV field. The
experimental data is acquired in 2 different phases, and the measurement uncertainty
along the measurement processes is estimated. Then, the two simulation models utilized
are described along with their advantages and drawbacks. Next, the selected indicators
of irradiance spatial heterogeneity are introduced, and the power mismatch computation
is thoroughly explained. Lastly, the different methods employed to compare models to
measurements and to analyse the effect of weather conditions and albedo coefficient on
bifacial PV performance, respectively, are exposed.
The Chapter 3 is a one-day comparison of the models with the measurements, and is also
used to validate or question the main conclusion of the literature.
The Chapter 4 is a global statistical comparison based on a large amount of data points
to validate the models over different albedo conditions.
The Chapter 5 describes the relationship between weather conditions and bifacial gain
and mismatch losses, using statistical tools as Partial Correlation Analysis.
In Chapter 6, the albedo coefficient dependency of the bifacial performance is analysed.
Also, the mismatch power vs. total irradiance standard deviation curve is analysed and
compared to the literature.
Chapter 7 concludes on the previous results, compares the different effects on the bifacial
PV yield that have been studied and opens up new perspectives for the continuation of
this work
10 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:19==
2
Method
2.1
Weather data
2.1.1
Weather data as an input parameter
The aim of this project is to model the front and rear side output of the bifacial panels in the
field at Risø Campus. DTU Fotonik measures the solar resource at the location of the PV
field where a climate station is equipped with spectral radiometers - for measuring direct
beam and diffuse spectrum -, and broadband radiometers - for measuring direct normal,
global horizontal and diffuse irradiance. At this place, PV products in outdoor conditions
are measured side-by-side to the solar resource measurement station: it is therefore the
perfect data input for modeling the PV product output.
The two models chosen to simulate the HSAT front and rear side output have the direct
normal irradiance (DNI), global horizontal irradiance (GHI), diffuse horizontal irradiance
(DHI), and the site location and time as input. Those data are then extracted from the
database. Weather data is measured at a 10-seconds resolution. To strike a balance
between good resolution and computational time, I decided to model the scene based on
a 10-minutes resolution. Thereafter, when extracting the weather data, the average value
over 10 minutes is taken.
When importing the weather data, several filters [19] are applied, gathered into 4 cate-
gories below. Some calculated indicators are needed to filter the weather data, namely
the global calculated radiation sumSW, the diffuse ratio Diff and the clearness indicator
Kt. They are detailed in Equations (2.1) to (2.3) with G0n the normal irradiance at AM0,
i.e. in extraterrestrial conditions and G0 the extraterrestrial horizontal irradiance. In more
details, the clearness index is the ratio between the amount of irradiance received from
earth and the irradiation available in extraterrestrial conditions, and is thus measuring the
clearness of the atmosphere. The diffuse ratio is the amount of diffuse light compared
to the global light received on a horizontal plane, and should then account for the cloud
density nearby.
sumSW = DHI + DNI · cos(θz)
(2.1)
Diff = DHI
GHI
(2.2)
Kt = GHI
G0
(2.3)
• Simple filters on the raw data The first filters applied are the simplest ones. First,
the GHI, DHI, and DNI data should be positive, which would otherwise correspond
to measurement errors. The indicator sumSW is a calculated GHI from the DHI
and DNI data, and the data is filtered so that this calculation error is lower than 5%.
Finally, Diff, DNI and Kt must be lower than 1, G0n and 1.1, respectively.
GHI, DHI, DNI ≥0
(2.4)
GHI ∈[0.95, 1.05] · sumSW
(2.5)
Diff ≤1
(2.6)
DNI ≤G0n
(2.7)
Kt ≤1.1
(2.8)
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 11
==PAGE:20==
Then, the physical and extremely rare limits defined in [19] are applied.
• Physical limits
GHI
∈

−4, 100 + 1.5 · G0n · cos(θz)1.2
W·m−2
(2.9)
DHI
∈

−4, 50 + 0.95 · G0n · cos(θz)1.2
W·m−2
(2.10)
DNI
∈
[−4, G0n]
W·m−2
(2.11)
• Extremely rare limits
GHI
∈

−2, 50 + 1.2 · G0n · cos(θz)1.2
W · m−2
(2.12)
DHI
∈

−2, 30 + 0.75 · G0n · cos(θz)1.2
W · m−2
(2.13)
DNI
∈

−2, 10 + 0.95 · G0n · cos(θz)0.2
W · m−2
(2.14)
2.1.2
Weather data as an analysis variable
The weather data is also useful to interpret why the models perform better in some days
and times than other, and to study the evolution of the rear irradiance non-uniformity and
bifacial gain as a function of weather conditions.
To study the effect of weather, several indicators were selected. First, to be able to char-
acterize how cloudy/sunny the weather is, the diffuse ratio Diff defined in Equation (2.2)
and the clearness index Kt in Equation (2.3) are used. Indeed, those indexes are directly
related to the density of clouds and the clearness of the atmosphere.
(a) Diffuse fraction vs. Clearness index
(b) Daily diffuse fraction and clearness index
Figure 2.1: Study of the diffuse fraction and clearness index from July to November 2019
Figure 2.1a shows the diffuse fraction vs. clearness index distribution for the first mea-
surement series from July 9th to November 13th as explained in Section 2.2. Also, us-
ing empirical relationships between the diffuse fraction and clearness index, irradiance
models such as Reindl [20] or Orgill and Hollands [21] have been created and areas in
Figure 2.1a are known as very cloudy, typical and very clear conditions, respectively. In
this study, located in Denmark, the weather conditions represented stretch from ’quite’
clear to very cloudy. The daily average has been calculated in Figure 2.1b to spot days
with very cloudy conditions and clear conditions. Indeed, it is easier to understand and
explain the results for a typically cloudy vs. sunny day. The selected days along with their
respective daily average indexes are shown in Table 2.1.
12 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.1: Selected days for further analysis
Very cloudy days
Date
7/31
8/17
9/8
10/16
11/04
Mean Diff
0.98
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00
Mean Kt
0.20
0.18
0.29
0.08
0.12
Quite clear days
Date
7/24
8/03
8/25
9/22
10/29
Mean Diff
0.33
0.288
0.33
0.32
0.26
Mean Kt
0.65
0.66
0.63
0.64
0.65
The other weather data parameters in this study are the GHI, DHI and DNI as mentioned
earlier and the solar elevation angle, which is a good indicator of the sun position. In this
study, it starts every day at 0° and increases until solar noon when it reaches up to 58°
early July, and only 17° on November 13th when the first part of this study stops.
Figure 2.2: Weather data of the sunny and cloudy days selected for the first measurement
series
For the one-day analysis in Chapter 3, a sunny day and a cloudy day are selected for
comparison. The selected dates are August 25th 2019 and September 8th 2019 so that
the sun elevation is similar between the 2 days, and only the sunny vs. cloudy conditions
differ.The GHI, DHI and DNI data of those days are plotted in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.3: Weather data of the sunny and cloudy days selected for the second measure-
ment series
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 13
==PAGE:22==
A similar analysis has been done on the weather data of the second measurement series
from May 10th to May 25th 2020, illustrated in Figure B.1, Appendix B. The selected sunny
and cloudy days are May 20th (Diff = 0.38, Kt = 0.67) and May 17th (Diff = 1.00,
Kt = 0.20), respectively. The GHI, DHI and DNI data of the selected days for the second
measurement series are displayed in Figure 2.3.
Highlighted on Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3, on the sunny day, the GHI follows well the
shape of the DNI. On the cloudy day, GHI ≈DHI. Those relations are less obvious for
the sunny and cloudy days of May. Indeed, with only 2 weeks of data acquisition in May,
it was more difficult to find a very typical sunny and cloudy day.
2.2
Rear irradiance measurement data
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partnership with European Energy A/S
operates a 260 kWp bifacial PV test facility in Roskilde, Denmark (55.6°N, 12.1°E) [22].
Figure 2.5 is a aerial view of this PV field and exhibits the the tracker studied in this thesis,
tracker T5, situated in the middle of an eight-tracker field with a ground cover ratio of 0.28.
The tracker is a 45 m long Soltec SF7 with a 2P-module mounting configuration. It has a
square-shape (15 cm × 15 cm) torque tube with a 10 cm “z-gap” from the module plane.
The tracker hub height is 1.95 m.
Figure 2.4: East and West custom
measurement panels on the edge of
the tracker
During this thesis, four bifacial PV modules are anal-
ysed, highlighted in red squares in Figure 2.5: two
(East and West) on position 1 at the edge of the row,
and two others in position 22 in the middle of the
row. On the backside of those modules, we have
mounted four custom 1 × 10 cell panels illustrated
in Figure 2.4.These panels have been assembled
by MG Solar using DTU’s PV module prototyping
facilities.
Each panel consists of ten 156.3 cm2 mono-silicon
Al-BSF cells wherein each cell’s electrical contacts
are accessible through the polymeric backsheet.
The low-iron glass is 3.2 mm thick and does not
have an anti-reflective (AR) coating. The short cir-
cuit current (Isc) of each cell within the laminate is
monitored using shunt resistors with ohmic values
sized for the expected cell-level current-voltage (I-
V) behavior at low light conditions.
The cells are numbered from 1 to 10, 1 being the outer cell far from the torque tube, and
10 the inside cell just next to the torque tube. The data is acquired through a data logger
and is stored in the DTU Fotonik solar energy team database.
14 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Aerial view of the field of HSATs. The tracker under investigation is T5. The
red rectangles show the modules tested (center and edge).
2.2.1
First series of measurement, natural grass albedo
The first series of measurement are made above the natural grass. The onsite measure-
ments indicate that the albedo is 0.22 in average (see Appendix C). The four measurement
panels were first installed on July 1st : two on the East and West side of the south-edge
panels (position 1) and two on the East and West side of the center panel (position 22).
Data logging started on July 9th. On November 13th, a moveable frame was installed to
be able to change the position of the measurement panels more easily and to analyse
the irradiance between the center and the edge modules. At the same time, the center
measurement panels were moved to the position 17. The moveable frame is not used
in this study, and only the measurements on the edge and center panels are analysed.
Then, as showed in the chronology Figure 2.6, the first series of measurements spreads
out between July 9th and November 13th.
Figure 2.6: Chronology of the measurement set up and acquisition
2.2.2
Second series of measurements: white polymer sheet albedo
On May 9th, we mounted a white polymer sheet underneath the tracker to investigate
empirically the effect of albedo on electrical mismatch.
First, the moveable frame previously in position 17 was moved back to the very center
in position 22. A picture shown in Figure Figure 2.7a was taken during this operation to
show the custom panels rear side and mounting frame. Then, the white polymer sheet
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 15
==PAGE:24==
was hammered in the ground using U-bolts, illustrated in Figure 2.7b. The white polymer
sheet covers around 2.5 m on each side on the tracker.
Our onsite measurements indicate that the albedo of this material is 60% in average (see
Appendix C. Backside irradiance measurement data is acquired for only 15 days due to
the timing of this thesis. The polymer sheet installation was delayed due to the pandemic-
related restrictions, and therefore reduced the data acquisition period.
(a) Back of the custom measurement panels
during transfer from position 17 to 22
(b) Tools and rendering of the white polymer
tarp hammered under tracker T5
Figure 2.7: Experimental work achieved on May 9th
2.2.3
Calculation of the measurement uncertainty
The measurement uncertainty was estimated using the guide to expression of uncertainty
in measurement (GUM). Together with Nicholas Riedel who did the first experimental part
of the project - installing the measurement panels in the field - , we identified the differ-
ent sources for measurement uncertainty. The expanded uncertainty of those individual
components are calculated and combined together in Table 2.2. The detailed individual
calculations are explained in Appendix D.
The spectral mismatch correction mentioned in the table relates to the spectral deviation
between the calibration light source and the rear POA irradiance seen by the custom
panels. The spectral mismatch correction was applied to the measurements by dividing
the measurement output by the spectral mismatch corresponding at each time stamp
[23]. An approximated formula of the spectral mismatch as a function of the tracker tilt
angle is used to apply the spectral mismatch correction, given in Equation (2.15). The
approximation in the formula leads to a mean absolute error of 0.01%.
MM = 1.2−0.002 · β[°] −2 · 10−5 · (β[°] −30.5)2 + 5 · 10−7 · (β[°] −30.4918)3
(2.15)
In Table 2.2, the spectral mismatch correction uncertainty corresponds to the expanded
uncertainty of the spectral mismatch correction applied in the calculation. This uncertainty
component is estimated to be as low as ±0.2% [23, 24].
16 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:25==
Table 2.2: Estimation of the measurements uncertainty
Individual Component
Expanded
Standard
Contribution
uncertainty
uncertainty
to total
U
u
Uc
Cell calibration coefficient
6.7%
3.4%
53.1 %
PV non-linearity
1.0%
0.6%
1.6%
Spectral mismatch correction
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%
PV directional response
5.0%
2.9%
38.9 %
Datalogger accuracy
0.04%
0.02%
0.0%
Datalogger repeatability
0.8%
0.4%
0.8%
Long term stability
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
Soiling (maintenance)
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%
Shunt resistor’s ohmic value
1.0%
0.5%
1.2%
Temperature of shunt resistor
0.2%
0.1%
0.0%
Temperature of PV (short-circuit current)
1.9%
1.0%
4.3%
Total
9.3%
4.6%
100
%
The column ’Contribution to total’ in Table 2.2 shows that the cell calibration coefficient
and the PV directional response are the major components driving the uncertainty. The
cell calibration coefficient was estimated in our laboratory, and the uncertainty is directly
related to the experiment made to determine it. The PV directional response is related to
the angle-of-incidence correction factor and was computed using the numerical method
from [25].
2.3
Backside irradiance simulation models
2.3.1
bifacialvf model (VF Model)
The first model used to simulate the rear side irradiance distribution is a view factor model
developed by NREL called bifacialvf [18]. The advantage of this model is that it is quite
simple, with a basic geometry and computationally inexpensive. View factor models are
commonly used for PV simulation (PVSyst, SAM for instance).
This model relies on the concept of the view factor (VF): the fraction of irradiance leaving
a surface that is incident on a receiving surface.
Of course, the simplicity and fast computation comes along with limited accuracy stem-
ming from some rough assumptions. First, the use of VFs assumes that the radiation is
isotropic i.e. the same intensity for all the angle-of-incidences considered. In our case,
the ground-reflected radiation reaching the backside of the PV module is impacted by
shadows which disrupt the isotropic assumption.
Another rough assumption is that the view factor model neglects edge effects along the
row. Indeed, when the model is applied to several rows of PV modules, it describes the
irradiance distribution profile in the module’s height direction, but does not distinguish
different irradiance levels in the row’s length direction. Then, the irradiance is calculated
only for one inner module per row, which permits faster program execution.
The rear side irradiance distribution is calculated using 3 main steps described by Marion
et al. in [26] and summarized in this section.
First, the sun position is calculated using the PV array dimensions, orientation, the site
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 17
==PAGE:26==
location and time. Shadows are then projected in the row-to-row (rtr) dimension, which
is divided into N segments (N = 100 for instance). Each segment is identified as shaded
or not. The second step computes the irradiance received by the ground, the DHI being
decomposed into circumsolar, sky and horizon components beforehand. The ground irra-
diance for each segment n is calculated using Equation (2.16). The sky view factor V Fsky
is sketched in Figure 2.8a for more clarity.
GRIn = a · (DNI + Icir) + V Fsky · Isky
(2.16)
Where :
• a = cos(zenith) if segment n unshaded, a = cos(zenith)·open if segment n shaded,
with open the
• V Fsky = 1
2 · (cos(θs1) −cos(θs2))
(a) Sky view-factor
(b) View factor of the segment i of the rear side
Figure 2.8: Schematic of the view factors used in bifacialvf [26]
In the last step, the backside irradiance (GPOA,rear) is determined by Equation (2.17).
The first part of the rear side irradiance is the irradiance from the sun and circumsolar
region of the sky if the angle of incidence is lower than 90°. However, since we are
using a HSAT bifacial PV installation, the sun will never be behind the array, so this direct
contribution from the sun is equal to 0. Then, the diffuse irradiance from the sky, the
irradiance reflected from the ground and the one reflected from the front surface of the PV
modules in the row behind are added up. The view factor of one segment i of the panel
rear side is represented in Figure 2.8b.
GPOA,rear =
i=180°
X
i=0°
V Fi · Fi · Ii
(2.17)
Where Ii is the irradiance viewed by the ith segment (Isky, ρ · GRIn or Irefl) and V Fi =
1
2 · (cos(θi−1) −cos(θi)).
In practice, to use the python module bifacialvf once it has been installed, the user just
has to launch the function simulate specifying the main input parameters gathered in
Appendix E.
The bifacialvf model is called VF Model in the following chapters.
18 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:27==
2.3.2
bifacial_radiance model (RT Model)
The other simulation model used in this work is bifacial_radiance [17], a python wrapper
calling and using the open-source software Radiance [27] for the ray-trace modeling of
Bifacial Photovoltaics.
Radiance is a highly accurate ray-tracing software which is a suite of tools for perform-
ing lighting simulation developed in 1985 by Greg Ward at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. The stable release used in this project is 5.0 from 2017. It uses ray-tracing
to perform all lighting calculations, accelerated by the use of an octree data structure. It
also implements global illumination using the Monte Carlo method to sample light falling
on a point.
Ray-tracing is a method for calculating the path of light through a system with regions
of varying index of refraction, absorption characteristics, and reflecting surfaces.Under
these circumstances, the light rays may have complex trajectories. Ray tracing solves the
problem by repeatedly advancing idealized rays through the medium by discrete amounts.
Figure 2.9: Principle of numerical discrete ray-tracing [28]
In bifacial_radiance, backward ray-tracing is used to evaluate the irradiance on the mod-
ules front and rear side to reduce the complexity and run-time. Indeed, the module area
is smaller than the sky area, so backward tracing is faster.
The advantage of this bifacial_radiance model over the vf one is first the level of details
that can be reached. Any geometry specifications, including the torque tube shape and
material, is included in the Radiance model. Radiance also evaluates edge effects and
obstructions or shading by the surrounding trees and barns around the field. This way, the
array-level non-uniformity and other indicators can be simulated, whereas the vf model
only allows to compute it for the inner modules. Furthermore, Radiance includes a dedi-
cated visual interface to allow rendering images.
This complexity comes with a high computational time that can be reduced thanks to High
Performance Computing Clusters, and requires some training from the user.
The parameters used for the specific application of bifacial_radiance in this master thesis
are listed in Appendix E.
The bifacial_radiance model is called RT Model in the following chapters.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 19
==PAGE:28==
2.4
Indicators of bifacial PV performance
2.4.1
Characterisation of the spatial non-uniformity
To characterise the rear irradiance spatial distribution, the selection of a proper indicator
is needed. Four different indicators have already been used for similar purpose in the
literature: the non-uniformity NonU [29], the relative standard deviation σ [13, 9] and
the relative mean absolute difference ∆[9] defined in Equations 2.18, 2.19 and 2.20,
respectively.
NonU[%] = xmax −xmin
xmax + xmin
· 100%
(2.18)
σ[%] = 1
x ·
v
u
u
t
N
X
i=1
(xi −x)2
N
· 100%
(2.19)
∆[%] =
1
N2 · x
N
X
i=1
·
N
X
j=1
|xi −xj| · 100%
(2.20)
In my thesis, the standard deviation σ is used to characterise the non-uniformity since it
is a very common indicator used in a greater number of studies. More precisely, it was
chosen to calculate the deviation of the total irradiance Gtot defined in Equation 2.21 with
ϕ the bifaciality factor. This definition of Gtot is used since it is representative of the current
output (see Section 1.2.3). This spatial heterogeneity indicator is calculated at 2 different
scales:
• At the module-level, where N is the total number of cells in the module
• At the array-level, where N is the total number of cells in the array considered
Gtot = Gfront + ϕ · Grear, ϕ = 0.7
(2.21)
In the thesis, the relative standard deviation of the total rear irradiance is called σtot.
2.4.2
Power mismatch losses calculation
Figure 2.10: Cell numbering and bypass diodes in PVMismatch
The power mismatch losses calculation is achieved using the python wrapper PVMis-
match [30].
First, the specific PV cell studied is defined applying the constants displayed in Table F.1 of
Appendix F. Then, the module is created, using the cell characteristics previously defined.
The cell positions and bypass diodes convention is illustrated in Figure 2.10. A bypass
20 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:29==
diode voltage Vbypass = −0.5V and a cell area Acell = 243.4 cm2 are specified. Finally, a
PV array and a PV system are created in PVMismatch.
• For calculating the module-level mismatch, the string contains only 1 module.
4 different PV systems are defined - Edge East, Edge West, Inner East and Inner
West -, each one containing 1 PV string.
• For calculating the array-level mismatch, the PV array contains 22 modules.
2 different PV systems are generated - East and West -, each one containing 1 PV
array.
Figure 2.11: Measured average Gtot [W ·m−2] July-November 2019 for the south-western
part of an interior row of 44 modules × 7 rows HSAT, without considering torque tube
Figure 2.12: Year cumulative Gtot [Wh · m−2] for an interior row of 20 modules × 7 rows
HSAT at 1.5-m hub height, considering torque tube [9]
Lastly, the cell irradiance levels are set individually to Gtot defined in Equation 2.21 as
illustrated in Figure 2.11.
• If the module is at the Edge (position 1) or Inner (position 22) side of the array, the
irradiance is set to the measured/modeled value.
• If the module is in between, it is interpolated and set equal to the average between
the edge and the inner value.
This convention is not exactly true to reality according to Figure 2.12 from [9], but we
assess that it should still give a good understanding of the power mismatch losses.
Once the cell-level irradiance intensity has been defined, those levels are applied to the
system, and PVMismatch calculates the resulting IV curve and maximum power point
Parray (Pmodule in case of module-level calculation) as a function of the time.
The cell-level maximum power point is also available. The cell power of all the cells within
the array or module is summed up and named Ptot,cell.
Eventually, the mismatch power losses are calculated from Equation (2.22).
M[%] = (1 −Parray
Ptot,cell
) × 100% = (1 −Parray
P Pcell
) × 100%
(2.22)
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 21
==PAGE:30==
2.4.3
Bifacial gain
The bifacial gain is defined at three different levels. First, the cell-level bifacial gain is set
in Equation (2.23) as the irradiance gain without considering the bifaciality factor ϕ.
BGcell[%] = Grear
Gfront
× 100%
(2.23)
The module-level and array-level bifacial gains are calculated using PVMismatch again.
Side by side with the Mismatch computation (Section 2.4.2), the case of a monofacial PV
module or array is also computed. The monofacial cell is defined, then the monofacial
module and system, and the front irradiance levels are set on each cell uniformly. Finally,
the maximum power point of the module or array, Pfront,mod or Pfront,array, is calculated
and the module- and array-level bifacial gains are derived in Equations (2.24) to (2.25).
BGmod[%] = (
Pmod
Pfront,mod
−1) × 100%
(2.24)
BGarray[%] = (
Parray
Pfront,array
−1) × 100%
(2.25)
2.5
Comparison of the models with the measurements
The first objective of my Master thesis is to compare the results of irradiance, spatial
distribution and power mismatch obtained with the two models described in section 2.3
and the same results measured in the on-field PV plant described in section 2.2. This
comparison ultimately aims at criticizing and validating the two models.
The first mean of comparison is a one-day comparison of the absolute values, curves
shapes and trends during the specific days defined in section 2.1 - one clear or sunny day
and one very cloudy day.
Secondly, a more global comparison over the all data points is undertaken. To begin
with, data points are screened to spot outliers that should be removed - for instance when
something in the field compromised the measurements, or if the models perform very
badly under certain weather conditions. To make this screening study, the model residuals
resi and the relative ones rel_resi defined in equation 2.26 are scattered as a function
of the date. Then, they are scattered a function of the weather input parameters for the
models - DNI, DHI, GHI: this should indicate if the model has a particularly bad behavior
for some weather conditions. Other indicators as the solar angles, the diffuse ratio and
clearness index can also be used here.
rel_resi = xmod,i −xmeas,i
|xmeas,i|
(2.26)
resi = xmod,i −xmeas,i
(2.27)
An interesting indicator to spot activity in the field impacting the measurements is the tilt.
Each model calculates the tilt and it is also measured on the PV plant. The modeled tilt is
extremely close to the measured one most of the time since it is mainly following the sun.
As a result, if the tilt deviates significantly from the model to the measurements, it means
that something on the field disturbs the data acquisition.
Once the outliers have been detected, the remaining data points are considered to be
usable to model a scene that cannot be replicated experimentally. To characterize the ac-
curacy of the model reduced to the selected data points, typical indicators are calculated:
22 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:31==
the normalised root mean squared error (nRMSE), the normalized mean absolute error
(nMAE) and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), defined in Equation 2.28, 2.29
and 2.30, respectively, with x the average of the data column x.
nRMSE =
1
xmeas
·
v
u
u
t
N
X
i=1
(xmod,i −xmeas,i)2
N
(2.28)
nMAE =
1
N · xmeas
·
N
X
i=1
|xmod,i −xmeas,i|
(2.29)
MAPE = 1
N ·
N
X
i=1
|xmod,i −xmeas,i|
|xmeas,i|
(2.30)
2.6
Weather effect analysis
One output of this work is to understand how the weather conditions impact the bifacial
PV plant performance, defined as the module-level bifacial gain BG and the power mis-
match losses M[%]. This dependence is studied on the experimental data during the first
measurement series so it does not rely on the simulations.
The influence of a given weather variable on the PV plant performance is characterized by
the degree to which a pair of variables are linearly related. To describe those relationships,
first a simple correlation matrix is calculated to visualize which correlations are stronger
pair by pair. Finally, a partial correlation analysis is carried out to be able to describe the
influence of one variable isolated from the others effect.
2.6.1
Simple correlation matrix
The correlation matrix is computed using the function corr of the python library pandas.
This function computes the standard Pearson’s correlation coefficient or product-moment
coefficient written ρXY , defined in Equation (2.31), with X and Y two variables, µX and µY
their expected values and σX and σY their standard deviation.
ρXY = E[(X −µX)(Y −µY )]
σXσY
(2.31)
The correlation coefficient varies from –1 to 1. The value –1 conveys a perfect negative
correlation, i.e. an exact linear relationship in which higher values of one variable are
associated with lower values of the other; the value 1 conveys a perfect positive linear
relationship, and the value 0 conveys that there is no linear relationship.
2.6.2
Partial correlation analysis
In probability theory and statistics, partial correlation measures the degree of association
between two random variables, with the effect of a set of controlling random variables
removed. If we are interested in finding to what extent there is a numerical relationship
between two variables of interest, using their correlation coefficient will give misleading re-
sults if there is another, confounding, variable that is numerically related to both variables
of interest. This misleading information can be avoided by controlling for the confounding
variable, which is done by computing the partial correlation coefficient.
For instance, in our case, if we wish to see if there is a relationship between mismatch and
clearness index Kt, failing to control for the DNI when computing a correlation coefficient
between the mismatch and Kt would give a misleading result. Indeed, Kt depends typically
on the DNI as we will see in Chapter 5. A measured correlation between mismatch and Kt
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 23
==PAGE:32==
might actually be contaminated by this other correlations, or others. The use of a partial
correlation avoids this problem.
Formally, the partial correlation between X and Y given a set of n controlling variables
Z = {Z1, Z2, ..., Zn}, written ρXY ·Z, is the correlation between the residuals eX and eY
resulting from the linear regression of X with Z and of Y with Z, respectively. That is how
I have computed it in Python.
Let’s have Zi, Zj, i ̸= j a pair of variables between which we want to calculate a partial
correlation coefficient, and Z\i,j = {Zk}1≤k≤n,k̸=i,j the remaining columns in the data
frame. First, the linear regression between Zi and Z\i,j, and between Zj and Z\i,j, are
fitted, resulting in Equations (2.32) to (2.33), where ai,j is the estimated linear coefficient,
bi,j the estimated intercept and ei,j the residuals.
Zi = ai · Z\i,j + bi + ei
(2.32)
Zj = aj · Z\i,j + bj + ej
(2.33)
Then, the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between ei and ej is computed: this is the par-
tial correlation coefficient between Zi and Zj. Importantly, prior to perform the partial cor-
relation analysis, the variables are centered and standardised following Equation (2.34).
xnew = x −x
std(x)
(2.34)
In Python, the partial correlation analysis is computed using the library scipy. The multilin-
ear regression is computed using the function lstsq of the module linalg of scipy and the
Pearson’s correlation coefficient using the function pearsonr of the module stats of scipy.
*lastly, multilinear regressions are computed to evaluate the resulting coefficients and error
rate (nMAE). To be noticed that for the multilinear regressions, the predicting variables
(weather variables) are standardized following Equation (2.34) but the dependent variable
(BG, M[%] or σtot) are not standardised.
2.7
Albedo effect analysis
The impact of ground albedo on the bifacial PV performance are also studied in this thesis.
This study is based on simulations since only two different ground albedo were tested on
the field, and the second one for a very short acquisition period.
First, several simulations are carried out at different albedos using the RT Model. Previ-
ously, the RT Model is validated on a certain range of timestamps of the first measurement
series in Chapter 4. Thanks to this validation, we consider that the simulations performed
using the RT Model are true-to-reality on the range of timestamps selected. Then, the
simulations carried out to analyse the albedo effect are based on the weather data input
of the selected timestamps of the first measurement series.
To study the impact of ground albedo, the average and standard deviation of the variables
of interest - BG and M[%] - are computed as a function of albedo.
The curves of the mismatch M[%] as a function of the total irradiance relative standard
deviation σtot are studied including the simulation data of all the studied albedo, and com-
pared with similar studies in the literature [9].
24 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:33==
3
Analysis of typical sunny vs. cloudy
days - comparison of the models with
the outdoor measurements, validation
of conclusions from the literature
The two outdoor measurement series from July to November 2019 and in May 2020 are
the basis to evaluate the performance of the two models introduced in section 2.3. To
do so, the first step is to visualize the model results and real measured data during a
sunny day and a cloudy day. Using those typical sunny and cloudy measurements, con-
clusions from the literature can also be validated or questioned. The second step is to
perform a statistical comparison of models to measurements using the large amount of
data gathered in the first acquisition series during four months and a half. The second
step is performed in Chapter 4.
3.1
Visual rendering
The scene modelled using bifacial_radiance is visually compared to real pictures using the
Radiance rendering tool in Figure 3.1. The custom measurement panels are not created
in Radiance, but instead the bifacial panel is set in plane with the torque tube to replicate
a similar measurement set up. The edge panels in Figure 3.1a are very well reproduced.
The inner modules in Figure 3.1b are less true-to-reality since the gap next to the inner
modules is not captured in Radiance simulations.
(a) Edge panels
(b) Inner panels
Figure 3.1: Visualisation of the real measurement panels (left) and the virtual rendering
in Radiance (right)
The complete radiance scene is visualized during the first measurement series (Figure 3.2b)
and during the second measurement series (Figure 3.2d) to be compared to real pictures
(Figure 3.2a and Figure 3.2c, respectively). The surrounding barns and neighboring E-W
single-axis tracker block on the East of the HSATs under investigation are reproduced
accurately in Radiance. The simulated modules are highlighted by a red square. The
overall radiance scene is visually very close to reality.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 25
==PAGE:34==
During the second measurement phase, the white tarp was replicated in the same 2.5 m
width dimensions on each tracker side. Using the RT model, this width was varied to 5 m
and a completely uniform albedo of 0.60 was also simulated.
Some more advanced scene parameters such as time-dependent or spectrum-dependent
albedo would certainly improve the model performance. Also, standard parameters spec-
ified in Appendix E are used to described the different PV materials - module front and
rear reflectivity parameters, tracker reflectivity. Actually measuring each of those mate-
rials properties could also enhance the accuracy of the RT model. There was not time
enough to tackle those points in the framework of this thesis.
(a) Riso PV field, 1st series
(b) Radiance rendering, 1st series
(c) Tracker under investigation, 2nd series
(d) Radiance view, 2nd series
Figure 3.2: Pictures of the real PV field and virtual renderings in Radiance, afternoon view
26 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Front irradiance
Several variables are studied to compare the model to the reality. The first one is simply
the front-side irradiance in the plane-of-array of the PV panels. Figure 3.3 shows the
measured and modeled front irradiance for a sunny and a cloudy day. During both days,
the two models estimate very accurately the front irradiance.
Figure 3.3: Measured and modeled front irradiance on sunny (left) and cloudy (right) days
The remaining sections of this chapter rely on the article I wrote in collaboration with
Nicholas Riedel-Lyngskær et al. [31]. Some sentences and abbreviations are modified to
match my thesis terminology.
3.3
Rear irradiance spatial distribution over grass albedo
Figure 3.4: Average rear irradiance of the ten cells measured within a module on a sunny
(08/25/2019) and an overcast day (09/08/2019) over grass [31]
The measured and modeled backside irradiance of the four different modules (Inner East,
Inner West, Edge East and Edge West) during the first measurement series is studied
here. Figure 3.4 displays the average measured rear irradiance within each module for a
sunny and a cloudy day.
Thanks to the measurement data, several conclusions from the literature are verified in the
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 27
==PAGE:36==
context of Northern Europe in a HSAT configuration. On the sunny day, it is easy to see
that the cells within the two edge panels receive nearly twice as much irradiance as the
cells within the two inner panels. On the cloudy day, the irradiance becomes more uniform
and irradiance values observed in one array are within 10 W.m−2. Hence, conclusions
from the literature that the edge module rear side is brighter than the inner one [7] and
that homogeneity improves on the cloudy day [13] are validated.
Other trends are observed in the measurement data. During the cloudy day, the module
the closest to the sky receives more irradiance. During the sunny day, the inner module
the closest to the ground tends to catch more irradiance, but this trend is less obvious
than the one during the cloudy day.
Figure 3.5: Hourly average of measured/simulated rear irradiance on the edge module,
west side of the HSAT on a sunny and a cloudy day over grass [31]
Figure 3.6: Hourly average of measured/simulated rear irradiance on the inner module,
west side of the HSAT on a sunny and a cloudy day over grass [31]
Figure 3.5 and Figure 3.6 overlay the hourly averaged measurements, bifacial_radiance
(RT Model) and bifacialvf (VF Model) simulations for the west side of the tracker at the
inner and edge module locations. The VF Model results are only shown in the inner
28 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:37==
module plot, since edge effects are not considered. Ten data points are shown at each
hourly timestamp and group, which represent the ten cells measured within the module.
Color shades are applied to differentiate from cell #1 to #10 as detailed in the legend –
the lighter color means cell #10, closest to the torque tube. The #10 cells can receive
as much as 20% lower rear irradiance values than #1 cells on the sunny day and up to
10% lower on the cloudy day. The similar analysis from Deline et. al [9] is then confirmed
here. Furthermore, since the cell-irradiance level spreads over a larger gradient during
the sunny day, this supports again Janssen et. al argument [13] that the cloudy day is
more uniform.
The RT Model simulations reproduce well the measured inner and edge module rear ir-
radiances. The poorest agreement of measured to modeled values is observed on the
sunny day on the edge module. In the case of the west module, the model tends to un-
derestimate the irradiance in the morning, and to overestimate it around solar noon. In
the morning, the error is larger than the estimated measurement uncertainty (±9.3%) but
around solar noon the error becomes smaller than the uncertainty. During the cloudy day,
the simulated absolute values are within the measurement uncertainty 76% of the time
- considering all 40 sensors. Also, the model agrees with the observed measurements
trends such as: during the cloudy day, the module the closest to the sky receives more
irradiance and during the sunny day, the inner module the closest to the ground receives
more irradiance.
The VF Model simulation results are slightly less accurate than RT Model simulations
of the inner modules, which makes sense as it is a reduced order model. The VF Model
tends to underestimate the rear irradiance during the sunny day by as much as 20 W.m−2.
The performance of the VF Model on the two days analysed are poor compared to the
RT Model. The models error rates have been statistically computed in Chapter 4, and
show that the VF Model error rates are significantly higher than the RT Model ones. Fur-
thermore, the VF Model allows less geometry details and does not capture edge effects,
a key element for mismatch computations. As a result, the VF Model is not used for the
remaining analysis of this Chapter.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 29
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Influence of albedo on the backside irradiance
In this section, the effect of a ground cover of albedo 0.60 on the backside irradiance is
studied on a clear and an overcast day. The intent is to compare to the results made over
low albedo grass that were shown in Section 3.3. The white cover mounted is 2.5 m wide
on each side of the tracker, so the measurement values correspond to this configuration.
Using the RT Mode, 2 different scenes are simulated: one similar to the field experiment
with a 2.5 m wide white (albedo 0.60) band on grass, and one with a uniform 0.60 albedo
on the entire surroundings.
Figure 3.7: Hourly average of measured/simulated rear irradiance on the edge module,
west side on a sunny/cloudy day over different types of white ground cover [31]
Figure 3.8: Hourly average of measured/simulated rear irradiance on the inner module,
west side on a sunny/cloudy day over different types of white ground cover [31]
The backside irradiance levels of the edge and inner modules of the west side are dis-
played in Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.8, respectively. First, the measurements are used to
validate the accuracy of the RT model for the high albedo condition. Indeed, the 2.5 m
wide band simulation is very close to the measurement irradiance values, with a normal-
ized Mean Average Error (MAE) of 9.6% during the sunny day and 12.5% during the cloudy
day.
30 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:39==
Now comparing the 2.5 m band case with the uniform albedo, it appears that the band is
not wide enough to be representative of a uniform 0.60 albedo. In other words, it seems
that a large quantity of ground reflected light reaching the cells comes from the grass,
not the white cover, and this has been studied in more details in Section 4.4. To give an
example, in the morning when the west module is far from the ground: V FGround→Cell#1
on the tracker west side includes a considerable portion of the grass area. An additional
simulation using the RT Model showed that a 5 m band on each side of the tracker would
lead to results more similar to a uniform 0.60 (see Section 4.4). This much additional white
cover material could not be provided nor mounted yet due to pandemic-related restrictions.
Figure 3.9: Average bifacial gain within the edge and inner modules of the west side on a
sunny and a cloudy day over an albedo of 0.22 (measured, 08/25/2019 and 09/08/2019)
and over another albedo of 0.60 (RT model, 05/20/2020 and 05/17/2020) [31]
The RT Model shows good agreement with the measured rear irradiance on the stud-
ied days under different albedos. Even more, the RT Model is statistically validated in
Chapter 4. Over grass, the RT Model shows a normalized MAE of 10.3%/12.4% for the In-
ner/Edge modules, respectively, over the whole acquisition period. The daily normalized
MAE over the white cover is given above. Hence, the outdoor measurements success-
fully validated the RT Model performance in simulating backside irradiance under different
albedo conditions.
The rear side irradiance over grass and white polymer sheet albedo are now compared.
The rear irradiance levels in W.m−2 are not directly comparable because the daily GHI
profiles are different between the sunny and cloudy days of the two measurement series.
Thus, the cell-level irradiance bifacial gain defined in Equation (2.23) of Section 2.4.3 is
used for this comparison. The average irradiance bifacial gains within the edge and the
inner modules during cloudy and sunny days are plotted in Figure 3.9. Over grass, mea-
surement values are displayed. However, the RT model is used for the high albedo case
because the bifacial gain observed over our white cover in the field is not truly represen-
tative of a uniformly covered field.
The average bifacial irradiance gain is up to 2.5 times higher under an albedo of 0.60
than under grass albedo. As a result, the bifacial gain varies linearly with the albedo in
average. Also, the average bifacial gain over the edge module is as much as twice as the
inner panels one, especially during the sunny day.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 31
==PAGE:40==
3.5
Power mismatch losses over different ground albedos
The electrical mismatch calculated using inputs from the onsite measurements and the
RT Model simulations during the first measurement series over grass albedo is studied in
Figure 3.10 at the module-level and in Figure 3.11 at the array-level.
Figure 3.10: Module-level mismatch on the West side using the measured/simulated rear
irradiance values for a sunny/cloudy day of the first measurement series over grass [31]
When used to estimate module-level mismatch losses, the RT model agrees very well
with the measurements, except late in the cloudy day when some direct beam light was
observed. The large discrepancy late in the day could be due to passing clouds and a
lagged response from the pyranometer sensors. During the sunny day, the module-level
mismatch is lower than 0.2%. And during the cloudy day, the module-level mismatch
losses are mostly lower than 0.2%, except at the beginning and at the end of the day. The
conclusion from [15] that the module-level mismatch is higher in the middle of the day
when it is sunny and is quite constant throughout the day if it is cloudy is validated here.
Please note that the results from the Eastern panels are not shown here to maintain clarity
in the figures. An interesting observation found when comparing East and West sides
during the sunny day is that the module closest to the ground suffers higher mismatch
losses than the top module.
Figure 3.11: Array-level mismatch losses using the measured/simulated data points of
the HSAT for a sunny and a cloudy day of the first measurement series over grass [31]
32 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:41==
At the array-scale now in Figure 3.11, the RT model tends to overestimate the mismatch
but follows the same trends as the measurements. During the sunny day, both the sim-
ulated and measured mismatch are lower than 0.25%. The power mismatch losses are
again higher in the middle of the sunny day. It also corresponds to the lowest tilt. Indeed,
when the tilt is higher, the rear side of the module sees more sky, which results in a more
uniform irradiance than the ground as inferred in [11].
During the cloudy day in the middle of the day the mismatch is < 0.15%, but in the morning
and afternoon the mismatch increases on the array the closest to the ground up to 1% for
periods with meaningful levels of irradiance (GHI > 100 W.m−2).
The electrical mismatch calculated using inputs from the second measurement series is
studied in Figure 3.12. Two different albedo conditions are compared: the measurements
made over a 2.5 m wide band of albedo 0.60 on each side of the tracker, and the RT scene
with a uniform 0.60 albedo. During the sunny day, the modeled mismatch is similar for the
east and west arrays, with a significantly higher albedo in the middle of the day. In contrast,
the measurements show that the array the closest to the ground experience a higher
mismatch, which is likely due to the inhomogeneous albedo. For analysing the effect of
albedo on the mismatch, the RT model calculations are used instead of the measurements,
since the comparison should be done over a uniform albedo for both the grass and white-
cover albedo.
Figure 3.12: Array-level mismatch losses using the measured and simulated data points
of the HSAT for a sunny and a cloudy day of the second measurement series over an
albedo of 0.60 – 2.5 m white bands and grass for the measurements, uniform 0.60 albedo
for the RT model
Figure 3.12 validates the conclusion from the literature that mismatch losses are higher
under high albedo than for low albedo conditions [15]. Indeed, the peak array-level mis-
match during the sunny day increases from 0.25% over an albedo of 0.22 to 3% over an
albedo of 0.60, i.e. by an order of magnitude. During the cloudy day, the mismatch losses
are in the order of 1%. On the sunny day, the mismatch is higher in the middle of the
day. On the cloudy day, it is quite constant with the module the closest to the ground
experiencing more mismatch losses.
The electrical mismatch is now studied as a function of the relative standard deviation
of the total irradiance σtot defined in Equation (2.19) of Section 2.4.1. As stated in Sec-
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 33
==PAGE:42==
tion 1.3, similar studies have already been carried out by Deline et al. in [12] and Janssen
et al. in [13]. To be able to compare our outcomes with their fitted curves, the module-
level mismatch is studied. Indeed, the interpolated data used to calculate the array-level
mismatch is not exactly true to reality. We estimate that it does not affect the mismatch
losses much, but it does reduce significantly the array-level σtot, which thus makes it un-
suitable for plotting mismatch vs. σtot results. Only timestamps when GHI > 150 W.m−2
are considered here.
Figure 3.13: Module-level electrical mismatch vs. the GPOA,tot relative standard devia-
tion σtot. Results from the measurements and Radiance simulations are shown for all 4
modules over grass albedo applying GHI > 150 W.m−2 and compared to Deline et al.[9]
and Janssen et al. [13]
Module-level mismatch losses vs. total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot over
grass is shown in Figure 3.13. During the sunny day, both the measurements and the RT
model fit quite well to the exponential curve of Deline et al. in [9] specified in Equation (1.6)
in Section 1.3. To be noticed that the edge modules are very uniform and correspond to
the large amount of data points with σtot[%] < 0.25% white the inner modules data best
fits the Deline correlation [9].
During the cloudy day, the correlation between mismatch and σtot is less obvious. Some
measurement data points, and even more RT model data points are closer to Janssen
polynomial curve [13] (see Equation (1.7)). This suggests that the effect of diffuse light
ought to be accounted for when modeling mismatch losses in this range. Mainly, during
the cloudy day and over grass albedo, no correlation is observed between mismatch and
σtot. Furthermore the RT model data points following the yellow curve diverge from the
measurements. This shows that under cloudy conditions, the module-mismatch is less
precisely captured by the model.
Importantly, one must keep in mind that the mismatch values obtained in this study are
on the very low end of possible values that bifacial PV systems - particularly low ground
clearance systems - can incur.
Fig. 19 again shows the module-level mismatch vs. σtot curve, but for the second mea-
34 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:43==
surement series over the reflective cloth of albedo 0.60. As a reminder, the measurements
were done over a 2.5 m wide tarp under each side of the tracker whereas the RT model
considers a uniform 0.60 albedo for comparison.
Figure 3.14: Module-level electrical mismatch vs. the GPOA,tot relative standard devia-
tion σtot. Results from the measurements and Radiance simulations are shown for all 4
modules over 0.60 albedo applying GHI > 150 W.m−2 and compared to Deline et al.[9]
and Janssen et al. [13]
Both the measurements and the model fit well to the exponential curve of Deline et al.
in [9] (Equation (1.6)), for a sunny and for a cloudy day. However, during the cloudy
day, most of the data points are still gathered in a wide cloud where the relative standard
deviation lower than 1%. The sunny day-datapoints follow the exponential curve on the
full extent more evenly, with total irradiance relative deviations up to 3% and module-
mismatch losses up to 0.9%.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 35
==PAGE:44==
4
Validation of the models on a large
dataset
In this section, the two models are compared to the measurement data on a large dataset.
The aim is to validate the models statistically, i.e. on a very large number of datapoints.
The dataset spreads from July 10th to November 12th with a 10-minutes resolution acqui-
sition - it gathers 10051 timestamps.
4.1
Dataset preparation - data filtering and outliers detection
The first step in the analysis of this large dataset is to detect outliers and filter the data
properly so that the statistical results are consistent.
In the scope of this work, the first kind of outliers I want to remove from the dataset cor-
responds to timestamps when there is activity on the field - maintenance, observation -
since it can disturb the measurement process. An interesting indicator of this activity is
the HSAT tilt angle. Indeed, it is observed that most of the time, the tilt angle is quite accu-
rately predicted by both models. This accuracy is measured by the tilt residuals defined in
Equation (4.1), and follows the daily pattern shown in Figure 4.2a. Typically, the absolute
tilt residuals are lower than 2° all day except before 08:30 and after 20:00 on a typical
August sunny day (August 25th 2019).
restilt[°] = tiltmodeled −tiltmeasured
(4.1)
This regular pattern makes it easy to spot timestamps with apparent tilt deviations. In
Figure 4.1, the tilt residuals are plotted as a function of the time for the entire acquisition
period, and tilt deviations appear evidently. Based on those observations, a list of time
intervals to be ignored is established in Appendix G.
Figure 4.1: Scatter of the tilt residuals over the whole acquisition period
Moreover, based on the daily tilt residual pattern, it is observed that the residuals are
higher early in the morning and in the evening, when the sun is low. This can come from
the fact that the modeled tracker can go in one time step from 0 to 60° in the morning when
36 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:45==
the sun appears low in the horizon whereas in reality it takes time for the tracker to get
there. Also, when the sun is low in the horizon, more shade applies and disturbs the tilt
tracking calculations. The conclusion is that the tilt deviates from model to measurement
for low solar elevation angle αS - this is depicted in Figure 4.2b. Hence, I decide to apply
the filter αS > 12° for further analysis.
(a) Typical daily pattern of the tilt residuals on
August 25th 2019
(b) Scatter of the tilt residuals as a function of
the solar elevation angle αS
Figure 4.2: Analysis of the tilt residuals to filter the data
This choice is also supported by the power mismatch remarkably higher in early morning
and late afternoon, with values not representative of a significant loss since the output
power levels are low at those times of the day.
In a similar way, I find out that the total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot and power
mismatch losses are particularly high for very low DNI. This is observed in Figure 4.3 for
the case of the mismatch power losses. Thus, the filter DNI > 0.6W/m2 is applied to
the raw data.
(a) Module-level mismatch vs. DNI
(b) Zoom on the module-mismatch peak
Figure 4.3: Analysis of the mismatch peak at low DNI for data filtering
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 37
==PAGE:46==
4.2
Analysis of the Ray-Trace (RT) and View Factor (VF)
models performance at the cell-level over grass
To analyse the models accuracy at the cell-level, the rear side irradiance values obtained
through measurement and using models are compared. First, scatter plots of the mod-
eled GPOA,rear as a function of the measured GPOA,rear are studied for the RT and VF
model in Figure 4.4. Those scatter plots are joint with the modeled and measured data
distribution. The RT modeled data values are divided between the inner and edge mod-
ules to be comparable with the VF model. The task of modeling the edge modules rear
side irradiance is only performed using the RT model since the VF model does not include
edge effects
(a) RT Model, Inner modules
(b) RT Model, Edge modules
(c) VF Model, Edge modules
Figure 4.4:
Scatter plots of the modeled GPOA,rear as a function of the measured
GPOA,rear. The data distribution of the measured GPOA,rear and the modeled GPOA,rear
are joint on the x-axis and y-axis, respectively. A linear regression is fitted (red) and a
green area represents the measurements uncertainty (±9.3%) around the y=x line.
38 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:47==
For each scatter plot, a linear regression is plotted.
The linear coefficient a so that
Gmodeled = a · Gmeasured and the correlation factor R2 are detailed in Table 4.1. The
identity function (y = x) is also drawn for comparison with the linear regression. Finally,
an area around the identity line is colored in green - it corresponds to the data points within
the estimated measurements uncertainty (±9.3%). The percentage of data points within
the uncertainty area is computed in Table 4.2.
In the case of the inner modules, both models reproduce well the data distribution shape
on Figure 4.4a and Figure 4.4c. However, both tends to underestimate the rear side irradi-
ance. This is seen through the linear coefficient a from the linear regression in Table 4.1,
which is then lower than 1. a = 0.96 for the RT Model and a = 0.91 for the VF model.
The VF tends to underestimate the rear side irradiance even more. This conclusion was
also inferred in the daily analysis in Chapter 3. The correlation coefficient of the linear
regression is also lower for the VF model (0.974 against 0.984 for the RT Model).
Table 4.1: Summary of the linear regression of the modeled irradiance as a function of
the measured one for 3 different configurations
Model / Position
RT Model / Edge
RT Model / Inner
VF Model / Inner
R2
0.976
0.984
0.974
Linear coeff. a
1.00
0.96
0.91
The RT Model also simulated the Edge modules rear irradiance and this is analysed in Fig-
ure 4.4b. The measured rear side irradiance data distribution of the edge module presents
a bump around 125 W/m2, whereas the modeled distribution is smoothly decreasing on
those high irradiance values. On this same range of values, the model is overestimating
the irradiance around 150 W/m2 instead of 125 W/m2. This high-irradiance overestima-
tion compensates with the underestimation trend for lower values - the resulting linear
coefficient is a = 1.00. The correlation coefficient R2 = 0.976 is however lower than the
one corresponding to the RT model, inner modules (R2 = 0.984). The linear coefficient is
the result of underestimation for irradiance levels lower than 100 W/m2 an overestimation
above, and does not mean that the RT model performs better for the edge modules.
Table 4.2: Percentage of modeled values within the measurement uncertainty over grass
Model / Position
RT Model / Edge
RT Model / Inner
VF Model / Inner
Within uncertainty (±9.3%)
49
%
53
%
38
%
Within 2 uncertainties (±18.6%)
77
%
83
%
67
%
Table 4.2 displays the percentage of data points the measurements uncertainty (±9.3%)
(represented by the green area in Figure 4.4). The model leading to the biggest percent-
age of datapoints within the uncertainty is the RT model. When the RT Model is used to
estimate the inner modules GPOA,rear, 53% of the datapoints are within the uncertainty
whereas this percentage falls to 49% in the case of edge modules. The VF model leads
to only 38% of the modeled datapoints within the estimated uncertainty. The RT model is
the best-performing model, but still half of the RT-modeled irradiance values are outside
the measurement uncertainty. It was computed as an order of magnitude that only 20%
of the datapoints are outside two uncertainties (18.3%).
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 39
==PAGE:48==
In order to analyse further the models performance, the model rear irradiance residuals
resGrear[W.m−2] are defined in Equation (4.2). The distribution density of those residu-
als are investigated in Figure 4.5. On each density plot, the normal distribution density
corresponding to the same average value and the same standard deviation is plotted for
comparison. Table 4.3 gathers the residuals average value also called the Bias, and the
standard deviation named std in the table.
resGrear[W.m−2] = GPOA,rear,modeled −GPOA,rear,measured
(4.2)
(a) RT Model, Inner modules
(b) RT Model, Edge modules
(c) VF Model, Inner modules
Figure 4.5: Distribution density of the residuals of the rear side irradiance resGrear[W.m−2]
of the two models simulating the Edge and Inner modules irradiance. For each configura-
tion, the normal distribution density with the same average (Bias) and standard deviation
(std) is plotted (red) for comparison.
Table 4.3: Bias and standard deviation of the resGrear[W.m−2]
Model / Position
RT Model / Edge
RT Model / Inner
VF Model / Inner
Bias [W.m−2]
−0.6
−1.4
−3.7
Residuals std [W.m−2]
11.2
5.8
7.2
In every configuration, the bias is negative, which corroborates the linear regression anal-
ysis inferring that the models underestimate the GPOA,rear.
The lowest bias in absolute value is obtained with the RT model on the edge modules.
However, it was seen during the linear regression analysis that there is a compensation
between the underestimation on the low-irradiance scale and overestimation on the high-
irradiance scale. In Figure 4.5b, a large amount of datapoints are actually underestimated,
40 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:49==
and fewest are overestimating, but the overestimation residuals are as high as 40 W.m−2,
which explains the compensation effect. Also, the RT residuals standard deviation is
higher for edge modules than for inner ones, and the residuals distribution almost follow
a normal distribution in the case of inner modules but not at all for edge modules.
For the inner modules, the RT model residuals have a lower bias and a lower standard
deviation than the VF model ones.
The relative residuals were plotted against the different weather variables, and no appar-
ent correlation was observed. Then, the models seem to perform equally as a function of
weather conditions for simulating the rear side irradiance.
Table 4.4: Model cell-level rear irradiance error rate for the first measurement series over
grass
Model / Position
RT Model / Edge
RT Model / Inner
VF Model / Inner
nRMSE [%]
17.3
13.8 %
18.9
nMAE [%]
12.4
10.3 %
14.5
MAPE [%]
12.4
10.7 %
15.5
Table 4.4 gathers the error rates of the two models whether they are used to estimate the
edge or inner modules GPOA,rear. Once again, the best model performance is obtained
using the RT model on the inner modules, with a normalized RMSE of 13.8%, a normalized
MAE of 10.3% and a MAPE of 10.7%. Importantly, those error rates are in the same
order of magnitude than the measurements uncertainty. The RT model displays lower
performance on the edge modules with a MAPE and normalized MAE of 12.4% and a
normalized RMSE of 17.3%. The VF model shows significantly higher error rates on the
inner modules with a MAPE and normalized MAE around 15% and a normalized RMSE
of 18.9%.
The normalized RMSE is always higher. Since it is based on the square of the residuals,
this error rate tends to be sensitive to the case when a few datapoints have are far from
reality. The other error rates are more evenly-weighted on all the residuals values. In-
terestingly, in the case of the edge modules, the MAPE and nMAE are exactly the same.
This means that the relative residuals are quite constant on the all dataset.
At the cell-level, the VF model performs with a significantly higher error rate than the RT
model. Furthermore, it does not include edge effects. Consequently, I decided to focus
on the RT model only for the remaining sections of this report.
Importantly, the error rates were also analysed as a function of the cell number, and for the
different module sides. No dependency of the error rates on the module or cell location
was found apart from the Edge/Inner differentiation.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 41
==PAGE:50==
4.3
Analysis of the model at the module- and array-level over
grass and effect of the weather conditions on the model
performance
The RT model has now been validated over grass (albedo 0.22) for modeling the rear
side irradiance at the cell-level on four different modules. To study the effect of different
model parameters on the bifacial PV performance, the RT model will be used to model
the bifacial gain and power mismatch losses at the module- and array-scale. This section
aims at evaluating the RT model performance for simulating the bifacial gain and the
power mismatch losses at module- and array-scale. The evaluation is based on the results
obtained using the first measurements series over grass.
rel_resM[%] = M[%]modeled −M[%]measured
M[%]measured
(4.3)
First, the relative residuals obtained when modeling the module-level mismatch and de-
fined in Equation (4.3) are investigated. To be noticed that the relative residuals are ratios.
If their absolute value is higher than 1, the difference between the model and the mea-
surement is higher than the measurement absolute value, so this datapoint is considered
as a very bad performance for the model. The relative residuals are studied as a function
of the clearness index Kt, the diffuse ratio, the solar elevation angle and the GHI in fig. 4.6.
Since the weather variables are interdependent, they are studied two by two.
First, the diffuse ratio is plotted as a function of the clearness index in Figure 4.6a. In this
same graph, each datapoint is colored according to its module-mismatch relative residual
value following the color scale on the right. Hence, if the relative residual is between 2
and 4, the datapoint is red, and this means that the modeled value is 2 to 4 times higher
than the measured one. It appears clearly that the model is significantly overestimating
the module-level mismatch under very cloudy conditions, defined by Orgill [21] as the
conditions beyond Kt = 0.35, Diff = 0.92.
Figure 4.6b is a scatter plot of the GHI as a function of the solar elevation angle αS.
Again, the datapoints are colored as a function of the relative residuals value. When the
sun elevation and the irradiation level are low, the RT model is overestimating the module-
mismatch with relative residuals from 2 to 4 again. The plot region with high residuals is
defined by the black line, for solar elevation angles lower than 40°.
(a) rel_resM[%] vs. Kt and Diff
(b) rel_resM[%] vs. αS and GHI
Figure 4.6: Module-level mismatch relative residuals rel_resM[%] vs. weather conditions
42 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:51==
The boundaries of the regions of the graphs with bad model performance are plotted in
black in the two figues. Those areas are well-delimited - as a result, I decided to remove
the datapoints within those lines prior to analysing the model further. More precisely, the
timestamp corresponding to any of the conditions in Equations (4.4) to (4.6) are removed.
Diff > 0.92
(4.4)
KT < 0.35
(4.5)
GHI < 8.185 · αS + 37.78 and αS < 40°
(4.6)
Those filters are applied to try to obtain a satisfactory RT model error rate when model-
ing the module- and array-level power mismatch and bifacial gain. Indeed, the relative
residuals of the bifacial gain at different scale and of the array-level mismatch were also
studied, and resulted in graphs similar to the one obtained for module-level,mismatch in
Figure 4.6. The aim of filtering those datapoints is to end up with a set of datapoints when
the RT model is effective for simulating the BG and M[%]. Once the model is validated on
this restricted dataset, it can be used using the same weather input data as the restricted
dataset, and changing some other parameters such as the albedo in Chapter 6.
Consequently, those filters are applied in the rest of this section to study the performance
of the model for simulating the module- and array-scale bifacial gain and mismatch. Sim-
ilarly to the cell-level comparison, the modeled vs. measured module- and array-level
bifacial gain are displayed in Figure 4.7.
(a) Module-level bifacial gain
(b) Array-level bifacial gain
Figure 4.7: Scatter plots of the simulated bifacial gain by the RT Model as a function of
the measured bifacial gain at different scales. The data distribution of the measured BG
and the modeled BG are joint on the x-axis and y-axis, respectively. A linear regression
is fitted (red) and the y = x curve is plotted for comparison.
Looking a the bifacial gain distributions, both at the module- and array-level, the modeled
distributions have a bump around 23% and 20%, respectively, which are not present in the
measured distributions. A linear regression is fitted to the data, summarized in Table 4.5.
Both fits have a high correlation factor R2 ≈0.99 and a linear coefficient close to 1, which
suggests the model is very good for modeling the module- and array-level bifacial gain.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 43
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.5: Summary of the linear regression of the RT modeled bifacial gain BG, mismatch
M[%] and total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot as a function of the measured
one at the module-level and/or at the array-level
Studied variable
Array BG
Module BG
Module M[%]
Module σtot
R2
0.987
0.986
0.870
0.926
Linear coeff.
0.98
0.97
0.80
0.83
The module- and array-level power mismatch losses are studied using the same modeled
vs. measured scatter plots in Figure 4.8. The mismatch values are lower than 0.3%, which
is extremely small. Those values represent nonuniform rear irradiance-induced mismatch
losses over grass with a ground clearance of 1.95 m, which are usually small compared to
configurations with a high reflectivity ground cover or a low clearance height. Moreover,
the very cloudy conditions have been removed from the analysis, which lowers even more
the mismatch values.
At the module-scale, a linear regression is fitted from measurements to model, displayed
in Figure 4.8a and specified in Table 4.5. The correlation coefficient and linear coefficient
are significantly lower, 0.87 and 0.80 respectively. In the data distribution plot, the density
increases around a mismatch of 0.11 % according to the model for both the module and
array-level indicators whereas it is smoothly decreasing according to the measurements.
(a) Module Mismatch
(b) Array Mismatch
Figure 4.8: Scatter plots of the simulated mismatch losses using the RT Model as a func-
tion of the measured mismatch losses at different scales. The data distribution of the
measured M[%] and the modeled M[%] are joint on the x-axis and y-axis, respectively. A
linear regression is fitted (red) and the y = x curve is plotted for comparison.
At the array-level, a lot of datapoints show a modeled mismatch between 0.05 and 0.15
% for a wide range of measured mismatch up to 0.5% (and even higher). This is also
observed when studying the relative residuals of the array-mismatch - a significant amount
of relative residuals are around -1, with no dependence on weather conditions (the graphs
corresponding to this analysis are not shown here to assure more concision in the report).
44 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:53==
This problem is left unsolved. The amount of datapoints with very low modeled array-
mismatch is high enough so that the linear regression is a very low-accuracy fit and is not
shown here.
A similar work was undertaken studying the total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot,
since this indicator will also be used for later analysis. The scatter plots are not displayed
here for the sake of clarity. A linear regression is also fitted only at the module-scale, and
shows a better adherence with the measurements than the mismatch, with a correlation
factor R2 = 0.93 but a linear coefficient still low, a = 0.83.
Table 4.6: Bias and standard deviation of the residuals of the module- and array-scale
calculated bifacial PV performance indicators BG, M[%] and σtot using the RT Model over
grass
Scale
Module
Array
Variable
BG
M[%]
σtot
BG
M[%]
σtot
Bias [%]
−0.43
−0.01
−0.07
−0.10
−0.12
−0.21
Residuals std [%]
2.17
0.03
0.16
2.03
0.45
0.42
The model module- and array-level residuals distributions are summed up in Table 4.6.
The values displayed are in absolute terms and not in relative terms - hence, the % is
the unit of the BG and of the mismatch and does not mean that the bias is relative to the
average BG or mismatch.
All the conclusions I made based on the linear regressions hold true here. All the bias
are negative. The bifacial gain bias and residuals standard deviation are very low at both
scales (−0.4% and −0.1% for module and array scale, respectively) compared to the bi-
facial gain typical value of 15-20%.
At the module-scale, the module-mismatch bias is also low, −0.01%, compared to the
mismatch typical values of 0.1-0.2%. However, at the array-scale the mismatch show a
significant bias and residuals standard deviation compared to the mismatch typical values
of 0.1-0.2%. The total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot follows the same conclu-
sions as the mismatch on both scales. The model seems to be inefficient for estimating
the mismatch and σtot at the array-scale.
This is also confirmed by the residuals standard deviation of M[%] and σtot at the array-
scale. For instance, in the case of M[%], the residuals std (0.45%) is higher than the typical
values of M[%] ≈0.1 −0.2%.
In Table 4.7, the error rates for all indicators at both the module and array levels are
displayed. The array-level mismatch and σtot are subject to extremely high error rates.
This corroborates the other inferences based on the scatter plots and on the residuals
bias analysis. To try to understand this bad model performance at the array-level, it should
first be remembered that the array-level indicators are calculated using interpolated data
which does not capture the actual rear side irradiance distribution, so more work should
be done to improve this point. However, the results here show that the current array-
scale computation seems to amplify the model error already present at the module-scale.
Hence, I decided to focus on the module-scale indicators for further analysis in this report.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 45
==PAGE:54==
Table 4.7: Error rates of the simulation using the RT Model of the BG, M[%] and σtot at
the module- and array-scale during the first measurement series over grass
Scale
Module
Array
Variable
BG
mismatch
σtot
BG
mismatch
σtot
nRMSE [%]
12.2
43.2
34.5
11.5
205.6
55.4
nMAE [%]
7.7
23.5
24.3
7.8
61.5
31.1
MAPE [%]
7.2
21.4
27.5
7.5
33.6
27.1
The error rates at the module scale are more reasonable. The bifacial gain MAPE is
as low as 7.2%, and the normalized RMSE is a higher - 12.2%. For the mismatch and
σtot, the MAPE and normalized MAE are around 25% whereas the RMSE goes up to
35−43%. Here, the RMSE is significantly higher than the MAE and the MAPE. The RMSE
is more sensitive to a few very high values whereas the MAE and MAPE are more evenly-
weighted error rates. Then, the high RMSE indicates that some outliers are still present in
the dataset. Still, the overall performance of the model on the selected timestamp leads
to acceptable error rates, so I consider the model validated on the presently selected
timestamps for estimating the module-level BG, M[%] and σtot.
Figure 4.9: Mismatch vs. σtot - comparison of simulations to measurement for different
module positions
To conclude the model validation over grass albedo, Figure 4.9 is a scatter plot of the
power mismatch losses as a function of the total irradiance relative standard deviation
σtot at the module-level for different module positions and compared with the literature.
Indeed, Deline et al. [9] produced a similar graph using their data and fitted an exponential
curve detailed as Fit#1 in Equation (1.6). In the figure, measurements datapoints are
distinguished from the RT model data, and the positions (Edge/Inner) are also split apart.
Both concerning the RT model and the measurements, the edge modules mismatch is
46 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:55==
lower than 0.10 % and the σtot is lower than 0.50 % - the model agrees well with the
measurements. The inner module mismatch and σtot reach higher values than for the
edge module, and follow well the Deline et al. Fit#1 curve. However, the measurement-
based mismatch calculation hits higher values, up to M[%] = 0.25% and σtot = 1.4%,
than the model with maximum 0.17% and 1.1%, respectively.
4.4
Validation of the model over a different albedo condition
The model has been validated over grass (albedo 0.22) using the first measurement series.
The second measurement series is now used to evaluate the RT model performance over
a higher albedo (0.60) condition. Using Radiance, the scene is replicated, with a 2.5 m-
wide white tarp (albedo 0.60) on the ground on each side of the tracker. The surroundings
are still made of grass. It should be highlighted that only four days of the second mea-
surement series, from May 17th to May 20th 2020, were modeled due to time constraints.
The cell-level error rates (over the four analysed days) resulting from this new set up are
gathered in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Model cell-level rear irradiance error rate for the second measurement series
over a white cover band of 2.5 m
Model / Position
RT Model / Edge
RT Model / Inner
nRMSE [%]
27.1
13.5
nMAE [%]
14.5
9.2
MAPE [%]
15.8
9.6
Excepted the Edge modules normalized RMSE, the error rates are within the same range
than the cell-level error rates of the first measurement series. Also, no date filtering was
accomplished for this dataset since already only four days are analysed, which can explain
the high RMSE value, indicating the presence of outliers. For the inner modules, the
normalized MAE (9.2%) is within the measurements uncertainty (±9.3%). The RT model
is able to well reproduce the new measurement set-up at the cell-level.
Table 4.9: Error rates of the simulation using the RT Model of the BG, M[%] and σtot at the
module-level during the second measurement series over a white cover band of 2.5 m
Variable
BG
mismatch
σtot
nRMSE [%]
19.7
66.5
46.2
nMAE [%]
16.3
34.3
28.9
MAPE [%]
16.6
41.1
49.2
The module-level error rates are displayed in Table 4.9. The normalized RMSE is signifi-
cantly higher than the other indicators because the few outliers have an important weight
with only four days of data acquisition. Looking at the normalized MAE instead, it is of
16.3% for the bifacial gain, 34.3% for the mismatch and 28.9% for σtot. It is higher than the
normalized MAE obtained for the first measurement series, but I attribute this difference
mainly to the different size of the dataset analysed. Indeed, a few datapoints with bad
model performance have a higher impact on a four-days error rate than on a four-months
one.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.10: Mismatch vs. σtot - comparison of simulations to measurement for different
module positions during the second measurement series over a white cover band of 2.5 m
Lastly, the module-level mismatch is scattered as a function of the total irradiance relative
standard deviation σtot in Figure 4.10. The edge modules datapoints are in the mismatch
low-range part of the graph, M[%] < 0.25%, and some measurement outliers can be
spotted, which confirms that the high RMSE rates are due to the presence of outliers in
the data.
Regarding the inner modules data points, they follow well the curve fit from Deline et al. [9].
The measurement mismatch of the inner modules reach slightly higher values (0.8%) than
the RT model (0.6%), but this is less significant than in Figure 4.9 of the first measurement
series over grass.
Critics and improvement of the experimental setup
The measurement series realised in May aimed at experimentally investigate the effect
of albedo on the rear side irradiance and power mismatch losses of the bifacial PV array.
However, I found out that the 2.5 m-wide bands under each side of the tracker are not
accurately representative of a uniform 0.60 ground albedo.
This finding was already illustrated for two days in Figure 3.7 and Figure 3.8 of Chapter 3.
In this section, I quantify the difference between the situation of a uniform albedo of 0.60
and the experimental set up of bands of width 2.5 m and 5 m. Those three situations are
modeled using the RT model during four days, from May 17th to May 20th 2020.
Table 4.10: Cell-level rear irradiance error rate from different experimental set-ups to a
uniform ground albedo of 0.60
Band-width
2.5 m
5 m
nRMSE [%]
36.9
19.0
nMAE [%]
25.2
13.2
MAPE [%]
23.9
12.9
48 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:57==
The cell-level rear irradiance error rates between the ideal situation (uniform 0.60 albedo)
and the experimental setup corresponding to bands of a certain width (2.5 m and 5 m)
are computed in Table 4.10. The simulation of a 2.5 m wide white cover leads to a MAPE
of 23.9%, a nMAE of 25.2% and a nRMSE of 36.9% when compared to the uniform 0.60
albedo case. Those error rates are twice as high as the error rates obtained when using
a 5 m-wide white tarp on each side of the tracker. Indeed, in the case of a 5 m bands, the
nMAE and MAPE are around 13% and the nRMSE is 19%.
The first conclusion from those error rates is that the current experiment is not properly
representative of a 0.60 albedo. Then, it cannot be used as comparison of our simulations
in Chapter 6.
The second conclusion of this short study is that doubling the white tarp width would
reduce the difference to a 0.60 uniform albedo by half. With a normalized MAE of ≈13%
from the ideal situation to be reproduced, it woudl be a good experimental setup.
To optimize the experimental setup, one should calculate the percentage of light coming
from the white tarp in the total irradiance reaching the rear side of the modules. If this
calculation is done for different white tarp widths, then a trade-off can be found between
the error rate that I calculated here using simulations, the percentage of rear irradiance
received from the tarp, and the quantity of material needed.
(a) View from the South
(b) View from the North
Figure 4.11: Grass growing under the white polymer sheet - Pictures from June 6th 2020
Lastly, only two weeks after fixing the white polymer sheet under the tracker, the grass
has grown impressingly under it, as if the white cover is actually boosting the grass growth.
Grass has already gone through the cover, altering the albedo coefficient in some places.
Moreover, the bumping caused by the grown grass could change the reflected irradiance
direction. The reflection on this material is mainly diffuse, but the part of specular reflection
potentially occurring is disturbed by the new cover shape.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 49
==PAGE:58==
4.5
Conclusion on the performance and validity of the
models
The RT Model has first been compared to the VF Model on the inner module of the first
measurement series. The RT Model models the rear side irradiance with a normalized
MAE of 10.3% whereas the VF Model does it with a nMAE of 14.5%. The RT Model is
then selected for the remaining analysis. It performs with a slightly higher nMAE (12.4%)
to reproduce the edge modules backside irradiance.
On the module level, the RT model is not performing well under very cloudy conditions,
and during timestamps when the sun elevation angle and the GHI are low. After removing
the bad-performance timestamps, the RT model simulates the module-level bifacial gain
with a nMAE of 7.7% and the module-scale power mismatch losses within a nMAE of
23.5%.
The RT Model is not effective for simulating array-level indicators, which are then dis-
missed.
The RT model is considered to be validated at the cell- and module- level on the selected
timestamps, removing the timestamps specified in Appendix G and those corresponding
to very cloudy weather or very low sun elevation and GHI. Then, this model is used in
Chapter 6 to simulate the effect of albedo on the bifacial PV performance during the first
measurement series.
50 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:59==
5
Effect of weather conditions on the
bifacial PV performance
In this chapter, the bifacial PV performance is studied as a function of weather using the
first measurements series data at the module-level over grass. The very cloudy conditions
datapoints are not removed from the dataset here, since the measurement data is used
and not the RT modeled one.
First, the effect of weather conditions on the bifacial gain and the mismatch losses are
analysed separately. Then, the effect of each weather variable is quantified through a
partial correlation analysis and multilinear regressions are fitted.
5.1
Effect of weather on the module-level bifacial gain
The effect of meteorological conditions on the bifacial gain is exposed here through 3d-
scatter plots where the third dimension is the data coloration. The first scatter plot in
Figure 5.1 displays the diffuse ratio as a function of the clearness index - this typical
relationship was already highlighted in Section 2.1, and shows clearly the weather trend
from very cloudy to quite clear sky. The data is then colored as a function of the bifacial
gain level as indicated on the color bar.
Figure 5.1: Scatter plot of Diff vs. Kt colored according to the module-level bifacial gain
(cf. colorbar) using measurements data of the first series over grass
It appears clearly from the graph that during very cloudy conditions where Kt < 0.4 and
Diff > 0.9, the bifacial gain is the highest with levels from 25% to 30% with even some
timestamps with a bifacial gain over 35% for diffuse ratios around 1. The low-bifacial-gain
timestamps with levels lower than 15 % are gathered in the region corresponding to a
quite clear day where Kt > 0.5 and Diff < 0.5. The datapoints with an intermediate
bifacial gain around 20 % are spread between those two main zones.
Mainly, cloudy conditions lead to a significantly high bifacial gain around 25−30% whereas
during a sunny day, the bifacial gain is lower, typically of 12 −15%. Other studies lead to
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 51
==PAGE:60==
the same conclusions that the bifacial gain increases with the diffuse ratio [8, 10, 12].
This trend of increasing bifacial gain during cloudy days would then lead to a stabilization
of the PV energy output: when the power output is lower, the bifacial gain then strikingly
helps to boost it up, whereas during a sunny day the bifacial contribution is less significant.
(a) Scatter plot of αS vs. γS colored according
to the Bifacial gain (cf. colorbar)
(b) Scatter of GHI vs. γS colored according to
the Bifacial gain (cf. colorbar)
Figure 5.2: Scatter plot of the effect of solar angles and GHI on the module-level bifacial
gain using measurements data of the first series over grass
The bifacial gain is now explained in the light of the solar angles geometry and the intensity
of GHI in Figure 5.2. Figure 5.2a is a scatter plot of the solar elevation αS as a function of
the solar azimuth angle γS. Interestingly, for a given solar azimuth angle, the data point
with the highest elevation angle corresponds to the day closest to the summer solstice
(June 21st) and the one with the lowest to the closest to the winter solstice (December
21st). Also, during the month closest to the summer solstice (here, July), the solar azimuth
starts around 70° in the morning and ends up around 290° in the evening. In November,
it startds at γS ≈150° and finished the day at γS ≈210°.
Interestingly, around solar noon when the solar azimuth is around 180°, the bifacial gain
is around 20% most of the days, except for very high solar elevation and GHI, in summer
months, when it decreases to around 15%.
The sunny timestamps with very low bifacial gain around 12% actually correspond to early
morning and late afternoon of the summer months, as seen in the solar elevation vs. solar
azimuth scatter plot. The GHI during those times is quite low. It can also be seen in
Figure 5.2 that the high bifacial gain values happen during the autumn months, mainly in
the mid-morning, with a GHI lower than 200 W/m2.
52 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:61==
5.2
Effect of weather on the module-level mismatch losses
The power mismatch losses are now explained using the same scatter plots as in the
previous section. First, Figure 5.3 is a a scatter plot of Diff vs. Kt with the datapoints color
corresponding to the mismatch losses value. This figure discloses that the mismatch
losses are higher during very cloudy days than during clear days. nder very cloudy con-
ditions, the mismatch losses are around 0.3 −0.5% whereas during clear sky days, the
module-level mismatch is mostly below 0.1%.
Figure 5.3: Scatter plot of Diff vs. Kt colored according to the module-level power mis-
match losses (cf. colorbar) using measurements data of the first series over grass
Figure 5.4 shows the effect of solar angles (elevation and azimuth) and of the GHI on the
power mismatch losses at the module-scale.
During summer days (identified in Figure 5.4a) with a high GHI value, the mismatch losses
are higher in the middle of the day around solar noon, which corroborates the conclusion
from McIntosh et al. [15] that during sunny days, the mismatch is higher in the middle of
the day.
(a) Scatter of αS vs. γS colored according to the
module-level mismatch (cf. colorbar)
(b) Scatter of GHI vs. γS colored according to
the module-level mismatch (cf. colorbar)
Figure 5.4: Scatter plot of the effect of solar angles and GHI on the module-level power
mismatch losses using measurements data of the first series over grass
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 53
==PAGE:62==
During autumn days, especially for days with a low GHI value, some high mismatch values
can be found with various azimuth angles, which makes reference to the inference from
McIntosh et al. that the mismatch is quite constant during a cloudy day [15].
Surprisingly, the low mismatch values around 0.05% (purple color) happen more often in
the morning than in the afternoon. This could come from some shading effect of the barns
at the south of the HSAT. Indeed, the barns are in diagonal compared to the tracker, and
the part of the barn the closest to the tracker is at the South-West, which corresponds to
the Azimuth of the sun when we see more mismatch than when the sun is at the South-
East. However, this asymmetry was not observed on the bifacial gain scatter plots, so
I am not sure that the barns are actually the cause for this asymmetry in the mismatch
results. This should be studied deeper.
Figure 5.5 is a scatter plot of the module-level mismatch as a function of the total irradiance
relative standard deviation σtot. The datapoints are colored according to the value of the
clearness index Kt (color bar in the right of the plot).
Figure 5.5: Scatter plot of the module-level mismatch losses as a function of σtot. The
datapoints are colored according to the clearness index Kt (cf. color bar on the right)
Interestingly, when the sky is clear with Kt > 0.6, the mismatch is low but the total irradi-
ance relative standard deviation σtot is spread out from 0 to 1.5 %. Also, the curve Fit#1
from [9] fits well the data points with a quite clear sky. There is now apparent correlation
between the mismatch and σtot when the sky is cloudy.
54 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:63==
5.3
Quantification of the weather impact
Now that the weather impact on the bifacial gain and mismatch losses has been under-
stood through scatter plots, it is quantitatively studied using correlations. Figure 5.6 dis-
plays the correlation matrix of the variables of interest (M[%], BG, σtot) with the meteoro-
logical variables. Before computing the correlation coefficients, the solar azimuth angle
was modified: in the afternoon when it is higher than 180, it is changed to 360 −γS, its
reciprocal in the morning. Indeed, I saw that the morning vs. afternoon was not the main
difference to be captured but I want to describe the opposition between solar noon and
the rest of the day, which is best described with the modified solar azimuth.
The three variables of interest are positively correlated to each other, except that BG and
σtot are not correlated together. M[%] is correlated at +0.47 to BG and +0.58 to σtot.
Indeed, the weather effect described in the two previous sections was quite similar on
BG and on M[%]. Also, we already studied several times M[% as a function of σtot and
already noticed the strong correlation between those variables.
σtot presents a remarkable correlation with the solar azimuth angle γS (+0.36). Conversely,
BG/M[%] experience negative correlations with the GHI (−0.35/ −0.40), DNI (−0.56/ −
0.46), and Kt (−0.56/ −0.55) and a positive correlation with Diff (+0.61/ + 0.48).
Figure 5.6: Correlation matrix of weather variables and bifacial PV performance indicators
The weather variables are also very correlated within each other. For instance, the diffuse
ratio is strongly negatively correlated with the DNI (−0.99) and the clearness index Kt
(−0.89). The DNI is interrelated with the Kt (coefficient of 0.91) and the GHI and DHI
are influenced by the solar elevation angle (+0.70 and +0.63, respectively). The solar
elevation angle is related to the solar azimuth angle (+0.52).
To capture the influence of each meteorological variable individually without including
the interrelations whitin the weather variables, a partial correlation analysis is performed.
Some variables are removed before proceeding - indeed, the GHI is the sum of the DHI
and DNI, so keeping the three variables would be redundant. The diffuse ratio is equal
to the GHI divided by the GHI, and the GHI also appears in the formula to calculate Kt. I
decided to drop the DHI and DNI variables, since the DHI can be obtained through the
GHI and the diffuse ratio, and the DNI through the DHI and the GHI.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 55
==PAGE:64==
Table 5.1: Partial correlation analysis
Variable
GHI
Diff
Kt
αS
γS
BG
0.37
0.24
−0.36
−0.38
0.17
M[%]
0.31
−0.08
−0.42
−0.35
0.24
σtot
0.15
0.02
−0.12
−0.11
0.25
Table 5.1 shows the output of the partial correlation analysis. The main factors influencing
the bifacial gain are the GHI, Kt and elevation angle with an absolute coefficient around 0.4.
The bifacial gain increases with the GHI, decreases with Kt and αS. Those same factors
are also the one influencing the mismatch losses with a higher absolute coefficient for the
Kt (−0.42) than for the GHI and elevation angle (+0.31 and −0.35, respectively).
The total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot is mainly influenced by the solar az-
imuth (0.25). This means that around solar noon, σtot is higher than in the morning and in
the afternoon.
In order to understand further the interactions between the weather conditions and the
bifacial PV performance, several multilinear regressions are fitted between each indicator
of interest (BG, M[%] or σtot) and the weather varibales. The coefficients from the mul-
tilinear regressions and the resulting error rates (here the normalised MAE) are given in
table 5.2.
The bifacial gain can be well estimated using a multilinear regression of the weather vari-
ables, with a normalised MAE as low as 15.2%. The weather variables the more correlated
to the bifacial gain are also the one with higher absolute coefficient value here.
Table 5.2: Multi-linear regression coefficients and normalized Mean Average Error
Variable
Offset
GHI
Diff
Kt
αS
γS
nMAE
BG
20.4
8.7
2.4
−7.1
−5.8
0.9
15.2 %
M[%]
0.11
0.13
−0.01
−0.15
−0.09
0.02
42.0 %
σtot
0.51
0.21
0.01
−0.14
−0.10
0.08
42.1 %
Conversely, the power mismatch and total irradiance relative standard deviation are less
easy to predict using a multilinear combination of weather variables. The error rate of
42% show that such a prediction would lead to a poor accuracy. Strangely, the higher
coefficient for predicting σtot is the GHI one, whereas σtot is most correlated to the solar
azimuth angle.
In conclusion, the bifacial gain is very correlated to the weather conditions and can be
quite accurately described as a linear combination of weather variables. On the other
hand, the power mismatch losses and the total irradiance nonuniformity cannot be thor-
oughly captured in such a simple linear combination of weather variables, and need more
complex computations to be properly estimated.
56 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:65==
6
Effect of albedo on the bifacial PV
performance
This chapter aims at investigating the impact of ground albedo on the bifacial gain and
power mismatch losses. The study is tackled using the RT model output data relying on
the weather data input of the first measurement series. The weather data input is reduced
to the timestamps when the model has been validated in Section 4.3, i.e. the timestamp
corresponding to quite clear to quite cloudy conditions with a GHI and solar elevation
angle not too low.
Only one albedo has been experimentally tested, and the experimental set up does not
accurately reproduce a uniform ground albedo, which explains why the analysis on this
chapter is carried out only through simulations.
6.1
Bifacial gain over different albedo conditions
It should be remembered that for each simulated albedo, the same weather data input was
used, corresponding to the weather data during the full period of the first measurement
series from July to November 2019.
In Figure 6.1, the bifacial gain average and the bifacial gain relative standard deviation
for each simulated albedo are pictured as a function of ground albedo in Figure 3.9.
(a) Average bifacial gain
(b) Relative standard deviation of the bifacial gain
Figure 6.1: Effect of the albedo on the module bifacial gain
The average bifacial gain increases linearly with the albedo with a correlation coefficient
R2 = 1.00. Around solar noon, the average bifacial gain almost equals the albedo in
percentage so the linear regression coefficient is close to 100. When averaged over the
whole day, the average bifacial gain is lower, around 80% of the albedo.
The standard deviation of the bifacial gain at a given albedo is captured in fig. 6.1b and
also evolves linearly with the albedo. Since the same weather data is used in input for
each simulation, the standard deviation at a given albedo can be considered as a measure
of the weather impact at this albedo. Then, fig. 6.1b shows that the weather effect on the
bifacial gain increases with albedo. At an albedo of 0.22, the weather and solar geometry
are typically responsible for deviations around 20 % of the bifacial gain average. At higher
albedo conditions, the weather impact represent up to 25% of the average bifacial gain.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.2 gathers boxplots of the bifacial gain for every simulation made using the RT
Model over different albedos. Then, the standard deviation increase can be understood
further. Indeed, the minimum bifacial gain value increases at a pace comparable to the
median, reaching 40% at an albedo of 0.80. The maximum albedo value increases to
faster reaching extremely high values, greater than 100%.
Figure 6.2: Boxplots of the bifacial gain for the different albedos simulations using the RT
model
6.2
Effect of albedo on the power mismatch losses
Now, the effect of albedo on the power mismatch losses is observed. The mismatch losses
average and standard deviation are plotted as a function of ground albedo on Figure 6.3.
The mismatch average varies with albedo more rapidly than the average bifacial gain,
following the exponential functions f1 for the daily average and f2 for the solar noon av-
erage, defined in Equation (6.1) and Equation (6.4), respectively. The mismatch relative
standard deviation increases more slowly with the albedo than the bifacial gain relative
standard deviation following logarithmic functions g1 daily and g2 at solar noon, specified
in Equation (6.3) and Equation (6.4), respectively.
(a) Average bifacial gain
(b) Relative standard deviation of the bifacial gain
Figure 6.3: Effect of the albedo on the module-level mismatch losses
It appears from Equations (6.1) to (6.4) that the mismatch is varying very quickly with the
albedo, but the mismatch variation around the average mismatch is increasing a bit more
slowly. Then, the effect of weather conditions on the mismatch increases with the albedo
58 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:67==
but less strikingly than the mismatch absolute value itself.
f1 : x −→e−1.3 · x1.61 + 0.05
(6.1)
f2 : x −→e−0.3 · x1.68 + 0.04
(6.2)
g1 : x −→74.0 · ln(23.4 · x + 6.8) −132.8
(6.3)
g2 : x −→19.4 · ln(114.7 · x −11.4) −8.6
(6.4)
Figure 6.4 gathers boxplots of the distribution of power mismatch losses for each RT
simulation at different albedos. It is seen that the majority of the of the datapoints are very
packed around the mean value, which is in the low range of mismatch calues (< 0.25%)
compared to the full extent of the mismatch values reaching up to 1.5% at a albedo of 0.80.
Even the forth quartile of the dsitribution corresponding the albedo 0.80 is around 0.3%
which is extremely low. From the figure, it is seen that less than 10% of the datapoints
suffer mismatch losses higher than 0.25% at albedo 0.40, and this threshold increases to
only 0.50% at albedo 0.70.
Figure 6.4: Boxplots of the power mismatch losses for the different albedos simulations
using the RT model
The power mismatch levels reach values as high as 1.5% so I decided to use the data
points of all the simulated albedos to analyse the mismatch vs. σtot relationship and
compare with the fit from Deline et al. [9] given in Equation (1.6). In the study from
Deline et al., when the sun is in front of the fixed-tilt array, the mismatch is lower than 3%:
that is around the same order of magnitude that we have here. Our work is not exactly
comparable to their work since they work on the array-level mismatch and we work on the
module-level mismatch.
In this section, I define the ’high-tilt’ period as the period of the day when the solar azimuth
follows |γS −180°| > 35°, and the period ’around solar noon’ when |γS −180°| < 20°.
The data points are divided into four categories, resulting in four different scatter plots of
the mismatch as a function of the total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot in Fig-
ure 6.5 and Figure 6.6. For each scatter plot, a curve is fitted. Fit#1 and Fit#2 were already
defined in Section 1.3 corresponding to the works from Deline et. al. [9] et Janssen et
al. [13], respectively. Fit#3 (Equation (6.5)) and Fit#4 (Equation (6.6)) correspond to the
data during the high-tilt period, split between the inner and the edge module, respectively.
Fit#5 (Equation (6.7)) and Fit#6 (Equation (6.8)) correspond to the data around solar noon,
also split between the inner and the edge module, respectively.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 59
==PAGE:68==
(a) High tilt, Inner
(b) High tilt, Edge
Figure 6.5: Mismatch vs. relative standard deviation curve fitting away from solar noon
(a) Around solar noon, Inner
(b) Around solar noon, Edge
Figure 6.6: Mismatch vs. relative standard deviation curve fitting around solar noon
M[%]Fit#3 = e−2.35 · σtot[%]1.70 + 4.52 · 10−2
(6.5)
M[%]Fit#4 = e−2.49 · σtot[%]2.15 + 4.81 · 10−2
(6.6)
M[%]Fit#5 = e−2.33 · σtot[%]2.06 + 6.27 · 10−2
(6.7)
M[%]Fit#6 = e−2.25 · σtot[%]1.97 + 5.08 · 10−2
(6.8)
The general fit parameter a, b and c are defined in Equation (6.9) and the fit relative error
is defined in Equation (6.10). Then, Table 6.1 summarized the different fit parameters and
relative error and compares it with the Fit#1 from Deline et al.
M[%]Fit = e−a · σtot[%]b + c
(6.9)
ϵFit =
1
N · M[%]
·
N
X
i=1
|M[%]i −M[%]Fit,i|
(6.10)
First comparing inner to edge modules, the mismatch range of values of edge modules is
extremely small, reaching a maximum of 0.25% even at albedo as high as 0.80. The fits
60 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:69==
corresponding to the edge modules show significantly higher relative errors since the mis-
match values are very small and a non-negligible amount of data points are gathered and
form clouds of data points with no obvious correlation between the two studied variable.
Table 6.1: Mismatch vs. standard deviation exponential curve fit
Fit #
Moment of the day
Module position
a
b
c [·10−2 %]
ϵFit [%]
1 [9]
All-day
Array-level
2
1.57
0
-
3
Morning/afternoon
Inner
2.35
1.70
4.52
9.2
4
Morning/afternoon
Edge
2.49
2.15
4.81
15.6
5
Solar noon
Inner
2.33
2.06
6.27
7.4
6
Solar noon
Edge
2.25
1.97
5.08
13.9
The remaining analysis now focuses on the inner modules. Strikingly, the mismatch power
losses are higher around solar noon. Indeed, the mismatch losses spread from 0.0% to
0.8% in high-tilt timestamps and from 0.1% to 1.5% around solar noon, reaching twice
as high values at solar noon. Even more interestingly, around solar noon, the module
mismatch increases more steeply as a function of the standard deviation, than the rest of
the day. This is mainly seen through the exponent b, equal to 2.06 around solar noon and
only 1.70 in morning/afternoon away from solar noon.
This result can be seen in parallel with Asgharzadeh et al. finding [11] that if the tilt angle
increases, non-uniformity decreases because the modules receive more uniform irradi-
ance from the sky than from the ground. Indeed, the total irradiance standard deviation
is lower during the high-tilt period. Moreover, building on Asgharzadeh consideration,
around solar noon, the panels backside receive mainly light stemming from the ground,
which is spectrally different from the sky. This could be part of the explanation of the
steeper relationship between standard deviation and power losses.
Finally, Deline et al. Fit#1 is the closest to the configuration of the inner module during
the high-tilt period. Indeed, in the fixed tilt system, the panel rear side always receive
as much irradiance from the sky and from the ground, and this amount corresponds to a
quite high-tilt region in the case of tracker tilt.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 61
==PAGE:70==
62 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:71==
7
Conclusions and perspectives
In this Master thesis, the backside irradiance distribution of a HSAT bifacial PV plant has
been studied based on experimental and simulated data. Importantly, the experimental
datapoints are very high-resolution irradiance measurements on the back-side of modules
being part of a large-scale outdoor bifacial HSAT PV plant in Denmark. The measurement
uncertainty was estimated to be ±9.3%. The simulations are done using two open-source
tools: bifacialvf also called the VF Model) and bifacial_radiance or the RT Model.
Conclusions on the experimental procedures and validation of
the VF and the RT Model
As a first major objective, this thesis successfully validated the two simulation models for
simulating the rear-side irradiance of a HSAT bifacial PV plant in the context of Northern
Europe.
A one-day analysis was made to study the performance of the model during a sunny and a
cloudy day in Chapter 3. The Radiance visual rendering shows that the bifacial PV plant is
reproduced with a good level of detailed as a Radiance scene, including the measurement
panels precise position relatively to the torque tube and the surrounding barns. Also, the
trends and absolute values of rear side irradiance and power mismatch losses during a
sunny and a cloudy day are well captured by both models. This chapter mainly consists
of the research works made to write a conference article for the 47th IEEE Photovoltaic
Specialist Conference (PVSC) [31].
To complete the evaluation of the two models in a more quantitative manner, a statistical
comparison of models to measurement was performed in Chapter 4 using a measurement
series of four months and a half over grass (albedo 0.22). It was shown that the RT Model
performs significantly better than the VF Model for estimating the backside irradiance
of the Inner modules, with a nMAE of 10.3% for the RT Model against 14.5% for the
VF Model. The RT Model performance is slightly lower for estimating the Edge module
backside irradiance with a nMAE of 12.4%.
The RT Model has also been validated on a short period (4 days) using measurements
over an albedo of 0.60. The nMAE for this second comparison is 9.2% for inner module
and 14.5% for edge modules. However, those error rates are less statistically-relevant
since they are based on only 4 days.
The RT Model is also evaluated for simulating the module-level bifacial gain, power mis-
match losses and total irradiance relative standard deviation σtot over grass.
At the
module-level, the RT Model is not performing well under very cloudy conditions. When
those bad-performance timestamps are removed, the bifacial gain is estimated with a
nMAE of 7.7% and the power mismatch within a nMAE of 23.5%. The RT Model is not
effective for simulating array-level indicators.
In the perspective of other research works based on the results of this study, two limitations
on the experimental procedure and related assumptions are inferred. It was assumed in
this work that the irradiance value of the modules between the very edge and the most
inner ones could be interpolated constantly as the average value. Several studies show
that this configuration is not exactly true to reality and actually impacts the array-level σtot
and power mismatch. This assumptions should then be revised to include also array-level
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 63
==PAGE:72==
results in a later study.
Furthermore, the experimental set up consisting of one 2.5 m-wide white polymer sheet
on each side of the tracker proved to be inappropriately reproducing the case of a uniform
0.60 albedo. Based on RT simulations, it is suggested to use twice as much material on
each side of the tracker, but further calculations should be carried out before updating the
set-up.
Conclusion on the variables actually impacting the bifacial PV
performance
Using the high-quality experimental data, the effect of the weather variables on the module-
level bifacial gain, power mismatch losses and total irradiance relative standard deviation
σtot over grass is studied.
It is shown that the bifacial gain is very influenced by the weather conditions, being greater
during cloudy days. This inference was also found in the literature that the bifacial gain
increases with the diffuse ratio [8, 10, 12]. Even more, a multilinear regression was fitted
to predict the bifacial gain based on a linear combination of the weather variables. This
estimation can be achieved within a nMAE of 15.2%.
The module-level mismatch is also interrelated with the weather conditions: the partial
correlation analysis revealed a partial correlation coefficient absolute values of 0.3 −0.4,
positive for the GHI, and negative with the clearness index and the elevation angle. How-
ever, the mismatch cannot be accurately estimated as a linear combination of weather
variables.
The impact of ground albedo on the bifacial PV power output is analysed through RT
simulations only. The bifacial gain increases linearly with the albedo, and the power mis-
match losses increases with the albedo with an exponential coefficient of 1.6, which is
then between the linear and the quadratic growth rate.
For the whole range of tested albedo (from 0.22 to 0.80), the Edge modules power mis-
match is lower than 0.3%. Studying inner modules now, the albedo reaches a maximum of
1.5% at an albedo of 0.80. Using the inner modules data, the mismatch is studied as a func-
tion of σtot, similarly to the study done by Deline et al. [9]. Interestingly, two distinct curve
trends were demonstrated and fitted. Around solar noon, the mismatch increases more
steeply with the total irradiance relative standard deviation. Also, the highest mismatch
values are reached around solar noon, hence at low tilt, which corroborates conclusions
from the literature [11].
Finally, the weather impact and the albedo effect are interrelated. Those two effects are
not easily comparable since under a different weather, the albedo effect is different, and
reciprocally. The reciprocal was studied here. Indeed, for each tested albedo, the weather
data was the same, so the influence of albedo on the weather data was studied. It was
found out that the bifacial gain and the mismatch losses are strikingly more influenced by
the weather under high albedo conditions.
64 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:73==
Comparison with order of magnitude from the literature
Order of magnitude estimated in the literature for different system and scene configu-
rations are compared to this study outcomes. First looking at the backside irradiance,
Peleaz et al. in [7] estimate that it is 15% to 25% higher on edge modules compared to
bright module. In our study, the inner modules rear irradiance is 34% lower than the edge
modules one in average over grass albedo. This is significantly higher, and can be due
to the bigger array length.
In the same study, they evaluate that the bifacial gain is typically 4%-15% depending on
albedo, with a global average of 9% [7]. In our study, over grass albedo, the module
bifacial gain stretches from 10% to 40%, with an average of 18.8% for the inner panels
and 22.4% for the edge panels. This is then higher than the range given by Deline et al.
Since the bifacial gain is higher in cloudy conditions, this could explain our high values in
the context of Northern Europe.
According to Janssen et al. [13], the relative standard deviation of the total irradiance σtot
never exceeds 5% even at high albedo of 0.80, and is usually much smaller. In our study,
σtot reached up to 3.5% at albedo 0.80. Over grass albedo, the average σtot is as low as
0.4% for the edge panels and 0.7% for the inner ones. The conclusion of Janssen et al.
is also true in the context of this study.
McIntosh et al. [15] find that the yearly mismatch losses average is lower than 0.1% and
Deline et al. [9] estimate that it is lower than 0.5%. In this study, the average mismatch
losses over four months and a half from July to November is 0.07% over grass and goes
up to 0.24% at an albedo of 0.80.
Perspectives
This study already demonstrates a lot of results about the irradiance distribution of a HSAT
bifacial PV plant. However, there is still much to be done within the same subject.
Experimentally, after studying more deeply the set up, different ground albedo can be
tested to demonstrate experimentally what has been inferred theoretically in the last chap-
ter of this thesis. Furthermore, the albedo was taken as a constant which is an simplify-
ing assumption that can be put into question. Indeed, the albedo varies greatly over the
course of the day, and is spectrally-dependent [15]. Those two dependencies should also
be implemented in the RT Model, at least to assess their impact on the results.
Furthermore, on this thesis, the bifacial gain and mismatch losses have been studied
mainly at the module-scale, while the output power generated and eventually sold by re-
newable energy producers is at the array-scale. It is then crucial to refine the interpolation
assumptions in order to study the results of this thesis at the array-scale.
The bifacial gain was successfully predicted using only a linear combination of raw weather
data. This could be a very computationally-inexpensive way of estimating the PV output
of a bifacial array if the multilinear coefficients were calculated at different places of the
globe. However, such a simplistic approach completely deny the physics laws behind
solar energy productions and could thus be not so robust.
As a logical extension of this work, the role of Module-Level Power Electronics (MLPE)
in reducing nonuniform backside irradiance-induced power mismatch losses could be in-
vestigated. Riley et al. [6] already studied the role of MLPE in this context, but they were
studying a fixed-tilt array. Their output was that the bifacial gain increase thanks to MLPE
was significant under high angle of incidence. However, on a HSAT, this is not very rele-
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 65
==PAGE:74==
vant since the angle of incidence is mostly low. Moreover, the mismatch values, at least
at the module-scale, encountered in this study, are very low, and might not justify the use
of MLPE.
66 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
IEA. World Energy Outlook 2019. 2019. ISBN: 978-92-64-97300-8. URL: iea.org/
weo.
[2]
Chris Deline et al. “Bifacial PV System Performance : Separating Fact from Fiction”.
In: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 2019, p. 42. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.
23189.27365.
[3]
R. Kopecek and J. Libal. “Towards large-scale deployment of bifacial photovoltaics”.
In: Nature Energy 3.6 (2018), pp. 443–446. ISSN: 20587546. DOI: 10.1038/s41560-
018-0178-0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0178-0.
[4]
Konrad Mertens. A comprehensive and up-to-date tutorial on all aspects of photo-
voltaic technology Technology and Practice Photovoltaics Photovoltaics Mertens.
2014, pp. 68, 135. ISBN: 9781118634165.
[5]
Claudia Duran. “Bifacial Solar Cells : High Efficiency Design, Characterization, Mod-
ules and Applications”. PhD thesis. 2012. URL: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:
bsz:352-205361.
[6]
Daniel Riley, Joshua Stein, and Craig Carmignani. “Performance of Bifacial PV Mod-
ules with MLPE vs. String Inverters”. In: 2018 IEEE 7th World Conference on Pho-
tovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC,
28th PVSEC & 34th EU PVSEC). IEEE, June 2018, pp. 1745–1748. ISBN: 978-1-
5386-8529-7. DOI: 10.1109/PVSC.2018.8547351. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8547351/.
[7]
Silvana Ayala Pelaez et al. “Model and Validation of Single- Axis Tracking with Bifa-
cial Photovoltaics Preprint”. In: World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conver-
sion (WCPEC-7), Hawaii Golden, CO.NREL/CP-5K00-72039 (2018).
[8]
Ismail Shoukry et al. “Modelling of Bifacial Gain for Stand-alone and in-field Installed
Bifacial PV Modules”. In: Energy Procedia 92 (Aug. 2016), pp. 600–608. ISSN:
18766102. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2016.07.025. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1876610216304520.
[9]
Chris Deline et al. “Estimating and parameterizing mismatch power loss in bifacial
photovoltaic systems”. In: Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications
(2020), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 1099159X. DOI: 10.1002/pip.3259.
[10]
Amy Lindsay et al. “Modelling of single-axis tracking gain for bifacial PV systems”.
In: 32nd EU PVSEC. 2016, pp. 1610–1617.
[11]
Amir Asgharzadeh et al. “A Sensitivity Study of the Impact of Installation Parame-
ters and System Configuration on the Performance of Bifacial PV Arrays”. In: IEEE
Journal of Photovoltaics 8.3 (May 2018), pp. 798–805. ISSN: 2156-3381. DOI: 10.
1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2819676. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8340958/.
[12]
Lev Kreinin et al. “PV module power gain due to bifacial design. Preliminary ex-
perimental and simulation data”. In: 2010 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Con-
ference. IEEE, June 2010, pp. 002171–002175. ISBN: 978-1-4244-5890-5. DOI:
10.1109/PVSC.2010.5615874. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5615874/.
[13]
G J M Janssen et al. “Impact of Inhomogeneous Irradiance At the Rear of Bifacial
Panels on Modelled Energy Yield”. In: 33rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy
Conference and Exhibition. 2017, pp. 1618–1623. DOI: 10.4229/EUPVSEC20172017-
5BV.4.31.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 67
==PAGE:76==
[14]
Yating Zhang et al. “Experimental Investigation of the Shading and Mismatch Effects
on the Performance of Bifacial Photovoltaic Modules”. In: IEEE Journal of Photo-
voltaics 10.1 (2020), pp. 296–305. ISSN: 21563403. DOI: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2019.
2949766.
[15]
Keith R. McIntosh et al. “Mismatch Loss in Bifacial Modules Due to Nonuniform
Illumination in 1-D Tracking Systems”. In: IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics 9.6 (Nov.
2019), pp. 1504–1512. ISSN: 2156-3381. DOI: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2019.2937217.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8846099/.
[16]
IEA. Solar Energy: Mapping the Road Ahead. Tech. rep. Paris: IEA, 2019. URL:
https://www.iea.org/reports/solar-energy-mapping-the-road-ahead.
[17]
Chris Deline and Silvana Ayala. Bifacial_Radiance. 2017. DOI: 10.11578/dc.20180530.
16. URL: https://github.com/NREL/bifacial_radiance.
[18]
Bill Marion, Silvana Ayala Peláez, and Chris Deline. bifacialvf - Bifacial PV View
Factor model. 2017. URL: https://github.com/NREL/bifacialvf.
[19]
José P. (et al.) Silva. “Quality Assurance of Solar Radiation Measurements”. In: So-
lar Resources Mapping, Fundamentals and Applications. Ed. by Jesús Polo, Luis
Martín-Pomares, and Antonio Sanfilippo. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
Chap. 4, section. ISBN: 978-3-319-97484-2. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-97484-2.
[20]
D.T. Reindl, W.A. Beckman, and J.A. Duffie. “Diffuse fraction correlations”. In: Solar
Energy 45.1 (1990), pp. 1–7.
[21]
J. F. Orgill and K. G.T. Hollands. “Correlation equation for hourly diffuse radiation
on a horizontal surface”. In: Solar Energy 19.4 (1977), pp. 357–359.
[22]
Nicholas Riedel et al. “The Outdoor Bifacial PV Testing Facility at Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark”. In: BifiPV Workshop, Amsterdam. 2019.
[23]
H. Field and K. Emery. “Uncertainty analysis of the spectral correction factor”. In:
Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (1993), pp. 1180–
1187. ISSN: 01608371. DOI: 10.1109/pvsc.1993.346955.
[24]
Jochen Hohl-Ebinger and Wilhelm Warta. “Uncertainty of the spectral mismatch
correction factor in STC measurements on photovoltaic devices”. In: Progress in
Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 19.5 (Aug. 2011), pp. 573–579. ISSN:
10627995. DOI: 10.1002/pip.1059. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/pip.1059.
[25]
Bill Marion. “Numerical method for angle-of-incidence correction factors for diffuse
radiation incident photovoltaic modules”. In: Solar Energy 147 (2017), pp. 344–348.
ISSN: 0038092X. DOI: 10.1016/j.solener.2017.03.027. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.solener.2017.03.027.
[26]
Bill Marion et al. “A Practical Irradiance Model for Bifacial PV Modules”. In: 2017
IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC). NREL, 2018, pp. 1537–
1542. DOI: 10.1109/pvsc.2017.8366263.
[27]
Greg Ward. Radiance. 2017. URL: http://www.radiance-online.org.
[28]
the free encyclopedia Wikipedia. Ray tracing (physics). 2020. URL: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_tracing_(physics).
[29]
Juan Lopez-Garcia, Alberto Casado, and Tony Sample. “Electrical performance of
bifacial silicon PV modules under different indoor mounting configurations affecting
the rear reflected irradiance”. In: Solar Energy 177.November 2018 (2019), pp. 471–
482. ISSN: 0038092X. DOI: 10.1016/j.solener.2018.11.051.
[30]
Mark Mikofski, Bennet Meyers, and Chetan Chaudhari. PVMismatch Project. 2018.
URL: https://github.com/SunPower/PVMismatch.
[31]
Nicholas Riedel-Lyngskær et al. “A Spatial Irradiance Map Measured on the Rear
Side of a Utility-Scale Horizontal Single Axis Tracker with Validation using Open
Source Tools”. In: 47th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC). 2020.
68 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:77==
[32]
Ibrahim Reda. Method to Calculate Uncertainties in Measuring Shortwave Solar Irra-
diance Using Thermopile and Semiconductor Solar Radiometers. Tech. rep. NREL/TP-
3B10-52194. 2011, p. 20.
[33]
Suellen C.S. Costa, Antonia Sonia A.C. Diniz, and Lawrence L. Kazmerski. “So-
lar energy dust and soiling R&D progress: Literature review update for 2016”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews September (2017), pp. 2504–2536.
ISSN: 18790690. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.015. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2017.09.015.
[34]
J. W. Bishop. “Computer simulation of the effects of electrical mismatches in pho-
tovoltaic cell interconnection circuits”. In: Solar Cells 25.1 (1988), pp. 73–89. ISSN:
03796787. DOI: 10.1016/0379-6787(88)90059-2.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 69
==PAGE:78==
70 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:79==
A
47th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist
Conference (PVSC) article
In this appendix is displayed the article that I participated writing in the framework of this
Master thesis, in the format that was sent to the Conference Proceedings [31].
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 71
==PAGE:80==
 
A Spatial Irradiance Map Measured on the Rear Side 
of a Utility-Scale Horizontal Single Axis Tracker with 
Validation using Open Source Tools 
Nicholas Riedel-Lyngskær 
Dept. of Photonics Engineering, Technical 
University of Denmark  
Roskilde, Denmark nrie@fotonik.dtu.dk  
Manon Petit 
Dept. of Photonics Engineering, Technical 
University of Denmark 
Roskilde, Denmark  
Djaber Berrian 
International Solar Energy Research Center 
Konstanz 
Konstanz, Germany                           
 
Peter B. Poulsen 
Dept. of Photonics Engineering, 
Technical University of Denmark  
Roskilde, Denmark 
Joris Libal 
International Solar Energy 
Research Center Konstanz 
Konstanz, Germany 
Michael L. Jakobsen 
Dept. of Photonics Engineering, 
Technical University of Denmark 
Roskilde, Denmark
Abstract—This work presents measurements from 40 
individual 125 mm x 125 mm crystalline silicon (c-Si) cells placed 
on the backside of a horizontal single axis tracker (HSAT) located 
in Roskilde, Denmark (55.6°N, 12.1°E). The measurements are 
used to validate a general set of conclusions gathered from recent 
literature, to compare to simulated backside irradiance results 
from view factor and ray-trace based methods, and to estimate the 
electrical losses caused by nonuniform illumination at the module 
and array level. In this work, all simulations are performed using 
the open source tools bifacialvf, bifacial_radiance, and pvmismatch. 
The tracker studied is 45 m long with 60-cell bifacial photovoltaic 
(PV) modules mounted “two-in-portrait” - a configuration 
commonly implemented in utility scale PV parks. Our 
measurements 
corroborate 
the 
conclusions 
from 
several 
simulation-based 
studies 
made 
by 
other 
authors. 
The 
measurements and simulations indicate that the irradiation-
nonuniformity-induced electrical mismatch of the bifacial array is 
not higher than 0.25% when mounted above grass (albedo 0.22) 
on a clear sky day. But the array-level mismatch can go up to 3% 
when the PV park is uniformly covered by a white polymeric 
material (albedo 0.60). During a cloudy day, the mismatch of the 
bifacial system over grass is as high as 1%, but is lower than 0.25% 
around solar noon. Above the white ground cover on a cloudy day, 
the mismatch is around 1-2%, even at solar noon.  
Keywords—bifacial, electrical mismatch, single axis tracking 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A well-known challenge in bifacial photovoltaic (PV) 
performance modeling is accounting for the spatial non-
uniformity reaching the backside of the PV array. To this end, 
the recent years have shown several studies where view factor 
(VF) and/or ray-trace (RT) based methods are used to 
understand how the nonuniformity changes with sky conditions 
and with site specific criteria such as module height, tilt angle 
and ground reflectance (albedo) [1] - [5]. Some of these studies 
include model validation and report spatial rear plane of array 
irradiance (GPOA,Rear) measurements, typically on static tilt 
systems using between two and ten irradiance sensors. From 
these papers a few conclusions regarding the spatial distribution 
of irradiance on the backside of bifacial PV arrays can be made:  
1. Edge modules are brighter than inner modules. 
2. Better homogeneity is observed under cloudy (high 
diffuse) than under clear sky conditions. 
3. The closer a cell is to the tracker torque tube, the more 
shade loss it will experience. 
4. Module-level mismatch losses are greatest in the 
middle of the day during a clear day, and constant over 
time when it is cloudy. 
5. Mismatch losses are higher under high albedo than for 
low albedo conditions. 
6. Homogeneity improves as a function of array height 
from the ground. 
 
This work uses detailed GPOA,Rear measurements collected on 
a two-in-portrait (2P) horizontal single axis tracker (HSAT) 
under clear and cloudy sky conditions and under two albedo 
conditions (0.22 and 0.60). With this measurement system, the 
aforementioned conclusions 1 - 5 can be validated in the context 
of Northern Europe using a HSAT configuration. We cannot 
validate conclusion number 6 because the tracker height is not 
adjustable. The movability of the sensors can also support 
answering open questions in the bifacial literature, such as 
where is the ideal location within an array to place a single 
backward-facing reference cell? For example, in the case of 
capacity testing or performance monitoring [6]. 
II. METHODS 
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partnership 
with European Energy A/S operates a 260 kWp bifacial test 
facility in Roskilde, Denmark (55.6°N, 12.1°E) [7]. The facility 
contains various measurement systems that investigate the 
parameters known to influence bifacial gain (e.g. albedo, 
tracker pitch, tilt angle etc.). Of these is a measurement system 
that provides information on the non-homogeneity of light 
reaching the backside of a horizontal single axis tracker 
(HSAT). The first measurement series begins in July 2019 and 
is made above the natural grass with an albedo around 0.22. On 
May 9th, 2020, we mounted a white polymer sheet underneath 
This work was funded by the Danish Energy Technology Development and 
Demonstration Program (EUDP) under project contract 64018-0624.  
==PAGE:81==
the tracker to investigate empirically the effect of albedo on 
electrical mismatch. Our onsite measurements indicate that the 
albedo of this material is approximately 0.60. The second 
measurement series was acquired only from May 10th to May 
25th. The installation of the white sheet was delayed due to the 
pandemic-related situation, and therefore reduced the data 
acquisition period. 
A. Measurement System 
The HSAT studied here is a 45 m long Soltec SF7 with a 2P 
module mounting configuration. The tracker is situated in the 
middle of an eight-tracker field, with a ground cover ratio of 
0.28 (Fig. 1). The tracker has a square shape (15 cm x 15 cm) 
torque tube with 10 cm “z-gap” from the module plane. The 
tracker hub height is 1.95 m. 
 
Fig. 1. Aerial view of the field of HSATs. The tracker under investigation is 
boxed in red. The orange rectangles show the most extreme distances (center 
and edge) tested. Views from the ground are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 
On the backside of this tracker we have mounted four 
custom 1x10 cell panels. These panels have been assembled by 
MG Solar using DTU’s PV module prototyping facilities. Each 
panel consists of ten 156.3 cm2 mono-silicon Al-BSF cells 
wherein each cell’s electrical contacts are accessible through 
the polymeric backsheet. The low-iron glass is 3.2 mm thick 
and does not have an anti-reflective (AR) coating. The short 
circuit current (ISC) of each cell within the laminate is monitored 
using shunt resistors with ohmic values sized for the expected 
cell-level current-voltage (I-V) behavior at low light conditions. 
The expanded measurement uncertainty was estimated at 
±9.3% (k = 2). The three principal components driving the 
uncertainty are the lab calibration (light source irradiance), the 
angular response, and spectral mismatch observed in the field. 
The measurement panels and Radiance renderings are 
shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. Note the 0.5 m motor gap adjacent 
to the inner modules has not been replicated in the Radiance 
simulations. The individual cells within the panels are difficult 
to see because the backsheet is black. On May 9th, 2020, a white 
polymer sheet was mounted underneath the studied tracker and 
is pictured in Fig. 4. The white cover is 5 m wide with 2.5 m of 
material on each side of the tracker. A similar scene was 
simulated in bifacial_radiance and is visualized in Fig. 5.  
To make sure that our field experiment is representative of 
a scene where the ground is uniformly covered by an albedo of 
0.60, one additional scene is simulated in bifacial_radiance 
where the ground albedo is set to 0.60 for the entire field 
surface. 
 
Fig. 2. Two 1x10 cell panels mounted on the east and west edges of the tracker 
along with the cell numbering convention. The left image shows the physical 
panels, the right image shows the Radiance rendering with the sensor locations. 
 
Fig. 3. Two 1x10 cell panels mounted on the east and west sides in the center 
of the tracker along with the cell numbering convention. The left image shows 
the physical panels, the right image shows the Radiance rendering. 
 
Fig. 4. Picture of the white sheet mounted under the investigated tracker.  
 
Fig. 5. Radiance rendering of the white polymer sheet mounted under the 
tracker considered from a top-view perspective.  
B. Backside Irradiance and Electrical Mismatch Models 
We simulate the spatial irradiance on the backside of the 
HSAT using two open source tools developed by the U.S. 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The first is 
==PAGE:82==
bifacial_radiance [8], which is based on the Radiance ray-trace 
engine. The second is bifacialvf  [9], which is a 2D VF model 
that implements the logic described by Marion et al [10]. We 
update the meteorological input files with 10-minute averages 
of onsite broadband diffuse horizontal irradiance (DHI), direct 
normal irradiance (DNI), global horizontal irradiance (GHI) 
recorded by spectrally flat class A sensors (per ISO 9060:2018). 
The onsite GHI - which includes all incident light - and ground 
reflected horizontal irradiance (RHI) measurements provide the 
albedo of the natural grass, and white surface. For each 
measurement series, two days are investigated: one clear sky day 
and one overcast day (Fig. 6 and Fig. 7). The daily clearness 
indexes (KT) on the two sunny days are 0.63 and 0.67 for the first 
and second series, respectively. The daily KT on the two cloudy 
days are 0.29 and 0.20, respectively. 
 
Fig. 6. Broadband irradiance (GHI, DHI, and DNI) from a clear sky day 
(08/25/2019) and overcast day (09/08/2019) in the first measurement series. 
 
Fig. 7. Broadband irradiance (GHI, DHI, and DNI) from a clear sky day 
(05/20/2020) and overcast day (05/17/2020) in the second measurement series. 
The electrical mismatch losses resulting from the 
nonuniform illumination are calculated using the open source 
code pvmismatch developed by SunPower [11]. The mismatch 
calculations are performed for conventional 60-cell (1.6 m x 1.0 
m) panels with three bypass diodes per substring. We assume 
that the rear irradiances observed in cell locations 1 through 10 
are constant along the 1.0 m horizontal width of the 60-cell 
panels. We calculate electrical mismatch within the four 
modules (Edge-E, Edge-W, Inner-E, and Inner-W) using two 
different inputs for GPOA,Rear: the measurements from the custom 
panels, and the bifacial_radiance simulations that contain the 40 
“sensors” placed in locations representative of the cells within 
the custom measurement panels. In all cases the electrical 
mismatch at each timestamp is calculated per (1). 
𝑀𝑖𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ [%] =  1 − 𝑃𝑀𝑜𝑑
∑𝑃𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠
 
(1) 
 
Where PMod is the maximum power point (PMP) of the 60-
cell module. This value is affected by electrical mismatch from 
nonuniform rear side illumination. PCell is the PMP of an 
individual cell within the 60-cell module. For each timestamp in 
our pvmismatch model, we apply the total effective irradiance 
(GTotal) for each cell i as shown in (2). The front and rear side 
irradiance rear GPOA,Front and GPOA,Rear,i are calculated using 
either the field measurements or the bifacial_radiance 
simulation outputs, with GPOA,Front assumed to be homogenous 
across the array. The total effective irradiance becomes: 
𝐺𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙,𝑖= 𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴,𝐹𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑡 +  𝜑∙𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴,𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑟,𝑖 
(2) 
Where φ is the technology-specific bifaciality factor 
calculated as the ratio of backside efficiency to front side 
efficiency (ηSTC,rear / ηSTC,front). In this work we have used a φ 
value of 0.7, which is representative of contemporary bifacial 
PERC modules on the market.   
We have calculated the array-level mismatch using the 
simplified assumption that the modules in the center of the array 
are illuminated by the average irradiance between the Edge and 
Inner cases, separated by the cell numbers, as shown in Fig. 8.  
Fig. 8. Measured average GTotal,i [W∙m-2] from July to November 2019 for the 
south-western half of an interior row of 44 modules surrounded by 7 HSATs. 
The numbers 1-10 on the y-axis represent cell positions, and the numbers 1-22 
on the x-axis represent module positions. 
III. RESULTS 
A. Rear irradiance spatial distribution over grass surface 
The measured and modeled backside irradiance of the 4 
different modules during the first measurement series is studied 
here. Fig. 9 displays the average measured rear irradiance 
within each module for a sunny and a cloudy day.  
 
Fig. 9. Average rear irradiance of the ten cells measured within a module on a 
sunny (08/25/2019) and an overcast day (09/08/2019) over grass.  
Fig. 9 confirms conclusion 1: especially during the sunny 
day, the edge module rear side is brighter than the inner one. 
On the sunny day, it is easy to see that the cells within the two 
edge panels receive nearly twice as much irradiance as the cells 
within the two inner panels. On the cloudy day, the irradiance 
indeed becomes more uniform and irradiance values observed 
within the array are within 10 W∙m-2. Hence, conclusion 1 and 
2 – that the edge module rear side is brighter than the inner one 
==PAGE:83==
and that homogeneity improves on the cloudy day – are 
validated. 
Fig. 10. Hourly average of measured/ simulated GPOA,Rear on the edge module, 
west side of the HSAT on a sunny and an overcast day over grass. 
Fig. 11. Hourly average of measured/ simulated GPOA,Rear on the inner module, 
west side of the HSAT on a sunny and an overcast day over grass. 
Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 overlay the hourly averaged 
measurements, bifacial_radiance and bifacialvf simulations for 
the west side of the tracker at the inner and edge module 
locations. The bifacialvf results are only shown in the inner 
module plot, since bifacialvf does not consider edge effects. 
Ten data points are shown at each hourly timestamp and group, 
which represent the ten cells measured within the module.  
Color shades have been applied to differentiate between 
cells 1 to 10. The lighter color means cell 10, which is located 
closest to the torque tube. The #10 cells can receive as much as 
20% lower GPOA,Rear values than the #1 cells on the sunny day 
and up to 10% lower on the cloudy day. This validates 
conclusion 3, and conclusion 2 again – that the backside 
irradiance is spread over a larger gradient during sunny days.  
bifacial_radiance simulations reproduce well the measured 
inner and edge module rear irradiances. The poorest agreement 
of measured to modeled values is observed on the sunny day on 
the edge module. In the case of the west module, the model 
tends underestimate the irradiance in the morning, and to 
overestimate it around solar noon. In the morning, the error is 
larger than the estimated measurement uncertainty (±9.3%), but 
around solar noon the error becomes smaller than the 
uncertainty. During the cloudy day, the simulated absolute 
values are within the measurement uncertainty 76% of the time 
- considering all 40 sensors. Also, the model agrees with 
observed measurement trends such as: during the cloudy day, 
the module the closest to the sky receives more irradiance and 
during the sunny day, the inner module the closest to the ground 
receives more irradiance.  
A daily root mean squared error (RMSE) was calculated 
individually for all 40 sensors. The cloudy day RMSE is 
between 1-3 W∙m-2 with no clear trend for higher errors 
occurring at any particular sensor location. The sunny day 
RMSE, however, is between 4-10 W∙m-2 wherein the 20 inner 
panel sensors show a systematic trend of lowest RMSE nearest 
the torque tube (4 W∙m-2) and highest RMSE farthest from the 
torque tube (10 W∙m-2). This could be due to an imprecise 
definition of the tracker motor gap in the Radiance scene. The 
20 sensors on the edge panels all have a sunny day RMSE 
between 8-10 W∙m-2.  
Our bifacialvf simulation results are slightly less accurate 
than bifacial_radiance simulations of the inner modules, which 
makes intuitive sense as it is a reduced order model. The VF 
model tends to underestimate the GPOA,Rear irradiance during the 
sunny day by as much as 20 W∙m-2, but the discretized mean 
bias error (MBE) for the 20 segments is between -6 W∙m-2  and 
-10 W∙m-2 on the clear sky day. The daily RMSE is 3-5 W∙m-2 
on the cloudy day and 8-12 W∙m-2 on the sunny day. Larger 
errors are again observed for cells farthest away from the torque 
tube. The errors could be because the structural elements of the 
tracker are not properly accounted for in the model (e.g. shed 
transparency factor, structure shading factor etc.). The 
bifacialvf model is not used for the remainder of the article 
since it accounts for fewer geometry details and does not 
capture edge effects, a key element for mismatch computations.  
B. Influence of albedo on the backside irradiance 
In this section, the effect of the white ground cover on the 
backside irradiance is studied on a clear and an overcast day. 
The intent is to compare to the results made over low albedo 
grass that were shown in section A. Using bifacial_radiance, 
two different scenes are simulated: one similar to the field 
experiment with a 2.5 m wide white (albedo 0.60) band on 
grass, and one with a uniform 0.60 albedo over the entire 
surroundings.  
Fig. 12. Hourly average of measured/ simulated GPOA,Rear on the edge module, 
west side of the HSAT on a sunny and an overcast day over different 
scenarios of white ground cover.  
Fig. 13. Hourly average of measured/ simulated GPOA,Rear on the inner module, 
west side of the HSAT on a sunny and an overcast day over different types of 
white ground cover. 
==PAGE:84==
The backside irradiance levels of the edge and inner 
modules of the west side are displayed in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, 
respectively. First, the measurements are used to validate the 
accuracy of bifacial_radiance for the high albedo condition. 
Indeed, the 2.5 m wide band simulation is very close to the 
measurement irradiance values, within 10% precision.  
Now comparing the 2.5 m band case with the uniform 
albedo case, it appears that the band is not wide enough to be 
representative of a uniform 0.60 albedo. In other words, we 
have reason to believe that a large quantity of ground reflected 
light reaching the cells comes from the grass, not the white 
cover. Imagine a scenario early in the morning when the west 
module is far from the ground: At such a moment, VFGND→PV on 
cell 1 on the tracker west side includes a considerable portion 
of the grass area. An additional bifacial_radiance simulation 
showed that a 5 m band (~2.5x torque tube height) on each side 
of the tracker would lead to results similar to a uniform 0.60 
albedo. This much additional white cover material could not be 
provided nor mounted yet due to pandemic-related restrictions.  
The daily RMSE of the bifacial_radiance simulations (2.5 
m band case) are between 5-10 W∙m-2 on the cloudy day and 
between 9-17 W∙m-2 on the sunny day. We again observed that 
the RMSE is lower for cells nearest the torque tube as was the 
case in the low albedo simulations. As the outdoor 
measurements seem to validate bifacial_radiance in simulating 
GPOA,Rear under different albedo conditions, we will compare the 
bifacial gain under both conditions. Here the RT model is used 
for the high albedo case because the bifacial gain observed over 
our white cover in the field is not truly representative of a 
uniformly covered field. Furthermore, the GPOA,Rear levels in 
W∙m-2 are not directly comparable because the daily GHI 
profiles are different between the sunny and cloudy days of the 
two measurement series. The average bifacial irradiance 
(optical) gain is defined in (3) where GPOA,Rear stands for the 
average rear irradiance within a module. 
𝐵𝐺𝑖𝑟𝑟= 𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴,𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑟
𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴,𝐹𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑡
 
(3) 
 
 
Fig. 14. Mean bifacial gain within the edge and inner modules of the west side 
on a sunny and a cloudy day over an albedo of 0.22 (measured, 08/25/2019 and 
09/08/2019) and over albedo of 0.60 (RT model, 05/20/2020 and 05/17/2020). 
The irradiance gains on the edge and the inner modules 
during cloudy and sunny are plotted in Fig. 14. The average 
bifacial irradiance gain is up to 2.5 times higher under an 
albedo of 0.60 than under grass albedo. As a result, the 
bifacial gain varies linearly with the albedo on average. Also 
apparent in Fig. 14 is how the bifacial gain can be 
overestimated by as much as 2x when edge panels - as 
opposed to inner panels - are used for the calculation.  
C. Power mismatch losses over different ground albedos 
The electrical mismatch calculated using inputs from the 
onsite measurements and the bifacial_radiance simulations 
during the first measurement series over grass is shown below. 
Fig. 15 shows electrical mismatch at the module-level and Fig. 
16 at the array-level.  
 
Fig. 15. Module-level mismatch losses of the west side modules using the 
measured and simulated rear irradiance values on a sunny and a cloudy day 
during the first measurement series over grass. 
When used to estimate module-level mismatch losses, the 
RT model agrees very well with the measurements, except late 
in the cloudy day when some direct beam light was observed. 
The large discrepancy late in the day could be due to passing 
clouds and a lagged response from the thermopile 
(pyranometer) sensors - although the sensors implemented here 
do have response times < 5 seconds. During the sunny day, the 
module-level mismatch is lower than 0.2%. And during the 
cloudy day, the module-level mismatch losses are mostly lower 
than 0.2%, except at the beginning and at the end of the day. 
Conclusion 4 is validated here, since the module-level 
mismatch is highest in the middle of the day when it is sunny 
and is quite constant throughout the day if it is cloudy.  
Please note that the results from the Eastern panels are not 
shown here to maintain clarity in the figures. An interesting 
observation we found when comparing East and West sides 
during the sunny day is that the module closest to the ground 
suffers higher mismatch losses than the top module. 
 
Fig. 16. Array-level mismatch losses using the measured and simulated rear 
irradiance values on a sunny and a cloudy day during the first measurement 
series over grass. 
At the array-level now in Fig. 16, the RT model tends to 
overestimate the mismatch but follows the same trends as the 
measurements. During the sunny day, both the simulated and 
measured mismatch are lower than 0.25% and the mismatch 
losses are again highest in the middle of the day. During the 
==PAGE:85==
cloudy day in the middle of the day the mismatch is < 0.15%, 
but in the morning and afternoon the mismatch increases on the 
array the closest to the ground up to 1% for periods with 
meaningful levels of irradiance (GHI > 100 W∙m-2). 
 
Fig. 17. Array-level mismatch losses using the measured and simulated data 
points of the HSAT for a sunny and a cloudy day of the second measurement 
series over an albedo of 0.60. The measurement consists of two 2.5 m bands of 
white cover material and the RT simulations used a uniform 0.60 albedo. 
The electrical mismatch calculated using inputs from the 
second measurement series is studied in Fig. 17. Two different 
conditions are compared. The measurements made over 2.5 m 
wide bands of white material on each side of the tracker, and 
the RT scene with a uniform 0.60 albedo. During the sunny day, 
the modeled mismatch is similar for the east and west arrays, 
with a significantly higher mismatch in the middle of the day. 
In contrast, the measurements show that the array closest to the 
ground experience a higher mismatch, which is likely due to the 
inhomogeneous albedo. For analyzing the effect of albedo on 
the mismatch, the RT model calculations are used instead of the 
measurement, since the comparison should be done over a 
uniform albedo for both the grass and white-cover albedo.  
Fig. 17 validates conclusion 5 – mismatch losses are higher 
under high albedo than for low albedo conditions. Indeed, the 
highest array-level mismatch during the sunny day increases 
from 0.25% over an albedo of 0.22 to 3% over an albedo of 
0.60, i.e. by an order of magnitude.  
The electrical mismatch is now studied as a function of the 
relative standard deviation, also termed the coefficient of 
variation, of the total irradiance as defined in (4) with 𝜇=
𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴,𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙) from (2). A similar study has recently been 
carried out by Deline et al. [12] where RT simulations were 
performed of a 10° fixed tilt system above a high reflective 
surface and ground clearances of 0.15 m to 1.0 m. Their work 
resulted in a simplified model that describes electrical 
mismatch loss as a function of irradiance non-uniformity. 
Janssen et al. proposed a similar model in [13] for a fixed-tilt 
system. The module-level mismatch is shown in this section to 
compare our outcomes to their fitted curves. Indeed, the 
interpolated data used previously to calculate the array-level 
mismatch is not exactly true to reality. We estimate that this 
assumption does not affect mismatch losses much, but can 
significantly affect the array-level standard deviation (non-
uniformity), which thus makes it unsuitable for building 
predictive models based on the standard deviation. Finally, only 
timestamps when GHI > 150 W/m² are considered here.  
𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑟[%] = 1
𝜇⋅√∑(𝐺𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙,𝑖−𝜇)
2
𝑁
𝑁
𝑖=1
⋅100% 
(4) 
 
Fig. 18. Module-level electrical mismatch vs. the relative standard deviation. 
Results from the measurements and Radiance simulations are shown for all 4 
modules over grass and compared to the literature [12] [13]. Data points are 
filtered when GHI<150 W/m².  
Module-level mismatch losses vs. relative standard 
deviation over grass is shown in Fig. 18. During the sunny day, 
both the measurements and the RT model fit quite well to the 
exponential curve of Deline et al. in [12] specified in (5). In 
fact, the edge modules are very uniform and correspond to a 
large amount of data points with 𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑟[%] < 0.25%. While the 
data from the inner modules best fits the Deline correlation (5).  
𝑀[%]𝑓𝑖𝑡1 = 𝑒−2 ⋅𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑟[%]1.57 
(5) [12] 
𝑀[%]𝑓𝑖𝑡2 = 0.33 ⋅𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑟[%] + 0.075 ⋅𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑟[%]2 
(6) [13] 
During the cloudy day, the correlation between mismatch 
and standard deviation is less obvious. Some measured data 
points, and even more RT modeled data points are closer to 
Janssen polynomial curve [13] detailed in (6). This suggests 
that the effect of diffuse light ought to be accounted for when 
modeling mismatch losses in this range. However, one must 
keep in mind that the mismatch values obtained in this study 
are on the very low end of possible values that bifacial PV 
systems - particularly low ground clearance systems - can incur. 
 
Fig. 19 again shows module-level mismatch vs. relative 
standard deviation, but for the second measurement series over 
the white cover of albedo 0.60. As a reminder, the 
measurements were done over a 2.5 m wide tarp under each side 
of the tracker, whereas the RT model considers a uniform 0.60 
albedo for comparison. Both the measurements and the model 
fit well to the exponential curve specified in (5), for both the 
sunny and cloudy day. However, during the cloudy day, most 
of the data points are still gathered in a cluster where the relative 
standard deviation is lower than 1%. The sunny day data points 
==PAGE:86==
follow the exponential curve more evenly, with relative 
deviations up to 3% and module-mismatch losses up to 0.9%.  
 
Fig. 19. Module-level electrical mismatch vs. the relative standard deviation. 
Results from the measurements and Radiance simulations are shown for all 4 
modules over white cover and compared to the literature [12] [13]. Data points 
are filtered when GHI<150 W/m². 
IV. SUMMARY 
 
We 
have 
presented 
high 
resolution 
irradiance 
measurements on the back of a 2P HSAT, compared them to 
VF and RT simulations and calculated electrical mismatch 
using open source tools. The RT and VF models has been 
validated during a typical sunny and cloudy day over natural 
grass (albedo 0.22) and over a white polymer sheet (albedo 
0.60), but the VF approach is less accurate as one would expect. 
Moreover, the effect of albedo on the backside irradiance, 
bifacial gain and irradiance-nonuniformity-induced power 
mismatch losses have been analyzed. Please note that the 
mismatch results shown here are expected to be different when 
the torque tube shape and module gap differ significantly from 
the tracker studied here.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  L. Kreinin, N. Bordin, A. Karsenty, A. Drori, D. 
Grobgeld and N. Eisenberg, "PV module power gain 
due to bifacial design. Preliminary experimental and 
simulation data," Conference Record of the IEEE 
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2010.  
[2]  S. A. Pelaez, C. Deline, P. Greenberg, J. S. Stein and R. 
K. Kostuk, "Model and Validation of Single-Axis 
Tracking with Bifacial PV," IEEE Journal of 
Photovoltaics, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 715-721, 2019.  
[3]  A. Asgharzadeh, B. Marion, C. Deline, C. Hansen, J. S. 
Stein and F. Toor, "A sensitivity study of the impact of 
installation parameters and system configuration on the 
performance of bifacial PV arrays," IEEE Journal of 
Photovoltaics, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 798-805, 2018.  
[4]  C. W. Hansen, R. Gooding, N. Guay, D. M. Riley, J. 
Kallickal, D. Ellibee, A. Asgharzadeh, B. Marion, F. 
Toor and J. S. Stein, "A Detailed Model of Rear-Side 
Irradiance for Bifacial PV Modules," 44th IEEE 
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2017 
[5]  K. R. McIntosh, M. D. Abbott, B. A. Sudbury and J. 
Meydbray, "Mismatch Loss in Bifacial Modules Due to 
Nonuniform Illumination in 1-D Tracking Systems," 
IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1504-
1512, 2019.  
[6]  M. Waters, C. Deline, J. Kemnitz, J. Webber, M. 
Waters, C. Deline, J. Kemnitz and J. Webber, 
"Suggested Modifications for Bifacial Capacity 
Testing," 46th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists 
Conference, 2019.  
[7]  N. Riedel et al."The Outdoor Bifacial PV Testing 
Facility at Technical University of Denmark," BifiPV 
Workshop, Amsterdam, 2019.  
[8]  C. Deline and S. Ayala, Bifacial_Radiance. Computer 
Software. https://github.com/NREL/bifacial_radiance. 
USDOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable 
Energy (EERE), Solar Energy Technologies Office (EE-
4S). 17 Dec. 2017. Web. doi:10.11578/dc.20180530.16.  
[9]  NREL, "bifacialvf," 2019. [Online]. Available: 
http://github.com/ NREL/bifacialvf. 
[10] B. Marion, S. MacAlpine, C. Deline, A. Asgharzadeh, 
F. Toor, D. Riley, J. Stein and C. Hansen, "A Practical 
Irradiance Model for Bifacial PV Modules," 44th IEEE 
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2017.  
[11] M. Mikofski, B. Meyers and C. Chaudhari, 
"PVMismatch Project," SunPower Corporation, 
Richmond, CA, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://github.com/SunPower/PVMismatch. 
[12] C. Deline, S. Ayala Pelaez, S. MacAlpine, C. Olalla 
"Estimating and parameterizing mismatch power loss in 
bifacial photovoltaic systems," Prog Photovolt Res 
Appl. 2020;1-13.  
[13] G. Janssen, R. Gali, K. de Groot, A. Carr, B. Van Aken 
and I. Romijn, "Impact of inhomogeneous irradiance at 
the rear of bifacial panels on modeled energy yield," in 
33rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference 
and Exhibition, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2017.  
 
==PAGE:87==
B
Weather analysis of the second
measurement series in May 2020
(a) Diffuse fraction vs. Clearness index
(b) Daily diffuse fraction and clearness index
Figure B.1: Study of the diffuse fraction and clearness index in May 2020
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 79
==PAGE:88==
C
Albedo on-site measurements
The albedo value depends on how it is measured, it varies over the course of the day.
For the sake of simplicity in the modelling approach, only one value was considered for
albedo in the different ground conditions. Based on the on-site measurement displayed in
Figure C.1, the grass albedo is estimated at 22% in average (Figure C.1a) and the white
tarp at 60% in average (Figure C.1b).
(a) Albedo of grass as measured by Class A pyranometer
vs. Class C photodiode [22]
(b) Albedo of the white polymer
sheet as measured by Class C pyra-
nometer vs. photodiode
Figure C.1: Ground albedo on-site measurements
80 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:89==
D
Detailed calculation of the individual
uncertainty components
To estimate our measurements uncertainty, following the guide for estimation of uncer-
tainty in measurements, (GUM), the expanded uncertainty of each individual components
indentified in Table D.1 is first evaluated. This part is detailed below the Table. Then, a
sensitivity coeficient s is applied. It is not specified in the table since in our case, s = 1 for
every component. Then, according to the uncertainty distribution specified in Table D.1,
a divisor d is also applied, d = 2.00 for a normal distribution and d = 1.73 for a rectangular
distribution. The distribution is normal is the uncertainty is statistical or type A, and rect-
angular if the uncertainty is non-statistical or type B [32]. The sensitivity coefficient and
divisor are applied to the expanded uncertainty to obtain the standard uncertainty follow-
ing Equation (D.1). Then, the total standard uncertainty utot is obtained by Equation (D.2).
The total expanded uncertainty is finally calculated back following Equation (D.4) with
k = 2. Also, the contribution to total of one individual component i is detailed in Equa-
tion (D.3).
u = s
d · U
(D.1)
utot =
sX
i
u2
i
(D.2)
uc,i =
u2
i
P
j u2
j
(D.3)
Utot = utot · k
(D.4)
(D.5)
Table D.1: Complete calculation of the individual uncertainty components
Individual components
Expanded
Distribution
Divisor
Standard
Contribu°
uncertainty
uncertainty
to total
U
d
u
Uc
Cell calibration coeff.
6.7%
Normal
2.00
3.4%
53.1 %
PV non-linearity
1.0%
Rectangular
1.73
0.6%
1.6%
Spectral mismatch
0.2%
Rectangular
1.73
0.1%
0.1%
PV directional resp.
5.0%
Rectangular
1.73
2.9%
38.9 %
Datalogger accuracy
0.0%
Rectangular
1.73
0.0%
0.0%
Datalogger repeatability
0.8%
Normal
2.00
0.4%
0.8%
Long term stability
0.0%
Rectangular
1.73
0.0%
0.0%
Soiling (maintenance)
0.2%
Rectangular
1.73
0.1%
0.1%
Shunt resistor R[Ω]
1.0%
Normal
2.00
0.5%
1.2%
T[K] of shunt resistor
0.2%
Normal
2.00
0.1%
0.0%
T[K] of PV module (Isc)
1.9%
Normal
2.00
1.0%
4.3%
Total
9.3%
Normal
2.00
4.6%
100.0
%
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 81
==PAGE:90==
Now, the individual component expanded uncertainty estimation is detailed.
The cell calibration coefficient was estimated through laboratory experiments, so the ex-
panded uncertainty is based on those experiments. Several uncertainty components have
been identified to calculate the total expanded uncertainty of the cell calibration coefficient.
The full calculations of the cell calibration coefficient expanded uncertainty is displayed in
table D.2.
Table D.2: Complete calculation of the cell calibration expanded uncertainty
Individual components
Expanded
Distribution
Divisor
Standard
Contribu°
uncertainty
uncertainty
to total
U
d
u
Uc
Cell alignment
5.7%
Normal
2.00
2.8%
70.3 %
T[C°] deviation from 25°C
0.1%
Normal
2.00
0.0%
0.0%
Datalogger accuracy
0.0%
Rectangular
1.73
0.0%
0.0%
Spectral mismatch
0.5%
Rectangular
1.73
0.3%
0.6%
Output ∆amongst 40 cells
1.1%
Normal
2.00
0.5%
2.6%
Datalogger repeatability
0.8%
Normal
2.00
0.4%
1.5%
Ref. cell uncertainty
2.0%
Rectangular
1.73
1.2%
11.7 %
Displacement ref. cell
2.5%
Normal
2.00
1.2%
13.3 %
position to DUT
Total
6.7%
Normal
2.00
3.4%
100.0
%
The PV nonlinearity is assumed at 1% based on typical Silicon photodiode response [32].
The spectral mismatch correction factor is applied to our measurement and results in an
expanded uncertainty of typically ±0.2% [23, 24]. The PV directional response is related
to the angle-of-incidence correction factor and was computed using the numerical method
from [25].
The datalogger accuracy is taken from the manufacturer, Campbell scientific, CR6 certifi-
cate of calibration, and is as low as ±0.04%. The datalogger repeatability was estimated
in the laboratory through experimentation.
The long term stability does not apply in our study since the calibration was made very
recently. Based on a review from Costa et al. [33], the soiling losses are estimated to be
lower than 0.2% for backward-facing panels.
The shunt resistor ohmic value uncertainty is taken directly from Ohmite 0.1 Ohm (15FR100E)
data sheet. From the same data sheet, the uncertainty related to the temperature of the
shunt resistor is calculated. The device temperature range is estimated to spread from
−10°C to 30°C, and the coefficient from the data sheet is ±50ppm/°C, so the uncertainty
is ±0.2%.
The uncertainty related to the temperature of the panel is calculated using a short-circuit
current (Isc) coefficient of 0.04%/°C. The ambient temperature rangeis considered to
spread from −10°C to 30°C. At the low temperature, very low light-conditions are assumes
so the device temperature is assumed equal to −10°C also. At an ambient temperature
of 30°C, a GHI of 200 W/m2 is assumed, leading to a device temperature around 38°.
Finally, the uncertainty is ±1.9%.
82 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:91==
E
Input parameters for the irradiance
simulation models
Several simulations were undertaken using the two python simulation tools bifacialvf and
bifacial_radiance. However, only the first simulation run was made under conditions com-
parable to the on-field measurement at Risø DTU Campus. The input parameters com-
mon on the two models for this first round of simulations are gathered in table E.1.
Importantly, the time resolution of the models simulation step was modified to be able to
run simulation with up to 1 minute resolution. This was done in the main code file of both
python wrappers.
Table E.1: Input parameters of the base case simulation and common for bifacialvf and
bifacial_radiance
Parameter
Unit
Value
# of PV rows
-
8
Hub height
m
1.95
Module height
m
1.65
Modules configuration
-
2P
Axis azimuth
°
180
GCR
-
0.295
albedo
-
0.22
Limit angle
°
60
PV front surface
-
ARglass
PV rear surface
-
glass
# of irradiance sensors
-
20
Tracking
-
True
Backtracking
-
True
It should be remembered that when ued in input of the bifacialvf functions, all the length
values must be normalized by the panels total height, so here 2 · heightmodule since we
are in a 2P configuration.
Also, two more parameters are needed as input of the bifacial vf. First, it must be specified
that the studied PV row is an interior row. Also, the open area fraction must be given,
estimated here at 0.0375.
More geometrical details are given in input of the bifacial_radiance model and are listed
in Table E.2.
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 83
==PAGE:92==
Table E.2: Input parameters specific of bifacial_radiance for the base case simulation
Parameter
Unit
Value
# modules per PV row
-
44
Precision of tracking
°
0.01
xgap
m
0.027
ygap
m
1.245
zgap
m
0.000
Panel dimensions
m
0.992 × 1.65
Torque tube width
m
0.145
Torque material
-
predefined ’Metal_Grey’
The block of E-W trackers on the East of the farm were also modeled as a squared block
in Radiance, and the surrounding barns geometry was accurately reproduced and is not
specified in this report.
Finally, it should be noticed that the ’cumulativesky’ option in bifacial_radiance was set to
False, so that the simulations are made in details, step by step (on a 10 minutes resolution
in our case) and not averaged.
84 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:93==
F
Cells parameters as input of PV
Mismatch to compute to power
mismatch loss
Table F.1: Cell parameters for grass albedo
Cell parameter
Rs
Rsh
Isat1,T0
Isat2,T0
Isc0,T0
aRBD
bRBD
Unit
mΩ
kΩ
nA
µA
A
10−4
-
Value
4.0
1.0
0.10
1.5
10.7
1.04
0.0
Cell parameter
VRBD
nRBD
Eg
αIsc
Tcell
Ee
bf
Unit
V
-
V
10−3
K
V
-
Value
-12
3.28
1.12
4.0
298
1.0
0.7
The short-circuit current actually depends on the average bifacial gain following the Equa-
tion F.1. The breakdown voltage coefficients aRBD, bRBD and exponent nRBD are calcu-
lating following the guidelines provided in Bishop article. [34]
Isc0,T0 = 9.7 A · (1 + BG)
(F.1)
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 85
==PAGE:94==
G
Timestamps intervals to be ignored for
analysis of the data set from July 10th
to November 13th 2019
Table G.1: Timestamps dismissed because of field activity disturbing the measurements
acquisition
Date (MM/DD/YYYY)
Timestamps interval
07/10/2019
All day
08/29/2019
12:40 - 14:00
09/03/2019
11:20 - 12:40
09/12/2019
09:00 - 10:30
09/12/2019
13:00 - 14:10
09/13/2019
13:30 - 15:00
09/30/2019
16:00 - 17:00
10/02/2019
14:40 - 16:10
10/04/2019
10:20 - 11:30
10/23/2019
11:00 - 15:00
10/30/2019
11:00 - 15:10
11/06/2019
All day
11/07/2019
All day
11/08/2019
09:00 - 10:00
11/13/2019
All day
86 Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant
==PAGE:95==
Investigation of the backside irradiance distribution of a Horizontal Single Axis Tracker Photovoltaic plant 87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399, Building 130
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.solar.dtu.dk
