==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Business Analytics
Feature Selection in Asset Allocation
Auður Anna Jónsdóttir (s181783)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Mangament and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
man@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The majority of Danish investors invest in a portfolio of Danish mutual funds. Mutual
funds are most often actively managed funds that have expense ratios as high as 1 −
2%. Research show that these high costs make it difficult for these funds to beat their
benchmarks. Those portfolios often consist of mutual funds managed and owned by
subsidiaries of the banks that suggest the given portfolio, which creates conflict of interest
in the counseling. This thesis aims to address this issue by minimizing the human element
in the portfolio construction and looking into the exchange traided fund (ETF) universe
as an alternative investment opportunity to Danish mutual funds. ETFs are most often
passively managed and track an underlying index. They are traided on an exchange and
often have expense ratios as low as 0.06%.
In this thesis general statistical methods as well as more advanced methods are
used, such as clustering and network science. These methods are used to look into the
universe of mutual funds and compare it to the universe of ETFs. Network science offers
techniques to graphically display the relationship between assets in a meaningful way,
which is especially useful when looking into a large universe of assets. Clustering is used
to split the assets into diverse groups and find the underlying structure in the asset
universe. The clusters are also used to create smaller subsets of assets to feed into an
optimization model, where the underlying hypothesis is that it will produce more robust
and superior portfolios by decreasing the parameter uncertainty.
A network science
technique based on the minimum spanning tree is also used to create subsets of assets.
Three datasets are considered for the analysis, a Danish mutual fund dataset, ETF
dataset and an indices dataset, which creates a bridge between the mutual funds and
the ETFs. All datasets contain historical returns for the assets. Analysis of the datasets
show that the universe of ETFs is broad and offers more diversification than the universe
of Danish mutual funds. However, a large part of the mutual funds are low risk/low
return funds that consist of Danish bonds, that the ETFs do not seem to replicate. This
suggest that a portfolio of both universes could offer investors maximum diversification
in a portfolio.
Clustering is carried out on the ETFs and the indices together. The assets are split
into three clusters and each cluster is a combination of ETFs and indices. An underlying
structure of the ETFs and indices is found, e.g. one cluster consists of the gold index
and ETFs that have underlying indices tracking the performance of precious metals,
but are in different asset classes such as equity and commodities. This shows that by
using clustering methods the underlying structure of a asset universe can be found in
an efficient way.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
Finally subsets of ETFs are created. Two different algorithms are used; clustering and
minimum spanning tree (MST). These two methods are beforehand expected to provide
different features into the asset management as the MST method picks up assets entirely
based on diversification, while the clustering provides groups of ETFs that are the least
similar and the highest performing assets are then picked up from each group. The
diversification of the subsets is evaluated based on the portfolio diversification index
and the average correlation. This shows that the MST method provides subsets with
considerably higher diversification in terms of these two measures. The performance of
the different subsets will be evaluated further in Petr Vaneks’ thesis, where the subsets
will be fed into various optimization models and optimal portfolios created.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Technology, Management and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements of
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Business Analytics. This thesis was conducted from the
27th of January to the 26th of June 2020 and corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
It was partly a collaboration between three master students; Auður Anna Jónsdóttir,
Steinn Arnar Kjartansson and Petr Vanek and was carried out under the supervision
of Associate Professor Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen. The author of this thesis is Auður
Anna Jónsdóttir. If the reader is interested in looking at the thesis of my collaborators,
they can be accessed under the following titles:
• Performance evaluation and tracking using optimization techniques, author: Steinn
Arnar Kjartansson
• Performance analysis of the most traded mutual funds versus optimal portfolios of
exchange traded funds, author: Petr Vanek
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2020
Auður Anna Jónsdóttir (s181783)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my gratitude to Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen for being a great supervi-
sor throughout the project and for inspiring and motivating me to do better. For always
bringing up a new perspective and being sincerely interested in guiding me through the
project.
My collaborators on the project, Steinn Arnar Kjartansson and Petr Vanek, for the
co-operation. Being able to discuss every step of the project and get another perspective
was really valuable. Their input helped me improve my work and the project wouldn’t
have been the same without their help.
My husband, Sindri Lárusson, and daugther, Edda Guðríður Sindradóttir, for the
emotional support and keeping me company in the ”isolation” due to Covid-19 for the
largest part of the last months.
My parents, Guðríður Friðriksdóttir and Jón Hallur Pétursson, for all the support
throughout the years. For being the greatest role models of my life and for encouraging
me to work hard and follow my dreams.
And finally my sister, Guðrún Margrét Jónsdóttir, for all the input throughout this
process and for proofreading my thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Exchange Traided Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Robo-Advisors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Modern Portfolio Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Feature Selection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods
9
2.1
Risk and Return
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Network Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Diversification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Asset Selection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Data Introduction
21
3.1
Index Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Mutual Fund Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Exchange Traded Funds Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Analysis
27
4.1
Insight into Asset Universe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Performace Evaluation of Different Clustering Methods . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Insight into Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Generating Subsets of ETFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Conclusions
55
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A Code Files
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In Danmark the majority of peoples savings end up being invested in Danish mutual
funds [“Finanstilsynet”, 2017]. Most of these mutual funds are actively managed asset
portfolios which require selling/buying of the shares that are bought or sold. The return
of such funds is reduced by the costs of managing the fund, marketing costs, and other
administration costs of the fund. These costs are typically 1−2% of the invested amount
and are paid yearly by the investors (expense ratio)[Kostovetsky, 2003]. On top of that
many funds have service fees or redemption fees.
These high costs make it difficult
for the mutual funds to beat their passively managed benchmarks. In 2019, 71.12% of
equity funds in Europe under performed the S&P Europe 350, and when considering the
performance over the last three years, 79.37% equity funds in Europe underperformed
the S&P Europe 350 [SP Dow Jones Indices LLC, 2020]. Many investors invest in a
portfolio of mutual funds suggested by one of the banks. This adds another layer on top
of the costs, advisory fees for suggesting a given portfolio. The underlying assets in the
suggested portfolios are most often managed by subsidiaries of the bank, which creates
a conflict of interest in the counseling. This raises the question, how can portfolios be
diversified in a cheaper and a more efficient way?
This thesis is done in collaboration with Steinn Arnar Kjartansson and Petr Vanek.
Three datasets are considered, which all contain return series. The first dataset consists
of 180 indices which are considered to replicate the market, the second dataset is a
collection of Danish mutual funds and finally there is a dataset of exchange traided
funds (ETFs). The ETFs are brought into the asset universe because of their desirable
properties; passive management strategy and low expense ratio. The indices dataset will
be used as a bridge between the Danish mutual funds and the ETFs.
The goal of this thesis is the following; show which parts of the market the Danish
mutual funds span and see if the universe of ETFs brings in more diversification poten-
tial. This is be done by applying general statistical methods, clustering and network
science. Secondly, subsets of ETFs are generated by reducing the universe of ETFs from
hundreds to tens. This is done by using unsupervised machine learning methods and
network science methods. The underlying hypothesis is that reducing the asset universe
before feeding the assets into an optimization model produces more robust and superior
portfolios. This step can be considered as one step in a robo-advisory algorithm, where
investment management advise is based on mathematical algorithmns. The overall goal
is to show that it is possible to offer cheap, well diversified and robust portfolios to
investors that consist of ETFs and build mainly on mathematical algorithms. This is
something that Danish investors could add to their portfolios to further improve diver-
sification.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
In the following sections two concepts essential to this research are explained; ex-
change traided funds and robo-advisors. Next Modern Portfolio Theory, which is the
basis in portfolio optimization, will be introduced and related work. Finally, the feature
selection methods used will be introduced and previous studies that are useful for this
project will be presented.
1.1
Exchange Traided Funds
In the recent years investments in exchange traded funds (ETFs) have grown rapidly.
Most ETFs are passively managed and they often follow an index.
Until 2008, the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC) permitted only ETFs that tracked
designated indexes. ETFs can be traded like stocks, when-ever in the day, and do not
require selling/buying of the fund when a new party sells or enters. The fees are much
lower than for mutual funds because of its properties and can be as low as 0.06%. Their
performance is most often slightly lower than the index they are following because of
the fees of operations [Sharifzadeh and Hojat, 2012]. Table 1.1 shows how the total net
assets (in billions of dollars) in the US registered investment companies split between
fund types.
The most significant categories are mutual funds and ETFs, where the
amount invested in mutual funds has grown by 50% while investments in ETFs have
more than tripled from 2010-2018. Total net assets declined by $1.1 trillion in 2018
where the amount invested in mutual funds declined by 5% compared to less than 1%
decline in ETFs, so the share of ETFs in the market is still growing [Knuth, no date].
Many of the properties described here are desirable for the focus of this thesis; creating
well diversified and robust portfolios while keeping the costs and the human element in
decision making at minimum.
Table 1.1: Total net assets in US registered investment companies, by type, in billions
of dollars. Source [Knuth, no date].
Mutual funds
Closed-end funds
ETFs
UTIs
Total
2010
11,831
239
992
51
13,113
2011
11,630
244
1,048
60
12,982
2012
13,054
265
1,337
72
14,728
2013
15,049
282
1,675
87
17,092
2014
15,877
292
1,975
101
18,244
2015
15,658
263
2,101
94
18,116
2016
16,353
265
2,524
85
19,227
2017
18,764
277
3,401
85
22,527
2018
17,707
250
3,371
70
21,398
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Robo-Advisors
3
1.2
Robo-Advisors
The first robo-advisors were introduced in 2008 and have been increasing in market
share in the recent years. Now there are a few robo-advisory services in Danmark; June
by Danske Bank, Darwin, Nord and more. These companies are offering investment
management advice based on mathematical algorithms which makes the fees a lot lower
and often eliminates conflict of interest. Typically a clients risk preferences and return
target is taken into account, just like in the portfolio management offered by the banks.
robo-advisors have faced some criticism based on the fact that they may result in invest-
ment recommendations that are based on incorrect assumptions, or circumstances that
are not relevant to an individual investor [Fein, 2015].
Figure 1.1 shows an example of a robo-advisory algorithm. The first step is to take in
all the assets and filter them based on a predefined criteria (due diligence screening). An
example of this is that historical data is available for at least 5 years, the expense ratio is
not higher than 0.7%, etc. Here the goal is to make sure enough data is available, that the
assets are liquid and that they fit the purpose of the investment. Next advanced feature
selection methods, such as clustering or principal component analysis, are applied to the
data, to reduce the number of assets while keeping as much diversification as possible.
Finally the assets that made it through the tunnel are fed into an optimization model
where the optimal combination of assets is found. In this thesis, the main focus is on
prepossessing the data and building the first two steps of the algorithm.
Figure 1.1: An example of a Robo-Advisory algorithm.
1.3
Modern Portfolio Theory
Modern Portfolio Theory was introduced in 1952 by Markowitz and is the discipline of
allocating and diversifying assets in a portfolio to maximize the expected return for a
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
given risk level or vice versa, to minimize the risk for a given return level. This theory
is still widely used today and is perhaps the most important theory introduced in asset
management as it presented the idea of diversification. The theory argues that a single
assets risk and return should not be evaluated alone, but how the asset affects the overall
portfolios risk and return. By allocating the assets in a portfolio the unsystematic risk
can be eliminated, such that the risk of the portfolio only consists of the systematic risk.
Unsystematic risk is the risk that is unique to a specific company or industry, while the
systematic risk is the market risk. A minimum variance portfolio is shown in equations
1.1 to 1.3.
min
1
2w⊤Σw
(1.1)
s.t.t.
w⊤µ = µP
(1.2)
w⊤1 = 1
(1.3)
Where w = [w1w2...wn]′ is a matrix representing the fraction invested in each of
the n assets, µ = [µ1µ2...µn]′ is a matrix of the expected returns on different assets
and Σ is the covariance matrix of returns. Here the risk of the portfolio is minimized
while fulfilling the constrains that the return of the portfolio must be equal to µp and
the weights must sum to one. Many other variations building on this theory have been
proposed over the years, and this concept is the foundation in asset allocation today.
The Modern Portfolio Theory has gained a lot of criticism over the years, especially
since returns are most often not normally distributed and thus variance is not considered
an appropriate risk measure [Fama, 1963]. CVaR or conditional value at risk is consid-
ered a better risk measure and fulfills the requirements of being a coherent risk measure
(monotonicity, sub-additivity, positive homogeneity and translation invariance). It is
the average of all events exceeding value at risk (which measures how much one will
maximally loose with a given probability), and thus only considers the extreme events
[Rockafellar, Uryasev, et al., 2000]. Also, according to Best and Grauer, 1991 models
that build on this theory are often really sensitive to the input parameters, such as the
expected return, risk and the covariance. Those estimation errors can lead to unstable
and extreme positions in single assets. Kan and Zhou, 2007 suggest that the problem of
parameter estimation increases with the number of assets. Many different methods have
been proposed as to solve this problem, such as shrinkage of the mean [Jorion, 1986]
and the covariance [Ledoit and Wolf, 2004].
1.4
Feature Selection Methods
The main focus of this thesis is looking into different feature selection methods to re-
duce the asset universe, before feeding the assets into an optimization model, and thus
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Feature Selection Methods
5
decrease the parameter uncertainty. The hypothesis is that it will improve the out-of-
sample performance and provide more robust and superior portfolios.
Both simple and more advance methods will be used in doing this. The first step
is to reduce the asset universe by picking out assets that fulfill a predefined criteria;
e.g. have a low expense ratio, are highly traded or have a Sharpe ratio higher than a
specific value. Then, more advanced methods will be studied, in particular clustering
and network science. In the following chapters these methods will be introduced along
with principal component analysis, which will be used to evaluate the diversification in
subsets of assets.
1.4.1
Clustering
Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning technique used to discover similar groups
in unlabelled data. As a solution to the problem of parameter uncertainty in portfolio
optimization, Bjerring et al., 2017 suggests using feature selection methods to reduce
the number of assets to feed into an optimization model. In this paper the asset menu
is reduced by using agglomerative hierarchical clustering, where the distance is based
on the correlation matrix.
Then one representative is chosen from each cluster and
the reduced asset universe fed into various optimization models.
The reduced asset
universe performs better when compared to the full universe in terms of alpha. Raffinot,
2017 tests several different hierarchial clustering linkage methods (how the distance
between clusters is defined) on three datasets of assets and shows that the hierarchial
clustering-based portfolios are robust, truly diversified and achieve statistically better
risk-adjusted performance than other commonly used portfolio optimization methods.
Many different methods exist for carrying out the clustering. Roelofsen, 2018 carried
out a comprehensive study comparing different clustering methods for time-series. Here
different methods for determining the distance between time-series, clustering algorithms
and the optimal number of clusters are compared both theoretically and practically.
This paper shows how these different methods have a big impact on the results of the
clustering, thus it is important to chose suitable methods when clustering time-series
data.
1.4.2
Network Science
Network science tequniques have becoming more popular in the recent years and are used
in various fields such as mathematics, biology, transportation, communication networks
and more recently; finance. Network analysis build on the basis of graph theory which
is traced back to 1735 when Euler solved the famous problem of the Seven Bridges of
Köningsberg [Euler, 1741]. The foundation in networks are the nodes and edges, in
financial applications the nodes are the assets and the edges (or links) are most often
defined as the correlation between the asset pairs.
Some researches have been done on network science for portfolio management in the
recent years, and many of build on the basis of Minimum Spanning Tree (MST). MST is
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
a minimum subset of edges of a graph that connects all nodes together, without cycles,
with the minimum possible link weight. Onnela et al., 2003 show that when looking at a
MST, which is generated from a fully connected network where the nodes are the assets
and links have weights corresponding to the distances based on correlations between as-
sets, the assets of the minimum risk Markowitz portfolio are always located on the outer
leaves of the tree. They also state that the asset tree provides essential information of
the market and can be used to add subjective judgement to portfolio optimization. Esfa-
hanipour and Zamanzadeh, 2015 propose a method to filter the stocks in the market by
taking the dangling ends of the constructed MST. They apply the method to three stock
markets and show that their proposed method generates a diversified subset of the stock
market compatible with the whole market. Wenyue Sun, no date builds a network for
the US stock market based on correlation between assets for portfolio optimization. He
constructs portfolios with the stocks which have the highest degree centrality, between-
ness centrality and closeness centrality (see section 2.3) and compares the performance
with the S&P 500. He shows that they could outperform the benchmark for certain
periods.
Networks can also be beneficial to present assets and their relationships graphically.
By creating a network of assets where the links are based on correlation the connection
between assets can be shown graphically. This is especially beneficial when the number
of assets is high. West, 2020 showes how networks can be used to gain insight into asset
universe in practice, by building a network where nodes have different sizes based on
their degree and edges are colored differently based on the correlation between assets.
He also creates an interactive graph where information on each asset can be assessed
easily, such as its average return, average standard deviation and which assets it is most
and least correlated with. This adds a lot of value when looking into a universe of assets
and trying to understand which assets are the most influential in the network.
1.4.3
Principal Component Analysis
In principal component analysis (PCA) the goal is to discover a simpler representation
of high-dimensional data, or to transform a number of correlated observations to the
same number of uncorrelated observations, called principal components. From the prin-
cipal components it is possible to construct eigen-portfolios. The first eigen-portfolio
is designed to capture the maximum amount of the variation in the market variation
(here the assets in the dataset are considered to replicate the market). Kim and Jeong,
2005 decompose the correlation matrix, of a selection of 135 stocks, into three parts
based on the Spectral Decomposition Theorem. They assign the following meaning to
the principal components.
• The first principal component represents a market wide effect that influences all
stocks, or the systematic risk.
• The following principal components represent synchornized fluctuations associated
with specific groups of stocks.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Limitations
7
• The remaining principal components indicate noise in the price fluctuations, and
are considered to contain no useful information.
Alexander and Dimitriu, 2004 suggest that the returns for the first eigen-portfolio are
highly correlated with the equally weighted portfolio and its weights are pretty stable
over time. They also indicate that this portfolio outperforms the equally weighted and
value weighted benchmark. Thus the first PCA portfolio has many desirable features of
a well diversified portfolio, and provides a new passive approach to constructing a well
diversified portfolio. According to Fenn et al., 2011 when looking at the development
of PCA using sliding windows of historical data, increases in variance explained by the
first principal component implies that there is more common variation in the financial
markets. This might be the result of increases in correlation among a few assets or
increases in the market-wide correlation. The later case decreases the possibilities of
diversifying a portfolio well.
1.5
Limitations
The main limitations in this project are related to the data available:
• The mutual fund data could only be accessed 6 weeks before the project was
handed in, which might affect how the project is set up and the analysis is carried
out.
• The return series for the 6 Eurobond indices was only available on Fridays so
the return series were shifted two days and that way moved to Wednesdays to
coordinate the dataframes. Also, the bond data was only available to mid year
2019, which made the time period considered for training in some analysis shorter.
• In the end of the project updated return series were accessed for the ETFs and the
indices due to the economic downfall in March - May 2020 caused by COVID-19.
During the time period for which the data was available, from mid-year 2014 to
end of 2019, there were no big economic crisis, so being able to extend the time
period for which the data was available added a lot of value.
1.6
Overview
This thesis is structured as follows: In chapter 2 the methods used are introduced.
Next the three datasets used for the project are introduced in chapter 3. In chapter
4 the results from the analysis carried out are presented and in chapter 5 the results
are discussed an and overview provided. At last, in the appendix, links to the code
constructed for the project is available.
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
In this chapter the methods used to carry out the analysis and the theory behind them
will be introduced. First two concepts essential to all financial analysis will be explained;
risk and return. Next the method used to cluster the assets will be explained and how
representatives are picked up from clusters. Then the basics of network science methods
will be introduced and the asset selection procedure using minimum spanning tree. Then
principal component analysis is explained along with how the diversification in a subset
of assets is measured. Finally, an overview of the methods introduced will be presented.
2.1
Risk and Return
Asset allocation has been a subject of great interest of researchers for decades. Investors
are generally interested in getting as much return as possible for a given level of risk, or
vice versa, as low risk as possible for a given level of return. These two concepts, risk
and return, are fundamental to this subject.
Return can be calculated as continuous returns or net returns. In this thesis net
returns will be considered and are defined as the difference in the asset price between
two points in time, measured as a fraction of the initial value, see the following equation.
Rt =
Pt
Pt−1
−1
(2.1)
Where Rt is the return at time period t and Pt is the price at time period t. When cal-
culating the average rate of return per time period, the geometric average is considered.
R =
 N
Y
i=1
(1 + Ri)
(1/N) −1
(2.2)
Where R is the average rate of return over a given time period, and N is the number of
time periods considered. Often it is useful to know the average annual return over the
historical period considered.
R
A = (1 + R
W)52 −1 = (1 + R
D)252 −1
(2.3)
Where R
A is the annual average rate of return, R
W is the weekly average rate of return
and R
D is the daily average rate of return. The risk of an asset is most often defined
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Methods
as the standard deviation of the return series. As with the returns it is often useful to
know the annual standard deviation.
σA =
√
52σW =
√
252σD
(2.4)
Where σA is the annual standard deviation (often denoted volatility), σW is the weekly
standard deviation and σD is the daily standard deviation.
Throughout this thesis the return of an asset is considered to be the average annual
return, and the risk or volatility is the annual standard deviation.
2.2
Clustering
Clustering seeks to find hidden patterns in data and group the data into clusters of
similar observations. It is a commonly used unsupervised machine learning technique,
which aims to classify data without predefining the different classes or groups. Here
clustering will be used to cluster the assets, based on their time-series of returns, into
groups of similar assets.
Since many of the widely used clustering methods are not
designed for time-series data, and may thus not perform well, the methods used must be
chosen wisely. The most widely used clustering method, k-means, is for example known
to show poor performance on time-series data [Roelofsen, 2018]. When clustering the
assets the procedure can be split to four steps:
• Determining the distance measure to quantify the similarities between observations
• Determining which clustering method to use and apply it
• Finding the optimal number of clusters
• Define a way to choose appropriate assets from each cluster
Two different distance measures will be considered, the Spearman correlation distance
and dynamic time wrapping. Here hierarchical clustering will be considered as the main
clustering algorithm. It has the advantage that the number of clusters doesn’t need to
be specified before applying it.
2.2.1
Distance Measures
In clustering time-series data, it is essential to determine how similar observations (here
assets) are. Many different distance measures can be considered when clustering time
series data, and here two commonly and promising distance measures will be considered,
the Spearman correlation distance and dynamic time wrapping (DTW). These methods
were chosen since they seem to fit the best for time series clustering and are straight for-
ward in application. The Spearman correlation distance is a lock-step distance measure
and the DTW is an elastic distance measure. An elastic distance measure allows for
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Clustering
11
one-to-many or one-to-none point matching. This gives more flexibility and robustness
for handling outliers [Wang et al., 2013]. The Euclidean distance measure is known
for not being good for time series [Keogh and Ratanamahatana, 2005], and the DTW
was developed to solve the problems of the Euclidean distance. This was confirmed by
testing the Euclidean distance measure, which was dropped due to poor performance.
The time complexity is another factor that should be taken into account when deciding
on which distance measure should be used. The total of N(N−1)
2
similarities have to be
calculated, so the number grows quickly as the number of assets increase [Roelofsen,
2018].
2.2.1.1
Spearman Correlation Distance
Spearman rank correlation is a non-parametric test that is used to measure the degree of
association between two time-series of equal lenght n. The Spearman correlation is used
here as it does not assume normality as Pearson correlation does. This suites well for
returns as they are often assumed to be normal distributed, but rarely are when tested.
The following formula can be used to calculate the Spearman correlation.
ρ(x, y) = 1 −6 Pn
i=1 d(x, y)2
i
n(n2 −1)
(2.5)
Here each data-point in the time-series of returns gets a rank based on how large the
return is compared to the other returns in the time-series. Then the distance, d(x, y)i,
between the ranks of two time-series x and y is calculated. The value of ρ lies on the
interval [−1, 1], where ρ = 1 indicates perfect correlation, ρ = 0 indicates no relationship
between the time-series and ρ = −1 indicates a perfect negative relationship.
The
distance measure is defined in the following equation.
dρ(x, y) = 1 −ρ(x, y)
(2.6)
Here the dρ is on the interval [0, 2]. When ρ = 1 the dρ = 0, indicating no distance.
When ρ = −1 the dρ = 2 indicating maximum distance.
2.2.1.2
Dynamic Time Wrapping
Dynamic time wrapping is a relatively new method, introduced in 2004, that seeks to
overcome some of the disadvantages of the Euclidean distance. In short, DTW calculates
an optimal match between two given sequences, or the path that has the minimal cost.
When calculating the DTW distance between two time-series of length n and m,
first an (n x m) local cost matrix is calculated. Each element of the matrix (i, j) is the
distance between xi and yj, defined as the quadratic difference d(xi, yi) = (xi−yj)2. Now
the warping path W = w1, w2, ..., wK is determined, where max(n, m) ≤K ≤m + n −1.
The path is subject to three constraints:
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Methods
• Boundary conditions: w1 = (1, 1) and wK = (m, n), which means that the first
indices from both time-series must be matched together and the last indices from
both time-series must be matched together.
• Continuity: If wq = (i, j) then wq+1 has to be (i + 1, j), (i, j + 1) or (i + 1, j + 1)
when q = 1, ..., K −1 and i = 1, ..., n −1 and j = 1, ..., m −1. This means that
only adjacent elements in the matrix are allowed for steps in the path.
• Monotonicity: Subsequent steps in the path have to be monotonically spaced in
time.
There are numerous paths that satisfy the above conditions. Here the path with the
minimum total distance is of interest and can be found by summing the individual
distances of the local cost matrix that the path traverses, and the DTW distance is
calculated by equation 2.7.
dDTW(x, y) = min
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
wk
(2.7)
This is equal to the euclidean distance when then time-series are of equal length (n = m)
and only the diagonal of the local cost matrix is traversed. To find the path with the
minimal total distance an recurrence algorithm based on dynamic programming must
be used, see equation 2.8 [Roelofsen, 2018] [Keogh and Ratanamahatana, 2005].
dcum(i, j) = d(xi, yi) + min{dcum(i −1, j −1), dcum(i −1, j), dcum(i, j −1), dcum(i, j −1)}
(2.8)
2.2.2
Clustering Algorithm
In this thesis hierarchial clustering will be considered. It is widely used and has the
advantage that the number of clusters do not need to be specified before the clustering
is carried out. The clusters are organized as a tree and can be visualized as a dendogram.
There are two types of hierarchial clustering methods, agglomerative and divisive. Here
the agglomerative will be considered. It is the more commonly used and is a bottom-
up approach. This means that in the beginning all observations form their individual
cluster and in each step the two closest clusters are combined into one new cluster. This
is repeated until all observations are in one big cluster, see Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Clustering
13
Algorithm 1 Agglomerative Hierarchial Clustering for Time-Series Data
Compute the distance matrix between time-series
Set all the assets to be the initial N clusters
while there are more than one cluster left do
Merge the closest two clusters (based on a pre-specified linkage method)
Update the distance matrix taking the pervious merge into account
end
return a set of nested clusters
Three different linkage methods are considered in the analysis: single linkage, com-
plete linkage and ward linkage. The linkage method has a large influence on the size
and shape of the clusters and thus it is important to choose the appropriate method for
the data. If the data can be grouped easily different linkage measures will provide the
same results [Sardá-Espinosa, 2017]. But when the data doesn’t have clear split between
groups the choice of linkage measure is really important for the quality of the results. In
single linkage the distance is defined as the smallest distance between any observations
in the two clusters merging together, while complete linkage is the biggest distance be-
tween any two observations in the two clusters. Single linkage is highly sensitive to noise
and outliers, and after applying and comparing the results from applying the different
linkage methods the single linkage was dropped due to poor performance. Ward linkage
aims to minimize the variance within each cluster [Raffinot, 2017].
2.2.3
Determining the Optimal Number of Clusters
When determining the optimal number of clusters for a given dataset there is often
no one ”correct number”. Many different measures have been proposed in literature to
determine the number of clusters. Two methods that are often used in implementations
and articles are the silhouette index and the gap statistic. Here the silhouette index will
be used, as it is easy to implement and generally seems to perform well. Also it can be
applied with any type of clustering method and any type of distance measure.
The silhouette score is calculated for every observation i (here the assets), see the
following formula.
s(i) =
b(i) −a(i)
max a(i), b(i)
(2.9)
Where a(i) is the average distance between observation i (here the assets) and all other
observations in the same cluster.
b(i) is the average distance between observation i
and every observation in the cluster closest to that observation (excluding the cluster i
belongs to). The term max a(i), b(i) scales the value of s(i) to [−1, 1], where a score close
to −1 gives the idea that the observation is not in the right cluster, and a score close to 1
gives the idea that the observation is well clustered, and that its dissimilarity with other
objects in the cluster is much less than its dissimilarity with members of the closest
cluster. The overall silhouette score of the clustering, SWC, is calculated by taking
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Methods
the average of all the s(i) scores calculated for each observation. To obtain the optimal
number of clusters the SWC score is calculated and compared between clusterings with
different number of clusters. The number of clusters that give the highest SWC score
can be considered the optimal number of clusters. This can also be used to compare the
quality of different distance measures, clustering algorithms and linkage methods. The
clustering that gives the highest SWC provides the most dissimilar clusters.
2.2.4
Comparing Clustering Methods
To be able to determine the quality of the different clustering methods it is essential to be
able to determine the how similar two clustering results are, where clustering is carried
out on the same dataset. This can also be used to evaluate how much the clustering
results change when applying clustering on rolling windows of data. This can be done
in various ways, here two commonly used methods will be used.
2.2.4.1
Rand Index
The Rand index takes every pair of observation (here the assets) and counts if they are
or are not in the same cluster in two different clusterings, see the following equation.
R(C1, C2) =
S + D
1
2N(N −1)
(2.10)
Where S is the number of matches (both observations in the same cluster in both cluster-
ings, C1 and C2) and D is the number of non-matches (observations in different clusters
in both clusterings). The denominator is the number of distinct pairs of observations
to compare. If the two different clusterings split the observations into exactly the same
clusters, R(C1, C2) = 1, and in general 0 ≤R(C1, C2) ≤1.
2.2.4.2
Variation of Information
The variation of information (VI) measures the amount of information lost and gained
in changing from clustering C1 to C2. Meilă, 2003 lists some shortcomings of the Rand
index which the variation of information overcomes.
VI it positive, symmetric and
obeys the triangle inequality. For more details and equations behind the variation of
information measure, please look at Meilă, 2003.
2.2.5
Representatives in Clusters
When the assets have been clustered and the optimal number of clusters has been chosen,
the next step is to determine the representatives of the clusters. This step is essential
as it decides which assets are fed into the optimization model.
Here three different
measures will be used to pick up assets from the clusters, the medoid, Sharpe ratio and
STARR.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Network Science
15
2.2.5.1
The Medoid
The most apparent way to pick the representatives is taking the medoid of each cluster,
that is the observation whose average similarity to other members of the cluster is the
highest. It is also possible to pick more than one medoid of each cluster by taking the n
observations that have the n highest similarity scores to other members of the cluster.
2.2.5.2
Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe ratio evaluates the performance of an asset or a portfolio compared to its
risk. The formula for calculating Sharpe ratio is the following.
SharpeRatio = R −Rf
σ
(2.11)
Where R is the return, Rf is the risk free rate and σ is the standard deviation of the
returns. The risk free rate is subtracted from the return to see how much is gained
compared to the risk taken, also called risk-adjusted return.
In this study the risk
free rate is disregarded from the formula as the ratio will only be used for comparison
between assets, so the actual value isn’t as important. The higher the Sharpe ratio the
more attractive the investment is considered. The downside of Sharpe ratio is that it
uses the standard deviation of returns as its risk measure, which assumes that returns
are normally distributed. This is often not the case for financial returns. Also standard
deviation assumes that negative and positive price movements are equally risky.
2.2.5.3
STARR
The stable tail adjusted return ratio (STARR) has been suggested as an alternative to
the Sharpe ratio, solving some of its drawbacks. The formula for calculating STARR is
presented in the following equation.
STARR =
R −rf
CV aR0.05(R)
(2.12)
Where CV aR0.05(R) is the Conditional Value-at-Risk at a confidence level 95%, defined
as the average loss in the 5% worst scenarios. As for the Sharpe ratio the higher the
STARR ratio the more attractive the investment is considered.
2.3
Network Science
A network is constructed from nodes and edges. Here the nodes are the assets and
the edges connect nodes together. The edges have a weight based on their pair-wise
correlation (or distance based correlations, see chapter 2.3.1). In this report networks
will be drawn using the Kamada-Kawai algorithmn [Kamada, Kawai, et al., 1989].
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methods
There are a few measures that are commonly used in graph theory to evaluate the
importance of a node in the network. The degree of a node is how many edges it has that
connects it to other nodes, the higher the degree the more connected the node is. There
exists at least one shortest path between each pair of nodes such that the sum of weights
of the edges is minimized. Betweenness centrality is the number of shortest paths that
pass through a node, the higher the betweenness centrality the more important the node
is in the network. Closeness centrality is one devided by the sum of the length of the
shortest paths between a node and all other nodes in the graph. Thus the higher the
closeness centrality the closer it is to all other nodes in the network.
In the following chapter an asset selection method building on the minimum spanning
tree will be introduced.
2.3.1
Asset Selection using Minimum Spanning Tree
Esfahanipour and Zamanzadeh, 2015 proposed a method for reducing the number of
assets in a network based on picking the dangling ends of a minimum spanning tree
(MST). Minimum spanning tree is a well known tool in the network literature to filter
redundant edges from networks. In a tree, where there is only one path between every
pair of nodes, the longer the path, the less correlated the nodes. Here this method is
used to create subsets of assets which will be fed into an optimization model.
The first step of the process is calculating the correlation between assets, see chapter
2.2.1.1. Here the distance measure is defined with the following equation [Mantegna,
1999].
dij(x, y) =
q
2(1 −ρ(x, y))
(2.13)
Where dij is the distance between assets i and j, and dij = [0, 2]. It satisfies the three
axioms of the Euclidean metric, (i) dii = 0, (ii) dij = dji and (iii) dij ≤dik + dkj.
The next step is to create a fully connected graph, G(V, E), where V is the set of
nodes (here the assets) and E is the set of edges. Each edge eij = (vi, vj) has the weight
dij, where eij ∈E and vi, vj ∈V . The minimum spanning tree M(V, E′) is a subset of
the G(V, E) graph, where E′ ⊂E, and the sum of the weights on the edges, P
e∈E d(e)
is minimized.
The Kruskal algorithm is used to find the MST. This is a greedy algorithm where
the edges are sorted based on their weights in an ascending order. Then the edge e1
with the minimum weight is selected. Next edges e2, e3, ..., en+1 are selected if only one
endpoint of the edge is already connected to the tree. This way a tree is created which
has the same number of nodes, n as graph G but n −1 edges [Kruskal, 1956].
The next step is to select the dangling ends of the MST, or the nodes with degree one
(or have only one edge connected to them). The procedure described above creates a
subset of the full universe of assets, where the assets selected are less correlated and have
more diversification potential [Esfahanipour and Zamanzadeh, 2015]. In this project this
procedure was applied recursively, or on the subsets created, to create even smaller subset
of assets.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Diversification
17
2.4
Diversification
A well diversified portfolio is expected to be immune against shocks created by a single
or a few assets in the portfolio. This does not mean that the the portfolio should not be
subject to any shocks; up and downturns in the market will affect its value. The goal is
to make the portfolio neutral to the idiosyncratic shocks, or shocks that are generated
by individual assets.
The shocks that are induced by the market and are therefore
unavoidable, will not be eliminated by diversification.
There exist many different methods to measure the diversification in a portfolio of
risky assets. The most commonly used measure of risk in a portfolio is the variance
or standard deviation.
The main downside of that risk measure is that it does not
measure the direction of price change and investors are generally more worried about
negative returns. Here the portfolios have not been constructed so the diversification
in the subsets of assets will be evaluated based on the average correlation between the
assets in the subsets and by the portfolio diversification index, as it does not rely on
the weights of the assets. In the following chapters principal component analysis (PCA)
will be introduced and then the portfolio diversification index which uses PCA in its
calculations.
2.4.1
Principal Component Analysis
In principal component analysis the goal is to find the number of ”true” dimensions in
a dataset, or to discover a low-dimensional representation of a high-dimensional dataset.
The first principal component explains the largest part of the variance in the data and
is orthogonal to the other principal components [Herlau et al., 2016]. Each principal
component is a linear combination of the variables, which in this case are the assets that
are examined. This can be useful in portfolio optimization to find the eigen-portfolios
that explain the most variance in the data [Guo et al., 2018].
The following procedure explains the steps that were taken in order to apply principal
component analysis to the return series for the assets. First the return series for the
assets are standardized since the assets may have different volatility. Next the correlation
matrix is constructed, and will be denoted as Σ. Here it is assumed that Σ is the true
covariance in the data for simiplicity. The eigen decomposition of the correlation matrix
is show in the following equation.
V ΛV T = Σ
(2.14)
Where Λ is a diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues, λ1 ≥λ2 ≥... ≥λN > 0, that have
been ranked in an decreasing order. V is the orthogonal matrix of the corresponding
eigenvectors, V = (v(1), v(2), ..., v(N)), where v(j) = (v(j)
1 , ...., v(j)
N ) for principal compo-
nent j = 1, ..., N. The amount of variance explained by each principal component is
calculated according to the following equation.
Wk =
λk
PN
j=1 λj
(2.15)
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methods
2.4.2
Portfolio Diversification Index
The portfolio diversification index or PDI uses principal components of the correlation
matrix of the assets to measure the diversification of a portfolio of assets. The PDI does
not take the weights of the assets in a portfolio into account, but it is possible to use
it to measure the diversification of a given group of assets and compare across different
subsets or different time periods. PDI is defined according to the following formula.
PDI = 2
N
X
k=1
kWk −1
(2.16)
Where k = 1, ..., N are the the principal components which are as many as the
number of assets. Wk is the percentage of variance explained by component k. If the
first principal component explains all the variance then PDI = 1 and if all the principal
components explain equal amount of variance W1 = W2 = ... = Wn = 1/N, PDI = N
and the subset is diversified as well as possible. PDI is the center of mass of the principal
components relative strengths vector.
2.5
Asset Selection Process
Here the asset selection process is shown graphically to provide an overview of the meth-
ods introduced in the last chapters. Figure 2.1 shows the process of picking subset of
assets from the asset universe to feed into an optimization model. In the first method,
the clustering procedure, the first step is to determine the right distance measure (sec-
tion 2.2.1). The next step is to determine which clustering algorithm is used (section
2.2.2), then the optimal number of clusters is determined (section 2.2.3) and finally rep-
resentatives from each clusters are picked up to create a subset of assets (section 2.2.5).
In the second method, the minimum spanning tree procedure, the first step is the deter-
mine a distance measure, next a fully connected graph is created based on that distance
measure, then the minimum spanning tree is created and nodes with degree one are
selected to create the subset. These steps are repeated as often as considered necessary.
This procedure is decribed in detail in section 2.3.1. The diversification in the subset
of assets is then evaluated based on average correlation and the portfolio diversification
index (see section 2.4). The next steps are outside the scope of this thesis and will
be carried out in Petr Vaneks’ thesis. Those steps include feeding subset of ETFs into
various optimization and constructing portfolios. The portfolios will be evaluated based
on their performance in the test period and in terms of their diversification.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Asset Selection Process
19
Figure 2.1: Flowchart showing the process of picking subset of assets to feed into an
optimization model and evaluating their diversification.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Data Introduction
Here the three datasets used in the analysis will be introduced. The original form of the
data and its source will be introduced and how it was prepossessed. The datasets are
the following:
• Indices dataset
• Mutual funds dataset
• Exchange traded funds dataset
The indices dataset is considered to replicate the market and the goal here is to see
which parts of the market the ETFs and the mutual funds span. All price series were
converted to weekly return series, shifting on Wednesdays, since Wednesdays are least
likely to be missing price data. The datasets had return series in dollars (USD) and
danish kronas (DKK) which were converted to euros (EUR). To be able to convert the
USD and DKK returns to EUR, daily USD/EUR or DKK/EUR quotes were downloaded
from Investing.com [Investing.com, 2020].
3.1
Index Data
The indices dataset consists of 49 industry portfolios, 125 developed market factors
and returns and 6 eurobond indices. These indices are chosen as they are expected to
replicate the market. The total number of indices is 180. All return series were converted
to weekly prices shifting on Wednesdays.
3.1.1
125 Developed Market Factors and Returns
The 125 portfolios formed on size and operating profitability consist of 25 indices from 5
different developed markets: North America, European, Japanese, Asia Pacific (exclud-
ing Japan) and Global. These portfolios are stocks in a region sorted into five market
cap (ME) and five profitability (OP) groups at the end of June each year. The size
breakpoints (ME) for a region are the 3rd, 7th, 13th, and 25th percentiles of the region’s
aggregate market capitalization. The OP breakpoints for all stocks in a region are the
20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles of OP for the big (top 90% of market cap) stocks
of the region.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Data Introduction
The data contains daily dollar (USD) return series (simple returns) from 02-07-1990
to 01-04-2019. The returns are quoted as total return indices and thus include capital
gains and dividends [French, 2020a]. The return series were converted to weekly EUR
return series, shifting on Wednesdays.
3.1.2
49 Industry Portfolios
This dataset contains 49 industry portfolios which are formed by assigning each NYSE,
AMEX and NASDAQ stock to an industry portfolio based on their Standard Industrical
Code (SIC) code at the end of June each year. Some of the industry indexes are Agric,
Food, Soda, Smoke, Toys, Fun, etc.
The data contains daily dollar (USD) return series (simple returns) from the 01-07-
1926 to 01-04-2020 [French, 2020b]. The return series were converted to weekly euro
(EUR) return series, shifting on Wednesdays.
3.1.3
6 Eurobond Indices
The Eurobond indices track different types of investment grade, fixed rate public obliga-
tions from the Eurozone countries. These indices serve as an aggregate exposure to the
European government bond market and are used as benchmarks by many investment
funds and exchange-traded funds. Here 6 Bloomberg Barclays Euro Aggregate Treasury
Indices are considered. The data was obtained from Bloomberg Terminal data dump
and contains weekly price series, shifting on Fridays, quoted in euros (EUR) from 03-07-
1998 to the 12-04-2019. Since the bond data was not available as daily data the return
series for the bonds were shifted two days backwards as they would shift on Wednesdays.
All the indexes are total return indices, so that all cash distributions are reinvested and
include coupons.
• LET1TREU Index measures the performance of the Eurozone government bonds,
with 1-3 years to maturity. Currently it includes bonds from Austria, Belgium,
Cyprus, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Nether-
lands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain [SPDR®, 2020a].
• LET3TREU Index measures the performance of the Eurozone government bonds,
with 3-5 years to maturity. Currently it includes bonds from Austria, Belgium, Fin-
land, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Netherlands, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Spain [SPDR®, 2020c].
• LET5TREU Index measures the performance of the Eurozone government bonds,
with 5-7 years to maturity [SPDR®, 2020d].
• LET7TREU Index measures the performance of the Eurozone government bonds,
with 7-10 years to maturity [SPDR®, 2020e].
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Mutual Fund Data
23
• LET0TREU Index measures the performance of the Eurozone government bonds,
with more than 10 years to maturity [SPDR®, 2020b].
• LEATTREU Index reflects the performance and characteristics of the Eurozone
government bond market [SPDR®, 2020f].
3.2
Mutual Fund Data
The mutual fund dataset contains daily prices for 893 Danish mutual funds from the
30-06-2005 to the 06-05-2020. The data was retrieved from Morning Star. Some of the
mutual funds were introduced in the period so not all mutual funds have data for the
whole period. Figure 3.1 shows how the number of mutual funds develop through the
period examined. Here it can be seen that the number of mutual funds grows steadily
throughout the period.
Figure 3.1: Development of the number of mutual funds with price data available.
For the project weekly Wednesday return series were considered. The original dataset
included adjusted prices in danish kronas (DKK) which were converted to returns in euro
(EUR). When filtering out the mutual funds used for this project the only criteria that
had to be fulfilled was that data had to be available from the 24-09-2014. 557 mutual
funds fulfilled this criteria.
3.3
Exchange Traded Funds Data
The exchange traded funds data contains daily adjusted prices and volume series for
1,866 ETFs from the 09-12-1999 to 30-04-2020.
The data was retrived from Alpha
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Data Introduction
Vantage Inc., 2020. Some of the ETFs were introduced in the period so not all ETFs
had information for all the period. Figure 3.2 shows how the number of ETFs with price
data available develops through the defined period. From 2000 to 2005 the number of
ETFs grows slowly and in the beginning of 2006 the growth gets steeper until beginning
of 2017. Then the number of ETFs with available price data begins to drop until the
end of the period.
Figure 3.2: Developement of number of ETFs with price data available.
Metadata on the ETFs was also considered, which contained information on the full
name of the ETF, launch date, segment, expense ratio, leveraged factor, average daily
volume, asset class, geography and more. For the project weekly Wednesday return
series data was considered. The original dataset was in dollars (USD) but the return
series was changed to euro (EUR).
When picking which ETFs will be used for the project, the following conditions had
to be fulfilled:
• 5 years of price data must be available (1258)
• The ETF must be traided every week throughout the 5 year period (1075)
• Average daily traided volume must be higher than $ 1, 000, 000 (687)
• The expense ratio must be lower than 0.7% (537)
The number in the parenthesis indicates the number of ETFs that passed the filter. The
first step makes sure that there is enough data to make any sense of the data analysis.
The next two steps make sure the ETFs are liquid and can be traded when desired. The
last step makes sure that only the ETFs with considerably low expense ratio are included
in the analysis. This leaves us with data from the 24-09-2014 to the 30-04-2020 for 537
ETFs.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Exchange Traded Funds Data
25
Table 3.1 shows how the 537 ETFs split between asset classes. Most of the ETFs
are equity ETFs, or 402, meaning that the ETFs track equity indices. 102 ETFs track
fixed income indices, 19 ETFs track commodity indices and eight currency indices. Five
ETFs track asset allocation indices, which are most often composed of assets in different
segments, with the goal to minimize risk or fulfilling a target return. First Trust Multi
Asset-Diversified Income Index Fund (MDIV) is an example of an asset allocation ETF.
The fund tracks the performance of the NASDAQ Multi-Asset Diversified Income Index,
which is a modified market capitalization-weighted index designed to provide exposure
to multiple asset segments. One ETF is categorized as an alternative, PowerShares DB
G10 Currency Harvest Fund (DBV), which tracks an index with long exposure to the
developed-market currencies with high interest rates and short exposure to those with
low rates using forward contracts.
Table 3.2 shows how the ETFs split between developed and emerging markets and
different regions of the world. Countries in the emerging market are those which are in
the process of rapid growth and development with low per capita income and less mature
capital markets than the developed markets. Countries in the developed markets are
those which are more advanced economically than the emerging markets and have highly
developed capital markets with high levels of liquidity, meaningful regulatory bodies,
large market capitalization, and high levels of per capita income. Over 62% of the ETFs
are North American. 67 ETFs are categorized as global, 32 are European and 31 are
Asia-Pacific. 29 are in the developed markets and 23 in the emerging markets. 16 ETFs
are global, excluding the US, six are Latin American and only one is from the Middel
East and Africa. Comparing this to the regions of the indexes it can be seen that the
ETFs span all the same regions and go even further.
None of the ETFs are leveraged, the average expence ratio is 0.3% and all except
eight have an underlying index.
Table 3.1: ETFs represented by Asset Class.
Asset Class
Number of Assets
Equity
402
Fixed Income
102
Commodities
19
Currency
8
Asset Allocation
5
Alternatives
1
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Data Introduction
Table 3.2: ETFs represented by Region.
Region
Number by Region
North America
332
Global
67
Europe
32
Asia-Pacific
31
Developed Markets
29
Emerging Markets
23
Global, Ex. US
16
Latin America
6
Middle East & Africa
1
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
In this chapter the main results from the analysis will be presented. In the first section
the return series for the mutual funds, ETFs and indices will be compared. Next, four
different clustering methods will be compared and the best one choosen for the project.
Then the chosen clustering method will be used to cluster the indices and mutual funds
and then the indices and the ETFs to see how the assets split into diverse groups. The
clusters formed will be used to look into the underlying structure of the asset universe.
Finally, two different methods will be used to generate subsets of ETFs; picking up assets
based on clusters and the minimum spanning tree method. Subsets of different sizes are
created with each method and the diversification in the subsets is evaluated based on
the average correlation in the subsets and the portfolio diversification index.
4.1
Insight into Asset Universe
In this chapter the main results for the analysis of the return series of the different assets;
the 181 indices, 557 mutual funds and 537 ETFs, will be presented. Weekly return series
from the 24-09-2014 to the 11-04-2019 were considered for the analysis, as that is the
period that all assets have data available for. Here the goal is to gain insight into the
underlying assets in each of the three datasets, where the indices are considered to form
a bridge between the mutual funds and ETFs. The indices are considered to replicate
the market and here the goal is to see which parts of the market the mutual funds and
ETFs span.
4.1.1
Return series
Figure 4.1 shows the return versus the standard deviation of the indices (red), the
mutual funds (green) and the ETFs (blue). As noted before, when speaking of return,
the average annual return is considered and standard deviation is the annual standard
deviation, see chapter 2.1. When looking at the figure to the left, with the mutual funds
and indices, it can be seen that there seems to be more spread in the return vs standard
deviation for the indices although there are only 181 indices compared 557 mutual funds.
The mutual funds seem to be less volatile and therefore have more steady return than
the indices. When looking at the figure to the right it can be seen that the ETFs have
more spread than the indices. There seem to be a few ETFs in the bottom half of the
graph that have a high negative return and high volatility, with no indices close. The
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Analysis
five red dots that group together to the left of the graph are the bond indices and which
are the least volatile indices. There are only two ETFs located close to those points but
a large part of the mutual funds are located in this area of the graph.
Figure 4.2 shows the cumulative return series quantiles for the indices, mutual funds
and ETFs. When looking at the figure to the left, with the mutual funds and the indices,
it can be seen that the mutual funds have lower return and are less volatile on average
than the indices. The 50% quantile for the indices is higher than the 75% quantile for the
mutual funds. Also the minimum and maximum returns are less extreme for the mutual
funds than the indices. When looking at the figure to the right, the ETFs compared to
the indices, it can be seen that for the first 2 years of the observed period the 25%, 50%
and 75% quantiles look almost identical for the ETFs and indices, but then the price of
the indices begin to grow quicker. The quantiles for the ETFs are much more similar to
the indices than for the mutual funds versus the indices.
This is interesting as it shows that the universe of mutual funds observed is not likely
to offer as much diversification as the ETFs do. They also do not seem to span the whole
market of indices.
Figure 4.1: Return versus standard deviation of the indices (red), the mutual funds
(green) and the ETFs (blue).
Figure 4.2: Cumulative return series for the indices (red), mutual funds (green) and
ETFs (blue).
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Insight into Asset Universe
29
4.1.2
Correlation between Assets
Now the results of analysis on the Spearman correlation between asset pairs will be
presented. When looking into the Spearman correlation between assets it can be seen
that it ranges from almost perfect correlation to a negative correlation of -0.30. The
average correlation between two ETFs is 0.53, between two indices is 0.56 and between
two mutual funds is 0.45. So, the mutual funds have on average lower pair-wise correla-
tion than the ETFs and the indices, which means that the assets have on average less
similar return series. The average correlation between ETFs vs. indices is 0.45, ETFs
vs. mutual funds is 0.39 and mutual funds vs. indices is 0.43. The return series of the
ETFs and mutual funds are on average the least correlated, which was expected from
looking at figure 4.1.
Figures 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 show three networks of correlation between the assets. Figure
4.3 shows the network of the indices (red nodes) and mutual funds (green nodes), figure
4.4 shows a network of the indices (red nodes) and ETFs (blue nodes) and figure 4.5
shows a network of the ETFs (blue nodes) and mutual funds (green nodes). Two nodes
have a link between then if the correlation between them is higher than 0.5. The size of
the nodes is based on their degree, so the higher the degree the larger the node.
When looking at figure 4.3 it can be seen that there seems to be a clear divide in
the universe of mutual funds and indices. The largest group with the highest degree
nodes includes both indices and mutual funds, but the upper half of that group only
contains mutual funds. Other groups outside of the large group contain only indices or
only mutual funds. To the left of the graph there are 2-3 groups (depends on how it is
analysed) that all contain only mutual funds. To the right of the graph, there are a few
indices that group together. This shows that a large part of the mutual funds only have
a correlation higher than 0.5 with other mutual funds and that some of the indices only
have a correlation higher than 0.5 with other indices.
When looking at figure 4.4 it can be seen that the ETFs seem to be more correlated
with the indices, and there are no groups that consist of only ETFs or only indices.
The large group in the middle of the graph has ETFs and indices spread troughout the
group. The ETFs located at the top of the graph and spread around the gold index are
commodity and equity ETFs that invest in precious metals. The fixed income ETFs are
located to the left of the graph. A few fixed income ETFs are also located in the large
group in the middle of the graph. Then in the bottom of the graph and to the right
there are some assets that have a lower degree but they are a combination of ETFs and
indices.
This gives the idea that the mutual funds and ETFs offer different investment oppor-
tunities. Some of the Danish mutual funds seem to have low correlation with the market
indices and thus offer investments that the indices do not span. The ETFs offer a more
diverse pool of assets than the indices and could thus be a considered good investments
for Danish investors that want to introduce more diversification to their portfolio. In
this project the focus will be on creating a subset of ETFs to feed into an optimization
model. A portfolio of ETFs will then be suggested and can be considered as a good
addition to a portfolio of mutual funds to increase diversification in a portfolio for a
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Analysis
Danish investor.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Insight into Asset Universe
31
Figure 4.3: Network based on the correlation between mutual funds and indices. Here
the nodes are the assets and the links are based the correlation between two assets. The
mutual funds are colored in green and indices are colored in red. Two assets have a
link if the correlation between them is higher than 0.5. The link is light green if the
correlation is 0.5-0.75 and dark green if the correlation is 0.75-1. The size of the nodes
is based on the number of links they have, the more links the bigger the node. To make
all nodes visible a minimum size of nodes is set.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Analysis
Figure 4.4: Network based on the correlation between ETFs and indices. Here the nodes
are the assets and the links are based the correlation between two assets. The ETFs are
colored in blue and indices are colored in red. Two assets have a link if the correlation
between them is higher than 0.5. The link is light green if the correlation is 0.5-0.75
and dark green if the correlation is 0.75-1. The size of the nodes is based on the number
of links they have, the more links the bigger the node. To make all nodes visible a
minimum size of nodes is set.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Insight into Asset Universe
33
Figure 4.5: Network based on the correlation between ETFs and mutual funds. Here
the nodes are the assets and the links are based the correlation between two assets. The
ETFs are colored in blue and mutual funds are colored in green. Two assets have a link if
the correlation between them is higher than 0.5. The link is light green if the correlation
is 0.5-0.75 and dark green if the correlation is 0.75-1. The size of the nodes is based on
the number of links they have, the more links the bigger the node. To make all nodes
visible a minimum size of nodes is set.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Analysis
4.2
Performace Evaluation of Different
Clustering Methods
Here the different clustering methods will be evaluated and the ”best” clustering method
will be found. The clustering procedure was carried out on the 537 ETFs and 181 indices
together.
Weekly return series from the 24-09-2014 to the 11-04-2019 were used for
the clustering. As introduced in chapter 2.2 two distance measures were considered,
the Spearman correlation distance and the dynamic time wrapping. Also, two linkage
methods were considered, the complete linkage and ward linkage. In total four different
clustering methods were obtained from this, referred to as method 1-4, see the following:
• Method 1: Spearman correlation, complete linkage
• Method 2: Dynamic time wrapping, complete linkage
• Method 3: Spearman correlation, ward linkage
• Method 4: Dynamic time wrapping, ward linkage
To evaluate the performance of the different methods the dataset is split into two parts
and each of the four methods is applied to both the first and second half of the dataset.
The clustering method is considered to perform well if the grouping of the data is similar
when the clustering method is applied to the first and second half of the dataset. Table
4.1 shows the Rand index score and the variation of information (see section 2.2.4) for
the comparison of the clustering of the first and second half of the dataset for each of
the four methods. A Rand index of 1 means that the clusterings are identical, while a
Rand index of 0 means that no two observations are clustered in the same or opposite
clusters in both of the compared clusterings. The variation of information measures the
information lost and gained in changing from one clustering to the other clustering. A
value of 0 means that the compared clusterings are identical. Here it can be seen that
the similarity measures agree that method 1 provides by far the most similar clusterings
(when the assets are split into three clusters), when comparing the clustering on the first
and second half of the dataset. The Rand index and variation of information agree on
the order of the similarity of the clusters.
Table 4.1: Similarity measures between clusterings for the first and second half of the
dataset.
Rand Index
Variation of Information
Method 1: corr, complete
0.96
0.26
Method 2: DTW, complete
0.66
0.88
Method 3: corr, ward
0.65
1.19
Method 4: DTW, ward
0.53
1.65
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Performace Evaluation of Different Clustering Methods
35
Figure 4.6 shows the silhouette score, or SWC (see section 2.2.3) for each of the four
methods, when the clustering procedure is carried out on the weekly return series from
the 24-09-2014 to the 11-04-2019. The SWC is shown for 2-30 clusters. The higher
the silhouette coefficient the more dissimilar the clusters are, and thus the clustering
is considered ”better”. The highest silhouette score indicates the optimal number of
clusters. Here it can be seen that when the distance measure is based on correlation
(methods 1 and 3) the clusterings seem to provide more stable SWC scores for different
number of clusters, than the DTW methods, although the scores for 2-3 clusters are
lower. Method 1 has the highest SWC score for 3-5 clusters and significantly higher
values than method 3. For the DTW distance measure (methods 2 and 4) the SWC
score is high for 2-3 clusters and then drops significantly. When looking into the clusters
for method 2 it can be seen that for three clusters all except 18 assets are in the same
cluster. This will not provide a lot of information on the underlying structure of assets.
For method 4 the assets spread better between the clusters but the SWC score is really
low, indicating that the similarity between clusters is high.
From those results it is concluded that the correlation distance measure is better
suited in for clustering in this case. Method 1 provides the most dissimilar clusters for
3-5 clusters. From table 4.1 it can be seen that the complete linkage method provides
more stable clustering. For this reason method 1 will be considered as the clustering
method in this report.
Figure 4.6: SWC score for 2-30 clusters for each of the four different clustering methods.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Analysis
4.3
Insight into Clusters
Here the clusters obtained from clustering method 1 will be introduced. First the clus-
tering procedure is carried out on the 557 mutual funds and the 181 indices and then
the 537 ETFs and 181 indices. The reason for this is that the pair-vise correlation of
each pair of asset needs to be calculated before the clustering is carried out. Having
all 1275 assets in the clustering makes the computation time of the correlation matrix
really high. Weekly return series from the 24-09-2014 to the 11-04-2019 were used for
the clustering. The objective here is to make sense of the clusters and see if there are
any patterns that explain why the assets are placed in the observed cluster, and see if
there is an underlying structure in the asset universe. One way to group the assets is
to group them based on their asset class, but here the goal is to dive deeper and see if
there are e.g. some equities that behave more like some commodities. Also the goal is
to determine which indices are similar to which ETFs/mutual funds and to see if there
are any clusters that consist only of mutual funds, ETFs or indices.
4.3.1
Clustering of Mutual Funds and Indices
Here the clusters obtained from clustering method 1 will be introduced. The clustering
procedure was carried out on the 557 mutual funds and 181 indices together. Weekly
return series from the 24-09-2014 to the 11-04-2019 were used for the clustering.
When finding the optimal number of clusters the SWC score was considered. For
method 1 the SWC score is the highest for 2 clusters but that will not provide a lot of
information about the underlying structure of the data. Three clusters provide a little
bit lower SWC score and the second highest, so here 3 clusters will be considered.
Table 4.2 shows how many mutual funds and indices are in each of the three clusters
and the average return and the standard deviation of each cluster. Here it can be seen
that the first cluster consists of 411 mutual funds and 167 indexes and has the highest
average return, 7.3% and a standard deviation of 14.0%. The second cluster consist only
of mutual funds and has the lowest average return, 1.5% and standard deviation of 2.4%.
This is interesting as it shows that a large part of the mutual funds are really low risk
assets that do not have a representative in the universe of indices. Finally, the third
cluster consists of 46 mutual funds and 13 indices and has a average return of 3.0% and
average standard deviation of 5.9%. The indices in this clusters are the 6 bond indices
and 7 industry portfolio indices; Food (food products, Soda (candy soda), Beer (beer
liquor), Smoke (tobacco products), Hshld (consumer goods), Gold (precious metals) and
Util (utilities). Here it is interesting to see that the Sharpe ratio of the three clusters
ranges from 50.8 −62.5%, which is not considered high.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Insight into Clusters
37
Table 4.2: Information on the clusters generated by method 1 when clustering the indices
and mutual funds together.
# Mutual Funds
# Indices
Avg Ret
Avg Std
Sharpe Ratio
Cluster 1
411
167
7.3%
14.0%
52.0%
Cluster 2
100
0
1.5%
2.4%
62.5%
Cluster 3
46
13
3.0%
5.9%
50.8%
Figure 4.7 shows a network of the mutual funds and indices where the nodes as colored
based on clusters. Cluster 1 is colored green, where the mutual funds are colored dark
green and the indices are colored light green. Cluster 2 only consists of mutual funds
and is colored red. Cluster 3 is colored blue, where the mutual funds are colored dark
blue and the indices are colored light blue. Assets have a link between them if their
pair-wise correlation is higher than 0.5. Here it can be seen that the largest part of the
big group of assets in the graph are in cluster 1 (green cluster) and has a combination
of mutual funds and indices. The red cluster consists of mutual funds that seem to
have none or few links to indices. This is the low risk, low return cluster and here it is
confirmed that the assets in this cluster do not have a representative in the universe of
indices. Cluster 3 (blue cluster) spreads over the graph. What is interesting here is that
the light blue nodes (the indices) to the right on the graph seem to have no connections
with dark blue nodes (mutual funds) in the graph. This tells us that even though these
assets are in the same cluster they do not seem to behave much alike, and in fact the
dark blue mutual fund assets seem to have more links with other mutual funds from the
red cluster.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Analysis
Figure 4.7: Network based on the correlation of indices and mutual funds. Here the
nodes are the assets and the links are based the correlation between two assets. Two
indices have a link if the correlation between them is higher than 0.5. The link is light
green if the correlation is 0.5-0.75 and dark green if the correlation is 0.75-1. The size
of the nodes is based on the number of links they have, the more links the bigger the
node. Cluster 1 is green, where the mutual funds are dark green and the indices are
light green, cluster 2 is red and only contains mutual funds and cluster 3 is blue, where
the mutual funds are dark blue and the indices are light blue.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Insight into Clusters
39
Since metadata on the mutual funds was not available, random samples of the mutual
funds were researched through the Morningstar website and the asset classes of the
underlying assets of the funds observed. Note that since only random samples were
taken there might be some of the mutual funds in each cluster that do not fit to the
description of its cluster.
• Cluster 1: This high risk/high return cluster consits mainly of mutual funds that
invest in foreign stocks. There are also some of the mutual funds in this cluster
that invest in bonds in emerging markets.
• Cluster 2: This low risk/low return cluster consists mainly of mutual funds that
invest in Danish bonds.
Some of the mutual funds also have a small amount
invested in cash or equities.
• Cluster 3: This is the smallest cluster with medium risk/medium return.
It
consists mainly of mutual funds that invest in international bonds. There are some
mutual funds in this cluster that invest mainly in Danish bonds like the mutual
funds in cluster 2. Some of the mutual funds have small percentage invested in
cash.
The clustering seems to capture some underlying structure in the universe of mutual
funds. Here it is interesting to see that cluster 2, which did not have representative/s in
the indices consists mainly of mutual funds investing in Danish bonds. The other two
clusters which consist mainly of mutual funds investing in global stocks or bonds seem
have representatives in the indices.
4.3.2
Clustering of ETFs and Indices
Here the clusters obtained from clustering method 1 will be introduced. The clustering
procedure was carried out on the 537 ETFs and 181 indices together. Weekly return
series from the 24-09-2014 to the 11-04-2019 were used for the clustering.
When finding the optimal number of clusters the SWC score was considered. For
method 1 the SWC score is the highest for 3-5 clusters. Here the assets will be split
into 3 clusters.
Table 4.3 shows how many ETFs and indices are in each of the three clusters and
the average return and standard deviation of each cluster. It is interesting to see that
each cluster has a combination of ETFs and indices. Cluster 3 is the smallest cluster,
and contains 18 ETFs and only one index. It has the lowest return 1.1% and the highest
standard deviation, 23.6%. The second cluster is by far the largest and contains in total
558 assets, 390 ETFs and 168 indices. This cluster has the highest return of the clusters,
9.2% and a standard deviation of 18.1%. Cluster 1 has 140 assets, 129 ETFs and 11
indices, and has return of 6.8% and standard deviation of 10.8%.
Table 4.4 shows the number of ETFs in each asset class for each of the three clusters.
Here it can be seen that cluster 2 contains a large proportion of the equity ETFs, while
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Analysis
cluster 1 contains a large proportion of the fixed income ETFs. Cluster 3 has no dominent
asset class but contains 10 out of 19 commodities.
Table 4.3: Information on the clusters generated by method 1 when clustering the indices
and the ETFs together.
# ETFs
# Indices
Avg Ret
Avg Std
Sharpe Ratio
Cluster 1
129
11
6.8%
10.8%
63.0%
Cluster 2
390
168
9.2%
18.0%
51.1%
Cluster 3
18
1
1.1%
23.6%
4.7%
Table 4.4: Number of ETFs in each asset class for each of the three clusters.
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Equity
25
370
7
Fixed Income
95
7
Commodities
1
8
10
Currency
4
3
1
Asset Allocation
3
2
Alternatives
1
Figures 4.8 and 4.9 show a network representation of the 180 indices and the 537
ETFs. The assets are the nodes and the links are based on the correlation between them.
The color of the nodes indicate which indices/ETFs are in each cluster. There is a link
between two indices/ETFs if the correlation between them is higher than 0.5 and the
size of the nodes indicate how many links the nodes have. Since most of the nodes in
the green and blue cluster have really few or no links, those nodes were made bigger to
make them visible in the network.
When looking at figure 4.8 it can be seen that cluster 3 (blue cluster), includes only
one index, Gold, which has no links to other nodes. The six bond indices in cluster 1
(green cluster) are highly linked to each another but have no links with other indices
in the graph. The other 6 indices in cluster 3 are industry portfolios. Hshld (consumer
goods) is located in the middle of the graph, highly linked to other nodes in the graph.
Util (utilities), Soda (candy and soda), Smoke (tobacco products) and Beer (beer and
liqour) are located out of the highly connected group in the middle. When examining
cluster 2 (red cluster) it can be seen that the 125 developed market factors and returns
portfolios group together after regions; North American, Asian, European, Global and
Japanese portfolios group together, indicating that those indices have more links between
indices in their group than with other indices. Most of the industry portfolios are also in
the red cluster and most of them are located to the right of the graph. Coal and Guns
are located a bit out of the large group in the middle, indicating that they are not as
highly connected as the other industry portfolio indices.
When looking at figure 4.9 it can be seen that all ETFs from cluster 3 (blue cluster)
are located to the right of the highly connected group in the middle of the graph. The
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Insight into Clusters
41
ETFs in this cluster seem to have a few links with ETFs outside the cluster. Cluster 1
(green cluster) has most of its ETFs located in the bottom of the graph outside of the
large group in the middle of the graph. There are though a few of the ETFs located
inside the big group, which means that they are highly connected with ETFs from cluster
2 (red cluster). This cluster, cluster 1 has more highly connected ETFs than the blue
cluster, although some of the ETFs have a few connections. When looking into the
cluster 2 (red cluster) it can be seen that most of the ETFs are located in the highly
connected group in the middle of the graph, although there are a few ETFs from this
cluster that from a group on top of the graph with less connected ETFs. There are
three ETFs that have no links, FXE (cluster 3), FXF (cluster 1) and PALL (cluster 2),
meaning that they have a correlation that is lower than 0.5 with all other ETFs.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Analysis
Figure 4.8: Network based on the correlation of indices. Here the nodes are the indices
and the links are based the correlation between two indices. Two indices have a link if
the correlation between them is higher than 0.5. The link is light green if the correlation
is 0.5-0.75 and dark green if the correlation is 0.75-1. The size of the nodes is based on
the number of links they have, the more links the bigger the node. The blue and green
nodes have been made larger to make them highly visible in the graph. The green nodes
is cluster 1, red nodes are cluster 2 and blue nodes are cluster 3.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Insight into Clusters
43
Figure 4.9: Network based on the correlation between ETFs. Here the nodes are the
ETFs and the links are based the correlation between two ETFs. Two ETFs have a
link if the correlation between them is higher than 0.5. The link is light green if the
correlation is 0.5-0.75 and dark green if the correlation is 0.75-1. The size of the nodes
is based on the number of links they have, the more links the bigger the node. The blue
and green nodes have been made larger to make them highly visible in the graph. The
green nodes are cluster 1, red nodes are cluster 2 and blue nodes are cluster 3.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Analysis
The next step is to analyze the compositions of assets in the clusters and see what
characterizes each cluster. One way to group the assets is to look at their asset class
and group them based on that. That way it is assumed that assets which are classed as
e.g. equities follow similar trends as other equities. Here the goal is to dive deeper and
see if there are in fact some equities that behave more like fixed income assets, etc. The
main results are the following:
• Cluster 1: This cluster has average return and low volatility and is beforehand
expected to consist of assets which are fixed income like. Cluster 1 includes 11
indices, the six bond indices and five industry portfolios; Soda (candy and soda),
Beer (beer and liquor), Smoke (tobacco products), Hshld (consumer goods) and
Util (utilities). In terms of ETFs, this cluster includes 129 ETFs, 95 of them being
fixed income ETFs. This cluster includes the only ETF which is categorized as
alternative. This cluster includes 3 out of 5 asset allocation ETFs. 2 of those ETFs
are catagorized as conservative and modarate risk and invest 30 −50% in equity.
The third ETF seem to have more risky investment stragegy and invests 50 −70%
in equity. It also includes four currency ETFs, two of which track indices which
go long the dollar and short in a basket of global currencies. The other two have
underlying indices for the Japanese Yen and the Swiss Franc. When looking into
the 25 equity ETFs in this cluster it can be seen that it includes 6 out of 9 of the
equity ETFs in the consumer non-cyclicals segment. Non-cyclical companies are
those which price is not affected by the economy, since they produce non-durable
goods such as soap and toothpaste. Those companies are typically less volatile than
cyclical companies. This cluster also includes all 9 ETFs in the utilities segment,
which track indices utilities companies. Utilites are known as stable investments
that are considered haven investement during economic turndown. Finally 9 equity
ETFs in the real estate segments in the U.S. and global are in this cluster. There
are three ETFs which are in the global ex. U.S. real estate segment which are in
cluster 2. This cluster also includes the only commodity in the agriculture segment,
but the industry portfolio index in agriculture is not is this cluster.
• Cluster 2: Beforehand this cluster is known as the high return and high volatility
cluster, and is considered to contain equity like ETFs and indices. Cluster 2 is
the largest cluster and includes 168 indices, all the 125 developed market factor
and return portfolios as well as all the industry portfolios except Gold (precious
metals), Soda, Beer, Smoke, Hshld and Util. This cluster includes the largest part
of the equity ETFs, or 370 out of 402. This cluster also includes all the ETFs that
are in the commodities asset class and do not relate to agriculture, silver, gold and
other precious metals. These ETFs track indices that are commodities in energy,
gasoline, crude oil and more segments. There are three currency ETFs which have
underlying indices for the Australian Dollar, the Canadian Dollar and the Sterling
Pound.
The Canadian dollar is known to move in step with the commodities
markets, especially crude oil [Investopedia, 2020]. Two out of five asset allocation
ETFs are in this cluster. One of those ETFs is is the aggressive risk category
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Insight into Clusters
45
and the other invests 50 −70% in equity. When looking at the year to date daily
total return it can be seen that those two ETFs have dropped over 10% while the
other asset allocation ETFs have dropped from 2 −7% which indicates that their
investment stragedy is more conservative.
There are seven fixed income ETFs
in this cluster. One ETF tracks an index which represents the U.S. market for
convertible bonds (bonds that can be converted to shares of the issuing company’s
stock), which is not likely to behave like a regular bond. One ETF follows the only
international preferred stock index in the ETF universe and another ETF follows
the only international inflation protected index inflation. This cluster also includes
all the ETFs (total of four) that are in the emerging markets and have their debt
exposure listed in their local-currency. What unites these fixed income ETFs is
that they are exposed to some extra risk; currency, inflation or are convertible,
and are thus likely to have higher returns than other fixed income ETFs in the
universe of ETFs.
• Cluster 3: This cluster has on average high volatility and low return when com-
pared to the other clusters. When looking into the composition of cluster 3 it can
be seen than the only index in this cluster is Gold (precious metals). When looking
into the segments of the ETFs it can be seen that all the ETFs which are in the
commodities and equities asset classes are in segments that are related to gold,
silver or precious metals. Those commodities are known to have their own unique
risks and are a good choice to diversify a portfolio. Thus it is not surprising that
they have their own cluster. There is also one currency ETF in this cluster, which
has an underlying index following the Euro.
This gives an idea that there is some underlying structure in the assets that can be
identified in a simple way with clustering. It should though be noted that the results
from the clustering are sensitive to the historical period used for training the model and
thus the clusters can change between timeperiods. The clustering method used here
(method 1) showed that it was the least sensitive method to the input data.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Analysis
4.4
Generating Subsets of ETFs
In this section the rolling subsets of ETFs generated will be introduced. Two different
methods will be used; picking up assets based different performance measures from
clusters (see section 2.2.5) and generating subsets using the minimum spanning tree
method (see section 2.3.1). An overview of the process is shown in chapter 2.5. The
training set is 97 weeks and will be rolled forward 12 weeks at a time. This creates 17
different time periods. The first time period is from the 2014-09-24 to the 2016-07-27 and
the last time period is from the 2018-01-08 to the 2020-04-01. 12 weeks were considered
a good time frame for updating the subsets since the computation time of the correlation
matrix is high and rolling forward 4 weeks at a time would be computationally heavy.
This leaves it up to the portfolio constructor to decide and test whether it is best to
update the subsets on a 12 weeks basis or less often, such as every 6 months or on a
yearly basis.
The subsets created will be fed into an optimization model and evaluated by com-
paring the performance of different subsets and the whole universe of ETFs in a test
period. This will be carried out by my co-student, Petr Vanek. Beforehand the sub-
sets created with these different methods are expected to perform differently. The first
method, where the assets are picked up from clusters based on performance measures is
likely to generate higher returns for a given risk since the assets are picked up based on
their return/risk ratio. The second method is assumed to perform better in the time of
crisis as it only picks up assets based on the diversification. The diversification in each
subset will be evaluated using the portfolio diversification index (see section 2.4) and by
the average correlation in each subset.
4.4.1
Generating Subsets of ETFs using Clustering
In this chapter the results of using clustering to pick up subsets of assets will be presented.
The clustering is carried out on 97 week training period and rolls forward 12 weeks at
a time. Here clustering method 1 will be used (complete linkage, Spearman correlation
distance measure) and 3-5 clusters will be used to pick up the assets as that number
provides the highest SWC score for method 1, see figure 4.6. The three measures to pick
up assets from clusters are presented in chapter 2.2.5 and are based on the medoid (or
the most central assets in the cluster), the highest Sharpe ratio and the highest STARR.
When deciding on how many assets to pick up from each cluster based on these three
measures the numbers 3-5 were tested, creating subsets of 27 to 75 assets. Note that
some of the assets might be chosen twice or even three times in the subset if they are e.g.
among the highest Sharpe ratio assets and STARR ratio assets, and thus the subsets
might be smaller than expected. Also, when the data is split up to 4-5 clusters, in some
timeperiods there are less than 3-5 assets in a cluster so it is not possible to pick up as
many assets from each cluster as intended.
The clusters created are known to split the assets up to groups which are as diverse
as possible based on the Spearman correlation distance. Picking up some representatives
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Generating Subsets of ETFs
47
from each cluster is thus expected to create subset of assets that are more diverse than
randomly picking assets from the universe of assets. Since the assets are picked up based
on two performance measures, the subsets will contain assets with high performance in
the historical period used to train the clustering. The assets are also picked up based
on the medoid, which selects the assets that are the most representative in each cluster.
Figure 4.10 shows the development through time of the portfolio diversification index,
the average correlation and the number of ETFs in the different subsets as well as the
whole universe of ETFs. The labels on the lines indicate the number of clusters and
the number of assets picked up based on each performance measure, so 3x3 means that
the ETFs are clustered into 3 clusters and 3 ETFs are picked up based on each of the
3 performance measures (subset will contain maximally 27 assets). Here it can be seen
that the portfolio diversification index does not differ a lot between the subsets and is
pretty steady throughout the time period examined. It is more volatile for the subsets
than the whole universe of ETFs, but the PDI for the subsets follow the PDI values for
the whole universe throughout time. When looking at the average correlation it can be
seen than the subsets seem to have lower average correlation than the whole universe of
ETFs, although some subsets have spikes that reach higher than the average correlation
for all ETFs. When looking at the figure showing the development of number of ETFs
in the subsets it can be seen than most of the subsets have fewer asset in the beginning
of the time period than in the end. The reason for this is that for the subsets that
are based on 4 and 5 clusters, some of the clusters did not contain 3-5 ETFs so the
subset were smaller than expected. Later in the time period, this seems to change and
the subsets included more assets on average. Also, as noted before some of the ETFs
are chosen twice or even three times by the performance measures, making the subsets
contain duplicates which makes the subsets smaller.
When looking at the development of the PDI index and the average correlation from
the markets prospective it can be seen that the PDI for all ETFs reaches top in July
2018 while the average correlation reaches it’s lowest value some months later in the time
period. When the correlation is higher the market is more connected and the systematic
risk is higher. Thus it is more difficult to reduce risk by diversification [Yang et al., 2015].
The PDI index is based on principal component analysis and as the PDI score gets
lower the higher the variance explained by the first principal component. Fenn et al.,
2011 showed that increases in the variance explained by PC1 implied more common
variation the the financial market. This shows that the market is more connected in
the beginning of the time period examined, and then gets less connected as time goes
by. Late in the time period it begins to get more connected again. This could indicate
that the possibilities of diversification is higher in the in the middle of the timeperiod
examined.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Analysis
Figure 4.10: The developement of the PDI index, average correlation and number of
ETFs for nine different subsets of ETFs, where the subsets are created based on cluster-
ing.
Figure 4.11 shows return versus the standard deviation for the ETFs where the
ETFs in the subsets are colored in red. The clustering is trained on the first 97 weeks
of historical returns. The figures show subsets based on 3-5 clusters where 5 ETFs are
picked up based on each performance measure. Here it can be seen that the ETFs in the
subsets do not change alot between subsets, as expected since the only thing changing
is how many clusters the ETFs are split into. The ETFs in the subsets seem to spread
out in the ETF universe in terms of return and standard deviation, but it can be seen
that all the assets are in the upper half of the graph, leaving out all the low risk/high
return ETFs. This is most likely caused by the fact that two of the measures used to
pick up assets are performance measures that only pick up high performing assets.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Generating Subsets of ETFs
49
Figure 4.11: Return versus standard deviation for all ETFs in the first 97 weeks of the
historical period. Assets in the subsets are colored in red and the assets in the subsets
are picked up based on clusters.
4.4.2
Generating Subsets of ETFs using MST
In this chapter the results of using the minimum spanning tree method (see chapter
2.3.1) to generate subsets of assets will be introduced. The goal of using this method is
to generate subsets of ETFs which have maximum diversification potential based on the
correlation between ETFs. Here the minimum spanning tree is created from on a fully
connected network based on correlation, where the correlation in based on the last 97
weeks of returns. The window rolls forward 12 weeks at a time.
Figure 4.12 shows the development through time of the PDI index, the average
correlation and the number of ETFs in the subsets generated through four rounds of the
MST method. The full universe includes all the 537 ETFs and when the MST method
has been applied to the distance matrix based on the correlation subset 1 is generated
(round 1). Then the MST method is applied to subset 1 which generates subset 2 (round
2) and so on. In this approach the most highly correlated stocks are removed step-wise.
Here it can be seen that the PDI index is the lowest for all subsets in the beginning
and then rises as time goes on and reaches the top in July 2018. Then it begins to drop
again. When looking at the average correlation it is the highest in the beginning for all
subsets and then drops until January 2019 when it takes a small rise to the end of the
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Analysis
time period. It can also be seen that as the correlation gets lower the more the rise is in
the PDI for the smaller subsets which indicates that the diversification potential could
be increasing.
When looking at the size of the subsets it can be seen that the first subset includes
on average 211 ETFs, the second subset includes on average 101 ETFs, the third subset
includes on average 50 ETFs and the fourth subset includes on average 27 ETFs. The
average correlation decreases as the ETF universe gets smaller and the PDI index gets
larger.
This means that the variance in the data is better spread out between the
principal components and the diversification in the subsets is increasing as they become
smaller.
Figure 4.12: The portfolio diversification index, average correlation and number of ETFs
for the subsets for the four rounds of the MST.
Figure 4.13 shows the return versus the standard deviation for the ETFs where the
ETFs in the subsets are colored in red. This is based on the first time period, or the first
97 weeks of historical returns. The figures show the subsets created based on round 1 -
4 of the MST method. Here it can be seen how the subsets get smaller from round to
round. The ETFs seem to spread out really well in the graph, including assets located
all over the graph. This confirms that the diversification in the subsets created seems
to be good.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Generating Subsets of ETFs
51
Figure 4.13: Return versus standard deviation for all ETFs in the first 97 weeks of the
historical period. Assets in the subsets are red and are picked up based on MST.
4.4.3
Comparing the Two Different Methods
When comparing the diversification in the subsets for the two different methods it can
be seen that the subsets created by the MST method seem to offer more diversification.
Figure 4.14 show the PDI index, the average correlation and the number of ETFs
in the subsets based on the 3x4 clustering and 5x5 clustering and the subsets based on
round 3 and 4 of the MST method. Those subset are chosen for the comparison since
the 3x4 clustering subset and the round 4 subset are of similar sizes and the 5x5 subset
and the round 3 subset are of similar sizes. Here it can be seen that the value of the
PDI index are much higher for the subsets created based on the MST method and the
average correlation is significantly lower for the compared subsets at all points in time.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Analysis
Figure 4.14: The portfolio diversification index, average correlation and number of ETFs
for two clustering based subsets (3x4 and 5x5) and two MST based subsets (round 3
and round 4).
Figure 4.15 shows the return versus the standard deviation for the ETFs based on
the first 97 weeks of historical data. The ETFs in the subsets are colored in red. The
upper two figures, show the the 3x4 clustering subset and the round 4 MST subsets,
which are of similar sizes. The lower two figures show the 5x5 clustering subset and
the round 3 MST subset which are of similar sizes. It can be seen that the spread in
the ETFs in the subsets seems to be much better for the subsets created based on the
MST method, including ETFs that are spread throughout the graph, while the subsets
created based on clustering seem to leave out the high risk/low return assets.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Generating Subsets of ETFs
53
Figure 4.15: Return versus standard deviation for all ETFs in the first 97 weeks of the
historical period. Assets in the subsets are red.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusions
In this thesis the market of Danish mutual funds and exchange traided funds are stud-
ied. The goal is to see whether adding the universe of exchange traided funds to the
universe of mutual funds offers investors better performing assets with more diversifi-
cation potential. To provide the solution to that, general methods are used as well as
more advanced methods, such as clustering and network science. Network science offers
powerful ways to present the relationship between assets graphically. Clustering is used
to find the underlying structure of the market by grouping similar assets together. The
second step of the project is to see if reducing the ETF universe from hundreds to tens
before feeding them into an optimization model will produce more robust portfolios by
decreasing the parameter uncertainty. Two different methods are considered for this
that build on clustering and minimum spanning tree.
Three datasets are considered for this thesis. All datasets contain historical returns
of financial assets.
The first dataset consists of 180 indices which contain industry
portfolios, developed market factors and return portfolios and bond indices.
These
indices are considered to replicate the market. The second dataset contains 893 Danish
mutual funds. The third dataset contains 1,866 ETFs, where metadata is also available.
The indices are used as a bridge between the mutual funds and ETFs. The data is
preprocessed so that all assets considered for the project have at least five years of
historical data available. This results in 537 ETFs and 557 mutual funds.
First the historical return series of the three different datasets are analyzed. This
shows that in fact the universe of ETFs is broad and seems to offer more diversification
than the universe of Danish mutual funds. However, a large part of the mutual funds
are low risk/low return assets that the ETFs do not seem to replicate. This is further
confirmed by clustering the indices together with the mutual funds where it can be seen
that one out of three clusters consisted solely of these low risk/low return mutual funds.
When taking random samples of the mutual funds in this cluster it can be seen that
these mutual funds consist mainly of Danish bonds. The other two clusters contain
mutual funds that invest in global stocks and bonds. This suggest that a portfolio of
both universes combined could offer investors more diversification potential.
Clustering is also carried out on the ETFs and the indices together. The assets are
split into three clusters and each cluster is a combination of ETFs and indices. To test
if it is possible to make sense of the clustering, the underlying indices, their region and
currency, of the ETFs are considered. An underlying structure of the ETFs and indices
is found. One cluster consists of the gold index and ETFs that have underlying indices
tracking the performance of precious metals, but are in different asset classes such as
equity and commodities. This cluster has low returns and high volatility on average.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Conclusions
The second cluster includes 168 of the indices and consists mainly of equity ETFs. It
has high returns and high volatility on average. The fixed income ETFs in this cluster
are all exposed to some extra risk that most fixed income ETFs are not exposed to. The
third cluster has low return and low risk on average and consists of 11 indices; the 6 bond
indices and 5 industry portfolios. Most of the ETFs in this cluster are fixed income ETFs.
The equity ETFs in this cluster have underlyings that are more stable investments that
most equities. This shows that by using clustering methods the underlying structure of
assets universes can be found.
Finally subsets of ETFs are created. Two different algorithms are used; clustering
and minimum spanning tree (MST). When applying the clustering algorithm the ETFs
are grouped into clusters and representative assets are picked up from each cluster based
on the mediod, the highest Sharpe ratio and STARR ratio. When using the MST method
the endnotes of the minimium spanning tree (MST) of a fully connected graph are picked
up to create a subset recursively. This method is applied to the full universe of ETFs
in the beginning and a subset created. Then the method is applied on the subset and a
smaller subset created. These two methods are beforehand expected to provide different
features into the asset management as the MST method picks up assets entirely based
on diversification, while the clustering provides groups of ETFs that are dissimilar and
the highest performing assets are then picked up from each group. The diversification
of the subsets is evaluated based on the portfolio diversification index and the average
correlation and this shows that the MST method provides subsets with much higher
diversification in terms of these two measures. The performance of the different subsets
will be evaluated further in Petr Vaneks thesis, where the subsets will be fed into various
optimization models and optimal portfolios constructed. It will be interesting to see the
performance of the different subsets in the recent financial crises, and further confirm
which asset selection method provides better diversified portfolios.
5.1
Future Work
In this section some ideas for future work are presented. In the process of carrying out
this thesis many ideas came up that couldn’t be implemented in the given time frame
or due to other restrictions.
Picking up representatives from the clusters can be carried out in many different ways
and the chosen method is not likely to be the optimal way to pick up representatives.
It was inspired by papers read in the process of creating this thesis. Both the number
of assets picked up from each cluster and which measures to use is subjective and can
have huge impact on the results.
It would be interesting to try different measures,
different number of assets and different number of clusters and see how that affects the
performance and diversification in the optimal portfolio. Having more clusters (> 10)
could have provided better diversified subsets, but low silhouette score for more than
five clusters was the reason for why that wasn’t done.
It could be interesting to cluster the ETFs and the mutual funds together and see
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Future Work
57
how the assets split between clusters. This wasn’t done due to the fact the the mutual
fund data was available late in the project and also because of the computation time of
the correlation matrix.
Creating subsets of mutual funds and the ETFs together could have been valuable
for investors to be able to construct a portfolio consisting of both mutual funds and
ETFs.
Again the computation time was the main factor why this wasn’t done, as
applying selection algorithms on rolling scenarios for 17 time periods would have been
computationally heavy.
Working on the portfolio construction on the subsets in parallel with this project
could have resulted in better performing subsets, as testing the subsets during the process
and possibly changing them based on the results could have been valuable for the process.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Code Files
Here code constructed for the project can be accessed.
• Section 3.1: Preprocessing of index data
• Section 3.2: Preprocessing of mutual fund data
• Section 3.3: Preprocessing of ETF data
• Section 4.1:
– Section 4.1.1: Return series
– Section 4.1.2: Network - mutual funds and indices, Network - ETFs and
indices, Network - mutual funds and ETFs
• Section 4.2: Performance evaluation of different clustering methods
• Section 4.3:
– Section 4.3.1: Clustering of mutual funds and indices
– Section 4.3.2: Clustering of ETFs and indices
• Section 4.4:
– Section 4.4.1: Generating subsets of ETFs using clustering
– Section 4.4.2: Generating subsets of ETFs using MST
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Alexander, C., & Dimitriu, A. (2004). Sources of outperformance in equity markets. The
Journal of Portfolio Management, 30(4), 170–185.
Best, M. J., & Grauer, R. R. (1991). On the sensitivity of mean-variance-efficient port-
folios to changes in asset means: Some analytical and computational results. The
review of financial studies, 4(2), 315–342.
Bjerring, T. T., Ross, O., & Weissensteiner, A. (2017). Feature selection for portfolio
optimization. Annals of Operations Research, 256(1), 21–40.
Esfahanipour, A., & Zamanzadeh, S. (2015). A stock market filtering model based on
minimum spanning tree in financial networks. AUT Journal of Modeling and
Simulation, 45(1), 67–75.
Euler, L. (1741). Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs pertinentis. Commentarii
academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae, 128–140.
Fama, E. F. (1963). Mandelbrot and the stable paretian hypothesis. The journal of
business, 36(4), 420–429.
Fein, M. L. (2015). Robo-advisors: A closer look. Available at SSRN 2658701.
Fenn, D. J., Porter, M. A., Williams, S., McDonald, M., Johnson, N. F., & Jones, N. S.
(2011). Temporal evolution of financial-market correlations. Physical review E,
84(2), 026109.
Finanstilsynet. (2017). Collective investments: Market developments in 2016. https://
www.finanstilsynet.dk/~/media/Tal-og-fakta/2017/MU/Market-development-
in-2016-for-collective-investments-pdf.pdf?la=en
French, K. R. (2020a). 25 portfolios formed on size and operating profitability (5x5).
Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/
ken.french/data_library.html
French, K. R. (2020b). Detail for 49 industry portfolios. Retrieved 5 March 2020, from
https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/
det_49_ind_port.html
Guo, D., Boyle, P. P., Weng, C., & Wirjanto, T. S. (2018). Eigen portfolio selection: A
robust approach to sharpe ratio maximization. Available at SSRN 3070416.
Herlau, T., Schmidt, M. N., & Mørup, M. (2016). Introduction to machine learning
and data mining. Lecture notes of the course of the same name given at DTU
(Technical University of Denmark).
Inc., A. V. (2020). Alpha vantage. Retrieved 15 February 2020, from https://www.
alphavantage.co/
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
Investing.com. (2020). Usd/eur - us dollar eurp. Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https:
//www.investing.com/currencies/usd-eur
Investopedia. (2020). Six most popular currencies for trading. Retrieved 29 April 2020,
from https://www.investopedia.com/articles/forex/11/popular-currencies-and-
why-theyre-traded.asp
Jorion, P. (1986). Bayes-stein estimation for portfolio analysis. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative analysis, 21(3), 279–292.
Kamada, T., Kawai, S.
Et al. (1989). An algorithm for drawing general undirected
graphs. Information processing letters, 31(1), 7–15.
Kan, R., & Zhou, G. (2007). Optimal portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty. Jour-
nal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 42(3), 621–656.
Keogh, E., & Ratanamahatana, C. A. (2005). Exact indexing of dynamic time warping.
Knowledge and information systems, 7(3), 358–386.
Kim, D.-H., & Jeong, H. (2005). Systematic analysis of group identification in stock
markets. Physical Review E, 72(4), 046133.
Knuth, D. (No date). 2019 investment company fact book. https://www.ici.org/pdf/
2019_factbook.pdf (accessed: 10.02.2020)
Kostovetsky, L. (2003). Index mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. The Journal of
Portfolio Management, 29(4), 80–92.
Kruskal, J. B. (1956). On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling
salesman problem. Proceedings of the American Mathematical society, 7(1), 48–
50.
Ledoit, O., & Wolf, M. (2004). Honey, i shrunk the sample covariance matrix. The
Journal of Portfolio Management, 30(4), 110–119.
LLC, S. D. J. I. (2020). Spivaőstatisticsreports. Retrieved 20 March 2020, from https:
//us.spindices.com/spiva/#/reports
Mantegna, R. N. (1999). Hierarchical structure in financial markets. The European Phys-
ical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 11(1), 193–197.
Meilă, M. (2003). Comparing clusterings by the variation of information, In Learning
theory and kernel machines. Springer.
Onnela, J.-P., Chakraborti, A., Kaski, K., Kertesz, J., & Kanto, A. (2003). Dynamics of
market correlations: Taxonomy and portfolio analysis. Physical Review E, 68(5),
056110.
Raffinot, T. (2017). Hierarchical clustering-based asset allocation. The Journal of Port-
folio Management, 44(2), 89–99.
Rockafellar, R. T., Uryasev, S. Et al. (2000). Optimization of conditional value-at-risk.
Journal of risk, 2, 21–42.
Roelofsen, P. (2018). Time series clustering. Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
Sardá-Espinosa, A. (2017). Comparing time-series clustering algorithms in r using the
dtwclust package. R package vignette, 12, 41.
Sharifzadeh, M., & Hojat, S. (2012). An analytical performance comparison of exchange-
traded funds with index funds: 2002–2010. Journal of Asset Management, 13(3),
196–209.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
SPDR®. (2020a). Spdr® bloomberg barclays 1-3 year euro government bond ucits etf
(dist). Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https://www.ssga.com/doc/factsheets/
FS1285_English.pdf
SPDR®. (2020b). Spdr® bloomberg barclays 10+ year euro government bond ucits etf
(dist). Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https://www.ssga.com/doc/factsheets/
FS1942_English.pdf
SPDR®. (2020c). Spdr® bloomberg barclays 3-5 year euro government bond ucits etf
(dist). Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https://www.ssga.com/doc/factsheets/
FS3942_English.pdf
SPDR®. (2020d). Spdr® bloomberg barclays 5-7 years euro government bond ucits etf
(dist). Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https://www.justetf.com/de- en/etf-
profile.html?isin=IE00BYSZ5Y35
SPDR®. (2020e). Spdr® bloomberg barclays 7-10 year euro government bond ucits etf
(dist). Retrieved 5 March 2020, from https://www.ssga.com/library-content/
products/factsheets/etfs/emea/factsheet-emea-en_gb-syb7%20gy.pdf
SPDR®. (2020f). Spdr® bloomberg barclays euro government bond ucits etf (dist). Re-
trieved 5 March 2020, from https://www.ssga.com/doc/factsheets/FS1205_
English.pdf
Wang, X., Mueen, A., Ding, H., Trajcevski, G., Scheuermann, P., & Keogh, E. (2013).
Experimental comparison of representation methods and distance measures for
time series data. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 26(2), 275–309.
Wenyue Sun, G. Y., Chuan Tian. (No date). Network analysis of the stock market, (5).
West, J. (2020). Visualising asset price correlations. Retrieved 29 April 2020, from https:
//julian-west.github.io/blog/visualising-asset-price-correlations/
Yang, L., Rea, W., & Rea, A. (2015). How much diversification potential is there in
a single market? evidence from the australian stock exchange. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.06486.
==PAGE:74==
