==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master’s Thesis
Real-time Data Processing Pipeline:
A pipeline to assist digital phenotyping research studies
Alexander V. Pedersen (s145099)
Kristoffer B. Thorø (s182826)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In today’s age of big data, data is being collected from multiple sources, and in most
cases, this data remains unused and stored away in various storage mediums. When
talking big data, this approach can be considered very traditional and in many cases
leaves data hard to analyse. Working with real-time analytics can especially prove
vital within healthcare, where time is considered to be a big factor when dealing with
diseases and the discovery of those.
This thesis seeks to go beyond traditional data collection within healthcare and
utilize data by the use of near real-time data processing, which will allow data analyt-
ics nearly as soon as data is generated. This data comes from wearable devices, from
earlier research studies that track participants’ step count, calories burned, etc. The
thesis is focused on developing a real-time data processing pipeline that is designed
to support the conduct of digital phenotyping research studies. In addition, the ratio-
nal for how it is designed is described, and the design is compared with alternative
options.
The thesis summarizes the distinct features of the resulting pipeline, which in-
cludes a feature that allows researchers to submit their own custom scripts into the
pipeline, such that data can be retrieved in a real-time manner and transformed ac-
cording to the requirements from the researcher. This enables the researcher to per-
form data statistical operations on the data to unveil new information about the data.
The thesis concludes with a discussion of the challenges and recommendations for
future work, that arose from learning during the development of the pipeline.
Keywords: digital phenotyping; Open mHealth; Movisens; Fitbit; Garmin; health
technology; real-time; data processing; framework; software development
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s
degree in Computer Science and Engineering. The thesis was written in collaboration
with the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology, and the work on the thesis was
carried out from January 27 2020 to June 27 2020 with a workload of 30 ECTS credits.
Signatures
Kristoffer Børner Thorø-Hansen
Alexander Vikkelsø Pedersen
Date
27-06-2020
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, we would like to thank Alban Maxhuni, Postdoc at Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) who has, with his enthusiasm, expertise and impressive knowledge
in real-time frameworks, been a great supervisor throughout this project.
We would also like to thank Jakob E. Bardram, Professor at DTU, Steven Tom Jeuris,
Postdoc at DTU, and all the participants in our bi-weekly meetings that has helped
guide this thesis in the right direction.
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to our family and friends for their
support over the months working on this thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Digital Phenotype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Thesis Objective and Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Related Work
7
2.1
RADAR-base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Striim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
InSTIL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
SMACK Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Real World Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
System design
15
3.1
Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Non-functional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Implementation
39
4.1
System Design Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Evaluation
57
5.1
User Story Demonstration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Testing Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Technical Requirements and Stress Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.5
Compared to Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6
Discussion
73
6.1
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Future Ideas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7
Conclusion
79
Bibliography
81
Acronyms
87
Glossary
89
A Appendix
91
A.1
Complete list of running services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.2
Testing Flink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
A.3
Web application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.4
User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.5
Movisens test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
A.6
Fitbit and Garmin test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
A.7
Airﬂow-Spark Docker Compose File
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
A.8
Conﬂuent Kafka Docker Compose File . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
A.9
Open mHealth Calories Burned Schema Creation Example . . . . . . .
113
A.10 Standard deviation script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
"Talented data scientists leverage
data that everybody sees; visionary
data scientists leverage data that
nobody sees."
Vincent Granville , Executive Data
Scientist & Co-Founder at Data
Science Central
1.1
Background
In the age of big data, huge amounts of data are collected in different ﬁelds of work.
These include the medical ﬁeld, where much data is collected by many medical de-
vices to support various medical functions such as clinical decision support, disease
monitoring, and population health management [RR14]. According to the Institute
for Health Technology Transformation [Hoo13], medical data in the United States
alone has reached the order of Zettabyte and could soon reach the order of Yottabyte
[Saf+19], i.e. a signiﬁcant amount of data derived from medical sources. This is pri-
marily due to the wide variety of data sources that can generate different types of data,
such as imaging and sensory data that are normally not readable by people. In order
to be able to use these large amounts of data, they must be analysed and put into use.
Moreover, data science is constantly evolving, and there are many ways to start
analysing and make predictions based on this data. Predictive analytics enables a
researcher to analyse patterns and predict future values based on historical data. This
can provide potentially useful information that can form a solid basis for informed
decision making [MAA18].
The beneﬁts of performing predictive analytics are proving to be decisive in many
industries. Amazon is one of the companies that has adopted these business ideas
of data usage to predict what type of products a particular customer group would
want to buy. In this way, logistical considerations could be made to ensure rapid ship-
ping [MAA18]. In healthcare, these predictions can be useful in dealing with patients,
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
when detecting diseases or cancers [BMH16], which can lead to informed decisions-
making when doctors need to take action. If this were combined with the aspect of
time, healthcare providers would be able to act immediately when a medical condi-
tion is detected.
Today, this type of real-time feedback is already used in various applications, most
of which are focused on monitoring applications. For example, Dexcom [Dex], which
provides both a device and a mobile app, allows patients to monitor their blood glu-
cose levels themselves. This is especially important for patients with diabetes, as this
type of device allows the patient to monitor glucose levels and act on the output of
the device by displaying the glucose level. This works by continuously collecting data
from the device and displaying it in the mobile application.
Traditionally, the data is simply collected in memory that can be queried at a later
time when one wants to analyse the collected data. One problem with this approach
is that you would be analysing historical data, which ultimately makes immediate
action impossible. As this research work states [Eva], "As a result, they can take im-
mediate action based on enriched data insights and analysis that may be relevant to
a patient’s health as well as to their (his or her) experience with a hospital or health
care facility," which suggests that in some areas of work, such as healthcare, time may
become a major factor in handling data.
The processing of data streams in real-time is necessary to handle the temporal
aspect of data analysis as well as the rapid data ﬂow from multiple data sources. The
ability of data stream processing would allow us to respond to incoming data in a
modular fashion so that data can be analysed without blocking the incoming data
ﬂow. This would ultimately make it possible to use data "on the ﬂy" so that the time as-
pect of data analysis can play a role. In this way, researchers would be able to retrieve
medical information and do aggregations or carry out data statistical operations that
could guide each of the medical functions mentioned above, such as clinical decision
support, disease surveillance, and population health management.
There are several possibilities when looking at how data can be used for more
than just monitoring. As with Dexcom, the glucose levels had to be monitored by the
patient using the glucose monitor. In Dexcom’s case, would it be possible to build
a real-time processing pipeline so that the application itself could begin to predict
when a patient would need to take action when glucose levels were low? Or perhaps
predict at what times of the day a patient is likely to need to take action?
With this in mind, how can we build a pipeline that works in such a way that re-
searchers can utilize a real-time processing pipeline to perform tasks like statistical
operations as mentioned above? And could this pipeline be created in a generic way
so that it could have multiple applications?
==PAGE:13==
1.2 The Digital Phenotype
3
1.2
The Digital Phenotype
The term digital phenotype is derived from the concept of "extended phenotype". Es-
sentially, it is the idea that humans and animals can change their environment to
increase their chances of survival. The digital phenotype is an extension of this con-
cept to digital technology. It is the idea that we can use digital data to identify and
improve the health outcomes of individuals [Jai+15].
Digital data have the ability to show forms of disease expression. For example, re-
searchers have demonstrated that Google search data can be used to identify suicidal
behavior [GL12]. As mentioned above, there is a huge and growing body of health-
related sensor data from mobile devices that can help to provide a nuanced picture
of how health outcomes can be treated and predicted, and many research studies
could beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from this. For example, activity trackers such as Fitbit1 or
Movisens2 could be valuable in patients with cardiometabolic disease where it is im-
portant for prognosis and management to monitor activity levels [Jai+15]. Now that
we have established that research studies using digital phenotyping are important, it
is equally important that they have the infrastructure in place to obtain the informa-
tion that the data convey. What is the point of knowing that you have data that is
valuable if you cannot extract that value? This is where the research question of this
thesis comes into play.
1.3
Research Question
With the increase in research studies using digital phenotyping, there is a reason for a
processing pipeline to assist studies in analysing signals from participants’ wearable
devices. As a result, a research question was formulated to determine exactly what is
needed to achieve this goal.
Research question: How can we develop a processing pipeline with near real-
time processing, that will allow the processing of health data acquired from mobile
and wearable devices?
Sub-problems are also identiﬁed:
• What are the most efﬁcient and effective frameworks for a data pipeline for this
type of data?
• How can we allow the pipeline to accept custom scripts to read/process data on
the ﬂy, allowing researchers to process data based on their speciﬁcations?
1https://www.fitbit.com
2https://www.movisens.com
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
• How can the pipeline be built so that it is easily deployed?
• How can the pipeline be extensible, such that it also supports the domain out-
side health data?
The subproblems reﬂect four design objectives. First, the pipeline should sup-
port high data ingestion rates, i.e. the ability to collect data from thousands of users.
This objective reﬂects the interest of researchers who base their studies on data from
multiple portable devices. Second, the pipeline should allow scripts to run as part of
analysing the data stream. Third, the pipeline design should aim to keep the cost of
building the pipeline as low as possible, since research teams often work with a lim-
ited budget and may not have a developer available. Fourth, the pipeline should be
sufﬁciently extensible, so that it is not just usable for one or a few types of data. It
should not care about the types, and leave it up the the user to deﬁne it if needed.
1.4
Thesis Goals
The aim of this implementation is to help healthcare providers with a higher degree
of accuracy in time-sensitive data, and from an analytical point of view, it will allow
statistical analysis "on the ﬂy" within the data stream. The research question has
many aspects. Such as, the design challenges to ﬁnd out which frameworks work best
in the area we are working in, and also the technical challenges of how the different
frameworks work together.
Some goals have been formulated from the research question and the subprob-
lems. It is expected that the project will be completed when the following objectives
have been achieved:
• An analysis was carried out to ﬁnd out which conditions are efﬁcient and corre-
spond to the application/use case
• A real-time data processing pipeline has been built.
• The data pipeline utilizes a stream processing engine that allows statistical op-
erations on data in near-real time.
• The data pipeline allows the execution of custom scripts that analyse the data
stream.
• The data pipeline allows scheduling of the custom scripts.
• The data pipeline should be easily deployable by using a single start script.
• The pipeline’s use case is not bound by one type of data
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Thesis Objective and Outline
5
1.5
Thesis Objective and Outline
From a software development perspective, building a pipeline for real-time data pro-
cessing will indeed prove to be a challenge, e.g. because of the scalability, ability to dis-
tribute, and extensibility necessary to ensure that the pipeline will continue to deliver
value over a long time. Choosing the right technologies will have a massive impact on
a user’s productivity and also on how efﬁcient the pipeline is from a computational
perspective. In addition, the pipeline should be deployed in such a way that it can
be considered plug-n-play. In other words, the pipeline should be deployable on the
target machine simply by cloning the pipeline and should be executable out of the
box with a single script.
Therefore, the thesis focuses on the steps necessary to successfully build a pipeline
for real-time data processing - more precisely, the thesis will deal with the following:
• Development of a real-time data processing pipeline consisting of properties
like scalability, distributability, and expandability
• Development of a feature to the pipeline that allows users to make custom
scripts to process the data ﬂowing through the pipeline
• An analysis of the most popular data ingestion, processing and database frame-
works for the pipeline
• A review of the pipeline on some real-world data.
• Discussion of our results and suggestions for future work.
In regards to the outline, there will be 7 chapters, where this is chapter 1. Chapter
2 will be a comparative analysis of similar solutions to this project, and also a more
general view on what value these type of solutions bring, as well as what this thesis
will add to the literature. Chapter 3 will go over the requirements of the solution, and
provide an analysis of the frameworks that are a candidate to be used and ultimately
pick the ones that will best accomplish the goals. Afterwards, in chapter 4, the im-
plementation of the solution will be presented, with the goal of explaining how the
pipeline was set up, and what role each framework plays. The solution will then be
evaluated in chapter 5, with the help of tests and by comparing the solution to the
requirements and related work. Next, in chapter 6, there will be a discussion of the
challenges, future ideas, and the limitations of the system. Finally, the conclusion in
chapter 7 will conclude the most important ﬁndings and results from this thesis.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER2
Related Work
With increasing digitisation, the doors of the health sector have opened for an op-
portunity to analyse huge amounts of data. The type of data that can beneﬁt from
real-time processing solutions are wearable devices that monitor overall health data.
The beneﬁt lies in being able to track and analyse medical patterns of patients and
therefore being able to make informed decisions from a broader point of view [SD20].
Few solutions have tried to take advantage of this beneﬁt, and those that have, have
seen great value. This chapter will explain what these solutions achieve, what their
challenges are and what value they have. At the end, we will summarise what this
thesis will add to the literature.
2.1
RADAR-base
RADAR-base is a platform that uses data from wearable and mobile devices. This
platform stores, manages, shares, and analyse data streams from wearable devices
[Ran+18]. Figure 2.1 shows an overview of the RADAR-base architecture. The RADAR-
base platform has a much broader scope than this thesis, but its approach to mes-
sage capture and processing is interesting to consider. RADAR-base uses Kafka as a
message broker. As can be seen in the "core" section of Figure 2.1, the platform also
allows real-time data processing. However, the solution is limited to the client library
Kafka Streams. This library provides aggregations (average, maximum, etc.) in differ-
ent time resolutions (second, minute, hour, day, week). The result is then stored in a
MongoDB, which provides Application Programming Interface (API) endpoints to re-
quest the aggregated data in near real-time. This architecture enables near real-time
visualisation where the result of the aggregation is presented to the user in a dash-
board. The architecture of the RADAR-base platform has proven to be an expandable
and horizontally scalable platform, meaning computational resources will increase
depending on the needs. Even so, they also found some technical challenges related
to processing data in real-time. These challenges were related to the fact that high
throughput, volume, and speed of data, require high processing power, and also that
sensor data can be an invasion of privacy.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related Work
Figure 2.1: High-level Architecture of RADAR-base
2.2
Striim
A solution that shares goals with this thesis, is Striim [PZK19]. Striim is a distributed
streaming platform that can
• ingest data from databases, log ﬁles, IoT devices, and message queues.
• ﬁlter, aggregate, and transform the streaming data
• analyse the data using SQL-like language and machine learning models
• visualize the real-time data and the associated analysed results
• alert on issues or anomalies if necessary
Figure 2.2 shows how these concepts work in the system. Here, ingest data from vari-
ous sources are fed into the system as a continuous stream of data, which then allows
stream analytics and ﬁnally it is delivered to any of the designated data stores or mes-
sage queues.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 InSTIL
9
Figure 2.2: High-level Architecture of the Striim platform
Striim is a closed-source solution with undisclosed pricing 1. Striim limits the
possibilities of data analysis to a SQL-like language. This allows the data stream to
be analysed only as far as the SQL language allows. Because Striim is a Java-based
system, machine learning models are limited to using third-party libraries and built-
in machine learning models written in Java [PZK19]. This is a limitation that is sure to
hold back some data scientists since according to a recent survey, about 83% of data
scientists say they use Python2 regularly, and for Java, it is 21% 3. It would certainly
be of great beneﬁt if the users of the platform are able to use tools they are familiar
with, such as Scikit-learn or Numpy. Nevertheless, Striim is certainly an impressive
platform with its machine learning predictions and on-the-ﬂy data analysis.
2.3
InSTIL
InSTIL is a platform for collecting sensor signals from smartphones. Figure 2.3 shows
the basic idea, where a researcher designs a study that is distributed to the partici-
pants’ smartphones that is uploading its data to a central store that the researchers
can read from.
1https://www.striim.com/
2https://www.python.org/
3https://www.kaggle.com/kaggle/kaggle-survey-2018
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related Work
Figure 2.3: High-level Architecture of the InSTIL platform
The goal of collecting this data is to improve the understanding of the cause and
trajectory of health conditions such as depression, anxiety, and bipolar disorder among
the youth [Bar+19].
It was important for the platform that it supported high throughput with the abil-
ity to support tens of thousands of users, and to achieve this they selected Kafka as
their data ingestion framework. They concluded that Kafka was sufﬁcient at manag-
ing high-volume data ingestion scenarios, but the persistent queries and data replay
features of Kafka were never used. They used Elasticsearch to store ﬁles that should
make searching for data-efﬁcient. However, they concluded that including the search
engine Elasticsearch in an attempt to simplify the pipeline architecture was unneces-
sary because the data storage format ended up being JSON where a regular database
with indices would have been enough if they used that. InSTIL uses Kibana to visual-
ize and give feedback on the data that was sent. Another important property of the
platform was extensibility. It achieved this by being agnostic to the form and type of
the data being uploaded by requiring each data upload to include metadata which
includes the data type and timestamp in a standardized format [Bar+19]. InSTIL does
not use an analytics engine, also known as a processing engine, and so it falls short in
its ability to transform or model data to draw conclusions.
2.4
SMACK Stack
To get a more general view of how a pipeline can be structured, and what problems
it’s trying to solve, the book Estrada and Ruiz [ER16] has some interesting points. It
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Real World Case
11
discusses why pipeline architecture is needed for large amounts of data. The authors
argue that it is too slow to store data in a warehouse so that it can be used at another
time. The data in these warehouses becomes obsolete, and the expiration date af-
ter which new data becomes useful becomes shorter every day. The ﬂow of data is
constant and there are unique ways to react to data that may not be repeated. There-
fore the solution is a pipeline architecture. The architecture presented in this book
is the SMACK stack. SMACK is the acronym for Spark4, Mesos5, Akka6, Cassandra7,
and Kafka8. Spark is the framework used to analsze near real-time and batch process
data. Kafka is used for recording events received e.g. from sensors or devices. Cas-
sandra is used for storing data in a distributed and scalable database. Akka is used to
visualise data and create data-driven applications. Mesos is a container that enables
elastic distributed systems and fault tolerance. It takes a bit of a different approach to
cluster orchestration, as it primarily focuses on ﬂexibility and massive scale clusters.
The authors [ER16] presents the SMACK stack as a starting point for further considera-
tions and arguments about which frameworks to use for your use case. If a framework
can improve the pipeline compared to the one already in the SMACK stack, then that
framework can be integrated instead. The SMACK stack, therefore, consists of ﬁve
frameworks, where the integration can be done naturally, quickly, and in the right
place.
2.5
Real World Case
It is important to learn from other people’s real-world experiences, such that it can
help avoid challenges that might not be clear at the time of designing. One book that
shares their experiences with the design and implementation of a real-time data pro-
cessing pipelines is Househ, Kushniruk, and Borycki [HKB19]. It examines some of
the challenges of Big Data in the healthcare industry. The authors claim that the cur-
rent pipeline infrastructure for the data processing that data scientists need is very
different from what it used to. This is due to the increased volume of data and pro-
cessing power required to collect, calculate, analyse, validate, and interpret the data.
Therefore, it is not sufﬁcient to use platforms such as SAS9, STATA10 and R11. Instead,
platforms such as Apache Hadoop12 and Spark are more appropriate. The article
4https://spark.apache.org/
5http://mesos.apache.org/
6https://akka.io/
7http://cassandra.apache.org/
8https://kafka.apache.org
9https://www.sas.com/en_us/home.html
10https://www.stata.com/
11https://www.r-project.org/
12https://hadoop.apache.org/
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Related Work
Rantz M [Ran19] presents some real-world case studies that describe the beneﬁts and
challenges in detail. One interesting case study they conducted is one where a team
attached sensors to some of the people living in 13 supervised communities. The aim
was to ensure that the elders maintain an independent and high quality of life in their
own homes and communities. The sensors monitored things like breathing and pulse,
but could also detect falls. The data was processed so that automatic health warnings
were generated and sent to the health workers when something was wrong. The case
study concluded that the quality of life of people who used the service decreased less
than that of people who did not use it. One of the biggest challenges that emerged,
however, was that a reliable network infrastructure was essential for the nursing staff
to be able to use the data for real-time decision making.
2.6
Summary
From the related work, the state of the art technologies can be summarised with the
following list:
• Data ingestion framework: Apache Kafka
• Data analytics framework: Apache Kafka Streams/Apache Spark
• Database system: Cassandra/NoSQL database
• Visualization framework: Akka, Kibana
• Deployment tool: Docker
It is clear that the value the data analysis brings is because it is in real-time. The reason
boils down to the fact that you can visualize results in real-time, and take action before
it is too late and data becomes irrelevant. What this thesis proposes to complement
the literature with, is a near real-time processing pipeline that provides an end-to-end
solution for data analysis "on the ﬂy" with a focus on mobile health data. Near real-
time processing pipelines have obviously been created before, but none that we know
of, allow interaction with the data stream on the ﬂy in the form of custom scripts. In
addition, our solution will aim to use a general open-source framework as an analytics
engine that should support many different concepts like in-memory processing and
machine learning. Other solutions, such as RADAR-base, use Kafka streams for data
processing, which only supports these concepts to a limited extent. Like the RADAR-
base platform, we are also interested in providing a scalable solution for event-driven
messaging that meets multiple use cases related to real-time processing, fault toler-
ance, high throughput, and low latency. For this, they use the Conﬂuent platform13,
13https://www.confluent.io/
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Summary
13
which is based on Kafka, In addition, their pipeline is being deployed as microservices
with Docker14 containers so that their deployment requires minimal effort, which is
certainly also something that is helpful for the design of the pipeline. In regards to
InSTIL, they also concluded that Kafka was good as a high throughput data ingestion
framework and they also focused heavily on extensibility by making the system ag-
nostic to the form and type of data, which is a trait we are also interested in. However,
InSTIL only collects data. It doesn’t process it with a processing engine, that can ex-
tract valuable statistical information, but that is something this project will add to the
pipeline.
14https://www.docker.com/
==PAGE:24==
14
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER3
System design
This chapter presents how the pipeline was designed. First, the requirements of the
system with the help of use cases, user stories, functional and non-functional require-
ments is presented. This is followed by an analysis of frameworks that this thesis has
considered for the design, which will ultimately lead to a design that will satisfy the
requirements.
Data and several different frameworks are crucial for the implementation of such
a project. The data will be provided from various sources, including devices such as
wearable and mobile devices. This project will be carried out in collaboration with
the Copenhagen Centre for Health Technology [CAC], which already has an existing
solution that collects data from a number of devices that will eventually enter the
pipeline provided by this project. Through this collaboration, resources such as test
data will prove useful in testing this pipeline, as they will provide insight into the type
of data that will ﬂow through such a pipeline in a real-world environment.
In addition, once this project is completed, researchers should be allowed to use
the pipeline for data analysis. As far as frameworks are concerned, there are several
options available for creating such a real-time stream pipeline. These options are also
analysed in this section.
3.1
Requirements
To get a good idea of what the system should do, some requirements have to be con-
sidered. In this section, we will take a look at what functionality should be included
and how this is designed.
3.1.1
Use Cases
Use cases are used to identify the requirements. This is done so that it can be deter-
mined which things the provided solution should support. Figure 3.1 shows the use
cases for the data processing pipeline. A researcher should be able to apply a script
to the pipeline to perform data analysis on the ﬂy. Also, a dashboard may be intro-
duced into the solution that can support features such as scripting and submission,
==PAGE:26==
16
3 System design
and viewing the result of pipeline execution. Here, three actors Researcher, Admin-
istrator, and Developer are introduced. The researcher is responsible for submitting
scripts and the administrator is primarily responsible for monitoring and managing
the pipeline. The developer is responsible for the deployment and distribution of the
pipeline.
Data Processing Pipeline
Researcher
FR1:
Import script into
pipeline
FR3:
Conﬁgure data
source
FR3:
Conﬁgure sink for
result data
Administrator
Minimum
viable product
FR1:
Write script using
dashboard
FR7:
Schedule script
execution
FR2:
View result of script
execution
FR6:
View currently
running scripts
FR5:
Cancel currently
running script
FR9:
View job error log
FR8:
Conﬁgure script
running time
FR10:
Delete existing script
Figure 3.1: Use Cases
3.1.2
Functional requirements
The functional requirements are used to determine what the solution should support
in terms of functionality. Next to the requirements is a column that shows if it allows
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Requirements
17
the user to Create, read, update or delete (CRUD) data in the pipeline.
Table 3.1: Functional requirements for the researchers using the real-time data
pipeline
FR
Description
CRUD
FR1
A Researcher should be able to add a custom script to the pipeline
C
FR2
A Researcher should be able to see the result from the pipeline
R
FR3
A Researcher should be able to conﬁgure in such a way
that they can choose a data source and destination
U
FR4
A Developer should be able to distribute the pipeline
R
FR5
An Administrator should be able to cancel a script being executed in the pipeline
U
FR6
An Administrator should be able to track the execution of a running script
R
FR7
A Researcher should be able to pick when their script should start running
U
FR8
A Researcher should be able to pick how long their script should be running for
U
FR9
An Administrator should be able to see a script log in the event that a script fails to run
R
FR10
A Researcher should be able to delete their script
D
In details, the functional requirements include:
• FR1 refers to a feature of the pipeline that allows users to create scripts that can
process the stream.
• FR2 refers to the ability of the pipeline to show the researcher, the result of the
scripts.
• FR3 refers to the fact that the Researcher should be able to pick the speciﬁc
stream that they want to do data analytics on.
• FR4 refers to the fact that a developer of this pipeline should easily be able to
deploy the pipeline on other machines with minimal conﬁguration.
• FR5 refers to the ability to abort a running script, which the Administrator should
be able to do.
• FR6 refers to the ability to track progress while a script is running and see what
scripts are currently running in the pipeline.
• FR7 refers to the ability of a Researcher to pick a time for when their script
should execute.
• FR8 refers to the ability of a Researcher to pick the duration for how long a script
should be running after picking a start time through FR7.
• FR9 refers to the ability of an Administrator to see a log for each of the running
scripts, which could help the Administrator get a better understanding of po-
tential complications that occur in the pipeline.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 System design
• FR10 refers to the ability of a Researcher to delete their script when they don’t
want it to run anymore.
3.1.3
User Stories
User stories were created to gain a better understanding of the functional require-
ments and their interaction with the roles of the solution. Here the functionality
exposed to the different roles of the system is explained in detail by means of user
stories, and ﬁnally, these user stories are veriﬁed in Chapter 5. To get a better under-
standing of the user stories, these are listed below:
• US1: As a Researcher, I want to submit a script so that it can be used to analyse
the data stream of the pipeline.
• US1.1: As a Researcher I want to write a script, without the use of an IDE.
• US1.2: As a Researcher I want to import my own script, so that I can use an IDE
of my preference.
• US2: As a Researcher I want to submit a conﬁguration, so that I can conﬁgure
how my script should be executed.
• US2.1: As a Researcher I want to write my own conﬁguration, so that I do not
have to use an IDE for the purpose.
• US2.2: As a Researcher I want to import my own conﬁguration, in order to use
an editor of my preference.
• US3: As a Researcher I want to import new PyPi packages, so that the server has
the right packages when my script is executing.
• US4: As a Researcher I want to view existing script executions to ensure that the
script is executing and to see if a script is already submitted.
• US4.1: As a Researcher I want to delete a script execution as the script is no
longer needed.
• US5: As an Administrator I want to monitor the environment in order to see
what scripts are running.
• US6: As an Administrator I want to stop a script from running in order to insure
good server performance.
• US7: As an Administrator I want to manually trigger a script, in the event that a
Researcher experiences issues with running their script.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Non-functional requirements
19
• US8: As an Administrator I want to be able to see execution logs, so that I can de-
bug script executions if a Researcher experiences issues upon running a script.
• US9: As a Researcher I want to visualize my data, so that I can use it for future
research.
3.2
Non-functional requirements
Non-functional requirements will go into details with the requirements outside the
domain of functionality, here we will take a look at speciﬁcations including perfor-
mance and requirements to the frameworks.
Table 3.2: Non-functional requirements for the pipeline
NFR
Description
NFR1
The pipeline should be capable of processing data ﬂowing
at a high velocity, e.g data captured in real-time or near real-time
NFR2
The pipeline should be scalable and easy to distribute
NFR3
The pipeline should be fault tolerant
NFR4
The pipeline should be able to guarantee at-least-once processing
NFR5
The pipeline should be extensible
NFR6
The pipeline should be able to run on the cloud
NFR7
The pipeline should allow Python scripts to do analytics on the stream
• Requirement NFR1 refers to the pipeline’s ability to process data that possibly
never stop being sent. This data is often being sent at a high velocity and should
be processed in real-time or near real-time.
• The requirement NFR2 speciﬁes that the pipeline should be made in a way that
makes it easy to distribute to different machines, and the ability to add or re-
move script executions to the running pipeline without seeing any downtime.
• The requirement NFR3 refers to the pipeline’s ability to recover gracefully from
failure.
• The requirement NFR4 speciﬁes that the pipeline should be capable of guaran-
teeing at-least-once message delivery.
• The requirement NFR5 refers to the pipeline’s capability to integrate into other
frameworks and the ability to change the existing architecture with other frame-
works.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 System design
• The requirement NFR6 refers to the fact that the pipeline should be able to run
in the cloud on a server.
• The requirement NFR7 speciﬁes that the programming language that the scripts
use should be Python. This is because Python is a simple scripting language
that novice programmers can learn, and also because according to a 2018 sur-
vey, about 83% of data scientists say they use Python regularly1.
3.3
Analysis
To create a pipeline, one must consider the components that exist in order to stream
and analyse data on the ﬂy. The components included in a typical data processing
pipeline would look as illustrated in Figure 3.2. This section will also introduce some
important pipeline concepts, that will help understand the process of picking frame-
works.
EVENT
PIPELINE
ANALYZE
STORAGE
ACT
Real-time streaming of
messages
Real-time or batch
processing of data
Data storing after
analyzis
Consumers
Incoming events from
multiple devices
Custom scripts to retrieve
speciﬁc data
Figure 3.2: Data pipeline [Sch]
As seen in the ﬁgure, it is obvious that an event is needed in some way. This
event can be anything and can be in any data format. The event then passes into
the pipeline, which would then determine the route that these events would have to
go. Next, data is analysed as a stream of either batch or real-time data stream. In
this part, a custom module should be built into the solution, in order to allow outside
custom scripts to be executed in the actual pipeline. During the analysis phase, oper-
ations can be performed to aggregate data or perform other data science operations.
1https://www.kaggle.com/kaggle/kaggle-survey-2018
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Analysis
21
Finally, a result should ﬂow into some sort of memory/storage on which a frontend
can then act.
Figure 3.3 shows the basic idea of a data pipeline. Each stage in the pipeline is
a step in which data is processed. Each stage is executed in parallel with the other
stages. Initially, the pipeline does not process any data, and it is in an idle state, wait-
ing to receive data. At some point, all stages of the pipeline have data to process, and
when there is data in the pipeline and no new data is waiting for instructions, the
stages return to idle.
Figure 3.3: Illustrates a generic 4-stage pipeline
When building a data pipeline, one of the aspects to consider is the timing of
when the data should be processed. This is where the concept of real-time processing
comes into play. Real-time processing differs from traditional data processing in that
it is an unlimited stream of input data where the latency requirements are very short,
typically milliseconds or seconds.
By processing a stream of data, it allows a researcher to process and analyse data
on the ﬂy, which can have many advantages. In Chapter 1, it was mentioned that real-
time data processing could lead to immediate decision support. In the medical ﬁeld,
this is interesting as it has the potential of noticing different diseases in real-time,
through the use of predictions and machine learning in general. Moreover, it could
be interesting if a generic pipeline structure could make the pipeline multi-purpose
and allow easy accessibility for many different types of data to be used.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 System design
3.3.1
Standardized Data Formats
The pipeline works best when the data entered is of a standard. Otherwise, there is
a risk that a phase in the pipeline expects data that does not exist, and the user ends
up with a different result than expected. Besides, following a standard offers a great
advantage for the user of the pipeline because it allows him or her to combine differ-
ent data types with common parameters such as time or location. Open mHealth is a
popular non-proﬁt developer of international data standard schemes for health data
and is used by the Copenhagen Centre for Health Technology [CAC] to collect and
store mobile health data. Some data used in this thesis is provided by stakeholders
that follow the Open mHealth data formats. The data is formatted as JSON, and an
example of a data sample for a pedometer received from a mobile device can be seen
at Listing 3.1.
1 {
2
"step_count": {
3
"value": 10600,
4
"unit": "steps"
5
},
6
"effective_time_frame": {
7
"time_interval": {
8
"start_date_time": "2016-02-05T06:25:00Z",
9
"end_date_time": "2016-02-05T07:25:00Z"
10
}
11
}
12 }
Listing 3.1: Open mHealth step count sample data
There is also data from a device called Movisens. This data follows a standard that
is formatted as JSON and is currently used by the mobile sensing framework CARP
[Bar20], at the Department of Health Technology at the Technical University of Copen-
hagen. An example of this can be seen at Listing 3.2
1 {
2
"id": "6186a150-5970-11e9-add4-479ac370e31c",
3
"timestamp": "2019-05-20T16:14:44.704627Z",
4
"step_count": "3",
5
"movisens_timestamp": "2019-05-20 16:12:44"
6 }
Listing 3.2: Movisens step count sample data
3.3.2
Incoming events
The incoming events are the most important part of the pipeline. Without incoming
events, all other steps in the pipeline are irrelevant because they have no data to react
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Analysis
23
to. Depending on the use case, events are usually sent to the pipeline several times
per second. These events can come from a database where a connection is set up so
that every time something is added to a table, it is published as an incoming event, or
incoming events are simply a topic set up by the pipeline where external sources can
publish.
One problem with incoming data is that its content is not static. It can change over
time or contain errors that need to be handled by the pipeline to prevent the compo-
nents that want to use this data from crashing. Fortunately, there are ways to handle
this, for example, by implementing a schema. A schema is simply an additional data
element that is sent together with the payload and describes the data types of the
ﬁelds in the data. This is explained in further detail later on.
3.3.3
Ingestion of events
The ingestion component of a pipeline is the process that reads data from sources.
The data is collected either via a stream or as a batch. Streaming is an ingestion
paradigm in which the data is sent as individual records one after the other. Streaming
is used when the data needs to be processed in near real-time for an application that
requires the lowest possible latency. In contrast, batch processing does not look for
new data sets, but rather the system runs out according to a schedule or from external
triggers.
3.3.4
The selected design
In this section, we propose a real-time processing pipeline using open source frame-
works that is capable of capturing large amounts of data from a source, processing it,
and storing it efﬁciently in a database.
Distributed Data Ingestion System
We receive health data from wearable devices several times per second, so we need an
ingest framework that can move huge amounts of data in real-time. Table 3.3 covers
critical aspects of the ingestion frameworks and some of their capabilities. As we can
see, both Flume2 and FluentD3 are data collectors of what is usually log data. They are
both scalable and can handle large amounts of data. Flume is most commonly used to
transfer data to a central data store, and FluentD is designed to build a uniﬁed logging
layer [20c] [20b]. Another interesting ingest framework is NiFi4. This framework was
2https://flume.apache.org
3https://www.fluentd.org
4https://nifi.apache.org
==PAGE:34==
24
3 System design
created to facilitate the management of data ﬂows by providing a web-based user in-
terface to easily monitor the data ﬂow between sources and destinations [20f]. There
is also RocketMQ5 a framework that focuses on low latency, high performance, and re-
liability, and is very effective when using many topics [20h]. Pulsar6, a framework that
focuses on low weight, low latency, and high durability, is also an interesting frame-
work. The last two frameworks considered are Kafka7 and RabbitMQ8. They are both
highly scalable and fault-tolerant. However, RabbitMQ is general-purpose and opti-
mized for high throughput, while Kafka is optimized to move, process, and analyse
huge amounts of data in real-time. Both also use the publish/subscribe messaging
protocol [20e] [20r].
To conclude what ingest framework we will use, we can cross out Flume and Flu-
entD, since we want a framework that is more focused on real-time data streaming
rather than logging data. We can also eliminate NiFi, as it is better suited as a ﬂow
manager to get an overview of where data is sent to and from, which is not a big prob-
lem for us, as we don’t have many different destinations for the data. RocketMQ is a
good choice for scenarios where you want many different topics and the consump-
tion ends [Clo18]. We want to have one topic for each type of data, which will not be
enough to justify the use of RocketMQ. As for Pulsar, it seems to have too narrow a
community, which may make it difﬁcult to maintain.
Now to Kafka and RabbitMQ, which are similar, but show some signiﬁcant differ-
ences. One of these critical differences is that Kafka allows messages to be replayed
and RabbitMQ does not. This is because RabbitMQ controls its messages in-memory,
and Kafka does it on disk I/O operations. The ability to replay messages is impor-
tant because, say we need to update the consumer or ﬁx a bug, we need to be able
to reprocess critical messages about a participant’s health. We cannot afford to miss
important messages when we are handling data on individuals health. In addition,
Kafka scales horizontally as opposed to RabbitMQ which scales vertically. This means
that Kafka scales by adding more brokers and RabbitMQ scales by replacing existing
brokers with more powerful ones. For this system, horizontal scaling is more impor-
tant than vertical scaling because it provides better fault tolerance. Having several
"less powerful" brokers is better for us, than having fewer, but powerful, brokers be-
cause we want to make sure that if one of the brokers fails, another broker is always
available. This comes back to the fact that we deal with people’s health data, which
makes it very important that we can reliably say that we always get valid information.
Furthermore, every message in Kafka is added to a protocol, and the partitions of the
protocol are distributed to the servers in the Kafka cluster. In this way, error tolerance
is achieved by duplicating the partitions across multiple servers (clusters). For these
5https://rocketmq.apache.org/
6http://pulsar.apache.org/
7https://kafka.apache.org
8https://www.rabbitmq.com
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Analysis
25
reasons, we can conﬁdently say that Kafka is the preferred ingest framework that is
used. To improve on Kafka, a version of Kafka based on Conﬂuent9, is used in order
to allow extra functionality such as dashboard, to see what is being published.
9https://www.confluent.io/
==PAGE:36==
26
3 System design
Table 3.3: An overview of critical aspects of the ingestion frameworks
Kafka [20e]
RabbitMQ
[20r]
Flume
[20c]
FluentD
[20b]
NiFi [20f]
RocketMQ
[20h]
Pulsar [20g]
Deﬁnition
High-
performance
low
latency
data stream-
ing
General
purpose,
low
latency
brokering
system
Efﬁciently
collect,
aggregate,
and move
large
amounts
of
log
data
Data
col-
lector,
which
uniﬁes
logging
Data
ﬂow
manager
between
distinct
systems
for
data
with
arbitrary
size
Uniﬁed
messag-
ing
engine,
lightweight
data
pro-
cessing
platform
Multi-
tenant, high-
performance
solution for
server-
to-server
pub-sub
messaging
Fault tolerant
×
Scalable
Community
Mature and
broad
Mature and
broad
Decent
Decent
Decent
Narrow
Narrow
Delivery
Exactly-
once,
At-
least-once,
At-most-
once
At-least-
once,
At-
most-once
At-least-
once
At-least-
once,
At-most-
once
At-most-
once
At-least-
once
At-most-
once,
At-
least-once,
Effectively-
once
License
Apache
Mozilla Pub-
lic License
Apache
Apache
Apache
Apache
Apache
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Analysis
27
Stream Processing Engine
In order to continuously stream and do analysis on data, a stream processing engine,
also known as stream analytics engine, is necessary. In Table 3.4, a comparison be-
tween different processing frameworks is presented. Looking into these, the following
parameters were selected:
• Data Processing Type
• Delivery Guarantee
• Performance
• Scalability
• Ease of use
• Fault tolerance
• Community
• Initial release date
• Compatible language
Taken together, these parameters should answer some questions when choosing
a suitable framework. The frameworks that are being considered for this project are
listed as the column header in Table 3.4. Here, one should focus on the fact that the
chosen framework should be compatible with Python, which is going to be the un-
derlying language. This eliminates Samza, which only has API’s for Java. Secondly,
native streaming or micro-batch processing should be used in this type of project, as
we want real-time or near real-time processing. Both Apache Spark, Flink, and Storm
meet this requirement, which makes Hadoop less favorable for this type of project.
This ﬁnally leaves Spark, Flink, and Storm as the remaining frameworks that could be
used for this type of project.
When choosing from these three, performance, delivery guarantee, community,
and usability are also considered. Here the different frameworks perform slightly dif-
ferently. In general, Spark is an option that many uses when dealing with data streams,
because it supports near real-time processing, the community is large, and it is easy to
use. The downside of this framework is performance, according to the article [Chi+16]
a benchmarking was done for the three different streaming frameworks. This shows
that Spark generally has better throughput, but has the cost of latency, considering
that it does micro-batching. On the other hand, Flink and Storm focus mainly on pro-
viding a real-time computing engine. When choosing between the two, it is said that
==PAGE:38==
28
3 System design
Flink generally supports more than Storm and that Flink looks like the successor to
Storm [Pra18].
In summary, Spark and Flink seem to be the two frameworks to choose from. One
supports real-time stream processing with the disadvantage of lower throughput than
Spark, while Spark supports near real-time stream processing. Both work in different
ways, so the choice of a framework depends heavily on the use cases.
This project has a big focus on having near real-time data processing, which both
supports in theory supports. Some issues were although discovered while testing
Flink as seen in the appendix Figure A.1. Flink has a lack of support when it comes to
writing in Python. Because Flink is created in Scala, the API primarily revolves around
Java and Scala, therefore some functionality is not documented or supported accord-
ing to Flink documentation as can also be seen from the Flink example page [20m].
Furthermore, after doing some testing in Java, doubts started to arise on how Flink
should support custom script execution since Java is not a scripting language. This
ultimately proved to be a challenge when testing Flink, therefore it led to the decision
of going with the more popular option of Spark framework, which has large support
for Python and is considered a popular option for data scientists.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Analysis
29
Table 3.4: An overview of stream processing engines
[Kar+18]
Apache Spark
[NsT19]
Apache Flink
[Kar+18]
Apache
Hadoop
[SZT18]
Apache Storm
[Pra18]
Apache
Samza
[Pra18]
Data Processing Type
Micro-batch
processing
Batch and Na-
tive
Stream-
ing
Batch process-
ing
Native
Streaming
Native
Streaming
Delivery Guarantee
Exactly Once
Exactly Once
Exactly Once
Atleast Once
Atleast Once
Performance (Latency)
++
+++
+
+++
+++
Performance (Throughput)
+++
++
-
+
-
Scalability
++(+)
++(+)
+++
++
++
Ease of use
Easy
due
to
high
level
operators
Easy
due
to
high
level
operators
Utilizes
MapReduce,
complex
operators
-
-
Fault tolerance
Community
+++
++ (Growing)
+++
++
+
Initial release date
May 2014
May 2011
Dec 2011
Sep 2011
Jan 2015
Compatible language
Scala,
Java,
Python, R
Scala,
Java,
Python
Any
Scala,
Java,
Python,
Clo-
jure, Ruby
Java
==PAGE:40==
30
3 System design
Visualization system
The researcher can gain great value and insight into the data by visualizing it in a
graph. Therefore a visualization framework added to the pipeline is important. It
can be difﬁcult to predict exactly what researchers ﬁnd relevant for visualization and
how they will visualize it. Therefore, the framework must be highly customizable.
One framework that does this is Grafana. Grafana is a popular, highly customizable,
and open source. It has a wide community and is regularly updated 10. Another
framework considered, which is also mentioned in Chapter 2 as being used by other
pipelines, is Kibana. However, Kibana only works with Elasticsearch and, as men-
tioned in Section 2.3, Elasticsearch is not necessary if your data format is JSON, which
is the case in this project. Akka was also mentioned in Chapter 2, however, Akka is not
as lightweight and straightforward to use as Grafana. Therefore Grafana seems to ﬁt
the best into the pipeline.
For Grafana to automatically set up with the data produced by an uploaded script,
we need a Representational state transfer (REST) API service that can set up a data
sink to the database for each script, and then send a request to Grafana to set up a
connection to that data sink. Data sink is deﬁned as a class or function which job is to
move data from one place to another, and in our case, it is to move data to a database
The visualization framework can easily be decoupled from the other parts, and
replaced with another framework that can read from the database system.
Distributed Database System
The result of the analysis must be stored for later use or simply to backup the result.
To do this we need a database that is extremely fast, scalable, and well suited for real-
time recording. We chose a NoSQL database because it has many advantages over
SQL to achieve these characteristics. It is not absolutely necessary to describe the
schema for inserting data into the database. Consequently, the data can be changed
if and when necessary. This can be useful if the format of the data we receive from the
portable devices changes.
Table 3.5 captures the critical aspects of the storage frameworks under considera-
tion. The favourite of these storage frameworks is InﬂuxDB. There are the following
reasons for this:
• Great availability: The wearable devices generate huge amounts of continuous
data and we need to make sure that this data is stored. Due to the InﬂuxDB
Relay, it has a high availability 11. With the relay, the data can be stored in RAM
when the Inﬂux server is down. This means that the database is fault-tolerant,
if it is set up correctly.
10https://grafana.com
11https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb-relay
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Analysis
31
• Great scalability: InﬂuxDB supports horizontal scaling. Horizontal scaling is
when you divide the load on the system over multiple servers and adding ad-
ditional servers to increase capacity as required. The scaling is made possible
with a cluster, which is a method for distributing data across multiple machines.
However, to utilize this it requires InﬂuxDB Enterprise 12
• Grafana support: It is very important that the researcher is able to visualize the
data on Grafana. Grafana has great support with InﬂuxDB
• Time series: InﬂuxDB is a time series database, meaning all data has a date and
time tied to each entry. When dealing with a real-time streaming pipeline, date
and time is in many cases relevant for each entry
In addition to the above points, we need a storage framework that we can write
to with Python, because we need to make a data sink from Kafka to the database.
InﬂuxDB fulﬁlls all the important points, and therefore this is our choice. For our use
case, the difference between InﬂuxDB and Prometheus is negligible, and we could
have chosen Prometheus, but since we have much more experience with InﬂuxDB, it
is our preferred choice.
Table 3.5: An overview of critical aspects of the storage frameworks
Cassandra
[20a]
MongoDB
[20o]
HBase
[20d]
InﬂuxDB
[20k]
Prometheus
[20q]
Data model
Column-
Family
Document
Column-
Family
Time
Series
Time
Series
SQL
NoSQL
NoSQL
NoSQL
NoSQL
NoSQL
Python support
Availability [Lou+15]
Great
Mediocre
Mediocre
Great
Great
Scalability [Lou+15]
Great
Mediocre
Great
Great
Great
Grafana support
×
×
×
Job Scheduling
Since time is a major factor in real-time data analysis, a way to schedule jobs is re-
quired. A job is deﬁned as the execution of a script that has been scheduled. In some
cases, scheduling jobs would be more than just a convenience, considering that you
might not be able to schedule jobs manually due to unavailability. A researcher may
need to analyse data at a certain time and for a certain period of time, so the real-time
aspect is different from simple data analysis.
12https://www.influxdata.com/blog/influxdb-clustering/
==PAGE:42==
32
3 System design
Some parameters that are considered when selecting a framework to schedule
jobs are considered below:
• Scheduling Capability
• Concurrent executions
• Scalability
• Automation
• Language support
• Docker support
• User Interface
When looking at these parameters, some things are important to note. Schedul-
ing Capability is ranked of highest importance considering that a researcher typically
would like to schedule jobs at a certain point in time for a speciﬁed period of time.
Furthermore, being able to concurrently execute custom scripts will also prove vital
when dealing with this sort of pipeline. Several researchers should be able to run
their scripts simultaneously without interfering with each other, which also means
that the demand for processing resources on the machine that is running the scripts
will increase. Therefore, scalability should also be considered. Finally, a few minor
parameters such as automation, language support, docker support, and the user in-
terface are included in the evaluation when choosing a framework.
In detail, Table 3.6 shows how the current state of each parameter compares to the
available frameworks. The frameworks selected for comparison are listed in the top
row for each column, while each parameter is listed as a row. The selected parameters
are based on reviews from several articles [Tre16; Xu18].
In Table 3.6, the framework’s purpose is selected as the most important parameter
to consider. When choosing the framework for the pipeline, general-purpose work-
ﬂow management is primarily what is needed for doing the tasks. In terms of func-
tionality, simple operations are required to run the custom Python scripts, Airﬂow
is capable of doing this, hence the good rating. This is where other frameworks like
Oozie and Conductor fail, as they are not designed for this purpose. Calendar plan-
ning is one of the most important factors in dealing with the real-time data pipeline,
only Pinball and Airﬂow supports this. Concurrency has a lot to do with scalability,
depending on how the environment is conﬁgured, all scheduling platforms seem to
provide concurrency and scalability. Multiple workﬂows are a necessity when dealing
with custom scripts, as several different scripts should be able to run simultaneously.
Finally, there are several parameters, including docker support, user interface, and
GitHub activity. These parameters do not describe the framework but are intended
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Analysis
33
to determine whether it is still in development. Here it is interesting to take a look at
Pinball, whose GitHub page [Pin] states that Pinball is no longer under development,
which is reﬂected in the number of commits. Also, Airﬂow has far more commits than
the rest of the discussed frameworks and provides continuous daily updates.
In Table 3.6 all positive results of the individual parameters are marked bold. Here
you can see that Airﬂow wins on many parameters, in general, it seems that Airﬂow
supports most features and is generally up to date.
Table 3.6: An overview of selected important parameters for scheduling
Luigi
[Spo]
Airﬂow
[Apaa]
Oozie
[Apac]
Pinball
[Pin]
Conductor
[Net]
Purpose
General
Purpose
Workﬂow
Manage-
ment
General
Purpose
Workﬂow
Manage-
ment
Hadoop
Job
Schedul-
ing
Open
sourced
workﬂow
manager
Microservice
Orchestra-
tion
Functionality
++
+++
++
+
+
Scheduling
+
++(+)
+
++
-
Concurrency
Workers
Workers
-
Workers
-
Multiple
work-
ﬂows
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
-
Scalability
Very good
Good
-
Very good
Very
good
Good
Very good
Written in
Python
Python
Java
Python
Java
Docker support
×
×
User Interface
++
+++
++
+
-
Monitoring
Good
Good
Good
Limited
Limited
GitHub activity
(updates)
3908
commits
(Weekly)
8943
commits
(Daily)
2355
com-
mits
(Monthly)
151 com-
mits
(Yearly)
2135
commit
(Weekly/-
Monthly)
Deployment
A very important feature of this solution is that it should be deployed very easily. The
idea is that every framework, its settings, and networking should be deployed by just
running one simple startup script. The alternative is that we provide an installation
manual for the different frameworks, which versions and their settings. One might
==PAGE:44==
34
3 System design
think that this is not an issue. What can be difﬁcult with installing, conﬁguring, and
booting frameworks? These are some problems with just providing an installation
manual for the pipeline:
1. There are a variety of frameworks, and it is time-consuming to go and visit the
different download sites for each machine you wish to deploy the pipeline
2. Many of the frameworks used are updated regularly, and going back to the web-
sites to update is wasted time
3. The frameworks need to have a network with each other. The network settings
will not change after the correct setup, but it is critical that they are 100% correct.
It’s easy to lose track of which frameworks rely on each other, and just a wrong
number in the port or IP address and that framework will not work.
4. For each framework, there are many settings that need to be conﬁgured, which
is not important to know for the actual deployment of the pipeline.
Docker is the solution to these problems. Docker is a tool that is designed to make it
easier to create, deploy, and run applications using so-called containers. Containers
allow developers to package their application and all the parts needed to run it, such
as libraries and dependencies and deploy them as one package. This concept of a con-
tainer assures the developer that the application will run on any other Linux machine,
regardless of the settings of a machine that is different from the one used for develop-
ment. Figure 3.4 shows the concept of containers. Containers are an abstraction at
the application layer, where many containers can run on the same machine but are
isolated processes in userspace.
The many frameworks presented in this section need to be interlinked. There are
many different ports and IP addresses that must be conﬁgured to communicate prop-
erly. Docker is extremely useful for this, as it provides a structured way to conﬁgure
the network, the versions of the frameworks, and the settings. This way, we can use
the frameworks with the conﬁgurations already deﬁned on a completely different ma-
chine without having to do anything other than installing Docker.
With Docker, we can supply a YAML13 ﬁle. YAML is a human-readable data seri-
alization standard, which is often used to write conﬁguration ﬁles. This ﬁle can de-
scribe which framework and what version it should install. Updating them is as easy
as changing a number. All of the networking between the frameworks are contained
in the YAML ﬁle and can be speciﬁed by us beforehand. In addition, all the respec-
tive frameworks conﬁguration ﬁles are contained in their stack folder. This facilitates
maintenance because it is easy to ﬁnd the conﬁguration ﬁles. There are a few draw-
backs, such as that it becomes more difﬁcult to debug an application because there
13https://yaml.org/
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Analysis
35
Figure 3.4: Containerized applications [20t]
is this extra level of abstraction that you have to go through before you get feedback.
The fact that containers use persistent data storage makes things a bit more compli-
cated. Now, when you reboot/restart, you have to conﬁgure exactly which ﬁles or
folders you want to have stored and which ones you don’t care about are overwritten.
For example, when we boot our storage frameworks, we want scripts that initialize
our database to overwrite any database initialization scripts that preceded them, and
at the same time, we don’t want to lose all the data in our database if we simply reboot.
So we have to juggle the question of when we want persistent storage and when we
don’t.
3.3.5
Additional options
This section will explore Option A, B, and C. Option A and B will show popular frame-
work stacks when building a pipeline, and Option C is a framework that can be added
to the stacks for improvements.
Option A is the SMACK stack (Spark, Mesos, Akka, Cassandra, Kafka), which could
serve as the basis for the project. If other frameworks are noticed as better options
for the stack, there should be the possibility of exchanging internal frameworks de-
pending on the requirements of the solution. By choosing this stack, which is consid-
ered a popular option for processing data streams, a wide variety of functions will be
available. Furthermore selecting this stack, also means that a stable stack is selected,
which will frequently be updated in the near future. In terms of scheduling, Airﬂow is
selected for this stack because it seems to serve the purpose very well from the review
in the 3.3.4 section and according to the recent articles [Cac20].
==PAGE:46==
36
3 System design
The second option is Option B. This is the KFC stack (Kafka, Flink, Cassandra)[Gee].
According to a journal from the US National Library of Medicine National Institutes
of Health [EB18], it is mentioned that a prototype of a healthcare solution was made,
which utilized Spark. Disadvantages have been identiﬁed in terms of large data min-
ing and large data analysis, if this is a matter of performance, then switching to Flink
might be a better idea. The scalability within Flink is said to be better than Spark
[Gar+17], which could prove better performance in general in the long run.
Finally, Option B is to include Apache Beam in the stack. The goal of Beam is to
create a uniﬁed model that combines the interfaces of the various frameworks asso-
ciated with the data processing engine into a single framework. This allows the use
of a wide range of frameworks, including the previously discussed Flink and Spark, as
well as Google Cloud Dataﬂow14 and Gearpump15, to perform the necessary opera-
tions called runners. By supporting these frameworks, this also means that Apache
Beam supports different types of processing, including batch and real-time stream
processing, depending on which framework is chosen to perform the operations. This
is achieved by using a dedicated abstraction layer that allows the code to work even
if the [Hes+19] execution engine is changed. Apache Beam could be an interesting
framework to use in this project, as it allows easy replacement of the stream process-
ing engine. This could prove useful when experimenting with different use cases.
3.3.6
Summary
This chapter discussed which frameworks are best suited for this type of project. Here,
both Spark and Flink should be able to meet the requirements well on paper as an an-
alytics engine, but with the preference of Spark as Flink is lacking on functionality
when using Python. The streaming engine seen in Option C in Section 3.3.5 was pre-
sented as a competitor to Spark and Flink, but the lack of community around this
engine as part of a stack makes it less likely to choose this option for this purpose.
When considering the options as stacks, SMACK is generally a preferred choice for
many data scientists. The stack itself is simply a loose chain of frameworks that work
well together [Hsu17] and are production-proven. Here, the KFC stack is losing some
points, since KFC is only a concept as an alternative to Spark as a processing engine,
but has yet proven to be an actual good stack.
Therefore, SMACK comes out as the better stack to use as a starting point, then
parts of the stack can be interchanged or removed in the event that they are not
needed for this purpose. Here, parts like InﬂuxDB for the database is considered to be
an option to go for instead of Cassandra. Also, it can be discussed whether Mesos actu-
ally ﬁts into the size of the solution, as its primary intention is for large scale clusters,
therefore Docker should be satisfactory. Finally, the scheduling framework should
14https://cloud.google.com/dataflow
15https://github.com/gearpump/gearpump
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Analysis
37
also be considered in the pipeline as part of the stack, which should work around
Spark.
To ensure that the stack is easily developed in a project, Git16 will be used as ver-
sion control. In addition, Jenkins17 is used to automate building, testing, and deploy-
ing as well as enabling continuous integration and continuous delivery.
The follow is an overview of the how the framework stack looks:
• Data Ingestion: Apache Kafka
• Stream Analytics/Processing Engine: Apache Spark
• Database System: InﬂuxDB
• Job Scheduling: Apache Airﬂow
• Deployment: Docker
• Version Control System: Git
• Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery: Jenkins
16https://docs.gitlab.com/
17https://www.jenkins.io/doc/
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER4
Implementation
By evaluating the frameworks, we learned about their strengths and weaknesses and
how they ﬁt together. This chapter presents a solution on how to implement a real-
time streaming pipeline with some interchangeable components within the stack to
meet the requirements.
4.1
System Design Overview
Various technologies and frameworks are used in the development of the application.
Therefore it can be confusing to get an understanding of the system as a whole. From
a more technical perspective, the developed solution is structured as shown in Figure
4.1.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Implementation
          Conﬂuent Kafka
              Data from 
              devices
                (PostgreSQL)
           Script Executor
         (Airﬂow)
Schemed Data
           DAG Generator
         (Flask)
           Upload Web App
            (Vue.js)
Transformed Data
Transformed Data
             Graphical 
              Presentation
            (Grafana)
Uses
Uses
Uses
Uses
Raw Data
Executes
Generates
Uses
Transfers
script_dag
script_conf
          Timeseries DB
          (InﬂuxDB)
Timeseries Data
           Grafana REST
           (Flask)
Setup Grafana
Create Inﬂux sink
Setup new datasource
Result
script_init
script
Figure 4.1: Solution system design
Here you can see that elements from the SMACK stack are used to create the foun-
dation of the streaming pipeline. Our proposed stack now contains Spark, Kafka,
and InﬂuxDB as an alternative to Cassandra to handle time-series data. In addition,
Docker is added to orchestrate each component in its respective container, and Air-
ﬂow is used to schedule various jobs.
In Figure 4.1 the data ﬂow in the system is shown as arrows. To get a quick overview
of this, the ﬁrst raw data from multiple devices is inserted into a PostgresDB, this data
is collected by Kafka which then sends the data through a broker on a speciﬁc topic
and since a source connector from Kafka is used, a schema is applied to the message.
From here, the data can be captured by Airﬂow when a job is running. The dotted line
around the DAG Generator, Script Executor, and the scripts represent that they run
on the same Docker container. To submit a job, a web application has been created
that takes care of sending HTTP requests to a Flask REST API to obtain information
as well as creating new jobs. When the Flask receives a HTTP request that includes
a custom script and conﬁguration ﬁle, it will generate two ﬁles that accompany the
script to set up the stream and retrieve data. When the data is ﬁnally transformed,
the data is published back to Kafka and inserted into an Inﬂux database. From there,
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Frameworks
41
Grafana can start visualizing the data based on the transformed data retrieved from
the Inﬂux database.
In Section 4.2, we will take a look at how each of the frameworks works in relation
to the solution and what effect they make.
4.2
Frameworks
In this thesis, frameworks and tools are used not only for the creation of the pipeline
but also for its easy deployment and maintenance. These tools come together and
form the actual product and its use. All frameworks have services that run in the back-
end, but some frameworks have a GUI that is accessible to the users of the pipeline.
Table 4.1 shows the frameworks that have a GUI, their port, and who is expected to use
them. There are many more services that run under each framework. For a complete
list of running services, see Section A.1 in the appendix.
Framework
Port
Description
Used by
Portainer
(Docker)
9000
A tool to easily
manage Docker containers
and get and overview of the state of frameworks
Administrator
Web Server Dashboard
80
A place for a researcher to
upload/delete scripts
Researcher
Conﬂuent Kafka
Control Center
9021
A platform to get
an overview of throughput
and installed connectors and more
Administrator
Airﬂow Web server
8080
A platform to manage
running scripts
Administrator
Grafana UI
3000
A platform to visualize
the result of scripts
Researcher
Table 4.1: Shows the frameworks with a GUI, their port and who will use it
During the visit to the framework’s sections, the respective containers in the docker-
compose ﬁle are discussed, their purpose is presented, and how they are used in the
solution. We will also take a look at the Dockerﬁle, if applicable, and see what effects
this Dockerﬁle has when booting a container.
4.2.1
Docker
A major part of the solution consists of Docker and how different containers are con-
ﬁgured. When dealing with Docker, two concepts are introduced and play a big role
when dealing with automation and orchestration of Docker containers, these include
Docker Compose[20p] and Dockerﬁle[20l].
Here, Docker-Compose ﬁles play the role of orchestrating multiple containers. In
this implementation, this is done in such a way that the containers are segmented
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Implementation
according to which part of the project they belong to, i.e. there are two containers.
One consists of the ingestion framework and the other of the analysis, storage, and
visualization frameworks.
Both parts of the solution also have a Dockerﬁle which purpose is to set up the
target environment. It is a set of commands that is executed once the container starts.
These commands are packaged into a Dockerﬁle that ﬁrst builds an image based on
these commands and ﬁnally executes them after the image has been built. If the func-
tionality within the ofﬁcial image that was used from Docker Hub[20n] is satisfactory,
then a Dockerﬁle should not be needed.
To get a better understanding of these concepts, Figure 4.2 is shown.
Figure 4.2: Docker-Compose and Dockerﬁle
In Figure 4.2, we can merely see that a Docker-Compose ﬁle can have some default
images that contain basic functionality for a container. If the functionality contained
within the image is not satisfactory, a Dockerﬁle is built in order to generate a custom
image. Upon doing this, it is although a requirement to inherit all the functionality
from a parent image, prior to executing the custom commands in the Dockerﬁle.
The two containers each have their own docker ﬁle to manage the containers, and
their dependencies are contained in the two folders shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The left most folder structure
datapipeline
airflow-spark-grafana
confluent-kafka
start.sh
stop.sh
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Frameworks
43
The entire pipeline is started by simply running the script start.sh. This script
starts the Docker containers with all the different settings and networks that make
them a data pipeline. The advantage of starting the pipeline by running just one script
is that it makes deployment much more convenient. If not, you would have to start
each service individually with its own command, which is often hard to remember.
Also, some of the frameworks need to be started in a certain order, and if they are not,
they will not work properly. The folder airflow-spark-grafana contains the nec-
essary frames for the dashboard and the parts of the pipeline that analyse, store, and
visualize the recorded data. The folder confluent-kafka then contains the neces-
sary frameworks for data input.
If you only want to start one of the two containers, you can also do this by navi-
gating to one of the folders and executing the appropriate startup script, as shown in
Figure 4.4. With this structure, one does not need to shut down the entire pipeline,
for example, if you only want to add changes to the ingestion framework. This has
proven to be very useful throughout development.
Figure 4.4: Folder structure
datapipeline
airflow-spark-grafana
[...]
start.sh
stop.sh
confluent-kafka
[...]
start.sh
stop.sh
start.sh
stop.sh
4.2.2
Apache Kafka
Kafka plays a crucial role in the pipeline, as Kafka is responsible for bringing data into
the pipeline. The solution uses Conﬂuent together with Kafka, and they have become
the industry standard for building real-time data pipelines that can transfer data be-
tween systems reliably and to scale. Conﬂuent is a provider of community compo-
nents for Kafka and makes it easy to download them. Kafka relies on several com-
ponents being installed and conﬁgured to work properly. Many components play an
important role in Conﬂuent Kafka, while others are "nice-to-have" components. The
following is an overview of these components. The element with a star is considered
a "nice-to-have" component:
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Implementation
• ZooKeeper: Conﬁgures and maintain topics, as well as provide fault tolerance
• Broker: Receives messages from producers for passing to a topic and allows
consumers to fetch said messages by topic
• Connect: Enables Kafka to connect to external systems such as databases
• Control Center*: Gives an overview of the number of topics, brokers, clusters,
source connectors, and throughput. If more than one broker is used, a license
for Enterprise version is needed
• Schema Registry*: Stores and retrieves schemas and allows for schema evolu-
tion
• KSQL*: SQL engine that provides an interface to do stream processing
These components were all downloaded from Conﬂuent’s Docker Hub proﬁle1,
and conﬁgured individually to network together in the docker-compose ﬁle. This ﬁle
can be seen in the appendix Section A.8.
There are two ways to record data from Kafka. Data can be published with a pro-
gram written in a language that has a Kafka client where they are published directly to
a speciﬁc Kafka topic, IP address, and port number. Data can also be published by in-
stalling a source connector in Kafka that communicates with a database so that new
and updated data on a particular Kafka topic is sent. Our solution uses the second
approach. In this approach, everything that is added or updated in a table is recorded
and streamed in real-time on speciﬁc topics, making the data easier to access and
very convenient, since the ﬁrst thing most systems do with new data is to store it in a
database. The type of source connector depends on which database you are using as
the source. We use PostgreSQL as a data source database, and to monitor changes in
this database we use Debezium Connector for PostgreSQL.
Conﬂuent has many components, but the most important ones for this project
were the Control Center, which makes Kafka easy to manage and monitor, and Con-
ﬂuent Hub, a command-line tool that makes it easy to install and update source con-
nectors. For example, if we wanted to install or update a Kafka source connector, we
could do it simply with the command:
1 confluent-hub install debezium/debezium-connector-postgresql:1.1.0
Because we can install a source connector with one command, we can install it as part
of the pipeline startup, which is very helpful when you are doing both development
1https://hub.docker.com/u/confluentinc/
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Frameworks
45
and simple maintenance on the pipeline. The Control Center helps the pipeline ad-
ministrator to get an overview of the number of topics, brokers, clusters, and source
connectors. Figure 4.5 shows the overview, where you can also get an overview of the
throughput rate, etc.
Figure 4.5: Conﬂuent Control Center overview of Kafka
From here, a potential administrator can compared to not using Conﬂuent, quickly
check if there is too much load on the broker, or if the source connectors are working
correctly.
A question that quickly arises is, how are the data types kept throughout the stream?
This is where a schema comes in. A schema deﬁnes the structure of the data format.
For example, a message that represents a step from a Movisens device might look like
this:
1 {
2 "id": "86785530-5970-11e9-f4f8-eddb3f2f8f68",
3 "timestamp": "2019-05-20T16:15:46.690424Z",
4 "step_count": 0,
5 "movisens_timestamp": "2019-05-20 16:13:44"
6 }
It has a schema like this:
1 "type": "record",
2 "doc":"This message records the step count",
3 "name": "step_count",
4 "fields": [
5
{
6
"name": "id",
7
"nullable": true,
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Implementation
8
"type": "string"
9
},
10
{
11
"name": "timestamp",
12
"nullable": true,
13
"type": "string"
14
},
15
{
16
"name": "step_count",
17
"nullable": true,
18
"type": "integer"
19
},
20
{
21
"name": "movisens_timestamp",
22
"nullable": true,
23
"type": "string"
24
}
25 ]
The schema is linked to every Kafka message. The schemas fulﬁll a number of impor-
tant functions:
• They ensure that any erroneous data consumers might receive is classiﬁed as
invalid data
• They let both the producer and consumers of the data know which ﬁelds are re-
quired and the type of each ﬁeld, which makes it easier to create an application
that uses the data streams.
• They provide a good documentation on how the event is used and what the
meaning is of the ﬁelds.
The more types of data on different topics ﬂow through, the more important schemas
become. Imagine if dozens of applications in a system depend on this data being
formatted in a certain way suddenly received something very different. It would make
them crash, or require a lot of error handling on the side of the consumer.
In our solution, the schema is automatically created by our data source connector.
This means that the data types that are deﬁned for the table in the relational database,
are used to create the schema for messages coming from changes to that table. This is
helpful since the schema automatically follows the data type changes of the database
table, and thus does not require additional conﬁguration.
4.2.3
Spark
Giving researchers the ability to transform data is a necessity when it comes to a real-
time pipeline - this is where Spark comes in. Spark is a fast and easy to use analysis
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Frameworks
47
engine [Spa] that allows multiple operations related to extracting, transforming, and
loading data. Considering that Spark is one of the tools for data analysis, it should
make it easier for a researcher to perform various data analysis operations.
To get an overview of the components of Spark, refer to Figure 4.6, as seen below:
Apache Spark Core
Spark SQL
Spark
Streaming
MLib
(Machine
Learning)
GraphX
(Graph 
Computation)
Tied to
Solution
Exposed to
Researcher
Figure 4.6: Spark components
From the illustration in Figure 4.6, it can be seen that Spark consists of 4 compo-
nents in addition to the Spark Core. These include Spark SQL, Spark Streaming, MLib,
and GraphX. In this implementation, Spark SQL and Spark Streaming are crucial for
building the real-time streaming pipeline. When building the solution, Spark SQL is
used to enable on-the-ﬂy queries during data streaming, while Spark Streaming en-
ables the actual streaming of data from a data source. In the ﬁgure, these are marked
by themselves, as this is something that should be done behind the scenes and would
not be visible to the researcher performing the data operations. The researcher may
choose to use components such as MLib and GraphX in addition to the core function-
ality of Spark.
In addition, the researcher is able to install custom packages outside the spark
ecosystem, depending on how the application is built. The way this is handled is to
provide the researcher with the Python Package Index (PyPi)[Fou], which ultimately
enables the installation and management of different packages for Python.
The installation of Spark works very neatly and will be discussed in Section 4.2.4.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Implementation
4.2.4
Airflow
One of the requirements that were discovered was the ability to schedule a task to run
at a speciﬁc time. Among the competitors, Airﬂow was chosen as the best choice for
scheduling tasks due to its functionality in terms of both scheduling and actual execu-
tion of Python scripts. Airﬂow works "out of the box" by using Docker and some con-
ﬁgurations. When Airﬂow is running, it uses the concept of directed acyclic graphs
(DAG) to perform the executions. This affects the pipeline in such a way that each
DAG is executed only once and there is no feedback from each node, since a DAG
consists of "Directed" and "Acyclic". When a DAG is detected by Airﬂow, it is auto-
matically loaded into the Airﬂow dashboard, and since the conﬁguration is allowed,
Airﬂow is conﬁgured to automatically execute scripts when detected.
Several arguments can be parsed into the DAG, which can have several factors for
how the DAG should be executed and at what time since Airﬂow supports scheduling.
To get a glimpse of how it works, the Airﬂow dashboard is shown below in Figure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: Airﬂow DAG Execution
Figure 4.7 illustrates how the execution of a DAG is carried out. A simple tree view
shows which nodes are contained in the DAG and which edges bind the nodes of the
DAG. In this given example, the DAG simply has two nodes, one that checks whether
data is passing through Kafka, and one node that executes the custom script provided
by a researcher. It also displays data for each execution and status for the execution.
If the execution is successful, it is displayed in dark green and if the execution is still
running, it is displayed in light green. In the example shown in the ﬁgure, the con-
nection test phase is successfully completed while it is still running during the actual
execution.
REST API
Airﬂow reads new and existing DAGs from a designated folder. As of the current ver-
sion of Airﬂow, it does not have other means of adding a DAG than by dropping into
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Frameworks
49
the designated DAG folder. The solution needs a way to add it from outside the server.
Therefore, a REST API was developed with the following endpoints:
Url
Method
Description
/script/
POST
Upload a script to the pipeline
/script/<script_name>/}
DELETE
Cleans up everything the above call creates
/script/
GET
Returns a list of the current DAGs
Table 4.2: Endpoints to upload, delete and get scripts
The /script/ POST call should include a form-data ﬁle which is the script that
the researcher wishes to upload. A researcher can choose to upload a conﬁguration
text ﬁle, that explains execution time, running time, etc., if they do not want to edit
the default conﬁguration that is running on the server. This API is only used by the
Dashboard, described in Section 4.2.5, to allow the researcher to add, remove, and see
DAGs. These endpoints are important from a user experience perspective because the
alternative is that the researcher has to use a FTP software to place their scripts into
the folder, which is more time consuming and requires knowledge of an FTP software
than simply uploading it to the Dashboard and pressing Submit.
The REST API is deployed directly together with the Airﬂow container, this we will
take a look at when visiting the Dockerﬁle in the following Deployment section.
Deployment
Setting up Airﬂow is done by using Docker. When using Airﬂow in Docker, docker-
compose is used to orchestrate the container for the Airﬂow web server. Taking a look
at the docker-compose ﬁle, we have the web server docker-compose as seen in the ap-
pendix Section A.7.1. Here, it is visible that the web server does not have an image but
rather builds an image using a Dockerﬁle based on the path given in the build prop-
erty. Furthermore, information about the database connection is provided through
the environment properties. It should also be noticed from the snippet, that a vol-
ume is created that goes by the name dags. This is the directory that Airﬂow will read
DAGs from when it has to scan for DAGs to execute.
When getting Spark to work with Airﬂow, it is necessary to extend the image with
a Dockerﬁle, hence building a new image. When looking into the Dockerﬁle, seen in
Section A.7.2 in the appendix, an image is pulled from the Docker Hub, this image is
the actual Airﬂow image. From here, some environment properties are set and Java is
installed since Java is a prerequisite for getting Spark to work. Since the REST API for
executing new scripts are deployed on the same container as Airﬂow, some conﬁgu-
ration for this is needed as well. Here, PyPi packages are installed to primarily get the
REST API running on Flask. When the dependencies are installed, the actual Python
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Implementation
script that boots up the REST interface is added to the container. Collectively these
things make up the Airﬂow container as it is now.
4.2.5
Dashboard
A requirement that was later found during implementation was the Dashboard. Load-
ing in custom scripts for execution can be done in several ways. For this part of the
solution, a simple REST API was considered, which allows a simple ﬁle upload with
e.g. form data via Postman. This type of the solution required third-party tools so
that a researcher could submit his or her scripts to the pipeline, which would be a
nuisance in the long run. It was therefore decided to create a web application, and
since the REST API was already available, a web application could simply be attached
to the solution and connected to the existing endpoints.
A number of front-end frameworks were reviewed to determine which was the ap-
propriate choice for this type of solution. This choice was based primarily on the fact
that the solution should communicate with a REST API. The options include Angular,
AJAX, PHP, and Vue.js as candidates, of which Vue.js[20s] was selected as a suitable
candidate for building the web application. Vue.js enables the creation of reactive
websites and uses components to create such websites.
The development of a suitable site layout can prove difﬁcult when dealing with
websites. Therefore, a Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) framework was chosen for the web
application to facilitate the layout battles that can occur when elements are ﬁtted into
the website. Buefy[20i] was chosen for this solution for several reasons. First of all, it
eases the difﬁculties that can arise when creating a web application, since it takes care
of the layout structure and considerations. Second, Buefy works as a wrapper around
Bulma, allowing the use of full Bulma functionality, making it easy to implement in
Vue.js.
Finally, npm packages were used to create sections of code. An npm package
is needed to allow writing and highlighting Python code and the conﬁguration ﬁle.
Codemirror[20j] served this purpose very well, this package provides things like code
editing, syntax highlighting, code editor styling, and various events. Additionally, an
npm package, axios, was used to handle API calls. This package works simply by al-
lowing HTTP calls to a URL, which in this case is translated to the URL of the rest of
the API listed in Section 4.2.4.
4.2.6
Grafana and InfluxDB
The last framework in the pipeline is the visualization framework. We use Grafana so
that researchers can see the result of their scripts in a graph. Grafana works with both
relational databases and time-series databases. To give Grafana access to all data gen-
erated by the script, a data sink was developed to allow data transfer from Kafka to
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Frameworks
51
an Inﬂux database. This means that each uploaded script that produces part of the
data stream gets its own measurement in the Inﬂux database to which it is forwarded.
Furthermore, the data source that connects Grafana and the Inﬂux database is auto-
matically created when a script is successfully uploaded. And of course, if a script is
deleted, the data sink stops, and the Grafana Inﬂux data source is deleted. The data
sink is controlled with a REST API service which has the endpoints shown on Table
4.3
Url
Method
Description
/inﬂux-sink-create/
POST
Creates a data sink for an Inﬂux database
from data ﬂowing in a Kafka topic.
/inﬂux-sink-delete/<string:name>/
POST
Cleans up everything
the create endpoint made.
Table 4.3: The endpoints for creating and deleting a data sink
Calling the /influx-sink-create/ endpoint requires a body specifying the Kafka
broker, Kafka topic, and the desired table name. In addition to this, it also sets up a
data source connection from Grafana to that table.
This REST API is only used by the REST API described in Section 4.2.4. It allows the
creation and deletion of data sinks on the ﬂy - while a researcher uploads and deletes
scripts. The result, for example of aggregation, can then be displayed together with
a time parameter. This allows easy interpretation and can provide valuable insights
into the data.
When setting up the data source and visualization with Grafana, the researcher
ﬁrst uploads his or her script and then visits the Grafana hosting server. For example,
Figure 4.8 shows the sum of steps for each minute in real-time. For a real use case, 1
minute is probably not interesting enough, but the researcher can decide for themself
which time frame is appropriate.
Figure 4.8: Result of a script that sum step counts every 1 minute
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Implementation
4.3
Product
As part of the thesis and to investigate what these frameworks are capable of, a solu-
tion was created. The solution is based on the options discussed in Section 3 and the
frameworks selected in Section 4.2. Throughout the Section 4.3, each part of the so-
lution is examined to gain insight into how the solution works and how the different
frameworks work together. Looking at the pipeline as a whole, the structure follows
the Figure 3.2, as mentioned in Section 3.3
4.3.1
Product Layout
Initially, the data ﬂows into the pipeline via Kafka when accessing the solution. These
events contain data from one of the sensory devices that follow a scheme. When the
events reach the pipeline, the event can now be analysed. To accommodate this, a
web application, as mentioned in Section 4.2.5, has been implemented so that re-
searchers can load in their own scripts. To get an impression of this, Figure 4.9 shows
the web application.
Figure 4.9: Loading in a script using the webapp
When viewing the site, a researcher has the choice of either uploading the script
or simply writing the script in the two code areas for the custom script and the con-
ﬁguration ﬁle respectively. In case a researcher decides to upload a script that was
written elsewhere, e.g. by using an IDE of their own choice, the researcher is offered
two upload buttons that allow script and conﬁguration upload.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Product
53
Figure 4.10: Selecting upload script
As they press either, they are presented with an upload window, as shown in Fig-
ure A.2 in the appendix, which allows ﬁle selection. For the pipeline to work properly,
a conﬁguration ﬁle must be provided for execution with the custom Python script.
When the site is loaded, a default conﬁguration ﬁle is loaded ﬁrst. This ﬁle is re-
quested by the Flask REST API, which means that the initially loaded conﬁguration
ﬁle is updated according to the Flask REST API. So the researcher always gets the latest
version of a default conﬁguration ﬁle. Just like the script, uploading a conﬁguration
ﬁle is also possible. The conﬁguration ﬁle is used to explain details about the script
that is currently running, it contains custom parameters, among others:
1. function_name: Which function from the delivered script should be executed?
2. running_time: How long should the script be to be executed?
3. in/out broker and topic: Kafka settings for ingoing and outgoing data, to
and from the pipeline.
Different Airﬂow speciﬁc settings called default_args[Apab] can be added to
the conﬁg scripts, in order to control different scheduling mechanics. Some impor-
tant parameters of default_args include:
1. start_date: Execution date, when should the script be executed?
2. email: Email to send to for when a DAG run is completed.
3. retries: How many times should the DAG retry if error occurs?
Exposure of these settings gives the researcher more freedom, as he or she can ad-
just many parameters that are taken into account when Airﬂow executes the script. If
a researcher chooses to use third-party packages that are not already pre-installed on
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Implementation
the server, he or she can do so. The web application supports PyPi package manage-
ment from within the web application. This is done by selecting the import packages
button as shown in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Selecting Import Packages
After selection, a new view appears, as seen in Figure A.3, which contains an input
ﬁeld where the researcher can enter a package, and a list of existing packages. When
a package is entered and installed in the web application, the backend that runs the
custom Python scripts installs the package so that the script has all the necessary re-
sources before running. When packages are no longer needed, the Researcher may
rightfully delete the package again.
Finally, when a script is submitted, a dialog appears informing the researcher of
the details of his or her script. This is done primarily by telling the researcher the
assigned Job ID, as seen in Figure A.4. After submission, DAG appears in the list of
DAGs. In this case, the DAG has been assigned to the ID:
• dee22cc4-aa2f-11ea-b761-0242c0a87004_script_step_count
Once the script is submitted, the web application sends an HTTP call to the Flask
REST API in the backend, with a payload containing the custom script or conﬁgu-
ration ﬁle. The Flask backend accepts the ﬁles and generates two ﬁles that accom-
pany the custom script. In particular, the two ﬁles serve different purposes. One
ﬁle is the DAG python script, which is automatically detected by Airﬂow in a given
folder named Dags. This ﬁle describes what should be executed and then executes
the Python scripts in the correct order. A simple case of this can be seen in Figure A.6,
here a task test-connection checks if the Kafka broker exists and makes sure that
the broker actually receives data. Next, there is a task that takes care of the actual ex-
ecution of an initialization script. The initialization script, which is also generated by
Flask, initializes the pipeline and starts streaming data from Kafka with Spark. Basi-
cally, all the preparation work that is required for data to be sent to the custom script,
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Product
55
provided by the Researcher. After streaming the data, the initialization script then
sends all data to the custom Python script submitted by the researcher, who then re-
turns data when it is successfully transformed.
Administrators of the system can track the progress of already running scripts.
The Airﬂow dashboard can be used for this purpose. The dashboard contains all in-
formation about currently running DAGs, and the administrator can then intervene
in the these running DAGs. The Airﬂow dashboard is shown in Figure 4.12:
Figure 4.12: Airﬂow dashboard
In the dashboard it is possible to perform several operations, e.g. reschedule al-
ready existing DAGs, cancel executions, trigger executions and switch off a DAG so
that it can no longer be used. All scheduling mechanisms are part of the planning
platform and included in Airﬂow.
The Airﬂow dashboard can be accessed by all kinds of users, but it is intended
for an administrative user. Researchers do not necessarily need to access the Airﬂow
dashboard to see the result of the execution, this is where Grafana comes in to play.
Grafana retrieves all messages from Airﬂow using Kafka and displays them in a
dashboard, depending on what is conﬁgured when the dashboard is set up in Grafana,
as shown in Figure 4.13.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Implementation
Figure 4.13: Grafana dashboard
Grafana is a platform that was introduced to allow the researcher to use the data
transformed during the execution of the script. Grafana also offers several options for
aggregating and selecting data so that the result of data coming from the pipeline can
be further processed.
4.3.2
Summary
This section gave a brief introduction to how the implementation works in practice.
We got to see how the system was designed from an implementation point of view,
how it was actually implemented and how the ﬁnal result looked like. In Chapter 5,
we will have a look at how the implementation supports some of the goals mentioned
in Chapter 1 and see if the solution supports all the necessary functionality.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER5
Evaluation
This section will be used to evaluate the pipeline and see whether the goals and re-
quirements of the thesis are met. To accomplish this we will go through the user sto-
ries, requirements, goals and test the pipeline on some real world data. In addition,
we will stress test the pipeline on a server in the cloud and recommend the system
speciﬁcations required to run the pipeline. At the end, we will compare the ﬁndings
with the platforms that were reviewed in the Related Work section.
5.1
User Story Demonstration
User stories were created from Section 3.1.3 to ensure the functionality goals for each
of the roles in the system. A walkthrough of these goals is displayed to indicate that
they have been met.
First, it would be interesting to take a look at the ﬁrst part of the user stories that
revolve around the web server. This is the site that appears when you enter the do-
main name and covers the user stories US1-US4. The image in the appendix Figure
A.7 shows each user story in relation to functionality within the web application.
US1.1: As a Researcher I want to write a script, without the use of an IDE.
For this part, it is interesting to take a look at the mechanics of how the editor of the
website works. Here a simple editor has been added to the web application, which
allows the researcher to write Python code freely. Furthermore, the editor supports
Python highlighting to guide the researcher in writing the script. This user story can
be seen in the appendix Figure A.8.
US1.2: As a Researcher I want to import my own script so that I can use an IDE
of my preference.
When it comes to importing a script, a button was created to do this. When the re-
searcher presses the Import Script button, a simple ﬁle dialog appears and allows
the researcher to select the script to upload. Here, the File Explorer ensures that the
ﬁle format is .py before the researcher can upload the script. This user story can be
viewed in appendix Figure A.9 and Figure A.10.
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Evaluation
US2.1: As a Researcher, I want to write a conﬁguration without the use of an IDE.
As with the script, writing the conﬁguration is also supported by an editor with syntax
highlighting of the initialization ﬁle format. This user story can be seen in appendix
Figure A.11.
U2.2: As a Researcher, I want to import my own conﬁguration in order for me to
use an editor of my preference.
After pressing the Import Configuration button, the user is presented with a ﬁle
explorer that allows uploading a conﬁguration ﬁle; here the ﬁle explorer ensures that
the ﬁle format is of type .ini. This is shown in appendix Figure A.12 and Figure A.13.
US3: As a Researcher I want to import new PyPi packages so that the server has
the correct packages when my script should run.
Next, there is importing the PyPi package, this is done by using the Import Packages
button. Here, the Researcher is presented with another view that displays the import
screen. When the Researcher enters a package to use, it is listed in the list of PyPi
packages for the environment. This can be seen in appendix Figure A.14.
US4: As a Researcher, I want to view existing job executions to ensure that the job
is executing and to see if a job is already submitted.
In this user story, a researcher wants to view the existing jobs that have been submit-
ted. By pressing the arrow to the right, a list will appear, displaying the existing jobs.
When the list is loaded, the researcher is presented with all existing jobs. This can be
seen in appendix Figure A.15.
US4.1: As a Researcher, I want to delete a job execution as the job is no longer
needed.
When a job needs to be deleted, the button with a trashcan logo can be used. When
pressing this, the job gets deleted and the list is refreshed. As seen in appendix Figure
A.16.
US5: As an Administrator, I want to monitor the environment in order to see what
jobs are running.
Here, an administrator would like to access Airﬂow in order to monitor the environ-
ment. It is visible from appendix Figure A.17 that two jobs are displayed. These jobs
share the same name as the Researcher can see when accessing the web app.
US6: As an Administrator, I want to stop a job from running in order to ensure good
server performance.
The administrator can stop a job by simply toggling the job as seen in appendix Figure
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Testing Data
59
A.18. This is simply a switch to stop a job from running.
US7: As an Administrator, I want to manually trigger a job, in the event that a Re-
searcher experiences issues with running their job.
In order to manually trigger a job, an Administrator has to access a running DAG. This
is done by pressing on the dag ID as seen in appendix Figure A.19 and manually press
the Trigger DAG button which is done in appendix Figure A.20.
US8: As an Administrator, I want to be able to see execution logs so that I can de-
bug job executions if a Researcher experiences issues upon running a job.
Viewing the logs can be a necessity if a Researcher experiences issues whilst running
a job. Here, an Administrator can access the job, select a running node as displayed
in appendix Figure A.21, which opens a window showing options for the speciﬁc DAG
execution in appendix Figure A.22. Finally, the Administrator can access the logs by
pressing the View Log button, and the log presents itself (appendix Figure A.23).
US9: As a Researcher, I want to visualize my data so that I can use it for future re-
search.
When a Researcher wants to see their results, such can be visualized using Grafana.
Here, the Researcher accesses the Grafana dashboard and creates a new dashboard ac-
cording to appendix Figure A.24. Then the Researcher can select parameters for their
dashboard (appendix Figure A.25), this includes selecting the correct data source that
corresponds to their Job ID and then selects the parameters they want to visualize
and they can optionally select if Grafana should aggregate any of the data.
5.2
Testing Data
There are two scenarios of how the data is inserted into a table in the database that we
have focused on. Figure 5.1 shows that the ﬁrst option is to insert the data from the
wearable device as a JSON payload into a table that appears as the column jsondata.
The other option, shown in Figure 5.2, is to extract the data within the JSON payload
and give it its column. This is the most convenient way for a pipeline because then
the data types are clearly deﬁned. To get to the types of the JSON payload in Figure
5.1, you would have to unpack the JSON object, and use a schema deﬁned either by
the user or by another source.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Evaluation
Figure 5.1: When wearable data is saved as a JSON payload
Figure 5.2: When payload is extracted and inserted with correct types
In the event that the data is inserted as in Figure 5.1, we have included several
common health data schemes that researchers can use when unpacking their payload
to process their data. This makes it easier for the researcher because they do not have
to deﬁne the payload scheme in each of their scripts. If the data is inserted as shown in
Figure 5.2, the researcher can start immediately because the schema is automatically
generated from the table deﬁnitions in the database. The schema is then appended
to each message sent when the data is inserted into the table. When a researcher then
creates a script that listens to the topic on which the data is published, the schema
for the data used by the script is determined based on the ﬁrst message published
on that topic. This way, the researcher doesn’t have to specify the data type and can
start analyzing the data stream immediately. However, the reason that the data is not
always inserted this way is because a software is required between the portable device,
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Testing Data
61
and the database that can correctly load the JSON and insert it into a table with the
correct types.
As mentioned above, to support the data structure coming from these devices,
we have created schemas for them and integrated them as part of the pipeline. This
allows the researcher to convert the JSON payload into a usable data frame with just
one line of code. For example, if a researcher receives calorie burned data from Open
mHealth, the data can be unpacked with
1 from_json("jsondata", schemas.openmhealth_kcal_burned)
The beneﬁts with this approach is that up to the point of the data analytics, the pipeline
is agnostic to the data types. When the researcher wishes to unpack the JSON payload,
they can easily use one of the already included schemas:
• openmhealth_kcal_burned
• openmhealth_body_weight
• openmhealth_body_mass_index
• openmhealth_body_fat_percentage
• openmhealth_respiratory_rate
• openmhealth_sleep_duration
• openmhealth_step_count
• openmhealth_heart_rate
• movisens_step_count
• movisens_battery_level
• movisens_met
• movisens_movement_acceleration
• movisens_exercise_data
In addition, if the researcher’s data is different from those, they can always specify
their own schema in their actual script with the pyspark.sql.functions module.
An example on how the calories burned schema is made, can be seen in appendix
Section A.9.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Evaluation
5.2.1
Movisens
The pipeline was tested using data from a Movisens device. These are the types of
data we have:
• Step count
• Movement acceleration
• Metabolic equivalent of task (MET)
• MET Level
• Battery level
An example of these types can be found in the Appendix Section A.5. To simulate
inserting data in a data stream into the database, we wrote a data producer script that
reads from a ﬁle containing all test data and then inserts it into a database several
times per second.
Researchers can also choose to compare the results of their scripts by inserting
them into the same diagram. For example, as shown in Figure 5.3, you can track both
battery levels and step count in real-time.
Figure 5.3: Battery level and step count compared
Researchers can choose to perform a statistical analysis of these data. For exam-
ple, Figure 5.4 shows the step counts variance and the sample standard deviation.
As shown, the aggregations are compared along the common parameter time, which
may give the researcher insight into the data. The script that produced this output
can be seen in Section A.10 in the appendix. Figure 5.5 shows an example with the
motion acceleration data. Here, the researcher can observe what the minimum and
maximum values of the motion acceleration look like for the duration of the script
execution.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Testing Data
63
Figure 5.4: Step count aggregated by variance and step count
Figure 5.5: Maximum and minimum of movement acceleration
5.2.2
Fitbit and Garmin
Data from FitBit and Garmin devices were also used to test the pipeline. This data was
received from another Master’s thesis project who converted the raw data from FitBit
and Garmin to Open mHealth format. These are the types of data that we have:
• Calories burned
• Step count
• Heart rate (beats/min)
• Respiratory rate (breaths/min)
The pipeline was mostly evaluated using the calories burned data, since that was
the majority of the data. The data was inserted as shown in Figure 5.1 several times
per second with a data producer script. A sample of this data is shown in the appendix
Section A.6. Working with this data is more of a challenge because the categories that
support this data are not sent in real-time. Whenever a data item is sent, it includes a
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Evaluation
time frame that shows how long the data was recorded before it was sent. For exam-
ple, if beats/minutes data was sent, it would not be the beats/minutes of the carrier
at the moment, but the average beats/minutes over the time frame. This doesn’t tru-
ely follow the principle of real-time processing, because the data is not processed in
real-time when it comes to when the beats/minutes were recorded. One of the great-
est values is that it creates the ability to respond to data immediately, which is not
possible with a large time frame.
To try to extract value from this data, we have created a data producer script that
inserts this type of data once per second. This corresponds to setting the time frame
to one second. We created a script whose goal was to calculate the average calorie
burned for one day. The result of such a script is shown in ﬁgure 5.6. This script
allows the researcher to track the average calorie burned in real-time. This can be
combined with the alarm functionality in Grafana, for example, to be noticed when
the calories burned are below or above a certain threshold.
Figure 5.6: The average calories burned a day
5.3
Validation
This section aims at walking through the requirements described in Section a second
time, but this time explaining how they were satisﬁed. We will ﬁrst go through the
Functional requirements shown in Section 3.1.2.
• FR1: Spark was integrated into the pipeline and together with Airﬂow, which
schedules the execution of the scripts, they are able to allow scripts to be exe-
cuted on the stream. A REST API and web application was also implemented as
an access point to the server for the researcher
• FR2: To satisfy this requirement Grafana was implemented into the pipeline.
To make the data accessible for Grafana an Inﬂux database had to be imple-
mented. The connection between the database and Grafana is automatically
created/deleted by the backend so that all the researcher has to do is pick what
from their script they are interested in plotting in Grafana
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Validation
65
• FR3: This was satisﬁed by allowing the researcher to include a conﬁguration
ﬁle with each upload. This conﬁguration ﬁle can describe what topic the script
should do analytics on with the in_topic variable, and choose a destination
with the variable out_topic
• FR4: The whole pipeline is built exclusively with Docker images that are con-
ﬁgured and structured with a docker-compose YAML ﬁle where ultimately the
whole pipeline can be installed and booted by running a start.sh script
• FR5: The administrator is able to cancel running DAGs from the Airﬂow dash-
board as described in Section 4.2.4
• FR6: The administrator is able to get an overview of the running DAGs and their
status, as described in Section 4.2.4
• FR7: The researcher can specify, as a part of the conﬁguration ﬁle, at what spe-
ciﬁc date the script should start running
• FR8: The researcher can specify, as a part of the conﬁguration ﬁle, how many
seconds the script should be running
• FR9: The researcher can see a log of their running scripts from the Airﬂow dash-
board, as described in User Story 8 in Section 5.1
• FR10: The web application, described in Section 4.2.5, enables the researcher
to delete a script which results in its termination
For the Non-functional requirements in Section 3.2:
• NFR1: Apache Spark is a powerful analytics engine. Section 5.4 shows that with
the server speciﬁcations we are able to run 6 scripts simultaneously where all
of them are processing 100 messages a second. 100 messages are well above
the rate of what the researcher is actually receiving data. Usually it will be a few
messages a second. These results are promising even though our server has
fewer RAM, smaller hard drive, and weaker CPU than recommended system
speciﬁcations for production use.
• NFR2: The pipeline scales effectively because it doesn’t need to be redesigned if
the workload increases. If workload increases dramatically the frameworks can
easily be decoupled from each other because they all act as microservices that
communicate with each other through REST APIs. This means that Conﬂuent
Kafka can have its own server and so can Grafana. The only two frameworks
that has to be on the same server are Airﬂow and Spark. This is because Air-
ﬂow is used to schedule and run the Spark scripts, and for Airﬂow to run Spark
scripts it has to be installed on the same server. Furthermore, when reviewing
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Evaluation
the technology stack, scalability was a high priority as described in Section 3,
and as a result frameworks with the best scalability have been selected.
• NFR3: The pipeline uses Apache Kafka which is considered fault tolerant be-
cause of its partitioned log as described in Section 3.3.4. Furthermore, when a
script crashes it doesn’t interfere with the other scripts or frameworks.
• NFR4: The pipeline implements Apache Kafka which guarantee at-least-once
processing.
• NFR5: The pipeline is built with Docker with a Docker Compose which makes
it easy to extend with more frameworks. Furthermore, the frameworks are im-
plemented as microservices that communicate with each other via REST APIs,
and so they can easily be decoupled.
In addition, the pipeline is designed to be essentially agnostic to the form and
type of recorded data. Instead, when researchers upload their script and conﬁg-
uration ﬁle, they specify from which area the data originates and how this data
should be unpacked. Besides, the types from the database table, from which the
data originates, follow the data up to the analysis frame. This ﬂexibility means
that support for new data sources can be easily introduced without having to
change the underlying pipeline architecture.
• NFR6: The pipeline has been tested and successfully deployed on a server run-
ning in the cloud as described in Section 5.4.
• NFR7: As shown in Section 4.3, the pipeline accepts Python scripts to do analyt-
ics on the stream.
In Section 1.4 it was explained that the project is expected to be completed when cer-
tain objectives, related to the research question, have been achieved. The following is
a walkthrough of those objectives, and how they were achieved.
• An analysis was carried out to ﬁnd out which conditions are efﬁcient and corre-
spond to the application/use case
Section 3.3 shows a thorough analysis of several frameworks based on the most
popular frameworks in their respective ﬁelds. Conclusions that ﬁt the goals of
the project were based on several reviews from research papers and informa-
tion on the framework’s documentation page.
• A real-time data processing pipeline has been built
As shown in the Implementation section and demonstrated in Section 4.3, a
real-time data processing pipeline has been successfully built.
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Technical Requirements and Stress Testing
67
• The data pipeline utilizes a processing engine that allows data statistical opera-
tions on data
As demonstrated in Section 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 data is successfully transformed us-
ing statistical operations to show e.g. standard deviation and variance. This is
possible using Spark as the processing engine.
• The data pipeline allows the execution of custom scripts that analyse the data
stream
As shown in Section 4.3, the researcher is able to upload scripts together with a
conﬁguration ﬁle that speciﬁes what data stream the script should do analytics
on.
• The data pipeline allows scheduling of the custom scripts
To satisfy this goal, Airﬂow was integrated into the pipeline. This allows scripts
to be executed at a speciﬁc time and duration.
• The data pipeline should be easily deployable by using a single start script
To satisfy this goal, the whole pipeline was built using Docker with Docker-
compose and Dockerﬁles that ultimately allow the pipeline to be deployed by
running a single script.
• The pipeline’s use case is not bound by one type of data
This goal was achieved by being agnostic to the type of data that ﬂows into the
pipeline, and when the researcher wants to do statistical analysis they can eas-
ily unpack the data with a schema either deﬁned by themselves in their script,
or by using the ones integrated by us, as shown in Section 5.2.
5.4
Technical Requirements and Stress Testing
Testing of the resource consumption of the pipeline was conducted on a server hosted
by DigitalOcean1 with the following speciﬁcations:
• Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6140 Hexa-Core CPU @ 2.30GHz, 2294 MHz
• 16 GB DIM RAM
1https://www.digitalocean.com/
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Evaluation
• 160 GB SSD
• 1 Gbps download and 0.2 Gbps upload
• Ubuntu 18.04.4 LTS
To see how well the pipeline scales, it is important to see how it behaves under
heavy load. The server was tested by determining how many scripts are capable of
executing and analyzing data in real-time before the server’s CPU and memory usage
reaches a level where the server becomes very slow. The data producer was booted
to generate 100 messages of test data per second. 6 scripts that are executed using
regular aggregation functions, i.e. scripts that are likely to be used by researchers have
been uploaded to the server. The result shows that the solution is stable on the server
where 6 scripts are running, all of which process about 100 messages per second, and
Kafka produces about 0.33 megabytes per second. This can be considered a fairly high
throughput. The resource usage on the server is shown in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: The resource consumption running the whole pipeline and 6 scripts pro-
cessing 100 messages a second
The lines 1-6 represent each CPU core and its current load. The line Mem shows
how much memory is being used from the available 15.7 GiB. As we can see, each
core of the CPU is running over 95% of its capacity, and there are 2.6 GiB of RAM
left. Adding a 7th script results in a visible slowdown of the graphical interfaces on
the server. This shows that adding more CPU power would bring more beneﬁts than
adding more RAM. In a production environment, it would be very helpful to have two
servers, because it is not necessary for the ingestion framework to run alongside the
analysis and visualization framework, so moving this part of the pipeline to another
server can give the analysis framework more room. Figure 5.8 compares resource
consumption with the running and non-running ingestion framework. As we can see,
we get about 10% more CPU power when the ingestion framework is not running on
the server.
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Technical Requirements and Stress Testing
69
(a) Idle state (no scripts running)
(b) Without Conﬂuent Kafka running
Figure 5.8: Comparison of resource consumption
Now that we have seen how the server runs when processing many scripts. Let’s
look at how it behaves when it takes in a lot of data. The data entry part of the pipeline
has been stress tested by creating 1000 tables in a database with a source connector
installed so that a topic is automatically created for each table. As shown in Figure
5.9a, there are 1052 topics in total and a production of 5.5 megabytes per second, and
the PostgreSQL dashboard shown in Figure 5.9b shows that about 800-1000 transac-
tions are committed per second. This can be considered a fairly high load, as it would
require many users to produce that much data. Figure 5.10 shows that the CPU load is
about 60-70%, which can be considered safe. In addition, the latency was also within
a safe range of 10-20 ms.
(a) Overview of Kafka
(b) Amount of transactions per second in Post-
greSQL
Figure 5.9: (a) Conﬂuent Control Center overview, (b) PostgreSQL dashboard
Figure 5.10: The resource consumption with 1000 topics with a production of 5.5
megabytes/second
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Evaluation
According to the documentation for Conﬂuent Kafka, the framework requires 8
GB of RAM to run. However, if you use Conﬂuent Kafka in production, it is recom-
mended that your server has 64 GB RAM, 24 CPU cores, 500 GB SSD, and 1 Gbps
network 2. Note that this applies only to Conﬂuent Kafka. Spark, Airﬂow, and Grafana
must also run on our server. Spark recommends a minimum of 8 GB RAM, 75% of
which is allocated exclusively to Spark, and at least 8-16 cores CPU. Grafana is very
easy to use in terms of memory and CPU. The recommended minimum RAM is 255
MB and a 1-core CPU3. There are no ofﬁcial system requirements for Airﬂow, but it
does not impose a high computing load because it is a scheduler. Therefore, it does
not have a dramatic impact on server performance and runs without problems with
the server’s speciﬁcations.
It is safe to say that the server must be very powerful in order to work reliably in
production. Our server speciﬁcations are sufﬁcient to build the pipeline and test its
usability. However, if we were to put the pipeline into production, we would have to
give the Conﬂuent Kafka framework its server and upgrade it to the recommended
hardware described above. Since Grafana and Airﬂow is a lightweight, it should have
no problems running on the same server as Spark. However, according to system
requirements, this pipeline would need to be upgraded to a CPU with more cores.
Running 6 simulated scripts is good enough for testing and development purposes,
but from the above and the developers’ recommendations, we can safely conclude
that a production environment would require at least two servers. One with 64 GB
RAM, 24 CPU cores, 500 GB SSD, and 1 Gbit/s network speed for Conﬂuent Kafka and
another with at least 8 GB RAM, 8-16 CPU cores, 500 GB SSD and 1 Gbit/s network
speed for Spark, Airﬂow and Grafana.
5.5
Compared to Related Work
One of the limitations of the RADAR-base and InSTIL platforms, which this thesis
points out, is that they do not have an analysis engine. RADAR-base uses the client
library of Kafka Streams, which is very limited, and InSTIL does not use one. What
this thesis proposes as a solution to this limitation is a way to integrate Spark into the
pipeline.
Striim has more functionality regarding data analysis than RADAR-Base, however,
this is limited to Java. The majority of scientists prefer to program in Python, and
therefore the goal of the solution is to use Python with Spark as a language for data
analysis.
The solution followed the SMACK stack principle, in which a stack of frameworks
serves as a starting point and is then replaced by others when a more suitable one is
2https://docs.confluent.io/current/kafka/deployment.html
3https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/installation/requirements/
==PAGE:81==
5.5 Compared to Related Work
71
found. One thing this thesis has in common with many of the other pipelines in the
related work is the use of Kafka. Kafka seems to have a solid reputation when it comes
to data ingestion in pipelines.
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER6
Discussion
There have been many technical insights from the design and implementation pro-
cess which could be relevant to other developers involved in digital phenotyping.
Throughout this chapter, challenges, ideas, and limitations of the system will be dis-
cussed.
6.1
Challenges
6.1.1
Challenges with Docker
Docker is a very useful tool and in our opinion a necessity for building a distributable
software like this pipeline. But it does not come without its challenges. One of these
challenges is that some of the frameworks used are not fully mature enough to have a
Docker image that is up to date with the framework. For example, the docker image
used for Airﬂow comes from a third party vendor, as this image is widely used by the
community.
Another challenge that Docker raises is the fact that the efﬁcient implementation
of containers represents a big shift from traditional working methods. It forces prin-
ciples of DevOps into the project and the life cycle of the application. These are prin-
ciples like Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD). For example,
Jenkins was installed on the server to enable CD, and GitLab was set up to enable CI.
These principles are not negative for the software, quite the contrary. However, fol-
lowing these principles is time-consuming, as it often requires installing, conﬁguring,
and structuring the project accordingly - activities where it is not immediately clear
how it beneﬁts the solution to the research question. However, these are virtuous
software development practices that ensure high software quality in the long run.
6.1.2
Data variation
The testing could have beneﬁted from data from more devices and different measure-
ments. The measurements from Movisens did not change much from hour to hour,
and in many situations when data was inserted into the pipeline, we had to add a ran-
==PAGE:84==
74
6 Discussion
dom number to some measurements in order to see the value change. For example,
one of our Movisens data ﬁles has several hours where the step count is zero. The
movement acceleration data we had would also sometimes take several hours before
it changed value.
In regards to the Garmin and Fitbit data, we only had around 1000 records (100
a day), however, this was mostly due to the fact that it required that another parallel
Master’s Thesis project recorded and shared it, which for obvious reasons don’t have
time to record a lot of data. We would also have liked to see more data records a day,
since analyzing data in real-time is more interesting when you have a continuous ﬂow
of data every few seconds.
6.2
Future Ideas
Because real-time pipeline is still a rather new concept, many possibilities are possi-
ble for further development. In this section, we take a look at how the solution could
further evolve outside the scope of this thesis. Here, different future ideas are pre-
sented and in some cases present how they can be solved. Unlike Limitations, these
ideas are considered outside the scope of this thesis, but could be considered in the
process of doing further development to the solution.
6.2.1
Avro Serialization
Each Kafka message contains also the schema for that message. This can be avoided,
while still keeping the message structured with a schema. Thus, making the size of
each message smaller. This would require that the source connector is conﬁgured to
use Avro serialization, and would result in each message being encoded as an Avro
object. The Avro object contains the data and also a schema ID. The consumers then
deserialize the object and look up the schema ID in the Conﬂuent Schema Registry.
6.2.2
Machine Learning
One thing that would be interesting for further experimentation is to see how Spark’s
machine learning library can be used to process the data stream to predict a result.
For example, say you want to predict after 30 days whether a person is able to lose
10 kilos. The probability that the person would reach this goal would change every
day, depending on how a particular day went. If a person burned very few calories in
one day, the likelihood that he or she would reach this goal would decrease. To make
this prediction, one would ﬁrst need some historical data about how many calories
typically result in a weight loss of 10 kilos and how this activity is distributed over the
days of the month. Then you would use this historical data to train a classiﬁer, and
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Limitations
75
the classiﬁer can then be used to calculate the probability that a particular person will
lose 10 kilos, burning X calories in total on the remaining Y days. This probability can
then be used in combination with a threshold to alert a person that they are unlikely
to reach their weight loss goal if they do not change their behavior. The basic idea is to
inform the person that he or she is unlikely to reach the goal before he or she realises
it for himself or herself, and ﬁnally to allow the person to adjust his or her behaviour
in time.
6.2.3
Custom Schemas
A feature that could be useful, is to enable researchers to save their own schemas
for data on the server. As it is now, if the researchers’ data differs from the schemas
contained in the pipeline, they will have to create it themselves inside their script. A
feature that would allow the researcher to save schemas to the pipeline would make
the pipeline more extensible because it could easier adapt to new data.
6.2.4
Advanced Dashboard
The dashboard that is currently developed, supports basic tasks that work to feed data
into the pipeline and see what’s currently on the pipeline. One feature that could be
nice would be so that Researchers could see the result in the same dashboard as they
submit scripts through. Here, it could be nice if the Researcher could set up their
own visualization based on the data parameters that were chosen for the script and
to visualize the result coming from the script. Furthermore, it could be nice to simply
show the raw output of the pipeline as well, as it might not always be necessary to
visualize data. Basically allowing the researcher to access one page only when they
have to interact with the pipeline.
6.2.5
Real World Testing
Our testing has consisted of us simulating data being sent from a device. It would be
interesting if a test subject would wear a wearable device that could send data to a
server that stored it into a database that the pipeline is connected to. This would help
test the latency of the pipeline, and in general, could inspire new ideas for scripts to
do analytics.
6.3
Limitations
As development progresses, features are discovered which may not be within the time
frame foreseen for project development. This section describes features that could
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Discussion
have been implemented, but which appear at this stage to be limitations of the sys-
tem.
6.3.1
Security
Security is a big issue when it comes to a combination of web technologies, message
queues, and network communication in general. Throughout the development of the
solution, opportunities arose to add security to the various technologies. Additionally,
authentication is also considered a big issue when dealing with a large number of
technologies, as is the case in this solution. Some of the used technologies do not pro-
vide standard authentication, and some require extensive conﬁguration to work. The
web application that was developed as part of the ﬁnal solution does not currently
support authentication. Here, authentication could be added according to best prac-
tices for a Vue.js application [Thi18]. In addition, proper encryption could be added
to HTTP requests between the user and the server, this would also be a necessity when
adding authentication to the web application.
Security is also an important topic when dealing with personal information. Data
coming to and from Kafka is not encrypted, and data could potentially be eavesdropped
by a third party. Therefore, it is to say that the provided solution is not in a state that
is secure for handling personal information.
To aid in making the pipeline protect an individual’s privacy, one could learn from
the book Arbuckle and Emam [AE20] that explores how to establish and integrate se-
cure, repeatable anonymization processes into their pipeline in a sustainable man-
ner.
6.3.2
User structure
The solution could beneﬁt from a place where you can create a user. First of all,
it would ensure the consistency of the different logon credentials that the pipeline
would need in a production environment. You would also be able to structure the
uploaded scripts by the user.
Something that additionally could be nice would be to integrate Active Directory
(AD) with the different frameworks. This could allow Researchers to use their win-
dows login information to login to the different platforms on the same network in
business. This is supported in some of the frameworks.
6.3.3
Scheduler Worker Scalability
When jobs are executed within Airﬂow, a docker container Web server takes care of
numerous things. This container orchestrates both an Airﬂow web server that dis-
plays the visible dashboard, a scheduler that tells workers when to start executing a
==PAGE:87==
6.3 Limitations
77
job, and ﬁnally, the worker that takes care of the actual job execution. This option
was originally more scalable by dividing the web server into several containers, each
of which handles the dashboard, the scheduler, and several containers for the workers.
This worked as a scalable solution because it allowed adding and removing workers
by making simple changes in the Docker Composite ﬁle. Problems occurred when
PyPi package support was added to the pipeline.
Each container has its Python environment, so the installed PyPi packages were
not shared. When a Docker container needed to install a new package, a REST API
had to be provided on each of the worker containers, as well as on the scheduler and
dashboard containers. This is because the PyPi endpoint had to be deployed on each
of the containers to enable HTTP requests for package installations. The REST API
was deployed on each of the containers to test whether things worked, but it soon
became apparent that this was not a viable solution.
When using the REST API on each of the containers, performance problems and
unintended behavior occurred, so a single container solution was applied, simply
containing both web server, scheduler, and worker.
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER7
Conclusion
This thesis shows the design and implementation of a real-time data processing pipeline
that allows for interaction with the stream on the ﬂy in the form of Python scripts.
In order to ﬁnd out which is the most efﬁcient and effective design for the pipeline,
this project analysed an appropriate number of the most popular frameworks in their
respective ﬁelds. The conclusions from this analysis were based on a consensus of sev-
eral reviews and facts from the documentation page of the framework. The pipeline
was built using Apache Kafka as the ingestion system because of its large community,
scalability, and fault tolerance. Spark was chosen as the analytics engine because of its
Python compatibility, large community, and high throughput. InﬂuxDB as database
system because of its high availability, scalability, and Grafana support. Grafana as vi-
sualization system because of its high adaptability and the fact that it is open source
and has a broad community. Airﬂow as a scheduler for its Python support, scheduling
functionality, and scalability.
To enable the pipeline to accept custom scripts that process data "on the ﬂy", the
solution had to include three components: A dashboard, a scheduler, and the ana-
lytics engine Spark. The dashboard is a web user interface that serves as a pipeline
access point for researchers to upload Python scripts. The scheduler ensures that the
uploaded script has a connection to the stream it is trying to process and executes the
script at a speciﬁed time. An analytics engine has been installed and conﬁgured that
allows the researcher to use all the data analysis tools that are available to process the
stream.
To make the pipeline easily deployable, it was built with Docker infrastructure.
Each framework is downloaded and conﬁgured with Docker Compose and Docker-
ﬁles, which ultimately allows the entire pipeline to be booted by running a single
startup script. The pipeline has been designed so that the frameworks that do not
need to be installed on the same server are decoupled from each other in their con-
tainers. This makes the pipeline horizontally scalable. The pipeline was made exten-
sible by making it agnostic to the type of data and the source. Instead, customizability
for the researchers, in the form of a conﬁguration ﬁle, was introduced to give them the
ability to choose how data should be unpacked. Thus, making it easier for new data
types and sources to utilize the pipeline.
The pipeline was tested with data from three (sources) devices: Movisens, FitBit,
==PAGE:90==
80
7 Conclusion
and Garmin. Scripts were created that aggregate data in real-time and calculate, for
example, average calorie consumption or a total number of steps for a given period
of time. The scripts were scheduled to run at a speciﬁc time and for a speciﬁc period.
The results were then visualized in Grafana. This conclusively shows that data can be
ingested, processed, and visualized.
Stress tests show that the pipeline is stable and runs 6 scripts that process all 100
messages per second, and are, without problems, able to ingest data from more than
1000 topics which in total are producing 800-900 messages a second. However, run-
ning 6 scripts is not enough to scale to a research team, so for production use, two
servers are needed, and would need to be upgraded considerably. However, for devel-
oping and testing the server this thesis used was sufﬁcient.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[20a]
Apache Cassandra Documentation. http://cassandra.apache.org/
doc/latest/. [Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20b]
Apache FluentD Documentation. https://docs.fluentd.org/. [On-
line; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20c]
Apache Flume Documentation. https://flume.apache.org/documentation.
html. [Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20d]
Apache HBase Reference Guide. https://hbase.apache.org/book.
html. [Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20e]
Apache Kafka Documentation. https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/.
[Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20f]
Apache NiFi Documentation. https://nifi.apache.org/docs.html.
[Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20g]
Apache Pulsar Documentation. http://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/
standalone/. [Online; accessed 26-February-2020]. 2020.
[20h]
Apache RocketMQ Documentation. https://rocketmq.apache.org/.
[Online; accessed 26-February-2020]. 2020.
[20i]
Buefy. https://buefy.org/. [Online; accessed June-10-2020]. 2020.
[20j]
Codemirror. https : / / codemirror . net/. [Online; accessed June-10-
2020]. 2020.
[20k]
Couchbase Docs. https://docs.couchbase.com/home/index.html.
[Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20l]
Dockerﬁle reference. https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/
builder/. [Online; accessed 17-June-2020]. 2020.
[20m]
Examples. https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-
release-1.10/getting-started/examples/. [Online; accessed 24-
June-2020]. 2020.
[20n]
Explore - Docker Hub. https://hub.docker.com/search?q=&type=
image. [Online; accessed 18-June-2020]. 2020.
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[20o]
MongoDB Docs. https://docs.mongodb.com/. [Online; accessed 17-
February-2020]. 2020.
[20p]
Overview of Docker Compose. https://docs.docker.com/compose/.
[Online; accessed 17-June-2020]. 2020.
[20q]
Prometheus Documentation. https://prometheus.io/docs/. [Online;
accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20r]
RabbitMQ Documentation. https://www.rabbitmq.com/documentation.
html. [Online; accessed 17-February-2020]. 2020.
[20s]
The Progressive JavaScript Framework. https://vuejs.org. [Online;
accessed June-10-2020]. 2020.
[20t]
What is a Container? A standardized unit of software. https : / / www .
docker.com/resources/what-container. [Online; accessed 17-April-
2020]. 2020.
[AE20]
L. Arbuckle and K.E. Emam. Building an Anonymization Pipeline: Creat-
ing Safe Data. O’Reilly Media, Incorporated, 2020. ISBN: 9781492053439.
URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=jQRbzQEACAAJ.
[Apaa]
Apache. Apache Airﬂow. URL: https://airflow.apache.org.
[Apab]
Apache. Apache Airﬂow: Tutorial. URL: https://airflow.apache.org/
docs/stable/tutorial.html.
[Apac]
Apache. Apache Oozie. URL: https://oozie.apache.org/.
[Bar+19]
Scott Barnett et al. “A universal, scalable and governance-aware platform
for smartphone-based digital phenotyping for research and clinical appli-
cations (Preprint)”. In: Journal of Medical Internet Research 21 (September
2019). DOI: 10.2196/16399.
[Bar20]
Jakob E. Bardram. The CARP Mobile Sensing Framework – A Cross-platform,
Reactive, Programming Framework and Runtime Environment for Digital
Phenotyping. 2020. arXiv: 2006.11904 [cs.HC].
[BMH16]
Basma Boukenze, Hajar Mousannif, and Abdelkrim Haqiq. “Predictive An-
alytics in Healthcare System Using Data Mining Techniques”. In: volume 6.
April 2016, pages 01–09. DOI: 10.5121/csit.2016.60501.
[CAC]
CACHET. Copenhagen Center for Health Technology. URL: https://www.
cachet.dk/.
[Cac20]
Antonio Cachuan. “A gentle introduction to Data Workﬂows with Apache
Airﬂow and Apache Spark”. In: (2020).
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
83
[Chi+16]
S. Chintapalli et al. “Benchmarking Streaming Computation Engines: Storm,
Flink and Spark Streaming”. In: 2016 IEEE International Parallel and Dis-
tributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW). May 2016, pages 1789–
1792. DOI: 10.1109/IPDPSW.2016.138.
[Clo18]
Alibaba Cloud. Kafka vs. Apache RocketMQ - Multiple Topic Stress Test Re-
sults. https://medium.com/@Alibaba_Cloud/kafka-vs-rocketmq-
multiple-topic-stress-test-results-d27b8cbb360f. [Online; ac-
cessed 26-February-2020]. 2018.
[Dex]
Dexcom. Dexcom. URL: https://www.dexcom.com/.
[Dük+18]
Peter Düking et al. “Integrated Framework of Load Monitoring by a Com-
bination of Smartphone Applications, Wearables and Point-of-Care Test-
ing Provides Feedback that Allows Individual Responsive Adjustments to
Activities of Daily Living”. In: Sensors 18 (May 2018). DOI: 10.3390/s18051632.
[EB18]
Naoual El Aboudi and Laila Benhlima. “Big Data Management for Health-
care Systems: Architecture, Requirements, and Implementation”. In: Ad-
vances in bioinformatics 2018 (June 2018). PMC6032968[pmcid], pages 4059018–
4059018. ISSN: 1687-8027. DOI: 10.1155/2018/4059018. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30034468.
[ER16]
Raul Estrada and Isaac Ruiz. Big data SMACK – A Guide to Apache Spark,
Mesos, Akka, Cassandra, and Kafka. Berkeley, CA,; New York: Apress, 2016.
ISBN: 9781484221754 1484221753. URL: https://www.amazon.de/Big-
Data-SMACK-Apache-Cassandra/dp/1484221745.
[Eva]
Evariant. Batch vs. Stream Processing: Whats Best for Healthcare Big Data.
URL: https://www.evariant.com/blog/best- way- to- manage-
healthcare-big-data.
[Fou]
Python Software Foundation. The Python Package Index. URL: https://
pypi.org/.
[Gar+17]
Diego García-Gil et al. “A comparison on scalability for batch big data
processing on Apache Spark and Apache Flink”. In: Big Data Analytics 2.1
(March 2017), page 1. ISSN: 2058-6345. DOI: 10.1186/s41044-016-0020-
2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s41044-016-0020-2.
[Gee]
Bas Geerdink. FAST DATA WITH THE KFC STACK. URL: https://streaming-
analytics.github.io/Styx/presentations/oscon.html#/11.
[GL12]
John Gunn III and David Lester. “Using Google Searches on the Internet to
monitor suicidal behavior”. In: Journal of affective disorders 148 (Novem-
ber 2012). DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2012.11.004.
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[Hes+19]
G. Hesse et al. “Quantitative Impact Evaluation of an Abstraction Layer for
Data Stream Processing Systems”. In: 2019 IEEE 39th International Con-
ference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS). July 2019, pages 1381–
1392. DOI: 10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00138.
[HKB19]
M. Househ, A.W. Kushniruk, and E.M. Borycki. Big Data, Big Challenges: A
Healthcare Perspective: Background, Issues, Solutions and Research Direc-
tions. Lecture Notes in Bioengineering. Springer International Publishing,
2019. ISBN: 9783030061098. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=-HSKDwAAQBAJ.
[Hoo13]
W Hoover. “Transforming health care through big data”. In: Institute for
Health Technology Transformation (2013).
[Hsu17]
Edward Hsu. The SMACK Stack is the New LAMP Stack. https://d2iq.
com/blog/smack-stack-new-lamp-stack. 2017.
[Jai+15]
Sachin Jain et al. “The digital phenotype”. In: Nature biotechnology 33
(May 2015), pages 462–463. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3223.
[Kar+18]
Jeyhun Karimov et al. “Benchmarking Distributed Stream Processing En-
gines”. In: (February 2018).
[Lou+15]
João Lourenço et al. “Choosing the right NoSQL database for the job: a
quality attribute evaluation”. In: Journal of Big Data 2 (August 2015), page 18.
DOI: 10.1186/s40537-015-0025-0.
[MAA18]
M. M. Malik, S. Abdallah, and M. Ala’raj. “Data mining and predictive ana-
lytics applications for the delivery of healthcare services: a systematic lit-
erature review”. In: Annals of Operations Research 270.1 (November 2018),
pages 287–312. ISSN: 1572-9338. DOI: 10.1007/s10479-016-2393-z.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2393-z.
[Net]
Netﬂix. Conductor. URL: https://netflix.github.io/conductor/.
[NsT19]
Elham Nazari, Mohammad shahriari, and Hamed Tabesh. “BigData Anal-
ysis in Healthcare: Apache Hadoop, Apache spark and Apache Flink”. In:
(September 2019). DOI: 10.30699/fhi.v8i1.180.
[Pin]
Pintrest. Pinball. URL: https://github.com/pinterest/pinball.
[Pra18]
Chandan Prakash. “Spark Streaming vs Flink vs Storm vs Kafka Streams
vs Samza : Choose Your Stream Processing Framework”. In: (March 2018).
URL: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/spark- streaming- vs-
flink-storm-kafka-streams-samza-choose-prakash/.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[PZK19]
Alok Pareek, Bohan Zhang, and Bhushan Khaladkar. “A Demonstration
of Striim A Streaming Integration and Intelligence Platform”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 13th ACM International Conference on Distributed and Event-
Based Systems. DEBS 19. Darmstadt, Germany: Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, 2019, pages 236–239. ISBN: 9781450367943. DOI: 10.1145/
3328905.3332519. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3328905.3332519.
[Ran+18]
Yatharth Ranjan et al. “RADAR-base: An Open Source mHealth Platform
for Collecting, Monitoring and Analyzing data Using Sensors, Wearables,
and Mobile Devices”. In: (August 2018). DOI: 10.2196/preprints.11734.
[Ran19]
Et al. Rantz M J. “A New Paradigm of Technology-Enabled Vital Signs’ for
Early Detection of Health Change for Older Adults”. In: Househ, M. and
Kushniruk, A.W. and Borycki, E.M. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
Chapter 3.
[RR14]
Wullianallur Raghupathi and Viju Raghupathi. “Big data analytics in health-
care: promise and potential”. In: Health Information Science and Systems
2.1 (February 2014), page 3. ISSN: 2047-2501. DOI: 10.1186/2047-2501-
2-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/2047-2501-2-3.
[Saf+19]
Bahri Safa et al. “BIG DATA for Healthcare: A Survey”. In: IEEE Access 7
(January 2019), pages 7397–7408. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2889180.
[Sch]
Jörg Schad. Smack Stack and BeyondBuilding Fast Data Pipelines - Jorg
Schad. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P8ziya5v0us.
[SD20]
Apoorva Shastri and Mihir Deshpande. “A Review of Big Data and Its Ap-
plications in Healthcare and Public Sector”. In: Big Data Analytics in Health-
care. Edited by Anand J. Kulkarni et al. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2020, pages 55–66. ISBN: 978-3-030-31672-3. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-030-31672-3_4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
31672-3_4.
[Spa]
Apache Spark. Apache Spark. URL: https://spark.apache.org/docs/
latest/.
[Spo]
Spotify. Luigi. URL: https://luigi.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
index.html.
[SZT18]
Yassir Samadi, Mostapha Zbakh, and Claude Tadonki. “Performance com-
parison between Hadoop and Spark frameworks using HiBench bench-
marks”. In: Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 30.12
(2018). ISSN: 1532-0626. DOI: 10.1002/cpe.4367.
[Thi18]
Thibaud. Authentication best practices for Vue. https://blog.sqreen.
com/authentication-best-practices-vue/. 2018.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[Tre16]
Marton Trencseni. Luigi vs Airﬂow vs Pinball. http://bytepawn.com/
luigi-airflow-pinball.html. 2016.
[Xu18]
Shawn Xu. Workﬂow Processing Engine Overview 2018: Airﬂow vs Azka-
ban vs Conductor vs Oozie vs Amazon Step Functions. https://medium.
com/@xunnan.xu/workflow-processing-engine-overview-2018-
airflow-vs-azkaban-vs-conductor-vs-oozie-vs-amazon-step-
90affc54d53b. 2018.
==PAGE:97==
Acronyms
API Application Programming Interface. 7, 27, 30, 40, 48–51, 53, 54, 64, 65, 77
CRUD Create, read, update or delete. 17
DAG Directed Acyclic Graph. 40, 48, 49, 53–55, 59, 65
JSON JavaScript Object Notation. 10, 22, 30, 59–61
REST Representational state transfer. 30, 40, 48–51, 53, 54, 64, 65, 77
YAML YAML Ain’t Markup Language. 34, 65
==PAGE:98==
88
==PAGE:99==
Glossary
data sink A class or function which job is to move data from one place to another, i.e.
a database. 30, 31, 50, 51
framework An abstract concept of a platform where software can provide functional-
ity to build and/or deploy applications. vii, 3–5, 10–13, 15, 19, 20, 23–28, 30–32,
34, 36, 37, 39, 41–43, 45, 47, 49–52, 65, 66, 68, 70, 73, 76, 79
ingestion The process of importing data for immediate use or to store in a database
for later use. 4, 5, 10, 12, 13, 23, 26, 42, 43, 68, 71, 79
job The execution of a script that has been scheduled. 31–33, 37, 40, 54, 58, 59, 76, 77
microservice An architecture style where every application in a system is part of a
collection of loosely coupled services. 13, 65
source connector Ingests entire databases and streams table updates to Kafka topics.
40, 44–46, 69, 74
stack A set of software subsystems or components needed to create a complete plat-
form. vii, 10, 11, 34–37, 39, 40, 66, 70
throughput The amount of data or messages passing through the pipeline. 7, 10, 12,
13, 24, 27–29, 41, 44, 45, 68, 79
wearable device Electronic device worn close to, on or in the body that monitor,
transmit and/or analyse data, providing information concerning e.g. body sig-
nals such as vital signs, and/or ambient data [Dük+18]. 3, 7, 23, 30, 59, 75
==PAGE:100==
90
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIXA
Appendix
A.1
Complete list of running services
Name
Stack
Image
Published Ports
broker
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-server:5.4.1
9092:9092
connect
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentkafka_connect
8083:8083
control-center
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-enterprise-control-center:5.4.1
9021:9021
data_producer
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentkafka_data_producer
-
grafana
airﬂowsparkgrafana
grafana/grafana:latest
3000:3000
inﬂuxdb
airﬂowsparkgrafana
inﬂuxdb:latest
8086:8086
kafka_inﬂux_sink
airﬂowsparkgrafana
airﬂowsparkgrafana_kafka_inﬂux_sink
5001:5001
ksql-cli
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-ksql-cli:5.4.1
-
ksql-server
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-ksql-server:5.4.1
8088:8088
pgadmin
conﬂuentkafka
dpage/pgadmin4
5050:80
postgres_db
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentkafka_postgres
5432:5432
rest-proxy
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-kafka-rest:5.4.1
8082:8082
schema-registry
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-schema-registry:5.4.1
8081:8081
upload-app
airﬂowsparkgrafana
airﬂowsparkgrafana_upload-app
80:8080
webserver
airﬂowsparkgrafana
airﬂowsparkgrafana_webserver
8080:8080/5000:5000
portainer
pipeline
portainer/portainer
8000:8000/9000:9000
zookeeper
conﬂuentkafka
conﬂuentinc/cp-zookeeper:5.4.1
2181:2181/2888:2888/3888:3888
==PAGE:102==
92
A Appendix
A.2
Testing Flink
Figure A.1: Testing Flink - Git Repository
==PAGE:103==
A.3 Web application
93
A.3
Web application
Figure A.2: Uploading a custom script
Figure A.3: Importing new PyPi packages
==PAGE:104==
94
A Appendix
Figure A.4: Submitting a script
Figure A.5: List of existing scripts
==PAGE:105==
A.4 User Stories
95
Figure A.6: Status of a script being executed
A.4
User Stories
Figure A.7: User Story overview
==PAGE:106==
96
A Appendix
Figure A.8: User Story 1.1 - Editing Script
Figure A.9: User Story 1.2 - Importing script
Figure A.10: User Story 1.2 - Script imported
==PAGE:107==
A.4 User Stories
97
Figure A.11: User Story 2.1 - Editing conﬁguration
Figure A.12: User Story 2.2 - Importing conﬁguration
Figure A.13: User Story 2.2 - Script conﬁguration
==PAGE:108==
98
A Appendix
Figure A.14: User Story 3 - Importing PyPi package
==PAGE:109==
A.4 User Stories
99
Figure A.15: User Story 4 - Displaying all jobs
Figure A.16: User Story 4.1 - Deleting a job
Figure A.17: User Story 5 - Monitoring all jobs
Figure A.18: User Story 6 - Stop job
==PAGE:110==
100
A Appendix
Figure A.19: User Story 7 - Selecting a job
Figure A.20: User Story 7 - Triggering manual DAG run
Figure A.21: User Story 8 - Selecting a running node
==PAGE:111==
A.4 User Stories
101
Figure A.22: User Story 8 - Selecting view logs
Figure A.23: User Story 8 - Log view
==PAGE:112==
102
A Appendix
Figure A.24: User Story 9 - Creating a new Dashboard
Figure A.25: User Story 9 - Selecting parameters
A.5
Movisens test data
A.5.1
Battery level data sample
1 {
2
"id": 19145869,
3
"carp_header": "{\"user_id\": \"researcher@example.com\", \"end_time
\": 1558368947.372, \"study_id\": \"10\", \"start_time\":
==PAGE:113==
A.5 Movisens test data
103
1558368946.467089, \"trigger_id\": \"unknown\", \"data_format\":
{\"name\": \"movisens\", \"namepace\": \"carp\"}, \"upload_time
\": 1558368947.372, \"device_role_name\": \"unknown\"}",
4
"carp_body": "{\"id\": \"86564e40-5970-11e9-9d0e-bbf82d10e138\", \"
timestamp\": \"2019-05-20T16:15:46.467089Z\", \"battery_level\":
\"45.0\", \"movisens_timestamp\": \"2019-05-20 16:15:44\"}",
5
"storage_name": null,
6
"study_id": 10,
7
"created_by_user_id": 2,
8
"created_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:47.377000",
9
"updated_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:47.377000"
10 }
A.5.2
MET Level data sample
1 {
2
"id": 19145866,
3
"carp_header": "{\"user_id\": \"researcher@example.com\", \"end_time
\": 1558368946.678, \"study_id\": \"10\", \"start_time\":
1558368945.794659, \"trigger_id\": \"unknown\", \"data_format\":
{\"name\": \"movisens\", \"namepace\": \"carp\"}, \"upload_time
\": 1558368946.678, \"device_role_name\": \"unknown\"}",
4
"carp_body": "{\"id\": \"85ef9d30 -5970-11e9-f687-7bebb6607895\", \"
light\": \"0\", \"moderate\": \"0\", \"vigorous\": \"0\", \"
sedentary\": \"60\", \"timestamp\": \"2019-05-20T16:15:45.794659
Z\", \"movisens_timestamp\": \"2019-05-20 16:13:44\"}",
5
"storage_name": null,
6
"study_id": 10,
7
"created_by_user_id": 2,
8
"created_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:46.682000",
9
"updated_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:46.682000"
10 }
A.5.3
MET data sample
1 {
2
"id": 19145866,
3
"carp_header": "{\"user_id\": \"researcher@example.com\", \"end_time
\": 1558368946.678, \"study_id\": \"10\", \"start_time\":
1558368945.794659, \"trigger_id\": \"unknown\", \"data_format\":
{\"name\": \"movisens\", \"namepace\": \"carp\"}, \"upload_time
\": 1558368946.678, \"device_role_name\": \"unknown\"}",
==PAGE:114==
104
A Appendix
4
"carp_body": "{\"id\": \"85ef9d30 -5970-11e9-f687-7bebb6607895\", \"
light\": \"0\", \"moderate\": \"0\", \"vigorous\": \"0\", \"
sedentary\": \"60\", \"timestamp\": \"2019-05-20T16:15:45.794659
Z\", \"movisens_timestamp\": \"2019-05-20 16:13:44\"}",
5
"storage_name": null,
6
"study_id": 10,
7
"created_by_user_id": 2,
8
"created_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:46.682000",
9
"updated_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:46.682000"
10 }
A.5.4
Step count data sample
1 {
2
"id": 19145870,
3
"carp_header": "{\"user_id\": \"researcher@example.com\", \"end_time
\": 1558368947.576, \"study_id\": \"10\", \"start_time\":
1558368946.690424, \"trigger_id\": \"unknown\", \"data_format\":
{\"name\": \"movisens\", \"namepace\": \"carp\"}, \"upload_time
\": 1558368947.576, \"device_role_name\": \"unknown\"}",
4
"carp_body": "{\"id\": \"86785530-5970-11e9-f4f8-eddb3f2f8f68\", \"
timestamp\": \"2019-05-20T16:15:46.690424Z\", \"step_count\":
\"0\", \"movisens_timestamp\": \"2019-05-20 16:13:44\"}",
5
"storage_name": null,
6
"study_id": 10,
7
"created_by_user_id": 2,
8
"created_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:47.580000",
9
"updated_at": "2019-05-20 16:15:47.580000"
10 }
A.5.5
Step count data sample
1 {
2
"id": 19145876,
3
"carp_header": "{\"user_id\": \"researcher@example.com\", \"end_time
\": 1558368983.335, \"study_id\": \"10\", \"start_time\":
1558368982.468127, \"trigger_id\": \"unknown\", \"data_format\":
{\"name\": \"movisens\", \"namepace\": \"carp\"}, \"upload_time
\": 1558368983.335, \"device_role_name\": \"unknown\"}",
4
"carp_body": "{\"id\": \"9bcb7840 -5970-11e9-f98e -61514f476110\", \"
timestamp\": \"2019-05-20T16:16:22.468127Z\", \"
movisens_timestamp\": \"2019-05-20 16:14:44\", \"
movement_acceleration\": \"0.0078125\"}",
==PAGE:115==
A.6 Fitbit and Garmin test data
105
5
"storage_name": null,
6
"study_id": 10,
7
"created_by_user_id": 2,
8
"created_at": "2019-05-20 16:16:23.337000",
9
"updated_at": "2019-05-20 16:16:23.337000"
10 }
A.6
Fitbit and Garmin test data
A.6.1
Step count data sample
1 {
2
"distance": {
3
"unit": "m",
4
"value": 4580.03
5
},
6
"kcal_burned": {
7
"unit": "kcal",
8
"value": 160
9
},
10
"activity_name": "WALKING",
11
"effective_time_frame": {
12
"time_interval": {
13
"duration": {
14
"unit": "sec",
15
"value": 5100
16
},
17
"start_date_time": {
18
"hour": 12,
19
"nano": 0,
20
"year": 2020,
21
"month": "JUNE",
22
"minute": 51,
23
"offset": {
24
"id": "-05:00",
25
"rules": {
26
"fixedOffset": true,
27
"transitions": [],
28
"transitionRules": []
29
},
30
"totalSeconds": -18000
31
},
32
"second": 39,
33
"dayOfWeek": "THURSDAY",
34
"dayOfYear": 156,
35
"dayOfMonth": 4,
==PAGE:116==
106
A Appendix
36
"monthValue": 6
37
}
38
}
39
}
40 }
A.6.2
Calories burned data sample
1 {
2
"step_count": 64,
3
"effective_time_frame": {
4
"time_interval": {
5
"duration": {
6
"unit": "sec",
7
"value": 86400
8
},
9
"start_date_time": {
10
"hour": 22,
11
"nano": 0,
12
"year": 2020,
13
"month": "MAY",
14
"minute": 0,
15
"offset": {
16
"id": "+02:00",
17
"rules": {
18
"fixedOffset": true,
19
"transitions": [],
20
"transitionRules": []
21
},
22
"totalSeconds": 7200
23
},
24
"second": 0,
25
"dayOfWeek": "THURSDAY",
26
"dayOfYear": 149,
27
"dayOfMonth": 28,
28
"monthValue": 5
29
}
30
}
31
}
32 }
==PAGE:117==
A.7 Airflow-Spark Docker Compose File
107
A.7
Airflow-Spark Docker Compose File
A.7.1
Airflow Webserver
1 version: '3.3'
2 services:
3
webserver:
4
container_name: webserver
5
build: airflow/webserver
6
restart: always
7
environment:
8
- LOAD_EX=n
9
- EXECUTOR=Local
10
- POSTGRES_HOST=postgres_db
11
- POSTGRES_PORT=5432
12
- POSTGRES_USER=postgres
13
- POSTGRES_PASSWORD=confluent
14
- POSTGRES_DB=airflow
15
- C_FORCE_ROOT=true
16
#- REDIS_PASSWORD=redispass
17
volumes:
18
- ./dags:/usr/local/airflow/dags
19
- ./requirements.txt:/requirements.txt
20
- ./airflow/autogen:/usr/local/airflow/autogen
21
ports:
22
- "8080:8080"
23
- 5000:5000
24
command: webserver
25
healthcheck:
26
test: ["CMD-SHELL", "[ -f /usr/local/airflow/airflow-
webserver.pid ]"]
27
interval: 30s
28
timeout: 30s
29
retries: 3
30
networks:
31
- confluentkafka_shared -network
==PAGE:118==
108
A Appendix
A.7.2
Airflow Dockerfile
1 FROM puckel/docker-airflow:1.10.9
2
3 USER root
4
5 # Airflow
6 ARG AIRFLOW_VERSION=1.10.9
7 ARG AIRFLOW_USER_HOME=/usr/local/airflow
8 ARG AIRFLOW_DEPS=""
9 ARG PYTHON_DEPS=""
10 ENV AIRFLOW_HOME=${AIRFLOW_USER_HOME}
11
12 # install Java
13 RUN echo "deb http://security.debian.org/debian-security stretch/updates
main" >> /etc/apt/sources.list
14 RUN mkdir -p /usr/share/man/man1 && \
15
apt-get update -y && \
16
apt-get install -y openjdk-8-jdk
17
18 RUN apt-get install unzip -y && \
19
apt-get autoremove -y
20
21 WORKDIR ${AIRFLOW_USER_HOME}
22 RUN chown -R airflow: ${AIRFLOW_USER_HOME}
23
24 COPY config/airflow.cfg ${AIRFLOW_USER_HOME}/airflow.cfg
25
26 RUN pip install flask && pip install pytz && pip install Werkzeug && pip
install requests && pip install -U flask-cors && pip install
subprocess.run
27
28 # Put rest on worker to allow pip install
29 ADD app.py /
30 ADD main.py /
31 ADD script_config_minimal.ini /
32
33 EXPOSE 5000
==PAGE:119==
A.7 Airflow-Spark Docker Compose File
109
A.7.3
Upload Application
1 upload-app:
2
container_name: upload-app
3
#build: upload-app
4
build:
5
context: upload-app
6
#dockerfile: Dockerfile-prod
7
dockerfile: Dockerfile
8
depends_on:
9
- webserver
10
volumes:
11
- './upload-app:/app'
12
- '/app/node_modules'
13
ports:
14
- '80:8080'
15
# - '80:80'
16
networks:
17
- confluentkafka_shared -network
A.7.4
InfluxDB
1 influxdb:
2
image: influxdb:latest
3
container_name: influxdb
4
hostname: influxdb
5
ports:
6
- "8086:8086"
7
environment:
8
- INFLUXDB_USERNAME=root
9
- INFLUXDB_PASSWORD=root
10
volumes:
11
# Data persistency
12
- /srv/docker/influxdb/data:/var/lib/influxdb
13
networks:
14
- confluentkafka_shared -network
==PAGE:120==
110
A Appendix
A.7.5
InfluxDB
1 grafana:
2
image: grafana/grafana:latest
3
container_name: grafana
4
hostname: grafana
5
ports:
6
- "3000:3000"
7
user: "0"
8
environment:
9
- GF_SECURITY_ADMIN_USER=admin
10
- GF_SECURITY_ADMIN_PASSWORD=password
11
volumes:
12
- /srv/docker/grafana/data:/var/lib/grafana
13
#- ./visualization/grafana/provisioning:/etc/grafana/
provisioning
14
networks:
15
- confluentkafka_shared -network
A.7.6
InfluxDB
1 kafka_influx_sink:
2
depends_on:
3
- influxdb
4
build: visualization/influxdb_sink
5
container_name: kafka_influx_sink
6
hostname: kafka_influx_sink
7
ports:
8
- "5001:5001"
9
environment:
10
- INFLUX_HOST=influxdb
11
volumes:
12
- ./dags:/usr/local/airflow/dags
13
networks:
14
- confluentkafka_shared -network
==PAGE:121==
A.7 Airflow-Spark Docker Compose File
111
==PAGE:122==
112
A Appendix
A.8
Confluent Kafka Docker Compose File
1 version:
'3.3'
2 services:
3
zookeeper:
4
image: confluentinc/cp-zookeeper:5.4.1
5
hostname: zookeeper
6
container_name: zookeeper
7
ports:
8
- "2181:2181"
9
- "2888:2888"
10
- "3888:3888"
11
environment:
12
ZOOKEEPER_CLIENT_PORT: 2181
13
ZOOKEEPER_TICK_TIME: 2000
14
networks:
15
- shared-network
16
17
broker:
18
image: confluentinc/cp-server:5.4.1
19
hostname: broker
20
container_name: broker
21
depends_on:
22
- zookeeper
23
ports:
24
- "9092:9092"
25
environment:
26
KAFKA_BROKER_ID: 1
27
KAFKA_ZOOKEEPER_CONNECT: 'zookeeper:2181'
28
KAFKA_LISTENER_SECURITY_PROTOCOL_MAP: PLAINTEXT:PLAINTEXT,
PLAINTEXT_HOST:PLAINTEXT
29
KAFKA_ADVERTISED_LISTENERS: PLAINTEXT://broker:29092,PLAINTEXT_HOST
://localhost:9092
30
KAFKA_METRIC_REPORTERS: io.confluent.metrics.reporter.
ConfluentMetricsReporter
31
KAFKA_OFFSETS_TOPIC_REPLICATION_FACTOR: 1
32
KAFKA_GROUP_INITIAL_REBALANCE_DELAY_MS: 0
33
KAFKA_CONFLUENT_LICENSE_TOPIC_REPLICATION_FACTOR: 1
34
CONFLUENT_METRICS_REPORTER_BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS: broker:29092
35
CONFLUENT_METRICS_REPORTER_ZOOKEEPER_CONNECT: zookeeper:2181
36
CONFLUENT_METRICS_REPORTER_TOPIC_REPLICAS: 1
37
CONFLUENT_METRICS_ENABLE: 'true'
38
CONFLUENT_SUPPORT_CUSTOMER_ID: 'anonymous'
39
networks:
40
- shared-network
41
42
schema-registry:
43
image: confluentinc/cp-schema-registry:5.4.1
44
hostname: schema-registry
45
container_name: schema-registry
46
depends_on:
47
- zookeeper
48
- broker
49
ports:
50
- "8081:8081"
51
environment:
52
SCHEMA_REGISTRY_HOST_NAME: schema-registry
53
SCHEMA_REGISTRY_KAFKASTORE_CONNECTION_URL: 'zookeeper:2181'
54
networks:
55
- shared-network
56
57
connect:
58
build: connectors
59
hostname: connect
60
container_name: connect
==PAGE:123==
A.9 Open mHealth Calories Burned Schema Creation Example
113
A.9
Open mHealth Calories Burned Schema
Creation Example
1 __openmhealth_kcal_burned = """
2 {"fields": [{
3
"metadata": {},
4
"name": "distance",
5
"nullable": true,
6
"type":
7
{
8
"type": "struct",
9
"fields":
10
[{
11
"name": "unit",
12
"type":"string",
13
"nullable": true,
14
"metadata": {}
15
},
16
{
17
"name": "value",
18
"type": "double",
19
"nullable": true,
20
"metadata": {}
21
}]
22
}
23
},
24
{
25
"metadata": {},
26
"name": "kcal_burned",
27
"nullable": true,
28
"type":
29
{
30
"type": "struct",
31
"fields":
32
[{
33
"name": "unit",
34
"type":"string",
35
"nullable": true,
36
"metadata": {}
37
},
38
{
39
"name": "value",
40
"type": "integer",
41
"nullable": true,
42
"metadata": {}
43
}]
44
}
45
},
46
{
47
"metadata": {},
==PAGE:124==
114
A Appendix
48
"name": "activity_name",
49
"nullable": true,
50
"type": "string"
51
},
52
{
53
"metadata": {},
54
"name": "effective_time_frame",
55
"nullable": true,
56
"type": {
57
"type": "struct",
58
"fields":
59
[{
60
"name": "time_interval",
61
"nullable": true,
62
"metadata": {},
63
"type":
64
{
65
"type": "struct",
66
"fields":
67
[{
68
"name": "start_date_time",
69
"type":"string",
70
"nullable": true,
71
"metadata": {}
72
},
73
{
74
"name": "end_date_time",
75
"type": "string",
76
"nullable": true,
77
"metadata": {}
78
}]
79
}
80
}]
81
}
82
}],"type": "struct"}
83 """
84 openmhealth_kcal_burned = StructType.fromJson(json.loads(
__openmhealth_kcal_burned))
A.10
Standard deviation script
1 #!/usr/bin/env python
2 # coding: utf-8
3 from pyspark.sql import DataFrame, Window, functions
4 from pyspark.sql.functions import window, sum as _sum
5 from pyspark.sql.functions import from_json,to_json, struct, col
6 from pyspark.sql.types import DoubleType , IntegerType , StringType
==PAGE:125==
A.10 Standard deviation script
115
7 import schemas
8 import logging
9 logger = logging.getLogger('pyspark')
10
11 def my_function(df : DataFrame):
12
df = df.select(from_json("carp_body", schemas.movisens_step_count).
alias("jsondata"))
13
df = df.select(col("jsondata.*")) #enter json data struct
14
df = df.select(df.step_count.cast(IntegerType()))
15
df = df.agg({"step_count": "variance"})
16
df = df.select(col("variance(step_count)").cast("string"))
17
return df
==PAGE:126==
116
==PAGE:127==
==PAGE:128==
