==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Virtual Forestry
Analysis of microclimate, crown structure,
and growth conditions using a
three-dimensional biophysical forest model
Author: Nicolai Dige Jensen, s163923
Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Andreas Ibrom, DTU-Environment
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 38 00
info@env.dtu.dk
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The transition towards more sustainable forestry practices requires the development of
new tools that can encompass the complexity of mixed nature-like forests. This thesis
focused on studying and simulating local light conditions within a forest, and how a
light environment affects the potential of regenerative growth. The area studied was a
7.5 ha patch of the beech forest ”Lille Bøgeskov” in Sorø, Denmark. The forest patch
was quantified using three data types; aerial LiDAR data points, in-situ hemispherical
photographs, and in-situ vegetation assessments. The LiDAR data was used to generate
a 3-dimensional forest map, the hemispherical photographs were used to estimate LAIe
(light conditions), and the vegetation assessments were used to quantify local growth
potentials.
45 different spots within the area was measured, and the results showed no apparent
correlation between the LAIe values and the presence of regenerative growth, nor did
the LAIe correlate with simulated intensities in the same location, indicating that local
light environments are diﬀicult to extract from aerial data sources, like LiDAR data.
One third of the hemispherical photographs were obstructed by nearby branches, bi-
asing the LAIe estimates, and cloaking potential correlation with growth and simulated
intensities.
The software tools developed for the thesis; a hemispherical image analyser, an au-
tomatic forest map generator, and a light simulator, all performed as intended and were
primarily limited by their inputs.
With more time an in-situ measured forest map should be made and compared to a
LiDAR generated map. The analysed data set should include more spots free of inter-
fering vegetation so the relationship between regenerative growth and light conditions
can be studied further.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to first say thanks to my supervisor, Andreas Ibrom, for being understanding
and patient with my initial lack of knowledge about forestry and environmental biology.
The project required a great deal of data acquisition within Lille Bøgeskov, and this
could never have been obtained without the hard work of the field technicians Flemming
Møller and Jens Schaarup Sørensen. Especially Flemming was helpful, even when the
list of to-do’s kept growing. The project would never have been backed up by in-situ
data without the field technicians going out of their way to collect the data, so thank
you very much.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Analysis
3
2.1
The Power of Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Transitioning to a Sustainable Forestry Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Natural Regeneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Theory
5
3.1
Modernisation of Traditional Forestry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Generalisation and Loss of Variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Quantifying Light Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Hemispherical Photography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Simulating Light Environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Weighing Light Ray Rings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methods
17
4.1
Study Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Hardware and Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Hemispherical Photography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Vegetation Quantification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Forest Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Finding the Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.7
Estimating Crown Heights and Stem Diameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.8
3-Dimensional Map in Blender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.9
Finding Representative Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5
Results
37
5.1
LAI from Hemispherical Photographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
3-Dimensional Map Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Light Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
In-situ Measurements and LAI Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Representative Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Interpretation of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Significance of Diffuse light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Outdated Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Simulation Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Conclusion
61
A
Appendix
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
(Laser Technology Inc., 2020)
1.1
Introduction
Back in the late 19th century traditional forestry was slowly beginning to take more
scientific approaches towards eﬀicient and profitable silvicultural practices.
In 2020,
with an increasing focus on biodiversity, healthy ecosystems, and sustainability, the tra-
ditional practices are often criticised for cultivating forests types that contradicts the
sustainable vision of modern ideologies. Many of today’s forests were established under
an old traditional forestry paradigm, and hence lack the qualities desired in the modern
world. Luckily, the qualities can be easily introduced in the ”artificial” forests through
a couple of centuries of ecological succession, but due to the relatively short life span of
humans, this transition period is apparently not fast enough.
The transition towards natural and sustainable forests will eminently require a re-
vision of silvicultural practices to embrace the increased complexity of mixed forests.
Modern forestry is fortunately supported by an abundance of scientific research, biologi-
cal models, and computational power, and thus the transition can possibly be accelerated
using extensive forest modelling and simulation to study experimental forest manage-
ment techniques.
This thesis delves into a small part of the forestry field, namely light and gap theory,
and studies the role light availability plays for regenerative growth, and how to imple-
ment light in virtual forest models. Throughout the thesis a 3-dimensional modelling
framework is developed, and by using on-site data acquisition and publicly available
aerial data, a 7.5ha forest patch of a mature beech forest, Lille Bøgeskov in Sorø, Den-
mark, is recreated and investigated virtually. By comparing in-situ measurements of
light and vegetation with simulated results, the validity of the framework is investigated.
The overall objectives are to create a ”light map” that characterises the forest floor light
conditions over the entire 7.5 ha forest patch, and to find coherence between real-world
and virtual data.
The three main data sources laying the foundation of this thesis are; aerial LiDAR
data(2015), hemispherical photographs(2020), and vegetation assessments(2020).
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Objectives
• Describe how local light conditions affect the potential for regenerative growth,
and how light conditions can be quantified in the field.
• Describe why and how leaf area index can be estimated with hemispherical pho-
tographs.
• Devise mathematical formulas for estimating and simulating light intensities within
a forest.
• Develop software for estimating the effective leaf area index of a canopy using a
hemispherical photograph.
• Develop software for generating 3-dimensional forest maps using available data
sources.
• Develop a framework for simulating local light conditions within a 3-dimensional
forest map.
• Analyse the correlation between in-situ light conditions and the presence of regen-
erative growth.
• Simulate light conditions in a forest and compare the results to in-situ obtained
data.
• Discuss the results of developed methods and the limitations of the data sources.
1.3
Limitations
The project is carried out over a half-year period, and given that some of the data has
to be acquired in-situ under specific weather conditions, the amount of, and quality
of, data will is restricted by the possible coordination with field technicians as well as
the time constraints. Due to external factors, the planned data acquisition time was
severely cut short, resulting in an increased focus on modelling and simulation with
limited real-world data to support the simulated results.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Problem Analysis
2.1
The Power of Simulation
Forest sciences suffer from the inescapable fact that trees tend to grow in rates that are
impractical to study. The local environment within a forest can change significantly dur-
ing these extended periods, as can the scientists studying them and their measurement
techniques. Modern computing power combined with elaborate theories of biological
mechanisms and tree stand dynamics, have enabled scientists to better study forests
over longer temporal and bigger spacial scales digitally. It is becoming increasingly fea-
sible to recreate and modify existing forests virtually, and predict what alterations to
the forest structure affect factors like ecological health and biodiversity. Forest simu-
lation tools not only have great academic value, but could also be convenient for the
decision-making of foresters and environmental politicians.
2.2
Transitioning to a Sustainable Forestry
Practice
Traditional foresters cultivate forests much like farmers do field crops; by sowing seeds,
or transplanting seedlings, of a single species and spacially separate them to optimise
the growth of each plant. The resulting forests are often referred to as clear-cut forests,
since they are typically harvested at the same time, leaving behind large cleared-out
areas. This cultivation method has for centuries been favoured due to it being simple,
profitable, and more predictable than natural forests(HubertHasenauerauth.).
In
order to move away from the ecologically devastating forestry practices, it is essential to
convince current foresters that the novel and somewhat unproven methods can indeed
be manageable and profitable. The only way to do so, within a reasonable time frame,
is by presenting realistic simulations with persuading results.
Cultivation and harvesting of mixed forests has been, and still is, more demanding
than clear-cut forests, primarily due to a lack of tools for predicting profitable yield
and assisting with management decision-making. In modern times computational tools
for this have emerged, but the optimal way to advance the transitioning from clear-cut
to mixed forest still remains somewhat unclear. An inarguably important process in
sustainable forestry and mixed forests is natural regeneration. By fully understanding
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Problem Analysis
the processes that mediate natural regeneration, one can begin to artificially reinforce
these and introduce favourable vegetation to the forests(Pretzsch and Forrester, 2017).
2.3
Natural Regeneration
The process of naturally sown trees replacing newly opened canopy gaps is what is
referred to as natural regeneration. This process is important in maintaining a balanced
mixture of different ages and species within natural forests. In clear-cut forests, however,
the overstory structure is typically very dense, which hampers natural regeneration, and
as old trees are harvested, the understory vegetation is quickly overgrown by fast-growing
”light-loving” vegetation that outcompete tree seedlings(Česonienė et al., 2019).
Several factors affect the degree of natural regeneration in a forest, but amongst the
most important is light conditions. By controlling the local light environments, one
can possibly tailor light niches to favour desirable vegetation. To understand the light
environment of a forest and determine where and how to manipulate its trees, in order
to generate beneficial niches, one can make use of 3-dimensional forest models.
2.4
Thesis Overview
This thesis explores the use of 3-dimensional forest maps for analysing understory light
conditions. The general goal is to showcase ways to utilise available data, specifically
hemispherical images, aerial photographs, aerial LIDAR data, and local vegetation as-
sessments to create virtual 3-dimensional forest maps intended for predicting local light
conditions and natural regenerative potential.
The methods described can be used to locate microsites that are suitable for regener-
ative growth, and can also be used as guidance tools for selective thinning to tailor light
conditions of arbitrary sites. Methods like the ones presented are believed to be essential
for successfully facilitating the transition from clear-cut forests to mixed uneven-aged
forests.
The thesis starts off with the Theory chapter which introduces the essentials of
light-canopy interactions and the theoretical background for evaluating light environ-
ments using hemispherical photography. The following chapter, Methods, thoroughly
describes the used data sources and outlines the implementation of LiDAR-based forest
map generation, 3-dimensional light simulation, and LAI estimation using hemispherical
photographs. The outcome of the implementations are presented in the following chapter,
Results, where they are related to the real-world data. The validity of the data sources,
the interpretation of the results, and the prospects of the methodology are all discussed
in the fifth chapter, Discussion, followed by the closing chapter, Conclusion, which
recaps the essence of the thesis.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
3.1
Modernisation of Traditional Forestry
The first science-driven systematisation of forestry practices began in the early 1870s
with the establishment of Association of German Forest Research Stations. With this
association many contemporary forest management techniques rooting in observation
and experience were complemented, and somewhat replaced, by standardised methods
derived from a series of comprehensive measurements from long-term experimental forest
plots. This paradigm shift set the cornerstones of the quantitative field of forest sciences,
known today. The invention of yield tables led to a standardised method for quantifying
and summarising, and with these foresters were able to predict future growth and, more
importantly, the potential profits.
The focus at the time was profitability, which equated to simple maintenance and
predictable yields. Cultivated forests were typically initiated in deprived soils from pre-
vious agricultural or silvicultural land use, and thus the selection for suitable species
that could survive the harsh soil conditions, were the reflection of the quality of the
soils. With a focus on timber production, the tree species prioritised should have high
value, low maintenance, and be well researched in regard to nutrition, pests, propaga-
tion, etcetera. This led to many forests becoming monospecific and complicated tree
species were dismissed. As a result the available propagules and planting stock lost their
diversity, resulting in a positive reinforcement of monospecificity in forestry cite.
In order to systematise and simplify the forestry practices, many forests were, and
still are, grown as clear-cut forests, which is defined as large monospecific and even-aged
tree stands that are more predictable due to their homogeneity.
The complexity of
natural/mixed forests was, and still is, diﬀicult to inventory and maintain, causing most
foresters to prefer the simpler alternative.
Mixed forests are, however, more resilient in terms of structure, where they can bet-
ter withstand strong winds, but also in terms of pests, since the spatial and temporal
distancing between same-species trees makes outbreaks less frequent and less devastat-
ing. The biodiverse tree and undergrowth composition leads to the utilisation of a wide
range of biological niches, which prevents soil nutrient depletion, due to complementary
nutrient needs and diverse fixation capabilities.
Advances in scientific modelling, measurement technologies, and computational capa-
bilities, is making inventory and prediction of increasingly complex forests more accessi-
==PAGE:14==
6
3 Theory
ble, but since most of today’s cultivated forests were formed under a clear-cut paradigm,
the new-found forestry methods are of limited use.
The transition to mixed forestry will take many decades, but can hopefully be acceler-
ated by introducing modern silvicultural practices enhancing natural processes essential
for achieving the pre-mentioned traits of mixed forests.
One of the fundamental processes of healthy natural forests is natural regeneration.
The degree of natural regeneration within a forest is directly related to the amount of
light available to understory growth, which is determined by the 3-dimensional canopy
structure and nearby crown gaps. The optimal light conditions for slow-growing trees
are typically balanced, such that the trees receive just enough light to grow giving them
a competitive advantage over light-loving shrubs and herbs, that would otherwise out-
grow the tree seedlings.
Tailoring light environments for tree growth is diﬀicult, since the local consequences
of removing trees are not by any means intuitive, given the multi-directional nature of
shadow casting. In order to even discuss what makes a proper ”light environment” the
concept must first be properly introduced.
3.2
Generalisation and Loss of Variability
In order to successfully simulate complex forest dynamics, a wide range of factors are
to be taken into account. These include air temperature, soil pH, nutrient composition,
water availability, etcetera, many of which are usually generalised through analysis of a
series of soil samples and weather station data. Generalisations are justified if the factors
are homogenous throughout the area in focus, but often more variable factors, such as
stand density and tree sizes, are also reduced to simple values like ”Trees per Hectare”
and ”Mean Stem Volume”. This is in many cases the only feasible way to quantify the
state of a large forest.
By generalising all local variability is discarded, and silvicultural management proce-
dures must be based on averaged parameters and in-situ decision-making. In cases where
the end goal is to controllably cultivate a specific forest type, this type of impromptu
maintenance becomes unsatisfactory.
With regard to controlling understory light conditions, local variability is key. Quan-
tifying local light conditions for an entire forest, however, is a laborious endeavour and
would need to be updated every few years.
==PAGE:15==
3.3 Quantifying Light Conditions
7
3.3
Quantifying Light Conditions
In-situ light measuring is typically carried out using two-sensor setups, with one sensor
having an unobstructed view of the sky, and one mobile sensor used below the canopy.
Since the amount of intercepted light is proportional to the amount and orientation
of foliage, one can use the sensor readings to characterise the canopy. Forest canopies
are often quantified using the leaf area index, also referred to as LAI, which is the ratio
of one-sided leaf area per unit ground area, m2/m2.
The LAI can be found by physically measuring fallen or plucked leaves, but the pre-
mentioned proportionality between light intensity and foliage density enables the use of
indirect non-destructive measurement methods. These are often favoured over the direct
methods, even though they tend to underestimate the actual LAI, due to them being
non-detrimental and less time consuming.
LAI is used throughout this thesis as a proxy variable for light availability. This
measurement is, in this thesis, derived from the fraction of gaps in the canopy, and
therefore quantifies the amount indirect/diffuse light available. LAI does not, however,
take the trajectory of the sun and the amount of direct light into consideration. When
studying regenerative growth, which is often shade-tolerant, the amount of indirect light
is assumed more influential than sudden spikes of direct sunlight. The amount of direct
light is indirectly included, to some degree, in the LAI measure, given that more gaps
will lusciously also lead to more direct sunlight penetrating the canopy(Monteith and
Unsworth, 2013).
A popular way to measure LAI, and other parameters, is by using plant canopy
analysers, like LAI-2200c. This equipment uses a hemispherical lens system and multiple
sensors which each measure incoming light coming from specific directions, see fig. 3.1(LI-
COR, 2020). The way LAI-2200c estimates canopy parameters can be generalised to
work with other hemispherical sensor systems as well, here amongst digital cameras with
wide-angle/fish-eye lenses(Welles and Norman, 1991).
3.4
Hemispherical Photography
This thesis makes use of hemispherical photography, partly due to it being a flexible data
source compared to single-value measurements, and partly because it is useful for visual
characterisation of the forest in which the photographs were taken. The photographs
used throughout the thesis are captured using a camera setup as shown in fig. 3.2.
The equations for estimating LAI are based on gap fractions for various zenith angles
between 0◦and 90◦. Gap fraction, as the name suggests, is the fractional amount of
gap, or lack of canopy, when measuring a confined area of the sky. To find gap fractions
within a hemispherical photograph, the photo must first be binarised into ”gap” and
==PAGE:16==
8
3 Theory
Figure 3.1: Two examples of the measurement equipment for quantifying light. To the
left is a mobile plant canopy analyser, LAI-2200c, which measures incoming light from
various angles in order to estimate LAI. To the right is a PAR sensor, LI-190R, which is
often used in static setups to measure light conditions long-term. The images are from
LI-COR® at www.licor.com,
”canopy” pixels as seem example in fig. 3.3(Fournier et al., 2017). The methods for
binarisation are described in section 4.3.
The relationship between gap fraction and LAI is defined by the Beer-Lambert law
(Weiss2004; Fournier et al., 2017; Jonckheere et al., 2004).
P(θ) = exp
(−G(θ)Ω(θ)LAI
cos(θ)
)
(3.1)
• θ - Zenith angle.
• G(θ) - G-function, which corresponds to the fraction of foliage projected onto a
plane normal to the θ direction
• Ω(θ) - Clumping factor, which defines the deviation from a random distribution
of leaves throughout a canopy. If equal to 1, the leaves are randomly distributed,
and if between 0 and 1 the canopy ”clumps” its leaves in certain areas.
• LAI - Leaf area index.
Often the clumping factor, Ω(θ) is unknown and instead the factor is combined with
the LAI term, making up the effective LAI defined as
LAIe = Ω(θ)LAI
(3.2)
For broad-leaf forests, like beech forests, the clumping factor is often assumed to be
near unity, making LAIe≈LAI.
==PAGE:17==
3.4 Hemispherical Photography
9
(a) Side view.
(b) Top view.
(c) Setup in the field.
(d) Outputted view.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the camera setup and the view angles of the ”fisheye”/wide-
angle lens used for hemispherical photography. ”Hemi” means ”half”, so hemispherical
photography essentially tries to capture half a sphere, and thus should have a range of
180◦in the zenith direction (0 →90◦on either side) and 360◦in the azimuth direction
(around).
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Theory
(a) Original Image.
(b) White pixels - Gap, Black pixels - Canopy.
Figure 3.3: Example of the binarisation necessary for being able to calculate gap frac-
tions. The process requires a fine-tuned threshold in order to correctly classify what is
canopy and what is sky/gap.
In hemispherical photography all zenith angles are captured simultaneously, and
hence all P(θ) values can be found from a single image. As a result one can use Miller’s
Theorem, which inverts and rearranges eq. 3.1 to
LAIe = −2
∫π/2
0
ln[P(θ)]cos(θ)sin(θ) dθ
(3.3)
which eliminates the G(θ) term through the fact that
∫π/2
0
G(θ)sin(θ) dθ = 0.5
(3.4)
.
Miller’s theorem can also be used numerically for setups with discrete angle ranges,
such as with the in LAI-2200c, where the range between 0◦and 68◦are split into 5
zenith rings as seen in fig. 3.1 (Welles and Norman, 1991).
The discrete version of eq. 3.3 is
LAIe = −2
n
∑
i=1
ln[P(θi)]cos(θi)wi.
(3.5)
.
==PAGE:19==
3.5 Simulating Light Environments
11
Here n is the number of zenith rings, θi the zenith angle, and wi a weighting factor
proportional to sin(θi)dθi which sums to 1
n
∑
i=1
wi = 1
(3.6)
The zenith rings are determined either physically by a specific sensor design, as seen
in fig. 3.1, or within the software used for processing the hemispherical photographs.
The discrete Miller’s theorem is a relatively straightforward way to calculate LAIe
from a hemispherical photograph, but many other methods exist. Amongst the popular
solutions are the constrained linear least-squares inversion technique, constrained non-
linear least-squares inversion technique, and Lang’s regression method(Fournier et al.,
2017).
Due to its simplicity and ease of implementation, Miller’s theorem was used for the
hemispherical photograph analyser developed in this thesis. The calculated LAIe values
are subsequently used in as proxy variables for characterising local light conditions.
3.5
Simulating Light Environments
The key to successfully simulating light environments within a virtual forest is under-
standing the theory behind canopy-light interactions. In this thesis a light ray is defined
by its intensity. Leaves are assumed black, in other words, fully opaque, and hence the
intensity should be interpreted as the probability that a ray will reach the virtual light
sensor unobstructed by leaves. The intensity of a light ray in an arbitrary direction can
be described by
I(θ, [d1, d2, ..., dn]) = I0cos(θ)e−
k
cos(θ)·LAD·∑n
i=1 di
(3.7)
• I(θ) - Light intensity from the θ zenith direction.
• I0 - Unobstructed light intensity.
• θ - Zenith angle.
• k - Attenuation coeﬀicient.
• LAD - Leaf area density / half the leaf area per cubic metre crown.
• n - Number of crowns.
• di - travel distance inside crown i.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Theory
Eq. 3.7 combines two equations, namely
Itravel(θ) = I0e−ks(θ)LAI
(3.8)
and
Ireceive(θ) = I0cos(θ)
(3.9)
both described in (Monteith and Unsworth, 2013).
The first equation, eq. 3.8, is subscripted ”travel” since this attenuation is a result
of the light travelling through an intercepting canopy. This equation describes how the
attenuation coeﬀicient ks and the leaf area index, LAI, relates to the resulting intensity.
The effect of LAI is rather obvious, as this value translates directly to the number of
leaves obstructing incoming light, see fig. 3.4, whereas ks is more complicated.
The attenuation coeﬀicient, ks, is defined from k, which is defined as
k = Ah
A
(3.10)
where Ah is the light-intercepting area of an object and A the total surface area of
the object. The k-value for an object composed of multiple sub-objects, such as a tree
Figure 3.4: An illustration of how light ray are attenuated as a result of intercepting
leaves. The leaves are considered ”black” meaning they are fully opaque to the incoming
light.
The Itravel, as seen, is not linearly dependant on the LAI due to the leaves
overlapping.
==PAGE:21==
3.5 Simulating Light Environments
13
crown made of leaves, can be found by rearranging, without turning, the sub-objects
into shapes that are easier to interpret, as shown in fig. 3.6.
For randomly distributed leaf orientations, the leaves can be rearranged into a spher-
ical shape, which will, due to its symmetry, always have an occluding area equal to
half its surface area independent of the position of a light source. The shadow that is
casts, however, will vary with the zenith angle, as the shadow will be stretched out with
increasing zenith angles, as shown in fig. 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Rendering showing showing how the direction of a light source affects the
size of shadows. Here a the shadow of a sphere is used as an example with k = 0.5 and
ks = k/cos(θ).
Eq. 3.8 depends on a globally set LAI value, and thus effectively represents the
canopy as one single layer that light has to pass through. When simulating a light ray in
a 3-dimensional forest model, where the canopy is represented as a collection of spatially
separated tree crowns, one can no longer just use the LAI, but must reformulate the
equation to handle the attenuation caused by individual crowns.
This is done by introducing LAD, leaf area density, and di, ”in-crown” travel dis-
tances. Logically the density of leaves within a crown will affect attenuation, as will the
length of which a light ray have to travel through the crown. The two values are simply
just multiplied, and under the assumption that all the trees have the same LAD, one
can simply just sum up the d distances, and hence eq. 3.8 can be updated to
Itravel(θ) = I0e−
k
cos(θ)LAD·∑n
i=1 di
(3.11)
Each di value is the distance a light ray travels within the specific crown of the tree
i. If the light ray is intercepted by several crowns, the intensity is just further attenuated.
The summarisation of distances is justified by the fact that the attenuation terms
can be combined, as can be seen in the example where a light ray is intercepted by two
crowns;
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Theory
I(θ, [d1, d2]) = I0e−
k
cos(θ)LAD·d1e−
k
cos(θ)LAD·d2
= I0e−
k
cos(θ)LAD·(d1+d2)
(3.12)
Eq. 3.12 can be generalised to n crowns, if one assumes a global LAD value. If LAD
differs for each crown, the LAD should be moved into the sum as LADi. Overlapping
crowns will result in a ∑n
i=1 di that is longer than the actual ”in-crown” distance the
light ray experiences, since the overlapping region is accounted for multiple times. With
m overlapping crowns the overlapping region will be accounted exactly m times, but
assuming the LAD in the region is also m times higher, the terms cancel out and one
arrives at eq. 3.12 again, see example in eq. 3.13 where two crowns overlap by dol.
I(θ, [d1, d2]) = I0e−
k
cos(θ)[LAD·(d1−dol)+LAD·(d2−dol)+2LAD·dol]cos(θ)
= I0e−
k
cos(θ)LAD·(d1+d2−2dol+2dol)cos(θ)
= I0e−
k
cos(θ)LAD·(d1+d2)cos(θ)
(3.13)
The next equation, eq. 3.9, that is used for defining the full intensity equation, is
a version of Lambert’s Cosine Law. This law states that the intensity of a light beam,
illuminating a planar surface, depends on the incidence angle of the light relative to the
orientation of the illuminated surface, see fig. 3.7.
Figure 3.6: Illustration of how collections of leaves can be rearranged into specific shapes,
depending on their orientation distribution. Sphere - randomly oriented, Plane - hori-
zontal orientation, Cylinder - vertical. This ”trick” enables easier estimation of the ks
value. 8.1 Interception of Radiation by Plant Canopies (Monteith and Unsworth, 2013)
==PAGE:23==
3.6 Weighing Light Ray Rings
15
The virtual sensor, at which simulated light rays will be ”measured”, is defined as
being planar. This means that the cosine law can be directly applied, and the angular
dependency can be accounted for by multiplying the light ray intensity with a cos(θ)
term.
Figure 3.7: An illustration of Lambert’s cosine law, which states that the angle between
a light source and a illuminated surface determines the intensity felt on the surface. The
intensity and angle are defined by I(θ) = I0cos(θ), where θ angular different between
the direction of the light and the surface normal of the surface.
When adding the cosine term to eq. 3.11, one arrives at the full intensity equation,
eq. 3.7, here recapped for simplicity
I(θ, [d1, d2, ..., dn]) = I0cos(θ)e−
k
cos(θ)·LAD·∑n
i=1 di
3.6
Weighing Light Ray Rings
The upcoming simulation is used to estimate the local light environment at an arbitrary
position. This is done by sampling a series of individual light rays using eq. 3.7. The
directions of the light rays were defined by sampling an upwards-pointing hemisphere,
which was divided into n different zenith directions and m different azimuth directions,
resulting in a total of n · m simulated light rays.
For each light ray an intensity is calculated, and since eq. 3.7 is azimuth-independent,
the intensities can be grouped based on zenith angle and averaged, resulting in n intensi-
ties, one for each zenith direction. To further combine the remaining n intensities, they
are each weighed based on the size of the ring they represent, see fig. 3.8. This weighing
factor is dependant on the zenith angle, θ, but also the number of zenith divisions, n,
given this defines the sizes of the ring divisions. The weighting factor was deduced to be
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Theory
w(θ, n) =
(
θ + 0.5π
2n
)2 −
(
θ + 0.5π
2n
)2
(0.5π)2
,
(3.14)
where θ is the zenith angle in radians. The 0.5π terms, representing 90◦in radians,
set the max zenith angle boundary for incoming light.
Calculating the full light intensity of a virtual sensor using a series of sampled light
rays, can be done with
Isensor([I1, I2, ..., Im], [θ1, θ2, ..., θm], m) =
m
∑
i=1
Ii · w(θi, m)
(3.15)
Where each Ii intensity is defined by the previously derived
Ii(θ, [d1, d2, ..., dn]) = I0cos(θ)e−
k
cos(θ)·LAD·∑n
i=1 di
(3.16)
Figure 3.8: An illustration showing how, in this example, each of 6 zenith intensities
should be weighted. This circle illustrates why one must weight each intensity differently,
since the fractional contribution for each ring is unique.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
4.1
Study Overview
This thesis explores the potential of 3-dimensional forest maps for studying how local
light environments affect understory growth, and more specifically the degree of natural
regeneration of trees. The data was obtained near a monitoring station in Lille Bøgeskov,
translation: ”Little Beech Forest”, in Sorø, Denmark. The station has existed for over
20 years, but has since 2016 been a part of the European cooperation ICOS, Integrated
Carbon Observation System, whose main focus is ”quantifying and understanding the
greenhouse gas balance” (ICOS, 2020).
The area of interest defined for the study is a forest patch roughly 7.5 ha (7500 m2)
in size, see fig. 4.1. The patch contains the ICOS monitoring station as well as 4 circular
continuous measurement plots (CPs), in which a series of measurements are carried out
every few years. The size of the area was chosen to showcase the strength of aerial data,
as well as to encompass the CPs. The patch is subsequently referred to as the ”focus
area”.
The goal is to generate a 3-dimensional forest map of the entire focus area. Typically
forest maps are generated in-situ, with the use of specialised laser rangefinders, like the
one shown in fig. 4.2, to manually measure distances and relative angles of all trees
within a restricted region. Afterwards the stem diameters at breast height (dbh), tree
crown base and top heights, and crown shapes must be measured for all the mapped
trees. The entire process is laborious and time-consuming, and therefore tree maps are
typically only made for smaller regions.
These generated forest maps can be used with individual-tree models, like MAESPA,
MOSES, and SILVA, where tree stand dynamics, like competition and light availabil-
ity, and growth predictions can be simulated(Duursma and Medlyn, 2012; Pretzsch and
Biber, 2002; Thurnher et al., 2017).
In order to quickly generate crude forest maps of larger regions, this thesis uses freely
available data from The Danish Elevation Model, in which the height of the entire land-
mass of Denmark has been mapped using an aerial LiDAR system. It is proposed that
the LiDAR data can be used to locate top-canopy trees and determine their heights and
crown shapes. Using these parameters, the remaining tree parameters, dbh and crown
base height, are estimated using in-situ datasets to resolve their correlation with tree
==PAGE:26==
18
4 Methods
Figure 4.1: This thesis works with a constricted area in the forest Lille Bøgeskov in Sorø,
Denmark. The area is illustrated with a red boundary, and is referred to as the focus
area. Within the focus area four continous measurement plots, CPs, are illustrated by
the grey circles.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Study Overview
19
height.
The LiDAR-generated forest map is inputted to the python-based 3d-modelling soft-
ware Blender, in which its 3-dimensionality takes shape, and the map is expressed in a
practical form. A program is written, within Blender, that simulates local light condi-
tions at various positions within the virtual forest.
Within the real forest, several sites are quantified using hemispherical photography
and ground vegetation assessments. The physical data is used as a reference for the light
conditions found within the virtual forest.
Figure 4.2: A common way to generate 3-dimensional forest maps is by using range-
finding equipment, such as TruPulse® 360◦. This process requires expensive equipment
and is quite laborious for mapping large and dense forest area, given one must carefully
measure each and every tree. Images from (Laser Technology Inc., 2020).
==PAGE:28==
20
4 Methods
4.2
Hardware and Software
Hardware
For hemispherical photography the following setup was used:
A Canon EOS 70D camera with a Sigma AF 4.5mm f (2.8 Fisheye) lens
fixed to self-levelling mounting system with inbuilt compass (SLM9)
and operated using the Canon app on an Apple iPad.
For simulation and image analysis, a Windows 10 computer was used.
Software
All programming was carried out in
Python 3.7.6
The project was realised with the use of the following Python packages;
• OpenCV 2 (cv2) - Image analysis
• Pandas (pd) - Data management
• Numpy (np) - Numerical computing
• SciPy (scipy) - Statistical analysis
• Matplotlib (plt) - Data visualisation
• Requests (requests) - Web requests
• Bpy (bpy) - Blender-Python interaction
Analysis of hemispherical photographs was done with
Hemiview 2.1
Hemiview is complex canopy analysis program for Windows, that can be used to esti-
mate LAIe amongst many other parameters.
Presentation of the 3-dimensional forest map, and light simulation herein was done in
Blender 2.82
Blender is an open-source multipurpose program that is used for 3-d modelling, virtual
sculpting, animation, visualising physical simulations, etcetera. The software is built on
a Python foundation, making it easily programmable using Python and the packages
listed above.
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Hemispherical Photography
21
4.3
Hemispherical Photography
The main in-situ measurement for quantifying local light environments is found through
the analysis of hemispherical photographs. In order to do so the photographs must first
be pre-processed into binary images; gaps and canopy. Following this the images must
be divided into zenith rings that can be used to calculate gap fractions and input these
into the discrete Miller’s theorem, eq. 3.5. The processing pipeline for the analysis of
hemispherical photographs can be summed up in the following steps;
1. Crop & Rotate. The raw image from the camera is cropped and rotated such that
the circular image is perfectly centred, and the north indicating LED is pointing
upwards.
2. Isolate Blue Channel. Colour images have 3 channels, representing Red, Green,
and Blue, therefore also called RGB images. In the blue spectrum leaves are nearly
opaque, and thus the blue channel is favourable for finding good contrast between
pixel intensities of sky and leaves.
3. Blur. A Gaussian filter is used on the image to remove signal noise.
4. Sharpen. In order to make smaller objects within the image more detectable
a sharpening filter is applied, amplifying the transitions between light and dark
objects.
5. Otsu’s Thresholding. This thresholding method, based on Otsu’s method, au-
tomatically defines two classes within an image and selects a threshold value that
maximises the variance difference between the two classes(Bangare et al., 2016).
6. Gaussian Adaptive Thresholding. To complement Otsu’s thresholding, Gaus-
sian adaptive thresholding is applied to the image as well. This form of thresh-
olding uses the local pixel neighbourhoods to determine the class for each pixel.
Whereas Otsu’s thresholding sets an optimal global threshold, this method works
locally which result in a higher resolution classification.
7. Combine Threshold Images. Merging the two thresholded images the strengths
of both methods are combined.
8. Define Zenith Rings. By defining a set of rings that represent different zenith
angle ranges, one can count the number of gap and canopy pixels within each ring.
9. Calculate Gap Fractions. With a pixel count for both classes in each ring, one
can find the gap fraction for any given ring by
pixelgap/(pixelgap + pixelcanopy).
10. Calculate LAIe. Using the found gap fractions the effective LAI can be calculated
using eq. 3.5.
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Methods
(a) Original.
(b) Otsu’s thresholding.
(c) Gaussian Adaptive thresholding.
(d) Combination of (b) and (c).
Figure 4.3: Otsu’s thresholding is often used to binarise hemispherical photographs, but
as can be seen loses detail when leaves become too bright. Gaussian adaptive thresh-
olding works locally around each pixel and will classify based on local heterogeneity,
and therefore provides better detail, but at the cost of being inaccurate in homogeneous
areas, such as at the stems. Combining the two provides a high resolution thresholding
with no border artefacts and correctly classified stems.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Hemispherical Photography
23
(a) Original.
(b) Otsu’s thresholding.
(c) Adaptive thresholding.
Figure 4.4: Up close comparison of the two thresholding methods. Looking at the stem
it is seen that Otsu is superior, whereas the adaptive threshold is better to distinguish
the bright leaves in the big gap in the image centre.
Besides being used for LAI estimation, as described in sec. 3.4, the gap fractions will
also be used to quantify the influence of different zenith angles in order to determine
the sampling scheme for simulation. As described previously in sec. 5.3.1, Lambert’s
cosine law describes how the intensity of incoming light is dependant on its incidence
angle onto the sensing surface, in this case the camera sensor. In order to determine the
impact each zenith direction has one can apply a mask to the binarised image, as shown
in fig. 4.5, and calculate how much effect each direction would have on a horizontal leaf
growing at the position of the camera.
(a) The weight mask.
(b) Weight mask applied to fig. 4.3d.
Figure 4.5: Weighing each pixel using eq. I(θ) = I0cos(θ), the resulting image provides
information about both direction and sensitivity to incoming light.
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Methods
At increasing zenith angles not only will the effect of the incoming light diminish, but
the gap fraction is also expected to drop due to the light having to travel through more
tree crowns. When simulating light rays, one may therefore choose to dismiss zenith
angles above a certain point, due to the minuscule influence of light coming from these
angles.
Dividing fig. 4.5b into 10 zenith discs, from 0◦→90◦zenith angle, results in the
fractional disc contributions shown in tab. 4.1. With n rings and a set of hemispherical
photographs one can determine which zenith angles to include when simulating. From
tab. 4.1 it appears that the light influence starts dropping off at around 70◦. By reducing
the number of sampling points needed, the simulation time can be reduced.
Angles
0-10◦
10-20◦
20-30◦
30-40◦
40-50◦
50-60◦
60-70◦
70-80◦
80-90◦
Contrib.
0.03
0.08
0.13
0.16
0.18
0.18
0.15
0.08
0.01
Gap
0.69
0.60
0.60
0.61
0.63
0.61
0.61
0.46
0.27
Table 4.1: Angles - the ranges of the zenith rings, Contrib. - the fractional light contri-
butions, Gap - The gap fractions of the rings.
4.4
Vegetation Quantification
The reason for studying light conditions in the first place is to show how it can be
used to assist in development of new silvicultural practices. In order to relate the light
simulations to the real world, and correlate local LAI measurements to regenerative
growth potential, understory vegetation is quantified at the sites where hemispherical
photographs were obtained. This allows examination of correlation between light con-
ditions and understory growth, and can be used to review the validity of the proposed
methods. The positions where the hemispherical photographs were obtained, and the
vegetation assessments were carried out, is illustrated in fig. 4.6c.
The protocol for acquisition of vegetation data is as follows,
1. Go to the centre position of a CP.
2. Set 9 positions in a grid as shown in figure 4.6a.
3. For each point in the grid, a 1 × 1m frame is placed with the point at its centre.
4. Note down all regenerative growth older than a year contained within the frame.
The data used for each tree is; species, height, diameter, and number of leaves.
5. Capture a hemispherical photograph above the point centre.
The vegetation data can now be analysed together with the hemispherical photo-
graph taken right above the vegetation. Whether the LAIe found in the hemispherical
photographs is significantly different for ”regenerating” and ”non-regenerating” spots is
determined using student’s t-test.
==PAGE:33==
4.4 Vegetation Quantification
25
(a) HP setup. from (Gielen et al., 2018).
(b) Vegetation assessment frame.
(c) The CPs+SP defined with all all measure-
ment spots marked.
(d) The numbering used for referencing the 45
measurement spots.
Figure 4.6: Overview of the data acquisition locations (measurement spots) where hemi-
spherical photographs and vegetation assessments were obtained.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Methods
4.5
Forest Mapping
In this thesis restricting circumstances and time constraints hindered traditional in-situ
forest mapping, so instead two alternative approaches were examined;
1. Hemispherical Photographs. Using hemispherical photographs, taken at well-
defined positions, to map out azimuth angles of visible trees in each photo. Know-
ing the angles and the camera positions, the tree positions can be estimated using
triangulation. Knowing the distances from the trees to the camera positions, the
stem diameter, crown base height, total tree height, and crown shape can be ap-
proximated from the photographs.
2. Aerial data. Using publicly available aerial photographs and LiDAR measure-
ments, from The Danish Elevation Model, to approximate positions, crown dimen-
sions, and heights of trees visible from above.
Of these two approaches, the latter was able to map huge areas, and can generally
be used with no in-situ measurements and no expensive camera equipment. While using
hemispherical photos for mapping could work in practice, the manual measurements of
trees from photographs, and the measurement errors bound to the procedure, proved
to be too time-consuming and inaccurate. Therefore the second approach, using aerial
data, was chosen instead since this data was truer to the actual forest.
4.5.1
Aerial Photographs and LiDAR data
The Danish Agency for Data Supply and Eﬀiciency is a public supplier of various
mapping-related datasets, such as Denmark’s address registry, register of underground
cables, boundaries of Danish water bodies, etcetera. More importantly they have since
2014 provided high quality aerial photography and LiDAR measurements, obtained be-
tween 2014 and 2015, and continually updated the maps gradually ever since.
The
LiDAR data is the cornerstone of The Danish Elevation Model (DK-DEM), which com-
prises 415 billion data points over the entire landmass of Denmark, and is considered to
be the best national height model in the world. The data points are separated by ap-
proximately 0.4m and has a height resolution of 0.05m, which was acceptable for crude
forest mapping(SDFE, 2016).
The aerial LiDAR data can be obtained in 10 × 10km blocks at
https://download.kortforsyningen.dk/content/dhmpunktsky
The LiDAR data is delivered in the .laz format, which is manipulated to a workable
form using the LAStools software suite(), which is a collection of tools that can be used
for instance to rasterise, classify, or visualise LiDAR data, see fig. 4.7. For this thesis,
the primary tool used is LASgrid, which can rasterise the LiDAR points into a height
heat map, that can be subjected to a range of image processing methods.
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Forest Mapping
27
Figure 4.7: Examples of different views using LASview from LAStools. Classification:
Green - Vegetation, Brown - Ground. Height Map: Dark blue - low, light blue - high.
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Methods
LAStools can be obtained at
https://rapidlasso.com/
To extract a specific area from the 10 × 10km data block, Google Earth Pro(Google,
2020) is used to define a boundary box of an area, which contains all places where physical
data has been obtained using hemispherical photography and vegetation classification.
With a specified boundary box (UTM format) that encloses the area of interest, a
Python script is made to scan all .laz files making up the 10 × 10km area and dismiss
points outside the focus area. In this way, the point cloud is reduced to below 10.000.000
points, which makes LAStools work properly without a licence.
The focus area as shown in fig. 4.1, when obtained from kortforsyningen, consists
of approximately 1.400.000 data points, whereas the full 10 × 10km block contains
891.336.146 data points.
With the area extracted, one can use the LASgrid tool to generate a rasterised heat-
map image representing the measured heights within the region. By rasterisation one
facilitates the use of image analysis methods rather than having to work with individual
non-aligned data points.
The rasterised height map is generated with the following
command executed in the command prompt
lasgrid -v -i ”input.las” -o ”output.jpg” -elevation -max -subsample 5 -step 0.3
-set_min_max 27 68 -fill 3 -use_bb -gray -false
min_height and max_height for the focus area defined in fig. 4.1 are 27.0 and 68.0,
respectively. These values are set based on the 0.1 and 99.9 percentiles of all height
values in the .laz file, and by setting these, one ensures that the outputted .jpg image
will have pixel values where 0 represents 27.0m and 255 represents 68.0m, and hence the
height resolution becomes
68.0m −27.0m
255.0
= 0.16m
(4.1)
The minimum and maximum heights are defined relative to DVR90, short for Dan-
ish Vertical Reference 1990. By setting the ground plane to be at the lowest point at
27.0m, the tallest points within the region will therefore be about 68.0m−27.0m = 41m
above the ground plane.
To supplement the LiDAR data, aerial photographs, also from kortforsyningen, are
used as a means to visually inspect and verify the results of the automated forest mapping
described in later sections. By using the web service WMS, which is documented at
https://kortforsyningen.dk/indhold/webservice-liste
aerial photographs dating back to 2006 can be obtained. The photos used to supplement
the LiDAR data are from 2014 and 2015. These years are chosen since they coincide
with the year the LiDAR data of Lille Bøgeskov was last updated, and due to them
being with or without leaves, see fig. 4.8, making visual inspection easier.
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Forest Mapping
29
(a) Lille Bøgeskov, 2014
(b) Lille Bøgeskov, 2015
(c) Focus Area, 2014
(d) Focus Area, 2015
Figure 4.8: Aerial photographs of Lille Bøgeskov from 2014 and 2015. These years are
used to show the contrast between before and after leaf-fall.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Methods
4.6
Finding the Trees
By rasterisation of the LiDAR data points, all the spatial information is condensed into
an image, which can be processed as such.
The main idea is to use image analysis
methods to localise trees within the image and specify their heights and crown shapes.
The image analysis pipeline, also referred to as the tree-finder algorithm, used for finding
trees is visualised in fig. 4.9 and summarized in the following steps
1. Load in height map.
A height heat-map is loaded.
In order to work with
the image as heights in metre rather than pixel intensities, the height map is
transformed by multiplying each pixel by 0.16m, as found in eq. 4.1.
2. Blur the image. To remove outliers and smooth the image both median and
Gaussian blurring is applied. By doing so one can search for local peaks within
the image.
3. Find local peaks. Searching for local peaks within the image, one effectively
search for treetop positions, which will define the centre position of a tree.
4. Apply morphological transformations. Using closing and dilation morpholog-
ical operations, close disconnected peaks will join to represent single treetops.
5. Threshold. By thresholding the image with an adaptive thresholding method,
”canopy” and ”ground” pixels are separated, and the canopy pixels can now be
assigned to one of the found trees.
6. Watershed.
Watershedding effectively ”grows” the defined treetops until they
cover the canopy pixels.
Each treetop is instantiated as a separate unit that
iteratively grows until it collides with the boundary of another growing unit. The
canopy is hereby divided into separate tree crowns.
7. Estimate Ellipses.
The arbitrarily shaped tree crowns are approximated by
ellipses to provide the crowns with a parametrised and practical shape.
8. Find height.
Each ellipse is now turned into a mask that can be applied to
the height map. The tree height is found as the 99.9th percentile of the heights
remaining after applying the mask.
9. Estimate crown base height and trunk diameter. The final parameters to
describe each tree are estimated using data from in-situ acquired tree mappings
from Lille Bøgeskov.
10. Validate the results. By drawing the ellipses on an aerial photography, one can
inspect the results and dismiss or accept the found trees.
==PAGE:39==
4.6 Finding the Trees
31
(a) Unaltered height map. Step 1.
(b) Blur to remove outliers. Step 2.
(c) Find peaks (no morhp. ops.). Step 3.
(d) Apply morphological operations. Step 4.
(e) Threshold. Step 5.
(f) Watershed. Step 6.
(g) Fit Ellipses. Step 7.
(h) Validate results. Step 10.
Figure 4.9: A visual representation of the intermediate steps of the image analysis
pipeline for finding and defining trees using LiDAR data.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Methods
4.7
Estimating Crown Heights and Stem
Diameters
A completed 3-dimensional forest map defines all of its trees with a series of parameters
that fully describes the position and overall shape of the trees. Using the MAESPA
forest map definition, one must for each tree have
• Position in x and y [m]
• Crown dimensions [m]
• Trunk height (height from ground to crown base) [m]
• Crown base height [m]
• Stem diameter [m]
• Leaf area density [m2/m3]
Position, tree height, and crown dimensions can be found with the aerial LiDAR
data, but the remaining parameters, however, must be estimated from the available in-
formation.
Using an in-situ obtained forest map from Lille Bøgeskov (2005), and assuming that
the general forest structure has not radically changed since, one can examine whether
any of the available parameters correlate with the missing variables. If correlation exists
one can approximate the non-accessible parameters with the use of regression.
The leaf area density (leaf area per m3 within crowns), is assumed constant for all
tree crowns, and is found using the in-situ forest map from 2005.
The generated forest map is saved as a .csv that contains the data for each tree found
by the tree-finder algorithm.
==PAGE:41==
4.8 3-Dimensional Map in Blender
33
4.8
3-Dimensional Map in Blender
The forest map file is now loaded into blender through Blender’s in-built Python API
package, bpy. The data is translated into 3-D cylinders, representing tree stems, and
deformable ellipsoids, representing tree crowns.
The point of bringing the forest map into Blender, is to use Blender’s in-built func-
tions for ray casting. These functions simulate light rays and can be used to track when
the light rays collide with objects, such as the tree crown ellipsoids. By defining two
points in 3-D space, the function ray_cast can be used to find if the interconnecting line
is intersected by a tree crown, and if so, the distance of the intersection. By setting up
a common end point and n different starting points, see fig. 4.10, one can simulate n
light rays from each starting point to the end point. The end point here represents a
virtual sensor which senses single light rays in n different directions. The intersection
distances found are converted to intensities using eq. 3.7, as described in sec. 5.3.1.
A hemispherical sampling configuration, like the one shown in fig. 4.10b, resembles
the way hemispherical photographs are subdivided when estimating LAI, and hence was
chosen for consistency. By moving the configuration around the focus area in a grid-like
manner, and at each point simulate all the ”starting point”-”end point” light rays, a
map of light intensities is being generated and can now be compared to the results of
the in-situ measurement.
(a)
2-dimensional
illustration
of
how
Blender’s ray_cast function works between
two points.
(b) Visualisation of a 3-d sampling setup with
5 and 8 zenith and azimuth angles.
Figure 4.10: Illustration of how a series of simulated light rays are simulated for a given
centre position. The different colours in (b) represent different zenith angles, with the
exception of the red ball representing the ”End Point” as illustrated in (a).
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Methods
(a) Top View.
(b) Front View.
Figure 4.11: The Blender representation of the trees found in fig. 4.9. The crowns are
rendered with a see-through material to be able to see the crown overlaps.
==PAGE:43==
4.9 Finding Representative Plots
35
4.9
Finding Representative Plots
Quantification and long-term monitoring of forests are generally carried out by designat-
ing representative plots that are thoroughly measured in regard to the number of trees,
individual tree parameters, and canopy cover every few years. In Lille Bøgeskov four of
such continuous measurement plots exist, these are the previously mention CPs. This
thesis uses hemispherical photographs and vegetation assessments from the four CPs to
broadly speak about how light conditions are affected by canopy structures and what
this means for regenerative growth potential. To justify generalisations deduced from
these four plots it is relevant to evaluate their resemblance to the rest of the chosen focus
area. What is studied is whether they deviate from the average stand density, canopy
coverage, and canopy height for the 7.500m2 focus area.
This is done using the rasterised height map, as used in sec. 4.6. A circle with a
radius of 25m, approximately the size of the CPs, is used for averaging each pixel with
its neighbouring pixels. Finding a position within the generated ”deviation maps” where
the deviation is 0 indicates an optimal place to put the centre for a CP.
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
LAI from Hemispherical Photographs
To find the LAI values for the 45 spots shown in fig. 4.6c a Python script was made.
This script was able to process hemispherical photographs and calculate LAI. Due to it
being tailored for this thesis, it was simple compared to the commercial canopy analysis
software Hemiview, which was used as well. The script had the obvious advantage of
being fully transparent and flexible. In order to review the performance of the script,
its results were compared to those of Hemiview.
Hemiview uses a simple thresholding method where the user sets a global thresholding
value between 0 and 255. A well-performing threshold value of 230 was used for all 45
photos to keep the analysis consistent.
The developed script uses a different thresholding scheme that automatically sets a
threshold based on the photograph, as described in 4.3. To be able to fairly compare
the results of the script and the Hemiview results, a global thresholding scheme with a
threshold of 230 was implemented as well.
The 45 estimated LAIe values of the images using Hemiview and the developed script,
using both thresholding schemes, are presented in fig. 5.1. As seen the LAI estimates
of the written algorithms were similar to those of Hemiview, with the mean errors and
standard deviations of the two thresholding schemes presented in tab. 5.1.
The LAI of Lille Bøgeskov has previously been determined using several methods,
both destructive and non-destructive, and was found to be somewhere between 4.5 and
5.0 (Pilegaard et al., 2011). With the highest LAI of the estimates shown in 5.1 be-
ing 2.6, the underestimating nature of indirect LAI measurements using hemispherical
photography becomes quite apparent, and shows clear limitations of even commercial
software like Hemiview.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Results
Figure 5.1: The results of the LAIe estimations found using the script with two different
thresholding methods; One simple using a static thresholding value of 230, and one
using automatised and adaptive thresholding. Vertical distance from the line implies
disagreement with the Hemiview results.
Method
Adaptive Threshold
Simple Threshold
Mean Error
0.22
0.36
Standard deviation
0.20
0.20
Table 5.1: The average errors of the script compared to Hemiview results.
A reason for writing a script that used automated thresholding methods was to avoid
injecting user subjectivity into the results, as is done when manually determining global
threshold values. Small variations in choice of thresholds value can highly affect the re-
sulting LAIe estimates, which pose a problem when having to compare LAIe at different
sites. The threshold value sensitivity is shown in fig. 5.2.
The LAIe estimates for 45 photographs, taken at the sites shown in fig. 4.6d, are
presented in fig. 5.3. The values are found using the developed script using the adaptive
thresholding scheme.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 LAI from Hemispherical Photographs
39
Figure 5.2: This graphs shows how the choice of global threshold value linearly correlates
with the resulting LAIe . A threshold increase of 5 results in an increase in LAIe of
approximately 0.05.
Figure 5.3: The LAIe results for the 45 measurement spots (numbers from fig 4.6d) using
the script (with automated thresholding).
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Results
5.2
3-Dimensional Map Generation
Processing the LiDAR data of the entire focus area led to the results shown in fig. 5.4.
As seen in 5.4d the crown structures were generally well defined. As LiDAR data is aerial,
only trees visible from above can be quantified, and due to the peak seeking nature of
the tree-finder algorithm, trees that branch out into several treetops will, as a result,
be defined as separate trees, while trees with treetops below nearby crowns cannot be
detected.
The first issue leads to unrealistically thin an elongated ellipsis, due to treetops being
within too close proximity of each other, whereas the second issue will lead to unrealis-
tically big crowns, because a single treetop gets the ability to expand into big regions
due to the lack of nearby treetops, that are either hidden below other crowns or simply
not picked up by the algorithm.
To underline the limitations of the tree-finder algorithm, all trees within each CP
were counted in-situ and manually using aerial photographs and LiDAR visuals. These
counts can be compared to those found using the algorithm.
Method
In-situ
Visual Inspection
Algorithm
In-situ
Algorithm
Count
Count
Count
Height Range
Height Range
CP1
42
29
27
4.2 - 32.4 m
27.0 - 33.4 m
CP2
46
31
28
4.2 - 32.6 m
20.4 - 30.5 m
CP3
51
29
22
4.1 - 29.7 m
17.8 - 28.9 m
CP4
45
26
21
5.9 - 31.7 m
27.3 - 31.6 m
Table 5.2: Table showing the results of measuring trees in-situ and using the automated
LiDAR-based algorithm.
As can be seen in tab. 5.2 fewer trees were found using the aerial data, compared to
the in-situ counts, as expected. The manual count by visual inspection was very close to
the count of the algorithm, which indicated that the issue is due to the limiting nature
of the data source, rather than specifics of the algorithm. Histograms of the tree heights
within each CP is presented in fig. 5.5. As can be read off the histograms, the difference
between the in-situ and the algorithm counts (≈15 missing trees), could very well be
due to shorter trees, between 0 and 15 metres, not being picked up by the LiDAR, as
the Algorithm Height Range also indicates.
That being said, the algorithm might count a tree several times, if the tree has
multiple ”treetops”, and hence the results of the algorithm falsely appear more accurate.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 3-Dimensional Map Generation
41
(a) Rasterised LiDAR height image.
(b)
Thresholded
image
with
treetop
marked in red.
(c) The watershedded crowns with fitted
ellipses drawn.
(d) Fitted ellipses drawn on top of an aerial
photograph for reference.
Figure 5.4: The results of the LiDAR-based forest map generator run on the full focus
area.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Results
Figure 5.5: Histograms of the heights of the trees measured in-situ in each of the CPs.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 3-Dimensional Map Generation
43
5.2.1
Trunk Diameters and Crown Base Heights
In order to complete the forest map found in fig. 5.4, the crown base heights and stem
diameters for each tree were estimated based on the total heights of the tree.
For the purpose of this thesis, the stem diameter was somewhat irrelevant, but in
order to use the generated 3-dimensional forest map with simulators like MAESPA, this
parameter has to be defined as well. The data used for finding correlation between total
tree height and the crown base height and dbh, was taken from a forest map from Lille
Bøgeskov (2005) that had been laboriously mapped in-situ. The dataset consisted of 77
trees with all the parameters listed previously in sec. 4.7 defined.
The total tree height appeared to be a suitable parameter for estimating the param-
eters, since it is fair to assume a relationship between the height of a tree and the height
its crown, and similarly it is likely that taller trees are older and bigger than short trees,
and hence would tend to have wider stems as well. These relationships were examined
using linear regression, as shown in fig. 5.6, with all trees below 10m discarded.
Figure 5.6: Linear regression lines using tree height as the input variable and the crown
base height and trunk diameter, respectively, as output variables.
Deeming the R2 values for the regression lines acceptable, the two linear functions
were used to estimate the crown base height and dbh of each tree. With the crown
dimensions for each tree fully defined, the LAD is the only lacking parameter. This was
set by first calculating the total canopy volume from the tree crowns, then dividing the
known leaf area of the focus area with the total crown volume, see eq. 5.1, resulted in
an average LAD, which can be applied to all tree crowns.
LAD = LAI · Aforest patch
∑n
i=1 Vcrowni
= 5.0 · 74353 m2
469299 m3
= 0.79 m2/m3
(5.1)
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Results
This LAD was rather high compared to the average LAD found in the in-situ forest
map from 2005, which was 0.41 m2/m3. Exaggeration of the LAD in the new-found
trees is likely due to the effect of discounting the volumes of non-detectable low-canopy
trees.
It was ultimately determined to go with LAD = 0.41 m2/m3, since this had previ-
ously been used in other models with success, and also led to more realistic results when
used in the light simulations.
5.2.2
Full Map Results and Visualisation
The tree-finder algorithm generated a forest map of the focus area consisting of 721
individual trees. The parameters for the trees are summarised in the histograms in fig.
5.7. It can be observed that 5.7 a majority of trees are taller than 15m, whereas the
histograms of the CP in-situ tree height measurements, see fig. 5.5, had short trees
(<15m) almost equally represented, showcasing the limits of using LiDAR data.
The 4 different parameters presented in fig.
5.7 generally appear to have values
comparable to those of tall in-situ measured trees, so the estimations of dbh and crown
height fall within reasonable ranges.
Likewise after translating the forest map into a visual 3-dimensional model in Blender,
see fig. 5.8, the forest map showed convincingly proportionate tree structures at the
proper x- and y-coordinates.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 3-Dimensional Map Generation
45
(a) Histogram of found tree heights.
(b) Histogram of found stem diameters.
(c) Histogram of found crown heights
(d) Histogram of found stem heights.
Figure 5.7: Histograms showing the distributions of the essential tree parameters.
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Results
(a) Top View.
(b) Perspective View.
Figure 5.8: The generated forest map of the focus area, represented in Blender.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Light Simulation
47
5.3
Light Simulation
With the 3-dimensional forest map in Blender, a light environment simulation was run
following the methods presented in sec. 4.8. Through simulation of a series of light
ray directions at various x- and y-coordinates, the local light conditions were quantified
throughout the forest map.
The resulting local light conditions are summarised in the light intensity heat map
shown in fig.
5.9.
The light intensities range from 0.0 to 1.0, and as expected the
intensities drop when nearby, or beneath, tree crowns.
The light maps shown in fig 5.9 show a clear tendency for higher intensities closer
the image border. This is due to the fact that no trees are defined beyond the border.
Moving further into the map the intensity drops as expected, as the positions are now
surrounded by trees omni-directionally. In the inner region, the majority of intensities
drop below 10%, and most are somewhere between 3% and 5%.
Using the LAI value 5.0 from (Pilegaard et al., 2011) in the intensity equation 3.8
presented in sec. 5.3.1, and assuming a randomly distributed crown, ks(0) = 0.5, one
gets
I = I0e−ks·LAI
= 1.0e−0.5·5.0
= 0.082
(5.2)
This shows that the intensity map is indeed within a realistic range, but is a bit
below the intensity found with eq. 5.2. This could be due to the sampling scheme of
the simulation discards incoming light rays above 70◦zenith, and hence underestimate
the intensity.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Results
(a) The focus area with the CPs+SP
marked out.
(b) Heat map showing light intensities in the
range 0% to 30%
(c) Heat map showing light intensities in the
range 0% to 10%
Figure 5.9: Here the heat maps of the light intensities within the focus area are shown.
As seen the boundaries are brighter as a result of the lack of defined trees outside the
area border. In (b) and (c) the same heat map is shown but with different ranges, to
show the overall light condition (b) and to show a more detailed/high resolution view of
the inner area (c).
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Light Simulation
49
5.3.1
LAI and Intensity Correlation
To validate the results of the light intensity map, the 45 positions with calculated LAIe
values, see fig. 5.3, were simulated within the virtual forest map. Each of the found
intensities are presented in fig. 5.10. These majority of the 45 intensities are within the
3% to 5% range. To compare these with real-world data, the LAIe values of the 45 spots
are converted to intensities using the intensity equation introduced in sec. ,
Ii = I0e−k·LAIe,i
= 1.0e−0.5·LAIe,i
(5.3)
Optimally these intensities would correlate with the simulated intensities, but as can
be seen if fig. 5.11, there appears to be no correlation between the in-situ intensities
and the simulated ones, given the R2 = 0.06.
Figure 5.10: Simulated light intensities for the 45 measurement spots (numbers from fig
4.6d).
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Results
Figure 5.11: A plot showing the lack of correlation between the in-situ measured light
intensities (calculated from the LAIe values) and the simulated intensities.
5.4
In-situ Measurements and LAI Correlation
In order to test whether the use of local LAIe can be used to predict the growth potential
at a given site, a vegetation analysis below each hemispherical photography location
was carried out.
First each acquisition site was classified as ”regenerating” or ”non-
regenerating” based on the presence of young tree older than 1 year.
The 45 sites
were split into the two classes, 26 sites were ”regenerating” and 19 sites were ”non-
regenerating”. Carrying out a student’s t-test on the data showed, as fig. 5.12 also
suggests, that the two classes were not significantly different, with a p-value of 0.608.
Class
Regenerating
Non-Regenerating
Number of spots
26
19
Mean LAIe
2.04
2.10
Standard deviation
0.393
0.458
Table 5.3: An overview of the classification of the 45 spots.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 In-situ Measurements and LAI Correlation
51
Figure 5.12: Gaussian distributions for the LAIe values of two the classes representing
spots with young tree growth (regenerating), and spots without (non-regenerating). As
seen the two distributions appears far from significantly different.
The vegetation data points were initially assessed individually leading, but to con-
sider spatial dependencies they were also averaged for each plot, meaning that the 9 data
points in each plot were reduced to a single data point representing the plot. By doing
so outliers were evened out and if the position of the plot was taken into consideration.
The results are shown in fig. 5.13.
From the error bars it becomes apparent, that any correlation that might have been
expressed by through the averages, is like just coincidental.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Results
Figure 5.13: Here the binned CP+SP values are plotted based on their average LAIe
and the average number of leaves per spot. The error bars indicate that 4 of 5 plots are
not significantly different from each other.
5.5
Representative Plots
Estimating general forest parameters using the results from 5 relatively small plots can
only be justified if these plots are good representatives of the forest. Using the LiDAR
data three parameters were examined; height, ”stand density”, and canopy coverage.
Each parameter was based on the information contained within a circular region with
a radius of 25 m, the same size as a CP, moving across the LiDAR height map. The
results are shown in fig. 5.14.
The average height deviation, fig 5.14b, is influenced by three factors, ground ele-
vation, tree heights, and canopy coverage. By looking at 5.14c and 5.14d, the height
deviation appears to be primarily influenced by the high stand density.
Stand density in this case is the number of trees per hectare. The tree counts used
were found using the tree-finder algorithm described in sec. 4.6. The typical measure for
stand density would be Reineke’s stand density index, but since this index is calculated
using dbh values as well, this could not be used. Instead what is meant when referring
to stand density is simply ”the number of detectable treetops per hectare”.
==PAGE:61==
5.5 Representative Plots
53
(a) The rasterised LiDAR height map.
(b) Height deviations map.
(c) Stand density deviation map.
(d) Canopy gap deviation map.
Figure 5.14: Deviation maps showing how various measures vary over the focus area.
The CPs and the SP are marked by the dashed lines.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Interpretation of the Results
The premise of this thesis was to examine how local light conditions affect regenerative
growth, and how to practically predict light conditions for larger forests patches without
extensive field work.
The three main approaches for doing so were;
• Hemispherical photography for quantifying local in-situ light conditions.
• Regenerative vegetation assessment for quantifying local in-situ growth potential.
• Light simulation for predicting light conditions over vast areas.
The results of the hemispherical photographs showed that local LAIe measurements
using this method were remarkably underestimating the actual LAI estimates found
previously (Pilegaard et al., 2011). This indicates that the clumping factor, Ω, might
have been unrightfully set to 1.0, indicating a random distribution of leaves within the
canopy. The LAIe and LAI relate by LAIe = Ω· LAI, and given that it has been shown
that the clumping factor for broadleaf forest can range from 0.4 to 1.0 (Woodgate et al.,
2017), this could indeed be why the LAIe was only half the true LAI.
The measurement of LAIe was not to determine LAI, however, but to act as a proxy
parameter for quantifying the light environment at a given site. For that reason the
underestimation was not particularly important, since it was the relative correlation
between LAIe and site vegetation that was of interest.
This correlation was unfortunately not to be found. When classifying the 45 sites
into ”regenerating” and ”non-regenerating” sites, and binning the LAIe estimates, the
LAIe values were not significantly different. When binning the data based on the CP
plots wherein they were obtained, one could see a slight decrease in number of ground-
vegetation leaves with increasing LAIe above. This correlation neither appeared to be
significant, due to large standard deviations.
The results of the forest map generation were overall satisfactory. The method was,
however, limited to the way LiDAR data acquisition works, as trees below the crowns
of other trees can never be detected. That being said, it is fair to assume that the trees
forming the upper canopy layers have the biggest impact with regard to forming the light
conditions surrounding them, and hence the trees included in the forest map is likely to
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Discussion
be the most influential. The generated forest map had tree dimensions matching those
of trees seen and measured in-situ, and the Blender renderings of the crowns showed
clear resemblance to the aerial photographs if the focus area.
The light simulations carried out within Blender provided a high-resolution light
map, showing that the light availability decreases when approaching tree crowns, as
expected. The light map showed that most places within the focus area had light in-
tensities below 10%, which agrees with the 8% intensity found, as when estimating the
intensity of light penetrating a canopy with LAI = 5.0.
45 separate light simulations were made at the approximate locations where LAIe
values were found using hemispherical photography. The correlation between the LAIe
and the light intensities were not to be found.
When examining the hemispherical
photographs, it became evident that 16 out of the 45 photographs were heavily affected
by nearby trees not represented in the LiDAR data. An example hereof was at position
45 where a nearby tree blocked most of the view of the upper canopy, see fig. 6.1. The
fact that a third of the LAIe data was problematic due to the most influential vegetation
being undetectable by the LiDAR, indicates that using LiDAR for high resolution light
maps is not as feasible as expected.
Figure 6.1: An example that illustrates why measured LAIe values and the simulation
results have discrepancies. The hemispherical photograph has an above average LAIe
≈2.5 while the simulation assumes an open sky.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Significance of Diffuse light
57
The analysis of the representativeness of the circular plots showed that all of the CPs
were generally slightly taller, more dense, and had more canopy coverage compared to
the average of the focus area. These results were not particularly critical for the study,
but did provide an insight that could have, if used earlier in the process, been used to
determining interesting plots to study rather than the CPs and SP.
6.2
Significance of Diffuse light
In this thesis LAIe was used as a proxy variable to describe the light conditions of a
specific spot. LAIe is estimated using the gap fractions over different zenith angles, and
is independent of azimuth angles. This effectively means that the measure is indifferent
to the trajectory of the sun, and only takes diffuse light into account, making all gaps
equally important. By looking at an example of a hemispherical photograph with the
trajectory of the sun mapped out, see fig. 6.2, it becomes evident that if direct sunlight
has an influence on regenerative growth, some gaps are indeed more significant.
The presence of direct sunlight, however, is not necessarily optimal for regenerative
growth, since tree seedlings and saplings are generally shade-tolerant. The direct sun-
light is not damaging to the trees, but give rise to growth of competing herbs and shrubs
that are generally faster growing under high light conditions(Česonienė et al., 2019).
Beech trees, which are amongst some of the most shade-tolerant species in temperate
forests(Sterck, 2007), could indeed prefer low-light conditions, and hence the correlation
of LAIe and regenerative potential could in fact be positive, rather than negative as
hypothesised.
The fact that LAIe values for spots with and without regenerative growth were not
significantly different, indicates that diffuse light availability cannot be used as a primary
indicator of the regenerative potential of a given a spot, and the presence of direct
sunlight should perhaps be reconsidered.
The decision to study light availability as the essential factor for determining growth
potential was based on the assumption that remaining factors, such as water accessibility,
soil composition, etcetera, were homogenous throughout the forest and therefore could
be disregarded. This was not necessarily the case for the 4 CPs, which were located on
different sides of a drainage ditch, and possibly at different elevations, affecting the soil
water conditions. To complete the dataset and not only account for diffuse light, the
trajectory of the sun as well as the soil conditions should be accounted for as well.
6.3
Outdated Data
A caveat of the LiDAR data source was the time of its acquisition. Kortforsyning, which
provides the LiDAR data, updates the LiDAR data in blocks, and the last time Lille
Bøgeskov was updated was in 2015.
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Discussion
Figure 6.2: A sun map showing the trajectory of the sun over the sky.
The image
illustrates that the gaps in the lower part of the image will be more influential in regard
to the availability of direct light.
The LiDAR data is therefore five years older than the hemispherical photographs
and vegetation assessments. The acquisition time difference would generally be accept-
able, given that five years would rarely give rise to radical changes in a stable forest
environment, which is not subjected to big natural or silvicultural thinnings.
Lille Bøgeskov, however, was thinned in 2013 following a damaging hurricane event,
which is likely to have made the consecutive years less stable and more ”regenerative”.
Likewise 2018 was an extraordinarily dry year in Denmark, and the prolonged drought
could have set back or wiped out establishing growth, and caused the vegetation analysis
to be biased towards showing regenerative growth in wetter regions rather than brighter
ones.
The LiDAR data was also obtained before leaf-out, and hence the height data is
based on the reflections of penetrable branches and twigs rather than an effectively solid
canopy. Since each data point is a result of the combined light reflections of an area
with a 20 cm radius, the tree crowns in the LiDAR dataset will appear shrunken, due to
the limited reflections of twigs in the crown borders, and causing the observed canopy
gaps to be exaggerated.
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Simulation Performance
59
6.4
Simulation Performance
The main element of the developed simulator was the intensity equation,
I(θ, [d1, d2, ..., dn]) = I0cos(θ)e−
k
cos(θ)·LAD·∑n
i=1 di
(6.1)
For every spot, whose light environment had to be simulated, a sampling setup was used
with 8 different azimuth angles and 6 different zenith angles, making a sampling scheme
of 8 · 6 = 46 light rays for each position. The focus area was approximately 246m · 302m
in size, so to simulate the entire area in 1m steps, in order to achieve a high resolution
light map, would require 74292 samplings of the 46 light rays. Each light ray needs to
be evaluated in regard to all nearby tree crowns individually. With ”nearby” defined as
within 70m, the number of crowns to be evaluated would be approximately 100.
Simulating the light environment at a single position would require the simulation of
46 · 100 = 4600 light rays, and for the entire map this would become 4600 · 74292 light
rays, which took +12 hours to complete, even with some calculations running in parallel.
The way the simulation was set up to work with actual shapes within Blender is likely to
have severely slowed down the processing time, rather than working with mathematical
definitions of the crowns.
Working at lower resolutions, for instance with step sizes of 3m rather than 1m re-
duced the processing time significantly to < 2 hours.
The results of the simulations as seen through the light map appears promising, but
it is important to remember that the system was made on a series of assumptions, here
amongst
• Forests do not change significantly over 5 years, and LiDAR data dating back 5
years can therefore be used to represent the current state of a forest.
• Big trees composing the top canopy layers are the main reasons for variability in
local light environments.
• The leaves of beech trees are randomly oriented and distributed homogeneously
throughout the crowns.
• The crowns of beech trees can be approximated by ellipsoids, and their is a linear
relationship between how tall the trees are and at what height their crown begins.
Less assumptions are always preferable, and with more time some of these could
possible be dissolved by in-situ studies.
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Discussion
6.5
Future Work
The data used for this thesis was concentrated within the 4 CPs and a single plot chosen
specifically for this project, the SP. The 4 CPs were already defined before the begin-
ning of this thesis study as part of the ICOS project. The hemispherical photographs
captured within these plots were in many cases biased by the presence of trees within
close proximity of the camera, which distorted the resulting LAIe measures. The vege-
tation assessments, which were coupled to the positions of the photographs, often had
no vegetation to measure, making them less informative.
Given more time it would be ideal to step out of the CPs and try to locate distinctive
areas, possibly using the deviation maps, that could provide different light environments
to study. The in-situ light measurements were limited to the use of hemispherical pho-
tographs, even though a plant canopy analyser, LAI-2000, was available. Instead of
being affected by unfortunately positioned branches covering the view of the camera,
the LAI estimates from the 45 spots, should also be measured by averaging multiple
LAI-2000 measurements from each of the spots.
In hindsight the hemispherical photographs obstructed by nearby branches should
have been discarded, but due to the size of the dataset, they were all taken into account
to provide a stronger statistical foundation.
The light simulator developed in this thesis is rather simple, but complex light sim-
ulating frameworks, such as MAESPA, could have been used to study light conditions
as well.
Going forward the Blender simulator should be compared to the results of
MAESPA, in order to evaluate its performance and results.
The LiDAR data of Lille Bøgeskov is updated in 2020, and therefore it would be
interesting to see whether the new LiDAR data is significantly different from the 2015
data. This could be used to examine whether 5 years of growth could explain the lack
of correlation with the LAIe measurements. With temporally spaced datasets, one can
also study crown and height developments as well as track thinning procedures.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to identify whether regenerative growth potential can be predicted by
local light conditions. By evaluating 45 designated spots within Lille Bøgeskov in Sorø,
Denmark, using hemispherical photographs and vegetation assessments, the correlation
between diffuse light availability and young tree growth was examined.
Local light
availability was quantified using effective leaf area indices, LAIe values, which were
calculated using the 45 hemispherical photographs. The hemispherical image analysis
was implemented in Python, and the commercial canopy analysis software, Hemiview,
was used in parallel to evaluate performance of the Python implementation.
With an aim to study light conditions over extended areas, a 3-dimensional light
simulation pipeline was implemented using Python and Blender. A 7.5 ha area of Lille
Bøgeskov, containing four continuous measurements plots (CPs) and one single measure-
ment plot (SP), was chosen as the focus area, which was used throughout the thesis. A
3-dimensional forest map of the focus area was generated, using rasterised LiDAR data,
image analysis, and linear regression. The generated forest map was inputted in the
simulation, the light intensities at the 45 spots were simulated, and a light map was
generated to display the light conditions of the entire focus area. The 45 simulated
intensities were compared to those of the hemispherical photographs.
The 45 spots were located within the CPs and SP, and to study whether these loca-
tions were representative for the focus area, deviance maps were generated to examine
heterogeneity within the focus area.
The results from the 45 spots showed no apparent correlation between the estimated
LAIe values and the presence of regenerative growth. The average of the 45 LAIe values,
which was initially believed to be near-identical to the LAI of the forest, was found to be
2.06±0.42 and 2.36±0.90 for the self-written hemispherical image analysis and Hemiview,
respectfully. The true LAI of the forest has in previous studies been determined to be
≈5.0, indicating that they LAIe were far from the true LAI. This discrepancy was
believed to be caused by clumping within the canopy.
Intensities calculated from the LAIe values did not correlate with the intensities found
in the simulation. Besides having higher intensities around 35%, rather than ≈4%, the
LAIe based intensities appeared to decrease at spots where the simulation found higher
intensities, with a R2 = 0.06, however, this correlation was discarded.
A third of the hemispherical photographs were obstructed by close-proximity branches,
which resulted in high LAIe values. It is proposed to, in the future, to use multiple mea-
surements around each spot, preferably using a hand-held canopy analyser, to quantify
a spot in order to limit the effects of single branches.
==PAGE:70==
62
7 Conclusion
The methods developed for the thesis, namely the hemispherical image analyser, the
automatic forest map generator, and the light simulator, all performed well and as ex-
pected. The hemispherical analysis software outputted LAIe values comparable to those
of Hemiview, but by using an automatic thresholding scheme. The forest map generator
could quickly generate a map of the focus area which showed great resemblance to aerial
photographs of the area. The light simulator indicated that light intensity drops when
approaching large trees, and the outputted intensity map ranged between 2% and 8%
when inside the forest, which agrees with the expected intensities of < 10%.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
All hemispherical photographs and scripts were attached in a zip-file with the submission
of the thesis.
==PAGE:72==
64
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
Bangare, S., Technical, S., Society, E., & Patil, S. (2016). Reviewing Otsu ’ s Method
For Image Thresholding. (August).
Česonienė, L., Daubaras, R., Tamutis, V., Kaškonienė, V., Kaškonas, P., Stakėnas, V.,
& Zych, M. (2019). Effect of clear-cutting on the understory vegetation, soil and
diversity of litter beetles in scots pine-dominated forest. Journal of Sustainable
Forestry, 38(8), 791–808. https://doi.org/10.1080/10549811.2019.1607755
Duursma, R. A., & Medlyn, B. E. (2012). MAESPA: A model to study interactions
between water limitation, environmental drivers and vegetation function at tree
and stand levels, with an example application to [CO2] × drought interactions.
Geoscientific Model Development, 5(4), 919–940. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-
5-919-2012
Fournier, R. A., Mailly, D., Walter, J.-M. N., & Jonckheere, I. G. C. (2017). Hemi-
spherical Photography in Forest Science: Theory, Methods, Applications. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-94-024-1098-3_4
Gielen, B., Acosta, M., Altimir, N., Buchmann, N., Cescatti, A., Ceschia, E., Fleck, S.,
Hörtnagl, L., Klumpp, K., Kolari, P., Lohila, A., Loustau, D., Marañon-Jimenez,
S., Manise, T., Matteucci, G., Merbold, L., Metzger, C., Moureaux, C., Mon-
tagnani, L., … Wohlfahrt, G. (2018). Ancillary vegetation measurements at icos
ecosystem stations. International Agrophysics, 32(4), 645–664. https://doi.org/
10.1515/intag-2017-0048
Google. (2020). Google earth webpage. accessed 15/06/2020. https://www.google.com/
earth/versions/
ICOS. (2020). Icos webpage. accessed 15/06/2020. https://www.icos-cp.eu/
Jonckheere, I., Fleck, S., Nackaerts, K., Muys, B., Coppin, P., Weiss, M., & Baret, F.
(2004). Review of methods for in situ leaf area index determination Part I. Theo-
ries, sensors and hemispherical photography. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,
121(1-2), 19–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2003.08.027
Laser Technology Inc. (2020). Trupulse webpage. accessed 15/06/2020. https://www.
lasertech.com/TruPulse-Laser-Rangefinder.aspx
LI-COR. (2020). Lai-2200c webpage. accessed 15/06/2020. https://www.licor.com/env/
products/leaf_area/LAI-2200C/science
Monteith, J., & Unsworth, M. (2013). Principles of Environmental Physics: Plants, An-
imals, and the Atmosphere: Fourth Edition. https://doi.org/10.1016/C2010-0-
66393-0
==PAGE:74==
66
Bibliography
Pilegaard, K., Ibrom, A., Courtney, M. S., Hummelshøj, P., & Jensen, N. O. (2011).
Increasing net CO2 uptake by a Danish beech forest during the period from 1996
to 2009. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 151(7), 934–946. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.02.013
Pretzsch, H., & Biber, P. (2002). The single tree-based stand simulator SILVA: con-
struction, application and evaluation. Forest Ecology and Management, 162, 3–
21.
Pretzsch, H., & Forrester, D. I. (2017). Mixed-Species Forests. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-662-54553-9
SDFE. (2016). Danmarks Højdemodel, DHM/Punktsky. (August), 1–11.
Sterck, F. J. (2007). Explaining interspecific differences in sapling growth and shade
tolerance in temperate forests, 1250–1260. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2745.2007.01299.x
Thurnher, C., Klopf, M., & Hasenauer, H. (2017). MOSES – A tree growth simulator
for modelling stand response in Central Europe. Ecological Modelling, 352, 58–76.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2017.01.013
Welles, J. M., & Norman, J. M. (1991). (1991) Instrument for Indirect Measurement of
Canopy Architecture (AJ).
Woodgate, W., Armston, J. D., Disney, M., Suarez, L., Jones, S. D., Hill, M. J., Wilkes,
P., & Soto-Berelov, M. (2017). Validating canopy clumping retrieval methods
using hemispherical photography in a simulated Eucalypt forest. Agricultural
and Forest Meteorology, 247(February), 181–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agrformet.2017.07.027
