==PAGE:1==
Automatic flood mapping
Based on data from the Sentinel satellites
Master Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Simon Kok Lupemba
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Ørsteds Plads, Building 348, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Simon Kok Lupemba - s153283
ii
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A novel method for automatic flood mapping using Sentinel-1 images, called the Region
Growing Based Empirical method (REBEL), is introduced in the context of utilizing the
method in a commercial setting. The method utilizes backscatter coefficients from both
Sentinel-1 polarizations together with interferometric coherence to map flooding on bare
soil and in an urban environment. Three specific flooding incidents: Houston (2017 USA),
Ribe (2020 Denmark) and Vejle (2020 Denmark), are used to test the method. The de-
rived flood maps are compared with results from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti,
et al., 2019 and results from the HASARD service, M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. (2017),
Laura Giustarini et al. (2016), L. Giustarini et al. (2014) and Matgen et al. (2011). The
flood maps are validated for two of the flood events using aerial photos and a Sentinel-2
image. The accuracy of the new method is similar to the results from the article and the
HASARD service. The bare soil flood maps derived with REBEL was shown to have a
high enough quality to test with potential customers. The urban flood mapping was more
unreliable and would need further improvements in order to be used in a commercial con-
text. The value proposition of a flood detection service is explored in collaboration with
Vejle municipality. How customers can use and benefit from the flood maps is identified
as a significant challenge and needs to be further investigated by testing the use of flood
maps with potential customers.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Simon Kok Lupemba, MSc Earth and Space Physics and Engineering, DTU:
First I would like to thank my supervisors Henning Skriver, John Marryman Boncori and
Jason Li-Ying for the valuable feedback and guidance they have provided during the the-
sis. A special thanks to Marco Chini for providing access to the HASARD service, sharing
the results from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019 and answering my ques-
tions about the HSBA method. Vejle municipality also deserves acknowledgement for
their collaboration during the thesis. Lastly I would like to thank Rasmus Eilkær Hansen,
Kristian Sørensen, Eigil Hylgaard Lippert, Laurids Krudt and Helle Kok for proof reading
sections of the thesis.
iv
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Imaging principle of SAR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Scattering matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Scattering mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Speckle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Interferometric coherence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.6
Sentinel-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Flood mapping using SAR
17
3.1
Flooding response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Hierarchical Split-Based Approach (HSBA) method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Urban flooding extension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.4
Region Growing Based Empirical method (REBEL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Business case
33
4.1
Value proportion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Collaboration with Vejle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Data
41
5.1
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Visualizing the data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
Test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6
Implementation
56
6.1
HSBA method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.2
Urban flood extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.3
REBEL method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.4
GIS compatible format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7
Results and discussion
68
7.1
Houston . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.2
Vejle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
7.3
Ribe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
7.4
Overall discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
8
Conclusion
94
Bibliography
97
A Appendix
99
A.1 Revised project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
A.2 Summary from first meeting with Vejle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.3 Letter of intent from Vejle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Climate change and extreme weather events are making floods more common, even in
regions not affected by flooding today. Floods are a threat to the safety of people and a
cause of large economic losses. Disastrous flooding events, like those caused by hur-
ricanes, are the ones we hear most about in the news, but minor floods, which happen
frequently, are also responsible for a great deal of damage to crops, buildings and infras-
tructure. An example of this is the western part of Denmark, where a record breaking
amount of precipitation in February 2020 lead to widespread floods. It is estimated that it
cost the Danish agricultural sector around 10 million € to resow the damaged fields and
cover lost yield1. The costs associated with the damage would have been much higher,
had the flooding occurred later in the growing season. Apart from the economical losses in
the agricultural sector, the floods also caused major damage to infrastructure and private
property.
Flooding is a global phenomenon often covering vast areas of land, which makes it chal-
lenging to map from ground. Currently, there are hundreds of satellites in orbit dedicated
to observing the Earth, offering a birds-eye perspective on floods. Mapping floods from
space provides a broad coverage, which is essential for spotting larger trends and thereby
facilitating data-driven climate adaption around the world. The aim of this project is to
study and implement automatic flood mapping methods based on data from the Sentinel
satellites, while exploring the challenges associated with the commercialization of this
technology. This will help to quantify the issue of flooding, which could potentially aid in
the planning of future flood prevention.
The Sentinel satellites are a collection of different types of Earth observing satellites op-
erated by the European Space Agency(ESA), who guarantee long term operations of
the satellites and provides free access to the data. The Sentinel-1 satellites are Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR) satellites which are able to image at night and through cloud cover,
making them reliable in all weather conditions. The ability to image through clouds makes
Sentinel-1 a reliable tool for flood mapping, and Sentinel-1 is therefore used for all results
shown in this thesis. A Sentinel-1 SAR image is seen in Figure 1.1. Flood mapping is a
well known application of SAR imaging and more than 20 articles about flood mapping
using SAR images were published in the period from the 2001 to 2015, Schumann and
Moller (2015). The title of the thesis is ”Automatic flood mapping based on data from the
Sentinel satellites”, but it is only data from Sentinel-1 that is used2. It would have been
interesting to incorporate data from the other Sentinel constellations in the flood mapping,
but this was not possible in the time scope of this thesis.
Entrepreneurial thesis
This thesis is an entrepreneurial thesis that combines a classical technical thesis with an
entrepreneurial perspective on the potential commercialization of the technology. The
majority of the focus is on the technical development which constitutes around 80% of
the work done during the thesis. The thesis is made in cooperation with the early stage
startup Rebel Maps, that consist of three co-founders, the author being one of them3.
1Article from DR.dk
2An image from Sentinel-2 is used for validation in one of the test cases
3Rebel Maps is not a registered company yet. Rebel Maps was founded by Kristian Sørensen, Eigil H.
Lippert and Simon K. Lupemba
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Left: VV polarization (σ0
V V ), Right: VH polarization (σ0
V H). A visualization
of a SAR image acquired by Sentinel-1. A technical description of the visualization is
given in Chapter 5. Note that the two polarizations are scaled differently. The colored
squares in the image are examples of different land types. The red square is town of
Vejle (urban area), the blue square is in Vejlefjord (water), the green square is Ammitsbol
Skov (forest) and the orange square is agricultural fields. The images were acquired on
the 30th January 2020
The overall vision of Rebel Maps is to provide user-friendly analytics and maps, based on
satellite data, that enables smart climate adaption. One of the planned services by Rebel
Maps is automated flood mapping, because it is a recurring challenge that is globally rele-
vant and important for climate adaption. A user-friendly affordable flood mapping service
would help to democratize the satellite data by enabling customer segments, without prior
knowledge of satellites, to access and use satellite based flood mapping.
Rebel Maps has been a central part of defining this thesis. The business case described
in the thesis revolves around a pilot project with the municipality of Vejle that was agreed
upon before stating the thesis.
Main goals
The points of interest explored in this thesis can be summarised in the four following goals:
1. Investigate the potential and the challenges of flood mapping based on the data
from Sentinel-1.
2. Explore Rebel Maps value proposition of providing satellite based flood mapping to
municipalities in collaboration with Vejle.
3. Implement and test an exiting method for SAR based flood mapping described in
scientific literature.
4. Develop, implement and test a flood mapping method that can be used by Rebel
Maps for customer testing.
The hope is that the code developed in this thesis can be used as the core for the minimal
viable product (MVP) of Rebel Maps. The concept of MVP is described in Chapter 4.
Flood mapping
The existing flood mapping method implemented in this thesis is the method Hierarchi-
cal Split-Based Approach (HSBA) described in M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017. The
method is well suited for mapping flooding in open areas and is available as a scientific
service on the European Space Agency (ESA) ”Grid Processing on Demand ” platform
under the name HASARD, credit: M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. (2017), Laura Giustarini
et al. (2016), L. Giustarini et al. (2014) and Matgen et al. (2011). The HASARD service
2
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:11==
is developed by Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST) and it is patent
pending according to the ”Terms and conditions of use”4. A commercial version is avail-
able on the WASDI platform and is used by government agencies in south East Asia, the
World Food Program, the World Bank and more5. The method has been extended to
include flooding in urban environments, Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019.
This extension is also implemented and tested in the thesis.
A method to map flooding in both open areas and urban environments is developed in this
thesis. The method exploits both polarizations available in the Sentinel-1 data instead of
only using a single polarization, as is done by the HSBA method. The motivation for
this method is to introduce new ideas to the field of automatic flood mapping. The new
proposed flood mapping method helps to avoid potential patent issues and makes it easier
to build upon commercially.
The flood mapping methods are tested on a range of real world cases. The flood maps
are validated using aerial photos or optical satellite images when possible.
Technical setup
Using SAR images for flood detection requires a significant amount of preprocessing. This
is done using functions from a code toolbox developed in a previous graded project by the
author, Lupemba and Lippert (2020). The topic of the project was the implementation of
a Sentinel-1 interferometric coherence processing chain. The toolbox from the project is
handed in together with the thesis as ToolBox.zip. Minor modifications have been made
to the toolbox during this thesis, such as bug fixes and a few new functions, while the
majority of the toolbox is unchanged. There has also been significant code development
during the thesis and the functions developed are handed in together with the report,
speciale_tools.jl. A few functions of minor importance in speciale_tools.jl were not written
by the author as clearly stated with comments in the code.
All the code is written in The Julia Programming Language because of its high perfor-
mance, similar to C, and easy syntax, similar to Python and Matlab. The functions devel-
oped during this thesis add up to around a thousand lines of code6. Open source libraries
are used for standard tasks like optimisation and interpolation when possible, but all SAR
related functions were developed by the author. The choice to not use any commercial
software has been deliberate, in the interest of having full control of the software used
and to simplify the process of future deployments of the software.
The amount of data analyzed in this thesis is in the order of hundreds of GB. Therefore
a virtual machine7 on Amazon Web Service (AWS) was used for the majority of the pro-
cessing. The AWS credits needed for this were provided by Rebel Maps.
The reader is kindly asked not to share code handed in with the thesis without the explicit
consent of the author.
4The content and status of the patent is unknown. M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. (2017) does not mention
anything about a potential patent.
5The source is a mail correspondence with Marco Chini, LIST
6This is not including the scripts made for the actual processing
7Setup by- and shared with Eigil Lippert
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
This chapter is a brief introduction to Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) satellites and gen-
eral concepts in the interpretation of SAR images. It is far from exhaustive but serves to
give the reader a basis for the theory and concepts used in the thesis. A reader with a
broad knowledge about SAR might skip this chapter. The imaging principle of SAR is ex-
plained in this chapter followed by a short mathematical introduction to backscattering of
a radar pulse. The different common mechanisms of backscattering is introduced as they
will be used throughout the report to interpret the SAR images and the results. Speckle
is always a concern when working with SAR images so a short section is dedicated to
address this. Interferometric coherence has shown to be a useful tool for flood detection
in urban areas (Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019) so this is also presented
in this chapter. Lastly, since all SAR images used in this report are from the Sentinel-1
satellites, a short description of them are included at the end.
2.1
Imaging principle of SAR
This section is a modified copy of a section in a previously graded report by the author,
Lupemba and Lippert (2020). The basic geometrical setup of the SAR satellite is shown
in Figure 2.1. The setup builds on the principle of a side looking radar which transmits
radar pulses, in the microwave spectrum, sideways towards targets on the ground as it
moves in the azimuth direction. When the radar pulse hits targets on the ground, part
of the pulse is scattered back to the radar. The radar records the amplitude and phase
of the backscattered radiation for a range of times. The different times correspond to
different positions on the ground since the backscattered radiation from targets close to
the satellite will arrive at the satellite before backscattered radiation from targets far away.
The measurements of the backscattered radiation of a pulse for a set of times will result in
a line of pixels in the image. As the platform moves a bit further in the azimuth direction,
the next pulse is emitted and received and creates the next line of pixels.
The SAR system differs from a side looking radar by taking advantage of the changing
Doppler frequencies from stationary targets on ground to improve the azimuth resolution.
The beam width and pulse repetition frequency of the SAR system is such that the same
target is recorded with multiple pulses. As the SAR approaches a target it will see a
positive Doppler frequency which will decrease until the target is orthogonal to the flight
direction, the position shown between the SAR platform and the house in Figure 2.1,
where the Doppler frequency is zero. As the SAR passes the target it will begin to measure
a negative Doppler frequency. Since the SAR sees the same target several times as
it passes by, it is possible to synthesize a longer aperture length (antenna size) than
physically possible in a regular radar setup. This results in a much improved resolution
of the SAR system compared to the regular side looking radar. It can be shown that the
SAR has the azimuth and range resolutions:
ρaz = l
2
ρr =
c
2B
(2.1)
Where ρaz is the azimuth resolution, l is the aperture length, ρr is the range resolution, c is
the speed of light and B is the spectral bandwidth of the transmitted pulse. It is noticeable
that the azimuth resolution does not depend on the range. This approach is great for sta-
tionary targets however things on ground might move while being sensed which causes
4
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: The fundamental satellite SAR flight geometry. Image credit: Mohr (2005)
errors in the SAR data. As an example of this, cars on a highway will not appear to be on
the highway in a SAR image, instead they will be displaced some distance away from the
highway depending on their velocity.
The backscatter signal recorded by the SAR can be described as a complex signal z, and
this leads to an image with complex pixel values. A complex image contains information
about the intensity of the backscatter and the phase of the backscattered radiation:
1. The intensity of the backscatter provides useful information about the ground and
is particularly sensitive to the ground texture and the orientation of that texture. As
an example a field of crops will look different than a field of bare soil. Two fields of
bare soil might also look different depending on the orientation of their furrows.
2. The phase of a single image is not very useful due to the fact that the pulse on its
way down to Earth and back up again undergoes millions of cycles and actually turns
up as noise in the final image. However the phase difference between two images
taken from almost the same angle can be used for many different applications. This
is the basis of SAR interferometry which will be introduced later in this section.
2.2
Scattering matrix
It is mainly the backscatter intensity that is used when working with SAR images since
the phase of a single image is useless. The scattering of radiation by a target can be
modelled by a scattering matrix, Richards (2009, page 82-84).
[Eb
V
Eb
H
]
=
[SV V
SHV
SV H
SHH
] [Ei
V
Ei
H
]
(2.2)
where E is the electric field, V (vertical) and H(horizontal) denotes the polarization, Ei is
the incident pulse hitting the target and Eb is the backscattered radiation. The Sij elements
in the scattering matrix determines how a target backscatters an incident pulse. Note
that the scattering matrix notations differs from Richards (2009), where SHV and SV H
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
5
==PAGE:14==
are defined opposite. In Richards (2009, page 81) it is assumed that SHV = SV H for
monostatic radar systems1, like Sentinel-1. This assumption is also adopted in this thesis.
A SAR radar normally emits a pulse with either vertical polarization or horizontal polar-
ization. Take a SAR emitting a vertically polarized pulse. This is the case for the images
used in this thesis. Then the backscattered radiation is given by
[Eb
V
Eb
H
]
=
[SV V Ei
V
SV HEi
V
]
(2.3)
It is evident here that even though the radar only emits a vertical pulse it may receive the
backscattered signal in both polarizations. It is not all systems that are able to measure
both polarizations, but Sentinel-1 is. This gives information about SV V and SV H but not
about SHH. Sentinel-1 has another mode where it emits a horizontally polarized pulse
and receives in both polarizations but then there is no information about SV V .
The scattering matrix is mostly a modeling tool. The quantity normally used for analyzing
the backscattering of a pixel is backscatter coefficient, σ0, given by.
σ0
jk = 4π|Sjk|2
Apixel
(2.4)
where Apixel is the ground area of the pixel. |Sjk|2 is used because it is proportional to the
power of the backscattered signal, |z|2. It is normalized with the area since a bigger area
backscatters more light. The process of going from |z|2 to σ0 is called calibration and it is
briefly described in Section 5.1. The backscatter coefficient will some times be refereed to
just as the backscatter intensity since it is a measure of the intensity of the backscattered
signal. σ0
V V and σ0
HH are called the co-polarization backscatter coefficients. σ0
V H and
σ0
HV are the cross-polarization backscatter coefficients.
Sentinel-1 primary polarization mode is too transmit vertically polarized pulses and re-
ceive the backscattered signal in both polarization. Therefore σ0
V V and σ0
V H are the only
backscatter coefficients used this report. The nought will be omitted to simplify notation.
Note that the notation used in this thesis is such that VV is vertically transmitted, vertically
received and VH is vertically transmitted, horizontally received.
The images shown Figure 1.1 are visualizations of σV V and σV H.
2.3
Scattering mechanisms
There is a range of different ways a target on the ground can scatter the radar pulse.
A quick overview is given here based on Richards (2009, chapter 5). Figure 2.2 shows
the most common scatterings mechanisms. The three scattering mechanisms that are
most relevant for this thesis are surface scattering, volume scattering and double bounce
scattering (corner reflector in the illustration). Subsurface scattering is mainly relevant for
really dry conditions (desserts or dry snow) and radars with long wavelengths. The facet
scattering is simply an intense specular reflection of the radar pulse.
Surface scattering
Good examples of surface scattering are water, roads and sparsely vegetated or bare
agricultural areas. Surface scattering happens when the pulse is reflected from a surface.
Part of the radiation is absorbed by the surface and another part is reflected. If the surface
1A monostatic radar is a radar where the transmitter and receiver is located on the same platform. A
bistatic radar will have the transmitter and receiver placed in two different locations
6
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of different scattering mechanisms. The black arrows indicate the
travel path of the radar pulse. Image credit: Richards (2009, page 136)
is smooth the reflection will be specular, away from the satellite, and no backscattering
will occur2. A rough surface will on the other hand scatter some of the reflected light back
at the radar. This is illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: The effect of roughness on the backscattering from surfaces. Image credit:
Richards (2009, page 139)
The backscattering of a surface depends on the roughness of the surface3 and the di-
electric constant, at the frequency of the radar. In general, a rough and moist surface will
have a high backscatter coefficient whereas a dry or smooth surface will have a lower
backscatter coefficient. This can be seen with the results from the Semi-Empirical Model
for surface scattering, by Nashashibi et al. (1998), shown in Figure 2.4 and 2.5. Look-
ing at Figure 2.4 it is clear to see that the backscatter coefficient is very dependent on
the roughness of the surface. Water often appears dark in SAR images because of its
smooth surface even though it has a high dielectric constant at microwaves. The calm wa-
ter simply reflects the light away from the radar. Figure 2.5 shows the cross-polarization
backscatter coefficient relative to the co-polarization. It is worth to notice, that the cross-
polarization is much lower than the co-polarization for all conditions but it is especially low
for smooth surfaces. This means that the cross-polarization backscatter coefficient drops
even faster when a surface becomes smooth.
The low backscatter coefficient of from smooth surfaces can easily be seen in the SAR
image in Figure 1.1 where the water, in the blue square, is dark in both polarizations. The
fields, in the orange square, have much higher backscatter coefficients because of their
roughness even thou they have a lower dielectric constant.
2If the surface is angled perpendicularly to the satellite then it will result in facet scattering
3relative to the wavelength of the radar
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: The VV backscatter coefficient given by the Semi-Empirical Model for surface
scattering. Image credit: Richards (2009, page 146).
Figure 2.5: The ration between the cross polarization and co-polarization backscatter
coefficients given by the Semi-Empirical Model for surface scattering.
Image credit:
Richards (2009, page 144). The y-axis is modified to fit the notation of this thesis where
VH is vertically transmitted and horizontally received.
8
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:17==
2.3.1
Volume scattering
Volume scattering is common for dense vegetation. A prime example of volume scatter-
ing is the canopy of a forest. Volume scattering is often modelled using a cloud model
like the one shown in Figure 2.6. Each dot is a scatter and can be modelled by a thin
randomly oriented cylinder. When the radar pulse hits the volume scattering layer some
of the radiation is bounced around and backscattered from the layer. Depending on the
thickness of the volume scattering layer some radiation may be transmitted to and re-
flected from the surface below. This radiation will then interact with the volume layer
again after the reflection. This can be modelled as attenuation of the radar pulse. This
is important in many real world cases but let us start by just focusing on the properties
of the volume scattering. If the individual scatterers are randomly orientated it will lead
to a depolarization of the radiation as shown in Figure 2.7. A diagonally polarized wave
is reflected when a horizontally (or vertically) polarized wave hits a thin diagonal struc-
ture. This means that even though the light from the radar only has one polarization the
backscattered light will have a mix of polarizations. Freeman and Durden (1998) showed
that the normalised scattering matrix for volume scattering with randomly orientated cylin-
ders is given by ⟨|SHH|2⟩= ⟨|SV V |2⟩= 1 and ⟨|SV H|2⟩= 1/3 where the ⟨⟩indicates mean
values. This leads to σV H/σV V = 1/3 ≈−5dB. The backscattered signal in the cross
polarization is expected to be a third of the co-polarization signal. This fraction of cross
polarization is quite high, compared to the other scattering mechanism, and volume scat-
tering is often recognised by its high cross polarization backscatter coefficient. It is easy
to distinguish a rough bare field from a forest using the cross-polarization.
An example of volume scatter is the forest, in the orange box, in Figure 1.1. The forest
have a high VH backscatter coefficient compared to the fields around it.
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the cloud model for volume scattering. Image credit: Richards
(2009, page 155)
2.3.2
Double bounce
Double bounce scattering is when the radar pulse is reflected from a corner and this type
of scattering is common in urban areas. See the corner reflector case in Figure 2.2. In
double bounce scattering the radar pulse is reflected specularly from the first surface to
the second and then specularly back to the satellite. Using what we know from surface
scattering, this is strongest if the surfaces are smooth and reflective since it give the
highest specular reflections. This is often encountered with buildings, big trees or other
vertical structures when they form a corner reflector with a horizontal surface like the
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.7: Illustration of the depolarization process. The figure shows how a vertically
polarized wave will interact with a thin cylinder depending on the orientation of the cylinder.
(a) The wave pass through the thin cylinder when it is horizontally orientated. (b) The wave
is reflected as vertically polarized wave when the thin cylinder is vertically orientated. (c)
Part of the wave is reflected a diagonal polarized wave (with both a vertical and horizontal
component) when the thin cylinder is diagonally orientated. Image credit: Richards (2009,
page 159)
ground. This can be modeled as a dihadral corner reflector as shown in Figure 2.8.
The pulse has to hit the dihadral corner reflector perpendicularly to the intersection be-
tween the two surfaces for the back scattering to hit the satellite. The scattering matrix
for a dihadral corner reflector, orientated such that intersection between the two surfaces
is horizontal, is given by (Richards, 2009, page 167)
S =
[−ry,V rx,V
0
0
ry,Hrx,H
]
(2.5)
Where ry is the reflection coefficient of the vertical surface and rx is the reflection coeffi-
cient of the horizontal surface. The V and H subscripts in the reflection denote vertical
and horizontal polarization, they are both included because surfaces often have different
reflection coefficients depending on the polarization. The cross terms, SV H and SHV , are
zero when the dihadral corner reflector is orientated with a horizontal intersection. The
vertical component of the incident pulse is reversed because SV V is negative. This does
not effect the backscattering of a completely vertical or horizontal pulse but for diago-
nally polarized pulses the flip of the vertical component will cause the radiation to change
polarization to the opposite diagonal at reflection.
The same effect is seen if the dihadral corner reflector is rotated 45 degrees, around the
line of sight from the satellite. The scattering matrix of this setup would have SV V =
SHH = 0 and large cross terms SHV . This would result in no co-polarized backscatter-
ing but intense cross-polarization backscattering. The orientation of the dihadral corner
reflector is therefore important for the polarization of the double bounce scattering.
Most double bounce scattering observed in SAR images are created by horizontal, or
close to horizontal, orientated corner reflector eg. building/road, building/water or tree/-
ground. We would thus expect a high backscatter coefficient in the co-polarization, VV
10
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.8: Illustration of a dihadral corner reflector. Image credit: Richards (2009, page
104)
and HH, and a smaller contribution for cross polarization, VH, for the double bounce scat-
ters in the SAR images.
The strong double bounce effect is also seen in the red box in Figure 1.1 where Vejle,
has many bright pixels in the VV polarization. The city is far less prevalent in the VH
polarization.
2.3.3
Combinations
There can be several different scattering mechanism present in a single pixel. Take for
example a sparse forest. Here there will be volume scattering from the canopy, surface
scattering from the ground and possible double bounce between the ground and the tree
trunks. In many cases one type of scattering dominates the pixel which makes it really
useful to consider the scattering mechanism.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Speckle
One thing that always has to be considered when working with SAR images, is speckle. A
short introduction based on Oliver and Quegan (1998, chapter 4) is given here. Speckle is
a noise like phenomena that occurs in SAR images because the radar pulses are scattered
from multiple different scatterers inside a single pixel. This is shown in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Illustration of several individual scatterers inside a single pixel. Image credit:
Richards (2009, Page 121)
What is recorded by the radar is the sum of the radiation from all the individual targets
inside the pixel. The backscattered radiation from the targets will have different phases,
even if all the scatterers are identical. This is because the wavelength of the radar pulse
is much smaller than the pixel resolution. The randomness of the phases give rise to
interference when summing up the contributions from the individual scatterers. This leads
to the measured backscatter coefficient of a homogeneous pixels being exponentially
distributed.
Pσ(σ) =
1
σtrue
exp
( −σ
σtrue
)
σ ≥0
(2.6)
Where σtrue is the average backscatter coefficient of the individual targets and σ is the
measured backscatter coefficient. This is an exponential distribution so we have that
E(σ) = σtrue
VAR(σ) = σ2
true
(2.7)
where E(X) is the mean of X and VAR(X) is the variance of X. Speckle is not truly noise,
but depends on the relative positions of the individual scatterers relative to the satellite. If
the exact same pixel is imaged multiple times from the exact same position, the individual
scatterer would add up the same way and result in identical measurements of σ. This is
used in SAR interferometry. On the other hand, if a completely homogeneous area cov-
ering several pixels is imaged, the pixels will follow the distribution given in equation (2.6)
because the phases will add up differently for each pixel. This can give vastly different
measurements of σ from the same field even though it has no texture.
A natural way to reduce the speckle is to average several measurement of a pixel or
several pixels from a homogeneous area. The sum of exponential distributed variables is
gamma distributed so
Pˆσ(ˆσ) =
1
Γ(L)
(
L
σtrue
)L
ˆσL−1 exp
(−Lˆσ
σtrue
)
ˆσ ≥0
(2.8)
12
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:21==
where ˆσ is the mean backscatter based on L independent observations. L is also known
as the Number of looks. It is worth noticing that this becomes the regular exponential
distribution for L = 1. The mean and variance are now given by.
E(ˆσ) = σtrue
VAR(ˆσ) = σ2
true
L
(2.9)
The gamma distribution is shown for different values of L in Figure 2.10 with σtrue = 1. It
is clear that when L = 1 the effect of the speckle is severe and the measured backscatter
coefficient is likely to be far from σtrue. It is definitely better for the L = 10 case, where it is
likely to measure a backscatter coefficient close to the true value. The gamma distribution
approaches a normal distribution when L increases which is another nice property.
Figure 2.10: The distribution of the observed backscatter coefficient when σtrue = 1 for
different number of looks
It can be hard to know the exact number of independent observations L when the SAR
image is processed. Therefore the equivalent number of looks is often used. It is defined
as
ENL = E(ˆσ)2
VAR(ˆσ)
(2.10)
and is estimated using a homogeneous part of the image (a patch of ocean or a field).
When analyzing a SAR image it is a clear advantages to have pixels with a high ENL
since it reduces the variance and gives normally distributed speckle, but this comes at a
cost. Several observations have to be averaged to increase the ENL and this reduces the
spatial or temporal resolution. The most simple way to filter speckle is a boxcar filter. It is
just a local averaging of the σ using a sliding window. This works great for homogeneous
areas but blurs edges and point targets. Some more advanced speckle filters have special
techniques for conserving edges and point targets while reducing speckle.
Another trick to deal with speckle is to convert σ from linear scale to a logarithmic scale
(dB) after an initial speckle filtering. The log transformed of the speckle approaches a
normal distribution faster than the linear when increasing ENL, Xie et al. (2002).
All
backscatter coefficient used in this thesis are therefore converted to dB after an initial
speckle filtering. This is explained further in Section 5.1.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
13
==PAGE:22==
2.5
Interferometric coherence
Parts of this section is a modified copy of a section in a previously graded report by the
author, Lupemba and Lippert (2020). The SAR satellites measures both the intensity and
the phase of the backscattered radar pulse. The process of SAR interferometry (InSAR)
combines two or more images and uses the phase difference to gain additional information
about the mapped area. An important quantity in InSAR is the the complex coherence
that is defined as:
γ =
E(z1z∗
2)
√
E(|z1|2)
√
E(|z2|2)
(2.11)
Where E(x) is the expectation value of x, * denotes the complex conjugate and z is the
complex measurement for a pixel (phase and intensity). Coherence is closely connected
to correlation and is basically a measure of how much the measurements in one image
explains the measurements in the other. In order to obtain two complex signals with a
meaningful complex coherence the SAR system has to image the area of interest twice
from similar look angles. With the Sentinel-1 satellites, this can be done by waiting for the
satellite to pass over the same area twice and looking at the coherence between the two
acquisitions. One image will give z1 and the other z2. The true mean values are not known
so in practise, a sliding window is used to approximate the mean values in equation (2.11)
when estimating γ for each pixel. The complex coherence has an amplitude and a phase
term that both carry information:
1. The amplitude of the complex coherence (sometimes simply called ”coherence”),
|γ| has a value between 0 and 1. It is sensitive to changes in the texture of the sur-
face, because such a change leads to a different phase response. The amplitude of
the coherence is 1 if the measurements are completely identical except for a uniform
change in phase and/or a uniform change in backscatter intensity. Any changes to
the individual scatterers in a pixel will change its backscatter intensity and phase
and lead to a lower coherence. This is why the amplitude of the coherence is sen-
sitive to changes in surface texture even on a scale below pixel resolution. A stable
surface like the ones in cities, or fields of bare soil will have a high coherence but
a surface that changes between acquisitions like water, forests and vegetation will
have a low coherence. This is obviously a useful tool for change detection and land
classification.
2. The phase difference, ̸ γ, is especially useful when processed further. The phase
difference can be used to make elevation models and measure surface deformations
in the centimetre scale.
It is only the amplitude of the complex coherence that is used in this report and it will simply
be refereed to as the ”coherence”. The coherence can be derived using either the VV, HH,
VH or HV polarization. The cross polarization, is not used in this thesis since it is sensitive
to volume scattering which is incoherent. The coherence used in this thesis is only based
on VV acquisitions since HH is not available in the normal Sentinel-1 polarization mode.
The coherence between two images taken 6-days apart over Vejle is shown in Figure
2.11. Pixels with a coherence of 1 is mapped to white, pixels with a coherence of 0 to
black and all pixels between are mapped linearly to a corresponding gray-scale value. It
is the same area as shown in the SAR image in Figure 1.1. It is seen in Figure 2.11 that
the water, in the blue box, is dark because of its low coherence. The forest, in the green
box, is also easily identified by its low coherence. The city, in the red box, and the fields,
in the orange box, have a high coherence because they have a stable surface that did
14
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:23==
not change between the acquisition. The images are acquired in January, and hence a
lot of the fields are without crops. The coherence of the fields would be much lower if the
images were acquired in the summer when the fields are covered by crops.
Figure 2.11: Coherence over Vejle area. The colored squares is examples of different
land type. The red square is town of Vejle (urban area), the blue square is in Vejlefjord
(water), the green square is Ammitsbol Skov (forest) and the orange square is agricultural
fields. The image pair used is acquired the 24th and 30th of January 2020
2.6
Sentinel-1
This section is a modified copy of a section in a previously graded report by the author, Lu-
pemba and Lippert (2020). Sentinel-1 refers to the constellation of satellites, Sentinel-1A
and Sentinel-1B, which are a part of the European Space Agency’s Copernicus program.
Apart from Sentinel-1 there are also other constellations like Sentinel-2, 3 and 5 with dif-
ferent instruments and technical specifications. The Sentinel-1 satellites carry C-SAR
instruments which are SAR operating in the C-band 4. They move in the same orbital
plane 180° apart each with a revisit time of 12 days. This means that most of the Earth
can be imaged every 6th day by one of the satellites. Europe is imaged every 6th days
but other parts of the world is imaged less to save power and limit data transfer. In Table
2.1 the most important parameters of the Sentinel-1 satellites are summarised. Note that
some of the parameters are intervals rather than a fixed value because they vary with the
pixels distance to the satellite. The normal primary polarization mode over land is VV+VH
and Interferometric Wide swath (IW) is the primary imaging mode5. A short description of
the IW imaging mode is given in Section 5.1. All image used in this report is Sentinel-1
IW VV+VH.
4C-band is Radar-frequency band. The names of these Radar-frequency bands can be traced back to
World War 2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio_spectrum
5Source: https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-1-sar/acquisition-modes
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
15
==PAGE:24==
Launch year
1A: 2014, 1B: 2016
Centre frequency
5.405[GHz]
Look direction
Right (relative to flight direction)
PRF (Pulse Repetition Frequency)
1000 −3000[Hz]
Azimuth beam width
0.23°
Incidence angle range
20° to 46°
Resolution (range × azimuth)
2.7 × 22 [m] to 3.5 × 22 [m]
Pixel spacing (range × azimuth)
2.3 × 14.1 [m]
polarization Modes
HH+HV, VV+VH, VV, HH
Table 2.1: Some of the key parameters of the Sentinel-1 constellation. Source: https:
//sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-1-sar/sar-instrument
16
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:25==
3
Flood mapping using SAR
This chapter will first explain the effects of flooding on SAR images and how this can
be used to recognise flooding in SAR data. This is followed by concrete descriptions
of methods for flood mapping using SAR images. The first method is the Hierarchical
Split-Based Approach described in M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. (2017) which is available
online through the HASARD service. This method can be extended to include urban flood
mapping by using interferometric coherence (Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al.,
2019). A section is dedicated to this extension. Lastly a flood mapping method proposed
by the author will be explained. The implementation of the methods are described in
Chapter 6 together with intermediate results of each step. The final results of applying
the method to three test cases are presented and discussed in Chapter 7.
3.1
Flooding response
This section explains how flooding affects SAR images and the interferometric coherence
between them. An understanding of the mechanism at play is needed to discuss the
reasoning behind the flood mapping methods and the results. The focus is on VV and VH
polarization since VV+VH is the most common polarization mode of Sentinel-1 and the
one used in this thesis. The HH polarization will only be described briefly since the image
used in this those do not included this polarization.
It is useful to compare an image taken during the flooding event with a reference image
taken before or after the flooding event for flood detection. In this report, backscatter
recorded during the flooding event will be denoted σF and backscatter recorded before
(or after) is denoted σR, where the R stands for reference.
Flooding can look quite different in SAR images depending on which type of area and
flooding it is. Three different types of flooding are shown in Figure 3.1, and they will be
described individually in the following subsections.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the different ways flooding can change backscatter depending
on the environment. Sentinel-1 is a C-band SAR so it is the black arrows that are most
relevant as explained by the legend below the image. Image credit: Schumann and Moller
(2015)
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
17
==PAGE:26==
3.1.1
Bare soil flooding
The simplest type of flooding is when the entire pixel is completely covered by water.
This is most common in areas with bare soil or low vegetation where ponds and lakes
develop due to flooding. The pixels covered by the flood has the backscatter signature of
water with a low backscatter coefficient in both σF
V V and σF
V H. Flooding like this is often
recognised by the drop in backscatter coefficients in the image taken during the flood
relative to the reference image, σF
V V < σR
V V and σF
V H < σR
V H. The drop in the backscatter
coefficients is of course depending on the backscatter signature of the area before the
flooding and it is hard to see a change for areas with an extremely low backscatter before
the flood.
3.1.2
Urban flooding
Flooding in urban areas is a bit more complicated. These areas are in most cases covered
only partially by water. The ground is covered by water while the building still rises above
the flood. The flood water increases the reflectivity of the ground and thus enhances the
double bounce effect as shown in Figure 3.1. This leads to an increase in back scatter
which is very dependent on the relative orientation between the satellite and the buildings,
L. Pulvirenti et al. (2016). Houses facing parallel to the azimuth direction (flight direction
of the satellite) have a larger increase in backscatter than the ones being off parallel.
Urban flooding is often visible as an increase in backscatter in the co-polarization, σV V
F
≥
σV V
R . The effect is much more subtle in the cross-polarization because water surfaces
are horizontal and thus double bounces with water have no significant cross polarization
backscatter.
3.1.3
Forest flooding
In forest areas the backscatter signature is often a combination of volume scattering from
the canopy, surface scattering from the ground and double bounce between the ground
and tree trunks. The mixture of this is very depended on the wavelength of the SAR
system and the density of the canopy. For flood detection in these areas it is preferable to
have a long wavelength that can penetrate the canopy, but Sentinel-1 has a medium/short
wavelength of 5.5 cm. The volume scattering part is not affected by the flooding of the
ground below the volume scattering. The surface scattering will decrease but the double
bounce scattering will increase. This is only visible if significant part of the radar pulse
penetrates the canopy and is reflected from the ground. This can lead to a whole range of
changes depending on how densely vegetated the area is and which SAR system is used
and this makes it quite challenging to detect flooding in vegetated areas not completely
covered by water. M. Chini, Papastergios, et al. (2016) suggests to look for an increase
in σV V , due to the increase in double bounce, and a constant σV H, from the volume
scattering, when using Sentinel-1. Forest flooding does not receive much attention in the
thesis but is discussed briefly in Chapter 7.
3.1.4
Coherence
The interferometric coherence between two SAR images is also affected if flooding is
present in one of the images. The coherence generated with one image taken during the
flood, and one taken before (or after) the flood, is denoted γF in this thesis. The coherence
between two images both acquired before (or after) the flood is denoted γR. A flooded
pixel, completely or partially covered by water, will have a low γF . The presence of water
changes the surface geometry and the relative strength of the individual scatterers in a
pixel which leads to a loss of coherence. This is even seen in urban areas with only flooded
roads, Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al. (2019). The change in coherence can
be used to detect flooding in areas that are normally coherent and have a high γR, since
a drop in coherence will be observed, γF < γR. This is a key element in mapping floods
18
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:27==
in urban areas since only using the backscatter coefficients can be inconclusive, Marco
Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al. (2019), Li et al. (2019), L. Pulvirenti et al. (2016). The
coherence is less useful for flood detection in areas with dense vegetation since they are
incoherent from the start. The low γR can be used to identify areas with dense vegetation
so they can be treated accordingly during the flood mapping.
3.1.5
Overview
An overview of how the different flood types affects the SAR image is given in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Summery of the common effects of flooding in SAR images
Bare soil
Urban
Forest
VV
Decrease, low σF
V V
Increase, high σF
V V
Small increase
VH
Decrease, low σF
V H
Constant
Constant high
γ
Decrease or Constant, low γF
Decrease, low γF
Constant low
In practice, the flooding response can be even more complicated when there are several
types of flooding present in one pixel. There is not always a clear distinction between
the different types of flooding. Changes not related to the flooding like crop growth, soil
moisture and human activity is also a concern when mapping floods. Human activity is
probably the most severe. Events like harvest, plowing a field or building activity affects
the SAR image by changing the backscatter and coherence. This is worth keeping in
mind when interpreting the data and has to be considered when designing a robust flood
mapping method.
3.2
Hierarchical Split-Based Approach (HSBA) method
This section is based on M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. (2017) that presents the Hierarchical
Split-Based Approach (HSBA) for flood mapping. The method is designed to map bare
soil flooding. It has been implemented and tested in this thesis, see Chapter 6 and 7.
This section will start with an overview of the method and a description of the data required.
After that each step of the method is explained in depth.
3.2.1
Overview
The Hierarchical Split-Based Approach (HSBA) method is threshold based. It only consid-
ers one polarization at a time and uses an image acquired during the flood event, denoted
XF , and a reference image, denoted XR. The pixel values in XF and XR are given by
σ0 in dB. A change image, denoted XC, is also used but this is just the difference be-
tween the backscatter coefficients in the flooded image and the reference image in dB,
XC = XF −XR. The difference in dB corresponds to taking the ration between the im-
ages and converting it to dB because dB is a logarithmic transformation. TOUZI et al.
(1988) showed that the ratio between intensities is a well suited quantity when comparing
regions in SAR images. The pixel values in the change image are denoted ∆σ since they
represent a change in the backscatter coefficient.
Figure 3.2 shows a flow chart of the HSBA method. The flow chart gives an overview of
the different steps in the method. Note that one of the steps is referred to as the HSBA
step and the entire scheme as the HSBA method. The method builds on the hypothesis
that the image contains two classes of pixels, both with normally distributed backscatter
coefficients. These two normal distributions are denoted ˜G1(σ) and ˜G2(σ). The pixel
values are thus assumed to be bi-modal normally distribution, a combination of two normal
distributions. One class representing permanent water and flooding and another one
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.2: Flow chart of the HSBA method.
Abbreviations: Region growing (RG),
Change Detection (CD), Binary mask (BM). Image credit: M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al.
(2017)
representing all the non-water pixels. These classes are often heavily unbalanced making
it almost impossible to estimate both distributions based on the histogram of the entire
image. The HSBA step uses both the change and flood image to generate a binary mask
that selects tiles, square subsets of the image, suitable for estimating the two normal
distributions ˜G1(σ) and ˜G2(σ). These distributions are used to select three thresholds.
A combination of region growing and change detection using the flood image, XF , and
change image, XC, is done using the thresholds. This results in a map of ”flood and water
like surfaces”. The thresholds are also used to do region growing on the reference image
to map ”water surface like and permanent water”. Removing these from the ”flood and
water surfaces like” results in the final flood map.
Each of the steps in this process is explained further the next sections.
3.2.2
HSBA step
The HSBA step is a key element in the method. The goal of the HSBA step is to make
a binary mask XBM which encodes which tiles that are suitable for estimating ˜G1(σ) and
˜G2(σ). The HSBA step is done independently for the flood image and the change image
creating both a flood binary mask and change binary mask. These mask are then com-
bined by a pixel-wise AND operation to give the final XBM. The idea behind this is to find
tiles with a balanced mix of water/non-water using the flood image, XF , and tiles with a
balanced mix of change/no-change using the change image, XC. The hope is then that
by combining the masks the final mask, XBM, will have a good mix of flood/no-flood.
The change image, XC, has a normally distributed class if the assumption of normal dis-
tributed class for XF and XR holds since the difference between to normally distributed
20
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:29==
variables is normally distributed.
It is assumed that the change image, XC, has two
classes. One class representing no-change and one class with pixels that belong to the
non-water class in XR and to the water class in XF . The second class is the flooded
pixels. It is thus assumed that the number of pixels changing from the water class in XR
to the non-water class in XF , pixel drying up, is insignificant.
The left side of Figure 3.3 shows a flow chart of the HSBA step for a single image. The
image is split into tiles and a bi-modal normal distribution is fitted to the histograms of
each tile. Then the fitted distribution is examined for each tile to test if it fits the conditions
for a well balanced bi-modal normal distribution. It is only the tiles with a well balanced
bi-modal normal distribution that are selected in the binary mask XBM. Tiles not selected
are split into four and then each of these tiles are examined. This repeated splitting of
the image into tiles are shown on the right side of Figure 3.3. There is of course a stop
conditions when the tiles get too small to generate a meaningful histogram.
How the bi-modal distribution is fitted and the conditions for selection are described in the
next paragraphs.
Figure 3.3: Left: Flow chart of the HSBA step. Right: Illustration of how the tiles are split
into four new tiles at each level. Image credit: M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. (2017).
3.2.3
Fitting a bi-modal distribution
The histogram of a bi-modal normally distributed variable can be written as
h(y) ≈hf(y)
(3.1)
hf(y) = G1(y) + G2(y) = A1 exp
(
−1
2
[y −µ1
sd1
]2)
+ A2 exp
(
−1
2
[y −µ2
sd2
]2)
(3.2)
where
µ1 < µ2
(3.3)
where µ1 and µ2 are the mean values of the two classes, sd1 and sd2 the standard devi-
ation of the two classes and A1 and A2 determine the frequency 1 of the classes. h(y) is
the normalized histogram, hf(y) is the fitted bi-modal distribution and y is either σ or ∆σ.
G1(y) and G2(y) are the distribution of the two classes. The two classes are assumed
to be water-pixel and non-water pixel in flood image, when y is σ. In the change image,
when y is ∆σ, the two class are assumed to be change and no-change.
1Number of occurrences relative to the total sample size. Not the electromagnetic frequency
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
21
==PAGE:30==
The bi-modal normal distribution is fitted to the histograms of each tile using the Levenberg–
Marquardt algorithm2. The algorithm requires an initial guess and for that the Otsu thresh-
old, yOT , is used, (“A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms” 1979). The
initial guess, µ0
1 and sd0
1 is then given by the mean and standard deviation of pixel in the
tile with y < yOT . The pixels with y > yOT is then used to estimate µ0
2 and sd0
2. Then A0
1
and A0
2 is given by
A0
1 = h(y)|y=µ0
1,
A0
2 = h(y)|y=µ0
2
(3.4)
3.2.4
Otsu threshold
The Otsu threshold is designed to maximise the between class variance. This threshold
is used to find the initial guess for the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm when fitting the
bi-modal distributions.
The threshold is given by.
yOT = argmaxk
([µT ω(k) −µ(k)]2
ω(k)[1 −ω(k)]
)
(3.5)
Where argmaxx(f(x)) returns the argument, x0, that maximises the function, f(x). ω(k)
and µ(k) are defined as
ω(k) =
k
∑
i=1
h(yi),
µ(k) =
k
∑
i=1
yih(yi)
(3.6)
where yi is the center of the bins used to make the histogram. yi is ordered so y1 < y2 <
... < yL where L is the total number of bins. ωT and µT is then defined as
ωT = ω(L) =
L
∑
i=1
h(yi),
µT = µ(L) =
L
∑
i=1
yih(yi)
(3.7)
3.2.5
Selection conditions
Three conditions have to be satisfied for the tile to be selected.
1. The fitted distribution must have two clear peaks: AD > 2
2. The histogram is well approximated by two normal distributions: BC > 0.99
3. The two classes are well balanced: SR > 0.1
AD is the Ashman D coefficient, ASHMAN et al. (1994), given by
AD =| µ1 −µ2 |
√
2
sd2
1 + sd2
2
(3.8)
It describes how well the two normal distributions are separated.
BC is the Bhattacharyya coefficient, Aherne et al. (1998), given by
BC =
L
∑
i
√
h(yi)hf(yi)
(3.9)
If the histogram and estimated distribution fits perfect then BC = 1.
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenberg-Marquardt_algorithm
22
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: A toy example of region growing to illustrate how it works. The seed condition
is x < 2.5 and the region growing condition is x < 3.5 where x is the pixel value.
SR is the surface ratio and is given by
SR = min(r1, r2)
(3.10)
where
r1 = A1sd1
A2sd2
,
r2 = 1
r1
(3.11)
The surface ratio describes how balanced the two classes are and a surface ratio of 1
corresponds to equal occurrence.
3.2.6
Region growing
An easy way to separate the two classes, flooded and non-flooded, would be to use a
simple threshold. This leads to a large portion of miss classifications due to a large over-
lap between the distributions of the two classes. This can be improved by using a region
growing technique that exploits the information about neighbouring pixels in the classifi-
cation. The idea in region growing is to start by selecting pixels that fulfill a conservative
condition and then include connected pixels if they fulfill a more relaxed condition. The
pixels satisfying the strict seed condition is refereed to as the seed pixels and the pixels
satisfying the more relaxed region growing condition is refereed to as candidate pixels
in this thesis. The region growing process starts with selecting the seed pixels and then
includes candidates pixels only if they are spatially connected to the seed pixels. This is
good to find flooded areas that are connected. Figure 3.4 shows a toy example with a
seed condition given by x < 2.5 and a region growing condition given by x < 3.5 where
x is the pixel value. The left side shows the seed pixels highlighted in green. The right
side shows the pixels selected after region growing in green. The red pixels are candidate
pixels not included in the region growing selection. These pixels would be included if a
simple threshold of 3.5 was used to classify all pixels regardless of their spacial context.
The toy example shows how region growing prefers connected areas instead of spread
out dots. This is good for flood detection since flooding often occurs over larger connected
areas.
The region growing process can be written as an iterative equation
XRG,0 =Xseed
(3.12)
XRG,i+1 =XRG,i ⊕k
AND
Xcan
i = 0, 1, ...
(3.13)
where XRG,i is a binary mask of the selected pixels in step i, Xseed is a binary mask of
the seed pixels, ⊕is the dilation operator3, k is a 3x3 array with a cross of ones4, ”AND”
3Known from mathematical morphology
4Dilation with cross kernel includes neighbouring pixels vertical and horizontal but not diagonal
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
23
==PAGE:32==
is the pixel-wise and-operator and Xcan is a binary mask of the candidate pixels. It is
here assumed that all seed pixels are also candidate pixels. It can be seen that XRG
is initiated as the seed pixels. A new dilated mask, XRG,i ⊕k is created each step and
these pixels are included if they are candidate pixels. In this way the candidate pixels
neighbouring already selected pixels are added to XRG in each step. This is continued
until convergence or a maximum number of steps is reached.
Selecting the right threshold for the region growing is an important part of the HSBA
method and is covered in the next section.
3.2.7
Threshold selection
Examples of the threshold selection using real data will be given in Chapter 6. A final
bi-modal normal distribution is fitted to the histogram of the backscatter coefficients of the
pixels in the selected tiles, XBM. The fitted distribution is denoted
˜hf(σ) = ˜G1(σ) + ˜G2(σ)
(3.14)
This distribution is used to select the thresholds for the region growing step. It is assumed
that ˜G1(σ) represents the flooded pixels. Figure 3.5 shows the histogram of the pixels.
The seed condition XF < σseed is selected conservatively to reduce the number of false
positives. In practice, σseed is chosen at the point where ˜hf(σ) starts to diverge from ˜G1(σ)
as indicated by the dotted line in Figure 3.5. The selection of σseed is described in Chapter
6. This is a way to avoid the tricky pixels with a backscatter coefficient in the overlap region
between the two distributions and only select seed pixels which are clearly from the ˜G1(σ)
distribution. The region growing condition XF < σRG is then used to select the candidate
pixels for the region growing. Figure 3.5 show the histogram of the pixels selected by
region growing in the selected tiles, hRG(σ), in green. hRG(σ) follows G1(σ) much closer
than what is possible with a simple threshold. The hRG(σ) curve stops suddenly at σRG
because this sets the upper limit of which pixels are allowed to be included in the region
growing. It could be tempting to just increase σRG to better include the pixels with high
backscatter coefficients from ˜G1(σ) but this comes at a cost. More non-flood pixels would
also be included in the region growing when increasing σRG leading to a hRG(σ) curve
closer to the ˜hf(σ) curve.
A change detection condition is also used for the region growing. This is to ensure that
only pixels with a change in backscatter coefficient are included in the region growing. This
serves to exclude permanent water and water like surfaces from the candidate pixels. The
second condition is, XC < ∆σRG where ∆σRG is a threshold.
σRG, and ∆σRG are found using optimization where the difference between the histogram
of pixels selected by the region growing and ˜G1(σ) is minimized. The function that is
minimised is
fmin =
∑
i
[ ˜G1(σi) −hRG(σi)]2
(3.15)
It is the histogram of the selected pixels in the tiles selected by XBM that are compared
to ˜G1(σi). In this way the thresholds are selected such that the distribution of the selected
pixels is as close as possible to ˜G1(σ). It is expected that σRG > σseed otherwise the region
growing has no effect and just the seed pixels are selected. Flooding in open areas leads
to a decrease in backscatter so it is assumed that ∆σRG < 0.
3.2.8
The flood mapping
The optimal thresholds are used for region growing using XF , and XC for the change
condition, resulting in a map of ”flood and water like surfaces”. There is often included
24
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.5: Histograms of backscatter coefficients. The Blue line shows the distribution
of flood class. The red is the combined distribution. The green line show the distribu-
tion of the pixels classified as flooded by the region growing. Modified from M. Chini, R.
Hostache, et al. (2017)
some permanent water or water like surfaces in the ”flood and water like surfaces” be-
cause the change condition is insufficient to exclude it all. No change condition is applied
when selecting the seed pixels resulting in some seed pixels being permanent water. Fur-
thermore, changing wind conditions can generate a quite large change in backscatter for
permanent water causing it to be included in the region growing. This issue is fixed using
the reference image.
The σseed and σRG found using the XF and XC are used for region growing on XR. Here
no change condition is applied. This results in a map of ”permanent water and water like
surfaces” which is removed from ”flood and water like surfaces” to produce the final flood
map. This is done to reduce the number of false positives.
The final flood map is then a binary map indicating which pixels are flooded. This approach
does not consider urban flooding since it has another response. It is also questionable
how it will handle flooding in densely vegetated areas. It is an adaptive method designed
to map bare soil flooding.
3.3
Urban flooding extension
The HSBA method is useful for bare soil flood mapping. Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pul-
virenti, et al. (2019) proposed to extend the method with urban flood mapping based on
coherence. This section will introduce this extension and describes the different steps.
The implementation and results of this method is given in Chapter 6 and 7.
A block diagram of the method is shown in Figure 3.6. The bare soil flood mapping,
shown in light blue, is done using the HSBA method present in the previous section.
The t0, t1, ..., tn refer to Sentinel-1 images of the area where t0 is acquired during the
flooding and t1, ..., tn before. The article only uses the VV polarization for the bare soil
flood mapping and both the VV and VH for the double bounce extraction. The coherence
is used for the urban flood mapping and to assist with the double bounce extraction. The
coherence used is based on images in the VV polarization.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.6: A block diagram of urban flooding extension. Image Credit: Marco Chini,
Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al. (2019). The coherence notation has been modified to fit the
notation in this thesis
3.3.1
Double bounce extraction
The function of the double bounce extraction is to extract pixels dominated by double
bounce scattering and with stable coherence. This is also described in Marco Chini,
Pelich, Renaud Hostache, et al. (2018). The article focuses on detecting buildings using
the double bounce extraction to update urban footprint maps using Sentinel-1 images.
Double bounce pixels are assumed to be buildings in the image. The double bounce ex-
traction builds on the HSBA method but with some slight modifications. Figure 3.7 shows
a flow chart of the double bounce extraction which corresponds to the red blocks in Figure
3.6.
Figure 3.7: Flow chart of double bounce extraction. Image Credit: Marco Chini, Pelich,
Renaud Hostache, et al. (2018)
The different steps in the double bounce extraction is described in this subsection. First
the temporally averaged intensities (backscatter coefficients), TAI, and the HSBA is ex-
plained. Then the filtering of the bright pixels using the temporal average coherence,
26
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:35==
TAC, is described. The topographic filtering using a digital elevation model (DEM) is also
introduced briefly. In the end of the subsection the output of the double bounce extraction
is commented on.
The data used for the temporally averaged intensities, TAI, are the backscatter coeffi-
cients, σ, in the VV and the VH polarization. The VH polarization is included because it is
useful to detect double bounce when the corner reflector is on an inclined surface.
These TAI, are calculated using an array of images acquired over a long time period, e.g.
one image per month for a year excluding the image of the flood. The methods uses
both images from ascending orbits (satellite flying north) and descending orbits (satellite
flying south). The satellite images the area from two completely different directions in
ascending and descending orbits. The Sentinel-1 satellites are right looking so areas are
imaged from the west in ascending orbits and from the east in descending orbits. Using
images taken from the different directions enables the method to detect a pixel that only
produces double bounce scatter from one of the directions.
The HSBA is carried out on the TAI images but with some minor changes to extract the
bright pixels. The process of tile selection is the same except for a change in the conditions
for selecting the tiles. The Bhattacharyya coefficient condition is removed in favor of a
minimum backscatter coefficient condition, µ2 > σDB. It is more important to get tiles
where one class have high backscatter coefficient than the distributions being normally
distributed. This is because double bounce from buildings is a strong scatterer that has
high backscatter coefficients. A σDB of -3 dB for VV and -7 dB for VH is used in Marco
Chini, Pelich, Renaud Hostache, et al. (2018). The hope is that the two classes in the final
bi-modal distribution is non-buildings, with the distribution given by ˜G1(σ), and buildings,
with a distribution of ˜G2(σ).
The goal is to extract the building pixels belonging to the building class. Region growing is
used for this with the seed pixels selected as σ > σseed and the region growing condition
being σ > σRG since the target is the bright class this time. This leads to σRG < σseed for
the region growing to have any effect. The σseed is selected where h(σ) starts to diverge
from the ˜G2(σ) distribution. It is only the TAI that is used to extract the bright pixels and
no change conditions is applied. The region growing threshold, σRG , is again found using
optimization selecting the threshold that minimizes the difference between the histogram
of the selected pixels and the target distribution ˜G2(σ). Using the HSBA method to extract
the bright pixels gives an adaptive method that is able to adjust to the specific areas being
mapped.
The extracted pixels are filtered using the temporally averaged coherence, TAC. The pix-
els with TAC lower than a given threshold are removed since they are not stable double
bounce targets. The temporally averaged coherence, TAC, is an average of the coher-
ence found using sequential pairs of the VV images used in TAIV V . Building are stable
over long periods of time so it is preferable that the coherence has a long temporal base-
line (time between the two images used to calculate the coherence). Marco Chini, Pelich,
Renaud Hostache, et al. (2018) used images taken one month apart. The TAC is done
on ascending and descending images, separately.
The digital elevation model (DEM) is used to filter pixels affected by layover. Layover is a
phenomenon occurring in SAR images when the image area has steep terrain. The steep
terrain may cause large areas to have an identical range distance to the satellite and thus
compress their backscatter into one pixel. The pixels are ordered by their distance to the
satellite and not the position on the ground. This ordering of the pixels can thus differ
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
27
==PAGE:36==
from their ordering on ground in steep terrain giving rise to layover. These areas can be
identified and removed from the double bounce extraction, using a digital elevation model,
to reduce false positives.
The last step is to combine the bright pixels selected from the ascending and descending
VV and VH TAI-images to a final double bounce (building) mask. The final mask can be
used for the urban flood detection.
This double bounce mask does not have to be generated every time flood mapping is used
over a given area but can be used for years depending on the speed of city development.
This method requires a lot of data. A simplified version of this method is implemented in
this thesis using only images from descending orbits and without the layover filtering. This
is described in Section 6.2 where the implementation of the method is also explained.
3.3.2
Coherence threshold
Having classified the double bounce pixels these can be examined to determine if urban
flooding is present. The coherence based on an image acquired under the flooding event
and an image taken before the event, γF , is compared to a reference coherence found
using images taken before the flood, γR, to determine if the pixels have experienced a
significant drop in coherence. Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al. (2019) argued
that coherence with a short temporal baseline, e.g. images taken 6 days apart, is optimal
when using coherence to detect urban flooding.
A pixel is classified as urban flooding if it is selected as a double bounce pixel and γR −
γF > ∆γ0 where ∆γ0 is a threshold. The urban flood mapping relies on a fixed threshold
instead of the adaptive thresholds in the HSBA method. The urban flood map can be
combined with the bare soil flood map to produce a final flood map.
3.4
Region Growing Based Empirical method (REBEL)
This is a new method proposed in this thesis. The method is motivated by two issues
with the implementation of the HSBA method in this thesis. The first issue is that it is
impossible to selected suitable tiles for estimating the backscatter coefficient distribution
of flood pixels in cases with sparse flooding. The second issues is that occasionally, σRG
or ∆σRG ends up with a ridiculously high value after the optimization. These issues are
mainly related to the implementation of the method where smaller subsets of Sentinel-1
images are used and are described in Chapter 6. The HASARD service does not face
the same issues because it analyses entire Sentinel-1 images. More about this in the
discussion, Chapter 7. Another motivation for this proposed method is to try and combine
the information in VV and VH to do a combined analysis.
A flow chart of the method is shown in Figure 3.8.
The light blue boxes represent the bare soil flood mapping and the dark blue the urban
flood mapping. The two types of flooding are mapped separately. The method relies on
region growing for the flood mapping. The many steps in the bare soil flood mapping
serve to adjust the region growing conditions based on the images making the method
adaptive. The urban flood mapping is not adaptive and the region growing conditions are
just fixed based on tests using the test cases from Section 5.3.
The proposed method builds on some general ideas but the individual steps are not op-
timised yet. It could be interesting to explore different ways of achieving the objective of
each box. Possible alternatives are left for the discussion in Chapter 7. Another possible
improvement is to explore more adaptive ways of doing the urban flood mapping. Only
28
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.8: Block diagram of the change driven approach. The grey blocks are the data
used
one test case with urban flooding is used in this report making it hard to develop and test
adaptive urban flood mapping.
3.4.1
Bare soil flood mapping
The idea is to select a set of training pixels that are representative of the bare soil flooding
and then fit a distribution to their backscatter coefficients. This is done by selecting the
pixels with a large backscatter coefficient decrease in both VV and VH and use them to
fit a 2 dimensional normal distribution to the backscatter coefficients, Gt(σV V , σV H).
The selection criteria for the training pixels are given by
σF
V H −σR
V H < ∆σtrain
V H
(3.16)
σF
V V −σR
V V < ∆σtrain
V V
(3.17)
σF
V H < σtrain
V H
(3.18)
σF
V V < σtrain
V V
(3.19)
where ∆σtrain are fixed thresholds set to -2 dB after some testing. The backscatter coeffi-
cient thresholds σtrain are included to remove very bright outliers that will effect the mean
value and variance. The backscatter coefficient thresholds are set too σtrain
V H
= −7 dB and
σtrain
V H
= −3 dB. This is inspired by the lower limits of the mean backscatter coefficients
used in the double bounce extraction.
The mean vector, µt, and covariance matrix, Σt, of the train pixels then define the distri-
bution, Gt(σV V , σV H). The step of selecting training data corresponds to the tile selection
in the HSBA method but this is more robust for sparse flooding in small areas as shown
in Chapter 7.
Having found the distribution Gt(σV V , σV H) the next step is selecting conditions for region
growing. The way the seed and region growing condition are made are shown in Figure
3.9. Both the intensity and change conditions have to be satisfied for a pixel to be a seed
pixel or considered a candidate in the region growing process. A pixel has to be in the
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
29
==PAGE:38==
seed pixels region (Blue region) in both the change and the intensity space to be a seed
pixel. In the same way the pixel has be in either the seed pixel region or the RG region in
both the change and the intensity space to be considered a candidate when preforming
the region growing.
Figure 3.9: The condition for the region growing. Pixels in the blue regions in both change
and intensity are seed pixels. Pixels in the green or blue region in both change and
intensity are candidate pixels. Note that the blue regions are not limited by the axis but
extend to infinity in the negative directions.
The seed condition is chosen such that only pixels with a large decrease in intensity and
a low backscatter in the flood image are selected as seed pixels. These conditions are
quite strict but serve to limit the number of false positives.
The condition for the pixels included during the region growing is more relaxed. It is just
required that the pixels have some sort of decrease in intensity in both polarizations and
that the intensity is within a certain distance, d, to µt. All pixels within this distance which
fulfil the change condition are allowed to be included in the region growing. The distance,
d, is found by optimization, and adds to the adaptive nature of this method. The distance
d used is just the euclidean distance, L2 norm, but it could be interesting to exploit other
measures of distance like the L1 norm.
Before diving into the selection of d we have to address some properties of the 2D normal
distribution. A 2D normal distribution have contour ellipses given by a constant Maha-
lanobis distance5. The squared Mahalanobis distance is given by
d2
mal(X) = (X −µ)′Σ−1(X −µ)
(3.20)
Where µ is the mean of the distribution, Σ is the covariance matrix and X is a point in the
observation space. The squared Mahalanobis distance of observation from the normal
distribution is Chi-squared distributed with p degrees of freedom where p is the dimen-
sions of the data space, Ersbøll and Conradsen (2016, page 73). The probability that
observations will be inside a given ellipsis is simply found using the squared Mahalanobis
and looking up the Chi-squared cumulative distribution function (cdf).
Figure 3.10 shows an illustration of the contour ellipses of Gt(σV V , σV H). The contour
ellipses are spaced such that there is 20% chance of an observation being in the first
ellipse from the center, 40 % chance of an observation being inside the next ellipse and
so on. The symmetry axis of the normal distribution are shown in red and these are the
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahalanobis_distance
30
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:39==
same as the principal components of the data. The directions of the symmetry axis are
given by the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix Ersbøll and Conradsen (2016, page
286).
Together the contour ellipses and principal axis form small regions of equal probability.
One of them are filled with blue color in Figure 3.10 as an example. 5 % of the observa-
tions should be within each of these intensity regions if the observation follow the normal
distribution. This is used in the selection of d to determine how close the distribution of
the selected bare soil flood pixels is to Gt(σV V , σV H).
Figure 3.10: An illustration of the contour ellipses of a normal distribution and the sym-
metry axes.
The loss function is defined as the sum of squared difference between the frequency of
the pixel selected in the region growing in a intensity region and the theoretical probability
of being in the intensity region. This can be written as
fmin =
k
∑
i=1
(ni
N −p
)2
(3.21)
where fmin is the quantity to minimise when finding the optimal d, ni is the number of
selected pixels in region i, N is the total number of selected pixels, k is the number of
regions and p is the theoretical probability of an observation being inside a region.
This loss function has the advantage that it is not affected by the number of selected pixels
and considers all selected pixels instead of only considering pixels from specific tiles. The
distribution is heavily skewed when d = 0 because of the low backscatter of the seed
pixels. By increasing d the distribution of the selected pixels approaches Gt(σV V , σV H)
until a point where too many high intensity pixels are included and the distribution of the
selected pixels starts to diverge again.
The d that minimises fmin is then used for the final bare soil flood mapping. The fixed
change conditions helps to stabilize the method in case no optimal d is found. This pro-
duces reasonable results even if d blows up.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
31
==PAGE:40==
3.4.2
Urban flood mapping
The urban flood mapping is less sophisticated than the bare soil flooding but it is still in-
cluded to give a more complete method. The urban flood mapping is not adaptive and
relies on region growing using a set of predetermined conditions. These conditions are
chosen based on the knowledge about urban flooding presented in Section 3.1 and ad-
justed based on testing. This method is not optimised and there is room for improvement
but it serves to display the potential of using region growing to urban flood mapping.
The seed pixel conditions are
σR
V V > −10dB
(3.22)
σF
V V −σR
V V > 5dB
(3.23)
γR > 0.5
(3.24)
γF < 0.25
(3.25)
The seed pixels have to be coherent and bright in the reference image indicating that they
are dominated by double bounce. Urban flooding will cause an increase in double bounce,
seen as an increase in σV V , and a drop in coherence. Double bounce scattering with
water should not produce any significant cross polarization backscatter because water
forms a horizontal surface. This is why the VH polarization is not used for the urban flood
mapping.
The region growing conditions for the candidate pixels are only focused on the increase
of backscatter and the decrease of coherence. The conditions are given by
σF
V V −σR
V V > 3dB
(3.26)
γF −γR < −0.25
(3.27)
The condition for the increase in backscatter is a bit more relaxed than for the seed pixels.
The urban flood mapping is simply region growing using these conditions. The thresholds
are chosen based on trial and error with the three test cases used in the thesis. See
section 5.3. Only one test case, Houston, has large areas of urban flooding. There is a
risk of overfitting the thresholds which will cause the method to preform worse on other
data sets.
32
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:41==
4
Business case
This is an entrepreneurial thesis as described in the introduction. This section is focused
on the potential business case of providing a flood mapping service based on Sentinel-
1 for municipalities. This a preliminary investigation since an in depth analysis is out of
scope for this project. The main focus is on the value proposition explained in Section 4.1
and how it applies to the pilot project with Vejle municipality. The example with Vejle will
consist of an initial value proposition, a discussion of the uncertainties and the learning
outcome of the collaboration. One of the main aims of the pilot project with Vejle munici-
pality, mentioned in the introduction, is to improve and sharpen the value proposition.
4.1
Value proportion
This section is based on the theory presented in Osterwalder et al. (2014). The value
proposition is a corner stone in every business model. It is a tool to analyze how a given
product or service will generate value for a given customer or end user. It is through the
value proposition that you will convince the customer to buy or use your service. Oster-
walder et al., 2014 present a canvas to make the generation of value propositions easier.
The template is shown in Figure 4.1 The two parts of the value proposition is ”the value
map” and ”the customer profile”. The value map consists of the products and services
offered to the customer, which pain point they relief and how they create gains. The cus-
tomer profile zooms in on a given customer to list their jobs, pains and wanted gains. An
important aspect of a good value propositions is to ensure that there is a good fit between
the value map and the customer profile. These things are explained further below.
4.1.1
Customer profile
The Customer profile is the most essential part of the value proposition. The customer
is a key element in every business model and without them the business will not work.
General customer profile often miss essential points so customer profiles should always
target a specific customer segment1. It is often good to make several customer profiles
for different customer segments to get an overview.
The customer profile consist of three elements:
1There is a common saying in marketing ”If you’re selling to everyone, you’re selling to no one”
Figure 4.1: Value proposition canvas. Image credit: Osterwalder et al. (2014)
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
33
==PAGE:42==
Jobs: What are the jobs and tasks a given customer has to perform. It does not have
to be related to work, it could also be emotional or personal task. For a parent it might
be to entertain the children, ensure that they complete their homework, provide a stable
income and keep the house clean. Not all jobs are equal. Some are of great importance
to the customer while others are minor tasks.
Pains are the problems the customer has. It can be unwanted outcomes, obstacles, risks
or uncertainties. This could be the children playing too much on their computer, not being
able to help with the homework or living in an unsafe neighbourhood.
Gains are things the customer would like to achieve and the features they expect. Take
a tutoring service for children in elementary school. The gain could be improved learning,
time away from the computer and availability in the afternoon after the regular school.
The customer profile should try to reflect the customer but is initially based on assumption.
The customer profile is then improved by testing the various assumptions and interacting
with the potential customer.
4.1.2
Value map
The value map outlines proposed products and services, how they relieve customer pains
and how they create gains for the customer. This part is under the control of the en-
trepreneur during the product development. A good product should not aim to solve all
the customers’ pains or cater to all gains. The goal is instead to solve a few essential
problems for the customer and thus help them solve important jobs.
The value map has three components.
Services/products: The relevant service which the company offers or intend to offer to
a given customer. This is both physical- and digital products, customer service, product
insurance or similar. As an example a tutoring service might offer a personal tutor, an
online booking system and a tutor review system.
Pain relievers The pain relievers show which customer pains the products and services
will help relieve. Continuing on the example from before; qualified homework help and
time away from the computer might be pain relievers in for a tutoring service.
Gain creators The gain creators help the customer gain something they want. A learn-
ing service should increase the general academic level of the children and not just help
them handing in correct homework. Another gain could be to boost the motivation of the
children.
4.1.3
Fit
The aim of a good value proposition is to make sure that there is a good fit between the
value map and the customer profile. The fit can come in three different levels. The first
level of fit is problem solution fit where the attractiveness of the value proposition has
been confirmed by the customer. The next level of fit is product market fit where the value
proposition has been demonstrated in action. This shows that the products actually help
the customers. The final level of fit is business model fit. This is when it is proven that
a profitable business model can be build around the value proposition. This is the point
where the value proposition evolves into a functioning business.
Finding the right fit can be a tricky process. It often requires multiple iterations of the value
propositions and a range of testing with customers. It can be necessary to change parts
of the product or to target another customer segment to obtain a fit but this is part of the
development process.
34
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:43==
This project will mainly be considering the problem solution fit. The value proposition has
to be changed if it is unable to produce a good problem solution fit. The value map can just
be change by the entrepreneur but the customer profile can only be changed by finding a
new customer segment.
4.1.4
Minimal viable product
The minimal viable product is an important term in lean startups. The idea is to create the
minimal product that can validate the value proposition. A product without extra features
or optimisation but only the core features required for product market fit. The minimal
viable product is a way to test the value proposition in practise with minimal effort. This is
important to avoid wasting time on building a complex product with a ton of features just to
see it fail when it meets the market. A successful entrepreneur has to manage resources
and efficiently test ideas, this make the minimal viable product a treasured concept. The
first version released should be sufficient to give the customer a unique value proposition.
It is completely normal that there is room for improvements and extra features that can
be added in subsequent versions or releases.
4.2
Collaboration with Vejle
The aim of the pilot project with Vejle is to gain experience and test assumptions to enable
further business model development. The focus is on investigating the problem solution fit
of Rebel maps’ proposed value proposition and also identify some of the possible barriers
for the product market fit. This section will start with a small introduction to the pilot project
with Vejle and its background. The initial value proposition is presented and the uncer-
tainties are discussed. This is then followed by a subsection on the knowledge gained by
interacting with Vejle and how it is connected to the rest of the thesis. Perspectives on
further business development is not presented in this chapter but is left for Section 7.4.
4.2.1
Background of the pilot project
The contact with Vejle municipality was established at the Open Innorvation Hackathon
at DTU, autumn 2019. Jette Vindum is the contact person. She was a mentor at the
Hackathon and is a project developer in Vejle municipality Vejle municipality has major
problems caused by flooding and are interested in satellite based flood mapping. This
resulted in an letter of intend, see Appendix A.3 stating that Vejle are interested in a pilot
project. This is the basis of the pilot project referred to in this thesis.
The pilot project was started during the thesis period and is a part of the thesis but will still
be continued after the completion of the thesis.
4.2.2
Initial value proposition
An initial value proposition was made before starting the pilot project to outline the op-
portunities and challenges. It is based on internet research and a short conversation with
Jette Vindum at the Hackathon two months prior to the start of the thesis. The initial cus-
tomer profile is therefore full of assumptions and uncertainties. One of the main goals of
the pilot project is to clear up these assumptions and identify the real challenges.
The customer profiles are inspired by the job titles of the two employees from Vejle mu-
nicipality. The two employees where picked from the attendee list attached to a meeting
invitation from Vejle municipality. The initial value proposition was made before the ac-
tual meeting. The two employees were picked to help visualize the target customer when
making a customer profile. The job titles are climate coordinator and a water manage-
ment engineer both from the environmental department2 at Vejle Municipality. The job
2Teknik og Miljø in danish
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
35
==PAGE:44==
titles represent potential end-users and it is essential to get the interest of the end-users
to validate the problem solution fit and for prototype testing. The job titles are therefore
well suited targets for the customer profile. Customer profiles for other stakeholders in
the municipality would also be interesting for the business development but this is left for
further work.
The initial customer profile is shown in Figure 4.2. It is clear that the major challenge is to
prevent flooding of the city, more explicitly to prevent flood damage. The customers also
have other tasks like monitoring the current flood risk, form proposals for solutions that
reduce flood damage and to advise other departments in the city on this matter.
Figure 4.2: Initial customer profile targeting a water management engineer or climate
coordinator in Vejle municipality. The yellow boxes listed the jobs and task, the red boxes
pains, and the green boxes pains. The green check marks indicates the boxes that are
solve or partial solved by the value map given in Figure 4.3
The initial value map is shown in Figure 4.3. It is based on Rebel maps’ vision of a minimal
viable product, a flood mapping service using Sentinel-1 data. The most important part of
the service is flood maps in GIS3-format. Danish municipalities are already using different
GIS-software to manage digital maps. It is thus natural to provide the flood maps in a
familiar data format that enables easy integrating with other digital maps. The things
listed in the value map are closely related to the customer profile. The jobs, pains and
gains this value map solves are indicated with a green check mark in the customer profile,
Figure 4.2. The rest of the boxes are tagged with a question mark to indicate that there
might be a potential fit.
The match between the initial customer profile and the initial value map gives the initial
value proposition. Rebel Maps will offer GIS flood maps, frequency maps, and graphs
3GIS is an abbreviation for Geographical Information Systems
36
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.3: Initial value map for the minimal viable product envisioned by Rebel Maps.
The yellow boxes list the products and services. The green boxes list how the products
and services relief pains and create gains.
related to flooding in a user friendly way that does not require Vejle to have prior knowl-
edge of Earth observation or SAR. The department can then use the services to quantify,
monitor and communicate the problem in a cost efficient way. This will help them advise
other departments, find and evaluate solutions, compensate farmers and spot the larger
trends.
The value proposition is built on a lot of assumptions. The major goal of the pilot project is
to test some of these assumptions by discussing which problems the department actually
is facing and how flood mapping might help them. Customer interaction is a well known
way to sharpen and test a value proposition.
This leads to a range of question which would be nice to have answered.
• What are the primary tasks of the department?
• What are the main challenges of the department?
• How are you currently mapping flooding events?
• Which water management projects are planned?
• How will flood mapping help you?
• Which third parties will be affected by flood mapping?
• Which third parties will you share the flood maps with?
• How are you currently communicating the problem with flooding?
• How are you currently quantifying the problem with flooding?
• How will the spatial and temporal resolution affect you?
• How crucial is the delivery time for your applications?
• Which type of areas are you most interested in? (Urban, suburban or rural)
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
37
==PAGE:46==
• What data do you already have on flooding in Vejle?
The questions are not asked directly to Vejle municipality but are addressed during the
pilot project.
4.2.3
Meeting with Vejle
The main interaction with Vejle municipality was a meeting on February 2020 with four
employees. A summary of the meeting is given in Appendix A.2. Vejle municipality agreed
to provide feedback on a flood map of an event in 2020 but this was never received. This
is most likely due to a shift in priorities dealing with the Covid-19 lock-down in the spring
of 2020. It is still the plan to continue the pilot project and receive feedback on prototype
products but this is not done in this thesis.
Figure 4.4: Example of flooding in Vejle municipality. The red color indicates areas where
the backscatter coefficient dropped below its normal value on the 17. February 2020.
This drop of backscatter coefficient is most likely due to bare soil flooding. The white
polygons indicate potential flooding along streams. A zoomed in image of the black box
is shown in Figure 4.5. This visualization is a temporal composite of SAR images and the
visualization technique will be described in Section 5.2. The contrast and filtering in this
images are slightly different from the image shown at the meeting with Vejle. The black
box and the white polygons where also added later. The original image is included in the
summary, Appendix A.2.
An example of flooding seen in Sentinel-1 images was used to spark the municipalities
interest and set the basis for an informed discussion. Figure 4.4 shows a visualization
of flooding around Vejle. The visualization technique will be described in Section 5.2.
The red areas in the image are regions with a large decrease in backscatter on the 17th
February. This is probably caused by bare soil flooding. The image covers most of Vejle
municipality.
The potential flooded regions in the image correspond well with the prior experience of
the participants from Vejle municipality. They confirmed the presence of flooding along
the streams highlighted with white polygons in Figure 4.4. A zoomed in version of the
image is shown in Figure 4.5. Four red patches are visible in the center of the images.
These are assumed to be small lakes formed on fields due to flooding.
The small lakes and ponds on fields are examples of flooding that the municipality was
unaware off. The participants from the municipality were quite willing to interpret the
images and showed a high level of trust in images. This indicate that the customers
acceptance and trust in the data might not be as big of a challenge as one could fear.
38
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.5: A zoomed in image of the covering the black box in Figure 4.4. The four red
patches in the center of the image are assumed to be small lakes formed on fields due to
flooding.
The municipality is not mapping the extend of floods in rural areas at the moment. A well
known area in the city center is occasionally flooded but this is easily mapped manually.
The flooding in the city is also documented by citizens and journalist which helps the
municipality to understand the extent. The municipality is currently using Scalgo (a flood
modelling software based largely on high resolution elevation models) to estimate the
extent of floods in rural areas and asses the flood risk. They are quite satisfied with the
software.
The flooding of the rural areas in the image contained information new to the municipality
but flooded fields are not under the responsibility of the municipality but the farmer’s prob-
lem. The municipality has some responsibility in areas where they have altered the water
flow but the complaints are mostly related to increased soil moisture leading to swamp
like fields.
Vejle municipality is interested in comparing the satellite derived flood maps with Scalgo
to validate the output of the software and check its accuracy but this is not a recurring
task. Results from the flood mapping methods implemented are not compare with Scalgo
in this thesis an this is left for future work4
Vejle municipality’s main concern with flooding is the water levels in the streams going
through the city. If the water flow in the streams goes over a critical point the water level
in the city channels will exceed their limit and cause flooding in the city center. The mu-
nicipality has flood gates on some of the channels which enables them to smooth out
peaks in water flow and keep the water levels within capacity. The municipality is also
implementing small basins on selected fields up stream of Grejs å5 to further delay the
water and reduce peak stress.
The task of controlling the floodgates is quite complicated and builds on experience.
Weather forecasts and real time monitoring of the water levels are essential parts in con-
trolling the floodgates but a big uncertainty is the soil moisture of streams drainage basins.
This has a significant effect on how a given rain event will change the water levels in the
streams. The municipality is interested in soil moisture of the rural areas because it might
4This will likely presented at the oral defence of the thesis
5”å” is the danish word for ”stream”
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
39
==PAGE:48==
help them controlling the flood gates better. SAR images are sensitive to soil moisture
and estimation of soil moisture using SAR images is a well known application. unfortu-
nately, it requires other models than flood mapping and could easily be a thesis project in
its own right.
A forecasting system for the water levels in the stream is high on the municipality’s wish
list. It could be an AI model to help with forecasting water levels in the streams and
guide optimal control. This is out of the scope of this thesis and it is speculative how
much satellite images could contribute to a forecasting system like this. It is however a
business case that could be interesting to explore in the future.
4.2.4
The acquired knowledge
The collaboration with Vejle has shown that they are interested in flood maps based on
Sentinel-1 images but unsure how they can use them in the long run. The major challenge
for getting a proper product solution fit is not the technical specifications of the product.
There is no reason to believe that small changes in accuracy, resolution or delivery time
will lead to any significant change in the value proposition. The main interest was the rural
flooding which is quite important from a technical stand point. The real challenge from a
business development stand point is how the customer will be able to act based on the
flood maps and benefit from the information. A proper problem solution fit is not reached
before the municipality can see clearly how the flood map will create value for them. One
of the hopes is that the municipality will discover new tasks or improvements to old tasks
when they are presented with sample flood maps but this is uncertain. It would be ideal
to have a large catalog of use cases to inspire customers on how they can use the data.
The acquired knowledge are based on the collaboration with Vejle municipality but the
issue of how to use the data is probably common among municipalities.
40
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:49==
5
Data
The SAR images and test cases are an important part of the thesis. The test cases consist
of SAR images of flooding and are used to evaluate and compare the flood detection
methods. The preprocessing of the SAR images and the choice of reference images are
explained in the first section of this chapter. The reference images used in this thesis are
made based on several images acquired before the flooding event.
The second section in the chapter is dedicated to explaining the methods used to visualize
the SAR images and the coherence throughout the thesis. The last section describes the
three test cases used. Descriptions of the flooding events and the motivation for selecting
the test cases is given here.
5.1
Preprocessing
The Sentinel-1 images used are initially downloaded as Interferometric Wide (IW) Swath
Single look complex (SLC) products1. Several preprocessing steps are needed before
starting the actual flood mapping. The preprocessing builds on a code toolbox developed
in a previous project by the author Lupemba and Lippert, 2020. This will be refereed to
as the toolbox throughout this section.
This section will briefly go through the different preprocessing steps, explain their function
and describe if they where developed in this thesis or are taken from the toolbox. The
additional challenges with processing stacks of SAR images is also explained in this sec-
tion. Subsection 5.1.7 is included to compare the preprocessing done in this thesis with
results from ESA’s official software, SNAP2.
5.1.1
Coregistration
The coregistering step aligns several images, of the same area, such that the indices of
a given pixel corresponds to the same location on the ground for all coregistered images.
This is necessary to compare the backscatter coefficients of different images of the same
location and to compute the coherence.
The coregistration of two images is done using functions from the toolbox. The additional
steps needed to process a stack of images is described in the end of the section. Two
images are coregistered by resampling the pixels values in one image, the slave image,
to the corresponding location in the other image, the master image. A look up table is
used to do the resampling. The look up table contains master pixel indices, the corre-
sponding locations on the ground (latitude longitude and height) and the corresponding
slave pixel indices. The look up table is made using auxiliary information (included in the
SLC product) and precise orbit files (downloaded separately). The slave image is then
resampled based on the look up table. Special care has to be taken when resampling
the slave image because of frequency modulation in the complex pixel values in the IW
SLC images. This will not be described in this thesis. The look up table contains the
relation between pixel indices of the registered images and coordinates. This is useful
when comparing the images with georeferenced data.
1https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-1-sar/products-algorithms/level-1/
single-look-complex/interferometric-wide-swath
2http://step.esa.int/main/toolboxes/snap/
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
41
==PAGE:50==
Note that the coregistration function in the toolbox had a small bug3 that was fixed by Eigil
Lippert. The bug generated dark lines in the coherence which are discussed in Lupemba
and Lippert, 2020. The fixed version of the coregistering function is used in this thesis.
5.1.2
Mosaicing
The IW imaging mode used by Sentinel-1 is a way to extend the size of the area imaged
by the satellite. The name of the technique used is ”Terrain Observation with Progressive
Scans (TOPS)”. Figure 5.1 shows an illustration of this technique. First the satellite im-
ages burst 1 in swath 1 by scanning the antenna in the azimuth direction. Then it adjusts
the inclination of the antenna to image burst 1 in swath 2 followed by another inclination
adjustment to image burst 1 in swath 3. The process is then repeated for the next burst in
each swath. The bursts and swaths overlap to ensure full coverage. The IW SLC product
contains three swaths in separated files each with around 10 bursts separated by a band
of pixels with the value of 0.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of Interferometric Wide Swath (IW) imaging mode used by Sentinel-
1. Image credit: (Boncori, 2019).
The process of removing the overlap and patching these bursts together is called mo-
saicing.
A function from the toolbox has been used to mosaic bursts within a single
swath together.
New code had to be developed to mosaic the individual swaths to-
gether as it was needed in this thesis4. The function to mosaic swaths is implemented as
”_get_data_mosaic_swaths()”in speciale_tools.jl.
5.1.3
Calibration
The calibration is based on a technical report by ESA, Nuno Miranda, 2015. The technical
report describes three different types of calibrations but only the σ0 calibration is used. The
pixel values in the SLC products has an arbitrary engineering unit that can be converted
3A maximum() that should be minimum
4The test case from Houston is located right on the boundary of two swaths
42
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:51==
to backscatter coefficients. The backscatter coefficients are given by
σi,j = |zi,j|2
A2
i,j
(5.1)
Where i, j represent pixel indices, σ the backscatter coefficient, z is the complex pixel
value in engineering units and A is a calibration factor. A table containing the calibration
factor, A, for a grid of pixel indices are included in the SLC product. The calibration is then
implemented by interpolating A for all pixels to calculate σ. The interpolation method used
is bi-linear interpolation. Three functions are made for this. One to load and parse the cali-
bration table, one to calibrate an image and another one to calibrate an already resampled
image5. These functions have been developed during this thesis but are included in the
Toolbox instead of speciale_tools.jl. The load function is ”slc_calibration()” in ToolBox/s-
rc/Load.jl. The two other functions are ”calibrate_data()” and ”calibrate_slave_data()” in
ToolBox/src/SlcUtil.jl.
Additional terrain correction is necessary in steep terrain but this is not implemented or
used in this thesis.
5.1.4
Coherence and multilooking
A window of pixels are needed to estimate the local means when computing the coher-
ence. The same window is also used to compute the local mean of the backscatter co-
efficients as an initial speckle filtering. The computation of the coherence and the local
backscatter coefficients is done using functions from the toolbox. The window used to
calculate local means are 4 x 14 pixel big. The reason for the elongated window is that
the azimuth pixel spacing is much larger than the range spacing for the unprocessed SLC
images. The window is approximately 60 m x 60 m in ground resolution. This large slid-
ing window will blur out any small structure in the image. The coherence and backscatter
coefficient images are therefore subsampled to a pixel spacing of approximately 30 m x
30 m to reduce redundant pixels. All images used in this report is subsampled this way.
5.1.5
Speckle filtering
The speckle filtering provided by the 4 x 14 pixel window proved sufficient. The equivalent
number of looks (ENL) was estimated using a patch of ocean for 6 images in both VV and
VH. The ENL was over 15 in all cases except for a single image6. The high ENL means
that the assumption of normally distributed speckle is reasonable. Other more advanced
speckle filters could be used to preserve the resolution of the intensity images. This would
not improve the resolution of the coherence because it requires a quite large window to
produce a reliable estimate. It is chosen to keep the windows used for coherence and the
initial speckle filtering at the same size to simplify processing. Another motivation for this
is that a small resolution improvement is not essential for the use of the flood maps as
explained in Subsection 4.2.4.
5.1.6
Stack of images
The function in the toolbox was made to find the coherence between two images. Whole
stacks of images have been used for the flood detection in this thesis. It was thus neces-
sary to develop some code to process a stack of images.
A function ”coherence_factory_seq()”, implemented in speciale_tools.jl, was made to pre-
process a stack of images and save the output. The function is not just a simple for loop
since a substantial amount of code had to be developed to find matching subsets in the
images and ensuring that they are all coregistered to the same geometry.
5This was need to fit with the function of the toolbox
6This is probably due to strong winds creating large waves
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
43
==PAGE:52==
A whole range of additional functions have also been made to sort data, unzip files, re-
trieve individual file names and automatically download precise orbit files which are all
included in speciale_tools.jl.
The preprocessing of SAR images is the most computer intensive part of the thesis. It
takes 10-20 minutes to process 6 images on the virtual AWS machine7, which is sufficient
for this project. Therefore, no real effort was made to optimize this or the rest of the code
for that matter.
5.1.7
Validation
The preprocessing can also be done with ESA’s own software solution SNAP. SNAP can
calibrate images, filter speckle and compute the coherence between images. It is thus
natural to compare the preprocessing from this thesis to SNAP to validate the results. This
is done using a single pair of images. A window size of 9 x 31 pixels is used to reduce
the effect of small georeferencing errors.
Figure 5.2 shows histograms of the difference in the VV backscatter coefficient and co-
herence between the preprocessing used in this thesis and preprocessing done with
SNAP. There is a quite large difference between the results. The same is true for the
VH backscatter coefficient even though it is not included in the figure.
Figure 5.2: Histograms of the difference between the preprocessing used in this thesis
and preprocessing using SNAP. Note that the VV backscatter coefficient is not converted
to dB for this comparison
Figure 5.3 shows the results from SNAP visualized together with the results from the pre-
processing used in this thesis. The two different results are mapped to different colors
in the same image. This is similar to the temporal composite visualization described in
the next section. The images show the area around Vejlefjord. The gray scale pixels are
where the two results are similar and the colored pixels indicates large differences. Vejle-
fjord, the water, should be disregarded because it was excluded in the SNAP processing.
This part of the images are of course excluded from the histograms shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.3 shows that it is especially the bright pixels with high coherence in the city that
differ while the results are close to identical for the fields. This could indicate that the issue
is related to strong point targets. The focus of the thesis is on automatic flood detection
and not the preprocessing. The discrepancy will probably have little effect on the derived
flood maps since the processed images looks similar for large areas. The discrepancy is
therefore not investigated further. It is chosen to continue with the preprocessing made
in this thesis despite the discrepancy with SNAP. This is worth keeping in mind if one is
trying to reproduce the results from this thesis or comparing threshold values with articles.
7The virtual machine has 32 GB RAM and 8 CPU and is attached to 1 TB of storage. This is shared with
Eigil Lippert
44
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.3: A comparison between the preprocessing used for this thesis and preprocess-
ing using SNAP. The images show the area around Vejlefjord and the different results are
mapped to different colors in the image. Note that the snap results were not computed for
the open water (Vejlefjord). (Red: The results using the thesis preprocessing. Blue and
Green: The result from SNAP.) Left: Comparison of VV backscatter coefficient. Right:
Comparison of coherence
5.1.8
Reference image
The flood detection methods described in this thesis require a reference image of the
backscatter coefficients and coherence. It is chosen to use 5 SAR images acquired before
the flooding to generate the reference data. The reason multiple images are used is to
reduce noise and eliminate unwanted temporal variation. The number of images used
is set to 5 since it is sufficient to filter noise and variation. The generation of reference
images where not tested with other number of images. The processing of the flood map
is not delayed by the number of image used for the reference since all the images are
acquired before the flooding event.
The reference image for both the VV- and VH backscatter coefficients is the pixel-wise
median from the 5 images acquired before the flood. Figure 5.4 and 5.4 in the next sec-
tion are examples of reference images computed this way. The initial speckle filtering of
the images means that the speckle is approximately normally distributed. This makes the
median an unbiased estimator of the true backscatter, when the only variation between
images is due to speckle8. The pixel-wise median is used instead of the mean because
it efficiently remove outliers e.g. ships, extremely dry conditions, Radio frequency inter-
ference9, or minor flooding prior to the main flood. Radio frequency interference is a
phenomenon that occurs occasionally in Sentinel-1 images. It can completely mask the
true measurements, especially in the VH channel, resulting in big white patches or stripes
in the image. The pixel-wise median removes the radio frequency interference from the
reference image automatically so no manual selection is needed.
4 coherence images are formed by sequential paring of the 5 images taken before the
flood event. The pixel wise mean of the these coherence images is used as the reference
coherence. Figure 5.6 in the next section is an example of a reference coherence image.
The pixel wise mean is used for the coherence since outliers is less of a problem, due to
8The median should never be used to approximate the true backscatter in cases with low ENL since the
distribution of the speckle is very asymmetrical for low ENL
9Link
to
SNAP
forum
discussing
Radio
frequency
interference:
https://forum.step.esa.int/t/
noise-objects-in-sentinel-1-grd-data/7627
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
45
==PAGE:54==
the coherence being limited to values between 0 and 1. The 5 images used to make a
reference image are taken 6 days apart so the temporal baseline of the coherence is 6
days. One image was not available in the test case of Ribe so a pair of images taken 12
days apart was used instead.
5.2
Visualizing the data
visualization is an important tool for exploring the data. It is practical to show a SAR
acquisition as normal images mapped to black and white or to colors. This can be done in
different ways and this section will introduce the visualization methods used in this report.
The emphasis on these visualizations is not quantitative interpretation of pixel values but
rather giving the qualitative overview that can guide the analysis.
A reference image of the Vejle test case is used for the visualizations in this section and
the 5 images used for the reference are listen in Table 5.1, Section 5.3.
Figure 5.4: Reference image of the VV backscatter coefficient for the Vejle test case. The
intensity, shown in dB, stretches from -19 dB to 4 dB.
Figure 5.5: Reference image of the VH backscatter coefficient for the Vejle test case. The
intensity, shown in dB, stretches from -26 dB to -3 dB.
The backscatter coefficients are visualized by converting the backscatter coefficients to dB
and then mapping them to gray scale values. The range of backscatter coefficients is so
46
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:55==
large that it is necessary to use two cut off values, even in dB. All backscatter coefficients
over the maximum cut off value is then mapped to white and all below the minimum cut
off value are mapped to black. The dB backscatter coefficients in between the maximum-
and minimum value are then mapped linearly to gray scale values. A range of different
maximum and minimum values is tested to find the ones that best display the different
elements in the images. A single set of cut off values is used for all VV images and
another set for the VH images. This makes it easy to visually compare the intensities
between different acquisitions. The cut off value is chosen to enable easy distinguishing
of open water, fields, forests and urban area. The high intensity targets in the city and
the weak intensity variations in the ocean are cut short to better visualize the mid and low
backscatter coefficient most relevant for rural flooding.
Figure 5.4 and 5.5 are examples of this visualization method. The maximum and mini-
mum cut off values used for the VV polarization is -19 dB to 4 dB. The VH polarization is
visualized in the same fashion but the limits used are -26 dB to -3 dB. These cut off values
are used to visualize all VV and VH SAR images in this thesis unless otherwise specified.
The limits are much lower for the VH band because the backscatter coefficients are gener-
ally lower for the cross polarization than the co polarization. This means that even though
the backscatter coefficients are much higher in VV than in VH the visualizations still look
similar in brightness. This is worth keeping in mind when interpreting the data. It is also
worth remembering that very high and low values have been cut off in the visualizations.
Figure 5.6: The reference image of the coherence for the Vejle test case.
A similar method is used to visualize the coherence. No cut off values are needed when
visualizing the coherence since the values are between 0 and 1. The coherence is simply
visualized by mapping 1 to white, 0 to black and all values in between to gray-scale values.
This visualizes the entire range of coherence. An example of this is shown in Figure 5.6.
A standard digital color image consists of three colors. Red green and blue. This can
be used to show up to three different SAR bands at the same time. It can be different
polarizations or acquisitions taken at different times, represented as different colors. An
example of this is the temporal composite images in Figure 5.7. Two SAR VV images
are used. One flood image acquired just after heavy rain and a reference image. The
reference VV image is used for the red color and the flood image is used for green and
blue. The VV backscatter coefficients in dB is used and the same cut off values are used
as in the gray scale case. Figure 5.8 shows a similar images but using the VH polarization.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.7: A temporal composite of VV SAR images for the Vejle test case. Red: Ref-
erence, Green and Blue: 17th February 2020. The intensity shown in dB stretches from
-19 dB to 4 dB.
Figure 5.8: A temporal composite of VH SAR images for the Vejle test case. Red: Ref-
erence, Green and Blue: 17th February 2020. The pattern of in the white square is an
example of radio frequency interference. The intensity shown in dB stretches from -26 dB
to -3 dB.
Gamma correction is used to further enhance the contrast of these temporal composites
of backscatter coefficients. The gamma correction is done by using a power function
to map the pixels to colors instead of doing it linearly. In the implementation of these
visualizations the value of each color is mapped to a value between 0 and 1. The gamma
correction is then given by
˜Vi = V k
i
(5.2)
where Vi is the color value, linearly mapped, for either red green or blue and ˜Vi is the
gamma corrected color value. A gamma factor of k = 0.7 is used in the temporal com-
posites of intensities. This correction value is below 1 and thus enhances the contrasts
between low intensities. This is chosen to enhance flooded areas when making temporal
composite images.
The temporal composite images are a great way to get a qualitative overview of flooding
in an area. Figure 5.7 shows the area around Vejle. The red and dark red patches are
areas with a drop in backscatter coefficient from the reference image to the flood image.
The red areas are also showing in the VH band, Figure 5.8, and are located along known
48
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:57==
streams. These red areas are most likely due to bare soil flooding. This will be analyzed in
more detail later but it is worth remembering that the red areas in the temporal composite
are good candidates for bare soil flooding. There is a couple of more features in the
images worth mentioning now. The water (Vejle Fjord) in Figure 5.7 has a cyan color.
This is probably due to windy conditions under the acquisition of the flood image causing
an increase in backscatter intensity from the rough ocean. This is not visible in the VH,
Figure 5.8, where the fjord is dark but this is probably due to the choice of cut off values.
A light cyan patterns are is visible in a horizontal band across the image in Figure 5.8
and the white box highlights an example of this. This is probably an artifact due to radio
frequency interference from ground transmitters. It is not too bad in this case but it can
be much stronger10.
Figure 5.9: A temporal composite of the coherence for the Vejle test case. Red: Refer-
ence, Green and Blue: 17th and 11th January 2020.
The coherence can also be visualized as a temporal composite. An example is shown in
Figure 5.9. No gamma correction is used for temporal composites of coherence. It is not
clear to see from this image which areas that might be flooded.
10Image #2 from the Ribe test case has severe radio frequency interference making large patches of the
VH polarization useless
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
49
==PAGE:58==
Satellite
Date
#1
S1A
17th February 2020
#2
S1B
11th February 2020
#3
S1A
5th February 2020
#4
S1B
30th January 2020
#5
S1A
24th January 2020
#6
S1B
18th January 2020
Table 5.1: List of images over Vejle. Image #1 is the flood image and the 5 others are
used for reference. The coherence between #1 and #2 is used as the flood coherence.
5.3
Test cases
Three different test cases are used in this thesis. It is three quite different flooding events
so the flooding methods are tested in different settings. The three cases are the area
around Vejle on the 17th February 2020, the area around Ribe the on the 20th February
2020 and part of Houston on the 30th August 2017.
5.3.1
Vejle
An area around Vejle has been selected as a test case, since Vejle municipality agreed
to participate in a pilot project. Vejle municipality experienced flooding due to the heavy
rainfall in February and received 29 mm of rain the 16th of February11. No validation has
been found for the extent of the flood but Vejle municipality confirmed that areas along the
streams were flooded. Figure 5.7 and 5.8 show potential flooding along the stream and
many small red dots that could be ponds on fields. This is not a large connected flood
as one would see in the events of natural disasters. It is interesting to explore the model
performance of a case like this with small patches of flooding distributed over a large area.
These types of minor flooding could be part of a good and reliable business model that
focuses on climate adaption instead of emergencies management.
A list of the images used for the Vejle test case is given in Table 5.1. Image number
#1 is the one acquired during the flooding event. It is worth mentioning that the flood
image is taken under windy conditions and has a bit of radio frequency interference in VH
polarization.
5.3.2
Ribe
The area around the town of Ribe was also heavily affected by the rain of February 2020
and experienced large flooding which was imaged by Sentinel-1 on the 20th February. A
temporal composite of this event is shown in Figure 5.10. The test case of Ribe is chosen
because it contains large scale flooding while still being relevant in a context of Danish
municipalities.
There are several factors contributing to the flood. Two large streams, Kongeå and Ribeå
ends in sea locks- The sea locks are marked with green crosses in Figure 5.10. The
sea locks prevent ocean water from flowing back up the streams, past the dikes, during
high tide. Due to a continuous high sea level, caused by strong wind from the west, the
sea locks remained closed for a large part of February causing water from the streams to
accumulate behind the dikes12. Flooding caused by the closed sea locks is not uncommon
but the extent of this event was extraordinary. Another extraordinary event, related to the
flooding near Ribe, was the breach of a small dike, Varming-diget13, near the city of Ribe.
11https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/
12Danish news: https://www.tvsyd.dk/syd-og-soenderjylland/her-volder-vejret-stadig-problemer-og-her-staar-beredskaberne-standby
13Danish news: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/syd/dige-er-brudt-sammen-vand-oversvoemmer-marker-og-veje
50
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:59==
The location of Varming-diget is shown in Figure 5.10 with a white cross.
Figure 5.10: A temporal composite of VV backscatter coefficients for the Ribe test case.
Red: Reference, Green and Blue: 20th February 2020. The town in the black square
is Ribe. The green cross indicates the location of two sea locks (Kammerslusen and
Kongeåslusen). The white cross marks the location of Varming-diget. The orange square
marks the footprint of the Sentinel-2 image shown in Figure 5.11
A subset of an Sentinel-2 image acquired on the 27th February, and shown in Figure 5.11,
is used to validate the extent of the flood. Sentinel-2 consist of two multi-spectral satellites
and the image shown in the figure is a visualisation of the near infrared band (red), the red
band (green) and the green band (blue). The large flooding is shown in the black squares
not to be confused with the green squares which is shadows from the white clouds. The
image is taken during low tide and the sea locks are open offering a much needed relief.
A Sentinel-1 image acquired on the 26th February is available and would have been more
suitable as flood image when using a Sentinel-2 image from the 27th as validation. The
flood image used in this thesis is the one acquired on the 20th February 2020 which
complicates the validation.
Figure 5.12 shows temporal composites of the VH backscatter coefficient and the coher-
ence for the Ribe test case. Part of the flooding is clearly visible in the coherence image.
A list of the images over Ribe used in this report is given in Table 5.2. No image was
available on the 2nd of February.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.11: A subset of a Sentinel-2 image acquired over Ribe on the 27th February. The
three spectral bands shown are the near infrared band (red), the red band (green) and
the green band (blue). The black squares are regions with flooding not to be confused
with the green squares which is shadows from the white clouds. Image credit: Sentinel
Hub EO Browser
No.
Satellite
Date
#1
S1A
20th February 2020
#2
S1B
14th February 2020
#3
S1A
8th February 2020
#4
S1A
27th January 2020
#5
S1B
21th January 2020
#6
S1A
15th January 2020
Table 5.2: List of images over Ribe. Image #1 is the flood image and the 5 others are
used for reference. The coherence between #1 and #2 is used as the flood coherence.
Note that no image was available on the 2nd of February.
Figure 5.12: The Ribe test case. Left: A temporal composite of VH backscatter coeffi-
cients (Red: Reference, Green and Blue: 20th February 2020). Left: A temporal com-
posite of the coherence (Red: Reference, Green and Blue: 14th and 20th February 2020)
52
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:61==
5.3.3
Houston
Houston was hit by hurricane Harvey, August 2017, which was accompanied by massive
rainfall. On the 29th August, the Addicks reservoir west of Houston reached its capacity
and started to spill water, thus flooding nearby areas14. The flooding was imaged by
Sentinel-1 the day after. This area has been used as a test example in several articles
about flood mapping, eg. (Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019) and (Li et al.,
2019). A large part of the flooded areas were urban. A temporal composite of the flood
is shown in Figure 5.13. This test area is chosen to match the area used in (Marco Chini,
Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019)15.
The reservoirs are visible in the center of Figure 5.13 with large red patches of bare soil
flooding. The cyan areas along the border of the reservoir have a large increased VV
backscattering coefficient. This is due to the presence of urban flooding in these areas.
Figure 5.13: A temporal composite of VV backscatter coefficients for the Houston test
case. Red: Reference, Green and Blue: 30th August 2017. The Addicks Reservoir is
located in the center of the image. Aerial photos is of the orange and white square is
shown in the left and right side of Figure 5.14
High resolution aerial photos taken on the same day as the Sentinel-1 image is available16.
Examples of the aerial photos is shown in Figure 5.14. The left image is taken over an area
with urban flooding. This is mainly visible as brown water of the streets. The light blue lines
marks the extend of flood and all the urban areas right of the lines are flooded. The right
image shows the reservoir with large regions completely flooded by brown water and other
parts being covered by trees. It is possible to see brown water all over the reservoir when
zooming in on small clearings in the canopy cover. This leads to the assumption that all
the ground is flooded in the two reservoirs but only visible in parts due to the vegetation.
The same is true for the temporal composites of the SAR images. The flooding in the
14https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-41081629
15The article has rotated the SAR images so up is straight north. This is not done in this thesis and the test
areas seem rotated when comparing
16https://storms.ngs.noaa.gov/
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
53
==PAGE:62==
reservoirs are only visible in regions with no- or sparse canopy cover, indicating that the
Sentinel-1 radar pulse is unable to penetrate the dense canopy.
Figure 5.14: Aerial photos of the Houston test case. Left: An area with urban flooding.
The blue lines marks the extend of the flood and all urban areas to the right of the lines
are flooded. Right: Part of the reservoir which is clearly flooded by brown water.
This test case is chosen because of three factors. The area corresponds with the test case
used in (Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019) making it easy to compare the
implementation of the HSBA methods in this thesis with the results of the article. Good
quality validation data is available in the form of freely available aerial photos. The test
case contains both urban- and bare soil flooding.
Figure 5.15 shows temporal composites of the VH backscatter coefficient and the coher-
ence for the Houston test case. The urban flooding is far less visible in the VH polarization
since the double bounce is most dominant in the VV polarization. A general drop in co-
herence is seen by the red color of the coherence image shown in Figure 5.15. This is
probably due to damage caused by the hurricane. The flooded area along the reservoir,
highlighted by the green polygons in the coherence image, has an extra large drop in
coherence caused by the presence of flood water which can be seen by the extra red
color.
Figure 5.15: The Houston test case. Left: A temporal composite of VH backscatter coef-
ficients (Red: Reference, Green and Blue: 30th August 2017). Right: A temporal com-
posite of the coherence (Red: Reference, Green and Blue: 24th and 30th August 2017).
The green polygons highlight areas with a large amount of urban flooding
A list of the image over Houston used in this report is given in Table 5.3. Image number
#1 is the one acquired during the flooding event.
54
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:63==
No.
Satellite
Date
#1
S1B
30th August 2017
#2
S1A
24th August 2017
#3
S1B
28th August 2017
#4
S1A
12th August 2017
#5
S1B
6th August 2017
#6
S1A
31st July 2017
Table 5.3: List of images over Houston. Image #1 is the flood image and the 5 others are
used for reference. The coherence between #1 and #2 is used as the flood coherence.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
55
==PAGE:64==
6
Implementation
This section will describe the implementation of the flood mapping methods and present
intermediate results. The Houston test case is used in this chapter because it contains
both bare soil- and urban flooding. The first section is dedicated to the implementation
of the HSBA method, described in Section 3.2, and all the steps required. Section 6.2
explains the describes the implementation of the urban flood extension, introduced in
Section 3.3, with a focus on the building detection. The implementation of the REBEL
method, described in Section 3.4, is explained in the last section. All functions mentioned
in this chapter are located in speciale_tools.jl.
The results are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 where they are compared with results
from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019 and aerial photos. Results from the
other test cases are also given in Chapter 7.
6.1
HSBA method
This section will describe the implementation of the HSBA method. The examples are
only given for the VV polarization of the Houston.
6.1.1
Tile selection
The tile selection is implemented as a recurring function, find_bimodal_tiles(), that checks
if a tile is bi-modally distributed and if not the function splits the tile in four and calls itself
on each of the four new tiles. If the tile is bi-modal the pixels in the binary mask XBM
is set to 1. The tile size is limited by an upper and lower limit. The minimum size of a
tile is set to 103 pixels and the maximum size is 3 × 105 (The size of the test cases are
approximately 106 pixels).
The function bimodal_tile() is implemented to test if a tile is bi-modal. The function checks
if the tile satisfies the three selection conditions given in Subsection 3.2.5. A key element
of the function is to fit a bi-modal normal distribution to the histogram of the tile. This
is implemented in fit_bimodal_gauss(). Here the the Otzu threshold is used as an initial
guess for a Levenberg–Marquardt optimizer that fits the bi-modal normal distribution. The
Levenberg–Marquardt optimizer used is from the LsqFit Julia package.
The find_bimodal_tiles() function is used both on the flood image, XF , and the change
image, XC. The final binary mask XBM is then found by joining the two masks through a
pixel-wise AND operation.
Figure 6.1 shows an example of the tiles selected by find_bimodal_tiles(). The final tile
mask is shown in white and only covers a small fraction of the image, but all the tiles
contain regions of bare soil flooding. The magenta and yellow tiles are the tiles only
selected in the flood or change image. A large portion of tiles without bare soil flooding
would be included if only the change or flood image were used for the tile selection.
Figure 6.2 shows the histograms of the intensities in the selected tiles.
The black- and blue curve show the fitted distributions given by fit_bimodal_gauss(). The
blue curve G1 is the distribution of the flood pixel class and G2 the distributions of the
non flooded class. The two distributions have a large overlap which makes them hard to
separate.
56
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.1: The selected tiles in the VV polarization for the Houston test case. White: The
final selected tiles. Magenta: Tiles only selected in the flood image, XF , Yellow: Tiles only
selected in the change image, XC. The background is a temporal composite of the VV
polarization
6.1.2
Threshold selection
This subsection explains the selection the region growing thresholds. The implementation
of the region growing is explained in the next subsection.
The seed threshold, σseed, is selected as
0.99 =
˜G1(σseed)
˜G1(σseed) + ˜G2(σseed)
(6.1)
with σseed > µ1. If there are multiple solutions for σseed the smallest value is chosen. If
there is no solution for σseed > µ1 then σseed is set to µ1. The seed threshold is σseed =
-13.15 dB in the Houston VV example.
The selection of σRG and ∆σRG are done through optimization. The loss function that is
minimised when selecting these thresholds are given in equation (3.15). The loss function
is implemented as sse_water_fit() (SSE is short for sum of squared errors). The loss
function is a measure of the difference between ˜G1 and the histogram of the ”flood and
water like pixels” in the selected tiles, hRG.
A color map of the loss function evaluated for a range of different thresholds is shown in
the left side of Figure 6.3. The low values are located in a band that looks like an L turned
sideways. This shows that low values of the loss function can be achieved just by either
σRG = −10.5 or ∆σRG = −1. The lowest values are found around ∆σRG = −1 when σRG
is high. The Julia Optim package is used to find the thresholds that minimises the loss
function. The resulting thresholds are σRG = -2.58 dB and ∆σRG = -0.76 dB. The intensity
threshold, σRG is ridiculously high and will only exclude extremely bright pixels from the
region growing. This means that the main constraint of the region growing is the change
threshold, ∆σRG.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.2: Histograms of the selected tiles (red line) together with the fitted normal dis-
tributions (black and blue lines). The total fitted distribution is shown in green. Houston
VV
Only the intensity thresholds that are used for region growing on the reference image when
mapping ”permanent water and water like surfaces”. The high σRG leads to unconstrained
region growing causing almost all pixels to be included in the ”permanent water and water
like surfaces”. This results in a completely empty flood map when the ”permanent water
and water like surfaces” are removed from the ”flood and water like surfaces” in the last
step of the flood mapping, which is a clear issue.
Initially, it was thought that the issue was caused by a problem with the optimizer so
different optimizers were implemented and tested. It was later realised that the cause
of the issue was the loss function. The loss function was then modified to compute the
histogram h(σ) of the flood pixel in the selected tiles after ”permanent water and water
like surfaces” where removed. This ensures that h(σ) reflects the pixels selected in the
final flood map and not in an intermediate step. This new loss function is implemented
as sse_water_fit2(). A color map of the new loss function is shown in the right side of
Figure 6.3. The blue band of low values in the color map of the loss function corresponds
with reasonable values of σRG, lower than the backscatter coefficient expected for rough
fields and urban environments but higher than the normal backscatter coefficient for water.
Blue band is stretched over range of ∆σRG which might result in a high ∆σRG after the
optimization. A high ∆σRG will not have dramatic consequences for the flood maps and
is therefore acceptable. The optimal thresholds are now found to be σRG = -10.84 dB and
∆σRG = -0.48 dB which are very reasonable. The new loss function, sse_water_fit2(),
are used for all HSBA results in the rest of the thesis. This loss function differs from the
description given in M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017. This is discussed in chapter 7.
6.1.3
Region growing
The region growing is implemented in region_growing(). It starts with a binary mask of all
the seed pixels XBM,seed and a mask of all candidate pixels, XBM,can. Then the function
58
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.3: The loss function, equation (3.15), for the Houston test case in the VV polar-
ization. Left: The original loss function. Right: The new loss function
does iterations of Equation (3.13) from Chapter 3 until convergence or a maximum num-
ber of iterations is reached. The maximum number of iterations is set to 100 steps. This
limit is sometimes reached during optimisation but not for region growing with the selected
thresholds. The dilation of the selected pixels is preformed with the binary_dilation() func-
tion from the Python scikit-image package.
The left side of Figure 6.4 shows the seed pixels, in red and the candidate pixels, in green,
using σseed, σRG and ∆σRG found in the last subsection. The seed pixels cover quite a
large area and include several roads. The number of candidate pixels is much lower and
a large part of them are distributed around the image as small dots. The left side of Figure
6.4 shows the results of the region growing, the ”flood and water like surfaces”. It is a bit
hard to see in the image but a significant portion of the candidate pixels spread around
the image are not included.
Figure 6.4: Left: The seed pixels, in red, and the candidate pixels, in green, for the region
growing. Right: ”Flood and water like surface”. The background of both images is the VV
flood image
This is easier to see on the histograms shown in Figure 6.5. The histogram of ”flood and
water like surfaces” pixels in the selected tiles, hRG, is shown in green. hRG follows the
total histogram, h, until σseed where it starts to diverge due to the region growing. This
enables hRG to follow the distribution of the flood class, G1, closer than what is possible
without region growing.
6.1.4
The flood mapping
The region growing is done on the reference image to find the ”permanent water and water
like surfaces” which are colored red in the left image of Figure 6.6. The final bare soil flood
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.5: Histograms of the backscatter coefficients in the selected tiles (red line) to-
gether with the fitted normal distributions (black and blue lines). The histogram of ”flood
and water like surfaces” pixels in the selected tiles is shown in green and σseed is marked
by the orange line
map is shown in blue. The extend of the red pixels is extensive and large potion of the
pixels in ”flood and water like surfaces” are removed. The final bare soil flood map is also
shown in the right of Figure 6.6. A large parts of the clearly visible flood in the reservoir
are not included in this final bare soil flood map. This is discussed in Chapter 7.
Figure 6.6: Left: The ”permanent water and water like surfaces” are shown in red and the
final bare soil flood map in blue. Right: The final bare soil flood map shown in blue. The
background of both images is the VV Houston flood image
60
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:69==
6.2
Urban flood extension
The implementation of the urban flood extension is mainly focused on building detection
(double bounce extraction). The functions used for the urban flood mapping are just slight
modifications of the functions presented in the last section. These modifications are not
included in speciale_tools.jl.
6.2.1
Double bounce extraction
The double bounce extraction presented in this section is rather unsuccessful but the
discussion of this is left for Chapter 7. The double bounce extraction is based on 11
images from Sentinel with 30 days between each. The first image is from the 31th July
2017 and all images are from descending orbits.
The tile selection is done on the VV TAI and VH TAI using a modified version of
find_bimodal_tiles(). The function is changed to include the condition on the mean backscat-
ter coefficient, µ2 > σDB, and disregard the Bhattacharyya coefficient condition.
The selected tiles are shown in Figure 6.7. The left image shows the tiles selected in the
VV TAI and the pixels with a backscatter coefficient higher than σDB,V V = −3 dB. Only
a few small tiles are selected but this is probably due to the µ2 > σDB condition as seen
by the low number of red pixels. The right image in Figure 6.7 shows that no tiles are
selected in the VH TAI. Again, the µ2 > σDB condition is the obvious suspect. The low
number of bright pixels in VH relative to VV can be explained by the fact that the test area
is rather flat resulting in a low number of the double bounce pixels being on hills or other
inclined surfaces. Only the VV polarization is used in the rest of the section since no tiles
are selected in the VH polarization.
Figure 6.7: The white boxes indicate the selected tiles for the double bounce extraction.
Left: VV TAI, the red pixels have a backscatter coefficient over σDB,V V = −3 dB. Right:
VH TAI, the red pixels have a backscatter coefficient over σDB,V H = −7 dB.
The seed threshold σseed is selected in the same way as in the last section but just with
the distributions switched. This leads to σseed = −2.25 dB in this test case. The region
growing threshold, σRG, is found by minimising the difference between the histogram of
the pixels selected by the the region growing in the selected tiles, hRG, and G2, instead
of G1 which was used for the flood mapping. The double bounce extraction does not
face the issue with the loss function, described in Subsection 6.1.2, because the region
growing result is not filtered by using region growing on a second image. The region
growing threshold found for the test case is σRG = −7.26 dB.
The left side of Figure 6.8 shows histograms of the backscatter coefficients in the se-
lected tiles and the fitted distributions. The distribution of the building class G2 has a high
variance which causes a large overlap between the classes.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
61
==PAGE:70==
The last step in the double bounce extraction is to remove false positives by applying a
coherence threshold using TAC. The coherence threshold used is 0.51. The result is
shown in the right side of Figure 6.8. The green pixels show the double bounce pixels
after applying the coherence threshold, the final building mask, and the red pixels are the
ones removed by the coherence threshold.
Figure 6.8: Left: Histograms of the backscatter coefficients in the selected tiles (red line)
together with the fitted normal distributions (black and blue lines). The histogram of the
extracted double bounce pixels in the selected tiles is shown in green and σseed is marked
by the orange line. Right: All the colored pixels are selected as double bounce pixel in
the region growing but the red pixels are removed due to the coherence threshold of 0.5,
Background: VV TAI
6.2.2
Coherence threshold
The urban flood map is generated by combining the building mask, from the last subsec-
tion, with a threshold on the change in coherence, γF −γR < 0.25. The threshold of 0.25
is selected to fit Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 20192. The urban flood is
shown as the red pixels in Figure 6.9. The yellow pixels are all the pixels satisfying the
change in coherence condition but not included in the building mask. The building mask
is clearly the limiting factor for the urban flood map. The flood map is underwhelming with
only a few pixels selected and this is discussed more in Chapter 7.
1No special care was taken in selecting the threshold since the implementation of the method have some
more severe issues discussed in the next Chapter
2Not written in the article but Marco Chini shared it in an email
62
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.9: Urban flood map shown in red. Pixels satisfying γF −γR < 0.25 but not
included in the building mask are shown in yellow. Background: VV flood image
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
63
==PAGE:72==
6.3
REBEL method
This section will describe the implementation of the REBEL method and displays interme-
diate results. The method relies on the region growing function explained in Subsection
6.1.3.
6.3.1
Bare soil flood
The first step of the bare soil flood mapping is selecting the training pixels as described
in Subsection 3.4.1. The left side of Figure 6.10 shows the training pixels for the test
case. Most of training pixels are selected in the flooded area inside the reservoir. A 2D
histogram of the training pixels is given in the right side of Figure 6.10. The mean and
covariance matrix for the seed pixels backscatter coefficients are given by
µt =
[−15
−21
]
,
Σt =
[5.76
4.57
4.57
6.24
]
(6.2)
where µt is in dB and Σt is in dB squared. The correlation between the VV- and VH
backscatter coefficients are 0.76, which shows that the two polarizations are very cor-
related for the training pixels. The training distribution, Gt(σV V , σV H), is a 2D-normal
distribution defined by µt and Σt. The mean and the 90% contour ellipse3 are shown in
red on top of the histogram in the right side of Figure 6.10. The figure shows a reasonable
fit between the training data and the training distribution.
Figure 6.10: Left: The VV flood image with the training pixels shown in yellow. Right: A
2D histogram of the training pixels. The red dot and red ellipse are the mean value and
90% contour ellipse of the training distribution.
The seed pixels are found using the training distribution and the seed pixel conditions de-
scribed in Subsection 3.4.1. The seed pixels are shown in the left side of Figure 6.11. The
right side shows a 2D histogram of the seed pixels together with the training distribution
Gt(σV V , σV H). It is clear that the distribution does not represent the seed pixels because
of the conservative selection.
The condition for the candidate pixels depends on the distance, d, as described in Sub-
section 3.4.1. The optimal d is found by minimising the loss function given by equation
(3.21). The loss function is implemented as loss_rg_fit() using the Julia Distributions pack-
age for the quantities of the Chi-squared distribution. The plot in the left side of Figure
6.12 shows the loss function evaluated for a range of different distances. The optimal
distance is found to be dopt = 6.2 dB. The bare soil flood map are found by doing the final
390% percent of observations from Gt(σV V , σV H) should fall inside the ellipse and 10% outside
64
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.11: Left: The VV flood image with the seed pixels shown in yellow. Right: A 2D
histogram of the seed pixels. The red dot and red ellipse are the mean value and 90%
contour ellipse of the training distribution.
region growing with dopt. A 2D histogram of the selected pixels is shown in the right side
of Figure 6.12. The white line illustrates the condition of the candidate pixels being closer
than dopt to µt. The distribution of the selected pixels fits well with the Gt(σV V , σV H) as
expected.
Figure 6.12: Left: The loss function evaluated for different distances. Right: A 2D his-
togram of bare soil flood pixels. The red dot and red ellipse are the mean value and 90%
contour ellipse of the training distribution. The white line is the candidate pixel condition
given by dopt = 6.2 dB.
The image on the left in Figure 6.13 shows the candidate pixels, given by dopt = 6.2 dB, in
yellow. The green pixels satisfy the intensity region growing condition but not the chance
condition and the red pixels satisfy the change condition but not the intensity condition. It
is clear that large areas would be included if only the intensity condition were used. The
result would be better with only the change condition but this would result in candidate
pixels spread around the entire image. The final bare soil flood map is shown in the the
right side of Figure 6.13.
6.3.2
Urban flood
The urban flood mapping is done just with region growing. The left image in Figure 6.14
shows the seed pixels in red and the candidate pixels in green. The seed pixels are hard
to spot, but there are 2150 seed pixels spread around the image. The final urban flood
map is shown in the right side of Figure 6.13.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 6.13: Left: The candidate pixels are shown in yellow. The pixels only satisfying the
intensity condition is shown in green and the pixels only satisfying the change condition
in red. Right: The final bare soil flood map in blue. The background of both images is the
VV flood image.
Figure 6.14: Left: The seed pixels are shown in red and the candidate pixels in green.
Right: The final urban flood map in red. The background of both images is the VV flood
image.
66
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:75==
6.4
GIS compatible format
The binary flood maps are not the final product. The flood maps need to be converted
to a format compatible with common GIS-software before it can be sent to a potential
customer. A function, quicksave_shape() is therefore implemented to segment the binary
flood maps into polygons and save the results as a shape-files4. The function uses the
scikit-image Python package for the segmentation and the GeoPandas Python packages
to save the polygons as a shape-file. Figure 6.15 shows the polygons for the bare soil flood
map found with the REBEL method approach in a QGIS, a common GIS-software. The
segmented polygons can be filtered based on the backscatter coefficients or coherence
of the pixels inside the polygon. This type of post processing is very useful for initial
customer tests.
Figure 6.15: The bare soil flood map derived with the REBEL method segmented and
shown in QGIS. The background is a map by OpenStreetMap
4A Shape-file is a commonly used GIS format for geospatial data
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
67
==PAGE:76==
7
Results and discussion
The results of using the different flood mapping methods on the three test cases is pre-
sented and discussed in this chapter. The first Section is dedicated to the test case of
Houston and is a natural continuation of the examples shown in the last section. The
Houston flood maps are compared with results from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti,
et al., 2019 and with aerial photos of the flood1, taken by the National Oceanic and Atmo-
spheric Administration (NOAA). Note that Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019
will be refereed to as the article in the rest of the chapter and all results from the article
have been resampled to fit the Houston test case even though it reduces the resolution
from 20m x 20m to 30m x 30m. Section 7.2 presents the results from the Vejle test case
and compares with results from the HASARD service. The results from Ribe are given in
Section 7.3. These results are compared with the HASARD service and with an optical
satellite image of the flooding. The results from the HASARD service have also been re-
sampled to fit the test cases. The last section is dedicated to a combined discussion the
flood mapping methods and also includes a subsection focusing on the implications the
results have on the business case.
A special thanks to Marco Chini for sharing the results from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca
Pulvirenti, et al., 2019 and providing access to the HASARD service.
7.1
Houston
The Houston test case is important for evaluating the performance of the methods since
high quality validation data is available and it contains a mixture of urban and bare soil
flooding. Comparing the result of the HSBA method and the urban flood extension with
the results from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019 enables a discussion
of the implementation since the methods are based on the article. The section is divided
into two parts, bare soil flooding and urban flooding, each with their own discussion.
7.1.1
Bare soil flooding
A comparison of the flood map, derived using the HSBA method with the VV polarization,
and the bare soil flood map from the article is shown in Figure 7.1
Figure 7.1: Left: The flood map using the HSBA method on the VV polarization. Right:
The bare soil flood map from the article. The background of both images is the VV flood
image for the Houston test case.
1Link: https://storms.ngs.noaa.gov/
68
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:77==
Large differences are visible, which is odd, since the same method, polarization and flood
images are used to generate the two flood maps. The preprocessing and choice of refer-
ence image jumps to mind as possible sources of this missmatch but there is a far more
likely explanation. The results received from Marco Chini covers an area much larger than
the subset presented in the article. This indicates that the flood mapping was done on the
entire Sentinel-1 image and then cropped for the article. The HSBA method implemented
in this thesis was only used on a subset of the images, given by the test cases. The se-
lected tiles used in the article, also shared bu Marco Chini, confirms that the discrepancy
is likely due to the use of a subset. The selected tiles are shown as black boxes in Figure
7.2. The red square indicates approximately the subset that is the Houston test case. The
selected tiles used in the article are mostly outside of the subset which could easily lead
to significant differences in the estimated distributions and the selected thresholds. The
fact that the HSBA method is indented for analyzing entire images and not subsets, as is
done in the thesis, might explain part of the issue with the original loss function described
in Subsection 6.1.2. Another difference is that the threshold selection in the article is
done by evaluating the loss function for a grid of values, defined by the distributions, and
then selecting the threshold pair that corresponds to the lowest value2 instead of using
an unconstrained optimizer.
Figure 7.2: The black squares show the selected tiles used for the bare soil flood map-
ping in Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019. The red square indicates ap-
proximately the subset used for the HSBA flood mapping for the Houston test case. The
background is a map by OpenStreetMap
The results of using the HSBA method on the VH polarization are shown in Figure 7.3
together with the selected tiles. More and larger tiles are selected with the VH polarization
than the VV polarization. No results based on the VH polarization were presented in Marco
Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019 and the HASARD service is only based on VV.
The bare soil flooding map found with the Change driven approach was shown in Figure
6.13 in the last Chapter.
2This was explained by Marco Chini in a Skype conversation
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 7.3: Left: The tiles selected by the HSBA method using VH polarization. The
background is a temporal composite of the VH polarization. Right: The bare soil flood
map in blue given by the HSBA method using VH. The background is the VH flood image.
Comparison and validation
This subsection compares the different bare soil flood maps quantitatively. The Change
driven approach and the results from the article are also compared qualitatively to the
aerial photos of the flood.
Table 7.1 shows a comparison of the different bare soil flood maps. The table focuses on
the pixels classified as flooded and the non-flood pixels are thus not compared. Each field
shows the percentage of pixels classified as flooded, by the method given in the column,
also classified as flood by the method in the row. The number of pixels classified as
flooded by a given method is shown in parentheses next to the names and the number of
flood pixels agreed upon by two methods is given in parenthesis next to each percentage.
An example, 31% of the pixels classified as flooded by the HSBA using VV where also
classified as flood by the HSBA using VH. The total number of pixels the two methods
agrees upon is 8 993 which is 28% of the of the pixels classified as flooded by HSBA
using VH. The agreement between HSBA using VV and using VH is quite low even though
the number of pixels classified as flooded are similar. This shows that different pixels are
classified as flooded depending on the polarization used.
The Change driven approach and the results from the article both classify a larger number
of pixels as flooded than the HSBA method. A large part of the pixels mapped as flooded
by the HSBA method with the VV and VH polarization are contained in the flood map by
the Change driven approach and in the flood map from the article. This can be explained
by the fact that the HSBA method detects part of the flooding in the reservoir but the
Change driven approach and the results from the article maps even more of the flood.
There is the highest similarity between the Change driven approach and the results from
the article with 65% and 73%. There is still a significant difference in the pixels classified
as flooded even though these results are the most similar.
The Change driven approach and the results from the article are compared with each
other and aerial photos to better understand their difference. It is chosen not to spend
too much time on the HSBA method because of the clear under-detection and the issues
associated with processing a subset. Figure 7.4 shows the two flood maps in the same
image. The blue pixels are classified as bare soil flooding both in the article and by the
REBEL method. The red pixels are only classified as flooded by the REBEL method and
the green only in the flood map from the article. The white boxes indicate three numbered
subsets that are compared to aerial images in Figure 7.5-7.7.
70
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:79==
Table 7.1: Comparison of the pixels classified as bare soil flooding. Each field shows
the percentage of pixels classified as flooded, by the method given in the column, also
classified as flood by the method in the row. E.g. 31% of the pixels classified as flooded by
the HSBA using VV were also classified as flooded by the HSBA using VH. The number of
pixels classified as flooded by a given method is shown in parentheses next to the names
and the number of flood pixels agreed upon by two methods is given in parenthesis next
to each percentage.
HSBA VV
HSBA VH
REBEL
Article
HSBA VV (29 059)
-
31% (8 993)
62% (17 992)
68% (19 814)
HSBA VH (31 798)
28% (8 993)
-
75 % (23 741)
63% (20 170)
REBEL (42 731)
42% (17 992)
56% (23 741)
-
73% (31 576)
Article (48 737)
41% (19 814)
41% (20 170)
65% (31 576)
-
Figure 7.4: Comparison of the bare soil flood map from the article and the one derived
with the REBEL method. The blue pixels are classified as bare soil flooding both in the
article and by the REBEL method. The red pixels are only classified as flooded by the
REBEL method and the green only in the flood map from the article. The background is
the VV flood image. The white boxes indicate three numbered subsets that are compared
to aerial images in Figure 7.5-7.7.
Subset 1 is shown in Figure 7.5 and covers part of the reservoir. The orange polygon
indicates an area completely covered by flood water. Both flood maps capture this area
but the REBEL method is best at giving a complete cover of the area as seen by the many
red pixels. The red circle shows an area that is partly covered by vegetation this area is
best covered by the flood map from the article. The blue square is an area with dense
tree cover and none of the methods are able to detect the flooding under the tree canopy.
The white square indicates a drainage canal. The water levels and width of the drainage
canal have probably increased causing it to be mapped as flooded in the article.
Subset 2 is shown in Figure 7.6 and covers West Houston Airport, which is a small local
airport. Note that it is still the bare soil flood maps that are shown and the urban flooding
is saved for subsection 7.1.2. The orange circle marks the runway of the airport. The
flooding of the runway is best mapped by the REBEL method as shown by the red pixels.
The reason that only part of the runway is marked as flood in the article might be the low
backscatter coefficient of tarmac. This can cause the tarmac to be mapped as ”permanent
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 7.5: A zoomed in image of subset 1 in Figure 7.4 together with an aerial photo of
the same area. The orange polygon indicates an area completely covered by flood water,
the red circle shows a flooded area partly covered by vegetation, the blue square is an
area with dense tree cover and the white square indicates a drainage canal.
water and water like surfaces” thus removing it from the final flood map. The red circle
shows a flooded area partly covered by trees. This is not mapped as flooded by the
REBEL method, showing that the results of the article is better for areas partly covered
by vegetation.
Figure 7.6: A zoomed in image of subset 2 in Figure 7.4 together with an aerial photo
of the same area. The West Houston Airport is shown in the center. The orange circle
marks the runway of the airport and the red circle an area with flooding partly covered by
trees
Subset 3 is shown in Figure 7.7. It is chosen to examine some of the small ”dots” of
flooding spread around the image. The orange circles are actually draining canals. The
large canal is mapped as flooded by both methods and different parts of the small canal is
mapped as flooded by each method. The two areas marked as flooded in the white circle
are parking lots. This could be because parking lots have high backscatter coefficients
when they are full and low backscatter coefficients when they are empty.
72
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:81==
Figure 7.7: A zoomed in image of subset 3 in Figure 7.4 together with an aerial photo of
the same area. The orange circle marks draining canals. The flood detected in the the
white circle is false positive located on two parking lots
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
73
==PAGE:82==
7.1.2
Urban flooding
The building mask generated in this thesis is compared with the one used for the article
and the results for the urban flooding are presented and discussed in this subsection.
The urban flood map derived using the REBEL method and the urban flood map from the
article are compare to each other and aerial photos in the end of the subsection.
The building (double bounce) mask derived in this thesis is shown together with the build-
ing mask used in the article in Figure 7.8. It is clear that far less buildings are detected
by the implemented method than used in article even though the same method is used.
The building mask from the article is derived using entire Sentinel-1 images which is the
most probable cause of the large difference. Another contributing factor could be that the
backscatter coefficient derived in the preprocessing differs quite a bit from the results from
SNAP for bright targets as shown in Subsection 5.1.7. The building mask derived in this
thesis is only based on images from descending orbits due to limit data storage. This may
also contribute to the difference but can not explain the difference alone. Approximately
the same number of building pixels should be detected using ascending images, if the
double bounce extraction is stable. The inclusion of ascending images would therefore
not be able to explain that more than twice the number of pixels are classified as buildings
in the article. The building map derived in this thesis is not used because of these poor
results.
Figure 7.8: Left: The building mask derived in this thesis. Right: The building mask used
in Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019. The background of both images is
the VV flood image.
The urban flood extension relies on the building mask. It is thus chosen not to spend any
more time on this and just focus on comparing the urban flood map derived by the REBEL
method with the urban flood map from the article. The two flood maps are shown in Figure
7.9
74
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:83==
Figure 7.9: Left: The urban flood map in blue using the REBEL method. Right: The urban
flood map from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019. The background of both
images is the VV flood image.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
75
==PAGE:84==
Comparison and validation
A quantitative comparison of the two urban flood maps is given in Table 7.2. 50% of the
pixels classified as urban flooding by the REBEL method were also classified as urban
flooding in the article so there is some similarities. The number of urban flood pixels in
the article is more than double of the number detected by the REBEL method. The aerial
photos indicates that this could be due to over detection in the article.
Table 7.2: Comparison of the pixels classified as urban flooding. Each field shows the
percentage of pixels classified as flooded, by the method given in the column, also classi-
fied as flood by the method in the row. E.g. 50% of the pixels classified as urban flooding
by the REBEL method were also classified as urban flooding in the article. The number of
pixels classified as flooded by a given method is shown in parentheses next to the names
and the number of flood pixels agreed upon by two methods in the parenthesis next to
each percentage.
REBEL
Article
REBEL (8 769)
-
50% (4 403)
Article (25 727)
17% (4 403)
-
The two urban flood maps are shown together in Figure 7.10. Again, the pixels classi-
fied as urban flooding by both flood maps are shown in blue, the pixels only classified
as flooded by the REBEL method in red and the pixels only classified as flooded in the
results from the article in green. There are several clusters where both methods detect
flooding but it is often different pixels. The urban flood map from the article also has more
pixels spread around the image. The white squares indicate numbered subsets that are
compared to aerial images in Figure 7.11-7.14.
Subset 1, shown in Figure 7.11, covers an area with clear urban flooding. The flooding is
visible in both flood maps but with large gaps in different locations. The flood maps have
around the same level of accuracy even though they differ quite a bit. The methods are
able to detect urban flood but quite a lot of urban flood pixels are missed.
Subset 2, shown in Figure 7.12, covers West Houston Airport again. The airport build-
ings, marked by the orange circles, are visible in the flood maps. There is quite a large
difference in which pixels are classified as flooded by the two methods. The white square
shows a suburban neighbourhood that is flooded. The urban flood map from the article
captures a small bit of this flooding but the majority of the pixels are mixed. This is proba-
bly due to the fact that the houses, which are orientated the same way, are aligned poorly
for double bounce backscattering.
76
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:85==
Figure 7.10: Comparison of the urban flood map from the article and the one derived with
the REBEL method. The blue pixels are classified as urban flooding both in the article
and by the REBEL method. The red pixels are only classified as flooded by the REBEL
method and the green only in the flood map from the article. The background is the VV
flood image. The white boxes indicate three numbered subsets that are compared to
aerial images in Figure 7.11-7.14.
Figure 7.11: A zoomed in image of subset 1 in Figure 7.10 together with an aerial photo
of the same area.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 7.12: A zoomed in image of subset 2 in Figure 7.10 together with an aerial photo of
the same area. West Houston Airport is visible in the center of the image and the airport
buildings are marked by orange circles. The white square marks a flooded suburban
neighbourhood
78
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:87==
Subset 3, shown in Figure 7.13, is an area with a mix of trees and houses. The only part
of the subset not flooded is above the blue line. This area poses quite a challenge for
both methods and flooding is only detected in a few parts of the area. This is most likely
due to the high concentration of trees which mask the double bounce enhancement and
causes a low reference coherence.
Figure 7.13: A zoomed in image of subset 3 in Figure 7.10 together with an aerial photo
of the same area.
Subset 4, shown in Figure 7.14, is an example of an area with no flooding. A few pixels are
classified as urban flooding with the REBEL method but significantly more are mapped
as flood in the results from the article. This could indicate that a large part of the urban
flood pixels in the article scattered around the image are false positives although a more
thorough analysis would be needed to be certain.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure 7.14: A zoomed in image of subset 4 in Figure 7.10 together with an aerial photo
of the same area.
80
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:89==
7.2
Vejle
The tiles selected by the HSBA method using the VV and the VH polarizations are shown
in Figure 7.15.
Figure 7.15: Left: The tiles selected by the HSBA method using VV polarization. The
background is a temporal composite of the VV polarization. Right: The tiles selected by
the HSBA method using VH polarization. The background is a temporal composite of the
VH polarization
A large part of the selected tiles covers the ocean for both polarizations and this has a
large effect on the estimated distribution for the flooded pixels. This is especially true for
the VV polarization where waves in the ocean leads to a G1 distribution with a relative
high mean backscatter. This results in a high σV V
seed = −12.85 dB and σV V
RG = σV V
seed, which
means that the region growing has no effect and the flood maps are given by simple
threshold classification. The resulting flood map is shown in Figure 7.16. The flooding is
quite extensive with many pixels spread over the entire image.
Figure 7.16: The bare soil flood map in red given by the HSBA method using VV. The
background is the VV flood image.
The ocean has a low backscatter in VH despite waves which makes the effect of the ocean
less dramatic. The flood map derived with the VH polarization is shown in Figure 7.17.
Only a few areas are mapped as flooded which could indicate severe underdetection.
The results from the HASARD service are shown in 7.18. The service maps flooding with
the HSBA method using the VV polarization. The flood image is chosen to be the same
but the reference image is a single Sentinel-1 image acquired 30th of January3. The flood
map from the HASARD service looks much more reasonable than the flood maps found
with the HSBA method. The flooding is clearly visible along the streams and medium
3This image was picked because it had similar brightness and no visible flooding
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure 7.17: The bare soil flood map in red given by the HSBA method using VH. The
background is the VH flood image.
sized dots are spread around the image. These dots could very well be large ponds of
water on fields.
The HASARD service analyzes entire Sentinel-1 images and a sea mask is applied to
exclude ocean pixels from the selected tiles. The tiles selected by the HASARD service
are not shared but they are probably outside the test case area since it is very hard to find
a bi-modal tile with flooding, and not permanent water, of sufficient size in the test case.
The difference between the result from HSBA using VV and the result from the HASARD
service can thus be explained the lack of a sea mask and by the fact that only subset are
used in this thesis.
Figure 7.18: The bare soil flood map from the HASARD service in red. The background
is the VV flood image.
The bare soil flood map from the REBEL method, shown in 7.19, have some of the same
features as the flood map from the HASARD service. Flooding is visible along the streams
and dots of flooding are spread over the image. The number and sizes of the dots are a
bit large for the Rebel method.
The REBEL method is also used to derive an urban flood map. 116 pixels are classified
as being urban flooding spread out over the image. This is a low number and might just
be false positives. This is not investigated further because of lacking validation data.
82
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:91==
Figure 7.19: The bare soil flood map from the the REBEL method in red. The background
is the VV flood image.
Comparison
A quantitative comparison of the methods is given in Table 7.3. The number of pixels
classified as flood by the HSBA method stands out for both polarizations. The number
of flooded pixels is alarmingly high for the VV polarization and suspiciously low for the
VH polarization. The most similar flood maps are given by the REBEL method and the
HASARD service.
Table 7.3: Comparison of the pixels classified as bare soil flooding. Each field shows
the percentage of pixels classified as flooded, by the method given in the column, also
classified as flood by the method in the row.
HSBA VV
HSBA VH
REBEL
HASARD
HSBA VV (17 795)
-
2%(303)
18%(3 195)
11%(1 984)
HSBA VH (1 268)
24%(303)
-
68%(865)
56%(706)
REBEL (6 937)
46%(3 195)
12%(865)
-
47%(3 286)
HASARD (4 741)
42%(1 984)
15%(706)
69%(3 286)
-
Figure 7.20 shows the flood map derived with the REBEL method together with the flood
maps from the HASARD service. The pixels the method agree on are flooded are shown
in blue. The flooding along the streams and some ponds are captured by both floods.
The pixels only classified as flooded by the HASARD service are shown in green and the
pixels only classified as flooded by the REBEL method in red. A large portion of the green
pixels are located in the white box shown in the Figure 7.20. This area has a large drop
in VV backscatter coefficient but not in VH so it makes sense that the HASARD service
maps this area as flooded since it only uses the VV polarization. The area is a flat area
along the stream so it is probably flooded. There is a lot of red pixels spread around
the image. This could be small lakes on the fields due to the intense rainfall causing the
flooding or it could be false positives. A more thorough investigation is needed determine
this.
No aerial photos, taken during the flooding event, are available and the optical Sentinel-
2 images are masked by clouds. This makes it difficult to validate the flood maps but
highlights the advantage of the all weather capability of SAR images.
The flood event was caused by intense rainfall and it would thus be interesting to compare
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 7.20: Comparison of the bare soil flood map from HASARD service and the one
derived with the REBEL method. The blue pixels are classified as bare soil flooding both
by the HASARD service and the REBEL method. The red pixels are only classified as
flooded by the REBEL method and the green only by HASARD service. The background
is the VV flood image. The white box marks part of a stream, Vejle å
the flood maps with simulations from Scalgo’s Flash flood model, but this is left for future
work4.
4This will probably be included in the oral defence of the thesis
84
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:93==
7.3
Ribe
This section presents the results for the Ribe case stating with the HSBA method. The
tiles selected by the HSBA method using the VV and the VH polarizations are shown in
Figure 7.21. The selected tiles contain a large part of the flooding but they also contain
ocean as seen in the Vejle test case.
Figure 7.21: Left: The tiles selected by the HSBA method using VV polarization. The
background is a temporal composite of the VV polarization. Right: The tiles selected by
the HSBA method using VH polarization. The background is a temporal composite of the
VH polarization
The results of the flood mapping using the HSBA method for both polarizations are shown
in Figure 7.22. The flood method performs quite well in both polarization even though a
significant part of ocean was included in the selected tiles. The white arrows mark two
dark patches, which is flooding not mapped by the methods. This is due to the fact that
most of the flood is caused by water from the streams accumulated over several weeks
and because of this a minor part of the flood is also present in the reference image. The
dark patches are thus mapped as permanent water by the HSBA method.
Figure 7.22: Left: The bare soil flood map in red given by the HSBA method using VV.
The background is the VV flood image. Right: The bare soil flood map in red given by the
HSBA method using VH. The background is the VH flood image.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
85
==PAGE:94==
The results from the REBEL method and the HASARD service are shown in Figure 7.23.
The results looks similar but the flood map from the HASARD service covers more of the
dark patches, marked in Figure 7.22. A Sentinel-1 image acquired on the 8th of Febru-
ary 2020 was chosen as the reference image for the HASARD service, because of the
low amount of flooding in the image. This is why the flood map from the HASARD ser-
vice covers the dark patches better than the flood maps generated with the implemented
methods. This is also worth keeping in mind when comparing the flood maps.
Figure 7.23: Right: The bare soil flood map in blue given by the REBEL method. Left:
The bare soil flood map in blue given by the HASARD service. The background of both
images is the VV flood image.
The REBEL method was also applied on the Ribe test case and part of four fields were
classified as urban flooding. One of the fields is shown in Figure 7.24 as an example.
This is clearly false positives and is probably caused by some sort of farming activity. The
field experienced a large drop in coherence and an increase in the backscatter coefficient.
Misclassification by this could be avoided by using a base map of the land cover types to
only classify urban flooding in urban areas. The building mask is an example of such a
base map derived from Sentinel-1 data but it could based on other data sources instead.
Figure 7.24: Part of a field wrongly classified as urban flooding is shown in red.The back-
ground is the VV flood image.
Comparison
A quantitative comparison of the methods is given in Table 7.4. There is a quite good
agreement between the methods. The flood map from the HASARD service service has
the highest number of flooded pixels and it contains over 80% of the pixels classified as
flooded in each of the other methods. This could indicates that the method agrees quite
well with the others but detects more flooding due to the choice of reference image.
86
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:95==
Table 7.4: Comparison of the pixels classified as bare soil flooding. Each field shows
the percentage of pixels classified as flooded, by the method given in the column, also
classified as flood by the method in the row.
HSBA VV
HSBA VH
REBEL
HASARD
HSBA VV (32232)
-
50% (16158)
74% (23718)
82%(26477)
HSBA VH (21196)
76% (16158)
-
91% (19246)
89% (18907)
REBEL (29752)
80% (23718)
65%(19246)
-
91% (27055)
HASARD (41084)
64%(26477)
46%(18907)
66%(27055)
-
The HSBA method performs well for both polarizations in this test case, but it is only
chosen to compare the flood map from the REBEL method and the HASRARD service
to the Sentinel 2 image. This is because the implementation of the HSBA method on the
subset has proven so unstable that further testing is unnecessary.
Figure 7.25 shows the flood map derived with the REBEL method together with the flood
maps from the HASARD service. The pixels the method agree on are flooded are shown
in blue. The pixels only classified as flooded by the HASARD service are shown in green
and the pixels only classified as flooded by the REBEL method in red. The white boxes
indicate three numbered subsets that are compared with a Sentinel-2 image of the flood
in Figure 7.11-7.14. It is worth remembering that the Sentinel-2 image is acquired 7 days
after the flood image.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure 7.25: Comparison of the bare soil flood map from the HASARD service and the
one derived with the REBEL method. The blue pixels are classified as bare soil flooding
both by the HASARD service and the REBEL method. The red pixels are only classified
as flooded by the REBEL method and the green only by the HASARD service. The back-
ground is the VV flood image. The white boxes indicate three numbered subsets that are
compared with a Sentinel-2 image of the flood in Figure 7.26-7.28.
88
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:97==
Subset 1, shown in Figure 7.26, covers a large area of flooding. The flood maps match
the shape of the flooding very well. The white circles indicate dry areas in the middle of
the large patch of flooding that are correctly classified by both methods. The large green
patch in the orange circle is probably due to flooding being present in the reference image
used for the REBEL method and not in the reference image used by the HASARD service,
as described earlier in this section.
Figure 7.26: A zoomed in image of subset 1 in Figure 7.25 together with a subset of the
same area from the Sentinel-2 image shown in Figure 5.11. The white circle marks two dry
patches in the middle of the flooded area. The orange circle marks an area that appeared
flooded in reference image used for the REBEL method
Subset 2 is shown in Figure 7.27. The flooding in the white circle is captured by both
methods with some minor differences. The yellow circle shows an area, which is not
flooded in the Sentinel-2 image but is classified as flooded by both methods. This could
easily be due to the 7 day difference between the Sentinel-2 image and the flood image.
Subset 3 is shown in Figure 7.28. The flooding in the white box is captured quite well
by both methods. There are quite a few missing flood pixels especially for the REBEL
method but this is probably caused by flooding in the reference image due to the slow
build up of the flood. The yellow box marks the flooded area just west of where the small
dike broke. A large flooding is mapped by both methods but only parts of it is visible in the
Sentinel-2 image. This is most likely due to the time difference. The breach of the dike
was a fast event that happened the day before the flood image was acquired.
A quantitative comparison of the flood mapping methods with the Sentinel-2 image would
be very useful to get numbers on the actual accuracy of the methods. Especially, if the
Sentinel-1 image from the 26th February 2020 is used as the flood image instead of the
one from the 20th February used in this test case. This is left for future work
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure 7.27: A zoomed in image of subset 2 in Figure 7.25 together with a subset of
the same area from the Sentinel-2 image shown in Figure 5.11. The white circle marks
detected flood visible in the Sentinel-2 image. The orange circle marks detected flood not
visible in the Sentinel-2 image but this could be due to the time difference of 7 days.
Figure 7.28: A zoomed in image of subset 3 in Figure 7.25 together with a subset of the
same area from the Sentinel-2 image shown in Figure 5.11. The white square marks
detected flood visible in the Sentinel-2 image. The orange square marks detected flood
not visible in the Sentinel-2 image but this could be due to the time difference of 7 days.
90
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:99==
7.4
Overall discussion
This section will give an overall discussion. The first subsection will give a discussion of
the technical aspects of the flood mapping methods. This is followed by as subsection
dedicated to discussing the business case and the effects the results shown in the thesis
have on it.
7.4.1
Technical
The performance of the HSBA method is very unreliable when it is applied on smaller
subsets of a Sentinel-1 images. The method has to be applied on entire Sentinel-1 images
to really test the implementation but this would require changes to the code and the virtual
machine used. The lack of a sea mask is another clear issue with the implementation of
the HSBA method.
The performance of the REBEL method for bare soil flooding was quite similar to the
HASARD service and the results from Marco Chini, Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019
even though the REBEL method only uses a subset of the Sentinel-1 image. The REBEL
method, the HASARD service and the results from the article mapped the flooding quite
accurately in open areas but were all challenged by tree cover. None of the methods
could map flooding completely covered by tree canopy, but this is probably because the
Sentinel-1 radar pulses where unable to penetrate the tree canopy. The results from the
article performed a bit better in areas with sparse trees.
A quantitative comparison with validation data is needed to really evaluate the perfor-
mance of these methods. The test case of Ribe is an obvious candidate for evaluating
the performance of the bare soil flood mapping, but care should be taken when selecting a
reference image since the flooding event stretches over a long time period. The Houston
test case could also be used to asses the performance of the methods but the flooding
covered by canopy would have to be masked out.
The discrepancy between the preprocessing done in this thesis and SNAP, explained in
Subsection 5.1.7, did not cause any major issues for the REBEL method, but might be a
contributing factor for the failure to generate an accurate building mask. The poor results
of the building detection corrupted the urban flood extension implemented in this thesis.
The REBEL method had a performance similar to the results from the article for urban flood
mapping, but seemed to have a bit less false positives. The performance of both urban
flood maps was far from perfect. The pixels classified as flooded in the urban areas were
not connected shapes but spread out around the area and the two flood maps selected
quite different pixels. The urban flood mapping is only tested on the Houston test case
and more test cases with urban flooding are needed to draw any general conclusions.
The REBEL method could potentially have some issues with the selection of training pixels
in the case where a large amount of pixels have a drop in the backscatter coefficients
for a reason other than flooding. This could be due to farming activities decreasing the
backscatter coefficient of a field or if the flood image was actually selected at a drought5.
Human activity like farming might have some unwanted effects for the flood mapping
which needs to be considered for a robust automatic flood mapping method. The test
cases used have very limited farming activity. The test case of Vejle and Ribe are during
the middle of the winter and the Houston test case is inside a city.
There are several areas where the REBEL method could be improved: The selection
5This could happen if the method is applied uncritically to a large stack of images to produce large time
series of flooding.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
91
==PAGE:100==
of training pixels, how the training distribution is fitted, which distribution that is used, the
limit of change conditions, the adaptive part of the intensity condition and the loss function.
These are just for the bare soil flooding part. The urban flood mapping might benefit from
added filtering to reduce the resolution and increase the accuracy. An adaptive method
for the urban flood mapping based on the distribution of some training pixels or selected
tiles might be a bad idea, since large urban flooding is rare and minor floods would make
it hard to estimate any meaningful distribution.
The methods have been compared with validation data but a further analysis of the mis-
classified pixels would help to identify the source of the errors and guide the improvement
of the methods. Histograms of the misclassified pixels might help to spot trends and pat-
terns that could be taken into account when improving the methods.
Improvements in resolution is of course always nice but it would be better to focus the
energy on quantifying the accuracy of the methods and identify the potential issues at this
resolution level first.
The coherence is not used for bare soil flood mapping in any of the methods but it could
potentially be used to filter false positives. The effect of this is probably limited and the
coherence might just add another source of noise decreasing the accuracy of the bare
soil flood map.
Flood mapping using SAR images is very dependant on the land cover type that is flooded.
Incorporating a base map of land cover types in a flood mapping method would enable
the method to only look for own type of flooding in each pixel, help to select better training
data or tiles and aid in the filtering of false positives.
7.4.2
Business case
The major challenge found for the business case is how the customers should use and
benefit from the flood map. This creates quite some uncertainties regarding the business
potential. Testing the flood maps with potential customers is a way to address this chal-
lenge and feedback from Vejle could give some valuable insight. The intention is still to
continue the pilot project with Vejle and gain the much needed feedback.
The bare soil flood mapping derived from the REBEL method has a quality good enough
for customer testing by Rebel maps. The method is not ready to be deployed as a fully
automatic web service but the bare soil flood map, with minor manual adjustments and
post-processing, are ready for customer tests. The quality of the urban flood map derived
from the REBEL method is not of sufficient quality for customer testing but can be used
as proof of concept and tech demonstrations.
The flood mapping methods were unable to detect flooding covered by tree canopy but
this is not a feature expected by customers. The majority of the customers would naturally,
and correctly, assume that the tree canopy would block the view of the flood.
The business uncertainties are currently much greater than the technical uncertainties.
The focus should thus be on interacting with potential customers. The flood detection
method developed in this thesis, the REBEL method, enable rapid production of flood
maps and ease the process of testing with customers.
There is no need to make more technical improvements, from an entrepreneurial per-
spective, before the business uncertainties are reduced. This also applies to the urban
flood mapping. It would be inefficient to continue the development before a clear value
proposition is confirmed by potential customers.
92
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:101==
The REBEL method developed is quite powerful and it would be a good idea to explore
several customer segments to find a viable value proposition. Interesting sectors could
be farming organisations, large buyers of crops or government agencies maintaining in-
frastructure. The REBEL method is clearly not the only way to automatically map flooding
from SAR images as shown by the HASARD service, so it is important to be aware of
potential competitors and be clear on how Rebel Maps differs from them. The vision of
Rebel Maps is not to stand out from the competitors based on technical development but
instead to excel in user-friendliness and affordability.
A general saying in entrepreneurship is ”Fall in love with the problem, not the solution” so
it is important not to get too fixated on flood mapping using SAR images and still keep an
open mind for new opportunities.
The next step is to engage with potential customers and produce as many flood maps as
possible to validate or improve the value proposition. Technical optimisation can come
after.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
93
==PAGE:102==
8
Conclusion
The main outcomes of the the presented work was the successful accomplishments of
the goals stated in Chapter 1. The potential for using Sentinel-1 for flood detection was
explored thoroughly and key challenges related to flood detection from SAR was identified.
Generally, the detection of urban flooding proved more challenging than flooding in open
areas with one persistent challenge being tree canopy covering the parts of the flood,
preventing detection.
The REBEL method, for mapping bare soil- and urban flood, has been developed, imple-
mented and tested. The method is based on region growing and introduces new ideas
needed for a joint analysis of the VV and VH polarization. The REBEL method was tested
on three different flooding events and compared to the results reported in M. Chini, R.
Hostache, et al., 2017 and the output from the HASARD service. Aerial photos were
used as validation in the Houston test case and a Sentinel-2 image in the test case of
Ribe. The REBEL method showed a similar level of accuracy as results from M. Chini,
R. Hostache, et al., 2017 and the HASARD service even thou the method only analyzes
a subset of the Sentinel-1 image.
An existing method for SAR based flood mapping was also implemented based on sci-
entific literature. This was the HSBA method, for bare soil flood mapping, and the urban
flood extension presented in M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017 and Marco Chini, Pelich,
Luca Pulvirenti, et al., 2019. The implementation of these methods were tested on the
three test cases and compared with results from M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017 and
results from the HASARD service, which both uses the same methods. Two clear issues
with the implementation of the HSBA method were identified. The first issue is the lack of
a sea mask to filter ocean pixels which can cause errors when estimating the distribution
of the flood pixels. The second issue, and the most severe one, was that the implemen-
tation of the HSBA method only analyzes a subset of the Sentinel-1 image and not the
entire image as intended. This caused large quality variations in the derived flood maps
not corresponding to the results in M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017 and as produced
by the HASARD service which analyzes full Sentinel-1 images. The issue of using a sub-
set of the Sentinel-1 image also applies to the urban flood extension since it relies on a
method similar to the HSBA flood mapping for the extraction of a building mask. This
issue caused the implemented urban flood extension to fail. This did not have any major
implication for the thesis since the results from M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017 and the
HASARD service was used as a benchmark for the REBEL method.
The bare soil flood maps, derived with the REBEL method, were accurate and could be
used for commercial testing with minor manual adjustments and post-processing. The
urban flood maps produced by the REBEL method had an accuracy in the same order of
magnitude as the results from M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al., 2017. This is solely based
on the Houston case since it is the only test case with obvious urban flooding. A large
part of the urban flooding where missed by the REBEL method and the accuracy of the
urban flood map did not reach a sufficient level for customer testing, but can still serve as
a proof of concept.
Rebel maps value proposition of providing satellite based flood mapping to municipalities
was explored in collaboration with Vejle municipality. It was clearly identified, that the
most pressing challenge is that customers are unsure of how to use and benefit from the
94
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:103==
flood maps. Vejle municipality was interested in the flood maps and agreed to provide
feedback on flood maps of the municipality, but the feedback was not received within the
time scope of the thesis. The main business take away is that ongoing testing will be
needed in order to refine the value proposition.
This thesis is a valuable stepping stone for Rebel Maps future flood detection service.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
95
==PAGE:104==
96
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
“A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms”. eng. In: Ieee Transac-
tions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics SMC-9.1 (1979), pp. 62–6, 62–66. ISSN:
00189472.
[2]
Frank J. Aherne, Neil A. Thacker, and Peter I. Rockett. “The Bhattacharyya metric
as an absolute similarity measure for frequency coded data”. eng. In: Kybernetika
34.4 (1998), pp. 363–368. ISSN: 00235954.
[3]
KM ASHMAN, CM BIRD, and SE ZEPF. “DETECTING BIMODALITY IN ASTRO-
NOMICAL DATASETS”. eng. In: Astronomical Journal 108.6 (1994), pp. 2348–
2361. ISSN: 15383881, 00046256. DOI: 10.1086/117248.
[4]
John Peter Merryman Boncori. “Measuring Coseismic Deformation With Space-
borne Synthetic Aperture Radar: A Review”. In: Frontiers in Earth Science 7 (2019),
p. 16.
[5]
M. Chini, R. Hostache, et al. “A Hierarchical Split-Based Approach for Parametric
Thresholding of SAR Images: Flood Inundation as a Test Case”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 55.12 (Dec. 2017), pp. 6975–6988.
ISSN: 1558-0644. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2017.2737664.
[6]
M. Chini, A. Papastergios, et al. “SAR coherence and polarimetric information for
improving flood mapping”. In: (July 2016), pp. 7577–7580. ISSN: 2153-7003. DOI:
10.1109/IGARSS.2016.7730976.
[7]
Marco Chini, Ramona Pelich, Renaud Hostache, et al. “Towards a 20 m global build-
ing map from sentinel-1 SAR data”. eng. In: Remote Sensing 10.11 (2018), p. 1833.
ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs10111833.
[8]
Marco Chini, Ramona Pelich, Luca Pulvirenti, et al. “Sentinel-1 InSAR Coherence to
Detect Floodwater in Urban Areas: Houston and Hurricane Harvey as A Test Case”.
In: Remote Sensing 11.2 (2019). ISSN: 2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs11020107. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/11/2/107.
[9]
Bjarne Kjær Ersbøll and Knut Conradsen. Multivariate statistics - An Introduction 2.
DTU Computer, 2016. ISBN: 9788764313154.
[10]
A. Freeman and S. L. Durden. “A three-component scattering model for polarimetric
SAR data”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 36.3 (May
1998), pp. 963–973. ISSN: 1558-0644. DOI: 10.1109/36.673687.
[11]
L. Giustarini et al. “Accounting for image uncertainty in SAR-based flood mapping”.
eng. In: International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 34
(2014), pp. 70–77. ISSN: 15698432, 03032434. DOI: 10.1016/j.jag.2014.06.017.
[12]
Laura Giustarini et al. “Probabilistic Flood Mapping Using Synthetic Aperture Radar
Data”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 54.12 (2016),
pp. 7548327, 6958–6969. ISSN: 15580644, 01962892. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2016.
2592951.
[13]
Yu Li et al. “Urban Flood Mapping Using SAR Intensity and Interferometric Coher-
ence via Bayesian Network Fusion”. In: Remote Sensing 11.19 (2019). ISSN: 2072-
4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs11192231. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/11/19/
2231.
[14]
Simon Kok Lupemba and Eigil Hyldgaard Lippert. Synthesis on implementation of
SAR-coherence processing. 2020.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
97
==PAGE:106==
[15]
P. Matgen et al. “Towards an automated SAR-based flood monitoring system: Lessons
learned from two case studies”. eng. In: Physics and Chemistry of the Earth 36.7-8
(2011), pp. 241–252. ISSN: 18735193, 14747065. DOI: 10.1016/j.pce.2010.12.009.
[16]
Johan Jacob Mohr. SAR Light - an introduction to Synthetic Aperture Radar. Aug.
2005.
[17]
A Nashashibi et al. “Semi-empirical modeling of bare soil surfaces at millimeter-
wave frequencies”. eng. In: Igarss ’98 - 1998 International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium, Proceedings Vols 1-5 (1998), pp. 2270–2272.
[18]
P.J. Meadows Nuno Miranda. Sentinel-1 Radiometric Calibration of Products. Tech.
rep. Reference: ESA-EOPG-CSCOP-TN-0002. ESA, May 2015.
[19]
C. Oliver and S. Quegan. Understanding synthetic aperture radar images. eng.
Artech House, 1998, 479 s. ISBN: 089006850x.
[20]
A. Osterwalder et al. Value Proposition Design: How to Create Products and Ser-
vices Customers Want. Business planning. Wiley, 2014. ISBN: 9781118968055.
[21]
L. Pulvirenti et al. “Use of SAR Data for Detecting Floodwater in Urban and Agricul-
tural Areas: The Role of the Interferometric Coherence”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 54.3 (Mar. 2016), pp. 1532–1544. ISSN: 1558-
0644. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2482001.
[22]
John Alan Richards. Remote sensing with imaging radar. eng. Springer, 2009, xix,
361 Seiten (unknown).
[23]
Guy J.P. Schumann and Delwyn K. Moller. “Microwave remote sensing of flood
inundation”. eng. In: Physics and Chemistry of the Earth 83-84 (2015), pp. 84–95.
ISSN: 18735193, 14747065. DOI: 10.1016/j.pce.2015.05.002.
[24]
R TOUZI, A LOPES, and P BOUSQUET. “A STATISTICAL AND GEOMETRICAL
EDGE DETECTOR FOR SAR IMAGES”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing 26.6 (1988), pp. 764–773. ISSN: 15580644, 01962892. DOI:
10.1109/36.7708.
[25]
Hua Xie, Leland E. Pierce, and Fawwaz T. Ulaby. “Statistical properties of log-
arithmically transformed speckle”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 40.3 (2002), pp. 721–727. ISSN: 15580644, 01962892. DOI: 10.
1109/tgrs.2002.1000333.
98
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:107==
A
Appendix
A.1
Revised project plan
First first subsection presents original project plan and the second subsection provides a
short discussion.
A.1.1
Original project plan
Time span: Week 5 - Week 26
Week 5-8:
• Literature study
• Find Floods in SAR images and visualize
• Prepare question for meeting with Vejle
Week 9-10:
• Adjust project goal and plan to align with Vejle.
• Compare coherence and backscatter with SNAP.
Week 11 -13:
• Explore histograms of variables
• Speckle filter
• Do threshold/ decision tree model
• Implement region growing and morphology operation
Week 14:
• Implement segmentation and geo code
• Visualize in Qgis.
Week 15:
• Test and write
Week 16- 17:
• Implementer simple Baysian network
Week 17 – 20:
• Make Sentinel 2 base map and include in Baysian model
Week 20-22:
• Test and run on big data set. Compare different times. Analyse February.
Week 22-26:
• Finish rapport
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
99
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.1: The example image shown at the meeting with Vejle municipality. The red
color indicates areas where the backscatter coefficient dropped below its normal value on
the 17. February 2020. This drop of backscatter coefficient is most likely due to bare soil
flooding. This visualisation is a temporal composite of SAR images and the visualisation
technique described in Section 5.2.
A.1.2
Discussion
The work during the thesis started to diverge from the plan around week 11 where it was
decided to implement the HSBA method described in the report. The implementation of
the method was associated with some unexpected challenges, which dragged out the
process. The segmentation was implemented, and intermediate results was visualised in
Qgis. The idea of implementing a simple Bayesian network and develop a flood mapping
method was dropped and it was instead decided to implement a flood mapping method
based on the insight gain from the HSBA method. The ambition to test on the flood
mapping method was put aside as it was decided that the validation of the flood maps
was more important.
A.2
Summary from first meeting with Vejle
Vejle meeting summary:
Participants:
Vejle: Jette Vindum (Project developer), Ulla Pia Geertsen (Climate coordinator), Paul
Landsfeldt (Water management engineer) and Thorsten (GIS Technician)
Rebel Maps: Kristian Sørensen, Eigil Lippert and Simon Lupemba
Date and time: 13.00, 24th of February
Meeting Language: Danish
Location: Vejle
Agenda:
• Short presentation by Rebel Maps
• Vejle’s challenge with flooding and how mapping might help (discussion)
• The pilot project and how to proceed (discussion)
A.2.1
Summary
The presentation by Rebel Maps is included in the appendix. TO BE DONE All quotes
are tentative quote
100
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:109==
The meeting started with a short presentation of the Rebel Maps team and their back-
ground followed by a short introduction to Earth observation, the Copernicus program
and Sentinel-1. The participants from Vejle were familiar with the Copernicus program on
a superficial level, but they have not worked with the data.
Rebel Maps presented their vision to make smart and user friendly maps and spatial
analytics based on satellite images and thus democratising Earth observation market.
They then proceeded to show a demo website. Paul commented on this, saying: ”It looks
a bit too simple. In practise I would like to adjust more map related settings”. Thorsten
commented: ”A website is nice but what we really need is a Web feature Service so we
do not have to update our server with new maps all the time.”
After the presentation Rebel Maps showed the image seen in Figure A.1. It shows a
combination of Sentinel 1 images of Vejle and the flooded areas are visualised in red
color. The image immediately sparked interest. The date of the image corresponded
to high water levels in the streams of Vejle and red areas along the river corresponded
to the flooding observed by the participants from Vejle. However, the participants from
Vejle had not seen the pools on the various fields, also seen in Figure A.1, this was
new information for them. Nevertheless Paul commented: ”Flooded fields are not the
responsibility of the municipality but the farmer’s responsibility”. They noted that new
climate laws are underway which might change some of their responsibilities. Farmers
have the right to compensation when flood prevention initiatives by the municipality of
Vejle result in damages to their fields, but this is rarely due to flooding. The compensation
is most often given, however, due to flood prevention initiatives leading to an increase in
soil moisture giving swamp like soil and significantly reducing yield.
The way that Vejle is currently mapping floods in the city is by on the ground. Ground
observations made by employees combined with knowledge of the city enables them to
accurately determine the extent of the flood in the city. For flooding in the rural areas
Vejle rely on a surface water modeling software, Scalgo Live, which uses accurate height
models to model flooding based on rainfall. Paul expressed satisfaction with the results
from Scalgo which are reliable. He would like to compare Scalgo results with the flood
map based on Sentinel 1 but that is not a recurring task. The participants from Vejle found
the flood map interesting but struggled to come up with recurring tasks, where the map
would play a part. They are trying out new ways to map flooding. One example is a
collaboration with DTU and DHI where they have been flying drones both day and night
in week 8 to map and model the flooding caused by the severe rainfall in February.
The participants from Vejle would like to compare flood events from different dates and
their extent but they are not sure how they will use it and if it will be a recurring task.
One of the main recurring tasks for the municipality is controlling floodgates in the streams
to prevent flooding in the city. Optimal control could potentially limit the flooding more
than what is achievable currently. The control is mainly built on weather forecasts and the
experiences of a few employees. One of their main uncertainties are the ground saturation
level and the level of the water table, which affects the ground’s ability to absorb rain.
Rebel Maps explained how Sentinel 1 can be used to derive soil moisture. Information
about soil moisture was interesting to Paul since it might help controlling the floodgates.
After this we discussed the possibilities of using AI to forecast water levels in the streams
based on recent water levels, weather forecast and Sentinel 1 images. Data on the water
levels are available through hydrometri.dk. If it was possible to build an AI model that
could help forecasting water levels, they would be interested in buying it.
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
101
==PAGE:110==
Vejle is currently making a flood prevention project which will delay part of the water up-
stream during peak water levels in the streams. This should enable them to smooth out
peaks in the flow and keep the water levels under the critical limit. They call the project
”water parking” and it is along Grejs Å. This is because it is the ”fastest” stream and thus
put the most stress on the city channels during heavy rainfall.
They are working on several water parking projects but they are limited by the Natura 2000
areas around the streams. They will start building the water parking this year (2020). If
they need to monitor them they will equip the reservoirs with water level gauges so they
can get accurate information about the water levels. They did not see satellite derived
maps as a help in regard to water parking since it is only a few specific reservoirs that
would be easier to monitor in situ.
All the ”upland” for the streams are located in Vejle municipality so they are not dependent
on other municipalities for flood prevention.
It was agreed to continue with the pilot project to explore how Vejle might use flood maps.
Jette Vindum will be the main point of contact. Rebel maps will turn the flood example
from Figure A.1 into GIS polygons and deliver it to Vejle late Marts or start April. They
will then upload it in their internal netGIS and share it in the municipality. Later on Rebel
maps will improve the maps and also compare events of different dates. Vejle will provide
feedback on the products and how they can use them. Rebel Maps got the permission
from Vejle to mention them and tag them in social media posts about the project.
A.3
Letter of intent from Vejle
102
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
Automatic flood mapping based on data from the Sentinel satellites
105
==PAGE:114==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
