==PAGE:1==
 
 
Starting-Up with Support 
A case study on university-based soft-funding 
for startups 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Starting-Up with Support 
A case study on university-based soft-funding for startups 
 
 
Project: Thesis for the degree of MSc. Management & Technology 
Author: Paula Riedel, s191942 | 3673531 
Supervisors: Karen Murdock and Dr. Rebecca Preller 
Submission: 27th June 2020 
 
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis 
III 
Table of Contents 
Table of Figures 
V 
Table of Tables 
VI 
Acknowledgements 
VII 
Abstract 
VIII 
1. 
Introduction 
1 
2. 
Theoretical Orientation 
4 
2.1. 
Sources of Capital for New Ventures 
4 
2.2. 
Soft-Funding as a Source of Capital 
6 
2.2.1. 
Structure and Setting of Soft-Funding Initiatives 
7 
2.2.2. 
Who gets Soft-funding 
8 
2.2.3. 
Motivation of the Sponsors 
10 
2.2.4. 
Benefits for the Applicants 
11 
2.2.5. 
Performance Measurement 
15 
2.2.6. 
Interactions with other Financing Sources 
16 
2.2.7. 
Outcome for the society 
16 
3. 
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
18 
3.1. 
Denmark 
19 
3.2. 
Germany 
21 
4. 
Data and Methods 
24 
4.1. 
Data Collection 
24 
4.2. 
Cases 
26 
4.2.1. 
Initiative for Industrial Innovation 
27 
4.2.2. 
The Skylab Soft-funding Initiative 
29 
4.3. 
Analysis 
32 
5. 
Results 
33 
5.1. 
Application 
33 
5.1.1. 
Application Procedure 
33 
5.1.2. 
Who gets Soft-funding 
36 
5.2. 
Benefits for Startups 
40 
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis 
IV 
5.3. 
Interaction with Other Programs 
44 
5.4. 
Motivation of the Sponsors 
45 
5.5. 
Performance Measurement 
46 
6. 
Discussion 
48 
6.1. 
Industrial Cultural Differences 
49 
6.2. 
Selection Criteria: Product vs. Team Focus 
51 
6.3. 
Sponsors’ Motivation: Learning vs. Investment Objective 
52 
6.4. 
Performance Measures and Control Mechanisms 
52 
6.5. 
Limitations and future research 
54 
6.6. 
Practical Implications 
56 
7. 
Conclusion 
59 
8. 
Sources 
60 
9. 
Picture Sources 
65 
10. 
Appendix 
65 
10.1. Interviews conducted with DTU Skylab Soft-funding Initiative 
65 
10.1.1. 
Pål Simon Fernvall 
65 
10.1.2. 
Henrik Kaastrup 
77 
10.1.3. 
SSI-1 
83 
10.1.4. 
SSI-2 
93 
10.1.5. 
SSI-3 
99 
10.2. Interviews conducted at the Initiative for Industrial Innovation 
108 
10.2.1. 
Moritz von Klot 
108 
10.2.2. 
III-1 
116 
10.2.3. 
III-2 
121 
11. 
Declaration of Authorship 
126 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis 
V 
Table of Figures 
Figure 2-1 Startup Financing Sources. Adapted from: (Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018) ................ 5 
Figure 2-2 Conception of Venture Legitimacy over Time. Source: (Fisher et al., 2016) .......... 6 
Figure 3-1 GEDI Values for Denmark and Germany compared to the United States (Ács, Szerb, 
& Lloyd, 2018) ......................................................................................................................... 18 
Figure 3-2 A Guide to Startup Funding Sources in Denmark. Source: (Heyfunding ApS, 2018)
 .................................................................................................................................................. 20 
Figure 3-3 Funding Sources Germany. Sources: Own Figure based on: (Gattermann, 2017; 
Heyfunding ApS, 2018; Martineau-Fortin et al., 2020; Prüver & Turner, 2019) .................... 22 
Figure 5-1 From Application to Decision at the Initiative for Industrial Innovation. Source: 
Case-Study ............................................................................................................................... 34 
Figure 5-2 From Application to Decision at the Skylab Soft-funding Initiative. Source: Case-
Study ......................................................................................................................................... 35 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis 
VI 
Table of Tables 
Table 2-1 Sources of Hard-Funding and Soft-Funding. Source: Own Perception..................... 5 
Table 2-2 Direct and Indirect Effects of Soft-funding on Receiving Startups. Source: based on 
the named sources .................................................................................................................... 12 
Table 4-1 Interviewed Startups ................................................................................................ 25 
Table 5-1  Criteria for the Prototyping Grant Selection ........................................................... 36 
Table 5-2 Performance Measurement Indicators. Source: Interviews ..................................... 46 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis 
VII 
Acknowledgements 
First, I want to thank my supervisors who made this thesis possible. Thank you, for making this 
special setting of a joint thesis easy. Thank you, Karen Murdock, for always having an open ear 
and welcoming me so warmly into the world of DTU theses. Thanks, for understanding and for 
being so helpful in overcoming my pre-set view on how to write a thesis. Also thank you, for 
always challenging my own views on soft-funding. I especially grateful for some insights into 
your job and for making the best out of this exceptional Covid-19 situation. 
Also thank you, Rebecca Preller, for not making this over-complicated and your easy adaption 
to the specific regulations of my thesis. 
I am also grateful, for my censor Thomas Mathiasen, whom I not yet know but who will 
hopefully enjoy reading this thesis! 
I had the opportunity to get to know a lot of new persons during the process of this thesis. 
Thanks to all the interviewees who openly shared their experiences and thoughts with me. A 
“named” thanks goes out to Pål Simon Fernvall, Henrik Kaastrup and Moritz von Klot. An 
anonymized thank you to the five startups.  
Last, a big thank you to my friends and family who have proof-read this and stand by my side. 
Thanks to you, this thesis is more readable, but also more consistent. Thanks for always 
challenging my views and raising my spirit if needed. 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis 
VIII 
Abstract 
This thesis explores the phenomena of university-based soft-funding for startups. University-
based soft-funding is widely established at entrepreneurial-oriented universities in Germany 
and Denmark, however, not a lot of research on these exists yet. For the study, I performed two 
case studies at the Skylab at the Technical University Denmark [DTU] and the Industrial 
Innovators at the Technical University Munich [TUM] based on the Yin method, which show 
how such initiatives could be structured. The research demonstrates that university-based soft-
funding, even if the money given out is similar, still can differ widely. One reason for this could 
be different objectives such as financial, educational, philanthropical or economical. These 
objectives influence the structure and the set-up of the initiatives including its selection criteria, 
networks to other initiatives, performance measures and the outcome. Another point that 
influences this thesis is probably cultural differences. Within the thesis, I provide implications 
for practitioners as well as show where further research is needed. 
 
 
 
 
.
==PAGE:9==
Introduction 
1 
1. Introduction 
The number of entrepreneurship programs and initiatives at universities is rising. While in 2010 
there was barely a masters’ program focusing in entrepreneurship, there are at least 56 in 2020 
(Keystone Academic Solutions, 2020). Most of these master programs are likely to be taught at 
entrepreneurship centers which seem to be standard at a modern European university. These 
entrepreneurship centers often are of multi-purpose, acting as teaching centers, workshops for 
prototype building, incubators or accelerators and offering soft-funding for startups (Finkle, 
Menzies, Kuratko, & Goldsby, 2013). In this thesis, soft-funding is defined as a certain type of 
startup funding which, in comparison to hard-funding, is given without an expectation of a 
return. Most often, it is represented as grant or subsidy. Grants and subsidies are both small 
amounts of money that are given, in this context, to startups. The startups which usually must 
meet certain criteria, are confronted with certain expectations and sometimes these grants or 
subsidies have a purpose. The main difference between grants and subsidies is that subsidies 
are funded only by public organizations while grants are funded by companies, private persons 
or initiatives sometimes in cooperation with the government.  
Recent research on soft funding has concentrated on the outcome of grants or subsidies. Quite 
some authors have shown that receiving a grant or subsidy from a state or a university can serve 
as a certification (e.g. Ayoub, Gottschalk, & Müller, 2017; Howell, 2017; Meuleman & 
Maeseneire, 2012; Söderblom, Samuelsson, Wiklund, & Sandberg, 2015). This certification 
can limit the uncertainty and insecurity that external investors such as Venture Capitalist or 
Angel investors face when investing into early stage startups. Therefore, a startup that has 
received any kind of subsidy or grant is often more likely to also secure external funding. 
Additionally, Rasmussen and Wright (2015) claim that startups with access to soft funding are 
more likely to succeed. 
Cantner and Kösters (2012) have focused on selection factors and show that startups are more 
likely to receive a subsidy if they have a high degree of novelty and are an academic spin-off. 
Motoyama and Knowlton (2017) show that entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship support 
organizations build a network that pushes both parties to better outcomes.  
However, many of these studies focus on public subsidies that are offered by a central, public 
organization such as the EXIST foundation in Germany, the Innovationsfonden in Denmark or 
the SBIR grant in the U.S. (Ayoub et al., 2017; Howell, 2017; Islam, Fremeth, & Marcus, 2018; 
Link & Scott, 2012). Thereby, the studies neglect that additionally soft-funding initiatives are 
==PAGE:10==
Introduction 
2 
also set up in a university context, which focus locally on startups. Examples for such financing 
include grants to access workshops at universities or for continuing the work on master’s, 
bachelor’s or PhD projects. These university-based initiatives are often set up in a public-
corporate cooperation so that the moneys  given out are provided by the government and an 
external partner jointly.  
Information on these initiatives is yet scarce although their number is increasing as a look at a 
landscape of such initiatives in Denmark and Germany shows, universities such as the 
Technical University Denmark [DTU], the Copenhagen Business School or the Technical 
University Munich [TUM] offer grants at their entrepreneurial support centers. Therefore, it is 
important to gather information about those programs in order to learn from best practices, so 
that public monies as well as corporates are used in the best possible way. This thesis will 
therefore investigate how should a university-based soft-funding initiative be structured in 
order to a) identify the startups that have the best future prospect and b) support startups to 
benefit the most from the funding? How does a university-based soft-funding initiative interact 
with other offers at the entrepreneurial support center? Additionally, I shortly investigate why 
external partners participate in such an initiative. 
Propositions to answer these questions will be based on a literature review (Yin, 2014) 
combined with an overview over the startup financing scene in Denmark and Germany. These 
propositions will be tested with a case study with two soft funding initiatives in Germany and 
Denmark based on the Yin-Method (Yin, 2014). A look at Denmark and Germany is suitable 
to do so as the countries are known as innovation leaders within Europe (Kontolaimou, 
Giotopoulos, & Tsakanikas, 2016) as well as host two of the biggest European Startup Hubs in 
Copenhagen and Berlin (Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018). Looking at these two countries will 
therefore likely offer the possibilities to identify best practices for other initiatives within 
Europe or worldwide. In general, however, European states are more likely to involve into 
fostering entrepreneurship than e.g. the United States (Bascha & Walz, 2007). This is probably 
as European states still aim to foster Venture Capital and the entrepreneurial culture which can 
be done by encouraging venture capital and by public research funds (Samila & Sorenson, 
2010). It is therefore likely that the amount of public startup assistance organizations in Europe 
is higher than in other regions of the world. 
The case study is based on data sources such as interviews with responsibles of the soft-funding 
initiatives, sponsors and startups that received the soft funding. In total eight interviews were 
==PAGE:11==
Introduction 
3 
conducted. As common, the data will be triangulated with additional data (Yin, 2014) available 
from the two initiatives such as homepages, newspaper articles, social media communication, 
application procedures and participant statistics if available.  
The two case studies show that the main difference between the cases are the different 
objectives of the grant initiative. Objectives that could be seen were economically, financially, 
educationally or philanthropically oriented. The orientation thereby influences the whole set-
up of the initiatives, its selection criteria, the sponsors’ motivation as well as the outcome. 
Startups benefit in various ways from a grant funding; by easy and fast access to capital, 
networking possibilities, access to subsequent funding, consulting and a lean structure. Cultural 
differences could be identified in the amount of established control mechanisms and 
performance measurements. 
The thesis will be structured as follows: I start by introducing the most important constructs 
about start-up funding and soft-funding and by conducting propositions from those. This is 
followed by an overview of the entrepreneurial environment in Denmark and Germany as well 
as how it is in comparison to other European states as well as the world. After explaining the 
method and the cases in detail, I present results from the case study. Those are discussed in the 
subsequent section and the thesis will end with a conclusion and practical implications for soft 
funding initiatives.  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
Theoretical Orientation 
4 
2. Theoretical Orientation 
This thesis focusses on startups, however, while the most common definition is based on age 
(< 10 years), innovation (in product, service or business model) and their aim to scale (e.g. 
Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018), this thesis mostly focuses on early stage startups which might not 
yet be incorporated and could also be called “projects” instead. However, I will still use the 
term startup for those as it simplifies the reading. Additionally, the thesis will mostly focus on 
“knowledge-intensive” startups, which are startups that embed technology and are based on 
R&D findings.  
A study comparing the entrepreneurial culture in the U.S. and Sweden found out that in order 
to encourage such knowledge-intensive entrepreneurship, several mechanisms should be in 
place: tax-incentives for entrepreneurs, deregulated labor markets and a decentralized and 
competitive university system (Henrekson & Rosenberg, 2001). In general, start-up support can 
be separated into two categories: a) indirect support such as tax reduction, providing the 
scientific infrastructure or business initiatives such as network events between established 
companies and startups and b) direct such as inexpensive credits, venture capital or grants and 
awards (Witt & Hack, 2008). According to the EU Startup Monitor of 2018, Liquidity is a 
challenge for 72.3 % of all interviewees. European startups (Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018) which 
is why this thesis will mainly focus on direct support. A huge amount of these capital sources 
is available for startups and the next subchapter aims to introduce the main ones.  
 
2.1.Sources of Capital for New Ventures 
Sources of Capital can be separated into internal and external financing. Internal financing most 
often includes savings of the founders or of family and friends. External, on the other hand, 
includes venture capital, debt, business angels, crowdfunding, accelerators, incubators but also 
grants and subsidies. Figure 2-1 shows how often which financing sources were used by startups 
in Europe in 2018, darker green is for internal sources while light green was used for external 
sources. 
While Figure 2-1 shows that most startups use their own savings, it also shows the importance 
of external financing. Also, research from the last 20 years has shown that many young ventures 
depend on external financing (Drover et al., 2017). Especially, startups that use high-tech 
technologies attract more external capital than those that use medium or low tech approaches 
(Coleman & Robb, 2011). Reasons for this could be either their higher need of capital or that 
==PAGE:13==
Theoretical Orientation 
5 
they are more attractive for investors as the high-tech is often patented and the startup therefore 
saver from being copied.  
Figure 2-1 Startup Financing Sources. Adapted from: (Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018) 
  
External financing can thereby be further divided into soft-funding and hard-funding. While 
hard-funding requires a return from a startup such as equity, interests or a product, soft-funding 
does not require such a return. Table 2-1 provides an overview of how capital sources are 
divided into hard-funding and soft-funding. 
Table 2-1 Sources of Hard-Funding and Soft-Funding. Source: Own Perception 
Hard Funding 
Soft Funding 
Business Angel 
Venture Capital 
Incubator 
Accelerator 
Bank Loans 
Crowd Funding / Crowd Investing 
Grants 
Subsidies 
 
 
According to a model by Fisher, Kotha, and Lahiri (2016), startups go through three levels in 
order to achieve legitimacy and that in each level there is a legitimacy threshold to pass. Each 
phase has a specific audience which in Phase I and II are capital providers. The audience for 
the first phase (the conception phase) are grant providers while the audience in the second phase 
are venture capitalists and angel investors. The model can be seen in Figure 2-2. Interestingly, 
77,80%
30,20% 29,00% 26,30% 20,70% 20,00% 18,30% 15,70%
7,40% 4,80%
0,00%
10,00%
20,00%
30,00%
40,00%
50,00%
60,00%
70,00%
80,00%
90,00%
==PAGE:14==
Theoretical Orientation 
6 
it could therefore be concluded that soft-funding sources are especially important for very early 
stage startups in their conception phase while hard-funding sources are rather used by later stage 
startups.  
Figure 2-2 Conception of Venture Legitimacy over Time. Source: (Fisher et al., 2016) 
 
Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012) divide the conception phase into three financing sources which 
they claim to be mostly provided by government initiatives. Proof-of-Concept funding, Pre-
Seed funding and Seed funding. Proof-of-concept funding is usually grant-based and aims to 
reduce technology uncertainty and therefore the grant is to be used for technology development. 
Pre-seed funding could also be grant-based but sometimes also includes convertible loans, 
which means they are turned into equity in a subsequent funding round. It aims to reduce 
organizational uncertainty and is to support market and management development. As a last 
financing source, they describe seed funding which usually consists of equity funding or loans. 
This one is to reduce the investment risk for Venture Capitalists and is supposed to be used for 
the venture launch. While Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012) describe these three sources for 
government funding, I adapt these categories to soft-funding at entrepreneurial support centers 
at universities. 
 
2.2.Soft-Funding as a Source of Capital 
As defined before, soft-funding is a source of capital that is given without the expectation of a 
return. Soft-funding can be structured in several ways, some examples are given in this chapter. 
Also, in order to distribute soft-funding some kind of selection mechanism has to be in place. 
Some researchers have shown how sponsors and grant receivers are motivated and how they 
==PAGE:15==
Theoretical Orientation 
7 
benefit from grants. Also, it is interesting to see how soft-funding interacts with other financing 
sources as well as whether there is a measurable outcome for the society. This chapter will 
therefore look into these topics and what current literature has found out.  
 
2.2.1. Structure and Setting of Soft-Funding Initiatives 
Soft-funding can be seen in various set-ups. The setup that was mostly described in the literature 
is a statewide grant that is given out to startups by public institutions. Examples for this are the 
SBIR – the Small Business Innovation Research Grant – in the U.S., the German program 
EXIST but also the Innovationsfonden in Denmark. 
Although this thesis mainly focusses on Germany and Denmark, it is interesting to have a look 
at the SBIR as this one was the first nationwide grant in 1982 and was afterwards taken as a 
template for many other nationwide initiatives. The SBIR is divided into two independent 
stages. The first is an award of about $150.000 (~ 1 000 000 DKK or 140 000 €), the second 
which can be applied to only after receiving the first is $1 million (~ 6 800 000 DKK or 900 
000 €), received two to three years after phase one. (Howell, 2017) 
The EXIST program is a public German startup grant that is supposed to cover living expenses 
of the founders as well as spending for materials and equipment – on average 80.000 € (~ 600 
000 DKK). Startups are selected based on a reduced due diligence and a concept of the business 
idea. (Ayoub et al., 2017) 
The Innobooster or Innofounder by the Danish Government is also publicly paid for and covers 
living expenses of the founders, in sum around 690 000 DKK to 1 380 000 DKK (~ 90 000 € 
to 185 000 €) depending on the experience level of the founders. Startups are selected based on 
the innovativeness of the business idea as well as on their team and their experience. (Innovation 
Fund Denmark, 2020) 
The three programs have therefore in common that they are sponsored by the government, given 
out by one central entity and they are also comparable in their amounts. Especially the SBIR 
was part of many studies which especially focus on the output as the program was established 
in the 1980s and the data was since then accessed by many different researchers. A phenomenon 
less thoroughly researched are smaller soft-funding initiatives. 
Initiatives at universities usually give out smaller amounts as grants than these nationwide 
grants. The two initiatives that are investigated in this thesis – the Initiative for Industrial 
==PAGE:16==
Theoretical Orientation 
8 
Innovation and the DTU Skylab Soft-funding hand out grants that cover 1 000 € to 25 000 € (~ 
7.500 DKK to 200 000 DKK). As these amounts are a lot smaller than those given out at 
nationwide, they are probably also less powerful in their outcomes. However, the power of the 
outcome is probably dependent on the size of the startup, its stage and its progress. A startup 
that just recently started their first prototype can probably progress a lot further in relation to 
their actual stage with 25 000 € (200 000 DKK) than a startup that is about to entry the market 
and gain its first customers. I therefore expect that startups first apply for soft-funding at 
universities and afterwards apply for the above named nationwide grants. 
Proposition 1: Soft-funding provided at entrepreneurial support centers at universities 
is one of the first sources of funding within a startup’s life. 
 
2.2.2. Who gets Soft-funding 
As already described before, potential selection criteria could include a reduced due diligence, 
the business idea, its innovativeness, the team and / or the team’s and the individual’s 
experience (Ayoub et al., 2017; Innovation Fund Denmark, 2020). 
A German study, which conducted interviews with 450 founders that started a business between 
1993 and 2006, found that startups are more likely to receive a subsidy if they have a high 
degree of novelty and are an academic spin-off. They also found indicators that startups which 
are founded by a team and have a higher amount of initial capital are more likely to receive a 
subsidy. On the other hand, the founder’s prior ambitions and their patent experience had no 
measurable effect on receiving a subsidy. (Cantner & Kösters, 2012) 
Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012) split soft-funding at early stage into proof-of-concept and pre-
seed funding. Accordingly they also claim that selection criteria should match the desired 
outcome. Proof-of-concept funding which mainly is supposed to strengthen the technology 
development should therefore take into account the technology potential, while pre-seed 
funding, supposed to strengthen the market development, should concentrate on individual and 
project characteristics. Additionally, Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012) claim that the impact on 
society is often a criterium to evaluate startups at a very early stage. The authors explain this 
by the high risks of assuming an early valuation of the startups’ technology and market 
potential. In an early stage those are seen to be too unpredictable and instead a claimed value 
for society could be worth the risk and show that a startup follows certain intentions and goals. 
==PAGE:17==
Theoretical Orientation 
9 
Maxwell, Jeffrey, and Lévesque (2011) provide a huge catalogue of selection criteria that are 
used by business angels to evaluate early stage startups. Although, this thesis looks at grants, 
business angels as a financing source that is also directed to very young startups may also 
provide potential selection criteria. These authors categorize selection criteria into five types: 
product, market, entrepreneur, financial and investment. Potential product criteria are interest / 
benefits, status, protectability and innovation / quality. All of those could probably also already 
be evaluated even in a pre-prototype stage. Market criteria are market size, customer 
engagement, growth potential, supply / distribution and market dynamics. While the market 
size and its growth potential could already be applied to an earlier stage, it might be difficult to 
estimate the others before finishing the development. Entrepreneur criteria are industry 
experience, track record, passion / commitment, integrity / trustworthiness and technology 
knowledge. As soft-funding initiatives at universities are often directed to students, their 
industry experience and track record are potentially not that relevant as they have not yet had 
the chance to gather such. However, evaluating their passion / commitment, their integrity and 
trustworthiness and their technology knowledge should be possible. Financial criteria are 
usually not available in a stage of pre-commercialization. I would therefore not expect to see 
those criteria. Investment criteria are criteria that mostly show the liking of the investors. The 
authors see team characteristics, entrepreneur fit, business fit, location, referral source, co-
investment and investment role as such. Co-investments are potentially less relevant for soft-
funding as the “investor” does not gain equity in the startup. However, a soft-funding initiative 
could establish likings for the other criteria. 
Overall, from the business angel study by Maxwell et al. (2011), these criteria could also be 
used to evaluate startups at soft-funding initiatives at universities: market size, market growth 
potential, entrepreneur passion / commitment, entrepreneur integrity / trustworthiness, 
entrepreneur technology knowledge as well as certain criteria reflecting the liking of the soft-
funding initiative. 
Maxwell et al. (2011) further identify that business angels use an elimination-by-aspects 
approach. This means that due to the limited information about a startup available and its 
unforeseeable future, all described criteria have to pass certain thresholds, however, it does not 
matter by how much they pass the threshold. So, as long as the market is large enough, it does 
not matter whether it is twice as big or ten times as big as the threshold, business angels would 
– as long as their budget allows for it – invest into both startups.  
==PAGE:18==
Theoretical Orientation 
10 
Dencker, Gruber, and Shah (2009) also emphasize that pre-entry knowledge of the business 
field and related activities is important for the survival of the company.  
None of the described studies concentrates on soft-funding at universities, however, they 
provide an overview of potential selection criteria. From the studies, it is already clear, that 
startup selection is potentially complicated and sophisticated. Therefore, I would expect to see 
soft-funding initiatives at universities to use several criteria covering several aspects of the 
startups. 
Proposition 2: Soft-funding at entrepreneurial support centers at universities is 
provided based upon pre-defined criteria such as innovativeness of the business idea, 
team and team or individual’s experience. 
 
2.2.3. Motivation of the Sponsors 
Research at universities can be made public by using three different opportunities: conferences 
and scientific publications, education and commercialization; commercialization can further 
happen via consulting activities, research contracts or university spin-offs (Landry, Amara, & 
Rherrad, 2006). More spin-offs are created if the researchers can access grants from the 
university or through university-industry partnership grant programs or if the university in 
general has an entrepreneurial culture (Landry et al., 2006; Morris, Kuratko, & Pryor, 2013). 
Such a culture can be established via entrepreneurial support centres which provide grants and 
seed capital funds, emphasize cross-disciplinary research (with grants), learning communities, 
speaker series, student-run campus ventures, incubators and a curriculum (Morris et al., 2013). 
The reason for entrepreneurial support centres to give out grants is therefore most likely to 
foster the entrepreneurial culture at a university and thereby increasing the commercialization 
of the research of the university. 
An entrepreneurial support centre thereby highly benefits from having as many startups as 
possible. While startups are supported in their reputation if being awarded grants and awards 
from well-known entrepreneurial support centres, entrepreneurial support centres also increase 
their reputation if they have grown a larger amount of well-known startups. Therefore, the 
reputation of both, startup and centre increases if the other is successful. (Motoyama 
& Knowlton, 2017) Therefore, an entrepreneurial support centre should be aiming to support 
as many successful startups from its university as possible. 
==PAGE:19==
Theoretical Orientation 
11 
However, the two soft-funding initiatives that are investigated within this study do not hand out 
university money. Instead, they are supported by family foundations and family investment 
offices, so both by family inheritance that is either to be spent philanthropically or properly 
invested to grow. Additionally, one of the initiatives is supported by the European Union. Their 
motivation is probably lying in their nature – a philanthropical fund probably aims for projects 
with social impact, while a family investment office aims for financial benefits. 
 
2.2.4. Benefits for the Applicants 
The question whether startups benefit from soft-funding seems to be indisputable as startups 
almost always seem to crave for capital (Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018). However, the question 
which specific benefits soft-funding has on startups, has attracted the most research within the 
subject of grant and subsidy funding. In the following, I will review the literature by separating 
the effects into direct and indirect effects. Direct effects are how the startups use the money 
while indirect effects are effects on the startup such as a potential certification of legitimacy or 
follow-up funding. 
Direct effects are a part of a huge study on the SBIR grant in the U.S.. The study by Howell 
(2017) shows that a venture increases the citations of its patents by around 30 percent after 
receiving the Phase 1 award. Additionally, receiving the grant also increases the likelihood of 
a positive revenue or increases the positive revenue if already existing. 
As described before, the SBIR consists of two phases with a progressively increasing amount 
of funding. Interestingly, the author finds that the benefits of Phase 1 are dependent on the age 
and the experience of the founders. If founders have had a lot of often cited patents before, they 
are less likely to benefit from a Phase 1 grant. Also ventures operating in a relatively mature 
sector, experience less benefits from the award. 
Proposition 3: Less experienced founders benefit more from soft-funding than more 
experienced founders. 
A survey of 2004 awardees by Howell (2017) shows that the Phase 1 money is mostly used for 
basic research and proof-of-concept work. Phase 2 grants on the other hand are often used for 
patent applications. These findings of Howell (2017) that the grants are often used for basic 
research and proof-of-concept research are also supported by Hottenrott and Richstein (2020) 
who additionally find that startups which received grants also invest in new R&D employees.  
==PAGE:20==
Theoretical Orientation 
12 
Table 2-2 Direct and Indirect Effects of Soft-funding on Receiving Startups. Source: based on the named sources  
 
Also, Ayoub et al. (2017) found that startups which received the before described German 
EXIST grant perform well below in employment growth and financial performance than the 
control group which did not receive the grant. The authors take this as an indicator that the 
German EXIST grant might not be as efficient as other financing options. So, while Howell 
(2017) finds that the financial performance increases and Hottenrott and Richstein (2020) find 
that more R&D employees are hired, Ayoub et al. (2017) claims that these increases could be 
even higher if the startup would use other financing options. However, all three authors look at 
grants that are usually higher than those given out at entrepreneurial support centers at 
universities which is why this thesis probably cannot solve this conflict. 
Effects 
Direct  
Indirect 
Positive 
• Increased 
R&D 
expenses 
(Hottenrott 
& Richstein, 
2020; 
Howell, 2017) 
• R&D 
employment 
growth 
(Hottenrott 
& Richstein, 2020) 
• Increased number of 
citations on startup’s 
patents (Howell, 2017) 
• Increased 
revenue 
(Howell, 2017) 
• Increased likelihood to Venture Capital (Ayoub 
et al., 2017; Hottenrott & Richstein, 2020; 
Howell, 2017; Islam et al., 2018; Meuleman 
& Maeseneire, 2012; Söderblom et al., 2015) 
• Increased likelihood to receive long-term debt 
(Hottenrott & Richstein, 2020; Söderblom et 
al., 2015) 
• Increased attractivity to potential employees 
(Söderblom et al., 2015) 
• Increased survival rate (Rasmussen & Wright, 
2015) 
• More successful exits (Hottenrott & Richstein, 
2020) 
Negative • Smaller 
employment 
growth (Ayoub et al., 
2017)  
• Worse 
financial 
performance (Ayoub et 
al., 2017) 
 
==PAGE:21==
Theoretical Orientation 
13 
The research on indirect effects of soft funding on startups mainly concentrated on their 
attractivity and ability to attract further financing. Attracting further financing is a common 
measure for success in entrepreneurial research. As shown in the Fisher et al. (2016) model 
(Figure 2-2), passing the next threshold to get into the next phase often includes attracting a 
specific investor audience. 
All research results pointed to an increased likelihood of securing venture capital after having 
received soft-funding (Ayoub et al., 2017; Hottenrott & Richstein, 2020; Howell, 2017; Islam 
et al., 2018; Meuleman & Maeseneire, 2012; Söderblom et al., 2015). Two U.S. American 
studies find the increased likelihood to be between 9 to 12% (Howell, 2017; Islam et al., 2018). 
Apparently, the effect is the largest within the first six months after receiving the grant. The 
effect is higher if a startup has less patents, probably because a patent is taken as a signal of 
success and not having this, means that the value of a grant as a signal of success increases. 
(Islam, Fremeth, & Marcus, 2018)  
Other studies also explain the effect by soft-funding serving as a kind of certification of 
legitimacy for the startup (Söderblom et al., 2015). Comparing 1107 Belgian SMEs that 
received a research grant to 500 who applied but got denied, the Meuleman and Maeseneire 
(2012) find that SMEs which received a public subsidy are also more likely to receive long-
term debt. They could only find an effect on external equity finance (such as VC or PE) in the 
subsample of Startup SMEs. The article shows that subsidies also work as certifications for 
SMEs and not only for startups.  
 Howell offers two explanations for the increased likelihood of receiving venture capital: either 
the Phase 1 award serves as a certification for the technology. By receiving state money, the 
technology might be perceived more positively. On the other side, the money could also be 
especially useful for prototypes and the testing of those. This could provide security for 
investors. A survey of 2004 awardees shows that the Phase 1 money is mostly used for basic 
research and proof-of-concept work which confirms the second theory that the grant enables to 
reduce uncertainty at the investor. Phase 2 grants on the other side are often used for patent 
applications. 
The measured increasing venture capital investment into startups that had received a grant, 
could be that the grant is used for patents. According to a study by Conti, Thursby, and 
Rothaermel (2013), venture capitalist value patents as strong success signals. Therefore, they 
prefer to invest into startups that had secured a patent. Startups that use grant money to secure 
==PAGE:22==
Theoretical Orientation 
14 
patents or used the grant money to survive the time until a patent is granted could therefore be 
more attractive to venture capitalist then those that did not have grant money and could 
therefore not secure patents. 
Proposition 4: Startups use soft-funding as indication for their legitimacy as the money 
enables the startups to test, patent and develop their technology.  
An additional effect on the capital structure of the startups was measured by Howell (2017). 
She showed an increased survival rate and more successful exits in terms of an Initial Public 
Offering [IPO] or an acquisition. Also, Söderblom et al. (2015) showed that startups that 
received subsidies are also more likely to attract human resources than those who did not 
receive a subsidy. 
The authors Rasmussen and Wright (2015) found out that startups that have access to 
government grants and soft-funding are more likely to succeed than those who don’t. However, 
grants and soft-funding in their study are only one of several factors that influence the success. 
Others include time and physical resources in the university, advice from colleagues and 
research networks, networks with industry and investors and infrastructure such as advice and 
financing from a technology transfer office. Additionally, success is increased with the 
availability of team members with industry and entrepreneurial experience, external investors 
such as business angels and venture capital, industry partners and customers. However, most of 
these other factors can be found in entrepreneurial support centers at universities, so that 
university-based soft-funding should combine both of these factors. 
The chapter has shown that according to the literature, grants can have positive and negative 
effects on startups. Positive effects include increased R&D expenses, an R&D employment 
growth, an increased number of cites on startup’s patents or an increased revenue (Hottenrott 
& Richstein, 2020; Howell, 2017). These positive effects are further complemented by an 
increased likelihood to receive Venture Capital, an increased likelihood to receive long-term 
debt, an increased attractivity to potential employees, an increased survival rate and more 
successful exits (Ayoub et al., 2017; Hottenrott & Richstein, 2020; Howell, 2017; Islam et al., 
2018; Meuleman & Maeseneire, 2012; Söderblom et al., 2015). Negative effects that the current 
research has found, include a smaller employment growth and worse financial performance 
(Ayoub et al., 2017). The research that was reviewed in this chapter, however, concentrates on 
nation-wide grants and therefore, probably not all of it can be applied to grants at universities. 
For example, it is unlikely that such a very early-stage startup that probably is supported by a 
==PAGE:23==
Theoretical Orientation 
15 
university grant, has an increase in R&D employment as teams might just consist of the 
founders. It is therefore, interesting to review which of these benefits and which additional 
benefits can be seen at university-based grants. 
 
2.2.5. Performance Measurement 
The above-mentioned benefits for startups probably depend on the relating program. Whether 
a program is successful in creating these benefits is probably highly dependent on its structure, 
its overall goal and its environment.  
Measuring performance thereby is in general a difficult task and many definitions exists in 
academic studies (Miller, Washburn, & Glick, 2013). Potential performance measures could be 
resource-based, finance-based or sales-based. For startups, the survival rate is a potential 
performance measure that is widely used (Coad, Frankish, Roberts, & Storey, 2016; Miller et 
al., 2013; Rotger, Gørtz, & Storey, 2012). However, using solely the survival rates of the 
startups that go through a university-based soft-funding initiative to measure the performance 
of the initiative is probably too limited (Miller et al., 2013) as it would not consider education 
aspects which could be important especially at universities. Additionally, a startup that receives 
external funding and survives, does not have to also be successful in generating sales or 
developing a proper prototype. 
Other performance measurements that can be found in academic studies are the sales growth of 
the startup, the employee growth of the startup or the personal impression of the startup of the 
initiative (Coad et al., 2016; McMullan, Chrisman, & Vesper, 2001; Rotger et al., 2012). 
However, all three measures also have disadvantages. Most of the startups that are supported 
by the soft-funding initiatives probably do not yet have any revenue, so measuring a growth is 
mathematically not possible, the same applies to the employee growth as most startups at that 
stage probably only consist of the founders. Also, sales growth, employee growth and the 
survival rate are not suitable in cases where the initiative also exists for education purposes. 
The personal impression of the program by the startup, on the other side, has its flaws, as a 
study by McMullan et al. (2001) shows that it is not related to other more objective performance 
measures that are supposed to show the business performance. Still while being highly 
subjective, it would be cheap and easy to perform. 
==PAGE:24==
Theoretical Orientation 
16 
A potential solution that was recommended in the literature was to have the startup define 
certain outcomes before the grant and afterwards measure the performance of the program on 
whether they have succeeded establishing these outcomes or not (McMullan et al., 2001). 
 
2.2.6. Interactions with other Financing Sources 
Startups often rely on more than one financing source at a time (Steigertahl & Mauer, 2018). 
Hottenrott and Richstein (2020) find that grants and subsidized loans in combination 
complement each other. As described before, startups that receive grants extend their R&D 
expenses as well as invest in new R&D employees. On the other hand, startups with a subsidized 
loan tend to increase their investment in tangible assets. Startups tend to launch new services 
and products more often if they receive both a grant and a subsidized loan probably due to the 
beneficious effect of investing in R&D and tangible assets. (Hottenrott & Richstein, 2020) 
Therefore, it could be even beneficial for startups to rely on more than one financing source at 
a time. Especially at early stages of a startups, many options are available that are award low 
amounts of monies.  
Holstein and Eschenfelder (2017) also show that one source of capital for startups can attract 
another one. They claim that Pittsburgh has become a technology hub due to public funding of 
entrepreneurial activities. They show a transition from public grants to private funds within 
Pittsburgh in their case study from 2000 to 2015. It therefore could be beneficial for a certain 
region to give out also public funds in order to increase the number of private funds around. 
There are, however, also other effects on society which will now be reviewed. 
 
2.2.7. Outcome for the society 
Especially, if not private but public monies are awarded, the society most likely aims for an 
outcome. However, I could only identify such research in the U.S. The findings were mixed.  
Link and Scott (2012) find positive and negative impacts on the employment rate, very 
dependent on the individual case base. Public funding seems to be the most successful if the 
supported products or services are also purchased by the public afterwards. In these cases, the 
public funding can support by directing the research and providing a ready market afterwards. 
In other cases, where the state is not also the customer, the impact on employment of the SBIR 
==PAGE:25==
Theoretical Orientation 
17 
grant is almost zero. However, creating employment also is not stated as one of the objectives 
of the SBIR program. Instead, the program is supposed to foster technological transfer and 
innovation. Therefore, if a company keeps existing by selling its technology rights but without 
actually using the technology themselves, this is within the objectives of the grant but does not 
create new jobs. (Link & Scott, 2012) 
While these findings indicate that the effects on the employment rate are mixed, another study 
shows that venture foundations are fostered if levels of labor friction are low and the number 
of soft-funding is high. (Cumming & Li, 2013) Additionally, given the two factors, there is also 
an increase in venture capital. 
Overall, the effect of solely publicly spent money at least in the U.S. can therefore be seen as 
mixed. As this thesis, however, considers soft-funding that comes from private-public 
cooperation there is no direct need for a societal benefit.  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
18 
3. The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
While this thesis looks at soft-funding in general, its method will cover two soft-funding 
initiatives at technical universities in Denmark and Germany. Those two countries are together 
with Switzerland, the Netherlands, Austria, Iceland and Italy considered as “innovation leaders” 
within Europe, they show high innovation efficiency as well as minor technology gaps 
(Kontolaimou et al., 2016). They are considered to mostly rely on opportunity entrepreneurship, 
which in contrary to necessity entrepreneurship, is based on identifying opportunities to start a 
company. Founders that found opportunity startups are not depended on the jobs in the startup 
but could have also found a job in the common labor market 
In general, both countries are considered as startup-friendly, however, Denmark is considered 
to be even more dedicated towards entrepreneurship than Germany (Woodside, Bernal, & 
Coduras, 2016). This can also be seen in the Global Entrepreneurship and Development Index 
[GEDI], which measures the entrepreneurship in a country as well as identifies bottlenecks that 
need to be addressed to further foster entrepreneurship (Ács, Autio, & Szerb, 2014). It consists 
of fourteen values which are calculated based on several measurements for each country 
globally. The annually published GEDI shows that both Denmark and Germany are among the 
Top 20 globally. 
Figure 3-1 GEDI Values for Denmark and Germany compared to the United States (Ács, Szerb, & Lloyd, 2018) 
  
1. Opportunity Perception
2. Startup Skills
3. Risk Acceptance
4. Networking
5. Cultural Support
6. Opportunity Startup
7. Technology Absorption
8.Human Capital
9. Competition
10. Product Innovation
11. Process Innovation
12. High Growth
13. Internationalization
14. Risk Capital
United States
Denmark
Germany
==PAGE:27==
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
19 
Figure 3-1 shows how the both countries compare to the United States which is leading the 
overall ranking in the 2018 data set. Thereby, a high value and being close to the outer limit of 
the circle is scoring high and better while the closer to the center the worse the score. As shown 
in the Figure, Denmark has a high opportunity perception, high cultural support, high 
technology absorption and high rates of product innovation but also a lot of available risk 
capital. In comparison, Germany has higher values for internationalization, high growth and 
process innovation. (Ács et al., 2018) 
Of special interest for this thesis, is the risk capital value of the GEDI. It consists of two 
measures: the informal investment in start-ups and the availability of finance (Ács et al., 2014). 
While availability of finance is calculated by liquidity of stock markets, amount of credit lines 
and others which are probably less relevant for soft-funding it still shows how much money the 
system is able to invest into startups. Interestingly, Denmark scores best even above the overall 
leader United States, while Germany scores well below. 
 
3.1.Denmark 
In the following, I will show and introduce the funding landscape in both countries.  
The Danish startup scene has clearly developed since 2008 (Møller & Kreijler, 2020). The 
number of startups but also the availability for funding have raised and especially Copenhagen 
became a clear hotspot for startups. Most VCs are seated here and also due to the three 
universities, most startups are founded in the city. 
Figure 3-2 shows an overview of the different funding possibilities available in Denmark. The 
source distinguishes between six stages and identifies which funding is appropriate at which 
stage. While this thesis has already discussed in chapter 2.1 how different startup stages require 
different funding sources, this figure offers the additional benefit of naming examples that could 
be contacted in Denmark. 
The figure separates soft-funding and grants, however, the main difference that could be 
identified was the amount of funding provided which naturally increases the more mature a 
startup gets. Grants and soft-funding are hereby provided by state (such as the 
Innovationsfonden, VentureCity Karma Kapital), private companies and industry associations 
(Alexander Foss Industrifond). Some of them such as the Startup Boost also operate 
==PAGE:28==
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
20 
internationally. Additionally, universities such as the DTU offer programs for their students, 
PhDs and alumni. 
Figure 3-2 A Guide to Startup Funding Sources in Denmark. Source: (Heyfunding ApS, 2018) 
 
What is not shown in Figure 3-2 is that startups in Denmark most often exit via merger and 
acquisition (Møller & Kreijler, 2020). Hereby, especially national corporation have been very 
active over the last year so that their share in the acquisition has overtaken the one of 
international investors (Møller & Kreijler, 2020). 
One example for such a university-based initiative in Denmark will be covered extensively in 
this thesis. The entrepreneurship center of the DTU, Skylab, has an initiative which is directed 
to DTU members (students, PhDs and postdocs) as well as alumni within one year from 
graduation or to teams with at least one DTU connection. The initiative hands out soft-funding 
billing from 15 000 DKK to 200 000 DKK (~ 2 000 € to 25 000 €) to early stage start-ups or 
student teams. Thereby, the DTU acts as a matchmaker between foundations which give the 
money and start-ups that receive the money. Start-ups apply via the Skylab website in February 
or in September, the Skylab team processes these applications and a shortlist is then pitched to 
==PAGE:29==
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
21 
the huge number of sponsors such as e.g. Tranes Fond, Kai Houmann Nielsens Fond, Nimbs 
Fond and many more. 
The application for the grant is thereby rather sophisticated, including general information, 
activities, background of the founders, a detailed budget plan and written introduction to the 
team and the product. Afterwards the application is evaluated based on market potential, 
societal and public benefit, value for money, innovativeness and the team. Startups may use the 
soft-funding as they see its best fit, however, the use for salaries is restricted. 
As similar programs are also available at the Copenhagen Business School and the Copenhagen 
University, a study looking at such university-based grants seems to be justified as findings of 
this study could be applied to more than one initiative. 
 
3.2.Germany 
The German startup capital scene has mainly developed in the last ten to fifteen years. A huge 
difference between the U.S. and Germany is the cooperation of public and private agencies 
which therefore also often require lower returns from their investment in portfolio companies 
(Bascha & Walz, 2007).  
Like in Denmark, many financing options are available. For example, there is bootstrapping or 
family and friends financing, Business Angels, traditional banks, public subsidies, 
crowdfunding and VC (Tech, 2018). Based on Figure 3-2, I created Figure 3-3 which presents 
some of the funding sources available in Germany. Thereby, I took the view of a Munich-based 
startup and tried to focus on Munich-based funding sources while still including most active 
funding sources even if not based in Munich. Main differences to Denmark are that Private 
Equity exits are less common, instead corporates often invest into startups and acquire them at 
a later stage (Martineau-Fortin, Stocks, & Lattes, 2020).  
The most popular sources for grants and soft-funding are probably the nation-wide EXIST grant 
which is organized by the state and sponsored by companies, but there also initiatives from 
federal states (such as the FLÜGGE program in Bavaria) and initiatives that are entirely 
financed by the state but are more focused such as the Go-Bio biotechnology business startup 
campaign. 
==PAGE:30==
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
22 
Figure 3-3 Funding Sources Germany. Sources: Own Figure based on: (Gattermann, 2017; Heyfunding ApS, 
2018; Martineau-Fortin et al., 2020; Prüver & Turner, 2019) 
 
Additionally, as in Denmark, some universities organize their own soft-funding program. One 
example for this is the Initiative for Industrial Innovation at the UnternehmerTUM at the 
Technical University Munich. While the Skylab belongs to the university and all employees are 
employed by the university, the entrepreneurship center at the TUM is two-folded: startup 
consultants and researchers are hired by the university and all funding possibilities are placed 
at the UnternehmerTUM which also holds lectures but is a commercially oriented company. 
The Initiative for Industrial Innovative is now placed at the UnternehmerTUM. It consists of 
two funding vehicles: a prototyping grant and pre-seed capital. Both of them should attract 
startups or student teams with a connection to the TUM, such as alumnis, students or PhDs. The 
pre-seed capital consists of a convertible loan of 50 000 € (~ 375 000 DKK), more interesting 
for this thesis is, however, the prototyping grant which is billed from 1 000 € to 10 000 € (~7.500 
DKK to 75 000 DKK). The grant can be used for materials or licenses needed for prototypes as 
well as for patents, however, it cannot be used for marketing or commercialization purposes. 
The prototyping grant is sponsored by the European Union Horizon 2020 initiative as well as 
by certain family foundations. Again, the initiative acts as a matchmaker between these 
foundations and the startups by reviewing applications and introducing a shortlist to the 
sponsors which have the final saying. The application thereby consists of general data about the 
startup, a budget plan and a pitch deck of the startup. The Initiative for Industrial Innovation 
==PAGE:31==
The Soft-Funding Scene in Denmark and Germany 
23 
asks for startups in certain areas such as IoT/Robotics, AI/VR, SynBio / MedTech all with a 
hardware or hardware and software focus. 
Just like in Denmark, also in Germany, other universities offer similar programs. Examples for 
such are the TU Berlin or the RWTH Aachen. 
As Germany and Denmark are both part of the European Union, there are also European options 
available such as the Climate-KIC which supports startups which are motivated by fighting 
climate change or Horizon 2020 which supports all kind of startups. 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
Data and Methods 
24 
4. Data and Methods 
Within the literature review, many knowledge gaps were identified within the field of soft-
funding especially soft-funding based at universities. One approach to fill such gaps, is the case 
study method by Yin (2014). The case study method is used in many different knowledge fields 
and is considered one of the most common methods in social science research.  
It should only be used for “how” and “why” research questions (Yin, 2014). Those kinds of 
questions are often of explanatory nature, which can also be seen by the research questions of 
this thesis:  
How should a university-based soft-funding initiative be structured in order to a) 
identify the startups that have the best future prospect and b) support startups to benefit 
the most from the funding? 
How does a university-based soft-funding initiative interact with other offers at the 
entrepreneurial support center? 
Why do external partners participate in such an initiative? 
Case studies are also used in a situation where the researcher has little or no control as well as 
in contemporary cases (Yin, 2014). These requirements are fulfilled here as I as a researcher 
cannot control how the soft-funding initiatives, startups or sponsors interact. Additionally, the 
initiatives are still operating and are therefore contemporary. 
A case study is useful as it enables to focus on a small amount of cases while getting an 
overview of a holistic and real world perspective (Yin, 2014). The aim is thereby to expand and 
generalize the theory but not to gain number or probabilities, a concept that is called “analytical 
generalization”.  
In the following, I will show how I obtained the relevant data, describe the two cases as well as 
how the data was analyzed. 
 
4.1.Data Collection 
The main source of data collection was semi-structured interviews which where hold with 
different stakeholders of the soft-funding initiatives. Semi-structured interviews are interviews 
that have defined interview questions however most questions can be openly answered and 
while a certain structure is kept there is no fixed procedure of the interview (Straits & Singleton, 
==PAGE:33==
Data and Methods 
25 
2011). Although, Yin (2014) emphasizes the importance of doing such interviews in person as 
it also offers the possibility for direct observations during the interview, all interviews were 
made via video call or phone call. This was due to the Covid-19 pandemic which restricted 
personal contacts from March 2020 onwards, this is inlign with the literature where phone or 
video interviews are recommended in case of endangerment for interviewees or interviewers 
(Oltmann, 2016). 
As a data basis, I decided to look at two cases: The Initiative for Industrial Innovation at the 
UnternehmerTUM at the Technical University Munich [TUM] and at the Skylab Soft-funding 
Initiative at the Danmarks Tekniske Universitet [DTU] in Denmark. 
From the Initiative for Industrial Innovation, I talked to an investment manager Moritz von 
Klot, which had been working there since January 2019. Although, he has had experienced all 
process steps of handing out a grant, his main responsibility is the first contact to the startups. 
Additionally, I contacted startups from all six batches via their website or their LinkedIn profile 
and was able to talk to two startups. One of them was working the MedTech area, the other one 
has had a software business. Both were founded in the first half of 2019 and received the grant 
in December 2020.  
I decided to anonymize all information that I got from startups as one of them asked for 
anonymity in order to be able to fully disclose all information. I therefore limited the available 
information for each startup to their industry (MedTech, Software, BioTech) and shortened the 
interviews in the Appendix so that they do not give away what a startup exactly develops or 
produces so that no conclusion could be made. In order to still have a stringent story of each 
startup, they were named by the initiative they got the grant from: Initiative for Industrial 
Innovation was shortened to III and Skylab Soft-funding Initiative was shortened to SSI. The 
name was then completed by a simple number. An overview of all startups as well as some key 
facts about them can also be found in Table 4-1.  
Table 4-1 Interviewed Startups 
Name 
Industry 
Founded in 
Received Grant in 
Used the grant mainly for 
Next Financial Step 
III-1 
MedTech 
2019 
December 2019 
IP registration 
Raise Seed Series 
III-2 
Software 
2019 
December 2019 
Product development 
Not decided 
SSI-1 
MedTech 
2018 
April 2019 
Product development 
Apply to other grants 
SSI-2 
BioTech 
2017 
April 2019 
Product development 
Apply to other grants 
==PAGE:34==
Data and Methods 
26 
SSI-3 
Software 
2019 
October 2019 
Salaries 
Raise Seed Series 
 
Within DTU Skylab Funding, I was able to talk to the project manager Pål Simon Fernvall. He 
is the main responsible for the soft-funding initiative and was the initiator of the program in 
2016. Apart from that, he also works as a startup consultant at Skylab. Additionally, I identified 
all 16 startups that received a grant last year (2019) and of which I could still find a digital 
possibility for contact such as their DTU mail, a website or a linkedin profile. However, 5 of 
those did no longer have a working website or could not be found in the internet. I contacted 
all those eleven remaining and received an answer from three startups with whom I then did an 
interview.  
Through the project manager Pål Simon Fernvall, I also had the chance to talk to Henrik 
Kaastrup who is responsible for the charitable donations at the NIMBS Foundation. He has 
worked there for four years and is elected for in sum 10 years, so will continue to work there 
for another six years. 
All interviews were recorded and afterwards transcribed using a transcription software. All 
interviews relating to the Initiative for Industrial Innovation were hold in German and were 
therefore translated to English afterwards. All transcripts can be found in chapter 10. 
From the interviewed startups, four of five were founded by students. While I learnt during the 
interviews that most startups supported by the two initiatives are founded by students, a study 
by Åstebro, Bazzazian, and Braguinsky (2012) also showed that student startups usually 
outnumber those that are founded by staff members of the university. 
Data collection, especially in case studies with a rather limited amount of cases should be based 
on data triangulation (Yin, 2014). This means, that more than one source of data is used, and 
the respective information is taken together and compared to each other (Patton, 2015). 
Therefore, the interviews were compared to data found in the internet such as websites, 
Linkedin profiles and marketing material of the initiatives. 
 
4.2.Cases 
Both case studies are placed at a European Technical University which should make them easier 
to compare as startups or about-to-be startups at these facilities probably face similar 
challenges. Both initiatives are also integrated within an Entrepreneurial Support Center – the 
==PAGE:35==
Data and Methods 
27 
UnternehmerTUM and the Skylab. However, they still differ in certain parts. In the following, 
I will give a short introduction to both programs. 
 
4.2.1. Initiative for Industrial Innovation 
The Initiative for Industrial Innovation at the UnternehmerTUM at the Technical University 
Munich started as a pilot project in 2017 and was turned into a permanent initiative by the end 
of 2018. Industrial Innovators is an investment funnel for very early stage startups and consists 
of two investment vehicles. Both vehicles are directed to students of TUM or to alumni of 
incubator or accelerator programs at the UnternehmerTUM. The overall objective of Industrial 
Innovators is to strengthen the TUM entrepreneurship ecosystem; however, the initiative also 
has financial drivers. 
Industrial Innovators is one initiative at the UnternehmerTUM. The UnternehmerTUM is the 
company at the Technical University Munich that is responsible to support and to some extent 
educate startups. Apart from the Industrial Innovators, the UnternehmerTUM also offers other 
programs such as an incubator, an accelerator and a makerspace. They also organize a huge 
number of events such as hackathons, startup trade shows and startup talks. 
The UnternehmerTUM as a company has commercial interests which separates them from the 
TUM Entrepreneurship Research Institute which also has offers for startups such as startup 
consulting and support in the application to state- and nation-wide grants. The institute is also 
responsible for entrepreneurship research as well as education. 
Industrial Innovators does not invest its own money into startups but the one of family offices. 
As of May 2020, the sponsors of the initiative are therefore GettyLabs from California and 
SKion, the Susanne Klatten Office from Germany. SKion is thereby the main sponsor of the 
whole UnternehmerTUM and invests the money of the BMW heir Susanne Klatten. These two 
family offices are further accomplished by the Horizon 2020 initiative of the European Union 
which was implemented to invest into promising startups all over Europe. 
Industrial Innovators sees themselves as a European-wide initiative and their aim is to establish 
their concept at other entrepreneurial support centers and that other family offices are also 
included. However, since the start of the program, they have not yet added additional sponsors 
or additional entrepreneurial support centers. 
==PAGE:36==
Data and Methods 
28 
As said above?, the initiative consists of two investment vehicles. The first investment vehicle 
is a prototyping grant. This prototyping grant is worth 1 000 to 10 000 € (~ 7 500 to 75 000 
DKK). The grant is directed to registered startups that are working on product development, 
the business plan set-up or forming a company and secure patents. Applicants to the grant have 
to apply via an online form which asks for a short description of the project, a pitchdeck, the 
industry, the market, the budget and contact details. Applicants are encouraged to apply if their 
startup sells a B2B product in the industry fields of MedTech, IoT / AI or Robotics. 
Additionally, the product should be hardware-heavy and either only hardware or hardware-
software-mix, so it should not be only IT-based. The application takes place around five times 
a year. So far, the prototyping grant has had six batches since its official start in end 2018 (excl. 
pilot phase) and has supported 65 startups, some of them more than once. Including the pilot 
phase, the number of startups ads up to 156 teams. This leads to an average amount of 11 
startups per batch if excluding those that received the grant more than once. However, the last 
batch in December 2019 only had six startups. Overall, the initiative has no fixed budget per 
batch but rather tries to support only those that they see fit and therefore, the number of 
supported startups per batch varies a lot. 
Startups can receive the grant more than once, however, the overall funding amount cannot 
exceed 10 000 € (75 000 DKK). The use of the grant is restricted to product development 
expenses or intellectual property registration expenses. It is not meant to be used for marketing 
or commercialization expenses neither to outsource product development or acquire 
consultancy services.  
The idea is that after receiving the first prototyping grant, Industrial Innovators offers the most 
promising startups a convertible loan, called pre-seed capital. However, there are also startups 
that have not received the prototyping grant but just start with the pre-seed capital. The pre-
seed capital is given out in amounts of 50 000 to 100 000 € (~ 375 000 to 750 000 DKK). 
Convertible loans, which are quite common financial instruments in the startup industry, are 
turned into equity if there is a subsequent financing round but have to be paid back otherwise. 
Pre-seed capital was handed out to 18 teams since 2017. 
Overall, the focus of the case-study was on the prototyping grant as only this is given out 
without the defined expectation of a return. The pre-seed capital was only considered as it 
influences the motivation of the startups as well as the one of the sponsors. 
==PAGE:37==
Data and Methods 
29 
The two startups III-1 and III-2 that were interviewed both received the grant in December 
2019. Both startups have been acquainted to the UnternehmerTUM before and heard about the 
initiative through other workshops and programs offered at the UnternehmerTUM. Also, both 
startups were founded in the first half of 2019, so that they were both around 6 months old at 
the time of the funding. III-1 is a MedTech startup. One of the founders finalized his bachelors 
at the TUM, however, afterwards gathered all his further education at another university, only 
to return to be part of the accelerator at the TUM. The other founder was not connected to the 
TUM before the incubator. At the time that the team applied for the grant, they were about to 
finish their time at the accelerator, and they had a first prototype which they were about to go 
to market with. The team applied to the grant as it was cheap and easily available money that 
they needed in order to pursue a patent application. After receiving the grant in December, the 
startup also applied for the pre-seed funding which they were granted from Industrial Innovators 
in March. At the moment, they are running the first pilot projects with several companies. Their 
plan for this year is to raise a seed series. 
III-2 is a software startup and therefore, technically not within the focus of the initiative. 
However, the program made an exception for them. Both founders had been part of the 
Manage&More program, an extracurricular education program for students of the TUM who 
are interested in entrepreneurship. The startup is based on the PhD research of one of the 
founders. Apart from the prototyping grant, they were also able to secure EXIST and are part 
of an incubator. They applied to the grant as the money was easily available and did not include 
too much bureaucracy and as they have high expenses for database licenses. At the time of the 
application, they have had a first prototype but not yet any customers. As of now, they were 
able to start the first pilot projects with customers and to adapt their business model to the actual 
Covid-19 pandemic circumstances. Within this year, they will probably raise a pre-seed or seed 
series. 
 
4.2.2. The Skylab Soft-funding Initiative 
The Skylab Soft-funding Initiative is part of the Skylab at the DTU. The soft-funding consists 
of a grant between 15 000 DKK to 150 000 DKK (2 000 to 20 000 €), however, recently funded 
projects also received amounts of up to 200 000 DKK (27 000 €). It was started in 2016 and 
has since then been handed out 78-times, sometimes to the same team more than once. The 
initiative is directed to DTU members (students, PhDs and postdocs) as well as alumni within 
==PAGE:38==
Data and Methods 
30 
one year from graduation or to teams with at least one DTU connection. The overall goal of the 
initiative is to market Skylab and to provide a learning environment to students and their 
startups. 
The initiative is one of many offers at the DTU Skylab. The Skylab belongs to the university 
and has no commercial objectives but is supposed to support startups and help students to learn 
about entrepreneurship. Apart from soft-funding, the Skylab also offers events such as 
hackathons, a makerspace, an incubator program, an accelerator program as well as startup 
consulting and entrepreneurship education. 
Entrepreneurship education is additionally also offered by the DTU Entrepreneurship, the DTU 
department for entrepreneurship. This one is also responsible for entrepreneurship research and 
has to be seen separately from DTU Skylab, although, both institutes work closely together.  
The Soft-funding initiative itself does not speak about “handing out grants to students” but 
rather call it “helping students to find grants”. This wording explains the procedure as the grants 
are handed out by the foundations that provide the monies. These foundations are mostly family 
foundations, so foundations that handle the inheritance of wealthy families. Examples for such 
foundations are the Tranes Fond, the Nimbs Fond, the Kai Houmann Nielsens Fond or the 
Odense Staalskibsvaerft. Additionally, private persons that are alumni of the DTU sometimes 
provide additional funds such as Humphrey Lau. 
Startups can apply directly to Skylab twice per year. So far, there have been eight batches and 
78 startups supported, so per batch there is an average of nine startups. How many startups get 
accepted to the grant depends on the amount of money that is provided by the sponsors which 
varies each year. The application consists of a rather sophisticated online application, including 
general information, activities, background of the founders, a detailed budget plan and written 
introductions to the team and the product. This application is then evaluated by Skylab, based 
on market potential, societal and public benefit, value for money, innovativeness and the team. 
However, the final decision is in the hands of the sponsors and therefore, they all receive a 
shortlist and then decide based on their own and individual criteria. 
Startups that have received the grant can spend it for everything but salaries, neither for 
employees nor for founders. They included this limitation as according to Skylab’s philosophy, 
the founding team should include all important abilities and therefore, should not have to hire 
employees at such an early stage but instead include missing abilities in their founding team. 
This means that startups can use the grant for product development, marketing, 
==PAGE:39==
Data and Methods 
31 
commercialization, travelling, administration and much more. Also, startups can apply more 
than once to the soft-funding initiative and there is no upper limit of how much money they 
could receive through the initiative. 
The three startups that I interviewed from this initiative are all founded by DTU students. SSI-
1 and SSI-2 received the grant in April 2019, while SSI-3 received it in October 2019. SSI-1 is 
working in the MedTech industry, they were founded based on an idea from a hackathon at the 
Skylab in 2018. All founders are still within their studies and run the startup in parallel. They 
heard from the initiative while talking to a startup consultant about their opportunities at Skylab 
and decided to apply for it in order to have more money to spend on the development of their 
first prototype. Apart from the Skylab soft-funding, they applied to several other grants and 
received some of those. By receiving grants, they feel to move forward in their start-up journey, 
get more legitimate but also are able to use the money for their prototype. At the moment, they 
are about to start a pilot project with a Danish health organisation and apply for other grants 
such as the ones from Innovationsfonden. 
SSI-2 is a BioTech startup that was funded in 2017. They have received the Skylab Soft-funding 
grant several times as well as received and applied to other grants such as the MicroGrant. They 
also aim to apply for other grants such as the ones from Innovationsfonden soon. One of the 
founders has just graduated as a DTU student, however, the Co-founders are a bit more 
experienced and graduated longer ago. All of them work full-time on the project and soft money 
is usually used for prototypes. Their main challenge is that the prototype development is quite 
expensive while it is not market-ready and cannot be sold yet. At the moment, they are 
developing their prototype further and plan to start intial sales this year.  
SSI-3 works with a software. The founders are all still within their studies, some of them at 
DTU. They have recently also received InnoBooster and are a part of several incubators. They 
applied to the soft-funding as having a startup means that there was no time for additional 
student jobs and receiving soft-funding helps them to fully concentrate on their startup while 
still getting a salary. Their main problem when they applied for the soft-funding was to define 
a business model and decide on a market that they aim for. In the future, they might start looking 
for venture capital and they will start pilot projects with international companies. 
Overall, the two cases seem to have enough in common to be comparable, as they are both 
based at entrepreneurial support centres at universities and they both are directed to students 
and their early-stage startups. Still, there are enough differences, such as a financial objective 
==PAGE:40==
Data and Methods 
32 
at the Industrial Innovators and a learning objective at the Syklab Soft-funding initiative. 
Further differences will also be identified within the process.  
 
4.3.Analysis 
According to Yin (2014), no such thing as a fixed recipe or protocol to analyze case studies 
exists. Instead, the analyzer should have a general analytical mind and should try to considerate 
all possible explanations. 
Therefore, I “played” with data. First, I read through the interviews multiple times. Afterwards, 
I tried to connect sections of the interviews to the propositions from the literature review as 
well as to the four overall research questions. For this purpose, I read through the interviews 
again and looked out for relevant sections. Relevant passages were collected in a separate 
document, sorted by the relating research question as well as the relating initiative. The whole 
process was done twice on separate days to limit disadvantages that come from having only the 
perspective of one researcher. 
The information for each research question or proposition was then also enriched by 
information from the web, like websites or social media information. The collected information 
was compared and summed up per initiative in order to derive findings which can be found in 
Chapter 5. After putting down the findings in text, I went back to the propositions and research 
questions in order to check whether those were answered by the information. In cases where it 
was not, I went back to the original data to look out for additional input. 
As the interviews generated a lot of knowledge on performance measurement, I decided to sum 
up these findings as well and add them as a separate chapter although, no proposition or research 
question was created about this topic. 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
Results 
33 
5. Results 
The following findings will be structured based on the four research-questions as well as the 
four propositions, thereby five main topics are highlighted: application, benefits for startups, 
performance measurement, interaction with other programs and sponsors’ motivation. Each 
section first introduces the Industrial Innovators and then goes on to the Skylab Soft-Funding, 
so that findings regarding each topic can be compared more easily between the cases. 
 
5.1.Application 
As evident from the interviews, initiatives such as the Skylab Soft-Funding or the Initiative for 
Industrial Innovators usually receive more grant applications than they can hand out. They 
therefore had to establish a selection and application procedure which is described below. 
Afterwards, I will outline the criteria they use in order to rank these startups. This section 
therefore addresses the research question: 
How are university-based soft-funding initiatives structured in order to identify the 
startups that have the best future prospect? 
and the relating propositions: 
Proposition 1: Soft-funding provided at entrepreneurial support centers at universities 
is one of the first sources of funding within a startup’s life. 
Proposition 2: Soft-funding at entrepreneurial support centers at universities is 
provided based upon pre-defined criteria such as innovativeness of the business idea, 
team and team or individual’s experience. 
 
5.1.1. Application Procedure 
The Initiative for Industrial Innovators sources most of its grants applicants actively by 
reaching out to other programs which are also offered at the same entrepreneurship center 
(UnternehmerTUM). These programs which are mostly incubators or accelerators, but also a 
makerspace for prototypes, mostly attract students from TUM but some of these programs (such 
as the accelerator) also allow startups without connection to the TUM. The investment 
managers from the Initiative for Industrial Innovators usually do workshops within these 
programs to get to know the startups. 
==PAGE:42==
Results 
34 
These startups then get the chance to have a short personal talk within this workshop, which is 
mostly followed by a video call to an investment manager from Industrial Innovators. After this 
second talk, which usually clarifies whether an application has a relevant chance to be accepted, 
the startups hand in an application via an online form. The online form consists of 13 questions 
about the project, the incorporation, a pitch deck, the industry and contact details. Both startups 
stated that the online application was very simple and completion did not take longer then 20 
to 30 minutes. 
In 2020, there were five batches. After a deadline, all applicants speak to the investment 
managers of industrial innovators. Those investment managers create a joint shortlist based on 
certain criteria, which will be further discussed in the next subchapter “Who gets Soft-funding”. 
The shortlist of the investment managers is presented to the Investment Committee. The 
investment committee consists of the three sponsors of the program, which are the three 
sponsors, the managing director of Industrial innovators and all its investment managers. The 
shortlist is discussed again and a joint decision is made. Thereby, the handed-in budget of the 
startups is often reduced to the fundable items of expenditure. Which items are fundable is also 
further discussed in the next subchapter “Who gets Soft-funding”.   
Figure 5-1 From Application to Decision at the Initiative for Industrial Innovation. Source: Case-Study 
 
 
The whole process can be seen in Figure 5-1. One of the interviewed startups thereby quantified 
the time between handing-in an application and receiving the decision as one to two weeks. 
However, the funding committee has no defined time for feedback and this short time could 
represent a special circumstance. In order to test this, interviews from another batch should 
have been performed. 
==PAGE:43==
Results 
35 
The selection procedure at the Skylab Soft-funding Initiative starts by Skylab Startup 
Consultants actively reaching out to startups in order to promote the Soft-funding initiative by 
either doing marketing or contacting them during startup consulting sessions at Skylab. The 
interviewed startup SSI-1 explained that it was not them asking for soft money but rather Skylab 
actively approaching them and “being so kind to offer this possibility”. Therefore, most of the 
startups that apply for the soft-funding are already known to Skylab beforehand. It is also quite 
common that startups begin the application and then at about “80% finished”, reaching out to 
the startup consultants from Skylab for their input. This process naturally improves their 
applications to match the requirements of the Skylab Soft-funding initiatives and these startups 
are therefore more often accepted. Usually, the initiative receives 40 to 50 applications per 
batch to around eight to ten funding possibilities. The initiative has two batches per year. 
All applications are then taken by around four to five startup consultants from the DTU and 
rated based on five pre-set criteria, which are again highlighted in the next subchapter “Who 
gets Soft-funding”. The average score from those consultants generate a shortlist for each 
sponsor. Each sponsor then receives around ten to 15 startups at the shortlist, some sponsors 
also require a short recommendation letter written by Skylab. 
The sponsors have very individual processes to work with the applications. The sponsor, I 
talked to, said that his foundation does another scoring of the 15 received startups and then 
invites the five to ten best ones to their offices and has them doing a pitch. Other sponsors, 
however, solely decide based on the applications without having met the startups personally. 
Figure 5-2 From Application to Decision at the Skylab Soft-funding Initiative. Source: Case-Study 
 
Again, the final publishing of the grant decision depends on the sponsors. Some do an award 
ceremony while others just send an email and transfer the soft-funding. Figure 5-2 gives an 
==PAGE:44==
Results 
36 
overview of how the application procedure usually works. Dashed lines indicate steps that are 
optional and are not performed by every startup or every sponsor. 
Overall, the procedure from the two initiatives are quite comparable. Both source the startups 
within their entrepreneurial support centers. Both meet most of the startups in person before the 
hand-in of the application. In both cases, the staff of the program does a shortlist which is then 
taken to the sponsors. However, while at the Skylab initiative, the sponsors are the ones that do 
the final decision, at Industrial Innovators, the decision is made jointly by the staff and the 
sponsors. Also, the Skylab initiative allocates startups to specific sponsors while at Industrial 
Innovators, all sponsors hand out the grants jointly. This leads to the fact that sponsors of the 
Skylab Initiative have individual and different final decision procedures regarding the 
publishing and the hand-out of the money, while the process at Industrial Innovators is 
standardized. While there is no such thing as an award ceremony at Industrial Innovators, some 
sponsors at the Skylab initiative organize such events. 
 
5.1.2. Who gets Soft-funding 
Both initiatives apply a rather sophisticated catalogue of selection criteria which I structure into 
four different categories:  
company structure, which include administrative, financial and historical aspects of the 
company,  
product factors, which is everything that is connected to the product,  
market / industry factors, or how can the product be commercialized and  
soft-factors, which include personal factors and the team.  
Within those categories, I clustered the factors by their relevance (obligatory, optional). The 
relevance was determined based on the interview with the investment manager. Additionally, I 
also checked already funded companies whether they actually fulfill the relating factor. Factors 
that are commonly used by both initiatives can be identified as they are underlined. All criteria 
can be found in Table 5-1.  
Table 5-1  Criteria for the Prototyping Grant Selection 
 
Relevance 
Company 
Structure 
Product 
Market / 
Industry 
Soft Factors 
==PAGE:45==
Results 
37 
Initiative 
for 
Industrial 
Innovators 
Obligatory 
• 
Registered 
company 
• 
Early stage 
• 
Connection 
to TUM 
• 
Innovative 
technology 
• 
IoT, AI, 
Robotics or 
MedTech 
• 
Investment is 
used for product 
development 
• 
Business 
Model in 
place 
• 
B2B focus 
• 
Good team 
dynamics 
Optional 
• 
No previous 
investments 
• 
Hardware or 
Hardware / 
Software 
• 
First pilot 
customers 
• 
First 
positive 
personal 
impression 
Skylab 
Soft-
funding 
Initiative 
Obligatory 
• 
Value for 
money 
• 
Registered 
company 
• 
Connection 
to DTU 
• 
Innovativeness 
• 
Business 
model in 
place 
• 
Value to 
society 
• 
Clear 
ambition 
• 
Diverse 
team 
 
Optional 
 
• 
Not too R&D 
intensive 
 
• 
First 
positive 
personal 
impression 
 
At the Initiative for Industrial Innovation, I found a larger number of funded software 
companies although the initiative states that it only invests into hardware companies or 
companies with a hardware-software-mix. I therefore concluded that while the initiative aims 
to invest in hardware-heavy startups, it is not a disqualifying factor if the startup concentrates 
only on software.  
One criterion which was mentioned by all three interviewees was the factor that the investment 
is used for product development. Both interviewed startups (III-1 and III-2) mentioned that they 
had included expenses in their application budget which were not fundable such as VR glasses 
and a laptop. Industrial Innovators only lets its grant recipients use their grant for product 
development or to secure IP rights. A startup that does not state such a use in their budget, is 
therefore not fundable. 
==PAGE:46==
Results 
38 
Startups receive funding if they are a registered, early-stage startup. They should have a product 
which includes innovative technology, is linked to IoT, AI, Robotics or MedTech and the 
investment should be used to develop it further or secure its IP rights. The business model 
should already be in place and the product should be a business to business [B2B] product. 
Team dynamics should be good, such as that the team should work well together and 
complement each other. 
Additionally, it is good for their application if they have not yet received any investments, if 
they develop a hardware or hardware/software product, have first pilot customers and leave the 
investment manager with a first positive personal impression. 
Moreover, Industrial Innovators has set themselves a budget in which the funding roughly has 
to fit in. To sum up, startups that are supported by Industrial Innovators have usually gone 
through another program at the UnternehmerTUM, are around half a year old, are funded by 
people with a relation to the TUM, are focusing on industrial applications of their hardware 
product and aim for pre-seed funding afterwards. 
The Skylab Soft-funding Initiative has a two-step application process in which each sponsor has 
his own application criteria which sometimes also diverge from Skylab’s universal criteria. I 
will therefore describe the two process steps individually. However, in Table 5-1, I summed up 
the criteria and the process, assuming that all startups applying to Skylab are also afterwards 
looked through by the NIMBS foundation. 
Skylab only takes applications from startups that have a connection to the DTU, like being a 
student, a PhD or having graduated within the last year. Apart from that, they rate startups based 
on five criteria: value to society, market potential, value for money, team competencies and 
innovativeness. Value to society is mostly based on whether the startups are able to solve one 
of the problems within the Sustainable Development Goals by the United Nations, which could 
for example also be creating a significant number of jobs. Market potential is based on whether 
they have a realistic view on the envisioned financial return and how to realize it, which should 
be reflected in a working business plan. Team competencies mainly means that the team should 
be as diverse as possible and all main functions and competencies required should be 
represented in the founding team. Apart from that, the product, the technology or the service 
that is sold should be innovative and should not exist in this form. The program manager of the 
Skylab initiative, however, emphasized that this is the one point that is the most difficult to 
evaluate as “[the Skylab team] are also not able to cover all areas”. 
==PAGE:47==
Results 
39 
Apart from these five criteria, being known to the Skylab team beforehand is often beneficial 
to the startups as it often improves their applications, also because Skylab offers to check those 
applications before the hand-in. 
The Skylab teams then allocates the best applications to fitting sponsors. These sponsors also 
apply criteria, which are quite unique. The sponsor from the NIMBS foundation that I talked 
to, told me that they only support startups that are already incorporated. They do so as they 
value startups that have high ambitions and are serious about their idea of starting a business 
and according to the sponsor taking the step to register their business is a good indication of 
seriousness. Apart from that, his foundation has a fixed budget and can only support but also 
has to support to the level of this budget. 
His foundation scores the startups by their originality which is somehow similar to the 
innovativeness idea of Skylab, so they want to support startups with new and creative ideas. 
They also value the commercial outlook of the startup, so what are their market entry plans 
which is similar to the market potential idea of Skylab. As a last criterion, this foundation does 
not want to support startups that are too R&D intensive because for those, the amount that the 
foundation could give is only a very small drop in the ocean. Therefore, they want to rather 
support startups that can make more out of this amount of money. The NIMBS foundation is 
also thinking about additionally supporting design startups as those according to Henrik 
Kaastrup can often start with little money and therefore have a high value for money. 
Concluding from the paragraphs above, Skylab soft-funding initiative usually startups that 
incorporated their projects from classes at the DTU, that are about half a year old and have a 
value for the society. Comparing to Industrial Innovators, one can see that although the startups 
are the same age, different other aspects are asked for. Probably, as startups at the Skylab are 
taken from classes while the one at Industrial Innovators are taken from other startup programs. 
Overall Proposition 2, that soft-funding at entrepreneurial support centers at universities is 
provided based upon pre-defined criteria such as innovativeness of the business idea, team and 
team or individual’s experience, can be supported by both cases. Both come along with a huge 
catalogue of pre-defined criteria. However, both initiatives have set different focusses for their 
criteria. The criteria of the Initiative for Industrial Innovation seem to be mostly product 
focused. Whether a startup fits in the scope depends on the industry, on to whom the product is 
marketed to and whether it is innovative. On the other hand, the focus of the Skylab Soft-
funding Initiative seems more focused on the team and the market / commercial potential then 
==PAGE:48==
Results 
40 
which product is sold. Both are not that focused on the experience of the founders, probably as 
they are both directed to student or PhD founders which by their nature do not come with a lot 
of experience. Proposition 2 therefore can be agreed as both initiatives show huge catalogues 
of selection criteria although those are not limited to the criteria named in the proposition but 
expanded by other criteria such as the industry and the market potential. Why the two catalogues 
of the initiatives differ, will be further discussed in the discussion. 
Regarding Proposition 1, that entrepreneurial support centers are one of the first sources for 
funding within a startup’s life, results are mixed. This proposition has to be viewed at from 
different perspectives. Supports for the proposition are that Industrial Innovators aims to be the 
very first investor of a startup. Similarly, the Skylab Soft-funding initiative is directed to “very, 
very young companies” and two startups told me that they have a long list of soft-funding 
initiatives to apply to and that Skylab Soft-funding was one of the temporal firsts on this list. 
All interviewed startups from both initiatives were supported within the first year after their 
foundation, which again supports Proposition 1. 
Another support for Proposition 1 is that startups also told me about negative sides of soft-
funding for example that it does not really have a strategic value such as a Venture Capital 
investor might have. Also, some said that one can “apply and apply and wait and wait” for soft-
funding. At some point however a startup has to start growing faster and that is not possible 
with soft-funding. Both of these points also hint that soft-funding in general should be rather 
directed to early-stage startups than to later stage ones.  
Overall, I would therefore approve Proposition 1 as supported startups were max. one year old 
and the initiatives were at least among their first funding sources, which was also because soft-
funding in general has more value for the startups at an earlier stage. 
 
5.2.Benefits for Startups 
In order for a grant to make sense, it has to be structured in a way that the recipients or the 
startups can benefit from the soft-funding. This subchapter therefore presents results relating to 
the research question: 
How are university-based soft-funding initiatives structured in order to support startups 
to benefit the most from the funding? 
==PAGE:49==
Results 
41 
From the literature two relating propositions were identified, which need to be approved or 
disapproved by the case studies: 
Proposition 3: Less experienced founders benefit more from soft-funding than more 
experienced founders. 
Proposition 4: Startups use soft-funding as indication for their legitimacy as the money 
enables the startups to test, patent and develop their technology.  
The Initiative for Industrial Innovation aims to be the first access to startup financing for the 
startups. Their main goal is to get the startups into a “funnel” where three months after receiving 
the grant, a recipient is looked at again and if it has developed positively is offered a convertible 
loan. A convertible loan converts into an equity share in the startup if there is the event of a 
financing round such as a seed or Series A Round. By offering the grant, the initiative therefore 
wants to get access to the startups and secure the position as very first investor. However, they 
also offer a first “try-out” platform on how to talk to investors, which documents to prepare and 
how to sell the startup. One of the interviewed startups especially emphasized how nice it is to 
now have all these documents prepared and be sure that they could guarantee access to funding. 
So, by providing a first platform for financing, Industrial Innovators also offers a learning 
environment to the startups. 
By offering the grant but even also their convertible loan, Industrial Innovators also enables to 
“buy time before the first concrete financing round” as III-2 stated. By doing this, the startups 
can work on their product or secure IP rights which then probably improves their standing in 
front of investors in subsequent investment rounds.  
The grant that is handed out by Industrial Innovators is only meant to be spent on product 
development or to secure IP rights. However, none of the startup interviewees III-1 and III-2 
thought of this as a disadvantage as they both were still in product development and less 
concentrated on marketing or commercialization. 
A benefit where the opinion of all three interviewees diverged was networking. The investment 
manager told me that they usually organize a kick-off meeting for all recipients of the 
prototyping grant. These “pizza events” are usually an opportunity to connect the startups to 
each other and to meet them personally for another impression whether they are also a candidate 
for pre-seed-financing. The interviewees who both were in the same batch, have not been 
invited to such an event. However, while III-1 said he would like to have such an event in order 
==PAGE:50==
Results 
42 
to meet other startups and connect to those, III-2 stated that he is not interested in such an event 
as he is already well connected to startups at TUM. 
A last, however, rather obvious benefit was mentioned by all data sources. The prototyping 
grant offers money without in return leading to too much bureaucracy or reporting efforts. All 
that must be done, is to hand in all receipts of how the money was spend and a report of one to 
two pages, usually after three to four months. By limiting bureaucracy, it enables startups to 
fully concentrate on their startup development and does not bind human resources in other 
ways. 
In sum, four main benefits for startups at the Initiative for Industrial Innovators could be 
identified: a learning platform on startup financing, an ability to improve prototypes or secure 
IP rights and thereby improving their legitimation and additionally a very unbureaucratic and 
lean access to capital. 
The Skylab Soft-funding Initiative has set as a main goal to provide a learning platform to DTU 
students. Their program therefore includes close contact to startup consultants and after 
receiving a grant, startups are told to be expected to talk to the consultants about their progress 
and their development regularly. Receiving a grant therefore always includes startup consulting. 
Such a startup consulting is the most beneficial to those who have not yet that much experience 
as SSI-2 told me. His team is rather experienced, and he therefore feels that they do not need 
that much of consulting compared to other startups as they already have the competency in-
house. Still, however, they benefit from the soft-funding as it enables them to develop their 
prototype further.  
All startups from Skylab soft-funding used the money to develop their product further, to buy 
components for prototypes, pay for travelling expenses, CPU, laptops, software and salaries. 
The program is usually not meant to pay salaries as the program manager suggests having all 
core competencies in the founder team and pay those with equity. However, the startup that 
paid salaries paid those also to the founding team as they develop software and therefore a lot 
of time goes into programming this. That the money is used within the rules should be ensured 
by the startup consultants with whom startups work closely together. While there probably is 
an interest of Skylab to ensure that the money is spent within the rules, on the other side it was 
mentioned by all startups how nice the lean organization of the program is and that it does not 
require extensive hand-ins but rather just aims for a short video when a prototype is finalized. 
==PAGE:51==
Results 
43 
Another benefit is naturally that by receiving soft money, startups do not have to give up equity 
at a too early stage where they have not yet the standing and would have a bad negotiation 
position. Also, by receiving soft money, the startups feel to receive legitimation as they were 
“able to generate something that has value” or can show to other funds and investors that they 
“have been funded by others” already.  
Overall, similar benefits could be identified for both initiatives. Both offer an ability to improve 
prototypes, both improve the legitimation of the startup and both offer an unbureaucratic and 
lean access to capital. A surplus at the Skylab Soft-funding initiative is that it also comes with 
startup consulting for the startups. Also, the soft money from Skylab is less limited in its use 
and can also be spent on marketing, travelling or assembled goods such as laptops. On the other 
hand, startups from the Initiative for Industrial Innovators named the funding as a potential to 
learn about startup financing which was not mentioned specifically by the interviewees from 
Skylab. 
Proposition 3 that less experienced founders benefit more from soft-funding than more 
experienced founders, can neither be approved nor disapproved. As mentioned, an interviewee 
from Skylab Soft-funding told me that his team is experienced and they therefore do not benefit 
from aspects of the funding such as the consulting sessions, still, they very much need the 
money to improve their prototype. On the other side, the prototyping grant from the Industrial 
Innovators is claimed to be a learning platform on entrepreneurial financing. Learning about 
entrepreneurial financing is probably more important for less experienced founders than for 
those that already had founded several times. Overall, this leads to a mixed picture for 
proposition 3 and it can neither be approved nor disapproved. 
Proposition 4 that startups use soft-funding for legitimation again can be approved. III-2 from 
Industrial Innovators explained to me that they use the grant to improve their position in later 
negotiations with investors and startups from Skylab even clearly stated that the soft-funding 
improves their legitimation. The factor of being able to show to investors that the startup has 
been funded by other was also mentioned. Additionally, the factor that startups “try-out” their 
funding documents as claimed by III-2, would probably improve these documents and therefore 
probably make them look more professional and thereby more legitimate. Overall, the 
proposition that startups use soft-funding for legitimation can be approved based on the 
evidence of the two cases. 
 
==PAGE:52==
Results 
44 
5.3.Interaction with Other Programs 
Both initiatives are organized within the larger setting of an entrepreneurial support center. 
These centers usually have more than one program which leads to the research question: 
How does a university-based soft-funding initiative interact with other offers at the 
entrepreneurial support center? 
The Initiative for Industrial Innovation sees themselves rather at the end of timeline of programs 
that startups could run through at the UnternehmerTUM. Startups that receive a prototyping 
grant from the Industrial Innovators have most often already been a part of either incubators or 
accelerator programs at the UnternehmerTUM. Industrial Innovators then sources potential 
startups by giving workshops at these accelerator or incubator programs. This was also 
supported by the two interviewed startups who have both been part of such programs. III-2 was 
with XPreneurs, an accelerator program and the interviewee from III-1 was a Manage&More 
participant, an entrepreneurship education program at the UnternehmerTUM which runs aside 
of a TUM student’s usual studies. Overall, the Initiative for Industrial Innovators can therefore 
be seen as the funnel out of the entrepreneurial support center. 
In comparison, the Skylab Soft-funding Initiative is rather a funnel into the Skylab as it is 
marketed as one of the positive sides at the Skylab. Startups that receive the funding are 
supposed to keep close contact to the Startup consultants and are also directed into the other 
startup programs at the Skylab. One startup, that I interviewed, told me that they first received 
the soft-funding and afterwards became part of the incubator. Another was funded during a 
hackathon at the Skylab and when they decided to incorporate their idea, at the first meeting 
with a startup consultant, they were directed into Skylab Soft-funding. The last startup received 
soft-funding from Skylab multiple times, however, they do not participate in other programs at 
the Skylab. 
Therefore, the two initiatives show two potential uses of soft-funding at an entrepreneurial 
support center: at the end or at the beginning of the journey. The differences could be in the set-
up of the entrepreneurial support centers as the staff at the Skylab Soft-funding initiative is part 
of multiple programs at the same time, while at the UnternehmerTUM those positions are more 
separated. Overall, this is of course a different setting. 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
Results 
45 
5.4.Motivation of the Sponsors 
The Initiative for Industrial Innovation and the Skylab Soft-Funding Initiative are both 
sponsored by external sponsors, which leads to the question: 
Why do external partners participate in such an initiative? 
Although both are sponsored by family offices, those still remain to be quite different. Industrial 
Innovators is mostly sponsored by family offices such as SKion, the company that invests the 
money of Susanne Klatten, one of the BMW heirs, but also by a Californian family office which 
also invests their money into startups. The “investment” is already the main difference because 
as the sponsors of Industrial Innovators call themselves “investors” and therefore aim for an 
increased value of their money, the Skylab Soft-Funding Initiative is mostly sponsored by 
family foundations, so those who aim to spend their money philanthropically. These 
foundations such as the NIMBS foundation, the Kaptajn Age Nielsens Familiefond or the Kai 
Houmann Nielsens Fond usually donate their money in order to improve the society. 
The motivation of the sponsors of Industrial Innovators can therefore be titled as financially. 
Startups usually also do not meet these investors or have any contact to them. Still, the investors 
are included in the application procedure and decide which startup receives the prototyping 
grant thereby always in mind whether the startup would also be a good candidate for a later pre-
seed financing round with the convertible loan. 
Additionally, the Initiative for Industrial Innovators is also supported by InnovFinEquity which 
belongs to the Horizon2020 initiative of the European Union which aims to support young 
startups with Strategic Investments and can therefore be considered a public instrument that 
supports startups Europe-wide. The motivation of this public instrument is to strengthen 
economic growth in Europe.  
The philanthropic motivation of the foundations behind Skylab Soft-funding Initiative is also 
complemented by administrative reasons. Those family foundations are often rather small and 
therefore do not have the possibilities to market their grants to a larger extent. Being part of 
Skylab therefore enables them to receive more applications from startups while still keeping 
the workload low as the applications are pre-screened and pre-ranked by the Skylab staff. 
According the program manager of Skylab, another positive aspect for them is that they can 
move something even with smaller amounts so that they spend 100 000 DKK (~ 13 500 €) and 
a startup can achieve an important step with that while if they would for example invest it into 
research, it would not be enough. 
==PAGE:54==
Results 
46 
Overall, I have seen financially, philanthropically, economically and administrative 
motivations to finance Soft-funding for startups at university-based entrepreneurial support 
centers.  
 
5.5.Performance Measurement 
Although performance measurement was not included within the propositions or the research 
questions, many results in this regard could be generated. As they also seem to be interesting, I 
want to show those within this chapter. As defining success is usually difficult, I want to show 
these results in the following. 
An initiative that spends money, especially if not spending its own, probably needs some sort 
of metrics whether this money is well spent and reaches its purposes. While the Initiative for 
Industrial Innovation defined this purpose as financially motivated, the Skylab Soft-funding 
Initiative and its sponsors had a philanthropical and learning approach. 
The Industrial Innovators have established several performance measurements for the 
prototyping grant. First of all, the prototyping grant is meant to attract startups that then proceed 
to receive the pre-seed funding. One performance measurement is therefore, according to the 
investment manager, whether a startup also receives pre-seed funding. Additionally, startups 
define several goals in their applications that are to be reached with the grant. Three or four 
months after receiving the grant, a report has to be handed in. The report which includes what 
the money was spend on and why, should show whether the pre-set goals have been reached. 
Startups that receive the prototyping grant have to hand in the receipts of the items that the 
money was spent in to reduce miss-use of the grant. Both interviewed startups described this 
procedure as simple and not too time consuming. 
Overall, the investment manager describes it as difficult to define certain Key Performance 
Indicators for the startups as they are too different in their nature. Still, he thinks that controlling 
for the self-set goals and whether they also receive pre-seed funding is a suitable performance 
indicator. 
Table 5-2 Performance Measurement Indicators. Source: Interviews 
Initiative for Industrial Innovation 
DTU Skylab Soft-funding 
- 
Receives pre-seed funding 
- 
Number of applications 
==PAGE:55==
Results 
47 
- 
Reaches self-set goals 
- 
Has the prototype developed further? 
 
At the DTU Skylab Soft-funding initiative, the program manager states that performance 
measurements have yet to be established. He aims to implement controls for the survival rate 
and the growth of the startup. However, he also emphasizes that Skylab is mainly supposed to 
provide education and therefore, he would also like to control for whether grant recipients are 
still using what they have learnt during the phase of the grant in their actual professional life. 
Although not clearly stated as a performance measurement during the interview, Skylab tracks 
the amount of applications that are received per batch. That this number is growing from year 
to year shows that the Skylab Soft-funding seems to be successful as a marketing tool for 
Skylab. As this is also one of the goals of the funding stated by the program manager, I would 
also consider this as a performance measurement. 
The Soft-funding initiative tracks the startups by asking for a short video pitch or short report 
six months after receiving the grant. This is supposed to show the development of the product. 
==PAGE:56==
Discussion 
48 
6. Discussion 
The results show how the two programs are structured, which selection criteria are used, how 
startups benefit from soft-funding initiatives, how performance is measured by the two 
initiatives, what motivates sponsors of these programs and how these programs interact with 
other programs. These findings are interesting as many universities seem to establish soft-
funding initiatives such as the TU Berlin, the RWTH Aachen and the Copenhagen Business 
School. Therefore, identifying how these initiatives are built up and find out about their 
structures can help to improve these and thereby, maximize their potential. 
The two programs viewed at within this thesis are not one to one comparable as the initiatives 
are too different in their objectives and the overall setting. Rasmussen and Wright (2015) made 
similar findings, when they compared entrepreneurial support centers at universities. Industrial 
Innovators is a financially-driven initiative that is located at the end of a startup’s journey 
through the entrepreneurial support center. On the other side, Skylab soft-funding is driven by 
education and is often also used to market the Skylab and its facilities to students from the DTU. 
Comparing these two concepts is therefore highly difficult and probably also not suitable. Still, 
I want to show the main differences and find explanations where they could come from within 
this chapter. A reason why the two initiatives are set-up so differently could be cultural 
differences, will discuss in the first sub-section of this chapter. 
Main differences can be especially found in the selection criteria to identify startups that are 
worth funding. While the Initiative for Industrial Innovation focusses a lot on the product and 
the technology behind it, this is different at the Skylab Soft-funding Initiative. In the second 
sub-section of this chapter, I compare the results from the case studies to the literature 
suggestions. 
Another difference is shown in the overall goal and motivation. In the third subsection, I aim 
to compare the financial and the education goal and will show why this is another explanation 
for the main differences. The third and last difference is the establishment of performance 
measurements and control mechanisms. 
Afterwards, I show, what this means for establishing a potential new soft-funding initiative and 
deliver a check list of must-haves. Additionally, I emphasize limitations of my research and 
propose new research topics in the area. 
 
==PAGE:57==
Discussion 
49 
6.1.Industrial Cultural Differences 
Comparing two initiatives from two different countries always includes the cultural differences 
and problems. Those can be shown at macro-level like economy and overall policy as well as 
on micro-level, so on university-level. 
The GEDI data from chapter 3 showed that Denmark in general has a more entrepreneurial-
friendly culture than Germany. However, Germany has had higher values for 
internationalization (Ács et al., 2018), probably as Germany has a higher export-import ratio 
than Denmark (OEC, 2020a, 2020b). A higher export-import ratio thereby probably also comes 
along with a higher focus on other countries and commercialization there. A little lower interest 
in internationalization could also be observed during the interviews. The startups from the 
Initiative for Industrial Innovators had applied to European programs and the initiative was 
even supported by the European Union. On the other side, two of the three DTU startups were 
very much focused on Danish funding possibilities. Due to the small number of interviewees 
this could be a coincidence, however, it might as well be an indicator for a different cultural 
perspective on internationalization. 
Another point is that the Initiative for Industrial Innovators supports industry-startups, while 
Henrik Kaastrup, the sponsor from Skylab Soft-funding, told me that his foundation is highly 
interested in also supporting design startups. On the other side, Industrial Innovators even by 
name but also by their selection criteria show that they are mostly focused on industry startups 
that commercialize as B2B products and include technical aspects such as IoT, MedTech or AI. 
Still, both initiatives are located at technical universities, so that they both should be and – based 
on the industries of the interviewed startups – are rather focused on industry applications. 
However, this cultural aspect might still influence selection choices. 
The two countries might also differ in their entrepreneurial financing structure. Denmark seems 
to have a more established culture of foundations giving to startups while such a procedure 
could not be seen by me in Germany. Soft-funding in general seems to be more common in 
Denmark or at least from DTU startups, where all three startups told me about a huge list of 
grants and subsidies that they applied to and will apply to, while the TUM startups rather told 
me that they plan to raise their first equity-round soon after receiving one or two grants. This 
can also already be seen in the funding overviews in Figure 3-2 and Figure 3-3, where more 
soft-funding options in Denmark were highlighted than in Germany. 
==PAGE:58==
Discussion 
50 
On a micro-level, the two universities are also of a different size. 11 200 students study at the 
DTU, compared to 43 000 students at the TUM (DTU, 2020; TUM, 2019b). One can easily 
guess that an entrepreneurial support center at the TUM might be bigger and more frequented 
than the one at the DTU – just because of the differences in numbers. A more frequented 
entrepreneurial support center, probably also calls for more staff that is clearly allocated to tasks 
as it can be seen at the UnternehmerTUM, where the single initiatives are more clearly separated 
and less connected, while startup consultants at the Skylab tend to work for more than one 
program at a time, just because the Skylab is smaller in numbers then the UnternehmerTUM.  
However, staff numbers are closer related: 6 000 employees at the DTU and 11 000 at the TUM 
(DTU, 2020; TUM, 2019a), so that potentially education at the DTU is less anonymous and 
higher ranked than at the TUM. This might also lead to cultural differences. 
Overall, reasons for differences at the two initiatives could therefore be rooted in cultural 
differences such as export focus, design / industry focus, availability of soft-funding, the size 
of the universities and different approach to education. These differences could therefore 
probably limit my findings as many differences could be due to cultural differences. A study 
considering and showing these differences would be interesting, especially as research 
comparing entrepreneurial aspects such as soft-funding but also others like entrepreneurial team 
characteristics, entrepreneurial education or entrepreneurial finance is probably done often. A 
study showing up differences could therefore justify these studies and help to quantify 
differences and their impact on studies such as this one. 
While the cultural reasons could be the cause for many differences, I additionally received that 
startups but also program managers have had a different attitude regarding startups and their 
ambitions at the two initiatives. While Skylab provides a learning environment for its startups, 
Industrial Innovators is focused on financial objectives and probably therefore, the interviewed 
startups from there seemed a lot straighter and more focused. Both startups at the TUM worked 
at their startups full-time, while the ones from Skylab were students and studied while doing 
their startup. I got the impression that Skylab wants to be a playground for students where they 
can try out their ideas, while the UnternehmerTUM is much more focused on the 
commercialization and the financial success of startups. The two environments or else the 
attitude was therefore different, which could be one of the reasons for differences between the 
programs. Again the different attitude could be caused by the cultural differences that I showed 
==PAGE:59==
Discussion 
51 
in this chapter, which again leads me to the research about entrepreneurial culture in Denmark 
and Germany that should be part of a next study. 
 
6.2.Selection Criteria: Product vs. Team Focus 
Looking at the selection criteria of the two soft-funding initiatives, it seems that the DTU Skylab 
Soft-funding initiative mainly applies team as well as commercial potential criteria. Examples 
for this are a diverse team, clear ambitions and a value to society. The Initiative for Industrial 
Innovation on the other hand mostly applies product-focused criteria. Examples for this are the 
industry of the product, the need for an innovative technology and a focus on B2B product and 
business model. 
Interestingly, this follows the theory of Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012) who recommend to 
select startups based on the objective of the funding. A funding that is to support product 
development should be given out based upon product technology criteria. A funding that is 
given to support market implementation should be given out based on team and market 
characteristics.  
The prototyping grant of the Initiative for Industrial Innovation can therefore easily be put in 
the funding category of “proof-of-concept” funding. This kind of funding is provided to early 
stage startups in order to decrease technology uncertainties. 
The soft-funding of the DTU Skylab, however, is less easy to put in these categories. On the 
one hand, it is directed to early stage ventures and should help those to either reduce 
technological uncertainty or organizational uncertainty. It can be spent on marketing and 
product development issues. However, the selection criteria reflect those for pre-seed funding 
where grants are given out based on team and market criteria. This makes sense as the grant 
also is not only directed to startups that actually apply a certain technology but could also be 
granted to startups without technology-focus. Overall, the grant can be seen as a mixture of pre-
seed and proof-of-concept funding. 
Another point that was observed by Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012) was that the impact on 
society is taken as a criterion for early stage startups that are difficult to evaluate. This could 
also be observed at the DTU Skylab where they use the “value for society”. As described in the 
literature, the main purpose of this value is to show a clear ambition and a clear objective of the 
founders.  
==PAGE:60==
Discussion 
52 
Comparing the selection catalogues of the two initiatives to those that Maxwell et al. (2011) 
had seen for Business Angels, the differences are rather marginal. It seems that soft-funding 
initiatives evaluate startups at almost the same level as Business Angels, however, leaving out 
financial criteria and sales criteria, which makes sense as those are usually not available for pre-
commercialization startups.  
 
6.3.Sponsors’ Motivation: Learning vs. Investment Objective 
The two initiatives were supported by three different kinds of sponsors. All these three sponsors 
then also came along with different motivations: economical, financial and philanthropical 
ones. Further, the initiatives also state their own motivations as different: educational and 
financial. 
Logically, these motivations are then reflected in the organization of the overall initiative. As 
educational initiative, the Skylab Soft-funding initiative includes startup consulting sessions 
into their grant and thereby monitors the progress of the startups closely. As most of the Skylab 
Soft-funding sponsors act philanthropically for them the selection criterion “value for society” 
is important, while this criterion cannot be seen at the financially motivated Initiative for 
Industrial Innovation. Industrial Innovators offers a convertible loan as subsequent funding and 
then sees the prototyping grant as a marketing tool for this convertible loan.  
A conclusion hereof could be that it is important to align the sponsors’ motivation and the 
initiative motivation in order to create a successful environment. Matching philanthropical and 
financial sponsors sounds like a mismatch that would probably lead to at least a bigger 
discussion. Based on my evidence, I would therefore recommend to define a clear motivation 
for a program and to change it only marginally after the establishment as the whole program 
should probably push into one direction. 
 
6.4.Performance Measures and Control Mechanisms  
Measuring performance, especially startup performance, can be difficult as there are too many 
different definitions that are used (Miller et al., 2013). However, in order to control whether a 
certain program for startups is successful, it might still make sense to define success for a certain 
soft-funding initiative. The literature has recommended the startup survival rate, sales growth, 
==PAGE:61==
Discussion 
53 
employee growth, the personal impression of program participants as well as pre-set goals of 
the participants (Coad et al., 2016; McMullan et al., 2001; Rotger et al., 2012). 
From the two case studies, only the Initiative for Industrial Innovation applied the idea of pre-
set goals of the participants. Their participants state before receiving the grant what to achieve 
with the grant and the initiative afterwards tests whether the goal was successfully achieved. 
While this is a performance measurement, it might still have its flaws as a pre-set goal might 
turn out to not be the right goal within the time of the grant. For example, if before stated that 
the goal is to get a patent granted, within the time of the grant, it might be more important to 
acquire building parts of the prototype. These parts are within what should be covered by the 
grant and might be needed within this moment; however, they are not helpful to achieve the 
pre-set goal. A performance measurement build on these pre-set goals should therefore embrace 
the opportunity of changing circumstances for a startup for example by including a quantifier 
like “no longer applicable”. Still, pre-set goals seem to be one approach to keep track of the 
success of the grant. 
The other performance measurement tool that was used by the Initiative for Industrial 
Innovation was to check whether a startup that received the prototyping grant afterwards also 
qualified for the pre-seed funding. As the main objective of the prototyping grant is to gather 
startups to apply for pre-seed funding, this seems a logical performance measurement here. 
The DTU Skylab Soft-funding initiative has not yet established performance measurements. 
Instead, they use the growing number of applications as an approach. However, as their 
objective is to educate students, evaluating the performance of the grant might be even more 
difficult than with a financial objective as education is usually not as quantifiable. Potential 
ideas to measure performance of the program manager were to look whether alumni of the grant 
use their knowledge in his or her current professional career.  
In my opinion, it might be worth, establishing pre-set goals and mechanisms to measure those 
also at the DTU Skylab Soft-funding initiative. Those have the advantage that they are rather 
easy to control, and they could still also include educational goals. Additionally, it seems to be 
easy and cheap to carry out. 
A difference between the two initiatives is their use of control mechanisms. Industrial 
Innovators defined a procedure that after three or four months a report is to be handed in as well 
as all receipts, how the money was spent. The procedure is written down in a contract signed 
by both parties. 
==PAGE:62==
Discussion 
54 
The end of the grant at the DTU Skylab Soft-funding initiative is after six months, just before 
the next batch receives its grant. Whether a startup has to hand in something depends on the 
sponsors’ liking, however, they are usually expected to report back what they achieved – via a 
video, a short report or personally. The recipients of the Skylab Soft-funding initiative usually 
don’t receive a contract; however, this is also dependent on the sponsor. The startups have no 
obligation to hand in what they spent the money on, so that they could also miss-use the money. 
However, based on the overall lean structure of this program, such a miss-use probably is less 
prominent or severe and maybe even calculated for. By refraining from using control 
mechanism, they probably also reduce the barriers to spend the money. As the program manager 
states many startups tend to not to dare spending the money, so that getting them to start using 
the money and working on their prototype might be more important than the control of the use. 
Not having control mechanism therefore might well fit within the educational goal of the 
initiative. 
 
6.5.Limitations and future research 
As every research, this study has limitations and certain flaws. One that was already discussed, 
is the one about the different industrial culture in the settings of the two initiatives as well as 
the one about the different attitude at the two initiatives. In the following, I will discuss further 
limitations as well as studies that are needed in order to solve those. 
While some of the results of this thesis might also be adaptable for grant initiatives that are not 
based at universities or entrepreneurial support centers, other insights might only be suitable 
for those. However, a study that clearly identifies differences between different these grant 
institutions is missing. Such a study that could look at several initiatives at different locations 
could be interesting as it would show the influences of the environment and whether a grant 
depends on those. Additionally, the research could show whether the fact that universities also 
have a teaching assignment impacts their decisions and to what extent. A potential research 
questions for such a study could be: To what extent is a grant dependent on the surrounding 
environment? Dependent variables could be the number of applicants, the survival rate or the 
ratio of achieved pre-set goals. 
While the proposed dependent variables might reflect to some extent the success of the 
initiatives, a clear performance measurement for grant initiatives is missing. How to best 
measure “success” of such an initiative, is a problem that needs widely implemented and 
==PAGE:63==
Discussion 
55 
standardized solutions in order to compare the numbers of different grant initiatives. Potential 
measurements that are also shown in this thesis and used in literature or in the case study are 
the number of applicants, the startup survival rate, the ratio of achieved pre-set goals, whether 
a startup gathers subsequent funding or whether founders use the gained knowledge in their 
current professional life. The performance measurement is probably dependent on the overall 
objective of the initiative. Still, a study that compares these performance measurements with 
actual cases and a larger data set would give new insights. 
A limitation of this study is also that only two cases were investigated. Due to the Covid-19 
pandemic in 2020, interviews were also more limited and not held in person. An additional 
study looking at more grant initiatives, maybe all with a similar objective could emphasize 
findings of these thesis and proof those. It could also be relevant to look at more than two 
countries, although the two countries looked at might well reflect the situation in Western and 
Northern Europe. However, as already stated, the findings might be influenced by cultural 
aspects and a larger amount of cases could compensate for those. 
The two cases investigated also stated that they use the grant for marketing purposes, either to 
promote a pre-seed funding source or to promote the entrepreneurial support center and to 
attract students to go there. It could be interesting to see whether startups are really attracted by 
grants or whether they would maybe also use the pre-seed funding source or the entrepreneurial 
support center to a similar extent if this “marketing” tool was not in place. This could be e.g. 
investigated in the rare case of an entrepreneurial center newly implementing a grant or by 
looking at several entrepreneurial support centers some with grant and some without. 
The largest limitation of my study is however that it only has one time-dimension and no 
longitudinal data was available. Especially, regarding the startup performance, it would be 
interesting to compare the journey of startups that received a grant from a university-based 
entrepreneurial support center and those that did not receive one for a time frame of five to ten 
years. If a researcher has access to a larger, representative data set of this as well as of a control 
group, it could solve research questions like: To what extent do business angels / venture 
capitalists value university-based grants? To what extent does a university-based grant 
influence the survival rate / sales growth / employee growth / number of patents of a receiving 
startup? As well as questions of the timing of the university-based grant: To what extent does 
the timing of a university-based grant influence the future performance of a receiving startup? 
==PAGE:64==
Discussion 
56 
While a lot of this information is limited to university-based soft-funding, it might also apply 
to other soft-funding sources as well as give further insights into the general structure and 
journey of a startup. Additionally, learning about how to foster entrepreneurship at universities 
could help to better commercialize research from universities instead of forgetting potentially 
highly relevant and interesting high-tech applications. 
 
6.6.Practical Implications 
This thesis has focused on two practical examples of soft-funding initiatives at two technical 
universities. These two examples hold a lot of input for any potential practitioners who aims to 
set up a grant initiative. Although, the study was especially focused on university-based 
initiatives, some of its findings might also apply to initiatives in other settings such as 
nationwide grants or soft-funding from non-university-based initiatives.  
Setting up such an initiative should start by lining out the objective of the initiative.  
Is the initiative financially, educationally, economically or philanthropically motivated? 
Should startups develop their product further or should they enter the market?  
Should the initiative be the first investor or is it okay to be recipients of several grants 
at a time? 
Setting this scope should help to identify which sponsors the initiative needs, who the audience 
of the initiative is and how to address this audience. In a next step, the practitioner should look 
for sponsors that align with the objective of the initiative. A financially motivated initiative 
should therefore look for investment companies, while an educationally motivated initiative 
might be better served with a foundation, just as an initiative that aims to create workplaces 
might look for an economically motivated sponsor. 
The initiative should then go out and market itself. Best practices have shown that it helps to 
be present at other workshops at entrepreneurial support centers, in entrepreneurship classes 
and maybe also on platforms such as LinkedIn. It seems that more applications are received if 
the application procedure is kept simple and does not require too much paperwork. Information 
that should be handed it, usually includes a description of the team, a description of the product, 
a description of the technology, an estimation of the market size and growth, potentially the 
==PAGE:65==
Discussion 
57 
value of the product for the society and what they aim to achieve within the soft-funding period. 
Documents that should be handed it include a detailed budget plan and a pitch deck. 
The selection of the startups should also align with the objective of the initiative. An initiative 
that aims its audience to develop their product further should mostly concentrate on technology 
criteria, while one that wants startups to enter the market should rather look at market and team 
characteristics as also stated by Rasmussen and Sørheim (2012). However, it is also possible to 
use mixed forms, this however means, that the initiative needs to focus on all the above-
mentioned factors. A philanthropically oriented initiative might ask for a value for society; 
additionally, this value could also be interesting for other initiatives as it shows the overall 
aiming of the startup even in a very early stage. 
Within this study, it was common, that the initiative created a short list of the most promising 
applications while the final decision was made by the sponsors themselves. Hereby, one could 
either allocate each startup to one single sponsor or have all sponsors handing out the money 
jointly.  
After the selection, I would recommend a contract in order to align all parties’ motivations. 
Such a contract should include what the money can be used for, how much money is provided 
as well as what the final hand-ins are. Additionally, I would ask the startup to hand in pre-set 
goals of what they aim to achieve with the money in the given time.  
Initiatives that want to promote either their entrepreneurial support center or a subsequent 
funding are recommended to keep close contact to the soft-funding recipients. One opportunity 
is to have some kind of start event, which could either be an award ceremony or just a kick-off 
pizza event. Apart from getting to know startups personally and thereby binding those to the 
initiative, this could also have network effects which might foster joint work between the grant 
recipients.  
The duration of the grant program depends on the initiative; however, it was recommended to 
rather have a shorter period (three to six months) as especially early-stage startups tend to be 
afraid to spend the money. Additionally, keeping this period short helps the practitioner to keep 
track of the grant recipients of the single batches as they don’t have to monitor too many batches 
in parallel. 
I would recommend asking for some kind of hand-in at the end of the grant period. This hand-
in should enable the evaluation if a company has achieved the pre-set goals that were set after 
==PAGE:66==
Discussion 
58 
signing the grant contract. Whether they achieved those or not, could be used as a performance 
measurement of the initiative. Additionally, I would also try to collect some numbers on 
whether they now have customers, pilot projects or what they see as their next step. This 
information might be helpful for a future research as well as evaluation of the program. In case, 
the initiative aims to offer subsequent funding, this might be the last chance to do so, therefore, 
I would ask potential candidates for a meeting. 
Setting up a soft-funding initiative might, as many other projects do, need some adjustment 
after each round. It therefore might be a good idea, to review every step together with the team, 
especially during the first few batches. 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
Conclusion 
59 
7. Conclusion 
Within this thesis, I aim to show how university-based soft-funding initiatives could be 
structured. I find out that the structure is highly dependent on the objective of the university-
based initiative. Even if giving out almost the same amount of money, two initiatives can be 
very different.  
The financially-driven prototyping grant of Industrial Innovators is used as an entry ticket to 
further pre-seed funding which would then allow for financial returns. It is directed to startups 
that have often already been part of an accelerator or incubator, although being only around for 
half a year.  
On the other hand, the more educationally-driven Skylab Soft-funding initiative is used as a 
marketing tool to market the Skylab as an entrepreneurial support center to students and their 
class’ projects. Startups that receive this soft-funding are usually also around half a year old, 
however, this half a year was mostly spend in class working on the project. Startups at the 
Skylab Soft-funding initiative are therefore more early-stage. 
The thesis and its outcomes are limited by the fact that the two initiatives are differing to that 
extent so that comparing the two initiatives is highly difficult and probably not appropriate. 
Still, the thesis shows some best practices that could be identified from both initiatives. Due to 
the very different objectives that a soft-funding initiative could have it is highly important for 
any newly founded initiative to define an objective. A solution to measure performance of the 
initiative could be to ask grant recipients to set goals for the time of the grant, which could be 
tested and measured.  
In my opinion, my results show that the topic of university-based soft-funding is interesting as 
many questions are still open. Therefore, it invites future research on this topic for clarification 
on a startup’s first funding source. 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
Conclusion 
60 
8. Sources 
Ács, Z. J., Autio, E., & Szerb, L. (2014). National Systems of Entrepreneurship: Measurement 
issues and policy implications. Research Policy, 43(3), 476–494. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2013.08.016 
Ács, Z. J., Szerb, L., & Lloyd, A. (2018). Global Entrepreneurship Index 2018 Data. 
Retrieved from https://thegedi.org/global-entrepreneurship-and-development-index/ 
Åstebro, T., Bazzazian, N., & Braguinsky, S. (2012). Startups by recent university graduates 
and their faculty: Implications for university entrepreneurship policy. Research Policy, 
41(4), 663–677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.01.004 
Ayoub, M. R., Gottschalk, S., & Müller, B. (2017). Impact of public seed-funding on 
academic spin-offs. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 42(5), 1100–1124. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-016-9476-5 
Bascha, A., & Walz, U. (2007). Financing practices in the German venture capital industry: 
an empirical study. In Venture capital in Europe (pp. 217–231). Butterworth-Heinemann. 
Cantner, U., & Kösters, S. (2012). Picking the winner? Empirical evidence on the targeting of 
R&D subsidies to start-ups. Small Business Economics, 39(4), 921–936. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-011-9340-9 
Coad, A., Frankish, J. S., Roberts, R. G., & Storey, D. J. (2016). Predicting new venture 
survival and growth: Does the fog lift? Small Business Economics, 47(1), 217–241. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-016-9713-1 
Coleman, S., & Robb, A. (2011). Sources of Financing for New Technology Firms: Evidence 
from the Kauffman Firm Survey. In G. Calcagnini & I. Favaretto (Eds.), Contributions to 
Economics. The Economics of Small Businesses (Vol. 18, pp. 173–194). Heidelberg: 
Physica-Verlag HD. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7908-2623-4_10 
Conti, A., Thursby, M., & Rothaermel, F. T. (2013). Show me the Right Stuff: Signals for 
High.tech Startups. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 22(2), 341–364. 
Dencker, J. C., Gruber, M., & Shah, S. K. (2009). Pre-Entry Knowledge, Learning, and the 
Survival of New Firms. Organization Science, 20(3), 516–537. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1080.0387 
DTU (2020). Facts & figures - DTU. Retrieved from 
https://www.dtu.dk/english/About/FACTS-AND-FIGURES 
==PAGE:69==
Conclusion 
61 
Finkle, T. A., Menzies, T. V., Kuratko, D. F., & Goldsby, M. G. (2013). An examination of 
the financial challenges of entrepreneurship centers throughout the world. Journal of Small 
Business & Entrepreneurship, 26(1), 67–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08276331.2012.761803 
Fisher, G., Kotha, S., & Lahiri, A. (2016). Changing with the Times: An Integrated View of 
Identity, Legitimacy, and New Venture Life Cycles. Academy of Management Review, 
41(3), 383–409. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2013.0496 
Gattermann, C. (2017). 5 Crowdfunding Plattformen in Deutschland - STARTPLATZ. 
Retrieved from https://www.startplatz.de/crowdfunding-plattformen/ 
Heyfunding ApS (2018). A Guide to Startup Funding Sources in Denmark. Retrieved from 
https://medium.com/@InnoOverblik/a-guide-to-startup-funding-sources-in-denmark-
ca73ed29b41d 
Holstein, A. D., & Eschenfelder, M. J. (2017). Economic Analysis of Public Support for Tech 
Startups: A Case Study of Pittsburgh. Journal of Business and Behavioral Sciences, 29(1), 
101–115. 
Hottenrott, H., & Richstein, R. (2020). Start-up subsidies: Does the policy instrument matter? 
Research Policy, 49(1), 103888. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103888 
Howell, S. T. (2017). Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants. American Economic 
Review, 107(4), 1136–1164. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20150808 
Innovation Fund Denmark (2020). Innofounder. Retrieved from 
https://innovationsfonden.dk/en/programmes/innofounder 
Islam, M., Fremeth, A., & Marcus, A. (2018). Signaling by early stage startups: US 
government research grants and venture capital funding. Journal of Business Venturing, 
33(1), 35–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2017.10.001 
Keystone Academic Solutions (2020). MSc Programs in Entrepreneurship in Europe 2020. 
Retrieved from https://www.masterstudies.com/MSc/Entrepreneurship/Europe/ 
Kontolaimou, A., Giotopoulos, I., & Tsakanikas, A. (2016). A typology of European 
countries based on innovation efficiency and technology gaps: The role of early-stage 
entrepreneurship. Economic Modelling, 52, 477–484. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econmod.2015.09.028 
==PAGE:70==
Conclusion 
62 
Landry, R., Amara, N., & Rherrad, I. (2006). Why are some university researchers more 
likely to create spin-offs than others? Evidence from Canadian universities. Research 
Policy, 35(10), 1599–1615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2006.09.020 
Link, A. N., & Scott, J. T. (2012). Employment growth from the Small Business Innovation 
Research program. Small Business Economics, 39(2), 265–287. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-010-9303-6 
Martineau-Fortin, E., Stocks, N., & Lattes, M. (2020). German Venture Capital Landscape 
2020: From the Eyes of an International Investor. Retrieved from White Star Capital 
website: https://medium.com/venture-beyond/diving-into-germanys-venture-capital-
landscape-in-2020-291cf4b86f2  
Maxwell, A. L., Jeffrey, S. A., & Lévesque, M. (2011). Business angel early stage decision 
making. Journal of Business Venturing, 26(2), 212–225. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.09.002 
McMullan, E., Chrisman, J. J., & Vesper, K. (2001). Some Problems in Using Subjective 
Measures of Effectiveness to Evaluate Entrepreneurial Assistance Programs. 
Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, Fall, 37–45. 
Meuleman, M., & Maeseneire, W. de (2012). Do R&D subsidies affect SMEs’ access to 
external financing? Research Policy, 41(3), 580–591. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.01.001 
Miller, C. C., Washburn, N. T., & Glick, W. H. (2013). PERSPECTIVE—The Myth of Firm 
Performance. Organization Science, 24(3), 948–964. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1120.0762 
Møller, T. H., & Kreijler, S. P. (March 2020). Venture capital and start-ups in Denmark: 
Capital matches opportunity. Fredriksberg.  
Morris, N. M., Kuratko, D. F., & Pryor, C. G. (2013). Building Blocks for the Development 
of University-Wide Entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 4(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1515/erj-2013-0047 
Motoyama, Y., & Knowlton, K. (2017). Examining the Connections within the Startup 
Ecosystem: A Case Study of St. Louis. Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 7(1), 109. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/erj-2016-0011 
OEC (2020a). OEC - Denmark (DNK) Exports, Imports, and Trade Partners. Retrieved from 
https://oec.world/en/profile/country/dnk/ 
==PAGE:71==
Conclusion 
63 
OEC (2020b). OEC - Germany (DEU) Exports, Imports, and Trade Partners. Retrieved from 
https://oec.world/en/profile/country/deu/ 
Oltmann, S. (2016). Qualitative Interviews: A Methodological Discussion of the Interviewer 
and Respondent Contexts. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 17(2). 
https://doi.org/10.17169/FQS-17.2.2551 
Patton, M. Q. (2015). Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory and 
Practice (4th ed.). Los Angeles, London, New Delhi, Singapore, Washington DC: Sage.  
Prüver, T., & Turner, M. (2019). Growth with purpose: German Tech start-ups changing 
society: Venture capital and start-ups in Germany 2019. Retrieved from EY - Ernst & 
Young GmbH website: 
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8
&ved=2ahUKEwiW7cji3vHpAhUpSBUIHXODDYcQFjALegQIBBAC&url=https%3A%
2F%2Fstart-up-initiative.ey.com%2Fwp-
content%2Fuploads%2F2020%2F02%2FVenture_Capital_and_Start_ups_in_Germany_20
19.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3qc6RoNAFR8jwwHIEA_twD  
Rasmussen, E., & Sørheim, R. (2012). How governments seek to bridge the financing gap for 
university spin-offs: proof-of-concept, pre-seed, and seed funding. Technology Analysis & 
Strategic Management, 24(7), 663–678. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2012.705119 
Rasmussen, E., & Wright, M. (2015). How can universities facilitate academic spin-offs? An 
entrepreneurial competency perspective. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 40(5), 782–
799. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10961-014-9386-3 
Rotger, G. P., Gørtz, M., & Storey, D. J. (2012). Assessing the effectiveness of guided 
preparation for new venture creation and performance: Theory and practice. Journal of 
Business Venturing, 27(4), 506–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2012.01.003 
Samila, S., & Sorenson, O. (2010). Venture capital as a catalyst to commercialization. 
Research Policy, 39(10), 1348–1360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2010.08.006 
Söderblom, A., Samuelsson, M., Wiklund, J., & Sandberg, R. (2015). Inside the black box of 
outcome additionality: Effects of early-stage government subsidies on resource 
accumulation and new venture performance. Research Policy, 44(8), 1501–1512. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.05.009 
Steigertahl, L., & Mauer, R. (2018). EU Startup Monitor: 2018 Report.  
==PAGE:72==
Conclusion 
64 
Straits, B. C., & Singleton, R. A., JR (2011). Social research: Approaches and fundamentals 
(5th edition). New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Tech, R. (2018). Startup Financing in Berlin. In N. Richter, P. Jackson, & T. Schildhauer 
(Eds.), Entrepreneurial Innovation and Leadership (Vol. 18, pp. 65–75). Cham: Springer 
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71737-1_6 
TUM (2019a). Staff - Facts and Figures. Retrieved from https://www.tum.de/en/about-
tum/our-university/facts-and-figures/staff/ 
TUM (2019b). Students - Facts and Figures. Retrieved from https://www.tum.de/en/about-
tum/our-university/facts-and-figures/students-studies/ 
Witt, P., & Hack, A. (2008). Staatliche Gründungsfinanzierung: Stand der Forschung und 
offene Fragen. Journal Für Betriebswirtschaft, 58(2), 55–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-008-0034-6 
Woodside, A. G., Bernal, P. M., & Coduras, A. (2016). The general theory of culture, 
entrepreneurship, innovation, and quality-of-life: Comparing nurturing versus thwarting 
enterprise start-ups in BRIC, Denmark, Germany, and the United States. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 53, 136–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2015.11.003 
Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (5th ed.). Los Angeles, London, 
New Delhi, Singapore, Washington DC: Sage.  
==PAGE:73==
Picture Sources 
65 
9. Picture Sources 
10. Appendix 
10.1. Interviews conducted with DTU Skylab Soft-funding Initiative 
Interviews that start or end without a proper introduction or ending, included anonymized 
personal or private information that was shortened by the author. 
 
10.1.1. Pål Simon Fernvall  
[00:00:00.580] - P 
OK. Yeah. So you're working with the soft funding for Skylab. 
[00:00:08.390] - I 
Yes. Yes. 
[00:00:11.550] - P 
OK. So maybe, I start with a short introduction and I'm - I'm doing a double degree at DTU and Technical 
University Munich. I  don't know whether you've heard about that.  
[00:00:22.110] - I 
Yes. 
[00:00:24.330] - P 
Oh, cool. Yeah. And yeah, I know I've worked the startup financing before. I've worked for a corporate 
venture capital company and now I'm doing this thesis about early stage startup finance. 
[00:00:42.150] - I 
Cool.  
[00:00:44.180] - P 
Yeah. So that's about me. And then how long are you working for Skylab? And what are you exactly 
doing there? 
[00:00:52.260] - I 
So I started in Skylab approximately six years ago. Yeah, I started in January of 2014. When actually 
also Skylab kind of got started. And we were building up like a community for student startups at the 
university. And before that, I was working in an organization called the Foundation for 
Entrepreneurship, yeah, the Danish Foundation for Entrepreneurship where I also was managing a grant 
program for student startups to help them get started, basically grants around 50 000 DKK or something 
like that. 
[00:01:44.620] - P 
It's a lot smaller than what you're managing now. Yeah. 
[00:01:51.010] - I 
yeah. And basically I've been - Yeah - When I started in 2014, since I had the background from the 
foundation for Entrepreneurship. You know, it's basically, uh, you know, kind of my big thing that I 
think that is soft-funding for startups and it's really important that something that can really, really 
==PAGE:74==
Appendix 
66 
support them getting started. It's it's a big shoulder clap, but also it's important like just small amounts, 
like even 10 000 DKK is a big amount for for students who don't have a lot of savings that they can use. 
So they, they go pretty far with a small budget. And that's why I kind of think it's interesting to work 
with this group. So when I started in Skylab, I started reaching out to some foundations. And basically, 
I I asked if if I can get could get like a few really good applications if they were interested in then set 
aside an amount for our startups. So basically that's how I started doing matchmaking between our 
students and their foundations.  
[00:03:18.640] - P 
Okay. Yeah, that's basically what you're still doing.  
[00:03:22.070] - I 
Yes, it is. Yeah. So now we have basically we have around the six, seven foundations and one or two 
private persons who are also giving grants. And I'm also looking into companies to see if they can chip 
in as well. 
[00:03:41.610] - P 
OK. So you're planning on expanding the whole thing more and more? 
[00:03:47.810] - I 
Yeah, yeah, definitely. I think this is going to do that. So I'm really keen on expanding. 
[00:03:56.070] - P 
Okay. And how can I imagine the setup? So it's you. Is there any other persons involved? 
[00:04:05.330] - I 
Okay. So. So let's say I'm the program manager. So basically, I'm going out talking to external 
foundations and I'm also doing the marketing towards students. So basically, even though I don't like 
have a specific budget, I know I have it like a framework with external foundations. So usually I try to 
negotiate a little bit. So if they chip in with at least 250 000 or something that will start, we can like do 
a little bit more marketing and have a little bit more fun together with them. 
[00:04:54.770] - I 
Otherwise if it's just smaller amounts, if it's only like a one time 50000 kroner. Yeah. Then we can say, 
OK, maybe we can find a match, but we want to make a big set-up tour for you. So basically, yeah, that's 
it. And sometimes if I if needed, I'll take my boss with me as well. We need to talk to some foundations 
and convince them that it's a good idea to support the students and that as well. 
[00:05:24.510] - I 
So yeah, basically the setup is you could say I'm starting with a marketing campaign towards students 
and saying we have soft-funding for startups and that's usually a no-brainer. We get almost 
automatically, you know, 40, 50 applications.  
[00:05:45.820] - P 
OK. 
[00:05:48.740] - I 
Usually we offer since we also do a lot of one to one coaching at startups, that's also a really good way 
to to get them to apply or help them to apply. So I'm actually like both managing the applications but 
also giving feedback to students in terms of writing good applications. So what usually happens then is 
I go to the foundations like prescreen the applications. So me and the three, three to five colleagues will 
screen all the applications and depending on the foundations they would have at hand will choose 
==PAGE:75==
Appendix 
67 
somewhere between 10 and 15 applications will also rank them and will usually will give the 10 best 
applications to to the foundations.  
[00:06:53.410] - P 
OK.  
[00:06:55.220] - I 
And then they will choose which one they want to support. 
[00:07:01.530] - P 
OK. And you ranked them based on what?  
[00:07:06.370] - I 
So we'll usually ranked them based on some different parameters. But so one of them is like if they 
create any value to society, like a public benefit or a private benefit, you know, it can be just like to have 
an idea that it's supposed to create a lot of a lot of work in workplaces, that's a good thing but it can also 
be used in creating some sort of value to society that we think it's interesting. So that's one thing. But 
that also is combined with, you know, if you have the, you know, basically if they are looking into any 
of the STGs, it's like something that's contributing as well to society. Yeah. Is that a positive? If the 
basically if create it and creating landmines and also a lot of work in places, then probably it's not for 
us. 
[00:08:24.600] - I 
But if they can somehow, you know, support the, let's say, people who are in the outskirts of social lives 
but also make money, then obviously it's a really, really good thing. And on the other hand, you have 
like a really, really beneficial goal. But we don't believe in the business model and it seems like 
unrealistic and obviously won't score high either. So obviously it has to have like both both sides. 
[00:09:05.630] - I 
And then we'll also look into something we call value for money. So since we don't have a big budget 
and we really want to support the ones that are early-stage we will also look into, you know, how far 
will they get with this money, if they basically have if they need to like raise the 50 million Danish 
kroners and this hundred thousand is just like one step. Then maybe, you know, it's it's not the right 
timing. But if this is like a big help for them to create the first prototype, then obviously or do a market 
test or something like that, then it's kind of a rank higher. 
[00:10:00.560] - I 
And then like how innovative is the project? It's also the last one. It can be a little bit difficult to assess 
it since we don't I can't we're not able to cover all areas. But let's say within the knowledge that we have, 
if we if we would like think this is something that we've seen many times before or this is the - Yeah, 
it's not going to change anything, basically. Then we won't rank it high basically. But it's obviously it's 
really difficult to cover all areas but since we're initially five people I think. Yeah, well we'll take an 
average of the scores that we that we give all of the teams and then we'll discuss it together and then the 
possibility to argue in one way or the other why we have scored like we have. And then we'll usually 
choose the top ten applications. 
[00:11:16.670] - P 
OK. And then you go with them to to the foundation.  
[00:11:20.980] - I 
Yes. Yes. And the foundations then will actually - Yeah, We'll have some like different foundations 
have different the like demands or asks from us. Some of them asking if we can like write a 
==PAGE:76==
Appendix 
68 
recommendation letter as well when we write a little bit about the team and say why we have chosen 
this one. Others just want to applications and have a look at them, so. So the idea is that the foundations 
that will work together with they will choose themselves who will receive the grant. 
[00:11:59.690] - I 
So out of the 10 that we send, most of them will choose like let's say between between one and maybe 
five or six applications that they will grant. And then there will also be able to discuss the budget savings. 
They think that the budget is realistic or if they want to change it. Give a higher lower than they've 
applied for. 
[00:12:29.430] - P 
So the sponsors change the budget, but you wouldn't, you don't look at the budget somehow? 
[00:12:36.810] - I 
We look at it and obviously but it mostly in terms of, let's say, the value for money. So if you have a 
huge budget for a really small project or vice versa, then we would probably we would like we would. 
We wouldn't like say they should change the budget, but we would look at the actual budget, that they 
have something and say it's doesn't seem realistic. 
[00:13:06.960] - I 
But then usually the foundations, they can actually go in and negotiate and say it's an interesting project, 
but we think it's too early. They can get half of the money or they can say it's not ambitious enough. 
You need some more. 
[00:13:29.970] - P 
OK. Do you know why the sponsors pay for this? 
[00:13:37.410] - I 
Yes, we do. Like most of the small foundations that we have, they say like they have actually the money 
that they have should be spent on supporting engineerings or like merchants within the engineering field 
somehow. So most of them are actually founded by engineers who made a lot of money but didn't get 
any children. 
[00:14:14.740] - I 
So instead of like giving the money to the children they just started a foundation basically and the 
companies and the private persons, they  are usually DTU alumnis. So they would do it to give something 
back because maybe they got some help when they were students and now they want to give something 
back to the community or to somebody else who is struggling. Also, maybe to get a closer relation to 
some some exciting teams that they maybe want to build further on at a later stage. That's usually the 
reasons. 
[00:15:04.700] - I 
So and the and the foundations that we put together with usually they are quite small. So most of them 
don't have project managers who can go out and market the opportunity. So they would usually rely on, 
you know, people just finding them and sending applications. And usually it means that they don't get a 
lot of good applications and they don't have resources to spend like on the marketing or helping with 
writing good applications. So for them, it's it's I think it's a good value for them to have somebody like 
us that can, you know, qualify applications and make sure that there's actually some applications to 
choose from. 
==PAGE:77==
Appendix 
69 
[00:15:54.330] - I 
That means that they will get better applications and it's more fun for them to support something that 
they believe in rather than just having to give the money away because they have too much surplus on 
the bank account or something like that. 
[00:16:11.100] - P 
Yeah. And you said you contacted them? How does this usually work? 
[00:16:23.220] - I 
Yeah. I've written out some messages in our DTU alumni network and I found some of them that way. 
I've also reached out to some foundations. And you actually do that and talk about this opportunity and 
ask if this is something for them. And then also when somebody like from the management or a little bit 
more senior management that at DTU if they need some foundations, I usually go around and ask 
colleagues to send foundations in my direction, because sometimes, you know, it's difficult for DTU to 
handle like than, let's say, smaller programs like a hundred thousand two hundred thousand because if 
if it's money that's going to go to a salary, you won't get very far with 300 000. Basically, you can hire 
somebody for half a year. But that's you know, it's difficult to find qualified. So this is a way of like 
spending the money. I think pretty, it's an interesting way to support the community and support the 
startup scene. And maybe support development within the technological area without spending a lot of 
money. 
[00:17:55.720] - P 
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, that's a good point. OK. And then. So this is all about the sponsors. But like, what do 
you see the startups like using the money for?  
[00:18:19.320] - I 
Yeah. Most of our startups would use the money for. For building first or second iteration of a prototype 
or something like that. Sometimes also going too fairs. You know, getting an airplane ticket and paying 
the fee to go to a big fair, that's usually a really good way to get connections and build a network within 
the area that you're working in. So mostly that.  
[00:19:08.340] - P 
OK. And then it's mostly like very early stage startups I suppose? 
[00:19:14.540] - I 
Yeah, I would I would say so. I would put them in that category. I think most people would. Yeah, but 
it's it's like pre-revenue all of them. But they would have registered company but usually... So, you 
know, one of the one of the agreements like when getting our grant is that you can’t pay salary with the 
money. You can if you - you can sometimes like hire external help. If you can argue why it shouldn't be 
on the core team. 
[00:19:59.750] - I 
If it's like a competency that should be on the core team. And then we would say then, you know, you 
shouldn't spend money on that. You should just offer them equity and hire somebody. But otherwise, so 
they can't use the money for salary. Not sort of themselves sometimes for external help, if they can argue 
why. And obviously they can't use the money to like invest in other stuff. 
[00:20:32.710] - P 
Yeah. And but do you have like a contract or anything? 
==PAGE:78==
Appendix 
70 
[00:20:37.550] - I 
I like to actually actually not have written one. I don't have. I actually leave that up to the foundations. 
So, uh, we don't we don't have a contract like that. But we make sure that we have close contact to the 
to the companies that receive a grant. So we have in Skylab we have like one to one talks with teams 
who receive it and obviously one of the things that we use to why, you know, why we want to spend 
time, because Skylab is paying for my salary to do this and the foundations aren't actually pretty. 
[00:21:26.410] - I 
So the reason is that it's a really, really good way for us to get startup to approach us and for us to get 
contacts to startups and build closer relations, basically. So what we do with this is we try to build 
relations with the teams who received a grant. And basically, yeah, we basically tell them that some of 
the reasons that you give this is give you this brand is that, you know, you're staying in Skylab and 
becoming a closer partner with us. 
[00:22:03.340] - I 
And if we don't already know them, then we'll make sure that we get to know them and that they get to 
know some of the other office - some of the other offers that they have for startups.  
[00:22:18.210] - P 
OK. So, you know all of the startups before you hand out the grant. 
[00:22:25.150] - I 
No, we don't know. No, we don't know all of them, but we know most of them. So it's  like not really a 
strategy, but it's kind of a I think it's it's we think that it's it's totally OK that it's easier to get funding if 
you know us. And obviously it is, because the more we know you, the more you come in, the the more 
we can understand, you know, the  applications and the project. We're able to dig into it a little bit more. 
So it is probably more if I would look at the statistics and say I would say like probably 90 percent of 
the ones who have received funding have known us before. 
[00:23:21.760] - I 
But since we get, you know, 40 to 50 applications in every round, this is also the way that we get to 
know new teams. So some of them will if we receive an application from a team we haven't heard about 
before, we'll definitely follow up on that and say thank you for your application. We did it. Couldn't 
really understand it or something like this. Let's hope you make a better application for next time. And, 
you know, tell me about the project and then: OK. It's actually a really good project. We couldn't really 
just understand it? So next time this is done. 
[00:24:03.640] - P 
OK. OK. And so like what like a startup really has to hand in during the grant time. It's depending like 
I talked to Paragit Solutions, you probably know them, and they told me about a video that they handed 
in after the prototype. So is that like a common thing or was it special because they were with this one 
foundation? 
[00:24:45.160] - I 
No, it's it's actually optional. So they have to hand in a three page application, a three page application, 
and it's one page about basically the idea, the technology and the project. Maybe about how they got 
started and where they are now and where they see themselves in the future. The next page is about the 
team, who is on the team and why do they think that they can make this happen? The team could have 
the competencies needed. 
==PAGE:79==
Appendix 
71 
[00:25:26.940] - I 
And the last page is the budget. Basically, you know, an Excel budget and also a few lines about how 
they spend the money. And usually I'll tell them that it's a good idea to do it like this. That's a project. 
So they need to try to explain where they're at right now as a startup and where they'll be after they've 
spent the money, basically. So, yeah. 
[00:26:13.400] - I 
And then they can also have a few appendixes, maybe some pictures of a prototype or some plans, but 
not, not a lot. We'll ask them to keep it as short as possible so we only promise them that we'll read the 
three pages that they can try to attach appendixes, but we don't promise that we'll read some. Sometimes 
we see like 30 pages of appendixes. And one thing that actually. So yeah. Other than that, I've also added 
it's quite recently that they also can send a video in. 
[00:26:52.040] - I 
And I think I think actually a video is really good because sometimes it's nice to be able to like look at 
the team and maybe some some teams are just like better with words than writing text. And you know, 
it's just that takes them unpersonal sometimes. So that's an option because. Yeah, the other side is 
obviously some teams are more talented in creating good videos than others that are more like they're 
like academic and more comfortable in writting text. Yeah, I think that's also okay. Yeah. So I've added 
both possibilities. 
[00:27:35.060] - P 
No. Okay. Well I was wondering like about like outcome control or anything. Like what I've heard is 
that they had a video that showed their prototype after they've invested.  
[00:27:49.550] - I 
Oh yeah. I'll look into it.  
[00:27:52.660] - P 
This thing was also interesting. So I  let you say you say that. 
[00:28:01.120] - I 
So following up. I usually, we'll expect them to use the money within six months. It's basically because, 
number one, it's difficult for me to have too many like ongoing projects and to keep an eye on like that 
they spend the money as we've agreed to have a talk with them. So I have two deadlines every year. I 
usually say that they should spend it within six months. So then I can still manage to keep an eye on 
them. 
[00:28:43.920] - I 
And the other thing is - some of the early stage teams maybe have a little bit trouble, like start spending 
the money. Maybe they're a little bit afraid of the consequences of spending money. So it's also nice to 
push them a little bit to start to start using it. And also, obviously, the foundation is also interested in 
progression. So within six months. And I think a video or a small like 2, 3 page report, 1, 2, 3 page 
report is really what I prefer. 
[00:29:23.250] - I 
I really like to send something back to the foundations. They obviously give the money away of 
philanthropic reasons. But if we're able to also tell them, give them a follow up. And that's really nice. 
It's a customer management and like pleasing the foundation. So we need to do that. A video is really, 
really good. And that's also what I prefer. But yeah, we can accept other stuff as well. 
==PAGE:80==
Appendix 
72 
[00:03:14.320] - P 
OK. 
[00:03:15.220] - I 
And sometimes I've also done like a small pitching sessions where where they come back like a year 
after and meet the foundation again and just to give a short pitch and what's happened during the last 
year, that's really a good way as well. Yeah. So I really want to give some sort of feedback to the 
foundations and also obviously for us to be able to keep an eye on what's happening in the startup. 
[00:03:53.450] - P 
So the sponsor and the grant receiver, they usually meet each other. 
[00:04:01.100] - I 
usually not OK, but sometimes they do. It really depends like depends on the foundation. And basically, 
let's say, the capacity or the engagement. So that's one of the foundations who are really engaged in like 
meeting them. And they are also arranging a pride ceremony for the ones who receive their grants. So 
they invite all of the teams into to an office that they have. And, you know, sort of champagne and 
canapés and give them a diploma. 
[00:04:48.530] - I 
And one of the other foundations, there's actually one guy who's a representative in two foundations that 
give money for Skylab funding. And it's basically it's just he just comes by. Can you hear me? 
[00:05:08.720] - P 
 Yeah, I can hear you. Can you hear me? 
[00:05:12.940] - I 
Yeah. It's just my headset went out of battery. Uh. So, he just comes by, reads a lot of application and 
then I get an e-mail, he says okay we have money for these three projects. Can you give me the account 
number. Yeah that's it basically. But yeah but then then like I'd say it's important for me to to make sure 
that that I give him feedback as well. He doesn't ask for it, but I can see he's always really happy when 
I tell him about the project and uh, make sure that they, you know, that they get to meet when he comes 
by Skylab or something like that. 
[00:06:10.010] - I 
So I think, that's a really good way to please them and make sure that he keeps it keeps on giving money. 
He can see that it comes value out of, you know, giving money to Skylab. It's not just he's actually he 
actually told me when we began, he said, we have -  our foundation have been supporting a project for 
a number of years, but we never see anything coming out of it. Usually it's just throwing money in a big 
black hole. 
[00:06:42.780] - I 
And we we usually don't even get invited to the PhD  defense or anything like that. So, like, I'm kind of 
tired of that. I'd like to see something of more concrete value. And I said, cool. That's Skylab funding. I 
promise you, we'll give you that. So he's never like complained or anything. But I kind of know that, 
you know, all I need to do to make him happy, it's just to make sure that he knows what's going on. 
[00:07:18.120] - I 
He knows that some of the project survives and some of them have success. That's more than enough 
for him. So that's why I like the video pitches are really good because then I can send it out to the team 
so I can show it to them when they come by. Skylab or. So it's. Yeah. It's a good way to give feedback. 
==PAGE:81==
Appendix 
73 
[00:07:43.710] - P 
Yeah. Yeah. And do you also collect any numbers or KPIs? Do you follow what the startups do after 
they finished the grant.  
[00:08:00.150] - I 
I don't but it's on my to do list.  
[00:08:08.850] - P 
Okay. 
[00:08:09.950] - I 
Maybe even on my working from home during Corona To do list if I can find time. But it would be a 
good thing to do now. But yeah it's been basically I think five years since we handed out the first grant. 
So it's kind of becoming the right time to start collecting data about what's happening with the startups 
that receive a grant. 
[00:08:39.750] - P 
Okay, and which kind of data do you think about collecting?  
[00:08:43.880] - I 
OK. So number one is basically some sort of survival rate. And also some sort of like looking at revenue. 
And how many employees do the startups have that receive a grant. But I also think it's important to 
remember that we're also a learning environment. So our main goal is probably not to like, you know, 
to create successful startups. We're really happy if we can do that. But it's not our main goal because we 
know that this is like a really, really early stage and it's very very risky. And since they are students, the 
learning outcome is really the most important part. So I also want to look into like the learning outcome 
somehow that that could be something like I've used this experience in other areas of your work life, 
you know? 
[00:09:58.210] - I 
Or have you started a new company after this? And were you, did you learn something? Something like 
that? I would also look into like some of the soft, soft stuff. So a combination of some of the hard 
numbers and some of the, like, learning outcomes. 
[00:10:32.040] - P 
So you're still in contact with most of them?  
[00:10:36.710] - I 
Um. Yes, some sort of sort of. Yeah, sort of like... Yeah. Yeah. I kind of keep an eye on them. At least 
I'm not. Yeah. There's so many know. I think it's around since I started probably, let's say I run 100 
grants or something like that. So probably this a few ones that I have forgotten and I know that there's 
also a few ones that have closed down. 
[00:11:16.050] - I 
But let's say the ones that are like sort of successful. Yeah. Obviously I have contact with them. Yeah. 
[00:11:24.290]  
Yeah. Yeah. Good. 
==PAGE:82==
Appendix 
74 
[00:11:30.990]  
And that's interesting. And then. OK, so I have something like what would you consider then being like 
the biggest success of all of this?After all the time that you spent, like the the biggest success until now 
is that. Could be structural or a startup 
[00:12:02.470] - I 
Yeah. Okay. Perfect. To begin with, I'm obviously too modest to say it's a success. So I think what 
would I'm personally professionally most happy about is that I've been able to like grow the program 
from year to year. So you know, we started out with 300 000 DKK a year and now we're handing out 
1.6 million Danish kroners last year 2019. 
[00:12:49.280] - I 
And yeah, so it's been growing since we started. And I think that's really  great, I think because that 
means that more DTU startups are getting access to soft funding and were, you know, able to build 
prototypes and creating great companies and delivering value to society without spending DTU money 
or their own money or giving up equity, giving up equity in an early stage or too early stage. So I think 
that's that's something I'm really happy about. 
[00:13:41.970] - I 
Yeah. Yeah, that's probably one one big, big success. That's probably how I should look at one thing 
that's probably this. Other than that, I think also obviously I'm happy that we've received so many 
applications. I can't really say that we're like a well-known, you know, institution or something at the 
university that everybody knows about. 
[00:14:20.740] - I 
But hopefully I hope we're getting closer to that, that like everybody who is starting a company at DTU 
should know that this an opportunity to apply for funding the Skylab funding. You know, since it's a 
university, the students are changing all the time. So you can obviously never reach the goal that 100 
percent knows about it because then there will be a new batch of students. But yeah. Yeah. So I'm getting 
close.  
[00:15:04.670] - P 
OK. And then is there any like major improvements that you would want to implement apart from your 
numbers and measurements that you might think about? 
[00:15:17.820] - I 
Yeah. Exactly. That's a that's a really big thing, I think. It's definitely something I want to change is to 
start like doing follow ups and looking into the data. I actually have Masters students who will write 
their thesis about it in September, so hopefully that they'll also give me a little bit of hope. Major changes 
now like I think it would be really interesting to to look in to corporate sponsorships and see if that is 
possible. That would be a pretty big change to say it will go from foundations giving grants to corporates, 
giving sponsorships to startups. 
[00:16:36.390] - I 
I don't actually even know if it's like legal, but it would be really interesting to look into if the company 
is able to give like they can give sponsorship to sport clubs and stuff like that, I would think it would be 
really interesting to see if the corporates are able to give a sponsorship to the startups, because I think 
that could be a pretty good thing. If it's if it's allowed.  
[00:17:14.680] - P 
Why? Why should it not be allowed? 
==PAGE:83==
Appendix 
75 
[00:17:18.740] - I 
Mainly because of tax reasons. Because when they give sponsorships to a sports club, they get a lot of, 
what do you say like, tax deductions and stuff like that. And if they're able to do something similar for 
startups, then it would be really attractive for, I think, corporate companies to do that. Yeah. And we 
could also make a setup where it's easier for them to find the right startups to give out sponsorship to 
and create connections. 
[00:17:55.220] - P 
Yeah. Yeah. Makes sense. I think I've gotten through most of my questions. I have one more question. 
I contacted quite some startups from last year that I got, I got like from your website funded in 2019 and 
I got quite some talk back, but it's kinda like I could only contact those that still have like an like a 
website or a LinkedIn profile that I could use for them. There's others which don't have this or I can't 
find it. It would be kind of interesting to talk. 
[00:18:45.020] - P 
I don't know maybe why they don't have it. Or like when the website is no longer active. It would be 
interesting. Yeah. Oh, I wondered whether you could maybe forward an email to them for me.  
[00:18:59.910] - I 
Yeah. Yeah, I guess so. What? What kind of questions would you like to ask? Well I would just want to 
ask for their experience. How they experience the whole program. Yeah. 
[00:19:15.610] - P 
I think I could send you, I think, it's two or three that I would like to contact so maybe. 
[00:19:23.440] - I 
Okay. Okay. So you know which ones you want to contact.  
[00:19:26.740] - P 
Oh yes.  
[00:19:28.690] - I 
Yeah. I'll do that probably. Yeah, exactly. And probably forward is best because of privacy reasons. I 
should probably send the e-mail out to them.  
[00:19:40.950] - P 
Yeah. Was what I was thinking. Yeah. 
[00:19:43.100] - I 
Exactly. Yeah. Probably not. Otherwise I wouldn't mind staying, but I think it's more easier if I send it. 
[00:19:50.970] - P 
OK. OK. And then. And then I wanted to ask whether this. Like, I thought it might be nice to also have 
like a view of the sponsor and talk about them, how they feel for it. I mean, you've told me a lot about 
it, but maybe it would be good to have like first hand contact. I wondered whether you have someone 
that I like after this long time there that I could probably contact and talk to.  
[00:20:28.220] - I 
Yeah, this one in particular in particular I think would be good to ask you. He probably also has time 
and be interested to talk to you. Yeah. I can send you his information.  
==PAGE:84==
Appendix 
76 
[00:20:46.760] - P 
Yeah, that would be great. 
[00:20:48.270] - I 
Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Great. Maybe. Yeah. Maybe I can do, I can send the, I can do an intro. Yes. 
You mean maybe. Yeah. Yeah. And just say hello. And then you can follow up on that. 
[00:21:08.310] - P 
Yeah. Yeah. That's a good idea.  
[00:21:10.290] - I 
Yeah. Yeah. 
[00:21:13.800] - P 
Cool. Thanks a lot for all of this.  
[00:21:16.630] - I 
You're welcome.  
[00:21:17.550]  
Good information. It was really Interesting. I send you definitely my master thesis, but if I have anything 
beforehand, can I also, like come back to you? 
[00:21:32.160] - I 
Yeah, you should definitely do that. No problem.  
[00:21:39.800] - P 
Good. Yeah. And thanks a lot. Yeah. You're welcome. Yeah. And join Sunny Day. 
[00:21:49.470]  
Yeah, I will. Thank you so much. Good day to you. Okay. Bye. 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Appendix 
77 
10.1.2. Henrik Kaastrup 
[00:01:00.960] - P 
And well you are like sponsoring the soft funding at DTU, I heard. 
[00:01:09.490] - I 
Yeah. I mean the right setting is to be precise that I'm a board member, one of three board members of 
a small fund. It's a family fund. And the fund has two so to say purposes. These are, you know, demands 
from from the original founders that this fund has to support the artists, that's for one thing. And the 
other thing is that they have to support, it is defined quite old fashioned, but it says upcoming salesmen.  
[00:02:00.200] - I 
Yeah, that's how it was described originally. And now we have been a modern version of that in the 
board saying that we want to support, first of all still artists for half of the money. And the rest will be 
support for promising new businesses which can turn into jobs and, you know, great trading companies. 
So we don't support, you know, projects that are more research based. 
[00:02:35.110] - I 
So it has to have some kind of commercial angle. Yeah. And we decided to support startups from the 
very, very early phase. So that means that we have no demand for equity or some kind of feedback. 
Yeah. What we like, of course, feedback, but we have no formal demands that there has to to turn out 
to something. So there are lots of funds supporting programs supporting later stage funding, but this is 
typically small, very, very young projects. 
[00:03:22.240] - I 
Last year we actually we thought that it would be better to ask that we only support a project that had 
already turned into a company so that  it's basically the one criteria that we currently set up. Yeah. Okay. 
So it's a better - the right setting. So. And I've been in the board for - the board is selected for 10 years 
then there's a new board. And I've been now with them for four years now and I've been, so to say, in 
charge of recruiting interesting startups. 
[00:04:06.590] - I 
And that's why we made this this this very nice cooperation with Skylab. They do the first, you know, 
initial screening of interesting projects and startups. And then we we do kind of a pitch. We select which 
project we want to hear more about. And they get a chance to pitch for their first very, very early money. 
Which typically goes into financing the first prototype or first scale up from from the prototype type 
stuff I get. 
[00:04:51.960] - P 
OK. So can we go back to the foundation? You said it has like initial purposes. So how old is this 
foundation? And like, where does it come from? 
[00:05:06.360] - I 
Yeah, I can't remember the exact year, but it's quite an old fund. It was a family fund. It was a married 
couple there. Their surname was NIMB. N-I-M-B. And they had no children. So it was a wealthy family 
with no children. A couple with no children. So and then the husband, he was he was into business. He 
was a businessman and his wife was very much into art. 
[00:05:39.930] - I 
So they took all their money in a fund when they died. And they couldn't agree on should we support 
this? And so they decide to do the split purpose. So half of the money will it needs to go to promising 
==PAGE:86==
Appendix 
78 
artist and the rest of the half of the money needs to go to this promising businessmen or projects. And 
then there's a small fund. 
[00:06:16.290] - I 
So the whole fund is administered by a law company. And for ten years time they select a board. So the 
chairman of the board is one of the partners of this law firm. And then every 10 year they select two 
new board members. So one artist today I have a colleague in the board, which is a very famous Danish 
artist. And then I was selected for taking care of the business part. 
[00:06:56.060] - P 
Yes. And it's how it works. So it's not my money, it's this nonprofit fund. So, the money that we hand 
out or give out, is split in two parts equally between the artist and these promising business projects. 
And then the capital in the fund is invested in chairs and bonds and stuff. And each year, we sort of say 
we give out the profit of the fund. 
[00:07:32.290] - I 
So we maintain so to say the fund. And depending on the profit of the investment of the initial capital, 
we can support the artists and these projects in the amount of, I think last time it was, one point five 
million or something, two million DKK around that. So typically we support maybe between five and 
10 artists and maybe between five or 10 projects from Skylab. And they make a small pitch and they 
make an application and they need to make a small budget saying what would they want to use the 
money for. Typically, it's a scale up or prototyping step they want to take and then we we make a budget 
and we provide them with this money typically within a couple of hundred thousand. 
[00:08:38.250] - P 
Okay. And so if you say you support startups, then it's only through Skylab and you don't support other 
startups that are not within... 
[00:08:51.320] - I 
No, not for the last four years. Earlier on, the former board, they had a different approach selecting who 
should be supported. But then when I came in, I thought it was a little bit boring what they did in the 
old board. So I think they know if I had to spend ten years here and we need to step up their vision a 
little bit. So, we found the Skylab more or less by coincidence. 
[00:09:22.250] - I 
Actually, we had a discussion in the board saying: OK, where do small companies come from. And a 
lot of small companies, they are founded on some good idea by engineers. So we can't take the DTU. 
And they say, okay, maybe you should talk to Skylab. And they have been very, very nice meeting them. 
They do a great job in providing interesting projects. 
[00:09:52.550] - I 
I would say we do have. It was last year that last year for that we had a discussion board, if we should 
involve other institutions, like maybe the design academy or, you know, here in Denmark, there are a 
lot of Danish design companies and also companies involved in that, you know, close to developing 
furniture, architecture, so, so we... There was some years, the quality of the projects coming from Skylab 
was a little... So, there's a big variation on them. And maybe we couldn't find really eight, 10 projects 
with that was mature enough. So there we decided maybe next year again, we will try  to also look at 
design projects of startups. But then I mean last year, it was just before Christmas, Skylab projects kind 
of stepped up a little bit. So I think the quality of the project last year we supported were much better 
than the year before. 
==PAGE:87==
Appendix 
79 
[00:11:14.660] - I 
So and obviously it's nice to see some of the projects that we supported like three years ago, they are, 
they turn into small businesses. Now, that is, of course, the whole purpose.  
[00:11:29.680] - P 
Yeah. OK, and then you said you decided that you will only support registered companies. Is that also 
to secure the quality of the startups? 
[00:11:49.040] - I 
Yeah. The learning from this first and the second funding round was that some of the projects that we 
actually decided to support, when we came back and asked them how did it go? Six months later or three 
months later, they decided to split up. So it turned out to nothing. So we decided to say, okay, if we have 
to put money in this in your project, then you have to also to - you need to mean it - you need to really 
commit yourself from the founders. We don't want to support just a school project. We want to support 
stuff that where the ambition by the founders is clear. And they are willing to also go all the way. I 
mean, it's OK if it turns out that was a bad idea. But we don't want to support founders that I mean, next 
month, find something else that is more interesting. 
[00:12:52.310] - I 
That was why we decided, OK, you need to have your company structure ready, otherwise we can't 
support you. And I mean there is also some formalities in that because if there's no company behind, 
then we have to pay the money directly to some person and then it's taxable. Then it turns out to be 
nothing. OK. So there's also tax reasons why this is relevant. Otherwise it simply personal income. And 
that makes some sense.  
[00:13:26.490] - P 
Yeah. Yeah. So the person who receives the money would have to tax that.  
[00:13:34.220] - I 
Yeah. You have to pay half of it in tax and then it turns out to be almost nothing. 
[00:13:45.330] - P 
So and then you talked about how you, like, select the start ups and as far as I know they hand in 
applications and then Skylab takes them, does an initial short list, then sends them to you? And then it's 
you who looks at the start ups or do you do that the whole board?  
[00:14:06.150] - I 
I take a look at them. Typically they sent me a shortlist of 10, 12 projects and then I go through them 
and I try to do a kind of a scoring of them based on originality, commercial outlook, maturity, how 
original the idea is. So do we buy the idea? Some of the projects turn out to be a little bit of artificial. 
So we simply don't buy the idea. Other projects are really, really fantastic. But for example, there was 
ta startup a couple of years ago that had this idea that they would do a vaccine against all known snake 
bites. 
[00:15:13.470] - I 
And they were really, really advanced. And they had really, really nice insight to how many snake bites 
cost lives per year and stuff like that. The problem is that within the limits that we can support, it's 
typically up to a couple of hundred thousand, puring 200.000 into a project that will need like 10 billion 
there before it will turn out to be a project. What they needed was a bigger funding. So the idea, the 
distance between our funding and when it will turn into something concrete needs to be matched. So to 
say both our, you know, funding idea, but also the capabilities that we have. 
==PAGE:88==
Appendix 
80 
[00:16:04.290] - P 
Yeah, I think Skylab calls this value for money or something. Yeah. 
[00:16:08.710] - I 
Yeah, yeah. On the other hand side, one of the best cases we had was these two guys who came up with 
a brilliant, simple idea to make children's toys based on very nice - so small animals where they 
incorporated magnet types of wood so they could be put together and so you could when you play with 
it, you could take the body of the elephant and put the head of the giraffe on it and have a lot of fun with 
it. And they were really nice. And that turned into the first product that is in retail now. 
[00:16:54.160] - P 
 Cool. You know the name? 
[00:16:56.750] - I 
Yeah. It was fablewood, you could google that.. That was Fablewood, which is probably one of the... 
They actually received money twice. Two years in a row. And then they are now in retail. People would 
know. 
[00:17:18.690] - P 
It sounds really nice. Just also then gift and stuff. OK, and so you do a scoring. And then what happens 
after you're scoring of the startups? 
[00:17:33.440] - I 
Then we have a meeting in the board. So I present the scorings of the shortlist and then the my co board 
members will present the list of promising artist and then this is what we discuss. How do we look at it. 
Are they a one out of these ten, twelve projects. You say anyone that we don't believe in, which might 
be a little bit too R&D based then we pick them out. And then we give feedback to Skylab. 
[00:18:09.860] - I 
OK. Out of these two original ten or twelve project, we want to give the chance to these five to ten 
projects. And then we arrange a day or an afternoon where they can come in and the team can do a pitch 
in front of the whole board. And to be honest, I mean, this is the end. Until now, we haven't had any 
pitches who have not received money.  And actually, some, it happens every time that we call in one of 
the pitches or several of the pitches twice during this pitch session and ask them: OK, if we double your 
money, what what could you..? Where would you take it? How would you spend it? And that has 
happened a couple of times that we simply stepped up their own ambition, they are very modest actually 
when they ask for...  
[00:19:17.150] - P 
So you look at their budget and then you say, OK. But if you have doubled the money then you could 
actually do even more. 
[00:19:23.760] - I 
So yeah, that it is too either it's too low or it's too little. Come on, take off your ambition guys.  
[00:19:33.380] - P 
Does it work the other way round as well. Like that you say this is too much money and then you give 
a lower amount? 
==PAGE:89==
Appendix 
81 
[00:19:40.070] - I 
Yes. A little bit, but that is seldom but it has happened. We say OK, you need so much money. We can 
only support you part of the way. Then you need to find other funds. But that's only happened a couple 
of times. 
[00:20:05.300] - P 
OK. And then after you, like, gave out the money to the startups, do you have a contract for them, for 
the startups?  
[00:20:17.420] - I 
No.No. We asked them for their account numbers and then the law company will take care of paying up 
the money and then there's no obligation, no contract, no nothing. So there is a nice reception where 
they get the certificate with why we think it's good to start up the evaluation of the border. And then we 
asked them to come again in one year and tell us , how it went, how they spent the money. Did it turn 
out to be something  
[00:20:53.240] - P 
So, you invite them in person again? 
[00:20:55.840] - I 
Yeah. Or last time, the guy in Skylab arranged that each of the projects did a small video presentation, 
feedback on video, on how they are doing and what their status was. 
[00:21:12.230] - P 
 Okay, cool. And then it's just like a video thing. And then you can say, OK, it worked good or it worked 
bad.  
[00:21:21.660] - I 
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. 
[00:21:24.140] - P 
Cool. I also heard about the ceremony from some other startups, that it was really nice. It wasn't really 
nice and really interesting. 
[00:21:36.800] - I 
Yeah, it was. 
[00:21:39.870] - I 
You could say that out of the -, if you just have one out of these 10, that one company out of it every 
second year, it's a success because there's a lot of failures among these startups. So but if just one 
company turns out to be, it's all worth it.  
[00:22:03.890] - P 
Yeah. Yeah. I mean really high risk... 
[00:22:08.000] - I 
Yeah. It is risky but we don't see it as risky. We're not buying into it. We don't have equity. We don't 
need a return capitalwise.  
[00:22:17.060] - P 
Yeah. But I just meant if you would then it would be a high risk game.  
==PAGE:90==
Appendix 
82 
[00:22:21.200] - I 
Yeah. And that's why they do it. But we're probably one of the - we actually thought when we started 
this that there would be tons of  the same kind of funding. But it turned out that we actually quite unique 
in that sense.  
[00:22:39.840] - P 
Yeah. One question that just popped up the foundation is not connected to the DTU, is it? As it was an 
engineering university and there's no like strings to do like that this family has studied at the DTU. 
[00:22:55.770] - I 
No, no, no, no, no. Not at all.  
[00:22:57.730] - P 
OK. I'm going through. But I think I've asked everything that I.  
[00:23:06.800]  
OK, Paula, I have a meeting in 2 minutes.  I think if you along the way you need more input, you have 
more specific things then feel free to come back to me.  
[00:23:21.800] - P 
Yeah. Yeah I will. It was really nice that you took the time for this.  
[00:23:26.640] - I 
No problem. Yeah. 
[00:23:29.070] - P 
So I let you go to your meeting and if I have something, I'd just drop you an email then.  
[00:23:34.340] - I 
Yes, yes. 
[00:23:35.280] - P 
Thank you. Bye.  
[00:23:36.700] - I 
Take care. Bye bye.  
[00:23:37.740] - P 
You too. 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
Appendix 
83 
10.1.3. SSI-1 
Before the recording, the interviewee was asked for his consent to the recording. There was also a talk 
about the product of the company and what the interviewee is doing, however, to anonymize this 
interview, this content was removed. The minutes start right after the consent. 
[00:00:02.780] - P 
Are you also in your own home office?  
[00:00:06.310] - I 
Yeah. This is the quarantine time, it is not making things easier. 
[00:00:11.780] - P 
No, No, it isn't I know that I'm really of them. It's so weird. Yeah. So I might just start with the short 
introduction and then you can go on and we can start the interview.  
[00:00:24.830] - P 
Sure.  
[00:00:25.500] - P 
Okay. I study a mixture of entrepreneurship and chemistry, and I'm doing this at TUM mostly which is 
in Munich. And I'm an exchange student at DTU. And you study at DTU? You studied dt DTU, right? 
I stalked your LinkedIn profile.  
[00:00:42.000] - I 
[…] 
[00:01:12.500] - P 
Okay. Okay. I got it. So you have two jobs here. Your start-up and then you're a student? 
[00:01:20.340] - I 
Yeah, basically my life. And yeah, that's it's a handful to say the least. I am, I mean, my title in […] is 
the CFO. So I am responsible for fundraising and budgeting, financing and all the economic aspect of 
the company. And that being said, I mean, I also take care of other smaller things within the company 
like presentation, pitching, PowerPoint and such.  
[00:01:55.190] - I 
So yeah, um, a little bit background about […] name. Now I don't know how much you know about it, 
but  
[00:02:03.970] - P 
As much as your homepage gives away  
[00:02:06.340] - I 
I am sure. We started as a group of friends back in 2018, back when there was something called Open 
Innovation X Challenge. 
[00:02:22.080] - P 
That's at Skylab as well, isn't it?  
==PAGE:92==
Appendix 
84 
[00:02:23.440] - I 
You know. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. And the year, the theme of that year was health. So companies such 
as the Nova Nordisk and Lundbeck and also Troik Fonden - the insurance company all made some 
different kind of problems, which challenges to students who come up with like solutions, basically for 
it. […] 
[00:03:07.410] - P 
Yeah.  
[00:03:08.430] - I 
And yeah. So the idea started - the original idea started there and we just took it a step further and chose 
to incorporate it into a company and worked our way through. 
[00:03:23.610] - P 
So you got to know each other through this challenge or you've known each other before. 
[00:03:27.960] - I 
No, we know we have known each other way before we went to college together. Basically, all of us. 
[00:03:35.250] - P 
Oh, okay. Way before. 
[00:03:38.220] - I 
So we have known each other for almost 10 years now. 
[00:03:42.560] - P 
Oh, nice. And now, like, how far are you with your start-up? Like, can you already sell this or is it a 
prototype? I couldn't get that from... 
[00:03:52.470] - I 
So, yeah, we are currently developing our prototypes. We've tested the idea as a proof of concept. And 
we just took. And yeah, we took the idea further. And now we're developing five prototypes and which  
we are going to conduct a larger scale pilot test […] here in Denmark. 
[00:04:22.980] - I 
So, yeah, that's the product in itself. We are still in the prototyping phase, but we are pretty close to our 
final product, as you can say. And we are currently we have just filed our first patent and we are working 
on two other patents as well as we speak and we are also funded by Skylab and what's called the Danish 
the Innovation Fund Denmark. We got accepted into their accelerator program called Inno Founder. 
[00:05:08.460] - P 
Yeah.  
[00:05:09.480] - I 
Which supports a member of the team with salary up to fifteen thousand DKK each month. And also a 
one time bonus, which is thirty five thousand DKK. 
[00:05:26.280] - P 
And when did you get accepted to that?  
==PAGE:93==
Appendix 
85 
[00:05:29.520] - I 
Just this month, actually.  
[00:05:30.810] - P 
Nice. Congratulations then. 
[00:05:33.690] - I 
Thank you. And we're also part of another accelerator program currently called the Business Accelerator 
Academy, which is a spinoff from Novo Nordisk Foundation. 
[00:05:48.870] - P 
Okay.  
[00:05:50.010] - I 
And they support by. Yeah. It's a - it's an accelerator program. So a lot of mentoring, a lot of workshops 
to sharpen - for entrepreneurs and things such as the legal entities, you know, the CBR and bank accounts 
and such and IP patent and such. And also business development then. Yeah, just basically helping as 
much - as much as they can and helping us to push us for ready to be ready at market.  
[00:06:25.330] - P 
Okay. Okay. Yeah. Well what I would be most interested in is like I heard that you got a grant from the 
Kai Houmann - Houmann? Yeah, Kai Houmann Nielsens Fund. So yeah. 
[00:06:41.970] - I 
Yeah, that is actually the Skylab funding.  
[00:06:46.520] - P 
Yeah.  
[00:06:46.740] - I 
What what happens if you, you know, the front page in Skylab Fund.  
[00:06:51.210] - P 
Yeah.  
[00:06:52.660]  
You know, they listed a couple of projects which have been funded. And the way it works is we as an 
applicant do not know which fund we are going to get. So what we do is we we apply for funding at 
Skylab and then Skylab would take our project and just basically pitch it to all these different fundations, 
private foundations. And if the foundation finds the idea interesting then there will be funding the 
programme basically so much. So we didn't know when we applied for this kind of fund that we were 
going to get supported by that foundation in itself, that that's all Skylab because they were out there. 
They were pitching our ideas. And then they just found out that this foundation was interested. And also 
the amount of money that they can provide was the highest and such. 
[00:07:57.400] - P 
Okay. But you have to say before which amount you need, don't you.  
==PAGE:94==
Appendix 
86 
[00:08:01.230] - I 
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. And we applied for it basically. I mean it makes sense to apply for the maximum 
amount. So I think what we did was we applied for 150000 at the time. And what we got was 146000 
which is basically the same.  
[00:08:24.520] - P 
OK. And like back at that time, so you basically were already kind of oriented at the Skylab probably 
because this is where everything started and then you just went to Skylab and got further funding or how 
can I - How did you get to know about the program? 
[00:08:45.790] - I 
that's how can I say this? My - my colleague I think CEO ***, he had some previous experience with 
Skylab before and most notably some workers there, namely Christopher and P°ol. They knew - they 
knew - they knew Mohammed. And because Mohammed went there with another project, not the Paragit 
Solution one, but another project, his own project and but it never did become anything but, you know, 
the relationship that that got established right here, right there. And then and also since we participated 
in the OiX Challenge, the Open Innovation Challenge, and you know that the staff, they could recognize 
Mohammed. So and they saw the potential of the - the technology that we have developed. They actually 
offered - they were kind enough to offer their help and told us about the Skylab funding. And so he 
wasn't - it wasn't like we were looking for or with anything specific within Skylab. It was much more 
the other way around when we got approached by Skylab. 
[00:10:06.790] - I 
And they just told us about all these kind of programs that are available for us. And in in which way that 
Skylab could be helping us. So I would say it wasn't as much as we were looking for the help, but they 
were kind enough to approach us instead. 
[00:10:26.890] - P 
Yeah, that's well that's nice. And then how? How - I mean - you still had to fill out all the applications 
and stuff or did it work differently because I found like all the information they wanted to hand in and 
that takes documents and budget plans and everything like this.  
[00:10:48.610] - I 
yeah, we that for the most part we did that ourselves. And what we did was we filled out the form as 
you said with all the budget and, you know, the what what's called project, the project itself, described 
the project itself. And when we're finished or when we were like 80 percent finished, we asked one of 
the staff which were in charge of the fund foundation, P°ol, to please have a look at it and tell us if 
there's anything missing or anything that was unclear that we need to clarify. And so they did Skylab 
didn't help us like they fill anything out for us, but instead they consulted us when we were like 80 
percent done.  
[00:11:44.730] - P 
Yeah. So there was a huge support still that you could build on and that was it. Okay. And then the 
selection. So you handed in all your documents, then they pitched it to other to all these funds and then 
did you have to meet the funds or did you just got an email like this is your aproved. 
[00:12:04.370] - I 
Yeah, it's the latter that like you said. So they they went around it went on for like - I want to say like 
two or three months after we had it in our application and then we just got the message and before a 
little bit before that they actually told us that this year the budgeting wasn't that it what's it called. They 
couldn't budget the funds that freely. So we might we might get skipped. So it wasn't guaranteed or 
anything that we would get the fund, the funding granted at all. But then two weeks later they told us 
==PAGE:95==
Appendix 
87 
that. Yeah, but we found the foundation. I don't remember the name of it. I just remember it as Skylab 
funding. And they and they just told me: Well, congratulations, boys. We we managed to get this 
foundation which are which is interested in the idea and which wanted to help you guys. So here's 
146000 DKK. 
[00:13:15.490] - P 
Okay. And did you ever meet the sponsor? Or talked to the sponsor or anything.  
[00:13:20.590] - I 
Not at all. That that all of that, Skylab took care of.  
[00:13:25.960] - P 
Well, interesting. And what have you done with the funding did you allocate it to a specific thing, or 
was it just, I don't know, running around capital? 
[00:13:37.290] - I 
We used it for a couple of things. First of all, product development. I mean, we are a hardware medtech 
startup. So there's a lot of development ongoing and a lot of the cost went there as well. And also, as I 
said before, the patent itself, we are also aiming and we also use some of it and so help us fund budget 
for the patent itself. And yeah, mostly that's where we used those money for. And there might be some 
overlaps with, let's say, some overhead or other smaller things, but primarily was product development, 
the hardware side of things, which is also what we applied to the foundation for. 
[00:14:32.280] - P 
So, you would say that the things you said, you're going to use it. You use it for it.  
[00:14:37.430] - I 
Yeah.  
[00:14:38.340] - P 
OK. And how long did it take until you need, needed like new funding after you got that one? Or how 
long did it take until you got new one provided. 
[00:14:49.860] - I 
I mean, the thing with startups is you can never have too much capital, right?  
[00:14:55.410] - P 
I know 
[00:14:56.360] - I 
 but soft-funding. So as soon as we got the grant from Skylab Fund, then we basically I mean, we 
celebrated like for a day or two and and right back into fund raising. And we also got the what's called 
micro microgrant, I think in English it's called we got that. And we also, as I said before, we are currently 
some other funds, such as Otto Bruuns - I'm sorry - it's a little bit confusing switching between Danish 
and English. And so we didn't wait that long. I mean, it was like immediatIy. We we had to apply for 
other things because because in the budgeting, as you said, we applied for the hardware development 
from the Skylab funding, but there are all kinds of fees and expenses attached to the whole project. So 
such as software, such as the legal rights and all the things which Skylab, which we didn't apply for 
within the Skylab Foundation, we had to get from other foundations. 
 
==PAGE:96==
Appendix 
88 
[00:16:18.220] - P 
But so far you've only relied on soft funding and you haven't gone into hard funding like the 
venture capital line.  
[00:16:26.280] - I 
Yeah. Yeah. We wanted too, because since the team consists of a lot of engineers. So the whole product 
development thing, it's it's within our expertise. So that the cost for developing that it would know what 
we have to know how we also have the capital now to develop the products in-house which you could 
keep the the whole budget at a bare minimum. So that's why we decide to. I believe this is what you call 
bootstrapping. So we just get a lot of soft funding within the company and and. Yeah, then we'll see. 
And when it is necessary to get investing or venture capital or all these other options, financial options 
as well. And I must say that we are almost at that point now. 
[00:17:24.740] - I 
I think logical wise and also just to be honest there, they're getting soft funding, it is a rather hard route 
to go. It is always - what's it called? - you're always going to get ask about questions like how legitimate, 
legitimate your company is and how far you've done this. And all of these things, you know, that they 
always ask you these things.  
[00:17:59.030] - I 
We've faced so far, which we still haven't been granted yet. It's something called InnoBooster there. 
[00:18:05.650] - P 
Yeah, I heard about that one.  
[00:18:09.600] - I 
So what InnoBooster is. It's like the founder. They're all, they're all programs of the Innovation Fonden 
Denmark, which is, which is, that like the Danish government owned? And that, that foundation, the 
support they have, like these three kind of categories. So you have the easier category for applicants that 
seek funding for sub 500 000 DKK. And then there's the 500 000 to 1.5 million. And then there's that 
1.5 million and upwards. 
[00:18:54.790] - I 
So what we we've applied for this would be like the fourth time we had it in our first application. 
Basically the same time as we applied for the Skylab foundation. And we still haven't gotten it granted 
until now even. And it is we applied for 450 000 DKK there. And yeah, so far we still haven't got 
accepted by the Grant, but that is the basically go-to-place whenever you hear about soft funding in 
Denmark.And you know, every entreprenuer, they're gonna say, oh, you know, InnoBooster, you should 
get that. And on that point, I do agree because a lot of them have, what's called, they have helped a lot 
of other startups. 
[00:19:59.340] - I 
But med-tech start up, because that's still a, that's a more conservative kind of area, because, you know, 
you have to, you know, it's about these regulatory problems and  
[00:20:13.300] - P 
A lot of standards to fulfill. 
[00:20:15.730] - I 
Exactly. So I would say actually for med-tech startups, it's kind of harder for us to get the funding 
through that program. Whereas if you were asked if you have something more of a I mean, I've heard a 
==PAGE:97==
Appendix 
89 
lot about other projects getting granted, like drone projects and some kind of lamp and also like what's 
called the window that prevents children from what's got breaking the glasses. So so they don't hurt 
themselves. Those kind of projects, you know, they don't have the kind of restrictions and regulatory 
pathway such as the med-tech startups, such as ourselves. 
[00:21:00.730] - I 
So I've heard a lot of other med-tech startups, you know, having a hard time getting that funding or 
getting that grant through, because it's no matter what project you are doing, it's still the same format. 
It's still the same application. 
[00:21:14.390] - I 
But that, the depth and of the technology that you had to answer within that field, it gets very restricted 
because you can imagine describing a med-tech product and describing something that's more of a you 
know, let's say the lamp, it's easier to understand. And it doesn't require as much explanation, scientific 
proofs and such.  
[00:21:42.600] - P 
OK. So why would you want to get like this InnoBooster? Because it's so much money and it's like the 
last step to go for it. 
[00:21:53.140] - I 
Yeah. So basically what I would say is. Yeah. You know InnoBooster, I mean, this is more like a... 
Because everybody said, you know, every entrepreneur, they said the InnoBooster, you guys should 
definitely go get that. You know, it's easy soft-funding. And and it's a large amount. I mean, it is the, it 
is basically one of the largest soft-funding programs that there is. So, again, for. Because if you do not 
get that, then we'll have to seek funding through other methods, such as hard funding. 
[00:22:30.720] - I 
And at this stage, we still we still don't want to do it yet. But I mean, we're pretty close to to that deadline 
that if we do not get the InnoBooster, that then we have to think about other options. And, you know, 
start up again. You can never get too much money and... So that's, So that's why we are trying to get the 
InnoBooster. And also because it is one of the last. 
[00:22:59.470] - I 
So so how how I work is I've worked out a list of funds that are potential match for us. And then we just 
apply for those. Right. So this InnoBooster is like one of the one of the first that got into the list but what 
of the last that we still haven't gone through and all the other funds, they they basically we've already 
got them granted. So that is why we  
[00:23:27.320] - P 
It's also kinda like tick it off.  
[00:23:29.030] - I 
Yeah. Exactly. Exactly.  
[00:23:31.140] - P 
And then you said something about that you have to always have to prove that you're legitimate. How 
do you prove that? 
[00:23:39.030] - I 
That's the thing, right. So something like, you know, other what other funds that have funded you? 
Because that's that's like a very big thing within the startup community that if they can see that you have 
==PAGE:98==
Appendix 
90 
been funded by other, let's say, big foundation, then they will automatically think that, hey, these guys, 
they have been funded by, let's say Novo Nordisk Foundation, which is like a huge foundation within 
the life science business. So this guy may might be onto something. 
[00:24:16.180] - P 
OK. 
[00:24:18.540] - I 
And also like having a board director or a scientific board of, board of advice, advisory board, you know, 
having people that have been doing, that having doing that, the business within the within that field for 
a long time, you know, having those guy kind of backing you up within as a board member also helps 
to prove the legitimacy of the company. Basically. 
[00:24:52.940] - P 
Interesting. And for like for this kind of funding, did you like during the Skylab program, do you ever 
report any numbers to them? Did you or to the other funds? Do you have to report what are you doing 
with the money or is it? 
[00:25:10.690] - I 
That's the thing with Skylab funding. We ask them about the whole rule. You know the, do we have to 
report anything within the fiscal year or anything like that? Well, we got as a manser that back then was 
we only had to make a video as soon as we have developed the sleeves so that we can send it to Skylab, 
which then can report back to the foundation itself that, hey, these guys, they have used the money that 
you've granted them to develop these things that they apply for way back then. And that that is a very 
rare case of grant. I would say most grants do not do it like that. 
[00:25:59.200] - I 
What, well, we have experienced most is when you get a grant, they don't they don't pay any money to 
your bank account. Right. They just ask you to send in the invoice. 
[00:26:14.590] - P 
Oh, okay.  
[00:26:15.990] - I 
Yeah. So. So that they know that you have done the work and they would and would gladly pay for it. 
And that's the most part. And yeah. But there are also other funds that you have to do the basically the 
report and that's the current that's one of the grants that we are currently sitting on 215000 DKK from 
Nova Nordisk foundation. And they require a report final report three months after the accelerator 
program, which is like August of this year. 
[00:26:55.410] - P 
Okay. And the final report then includes your budget and what you've done and all this kind of 
information. 
[00:27:00.910] - I 
Exactly.  
[00:27:02.320] - P 
Okay. Interesting.  
==PAGE:99==
Appendix 
91 
[00:27:04.970] - I 
So I would say the different, different foundation have different methods of, you know. You know, like 
knowing what you have spent your money on, some requires that report, some requires the invoice and 
some just require a video that that tells them about what you have been doing. It's very different. I would 
say.  
[00:27:26.140] - P 
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. It's really interesting. OK. One sec. And for this kind of funding is was also like you 
haven't had any restrictions on what to use the money for. So you were just like this, your money and 
you go for it. And what would have happened if you couldn't send in the video because it didn't work, 
for example, you know that? 
[00:27:53.590] - I 
actually, I don't know. I do believe that because in the Skylab funding there aren't any legal papers to 
sign, for example, with the current Nova Nordisk Foundation You know, you have we had to sign 
agreements on on what would happen if they if Novo Nordisk Foundation deemed that the project wasn't 
using the money correctly. Then they would, they will have to have the legal power to require the money 
back from us so that we can pay them back. But that was not the that was not the situation with Skylab 
funding. They just basically gave us the money and they just told us that guys, just whenever you make 
the products or the prototypes, make a video, explain it and send it to us.  
[00:28:52.640] - P 
That's really free.  
[00:28:54.050] - I 
Yeah, that is free. 
[00:28:56.800] - P 
Yeah. OK. Yeah, I'm kinda at the end. Do you have any... One question: Did you meet any other, was 
there anything like, probably not but I better ask, like meeting of all these people that were founded by 
Skylab or I mean, you probably met them by running around in Skylab, so have you met other Startups 
supported by Skylab? 
[00:29:29] – I 
Yeah, of course, yeah, Skylab because Skylab is a place where all kind of startups are there. So we have 
met other Startups there that have actually commercialized there products which were founded by 
Skylab as well. So, yeah, Skylab is also just a facility which facilitates all these startups because they 
have workshops, the machinery, 3D printers, let’s say very well equipped place for startups to be. I 
would say.  
[00:30:14] - P 
But there wasn’t like when you got the money it was not like you were invited to some kind of event 
where you could meet the other startups but it was rather like you can come by and then you meet 
someone. 
[00:30:29] – I 
Not specifically to meet other startups that had been funded but we have been invited to all kind of 
events you know like conferences we also had to do like a presentation for like 30 insurance companies 
who visited Skylab at that time so we got the honour to do that. So Skylab always tries to almost what’s 
it called I wouldn’t say its advertise as such but it’s a little bit of combination of advertising the startups 
that they helped  fund but also help the startups to connect to other people, relevant people, through 
these kind of events, so it’s like a two purpose fold move that skylab makes, to show off their startups 
==PAGE:100==
Appendix 
92 
and to help us networking basically. But there were never like some kind of big ceremony: hey, so now, 
let’s celebrate all the startups that Skylab has funded. It’s more like a more productive you know we got 
this and this event and we think it would be of interest for you guys would you like to do this. And then 
it’s always just yes and no. And for most times it will always be a yes. 
[00:32:10] – P 
Yeah, I mean, it’s also a great chance. 
[00:32:14] – I 
Yes, of course. 
[00:32:16] – P 
Good.  I am kinda done with my questions. Is there anything, we haven’t talked about that you think is 
important to say to soft-funding? 
[00:32:30] – I 
To Soft-funding, I mean, Skylab is great, that’s as much as I can say. You know a lot of it felt like we 
didn’t have to put it that much work but part of it has to do with what we had achieved beforehand 
because before we got the Skylab funding, we won a competition in the US in Silicon Valley, so that’s 
what I am talking about when I talk about legitimacy of a company. So when they see you have this 
kind of achievement then they will just be like these guys are serious about it. It also makes sense. But 
it kinda makes it, but we were lucky, but we also won a competition. But what about the startups that 
have just started that don’t have this kind of reputation, that kind of network, it would be really hard for 
them to get funding in my opinion.  
[00:33:47] – P 
Okay, interesting. So you kinda say that most of the grants are kinda oriented to the startups that have 
already legitmated themselves somehow? 
[00:33:58] – I 
Yeah, basically, because that’s always gonna be the case with foundations. Because they want to know 
that their money is spent well and they want their name on the successful startups somehow. So that 
they can say we helped these guys. It is understandable but it makes it harder for the startups that are 
still relatively new and still haven’t accomplished anything but still has the potential and if they never 
get the funding because no startups gonna be able to survive if no funding is in place no matter how 
good the idea is and it is just really really hard for them to get the funding if they have not yet proofen 
themselves even though they might have the potential to be the next unicorn startup the next 3 Shape or 
whatever it could be. But such is the world 
[00:35:09] – P 
Okay, well then, thank you very much for the interview. Can I contact you in case, I have any outstanding 
questions? 
[00:35:20] – I 
Sure! 
[00:35:25] – P 
Thank you for the interview. Bye! 
[00:35:30] – I 
Bye, thanks as well.  
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Appendix 
93 
10.1.4. SSI-2 
Before the recording, the interviewee was asked for his consent to the recording. There was also a talk 
about the product of the company and what the interviewee is doing, however, to anonymize this 
interview, this content was removed. The minutes start right after the consent. 
P (3:36):  
Ah okay, that’s probably also why you help me now. Probably. And are you already selling this or is it 
a prototype? 
I (3:49):  
Yeah, this is a prototype and hopefully we will be able to sell it in a few months. We’ve been set back 
a little by the corona problems and also some cashflow shortages but hopefully we will be up and running 
in a few. We are supposed to have a meeting about this soon but I think maybe one month? We very 
much depend on cashflow of course. 
P (4:21):  
I hope you find some cash soon. 
I (4:25):  
We actually hope to get an answer from InnoBooster this week. So that would be very interesting. 
P (4:34):  
So you applied to InnoBooster lately. 
I (4:42):  
We got an InnoBooster, let me think, last year and then we’ve been able to live from that and some other 
money we got up until now. Now we are kinda running out. 
P (5:01):  
And it was all grants that you got so far? 
I (5:04):  
Yah, oh, I have a list actually of the grants we gotten. So first we, so there is a lot of Skylab of course, 
Kai Houmann Nielsen Fond 77000 DKK from them in June 2017, when we started the company and 
then we got 300000 DKK from InnoBooster in 2018, the end of 2018, then we got some money from 
the BioInnovation Institute so that was 250 000 DKK in March 2019 and then we had Otto Bruuns Fond 
55000 DKK, MicroAlgae 50 000 both in January and then we just received the Nimbs Fond Grant 150 
000 DKK and that’s the grants we’ve been able to get so far. 
P (6:15):  
Well, that’s a lot. 
I (6:17):  
Yeah, we’ve been very lucky and very good at getting money from soft-funds. Hopefully, we can keep 
doing that because we are really at that point where, you know it’s really hard to get Angel investors 
interested if you haven’t sold one product. So, you just need to sell one product and then you can really 
get some more solid funding but until that you need to find that small funds to live from. 
P (6:49):  
Yeah, and, wait, what makes you so good in like getting these funds like how does it usually work and 
where do you find them? 
==PAGE:102==
Appendix 
94 
I (7:05):  
I think the reason why is because I have done that before. I’ve fundraised for how would you call them 
not companies but organisations before like for example ITEM back when they haven’t had any money. 
I did ITEM in 2015 which is now called the BIOBuilders. That thaught me a lot about how to write grant 
applications and what is good and what is bad, how do people who write or read these. And then I just 
write all of the people who could be interested in donating some money. And if possible I also do a 
phone call with them to see if they are still interested and if we fit and then I just write a funding 
application. And you know I have a lot of different templates that I use to write to them. 
P (8:15):  
And what are they like interested in 
I (8:20):  
It really varies a lot. It’s kinda like you have to give them the feeling there is a really high potential and 
you are the person you are the one person that can make this happen. We have everything you are really 
the contributing factor. And of course that is a half-truth but that’s kinda the world of funding. 
P (9:03):  
yeah, I guess so. Okay, and, okay, so, sorry now I lost my train of thought. Okay, and if you then apply, 
let’s say you compare the Skylab funding for example to other soft-funding. Is it harder to get for 
example in comparison to InnoBooster and others? 
I (9:41):  
Well, I don’t know, I guess, you could say it is maybe a bit easier because we have a relationship to 
some of the people at Skylab and then they read our applications and they do not think who are these 
people, why do they think they can do this. You do not have that much of this, I don’t know how to say 
this. You know, it means that probably you can come with some more grant claims or  you can come 
with more – they just know you and that’s very important. InnoBooster they don’t know us and many 
of the other funds they don’t know us and we don’t know how they think. I’d say there is kind of these 
different boxes of funds so there is the completely philantrophic fonds where they just want you to make 
a difference so the things you have to have an influence on is how do I influence the entire society, and 
you have kinda the more business minded fonds that they kinda wanna give money just at one shot. So 
if you give me this money right here like 100 000 then the business will be profitable in so and so on. 
And there it is kinda more, they have to feel confident with you have an idea of you are at step A and 
define step A and how to get to step B and how many steps are there. That’s the human, angel investors 
and stuff like that or maybe also venture capitalists. And I have not cracked them yet. It didn’t go so 
well with them yet.  
P (11:59):  
Have you talked to any yet? 
I (12:02):  
To maybe 5? Or maybe 5? I think there have been around maybe 5 people who have been seriously 
interested and then for one or another reason did not invest money. Or they didn’t really uphold to other 
standards. You know there you really give them equity. And that really fundamentally changes the game 
because with the soft-funding they just give you money and you just put them on the slide for the next 
five years whatever. But if they really become a part of the company especially if they want a say in the 
decision that you make then this is a really big decision. So the person has to be good for the company 
and it has to be worth it money-wise. Which of course there are two things how much money can you 
become it and two how desparate are you. 
==PAGE:103==
Appendix 
95 
P (13:26):  
Yes, of course, it is probably always harder when you are at the end of the cash flow. Okay, and what 
do you do with the funding? With grant funding. 
I (13:43):  
it really depends what we are allowed to do with the funding. Because you know some funds say, well, 
you can use the money for developing but you cannot use it for salary and so. Or for patenting but not 
something else. Like you always make a budget and there you say I am going to use this money for 
patenting and this money for developing. But primarly, we use it for this stocking up on products we 
need for developing and testing. Those are the main expenses right now. That probably eats maybe 95% 
of the money that we get. 
P (13:51):  
Okay, and if you make a budget. You usually do what you said before. So you make a budget and do 
you do what you said in the budget or then it changes and then you need the money for something else? 
I (14:13):  
You know it is kinda hard to make sure that the budget is correct. You know it can always change and 
then you thought you needed the money for this but then you need it for that. It really changes 
organically. But we haven’t had any problems with that with the funds and any aspect of it. So, but yeah 
they do change. But if it is just a small fund like 30 000 DKK then we typically do not contact them 
except there is one grant that we do not actually get the money. You have to send the receipt to them so 
they then pay the receipt which is probably a really smart way to do things if you have one big payment 
but typically it can also be really problematic. You know, we buy a lot of arduinos on Amazon and there 
it is really hard to just send one really big invoice to them. You can use this money over a really long 
period of time, you cannot just buy 10 000 arduinos. It varies. 
P (16:54):  
Okay, so if you go for Skylab and the Skylab funding, how what else comes with the Skylab funding. 
Are you regularly meeting with them? 
I (17:18):  
Well, it’s of course there is the exposure. Everytime you get money it’s always nice to say that you got 
money because that kinda shows that you are able to generate something that has a value. But we don’t 
typically meet that much with the people. I’d say mostly because I haven’t had any concrete questions 
that I would like to ask them. But I stay in touch also because I like to call back to the funds once in a 
while also just to say: hey you gave us money and that and that time and we are still doing very well. 
Because you know we got something upfront and now we are paying back to the funds by reporting so 
they also support other entrepreneurs in the future. Wow, you gave money to that awesome startup – 
which is ours – and then this is still going to prosper and probably it’s gonna be giant and generating a 
lot of growth in Denmark. And then it makes them even more interested in helping startups. So that is 
something I do sometimes. Once.  
P (18:56):  
Once? 
I (18:57):  
Once a year.  
P (18:58):  
Once a year. Okay. And if you say you call back and you are calling back to Skylab do you call back to 
Skylab or are you calling back to the fund behind that actually paid the money? 
==PAGE:104==
Appendix 
96 
I (19:18):  
Typically, I do it through Pal. 
P (19:20):  
Ah yeah. 
I (19:22):  
From Skylab, so with some of the funds actually the skylab funds it’s mainly through Pal. That’s also 
good because within a startup there is good and bad things that happen and you have to be very positive 
and communicate the people the positive side and then if the negative sides are very serious then you 
also have to think about telling them. So it’s about telling the winning stories to Pal and the others. 
P (20:09):  
Okay and like if you talk to Pal you only talk him the good stories so it is not like a consulting session? 
I (20:34):  
If I have some concrete questions so like for example how do I get more how do I contact VCs so for 
example before I am running out of money, I would typically tell him that upfront. So if there is 
something I want to discuss with them because they have knowledge in some areas that I don’t then I’ll 
be upfront about it. It is not like I am hiding things from them. You know I meant more like you have 
to show the positive sides to these kind of stakeholders and investors. Not that you do not talk about the 
negative sides. Just if you weigh them up against each other there is just so much more negative things 
because there is so many that you haven’t solved and there is so many problems that people would be 
scared of.  
P (21:28):  
Yeah sure an early stage startup always is a high risk. I mean it’s always an investment in the long run 
that’s what I meant. Okay, usually a grant is for a certain period, isn’t it? 
I (22:01):  
Oh, I can’t remember. But yeah probably. 
P (22:14):  
So you said you usually call the funds but is there also anything you send to them? Is there like an end 
report to hand in? 
I (22:22):  
Not really. Well, it varies from fund to fund. But not from Skylab. 
P (22:36):  
okay, and so you get grants, you are talking to Skylab from time to time, did you also participate in an 
accelerators or incubators or something like that? 
I (23:03):  
We participated in BioInnovation and it’s NoVAnORDISK controlled program at Kobisk and they have 
an accelerator program called BAA I think Business Academic Academy. 
P (23:40):  
Yeah, I’ve heard about it. 
==PAGE:105==
Appendix 
97 
I (23:44):  
What have you heard about it? 
P (23:45):  
Well, a lot of people participating. It’s not like I heard any good or bad things. Okay, why? Is it that 
bad? 
I (24:00):  
No, I think, we were the very first people participating back then. It was very much, they were trying to 
find out which structure it was. So, it was not an accelerator program but a decelerator program. But 
they gave us. So I am not angry at them but I am happy they gave us money.  
P (24:40):  
Looking through my questions whether there is anything. And if you compare an accelerator and a grant, 
is it like did you feel, there is a lot of different other things that come with an accelerator are you missing 
these with a grant. Because it doesn’t have all this consultancy and other stuff? 
I (25:03):  
Well, I think, we are kinda in a unique situation as we have a bit of a different team then most other 
DTU startups. So I am the youngest person in the company by far and most of the other persons are 
from the industry. So there is me the CEO who started the company had the idea and blablabla there is 
one other guy who has done pretty much every job you can imagine and is very good at thinking 
creatively and is also from the DTU and is fully employed at the company. And then we have two people 
from the industry. One has a lot of experience from sales and one that has a lot of experience in sensor 
development mainly from the mining industry. So we are very different from other DTU startups there 
let’s say 70% of the team will be engineers and most of those engineers will all be the same type of 
engineers. So maybe you have three biotech people and one electrician and then they are trying to build 
a new AI platform. And those teams profit a lot from going out to these accelerator programs and then 
learning to understand this different mindset. But for us as we have many of these competences in house, 
it was not that much of a boost to our productivity, creativity or way of thinking so I’d say I was more 
scared of from the accelerator experience. So I was more scared of by it but I think many startups would 
be very helpful for them also just to learn how investors think blablabla. But I did before I met all the 
other people to start the company with I did the what’s it called European EVP European Venture 
Program. Also one of these institutes startups can do through Skylab and that was a great experience 
where I learnt a lot of these things you learn in an accelerator. So for me, it wasn’t that big of a benefit 
going through an accelerator and I don’t know if we are going to do this again. And much of the things 
like report by lawyers and stuff like that, we will need that in a few months but it’s not something we 
have a high need of right now. 
P (28:32):  
So as you are still in R&D somehow you need more money then like kinda consultancy and startup 
education 
I (28:40):  
Yeah we do not really need people from their field coming in and say oh we think you should do it like 
this. Well, that’s fine but we won’t. Some of these people at accelerators are just hired to talk and some 
of them do not know anything about what they are talking about and they are just going to confuse you. 
And that can be fine sometimes but if it is just like in the movie groundhop day where you are just 
constantly waking up and then it is just repeating again and again and again where you know there was 
one reason why you turned left and not right but you can’t remember what the reason is and now you 
are asked why you turned left and not right. And then you remember it because you recall it and you say 
it but then in a few weeks you are asked again. You know at some point it is not productive anymore.  
==PAGE:106==
Appendix 
98 
P (29:52):  
Makes sense. Okay, I guess, I think, I got to ask all my questions. Is there anything that you could think 
of about soft-funding that we have not yet talked about?  
I (30:04):  
Yes there is. Do you know any soft-funding opportunities coming up that I haven’t mentioned yet? 
P (30:35):  
Yes, so I was wondering, so I am from Germany and here it is very popular to apply for Climate KIC. 
It’s for climate startups but they also accept some that aren’t too much into climate saving.  
I (31:04):  
Not for them, as they are not doing things for the environment. 
P (33:00):  
Thank you for the interview.  
 
 
==PAGE:107==
Appendix 
99 
10.1.5. SSI-3 
Before the recording, the interviewee was asked for his consent to the recording. I anonymized 
information that could directly lead to the startup. 
 
[00:00:00.320] - I 
And then I send it to you because 
[00:00:03.470] - P 
 Thank you, thank you very much 
[00:00:07.770] - I 
You can do it in Skype or directly in Skype or? 
[00:00:10.910] - P 
 Yeah, you have a direct link in Skype where you can just record. 
[00:00:14.520] - I 
OK.  
[00:00:15.040] - P 
I wanted to record this meeting and then I googled of course before of how to do it in Google hangouts 
and they said it's really easy, but I can't find a button. 
[00:00:22.380] - I 
No, it's it's really minimalistic and I like that. But it seems like it's no easy way to record it as I see it 
anyways. 
[00:00:33.940] - P 
OK. Aynways, so you are doing as far as I read, you do something […] 
[00:00:48.050] - I 
 Yes, […]. Yeah.  
[00:00:50.380] - P 
OK. And how far are you with us so far? 
[00:00:55.830] - I 
We are in the beta phase. We have some testing clients and we have been working on it for a year 
building our algorithms. And of course, it's very tech heavy and we have to test the tech and always 
update and find new algorithms and figure out what's the what's if it works? What's the efficiency? 
What's the accuracy? 
[00:01:19.830] - I 
And also to find the product fit on the market and on what industries and what markets we can provide 
the value for the client. So we get the the most benefit out of the technology itself. And what is the really 
the packaging? So what's the product? […]? […]? 
 
==PAGE:108==
Appendix 
100 
[00:01:56.970] - I 
Or is it more insurance legal or something else? So we're trying to figure out what market and what 
product we can provide based on our technology. So that's, uh, that's you know, that's where we are. 
That's where we were before, working with German media companies and also some smaller, bigger 
digital platforms for different purposes. Some of them are for image sharing or freelance photographers 
or for for media companies. And some of them for like even, you know, social media and that kind of 
stuff, or just in general fact checking on the Internet.So those are the segments.  
[00:02:41.580] - P 
A lot. 
[00:02:42.820] - I 
And we are in the in the in the beginning of figuring out exactly what market we want to sell for and 
what we can charge, you know, to gain the most money and growth in the shortest amount of time. So 
it's still in the in that phase and see where the problem really is. So is it like, you know, in general politics 
or is it more of a military or is it more of, you know, just pop culture? 
[00:03:05.820] - I 
Like, where do you where do you where do you […]? And where is has the biggest effect and what the 
emerging go kinds […]  where it will have the biggest effect or the biggest impact on. No, on on society 
or on online user and so on.  
[00:03:30.850] - P 
 Yeah, interesting. Therefore, you got a grand last year I read from Skylab, do you have any connections 
to Skylab apart from the grant? 
[00:03:43.180] - I 
Yes. Yes. So the two other co-founders, they are from DTU. They have, this is their last semester at 
DTU. And we started in December 2018. And that's where we had the, me from CBS or just graduating 
from CBS and these two guys from DTU. And yeah, I mean, we were not officially a part of DTU as 
such or Skylab. Like we were not like an incubator member or like an actual startup. 
[00:04:19.710] - I 
But I mean, we kind of became that and we, the guys, of course, knew about the Skylab funding. And 
you have to be a DTU student to apply and they did. And in, pardon, it was like the fall. So the last 
semester that they applied and I think we received it around October, September, October. Yeah, more 
like October. Um, and it was we applied the whole application process. I can check if - maybe you know 
the numbers better, but, um, we have a list where we.  
[00:05:01.940] - P 
Which number? How much you got? 
[00:05:03.570] - I 
No, no, no, no. When. Like what was the deadline or what date we applied?  
[00:05:08.350] - P 
Yeah, I know. it's enough if you say it was in the second half of the year.  
[00:05:14.220] - I 
Yes. Yes. Yes. So it was.  
==PAGE:109==
Appendix 
101 
[00:05:18.640] - P 
Yeah. And how did that work? So what are you doing with the money? I guess you have additional other 
money. 
[00:05:29.100] - I 
Yeah. In the last year may that could be interesting for you, We got the InnoFounder, which is the the 
accelerator or incubator. They don't even know. I don't know. It's like it's like a program that is for 
twelve months, which sounds like a lot, but it's not very intensive or anything. But we get 15000 every 
month and we've got a flat.  
[00:05:56.080] - P 
DKK? 
[00:05:56.220] - I 
Yes. And we got thirty thousand as a Grant and get 15000 every month for twelve months. So that's 
what the Innofunder looks like and that was in May. Um, we have applied this is for the this is for one 
year. So you have every year you have two batches and we are I think batch 6 or batch five that started 
in September. Yeah. And every month you have two calls with your mentor and one kind of, usually 
one workshop that is like a one or two day workshop about a specific topic, and that's in Copenhagen at 
BlockHub. And we have like some sort of talking about something like ideation or designing something 
or developing something or, you know, pitching communication, hiring and so on. 
[00:06:58.680] - I 
And that was in May and we started in September, as I said. And this is the graduate, you know, founder, 
graduate. So since I'm a graduate, I could apply and I was accepted personally. But you can also choose 
if you get this, 15000 every month as a salary. So you tax as a salary and you get it on your own bank 
account or you will get it on the company's bank account. This we have one on the company bank.So 
that's, uh, that's one of the sources. 
[00:07:27.960] - I 
And we also got the micro grant the same time in nineteen May, about eighty thousand. And that's a 
little bit funny. So it's it's really I don't I don't like the structure that micro grant works because you have 
to hire another company to do the work for you so you can spend it on a contractor and what you do you 
take the eighty thousand that is with the tax and basically you have to apply by doing a budget that is 
basically legal help. Twenty thousand development. Thirty five thousand something. Something. Fifteen 
thousand. And then you have eighty thousand. And then once you get it, it's a lot of administration and 
sending invoices and then they they pay the invoices so they go you send the invoice, they'd be the 
invoice. And so that's like a lot of emailing back and forth. And then: can we get the money for this and 
can be paid that and are we over the line? And some I think even like you have some part that you have 
to pay yourself and that there is also we got a check of like eight thousand once the whole thing was 
over. And that is meaning that we have to pay part of it ourselves and that it's really weird structure and 
we don't really get a lot of we don't get money out of it and we can spend it wisely, but we have to spend 
it in Denmark where it's a lot of you know, it's you have like a session with a lawyer and you pay twenty 
thousand like, you know, it's very expensive and it's not a lot of value that we get out of it. 
[00:09:16.870] - I 
It would be a lot more value to to just spend it in like development or other services. And I get to that 
question like the DTU Skylab funding we spend mostly on salaries and we still spend it on salaries. And 
for for this reason, like Denmark is especially good because you've got the SU and we could get two 
guys to work part time, which is more or less 40 hours and a month and both from DTU and also the 
two co-founders can concentrate only on this next to their studies. So they also get a salary from it like 
the just the minimum to go. So get the SU and also be able to to study to it. So that's... 
==PAGE:110==
Appendix 
102 
[00:10:10.200] - P 
 Wait, wait, one second. So what you basically did with the Skylab funding is you hired student 
assistants? 
[00:10:16.480] - I 
student developers, junior developers from DTU. Yeah. So that was two of them who are basically we 
are funding their work by the Skylab funding. But also, the co-founders are working in the company 
officially. And they are getting their salary or so from that. So it's basically four people working part 
time. 
[00:10:43.020] - P 
OK. I thought you can't spend this kind of funding on salaries. 
[00:10:47.240] - I 
That's a good point. They are not. So that's the opposite of micro grant. 
[00:10:53.390] - P 
OK.  
[00:10:54.900] - I 
And they are not checking on us. So that's the other part of it. So don't tell them or I can remain 
anonymous, but it's mostly going into salaries, but also, of course, other expenses. 
[00:11:09.020] - P 
Yeah, I won't tell them, no.  
[00:11:11.770] - I 
So there are definitely other expenses. And that was also funny like we got the funding and they were 
like, send us our bank account. And then we sent it and the money was there the next week. And since 
then, I mean, we have been collaborating like closely with them. So it's not that. But it's not like expected 
that we'd do any kind of accounting or anything for them. So we are not sending like this is what we 
spend the money on our. This is why we are using it for. Or do you approve this? Do you approve that? 
No, it's completely up to us. And that's I think it's really good. And maybe that's why they are not 
checking what we spend on because they obviously would expect us if they chose us based on the 
application and interview process, they would expect us to like spend it wisely. And that's why probably 
we got the funding, because they are not expecting us to, you know, pay ourselves only and smuggle 
the money or whatever. 
[00:12:09.800] - I 
But we actually invested into the business and the startup and could grow based on the the amount. And 
thus we are, of course, like in Germany and I'm in Germany, but also based in Germany. The guys have 
to come here for investor meetings or workshops. I have to go to Copenhagen. So. So for the for the 
travelling, it's pretty convenient. And also to get new gear like laptops or CPU you and renting CPU you 
from from Google or Amazon for that also. 
[00:12:41.960] - I 
So all kinds of. It's not that hardware heavy, but also for for software and the investing into into cloud 
computing. For us, it's very important because we are pretty much based on, uh, on, uh, on cloud 
computing and all kinds of, um, all kinds of AI related heavy computing stuff. Um, what else? Yeah. I 
mean, basically, that's it. I mean, we are a startup, so we don't we of course like have expenses for 
accounting, like, uh, hired an accountant after. 
==PAGE:111==
Appendix 
103 
[00:13:18.740] - I 
And we have to do like the VAT, the monthly accounting and also the the yearly bookkeeping. So for 
that is of course, very convenient. And there are smaller expenses for for accounting software and you 
know, everything that's kind of the the basic requirements. If you you're a Danish company to report 
first cat and register stuff on the VIAC and all kinds of stuff like that. So for that it's also convenient so 
that we can have a payment system, a salary system and and pay salaries like automatically register it 
with taxes. 
[00:13:55.460] - I 
And that's all kinds of integration. So the boring accounting stuff can be automated. And for that, of 
course, be it like an expenditure, maybe 2000 DKK a month or something like that. So that's another 
part of it.  
[00:14:11.880] - P 
Okay. Um, two questions. How many people do actually work for you? It sounds like you're paying so 
many salaries and stuff? 
[00:14:20.870] - I 
Right. So we have four people on part time salaried sort of say like Student Part-Time Workers, 
including the two co-founders. We have, uh, two contractors based in Hungary working with backend 
development and the front end development. And those are basically paid per per month or per three 
months on a on a - They they are not doing it full time. But, uh, yeah, they're working also with us and 
helping out. They are more senior so we couldn't even like we don't want to pay them because they 
would be expensive or more expensive. But they are helping a lot and working part time with us. And 
part of the team just as the others. And, um. Yeah, that's it.  
[00:15:12.130] - P 
Mm hmm. It sounds quite structured. 
[00:15:15.590] - I 
It's very it's very much the development also. So once we have more funding, we would get someone 
on the business side also help me. But so far we have been investing into development a lot. 
[00:15:27.700] - P 
Yeah. Well, it makes sense. You can't sell an unfinished product.  
[00:15:33.360] - I 
Exactly, exactly.  
[00:15:36.370] - P 
And then you say you work with Skylab a lot. How does that work? 
[00:15:38.730] - I 
 Yes. So since the guys returned from their exchange in January, we got, uh, like a place in Skylab to sit 
and collaborate. That's really nice because we can have, uh, very like, you know, collaborate, basically. 
So it's not through video calls or whatever, but the guys can sit down and meet like three or four times 
a week and and really work in-depth with the product and think and develop and and help each other. 
So for that reason, we we kind of applied for a desk and got it since February. 
 
==PAGE:112==
Appendix 
104 
[00:16:19.820] - I 
On the other hand, we have been talking to P°al and their staff about possibilities, applying for for other 
stuff and, you know, collaborating with other startups or other companies, getting contacts to people at 
DTU who can help us as a as a mentor or advisor or help with different applications, uh, for for funding 
or so. And also being part of the Skylab incubator, which is pretty, it's pretty much like, I don't know, 
the guys probably know better, but I don't think it's like that intense or anything. It's basically having an 
office space at Skylab and working from there. So it's pretty convenient because the guys are anyways 
on campus so they can sit down and work from there. So that's how we collaborate. And now we are 
also discussing possibilities to do workshops for DTU students at Skylab to to educate about synthetic 
content and so on. So that's something that we are going to look into, how we can benefit by, you know, 
kind of getting to know people and showing ourselves and how they can benefit from from learning 
about it and maybe even get a job and so on. So that's something else that we work on. So I think those 
are the main ones.  
[00:17:53.320] - I 
And of course, it's very nice to to be to be around and and have, you know, kind of up to date information 
about the our possibilities or options so what we have at Skylab and DTU, so hopefully for further like 
academic collaboration and. And now there is a there is a program for, I think, PhD students or 
something that is just starting. 
[00:18:20.190] - I 
And of course, it's the corona is making it a little more inconvenient because you have to do it in video 
calls or whatever. But we can get some PhD advisors and researchers to help us in a way and work with 
us for a given period of time. So that's something that we can we can gain from being part of the Skylab. 
[00:18:45.900] - P 
And like the sponsors from your Skylab Funding, I heard it's Danish *** Fond, have you ever met them 
or your friends have met them? 
[00:18:57.910]  
Yeah, I met them. And also the the other guys met them. And of course, the the two other co-founders 
were in […] and […] at the time. But we had the presentation that we had to do. And that was like a 
short presentation. And they had some questions. And then we had like us like a ceremony at the same 
day, like an announcement that we received the funding and that was announced by their representative. 
And then we had like a small event at, uh, in Copenhagen and in the inner city and just like a more 
formal event where we could go and and there were some, you know, some like short description of all 
the all the startups and all the other people that got funding from them. So that's also where we met. 
[00:19:55.120] - P 
Interesting. So you also met the others that got to same grant as you did? 
[00:19:59.220] - I 
Yes, yes. Yes, yes. And some of them are also of course, it was funny because one part was startups and 
the other part was more art, artists and art. So it was, because this fund, like the sponsoring. They have 
a partnership with DTU and they have a partnership with someone else, probably like some arts related 
organization. So it was a little bit of a mix of of young techie people and artists on the other side. 
[00:20:28.970] - I 
But there was like half an hour and everybody just da-dam-da-dam gets this much da-dam-da-dam. They 
have this much. And that was funny all in Danish. So that was that was it. But it was good. So we didn't 
have to do a speech or anything and we could get some champagne and then leave. That was a few days 
after the after the pitches. And since then that was. That was it. That has been it. Yeah.  
==PAGE:113==
Appendix 
105 
[00:21:04.300] - P 
And you know. Have you ever talked to them again since then? 
[00:21:08.750] - I 
Mm. No I don't think so. No. I mean we have been in Skylab and they are the the actual ones who are 
being in touch with them but no personnally no.  
[00:21:22.940] - P 
And do you know that. I mean I think it lasts six months the grant or  you are supposed to spend all the 
funding within six months?  
[00:21:29.930] - I 
Yeah.  
[00:21:32.300] - P 
Are those already over. No. Not yet probably.  
[00:21:35.470] - I 
Not just yet I think.  
[00:21:37.590] - P 
Okay. Do you know if you have to record anything soon? 
[00:21:41.450] - I 
I'm I have a suspicion that we will have to send in something formal, but I don't expect it to be that 
formal. It's more I think it's more for themselves for accounting purposes. So, I mean, we will be 
informed by Skylab if they require anything, probably. But I also don't remember them explicitly saying 
it or sending an email or anything, or if they did, it was for the the other guys because they are the 
contact people. 
[00:22:10.610] - I 
I'm not 100 percent sure. Yeah, I have an email. Yeah, it says with the within the next weeks or so, you 
will hear from one of us and ask to set up a few informal status meetings during the next six months or 
so. Did not exactly happen. All right. It's a pretty informal because that the guys are always at Skylab 
so they can just meet up and and talk. And P°al, who is the one of the one of the... 
[00:22:46.160] - P 
Yeah. I talked to him. 
[00:22:46.580] - I 
And the Christoffer. So they are always around Skylab and they are pretty up to date on our progress 
and what we are doing. Yeah. It's, uh. Yeah, they are. They know what we are up to and how we are 
developing.  
[00:23:06.990] - P 
Yeah. And so, like, what are you doing? Like what? What? What's next for your startup? So you're at 
your accelerator and then? 
[00:23:15.350] - I 
So we will officially be finished with the first part of the accelerator visit the the actual accelerator. So 
that's a hundred days since November. We finished in February. Now we have 100 more days to stay in 
==PAGE:114==
Appendix 
106 
the office space, you know. And. The goal would be to get investors on board by May, June, and also 
we are in progress to get some or apply for InnoBooster in Denmark and also European Union funding. 
So we that's Horizon 2020. That would be in the next few months that we are we applied in March, so 
we would get results throughout April and also for the InnoBooster. It's an ongoing progress but we are 
submitting this week and expecting answer in April and also discovering there are options for us in 
Berlin. 
[00:24:13.750] - I 
It's called ibb, the Investment Bank Berlin. And they have some programs for startups based in Berlin. 
And we're also collaborating with Extra Springer and Humboldt University to to to do this research 
together. And that would be by September or something. So that's a little bit longer term. But we are 
working on a on a paper to submit. So those are the next steps funding wise. And depending on how the 
economy is going to turn out, we would look into getting more testers or companies. 
[00:24:50.620] - I 
And also in we are in contact with Facebook and and Google. So see how we can partner with them, of 
course, or even get funding from them or just the partnership. But those are the the next steps. And of 
course, it's very much up in the air. But we'll figure out how how things develop and what we can do.  
[00:25:13.290] - P 
Yeah, pretty interesting things. Yeah. I think, I know. Wait, so you said you're looking into new 
financing, but that's still like that's mostly like grants and maybe this ibb thing and you are not going 
[00:25:34.340] - I 
Yeah, of course. I mean, we of course we would like to use the, you know, soft money as long as it's 
available, as long as we have the chance. And I think we have a very much, uh, since our mission or our 
vision and the technology itself is like has a impact or has like an effect on society and has this societal 
part that is easy to argue that it's useful and even like the European Union or whatever has, should invest 
into it because it's gonna be a growing problem and we're gonna solve a problem for them. Um, that's 
why I think we have a very good profile for soft funds. Um, yeah, but of course we are looking into into 
getting investors on board, but also we very much focus on getting strategic investments. So it's not just 
some random VC, but we actually won their support want their network to go to the US or get connected 
to other companies. 
[00:26:38.380] - I 
And that's why we are also talking to investors and like mixed funding in Denmark is one of them who's 
a VC but they are connected also to Innovation Fund. And you're also talking to some German investors 
who have a network in the US and are well-connected. Um, so on the we see a lot of strategic value 
having investors and we seize on the on the hard money side. And we wouldn't just give up because for 
for the hard money we would we would do it to grow faster and develop faster. 
[00:27:16.460] - I 
Otherwise we can just sit around and wait for the for the soft money to come in and apply and apply and 
apply. And, you know, in the end, maybe we'll get a few million. But to to grow really fast and have the 
opportunity to to grow and go to the US. And when all the corona and everything is over, then actually 
have money and actually invest it into growth. Well, that's something that we kind of see the value of. 
[00:27:42.280] - I 
So we have a certainty that we will get money and not just wait around for European Union funding or 
Danmark funding or Germany funding, but actually have have money and be certain that we can spend 
it and hire and grow. That's the logic. And that's, uh. That's yeah. I mean I have no idea how it's gonna 
turn out, but, uh, those are our hopes for the next few months.  
==PAGE:115==
Appendix 
107 
[00:28:10.760] - P 
Yeah. Thanks for sharing them. Yes, I think that's everything I wanted to know. Yeah. Can I send you 
an e-mail if anything important comes. 
[00:28:24.590] - I 
Please, please do. If you have any questions, let me know.  
[00:28:28.610] - P 
OK. Thanks a lot for spending your time. Yeah. Could you please send me a recording? 
[00:28:37.200] - I 
Yeah, I will. I will share with your DTU email? Yeah. Yeah. I think I'll get it. All right.  
[00:28:44.830] - P 
Thank you. Take care.  
[00:28:46.970] - I 
Have a nice day.  
[00:28:48.540] - P 
You too.  
[00:28:49.570] - I 
Bye. 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
Appendix 
108 
10.2. Interviews conducted at the Initiative for Industrial Innovation 
Interviews that start or end without a proper introduction or ending, included anonymized 
personal or private information that was shortened by the author. 
 
10.2.1. Moritz von Klot 
[00:01:19.120]  
No, it fits. The other was interesting too, but more for me. Above all, what you are doing right now is 
interesting for me. 
[00:01:33.820] - I 
At the moment, I am officially an investment manager and my job at the initiative is that I also approach 
teams. And that's all, so to speak, from deal origination to due diligence, where you then take a closer 
look at the teams and then introduce the team in the investment committee meeting, and then later on 
the team tracking and the contractual details. 
[00:02:15.590] - I 
But my main focus now is on everything that is before the contract. Approach teams, approach various 
programs at the UnternehmerTUM. And there are many different programs at the UnternehmerTUM, 
such as XPreneurs or TechFounders. And these are Accelerator or Incubator programs, where we source 
most of our teams. That means we go there and talk to the teams and see if they fit into the investment 
focus. And that is actually my main activity at the moment, to find teams. Our investment focus is mainly 
in hardware-heavy teams in the industrial sector with B2B focus. 
[00:03:20.540]  
And then I do a pre-screening, where I look, do the teams fit us, does that fit? How far are they? Have 
you possibly already received investments? Because ideally, we want to be the very first investor in the 
initiative. And that means that we - Therefore, I have to make a brief digression on how the program is 
structured. On the one side we have the grants - prototyping grants and then we have preseed capital, 
and these are the two investment vehicles that we have. And you can imagine this a bit like a funnel, 
that is, we hand out the grants from 1000 to 10000 euros. Which is actually free money. And then there's 
PreSeed Capital on the other hand, where we hand out convertible loans. Convertible loans are loans, 
which are converted in the first round of investment. 50,000 euros. And that is then converted into 
equity. And there is the idea that we give these grants to a lot of teams, and hopefully they will continue 
to develop positively. We then hand out Pre Seed Capital to the best. That's kind of the idea behind it. 
[00:05:01.810] - I 
We also have a lot of cases where we give pre seed capital directly. But that's the idea behind it that we 
support the very small student projects. Any TUM students who are in the makerspace and we give them 
grants and hopefully they develop positively. And then we can continue to support them with a 
convertible loan. And now this is a bit of my job before the grant but also PreSeed Capital Investments 
you have to check: Does that even fit our initiative? For example, we mainly want to strengthen the 
entrepreneurship TUM - TUM ecosystem. 
[00:05:49.730]  
That means they have to have some relationship to the TUM, either they are TUM students or they are 
currently participating in one of our programs. Like Xpreneurs or TechFounders and then the technology 
has to be innovative, is that something new, what does their business model look like? How is the team 
==PAGE:117==
Appendix 
109 
set up? Do they work well together? Have they worked together for a while? What was my first 
impression? So, to give an impression of what I'm doing, just a little bit about my job. 
[00:06:33.170] - P 
That means you speak to them or you scan their applications? 
[00:06:38.480] - I 
So what we do, we actively approach these programs. For example, XPreneurs now has a batch with 17 
teams. We know that the teams that are at XPreneurs actually fit relatively well in terms of timing. These 
are relatively young teams, but they already have a business model. They may already have the first 
pilot customers; they are currently at the stage where they have actually been registered. Some teams 
have not yet been registered, but mostly it fits relatively well. 
[00:07:15.490] - I 
And then we go to these programs and, for example, make slots so that we can say that day at this time 
you can speak to us. And then they have to register for a slot. And then we just have short introduction 
slots where we talk to them briefly, introduce the program, but then also talk about their team, the 
solution or the product they are developing. And just then find out a little bit, whether there is a fit. And 
that's actually just getting to know each other and then, of course, further follow-on meetings, where 
you go into more detail or even send documents to where they should apply. And then point out what’s 
the process to get money from us. 
[00:08:22.590] - P 
And during these meetings and during what follows after you get to know each individual team, even if 
they only get a grant of a thousand euros, do you get to know each individual team personally and speak 
it and so on? 
[00:08:39.810] - I 
Not necessarily, these teams that we get to know through XPreneurs are often grant teams, but they are 
also often a bit further. It starts with 50,000 euro tickets. But for these grants there is also the case that 
we have not yet met the team and still give money. I want to explain briefly that we have different 
batches for the prototyping grant, where the next deadline is now at the end of May. Teams can apply, 
and then we decide based on the information we have received. There is, for example, a photo of the 
product and various other details. Because of this, we then decide whether we want to give the teams 
the grant. And that is possible because they are still relatively small sums and because we have now 
gained experience over the years about which teams were good or not so good. 
 [00:10:03.860] - I 
Which means, there are also cases where we have supported teams that we have not yet seen in person. 
At PreSeed Capital, on the other hand, we definitely had a meeting or got to know the person. 
[00:10:24.030] - P 
Short question How long does Industrial Innovators exist in this form? 
[00:10:34.160] - I 
The program was - I think it was set up in 2017, where it was still in a pilot phase and then it really 
started at the end of 2018. Yes, at the end of 2018 the program officially started. And maybe again to 
understand the program: We don't invest our money, we invest for investors. For us, the Klatten Office  
- so Susanne Klatten. Then the Getty family - GettyFamilyOffice from New York and then the European 
Investment Fund, and these are the investors with us who are also present at the Investment Committee 
Meeting, where we present the teams that we think are good and that we want to promote . And then it 
is decided together whether these teams should be supported and how much funding we want to use. 
==PAGE:118==
Appendix 
110 
[00:12:15.060] - P 
Okay, but this Investment Committee meeting takes place when it comes to a PreSeed round and not for 
a prototyping grant? 
[00:12:21.610] - I 
Orignially for both grants and PreSeed Capital. In the meantime, this is a slimmed-down version, so 
since these are still smaller sums, it is now like a quick process. But the stakeholders are still involved 
in the process. 
[00:12:46.700] - P 
So they still see every startup and take a look at it. So there are these three sponsors, is it planned that 
there should be more, or will it remain only these three? 
[00:13:09.350] - I 
I'm not quite sure how much information I can disclose. The Industrial Innovators initiative was 
originally conceived as a pan-European initiative, where other offices and other entrepreneurship 
partners from other countries should also be involved. But that's exactly what is still in the process. And 
there are other partners to be offered, but that is not yet final. 
[00:14:05.210] - P 
I want to focus mainly on the grant because I can compare it better with the other one. But if you say 
you have all these grant applications now and you said then you see if they fit in and how it is. Does that 
mean that you are then at a table with all these investors. And then it is decided Okay, this one fits, this 
one doesn’t. How shall we do it? Or how can I imagine that? 
[00:14:38.010]  
So, we receive the applications. Then we have a list of possible applications and what we do in the 
investment team is we take a look as an investment manager. For the Grants, this is Bettina, a second 
working student, Aljoscha and me. Before that, when Bettina was on parental leave, it was Willem and 
I, the business angel and I, and we look at these applications and go through pitch deck for pitch deck. 
And then we look at different things. What’s their product. What are they building? We look at the team 
and the touchpoint. We also look at; What do you want to use your product for? They can then indicate, 
have to state in detail what they want e.g. the 5000 euros for and I will then see if that is fundable at all. 
What we don't pay for is, for example, if they now want to buy an entire, assembled laptop. We would 
not support that, but instead if they have a software connection. Hardware software mix, let's say, we 
wouldn't buy you a laptop now, but licenses, for example, or Asher Credit, or CPU, so to support their 
process to make the product better. But what we don't want to do is deliver finished products to them, 
but our funding aims to make the product better. 
[00:16:38.310] - P 
So, you say, so to speak, everything fits in that is about prototyping or development, and when it comes 
to things that you can use privately like a laptop, that's just out 
[00:16:58.440] - I 
Yes, but also a case where a finished robot should be bought. That will not do. So where, so to speak, 
the product is already at a finished stage. We want to try to support teams that build something that 
doesn't exist yet, something innovative. And that's what the grant is meant for. 
[00:17:35.360] - P 
What happens after you have chosen? 
==PAGE:119==
Appendix 
111 
[00:17:39.480] - I 
After choosing, we make a shortlist. Each one individually. And there is, for example, that they say 
okay, I would support the team, but I would not for this reasons - Many teams state that they want to 
have 10,000 euros because the program offers a thousand to ten thousand euros in grants. But often there 
are positions that we would not fund. And then you would suggest that I would support Team XY, but 
only for this amount due to this reasons. And everyone just puts forward their suggestions in the 
investment team. And that's then discussed within the investment team. And then a joint opinion is 
formed as an investment team 
[00:18:42.830] - I 
And with this opinion you jointly go one step further. So, it used to be in the Investment Committee 
Meeting with the investors, and then we had the same discussion with the management as we had in the 
Investment Team, but just as a joint Investment Team opinion. We would like to support the teams for 
these reasons, and then we would discuss it all together. And then there are cases where it is said: No, 
the team has to further develop and define the prototype. We don't see that yet. 
[00:19:26.570] - I 
And then we decide all together which teams should be funded and which should not. 
[00:19:35.070] - P 
And how many are funded per batch? 
[00:19:40.910] - I 
That varies widely because the number of applications also varies. It is therefore difficult to quantify 
how many teams we support. And the batches we make are also not quite regular. You could say we do 
a batch about quarterly but it’s little bit more often. So last year we had 5 batches. And then roughly ten 
to 15 teams per batch. Actually rather 10. 
[00:20:27.920] - I 
But it always depends, because there are a lot of student teams. And then there are exam periods or 
summer vacations or whatever. And then suddenly fewer applications come in. It is very different. 
[00:20:50.070] - P 
So, you also don’t have a fixed budget per batch of what is handed out, but simply who is good comes 
in and who is not does not come in. 
[00:21:04.590] - I 
Exactly. So roughly there is a budget. But we often deviate from, because we know exactly if we don't 
spend the budget now, a later batch may be stronger and if more applications are made, then we will 
also spend more. We are not strict, but rather more flexible, depending on how many applications we 
receive. 
[00:21:42.820] – P  
Yes, then I heard, then it goes on that the startups get a contract from you, which they then have to sign. 
So I wanted to ask if it is possible that you could send me a sample contract. Or is it not to be disclosed? 
[00:22:07.980] - I 
I can do this. We use standard contracts. And you are probably doing a benchmark analysis. 
[00:22:21.750] - P 
Yes exactly, so I just wanted to compare. And it's just interesting for me, because they don't have any 
contracts at the DTU. And that's why it's interesting to see and say: This could be the case with others. 
==PAGE:120==
Appendix 
112 
[00:22:41.840] - I 
I would just talk to my colleagues before? 
[00:22:45.030] - P 
Yes, sure. I’ll send an reminder after this interview. 
[00:22:57.580] - I 
And probably, it’s best if I just send you the contract for the grant program? 
[00:23:01.700] - P 
Yes, that’s the relevant one for me. So, the startups sign the contract and then the money is transferred. 
Does it all come in one charge or over several months? 
[00:23:30.530] – I 
As soon as the contract is signed, it will be paid in one charge. And the idea is that the teams will have 
some a kind of milestones. And then after four months that a final report is written about what was done 
with the money, how it was used. In this final report, the teams also send us all the receipts to show us 
what they spent the money on. And then we check a bit how the team has progressed, and ideally they 
have developed very well and have ideally developed into a candidate that we could then also to support 
with a convertible loan. 
[00:24:37.120] - P 
And when they submit the receipts, do you reconcile those with the budget that they submitted with the 
application. Or what do you do with it? 
[00:24:46.670] - I 
The receipts are just for us. Just so we know that they didn't buy anything that they shouldn't have 
bought. A review only. And that's where they often state - and often the teams spend a little less than 
the entire budget. Then we just tell the teams that they can keep the money, but they have to tell us what 
they want to do with it, how they want to continue using the money. So, they don't have to pay us back 
if there is still a small amount left, but they can tell us that they still need the components. Can we use 
that for that? And then in most cases they can use it for that. 
[00:25:46.590] - P 
And there is some requirements for this final report. Like how long and? 
[00:25:50.340] - I 
It’s actually mostly about the actual status of the product. A small photo of the product then the progress 
and a bit of the traction that they have now received. So, have they been accepted to any other programs? 
Do they have any pilot customers? What exactly did they do with the money? Which product features 
have they expanded? That's what we want to see mostly. 
[00:26:25.210] - P 
Do you have a kind of database where you measure KPIs or something, because you also said you now 
know which startups are successful and which are not. 
[00:26:39.990] - I 
This is difficult to standardize because the teams are so different. So, there is not only the MedTech 
area, but IOT Robotics or AI and that's why we always want to see that the teams set milestones for 
themselves, what they want to achieve, and we then evaluate the teams based on these. But we have no 
standardized KPIs that we use to evaluate the teams. 
==PAGE:121==
Appendix 
113 
[00:27:21.760] - P 
And then how do you evaluate whether the grant itself is a good idea or not successful? 
[00:27:41.330] - P 
So, the impression of success is actually assessed by the overall impression. We can see what was done 
with the money. We can see if they have reached the milestones that they had set themselves, and we 
can see the whole development of the team. And from this we can easily deduce where the team, how 
the team has developed. 
[00:28:08.510] - I 
Often, the teams approach us when they have developed positively. And we are in constant conversation 
with them and automatically, especially if a team develops good, the topic of convertible loans arises 
because the teams then just need further funding and would like to expand or build a new feature, a pilot 
with pilot customers or do whatever. There are various indicators that we then use. But even this is not 
a standardized checklist that we use where we say okay,  they have this and that and that. 
[00:28:59.570] - I 
So we have a kind of small checklist for Pre Seed Capital, with minimum requirements that startups 
must have so that we can fund them. But overall, it's actually about the overall understanding of the 
team and the product. 
[00:29:30.650] - P 
I talked to a startup which received the prototyping grant and he said, that… 
[00:29:40.250] - I 
To whom? 
[00:29:41.290] - P 
His name was […] You know him, don’t you? 
[00:30:08.360] - I 
Yes, but they aren’t a typical team actually as they focus more on data 
[00:30:17.390] - P 
Yes, I know, we’ve talked about that they don’t fit that well into the program. But actually during the 
interview the question has arisen whether a startup could apply more then once or not? To the 
prototyping grant. 
[00:30:31.480] - I 
The teams can apply as often as they want, but they can only get a grant twice. Maximum amount of 
10,000 euros. We have many teams that have received two 5000 Euro grants, for example.  
[00:30:55.250] - P 
Interesting. And then I wanted to ask: Why is it stipulated that the grant is only for prototypes and why 
is it not also for e.g. a large trade fair? or for things like that. 
[00:31:15.940] - I 
We say the teams can use it for other things too, such as patents. For the registration of patents or for 
any license or guidelines out there, you can use it too. But not for marketing expenses or for exhibition 
stands, and also not for paying a salary for yourself, for example, for a software startup, one could also 
==PAGE:122==
Appendix 
114 
say why we don't just pay programmers salaries. But there is the idea that we focus on the product, on 
something under development. And we want to help with that. 
[00:32:17.290] - I 
But we don't want them to use it to market their product as much. We want to support the people behind 
the product by supporting the product. 
[00:32:33.640] - P 
In order to avoid a risk or because the startups are so early stage that marketing is not yet necessary, is 
it? 
[00:32:43.290] - I 
Yes, and because it is at such an early stage. But that's my opinion now, I didn't set up the program. But 
in my opinion, at an early stage, it's mostly about the product, and then it's more about product 
development than how I market a product now. You can always market a product somehow, but what if 
nothing is behind it. That is not what we want to support, but we want to promote innovation. And to do 
that you need to build innovations first 
[00:33:18.620] - I 
And part of that is protecting innovation. And that is, for example, the patents. But paying the salaries 
or something. It's always a bit more risky because you don't really know what exactly have they done 
with it? So paid a salary? But if you pay for certian components of the product, you can really see: What 
have they done with the money now? And that's where it went in. This is a bit more traceable for us, the 
progress that you can see through it. 
[00:34:03.990] - P 
And then, do you know what the next big changes, improvements, plans are for the whole initiative. Is 
there anything you can disclose to me that you want to change in the near future? 
[00:34:21.160] – I 
Honestly, I don't know whether I can disclose something about that. Of course, we always have internal 
processes that we want to improve somehow. We also have a lot of Salesforce with us, of course, where 
we track teams internally, how we track communication with teams, how we store documents. And that's 
a big area, for example, where we always try to improve. 
[00:35:00.340] - I 
That would be the database topic. But there are various topics. But I think these are issues, the big 
questions, I can't talk about them that much. 
[00:35:10.130] - P 
Okay, no problem. Generally the communication with grant teams, how does it take place? 
[00:35:52.840] - I 
What we have, for example, is an onboarding meeting. That means, after we tell the teams that they 
have been taken, we invite them once, so we did it with several batches that we invited them. What we 
then did is a pitch session where each team briefly introduced themselves, of course we briefly 
introduced ourselves as an initiative. And then the goal is more that the teams learn from each other. 
And if they have questions, it is often the case that not only do they have the question, but that the others 
also had the same question. 
==PAGE:123==
Appendix 
115 
[00:36:28.830] - I 
That means we try to build a network between the teams. So that they can help each other later on, so 
that's the ideal case. And we also called these pitch or pizza events, because then with pizza, those events 
were actually always very positive and they very also good for us to see: What are the hottest candidates 
for pre-seed capital, because that's the preceding idea, the best should optimally get these convertible 
loans. And that was a good opportunity for us, but also a great opportunity for the teams to get to know 
us, but also the other teams. 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
Appendix 
116 
10.2.2. III-1 
[00:00:13.860]  
It worked roughly, but not thourougly. And then I wondered, whether I could use it later. Thank you 
again. So, you got in touch with Bettina and then? 
[00:00:40.470] - I 
So when we were done with XPreneuers, we got in touch with Bettina because Xpreneuers and Industrial 
Innovators work very closely together, so they always introduce themselves at XPreneurs Events and, 
above all, there is always the opportunity to have individual discussions with Industrial Innovators. I do 
not remember when that was –  
[00:01:07.250] - P 
probably November or December. 
[00:01:16.040] - I 
Yes, exactly, we got the confirmation shortly before Christmas. And then we had directly applied for 
the pre seed capital, which we had already planned beforehand. Then… 
[00:01:27.280] - P 
Okay, so you can just apply for one and then for the other without finishing the first program? 
[00:01:47.250]  
Yes, you can, you don't have to apply for both, so you don't need the prototyping grant for the pre-seed 
capital. But let me put it this way, the pre-selection for the prototyping grant was also very helpful for 
the pre-seed capital phase. But then the pre-seed capital phase also had significantly more documents, a 
financial plan and a smaller business plan. It's just an additional effort to do that again. It was the very 
last thing we did last year. Although the deadline was later in January, we had it as the last to-do last 
year.  
Once we had submitted everything, there was still a lot of feedback from Bettina, but also from her 
colleagues from Industrial Innovators, so that we had about 5 video calls and had to hand in all the 
documents and speakers for reference calls together in early March. At the beginning of March there 
was the Investment Committee Meeting, where we got approved for the Pre Seed Capital, which made 
us extremely happy, because especially now, in a phase when it is not easy to get investors, due to the 
difficult situation.  
At the beginning of this year after the XPreneuers expired, we moved from the premises to Werk1 to 
work. Don't know if you know them? 
[00:03:51.920] - P 
Yes, I've heard about it before. But where are they located again? 
[00:03:52.770] - I 
On the Werksgelände? At the Ostbahnhof. Actually, 100m away from the Atlas building where 
Xpreneuers are. So the Werksgelände is great, especially for startups, so I can really recommend it, 
having a look there, you can also visit us, but you are in Denmark, right? 
[00:04:15.090] - P 
No, so I'm actually back in Munich. My nice year abroad, let's see, how this turns out. 
==PAGE:125==
Appendix 
117 
[00:04:35.910] - I 
You had to cancel, didn’t you? 
[00:04:35.950] - P 
No, so it isn‘t cancelled as I still do my master thesis there, I am just not in Denmark anymore. 
[00:04:55.290] - I 
So the Werk1 is really great, about 15 startups and a lot of coworking areas. It's really like a family, we 
just had a call together yesterday again, so everyone who wanted and you get to know more and more 
at some point, so I think it's really great and there is ByStartup that supports you or also other institutions 
who support your startup, give information, look over documents, applications and things like that, so 
really great. Really great community and I think they are a bit related to UnternehmerTUM. So I don't 
really know how but somehow. 
[00:05:43.800] - I 
And now, we just received all available money from Industrial Innovators last month and yesterday it 
was officially announced via LinkedIn that they invested in us. 
[00:05:50.400] - I 
And regarding the prototyping grant: we got 3.5 thousand and used it completely for IP. It was also the 
starting signal for us to start patent talks with patent attorneys. We are at a patent law firm on 
Prinzregentenplatz, a very well-known patent office. Funnily enough, I did my semester abroad in 
Singapore and one of my roommates is now a patent attorney there. He also studied medical technology. 
So, of course, that's perfect. That's how the contact came about. And now we used the entire prototyping 
grant to register the patent. 
[00:07:12.650] - P 
But 3500 € are not enough for a patent, are they? 
[00:07:22.270] - I 
No, they aren’t, we are now applying for a European patent. Not all costs are included, with all 
submissions amounting to € 10,000. So, around one third is covered by the prototyping grant. 
[00:07:42.640] - P 
So you applied for the prototyping grant. Probably, through conversations with Bettina and on the 
website where you submitted all the documents. And then, were there also talks, personal talks for the 
application phase or did all of it go through documents? 
[00:08:05.880] - I 
The very first meeting was in person with Bettina, so we met personally in the Atlas building of 
Xpreneuers, they were there and talked to everyone from the Xpreneuers batch, who was interested and 
then we had a video call with her and Moritz again. Moritz, who also works there, he is also an 
investment manager there. 
[00:08:35.190] - P 
Yes, funnily enough, I know him, we studied together. 
[00:08:51.160] - I 
We exchanged ideas with them and asked whether it is worth to apply, whether it suits their consortium, 
their topic and so on. And they definitely said yes because they are also increasingly looking for medical 
technology. 
==PAGE:126==
Appendix 
118 
[00:09:05.070] - I 
We then filled out the application in the next step. I’m just looking, I can’t even remember the 
application. It wasn't that extensive. Ah yes, I no longer have that. Actually, that was an online form, 
there were only a few fields, so the effort was 20 minutes to half an hour. Yes, something about what 
we do, a little budget, what we use the money for, but it was relatively easy. 
[00:10:08.980] - P 
And you also had to submit a budget plan, as far as I know. Within this budget plan, did you say that 
you wanted exactly these 3500 euros, which you then received, or did they cut something out for you? 
[00:10:22.910] - I 
Yes, I think we wanted to submit 5000 euros. In addition to the patent costs, we had also submitted a bit 
of hardware because we have also plans in the area of virtual reality and had just submitted hardware 
items for it, which were dismissed. But I didn't ask why, actually. We were just happy that we received 
the € 3,500 and then ... 
[00:11:02.430] - P 
What you wanted to buy for VR, was it just like VR glasses? 
[00:11:07.970] - I 
Yes, exactly, that was really hardware that we wanted to use for a bit of reverse engineering, probably 
not the type of hardware that you can buy through Industrial Innovators, but this grant is more for really 
hardware components, manufacturing and things like that. 
[00:11:31.310] - P 
Well, that’s at least, what they told me. 
[00:11:42.560] - P 
Was there some kind of an award ceremony where you got the grant, or was it just transferred to your 
bank account? 
[00:12:08.180] - I 
No, no, I'm actually still waiting for it because I've heard from others that there was still a kickoff 
meeting with food. We haven't had that yet, who knows, maybe it’s still to come. It would be nice, but 
so far there was only one email. 
[00:12:09.020] – P 
But officially, it isn‘t over yet, as you had only just received in December, is it? 
[00:12:25.480] - I 
Yes exactly, but it runs very informally, so we already have the money. And then you have to submit a 
report within four months including you did with the money and that’s in our case simply an invoice 
from the patent attorney and we’re done. Yes, I would not write, but I also think they are relatively easy 
to deal with 
[00:12:58.420] - P 
Well, now that you had also received the Pre-Seed Capital, it might be even easier and leaner. 
[00:13:06.830] - P 
Exactly, we are in contact with them relatively often anyway and they also know what the steps are 
anyway, so I'm not afraid that we are doing something wrong with the money or something. 
==PAGE:127==
Appendix 
119 
[00:13:27.230]  
Yes, and then did you apply for the pre seed funding yourself or did any of them approach you about 
this possibility? 
[00:13:35.350] - I 
No, I think we approached them, I think I asked Bettina again whether it would fit, if we also apply for 
it, if the Pre Seed Capital whether it also fits into her consortium. I prefer to ask before doing all the 
work and then it doesn't fit. It’s just too much effort otherwise. Exactly and she said, no, definitely apply 
for it and then we applied. 
[00:14:18.470] - P 
And then there were additional conversations and interviews, only with Bettina or with even more 
people? 
[00:14:30.190] - I 
It was actually quite intensive, the whole due diligence, then with the pre seed capital, that was already 
quite extensive. Not only with Bettina but also with Moritz and Allejandro. 
[00:14:50.470] - I 
They also had quite some questions, also about the technical background, we then had a rather long 
document about the technical background, then they had a lot of questions and then a call and then they 
also had reference calls with customers and a consultant from us, each half an hour to an hour with the 
reference persons and then again questions to us and then questions again. Then I think they knew 
everything and then it went on to the Commission meeting. 
[00:15:40.850] - P 
Crazy, it's almost like having a real round of financing at some point later 
[00:15:46.880]  
Yes, actually, it was really quite a lot for the scope. So we got 100,000, not just 50,000, but in fact it 
was quite a lot, a lot of due diligence for the scope. We didn't expect it, the good thing is that we have 
the documents now and we should have drawn them up sooner or later, anyways. 
[00:16:28.940] - P 
But you didn't get to know the sponsors or the people behind it, in this process either? 
[00:16:36.400] - I 
No, not at all. So GettyLab or who is behind it, we had no contact with, only the Industrial Innovators 
team. 
[00:16:55.720] - P 
Okay, now you said that you now have your pre-seed and in a few months it will be about seed financing, 
so to speak. 
[00:17:30.410] - I 
That's right, that’s about to come. We are well advised by ByStartup, who establish contacts for us with 
business angels and VCs, Werk1 is also located in Werk1 and as a result we came into closer contact 
with them. They helped us a lot with the documents that they are also investor-ready and have now 
established contacts with 20 potential investors, with whom we are currently in discussions. 
==PAGE:128==
Appendix 
120 
[00:18:01.390] - P 
 Sounds very good, and then you try to sell your product as well. 
[00:18:14.380] - I 
Yes, at the same time. 
[00:18:14.500] - P 
And how many employees do you have and how big can I imagine your startup? 
[00:18:28.050] - I 
So we are 7 people in total now. 3 in management, so I as managing director, a technical managing 
director and then an operations and finance manager. And another four on the technical side. An 
employee who takes care of the software development on the visualization sid. And then two more, one 
in the AI area and the other making the user interface of the tool. 
[00:19:19.950] - P 
Sounds like it’s running very well! 
[00:19:29.670] - P 
Yes, I think, I’ve asked all of my questions. It was very interesting. If there is anything that I haven't 
found out yet, can I come back to you? 
[00:19:47.260] - I 
Yes, of course. 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
Appendix 
121 
10.2.3. III-2 
[00:00:10.470] - P 
So, I now understand what you're doing. And I'm writing my master's thesis at the DTU and at the TUM. 
And you recently received the prototyping grant, didn’t you? 
[00:00:31.360] - I 
Yes, exactly. 
[00:00:36.050] - P 
I wanted to ask first when did you get that? 
[00:00:38.250] - I 
Recently. But I have to think for a moment. What do we have now? We got it, I think we got word of it 
in December, and I think the transfer was in January. But we've been around since July and officially 
since October, but we've been working on it a bit longer. 
[00:01:10.080]  
And how are you connected to the TUM? 
[00:01:14.780]  
We are a kind of spin-off. A co-founder did his doctorate at a TUM, and I also studied computer science 
and also worked there as an assistant 
[00:01:33.460] - P 
And then you probably got into the UnternehmerTUM anyway. 
[00:01:40.440] - I 
We both did Manage&More. Do you know that? 
[00:01:46.500] - P 
Yes, sure. And this is why you know about all the programs at the UnternehmerTUM? 
[00:01:59.610] - I 
Yes, we actually have a very good network which we use actively to look for program and support to 
finance ourselves or to receive additional capital. 
[00:02:15.180] - P 
Okay, so which other programmes are you in? How do you secure capital? 
[00:02:19.830] - I 
We are mainly financed by EXIST. EXIST Gründerstipendium. This you know as well, don’t you? 
Otherwise it would be surprising. 
[00:02:28.800] - P 
Yes, it would be embarrassing if I wouldn’t know this. 
[00:02:33.510] - I 
Yes, and that’s our main funding source. Additionally, a little bit of money by Industrial Innovators and 
from MediaLab Bayern which we are also in. 
==PAGE:130==
Appendix 
122 
[00:02:51.760] - P 
A little bit of money means anything between 1000 and 10000€? 
[00:02:56.240] - I 
Yes, that’s not a secret. We got 10000 Euro in the first phase and it goes up to 40000. 
[00:03:08.430] - P 
Okay, but then it is Pre Seed Capital, isn’t it? 
[00:03:08.690] - I 
Yes, in that case it is really like a grant, just like with Industrial Innovators, now that we talk about it, I 
am not sure whether it is a classic subsidy, I would have to look at the contract. But the Media Lab is 
just an accelerator program or an incubator program. You can have a look at MediaLab Bayern Munich. 
And exactly these then pay up to 40,000 euros over three phases, but from a legal point of view it is 
simply a subsidy and not an investment. 
[00:03:48.740] - P 
You got 10000 Euro from MediaLab! 
[00:03:51.030] - I 
Yes, until now. 
[00:03:54.560] - P 
Okay, but Industrial Innovators is something else? 
[00:04:01.810] - I 
Yes, but there are a lot of programs. This is a program, as you say, it is a kind of pre-seed financing, 
what we now have from them is the prototyping grant. Exactly. And it is simply considered a subsidy. 
Now I would have to look again. Then that's the case with Industrial Innovators, then there's the Pre 
Seed Fund or what they call it exactly. Where can I get a convertible loan from 50,000 to 100,000 
[00:04:39.060] - P 
But you don’t get that one, do you? 
[00:04:40.340] - I 
we have not yet applied for that. We don't currently need it. But, of course, we are in contact with them 
accordingly. It's a very exciting story for project financing. If you want to bridge a little more time before 
raising a larger seed round, it is actually very exciting. How is it actually, let's talk specifically about 
Industrial Innovators, right? 
[00:05:07.670] - P 
Yes, this is what I was primarily concerned with, because in the end I examine exactly such small 
prototyping grants and look at them, what do you do with them? or overall. There are also other grants 
that are not very specific and because you are quite limited in what you can do with the money. 
[00:05:30.510] - I 
Yes, yes, now yes. Yes and no. It's all very, very. Yes, let's say kept lean. They're not really trying to 
put any reports on us or anything. In fact, we would have to prove what we used the money for, at the 
latest if there was to be an audit. 
==PAGE:131==
Appendix 
123 
[00:06:00.040] - I 
Yes, and in the end, after three or four months there is actually a short, definitely a phone call or actually 
a meeting, where you say okay again, what did you spend the money on? But everything is very 
unbureaucratic, you have to say. And without much reporting effort, which is also good, because 
otherwise, yes, if you have to spend more time on it, with us it is only 5000 euros, 5000 euros to manage 
than it is worth the money, well, than you could just leave it. 
[00:06:39.550] - I 
Do you have specific questions or should I just keep talking? 
[00:06:42.750] - P 
I have specific questions, but I would prefer you to just tell what you have. And then I ask my questions 
that I miss answers for. I often have the feeling that between the questions, between what I ask and what 
you tell, there is often a lot more information that I would otherwise not have received. But I always 
like to ask a question: I would very much like to know how it went with the selection process? 
[00:07:16.200] - I 
Yes, also relatively easy for the Grant prototype. You once have a form that you fill out. for the exact 
questions… 
[00:07:27.420] - P 
No worries, I looked at them. 
[00:07:29.190] - I 
Oh yeah, just a little bit of what you spend the money on. How is one connected to the program etc? 
The startup outlined, everything you do. And then it's pretty straightforward: do you actually get the 
grant, yes or no? In the run-up to the application, we called Bettina, who runs the whole thing. Because 
we came across the grant program through a different program. Exactly. Then we called her and let us 
explain what that is. 
[00:08:13.320] - I 
We introduced ourselves a bit, and then we filled out the document, and then it was that. A week or two 
weeks later, we were informed that we were getting the money and how much because the amount was 
not clear beforehand. You just state beforehand how much you could use, you saw it in the questions. 
And then you will either be paid out in full 10,000 or any other amount, that is what they determine in 
the end. 
[00:08:44.430] - P 
And did you apply for 5000€ or did you receive 5000 €? 
[00:08:48.040] - I 
We got 5,000. That's the way it is with us, actually this whole grant is a little more directed towards 
hardware startups. And that's exactly why it ended up being a bit lower for us. If I understood that 
correctly, then we have the opportunity to apply for the prototyping grant again  if you did not get 
10,000. But don’t take my word for it. I do not know that. 
[00:09:12.750] - P 
Yes. And you have set up a budget, are you implementing it as you said it, or are you spending it on 
something else now? 
==PAGE:132==
Appendix 
124 
[00:09:28.770] - I 
Yes, in fact that has changed a bit under the current situation due to Corona's story that we are 
rescheduling a bit there now. Actually, our plan was, it's not a big secret now, to buy data from it. 
Because we sometimes just buy and resell data. But the data sets we had in mind back then are no longer 
relevant today. And that's exactly why we now use the money differently, but is basically not a big 
problem for them now. As I said, you don't have to constantly say what you do with the money, but in 
the end, it just has to be spent somewhere, where it makes sense and what doesn't contradict the rules. 
[00:10:22.150] - P 
So you don’t hand in receipts or anything? 
[00:10:27.100] - I 
No. 
[00:10:27.150] - P 
Is there a contract? Did you sign a contract? 
[00:10:30.140] - I 
Yes, there is a contract. I don't know any details now. But like I said, I think it's a relatively standard 
grant contract. So really nothing wild. 
[00:11:24.480] - P 
I wanted to know whether you met other startups who also received the prototyping grant? 
[00:11:33.210] - I 
Not at all. It is not built in such a way that you necessarily build a community there. We already have 
that. But there is no big connection to the program or anything, if you wanted to have contact, they will 
surely make you an intro. They are very accommodating and very helpful. But it is not a supporting 
program and so on. 
[00:12:24.400] - P 
That the money is intended for prototypes was not a problem for you or for anything else, or yours is no 
longer a prototyp, right? 
[00:12:37.990] - I 
Yes, it's a little bit further, it's not a total prototype anymore. But yes, we use the money for the product, 
it is actually meant to develop new features that exactly. Does that not only mean that there is money in 
marketing but in prototyping? 
[00:13:02.720] - P 
And you also got the EXIST grant which I think is less defined.  
[00:13:07.110] - I 
Yes, Exist is pretty much expenses for living and then you have material expenses and other funds. The 
material expenses are actually relatively free to spend. This is much more bureaucratic than the 
prototyping grant. 
[00:13:39.720] - P 
Yes, you said after three months there will be some kind of end. 
==PAGE:133==
Appendix 
125 
[00:13:46.820] - I 
Yes it is. This is really not really defined. Indeed, but that's the time horizon. You have to see it like this, 
the prototyping grant is for them, so that's my assumption now, yes, we support projects now, and then 
we definitely have a touchpoint with them three months or four months later and then look, what 
happened to it. And then speak again that maybe you can then add money via this pre seed fund, that's 
actually what they want to do. They actually want to get into startups with the money that they hold 
shares in those in the end. 
[00:14:28.100] - P 
Yes, exactly. 
[00:14:30.840] - I 
So apply again for prototyping. As I said, I don't know if that's possible. For now the pre seed financing 
of this 50,000 or more is actually an interesting option, but at this point in time, I cannot say whether 
we are now getting pre-seed financing again via Industrial Innovators or collecting a seed financing 
directly. Either business angels or some classic VC. 
[00:15:10.860] - P 
Yes, but you already have customers, so people who pay for your product? 
[00:15:13.490] - I 
Exactly, we did first projects. 
[00:15:25.950] - P 
And you already had those in December? 
[00:15:38.810] - I 
Yes, no, we haven’t been this far back then. 
[00:15:44.760] - P 
Okay, I think, I am almost at the end of my questions. 
[00:18:05.970] - P 
Oh no, last question: Have you met the sponsors behind the program? 
[00:18:12.720] - I 
No, we haven’t seen those. 
[00:18:20.870] - P 
And was their any kind of UnternehmerTUM offer? Like startup consulting or similar things? 
[00:18:37.600] - I 
Oh, yes, at TUM it is usually done in such a way that, at least for EXIST startups, that TUM itself has 
founding consultants who can be used or in that case at least have to work with them if you get EXIST. 
I don't even know about the UnternehmerTUM, whether it does that at all. So we are very well 
connected. It happens that I sometimes write to Helmut from the UnternehmerTUM and he does an intro 
or something. But no, I don't get any specific consulting, no advice or anything. 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
Declaration of Authorship 
126 
11. Declaration of Authorship 
I hereby declare that the master thesis submitted is my own unaided work. All direct or indirect 
sources used are acknowledged as references. I am aware that the thesis in digital form can be 
examined for the use of unauthorized aid and in order to determine whether the master thesis 
as a whole or parts incorporated in it may be deemed as plagiarism. For the comparison of my 
work with existing sources, I agree that it shall be entered in a database where it shall also 
remain after examination, to enable comparison with future theses submitted. Further rights of 
reproduction and usage, however, are not granted here. This paper was not previously presented 
to another examination board and has not been published. 
 
