==PAGE:1==
Concrete with recycled concrete
aggregates:
Review of freeze-thaw resistance and eval-
uation by application of partial least squares
regression
Signe Harvig Bjerrum, s141886
Kgs. Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Byg
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
There is a great potential for using recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) from concrete
waste as partial and total replacement of natural aggregates (NA) to limit the consump-
tion of new natural resources. However, DS/EN 206 DK NA (2019) does not allow RCA
for concrete in moderate and aggressive exposure classes as its durability has not yet
been thoroughly documented. Thus, assessment of concrete with RCA as substitute for
NA in moderate and aggressive exposure classes with respect to freeze-thaw resistance
(F-T resistance) is needed.
Prior to initiating new research it is relevant to review results of previous research for
comparing and quantifying important variables and the influence of RCA on the F-T
resistance. The present thesis investigates, through a literature review, the influence of
substituting NA with RCA on the F-T resistance of concrete as quantified by measured
mass loss and/or relative dynamic e-modules (RDM). Quantitative data are extracted
from the literature along with the reviewed literature. The potential influence of RCA,
is attempted quantified using a statistical tool for partial least squares regression (PLS)
by comparing observation data from several studies. Initially the PLS model approach
is assessed by using the extracted data to model the known relationship between com-
pressive strength, air content and water/cement ratio described by Bolomey’s equation.
The reviewed literature shows contradictory findings regarding the influence of RCA on
the F-T resistance. The majority of the studies find a similar or better F-T resistance
of concrete with RCA (4 out of 11 studies) where especially the influence of attached
mortar is attributed to both positive and negative effects on the F-T resistance. The
results from the present PLS analysis supports this view where there is a tendency that
the increased RCA replacement ratio results in decreased RDM loss and/or Mass loss,
that is a higher F-T resistance. Evaluating the influence of RCA on the F-T resistance
with respect to other known important variables show that water/cement (w/c) ratio, air
content and air-entrainment are much more important for modelling the F-T resistance
than the RCA replacement ratio. Because of the relatively small size of the dataset the
importance of RCA cannot be quantified in relation to the other important parameters
identified as w/c ratio, air content and air-entrainment. Overall the literature review
combined with the PLS analysis suggests that RCA most likely have a positive or at
least indifferent effect on the F-T resistance.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This report present the master thesis, that constitute the final assignment for my master
education in Architectural Engineering at the Department of Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark. The project counts for 30 ECTS points and has been
carried out in the period from January 27th to June 27th, 2020.
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Lisbeth M. Ottosen for being available
through online meetings and for providing guidance in how to restructure this project
during the COVID-19 situation. I would also like to thank Kristine Bondo Pedersen for
being helpful answering practical questions regarding SIMCA.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 26, 2020
Signe Harvig Bjerrum, s141886
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Micro-Structure of Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Mechanical Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Durability of Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Assessment of Freeze-Thaw Durability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
16
3.1
Methodology of Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
. . . . .
20
4
Literature Review
26
4.1
Review of Available Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Overview of Included Studies and Measured Variables . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Review of influence of RCA on F-T resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Results and Interpretation
32
5.1
Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
34
5.2
Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
Incl. RCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA
. . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content 48
6
Overall Discussion
64
6.1
Assessment of the PLS model Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.2
PLS Analysis of F-T resistance of Concrete with RCA . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.3
Reliability of PLS analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
7
Conclusion
72
Bibliography
74
A SIMCA Results - Model #1.0L and #1.1L
78
B SIMCA Results - Model #1.0E and #1.1E
82
C SIMCA Results - Model #1.2L, #1.3L and #1.4L
85
D SIMCA Results - Model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E
90
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
95
F PLS Analysis of F-T resistance - The influence of RCA
103
G SIMCA Results - Model #5.0L
108
H SIMCA Results - Model #5.1L
110
I
SIMCA Results - Model #6.0L
112
J
SIMCA Results - Model #6.1L
114
K SIMCA Results - Model #7.0L
116
L SIMCA Results - Model #7.1L
118
M SIMCA Results - Model #5.0E
120
N SIMCA Results - Model #5.1E
122
O SIMCA Results - Model #6.0E
124
P SIMCA Results - Model #6.1E
126
Q SIMCA Results - Model #7.0E
128
R SIMCA Results - Model #7.1E
130
S
Dataset0
132
T Dataset1
134
U Dataset2
136
V Dataset3
138
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
W Dataset4
140
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
On a global scale there is a huge and rapidly growing demand for gravel and sand in
the building industry. In Denmark the large consumers are the big construction and
infrastructure projects like the planned Femern Link connecting Denmark and Germany
and the new Metro in Copenhagen. Dansk Beton (2019) estimates the Femern Link
project will require more than 3 million m3 of concrete and additionally 160,000 m3 of
concrete for temporary constructions (Teknologisk Institut, 2019). On a yearly basis
twice as much concrete is produced compared to the production of all other building
materials combined making concrete the most popular building material (Dansk Beton,
2017). In Denmark 25.4 million m3 of sand, gravel and stone were extracted on land in
2018, of this were 18.7 million m3 used for roads and construction work while 5.5 million
m3 were used in concrete production (Danmarks Statestik, 2018). At the same time
the construction industry is accountable for 1/3 of the total amount of waste produced
in Denmark where 1/4 is concrete waste. Waste that has the potential of becoming a
resource in terms of recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) rather than a waste product.
With good results many researchers have explored the potential of using RCA from con-
crete waste as partial and total replacement of natural coarse aggregates (NA) in new
concrete. The purpose is to limit the consumption of new resources and create a better
use of the concrete waste as the current practice is to use concrete waste for road-fill
(Miljøstyrelsen, 2015). Now with DS/EN 206 DK NA (2019) it is possible to use RCA
in the coarse fraction with up to a 30 % replacement ratio and the fine fraction (0-4 mm)
up to 10 % for passive exposure classes (X0 and XC1), that is not including potential
exposure to freezing.
DS/EN 206 DK NA (2019) does not allow RCA for concrete in moderate and aggressive
exposure classes as its potential has not yet been thoroughly documented. It is however
important to find a way to incorporate RCA including the fine fraction of RCA in these
exposure classes and environments to reduce the total consumption of natural coarse
aggregates and sand. To expand the use of concrete with RCA as substitutes for NA
in other exposure classes further investigations of the concrete properties and its abil-
ity to resist deterioration over time are needed. Physical impacts causing deterioration
of concrete includes volume changes, structural loading and exposure to temperature
extremes such as freezing (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). The volume expansion from
ice-formation can cause internal stresses which often result in deterioration over time in
terms of internal cracking or surface scaling (Nilsson, 2003).
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Objective
2
The freeze-thaw resistance (F-T resistance) of concrete is a measure of how well the con-
crete resists internal cracking and surface scaling when subjected to freeze-thaw cycles.
In this context the impact of de-icing salts is not included here. The F-T resistance is
assessed by measuring the mass loss due to scaling, loss in dynamic e-modules and the
air-void spacing factor (Walter, 2016). Air-entrainment (AE) of concrete is often used to
improve F-T resistance because the additional air-voids reduce the tensile stresses from
the volume expansion of water when it freeze (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006).
Deterioration of concrete with RCA caused by frost attacks has been studied previously
and Hansen (1992) early on recommended that this topic should be studied in more
detail. The studies back then revealed very opposing results as some reported better
freeze-thaw resistance of concrete with RCA while others reported a inferior resistance
as a brief inspection of the recent literature shows. This emphasizes the need for more
research in how RCA affect the F-T resistance of concrete as measured by scaling and
relative dynamic e-modules. But also investigations of which parameters are the most
influential on obtaining an acceptable F-T durability of concrete with RCA are needed.
In the need for more research it is relevant to look at studies performed previously to
compare and quantify important variables and the influence of RCA. A relevant and
strong statistical tool for comparison of influential variables on the F-T resistance is
partial least squares (PLS) regression analysis. PLS has until now mostly been used in
chemistry where many variables arise (James et al., 2013). In the analysis of concrete
it is an advantage that the PLS method copes with co-linearity between variables, non
quantitative variables and it can model several result variables simultaneously (Sartorius,
2017). Overall the PLS regression analysis has the potential to quantify the influence of
RCA on the F-T resistance of concrete by including observations from several more or
less identical studies.
1.1
Objective
The overall objective is to determine through a literature review if RCA have an influ-
ence on the freeze-thaw resistance of concrete as can be quantified by measured mass
loss and/or relative dynamic e-modules. The potential influence will be attempted quan-
tified by statistical analysis of data extracted from the reviewed literature.
It is investigated if partial least squares (PLS) regression can be used to quantify a
potential relationship between the freeze-thaw resistance and RCA replacement ratios.
Furthermore, PLS regression modelling is used to explore which of the modelled vari-
ables have the most significant influence on the freeze-thaw resistance of concrete with
RCA. Prior to this investigation an initial assessment of the PLS model approach is
conducted by using the extracted data to model the known relationship between com-
pressive strength, air content and water/cement ratio described by Bolomey’s equation
(Herholdt et al., 1985).
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
Concrete is a versatile and durable building material that is often preferred over e.g.
steel because of the minimal maintenance required (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). The
durability of concrete is however contingent by the concrete’s ability to resist deterio-
ration caused by environmental physical impacts where especially exposure freeze-thaw
cycles has adversely effects on the durability. These adversely effects are seen as crack-
ing and surface scaling resulting from the tensile stresses generated in the cement paste
when water freezes in saturated voids inside the concrete micro-structure Mehta and
Monteiro (2006). The concretes ability to resist these physical impacts, expressed as
the freeze-thaw resistance (F-T resistance), is dependent on functional properties de-
termined by the concrete micro-structure and the properties of the individual material
components (Aalborg Portland, 2016). Minimum requirements specified in DS/EN 206
DK NA (2019) for these functional properties include a sufficient air-void structure (Ta-
ble 2.1).
Table 2.1: Specific required limits for frost resistant concrete according to DS/EN 206
DK NA (2019)
Exposure class
XF1
XF2
XF3
XF4
Max. w/c ratio
0.55
0.45
0.45
0.40
Min. compressive strength
C30/37
C35/45
C35/45
C40/50
Min. air content in fresh concrete (vol-%)∗
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
Min. air content in hardened concrete (vol-%)†
-
3.5
3.5
3.5
Max. spacing factor†
-
0.2
0.2
0.2
F-T resistance‡
Good
Good
Good
Good
∗Measured according to DS/EN 12350-7 (2019)
† Measured according to DS/EN 480-11 (2005)
‡ Surface scaling measured according to the Swedish standard SS 137244 and
compliance with the additional listed requirements
The physical explanation for the required limits are elaborated in the following in terms
of the micro-structure, the mechanical properties of concrete and durability. Focus will
be on how the substitution of NA with RCA can influence the mentioned properties and
thereby the freeze-thaw resistance of the concrete.
3
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Micro-Structure of Concrete
4
2.1
Micro-Structure of Concrete
The composite nature of concrete is resulting in a complex heterogeneous micro-structure
which is subject to change with time and with environmental impacts such as humid-
ity and temperature (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). The composite structure is obtained
by the three main components cement, water and aggregates where cement is the key
ingredient. Cement acts as an adhesive in reaction with water which embeds the aggre-
gates in a solid structure when the cement hydrates (Munch-Petersen, 2017a). Additives
and admixtures can be added to obtain a certain property or improving/modifying the
properties of the concrete such as air-entrainment in frost resistant concrete. Mehta and
Monteiro (2006) defines the three components of the concrete micro-structure as:
• The aggregates
• The hydrated cement paste
• The inter-facial transition zone between the cement paste and aggregates
Knowledge of the individual components and their mutual relationship is important for
controlling the properties required in table 2.1 to obtain a satisfactory F-T resistance
Mehta and Monteiro (2006).
2.1.1
Aggregates
With approximately 2/3 of the total volume of concrete consisting of aggregates the
aggregates have a considerable influence on the concrete properties and micro-structure.
Especially the elastic modulus, the unit weight and the workability of the concrete are
influenced by the aggregates and in particular the physical characteristics of the aggre-
gates. Some of the most important physical characteristics are according to Mehta and
Monteiro (2006) size and shape, volume, permeability and porosity.
Traditionally concrete aggregates are natural mineral sand and gravel and the natural
aggregates are often divided into marine aggregates, land-based aggregates and crushed
rocks. Marine aggregates are known to have a round smooth surface where aggregates
from crushed rocks are often flat and angular (Munch-Petersen, 2017b). Recycled con-
crete aggregates have geometrical properties similar to crushed rocks in terms of shape
and surface texture (Bjerrum (2018) and Hansen (1992)). Angular, rough textured ag-
gregates are known to lower the workability of the fresh concrete compared to rounded
smooth aggregates (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006).
Both natural aggregates and RCA have a mix of different particle sizes and a sieving
analysis can be used to determine the grading of the aggregates. The grading is usually
expressed as the cumulative percentage of passed material through a sieving column.
Particles passing a sieve with mesh of 4 mm are characterized as sand or fine aggregates.
The bigger particles retained on a 4 mm sieve are characterized as coarse aggregates.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Micro-Structure of Concrete
5
Coarse aggregates are often divided into three fractions of 4-8 mm, 8-16 mm and 16-32
mm (Aalborg Portland, 2016).
2.1.1.1
Porosity
Aggregates are porous and many of the aggregates characteristics are related to the
porosity e.g density, strength and absorption (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). Absorption
is related to the porosity and permeability as connected voids in the aggregates can
be more or less saturated which can influence the F-T resistance of concrete as will be
elaborated in section (Section 2.3).
RCA are known to be more porous than natural aggregates because of mortar from
the original concrete has remained attached to the original natural aggregates. The
relationship between open porosity and attached mortar is visualized by Pepe et al.
(2016) (Figure 2.1). The open porosity is increasing with increasing amount of attached
mortar. As open porosity is directly related to absorption capacity, RCA are in general
associated with a higher absorption capacity. As a result many researchers suggest that
RCA should be to pre-soaked or pre-wetted before mixing the concrete ((Bogas et al.,
2016), (Yildirim et al., 2015), (Hansen, 1992)).
Figure 2.1: Correlation between attached mortar and open porosity expressed by Pepe
et al. (2016). Illustrating increasing open porosity with increasing attached mortar con-
tent for RCA
Hansen (1992) reports increasing attached mortar content with decreasing particle size
ranging from 20-25 % attached mortar for the 8-16 mm fraction to 25-30 % for the
4-8 mm fraction. The investigations show an significant increase in the AM content for
the fractions below 1.2 mm (Figure 2.2). The w/c-ratio of the original concrete has
according to Hansen (1992) no influence on the percentage of attached mortar in RCA
and the density.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Micro-Structure of Concrete
6
Figure 2.2: Weight percentage of attached mortar distributed on size fractions of RCA
for different w/c-ratios Hansen (1992). For the RCA fraction below 1.2 mm a significant
increase in attached mortar can be observed
2.1.2
Cement Paste
The hydrated cement paste constitutes the solid structure of the concrete and is essential
for the concrete properties such as strength and permeability. Especially the permeabil-
ity and porosity of the hydrated cement paste have an significant influence on the the
mechanical properties (strength) and the durability of the concrete including the F-T
resistance (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). A limit for the maximum w/c ratio for frost
resistant concrete is required in DS/EN 206 DK NA (2019) because a high w/c ratio is
related to a high permeability of the cement paste which has adversely effects on the
F-T resistance.
The hydration of cement is referring to the exothermic chemical reaction developing
when Portland cement is mixed with water. The hydration process result in a gradual
loss of the mixing water leaving empty voids in the cement paste resulting in an ini-
tial high porosity of the concrete (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). As a consequence of
the ongoing hydration the voids are filled with the hydration products resulting in a
decrease in porosity and permeability. When the paste has become solid the harden-
ing process (strength gain with time) begins and the strength is rapidly developing for
approximately four weeks (28 days) (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). The strength of the
hardened concrete is discussed further in Section 2.2.
Even though the porosity is decreasing with the ongoing hydration not all voids are filled
with hydration products. The volume of cement and water is bigger than the formed
hydration products resulting in empty internal air voids in the concrete when the ce-
ment paste is fully hydrated (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). These unfilled spaces are the
capillary voids and the higher the w/c ratio the bigger the volume of capillary voids
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Micro-Structure of Concrete
7
because the water will compose a bigger share of the initial volume. As a consequence,
a high w/c ratio will result in a large permeability of the concrete as capillary voids are
very often connected (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). Increasing the void size will likewise
result in an increased permeability, where an increased porosity is related to both void
size and permeability (Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3:
Schematic diagram showing the permeability of a porous material with
connected voids as a function of void sizes for different porosity (Herholdt et al., 1985)
Besides the capillary voids and the voids which are a part of the aggregate micro-
structure additionally spherical air voids and the very small gel pores are present in
the micro-structure of the hydrated cement paste.
2.1.2.1
Air Void Characteristics
The three basic categories of air voids in the micro-structure of hydrated cement are
spherical air voids, the earlier mentioned capillary voids and the gel pores. The three
categories of air voids influence the overall properties of the concrete differently. While
all types and sizes of voids contributes to the porosity of the concrete only the capillary
voids and bigger voids contributes to the permeability of the concrete (Pigeon and Pleau,
2006).
Figure 2.4: Size variation of the three basic categories of voids in concrete Pigeon and
Pleau (2006)
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Micro-Structure of Concrete
8
The first category is the spherical air voids trapped during the concrete mixing and these
voids can be as large as 3 mm making them the biggest type (Figure 2.4). Air voids
entrained in the hydrated cement paste due to air-admixtures are also spherical in shape
but much smaller. These voids range in size from 50 - 200 µm. Both types affect the
strength of the concrete because of their relative large size, but the air-entrained voids
does not contribute to the permeability of the concrete (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006).
In contrast to the entrapped and entrained air voids which are spherical, the capillary
voids are very often irregular in shape. The capillary voids normally range in size from
10 nm - 10 µm (Figure 2.4). The attached mortar of RCA tend to be dominated by
larger capillary voids compared to the capillary voids in the new cement paste (Liu et al.,
2020). Studies by Liu et al. (2020) show capillary voids in the attached mortar in the
size range of 1-100 µm which is much big than the measured capillary voids in the new
cement paste.
The smallest types of air voids is the interlayer space within the hydration product of
calcium silicate hydrate which in Pigeon and Pleau (2006) is referred to as gel pores.
These pores do not influence the strength and permeability of the concrete as they are
way too small (Figure 2.4). The size vary from 0.5 - 5 nm (Pigeon and Pleau, 2006).
2.1.3
Inter-Facial Transition Zone
The third component in the micro-structure of the concrete is the inter-facial transition
zone between cement paste and the coarse aggregates. The inter-facial transition zone
between the cement paste and aggregates have big influence on the strength (Mehta
and Monteiro, 2006). The inter-facial zone between cement paste and aggregates often
forms the weakest link in the concrete micro-structure because of capillary voids and
micro-cracks interrupting the stress transfer between the cement paste and the aggre-
gates (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). Micro-cracks dependent on i.a. w/c-ratio, humidity,
temperature and aggregate size and grading. The micro-structure of the inter-facial tran-
sition zone have great influence on the stiffness (elastic e-modules) and tensile strength
of the concrete.
In general aggregates are not assumed to influence the compressive strength of concrete
as the aggregates are much stronger than the cement paste and the inter-facial transition
zone. The aggregate characteristics such as size, shape, surface texture, porosity and
grading can however influence the strength because of the influence on the transition
zone. Aggregates with a rough surface are sometimes attributed to have a higher tensile
strength because there is as a stronger bond between the aggregate surface and the
cement paste that is a stronger inter-facial transition zone (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006).
However elongated and flat aggregates can contribute to a weaker transition zone as
water can accumulate beneath the coarse aggregates, causing a resulting higher porosity
and thereby lower strength (Herholdt et al. (1985), Mehta and Monteiro (2006)). This
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Mechanical Properties
9
phenomenon is assumed relevant for concrete with RCA as these types of aggregates
often have a flat and angular shape (Hansen (1992), Bjerrum (2018)). On the other
hand Corinaldesi and Moriconi (2009) imply that incorporation of RCA can improve the
strength of the transition zone. The RCA are most likely contributing to the internal
curing effect as the cement particles from the attached mortar reacts with water absorbed
by the RCA. This phenomenon is also observed by Yildirim et al. (2015).
2.2
Mechanical Properties
The inter-facial transition zone is affecting both the strength and the stiffness of the
concrete, as both the compressive strength and the elastic modules are affected by the
porosity and w/c ratio. In this context RCA are known to influence the strength because
of a higher porosity and sometimes lower strength because of attached mortar compared
to natural aggregates.
2.2.1
Compressive Strength
The concrete strength is a function of the cement hydration process as described above
(Section 2.1.2) and the compressive and tensile strength will always be decided by the
weakest component of the micro-structure (Aalborg Portland, 2016). The water/cement
ratio is the most important factor in terms of strength as this ratio is directly related
to the porosity of the cement paste and the inter-facial transition zone (Mehta and
Monteiro, 2006). A low w/c-ratio will result in a low porosity and permeability and thus
a higher strength (Figure 2.5) (Nielsen, 2016). Small round voids lower the strength less
than angular or big elongated voids as illustrated in figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Schematic diagram showing the relation between strength and porosity of
a porous material(Herholdt et al., 1985). (a) Small spherical voids, (b) small angular
voids, (c) big angular voids. Big angular voids result in the biggest strength reduction
The Bolomey’s equation describe the compressive strength (fc) [MPa] as a function of
the w/c-ratio and can be used to determine the theoretical concrete strength (eq. 2.1).
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Mechanical Properties
10
fc = K ·
( 1
w
c
−α
)
(2.1)
Where K [−] and α [−] are constants depending on cement type and hydration time.
Equation 2.1 assumes the air content in the concrete to be approximately 2% (Munch-
Petersen, 2013).
If the air content in the concrete is higher because of for example
air-entrainment the strength is reduced due to higher porosity (Aalborg Portland, 2016).
In general if the air content in the concrete is increased by 1% the strength is reduced
by 4-5%:
fc = K ·
( 1
w
c
−α
)
· (1 −0.045 · (a −a0))
(2.2)
Where a [%] is the actual air content and a0 [%] is the natural air content (2%). The
strength reduction because of an increased air content is illustrated for a natural air
content of 2% and an air content of 6% in figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Relationship between compressive strength, fc, and w/c ratio after 28 curing
days using K = 29 and α = 0.6 for Ålborg Portland Cement (Aalborg Portland, 2016)
The replacement of natural aggregates with RCA also affect the strength properties of
the concrete. The review by Hansen (1992) identified an average compressive strength
loss of 10 % for concrete with coarse RCA compared to concrete with natural coarse
aggregates. If the natural sand fraction were replaced by fine RCA the compressive
strength loss became 50 %. Bogas et al. (2016) also experienced strength loss using fine
RCA. In general the strength loss is thought to increase with an increased replacement
ratio of NA with RCA (Yildirim et al. (2015), Bogas et al. (2016)). The main reason for
this reduction in compressive strength is attributed the w/c-ratio and original strength
of the RCA (Hansen, 1992). If the strength of AM on RCA is lower than the new cement
paste the weakest link in the new concrete micro-structure will be the AM resulting in a
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Mechanical Properties
11
reduced strength. This weakness will become more pronounced with increased replace-
ment ratios. These results are in line with the observations by Corinaldesi and Moriconi
(2009) who experienced cracking in the AM rather than the inter-facial transition zone.
2.2.2
Stiffness
The stiffness of a material is related to the elastic characteristics where the elastic mod-
ules describes the stress-strain (σ - ϵ) relationship. Like the compressive strength the
elastic e-modules dependent on the w/c ratio because the e-modules will increase for
decreasing w/c ratios, but the e-modules is less affected by variations in the w/c ratio
compared to the compressive strength (Herholdt et al., 1985). While the strength de-
pend on the weakest component of either the cement paste or the inter-facial transition
zone, the elastic modules depend on both. Hydrated cement paste and aggregates have
linear elastic properties but when the aggregates and the hydrated cement paste are
combined into concrete the stress-strain relationship is no longer linear over the full
strain range because of micro-cracks can occur in the concrete (Figure 2.7) (Mehta and
Monteiro, 2006). However at strains up to approximately 50 % of the ultimate stress
the stress strength is nearly linear (Figure 2.7) (Herholdt et al., 1985).
Figure 2.7: Stress-strain relationship for concrete and the cement paste and the aggre-
gates separately loaded in uniaxial compression (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006)
As explained in section 2.1.3 micro-cracks will prior to application of an external load
be present in the inter-facial transition zone because of drying and thermal shrinkage ef-
fects (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). According to Herholdt et al. (1985) such cracks in the
inter-facial transition zone will remain stable until 30 % of the ultimate load. Because
the concrete is not a linear elastic material the e-modules cannot be calculated by Hooks
law. Instead the stress-strain relation is described by three types of elastic moduli i.e
the Initial tangent e-modules, the tangent modulus and the secant modulus (Figure 2.8).
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Durability of Concrete
12
Figure 2.8: Stress-strain curve with the tree types of e-modules: The Initial tangent e-
modules, the tangent modulus and the secant modulus (Frederiksen and Munch-Petersen,
2015)
As will be explained in section 2.3 the freeze-thaw resistance is often measured as the
relative dynamic e-modules which is approximately given by the initial tangent modulus
through origin (Figure 2.8). The dynamic modulus of elasticity corresponds to a very
small instantaneous strain which can also be measured by sonic test (Mehta and Mon-
teiro, 2006).
2.3
Durability of Concrete
The impermeable water tight property of concrete is one most important properties in
terms of durability and a long life time and especially exposure to frost action have ad-
versely effects on the durability (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). In most cases of concrete
deterioration water is involved and the porosity, the void sizes and interconnection are
significant factors for the permeability (Section 2.1.2) (Gottfredsen and Nielsen, 1995).
In this context the F-T resistance is commonly measured as surface scaling (Mass loss)
and internal cracking measured as the relative dynamic e-modules (RDM) by sonic test.
The influence of de-icing salts are beyond the scope of this report.
2.3.1
Permeability and Frost Action
Because of the porous structure determined by the voids the hardened concrete is capa-
ble of containing a large amount of moisture depending on the ambient humidity (Mehta
and Monteiro, 2006). The permeability of the concrete is however largely dependent on
the size of the voids and their interconnection as permeation of a material with small
voids will take longer than for a material with bigger voids (Gottfredsen and Nielsen,
1995). Where all types and sizes of voids contribute to the porosity of the concrete
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Durability of Concrete
13
only the capillary voids and bigger voids contributes to the permeability of the concrete.
This is why a small volume of capillary voids are desired for frost resistant concrete. As
explained in section 2.1.2 this can be obtained by a low w/c ratio or air-entrainment.
Frost damage like cracking and scaling of the concrete is often a result of the expansions
in the cement paste from repeated freezing and thawing cycles Mehta and Monteiro
(2006). The expansion happens when water freezes in the saturated voids as water ex-
pands approximately 9% when changing from liquid to solid state (ice formation). This
volume expansion in the voids create tensile stresses in the cement paste which can be
damaging. To prevent frost damage in the concrete it is essential that the volume expan-
sion of the ice is buffered without resistance. It is therefore important that a sufficient
part of the void structure is air-filled and not filled with water (Gottfredsen and Nielsen,
1995).
The risk of frost damage in concrete or any porous material is highly dependent on the
saturation level of the voids. A low saturation degree can be ensured by a low perme-
ability of the concrete obtained by a low w/c-ratio why for example DS/EN 206 DK NA
(2019) demands a maximum w/c-ratio of 0.55 (Table 2.1). With a low permeability the
amount of freezable water in the concrete is low resulting in a lower risk of F-T damage
in terms of scaling and internal damage.
Another way to ensure frost resistance is to ensuring a small distance between the small
air voids why standards have a minimum air content and a maximum spacing factor
of the air voids (Table 2.1). According to Mehta and Monteiro (2006) the most impor-
tant factor for ensuring a frost resistant concrete is the air void spacing factor. Using
air-admixtures results in small well distributed spherical air voids that are entrained in
the concrete. These entrained air voids provide an escape boundary for the water which
is forced out of the capillary voids by the pressure from the ice formation (Pigeon and
Pleau, 2006). These voids have to be distributed evenly in the concrete with a distance
of maximum 0.2 mm (Table 2.1) to relieve any pressure generated by the ice.
The porosity of the natural aggregates are usually much less than in the cement paste.
The permeability can however be similar or even higher than the cement paste (Mehta
and Monteiro, 2006). The F-T resistance is not directly affected by the aggregates be-
cause the higher permeability of the aggregates do not directly contribute to a higher
permeability of the hardened concrete. However, surface scaling as a result of the ag-
gregates can occur if an aggregate particle is close to the surface and saturated with
water while subjected to freezing. When the concrete is subjected to freezing the water
is expelled from the aggregate towards the surface of the concrete creating a pressure
inside the thin layer of mortar above the aggregate. If this pressure is too big the mortar
will break resulting in surface scaling (Pigeon and Pleau, 2006).
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Assessment of Freeze-Thaw Durability
14
2.4
Assessment of Freeze-Thaw Durability
When concrete is exposed to freeze-thaw attacks the most common types of deteriora-
tion is surface scaling and internal damage. The concretes ability to resist these types
of deterioration can be measured by several different tests. In Denmark a sufficient F-T
resistance is typically ensured by the limits in table 2.1, where air void analysis is carried
out according to DS/EN 480-11 (2005), and/or analysis of scaling at freezing according
to the Swedish standard SS 137244.
The studies reviewed here (Chapter 4) have primarily measured the F-T resistance of
concrete with RCA as:
• Surface scaling measured as Mass loss [%]
• Internal damage measured as Relative dynamic e-modules (RDM) [%]
where surface scaling and internal damage are measured according to the American
standard ASTM C666 and the Chinese standard GB/T 50082. Similar test methods
are DS/CEN/EN 12390-9 (2016) and DS/CEN/TR 15177 (2006) which describes the
assessment of scaling at freezing and internal damage respectively. The procedure vary
a bit in the different standards and test specifications but all tests involves subjecting a
concrete specimen to a number of freeze-thaw cycles. During these F-T cycles ongoing
measurements of relative dynamic e-modules and/or mass loss due to surface scaling is
performed.
2.4.1
Assessment of Surface Scaling (Mass Loss)
In terms of scaling the technical specification DS/CEN/EN 12390-9 (2016) describes the
testing of the F-T scaling resistance of concrete both with water and with sodium chlo-
ride solution which include one reference method and two alternative methods (Effects
of de-icing salts beyond the scope of this report). The reference method of these tests
are a procure where the concrete specimens are subjected to 56 F-T cycles where the
specimens are cooled to between −15◦C and −22◦C and then heated to between +16◦C
and +24◦C within a 22-24 hours duration period. At 7, 14, 28, 42, and 56 cycles the
material which scales off is collected. At 56 cycles the accumulated amount of scaled
material per unit area can be assessed together with the mean value of scaled material
which describes the concrete’s ability to resist scaling. The Swedish standard SS 137244
as described by Pigeon and Pleau (2006) provides a similar method.
2.4.2
Assessment of Internal Damage (RDM)
The technical specification DS/CEN/TR 15177 (2006) specifies different methods of
estimating the resistance to internal damage of concrete subjected to freeze thaw attacks.
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Assessment of Freeze-Thaw Durability
15
The general procedure is to subject the concrete specimens to freeze-thaw cycles of 12
hours where the specimens are cooled to between −16◦C and −22◦C and then heated
to between +4◦C and +22◦C. After 7, 14, 28, 42, and 56 cycles the dynamic modulus
of elasticity Edyn [kN/mm2] is measured either by the ultrasonic pulse transit time or
the fundamental transverse frequency of the specimens:
Edyn = X2 · l2 · ρ · C
(2.3)
Where X is the measures either the natural frequency [Hz] if the fundamental trans-
verse frequency is used or the reciprocal of the ultra sonic pulse transit time [µs] if the
ultrasonic pulse transit time is used. l [mm] is the length of the specimen, ρ [kg/m3] is
the density of the specimen and C is a correction factor containing the Poissons ratio
µ. The internal structural damage can be calculated as the relative dynamic modulus
of elasticity (RDM) in percentage:
RDMn = (Xn
X0
)2 · 100%
(2.4)
Where index n indicates the measured value at n F-T cycles, while index 0 indicates
the initial measured value. Because the internal structural damage is calculated as the
relative dynamic modulus of elasticity the parameters of l, ρ and C in eq 2.3 can be
neglected in eq. 2.4. The loss in relative dynamic e-modules can be calculated as:
RDMnLoss = 100 −RDMn
(2.5)
Many other test methods are available for assessment of F-T resistance, where especially
the American standard ASTM C 666 is widely used. This test describes a procedure
where the concrete specimen is subjected to a number of freeze-thaw cycles where the
specimen is cooled to −17.8◦C and heated to 4.4◦C within 2-5 hours. The F-T durability
is calculated after 300 cycles or when the dynamic modulus of elasticity has fallen to 60
% of the initial value. The durability factor (DF) is used for normalizing the performed
F-T cycles:
DF = RDM · N
300
(2.6)
where RDM [%] is the the percentage of the initial dynamic modulus after N number of
cycles. A concrete with a DF > 60 is in general considered frost resistant even though
there are no specific limits on DF. Concretes with a DF < 40 are considered to have
unsatisfactory F-T properties.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
Recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) may or may not have a considerable influence on
the freeze-thaw resistance of concrete. This influence of RCA will here be evaluated
and attempted quantified in two steps: First by a literature review and extraction of
data and subsequently by analysis of the extracted data by application of partial least
squares regression (PLS).
The literature review and extraction of data will provide the datasets and prior knowl-
edge necessary for conducting the PLS regression analysis.
The overall approach of
literature review method is similar to that presented by Okoli and Schabram (2010) but
here expanded to include the PLS analysis using the guidelines provided by Wold et al.
(2001). In normal application of the PLS method it is recommended that the dataset
is divided into a training subset and a validation subset. However, the limited data
available in the literature precludes sub-sampling. As a result the applied PLS method
is only used to develop a model based on the full dataset, whereas the PLS model vali-
dation will remain a prospect for future research.
3.1
Methodology of Literature Review
To obtain an overview of existing literature concerning the F-T resistance of concrete
with RCA a review of existing literature have been carried out and presented in chapter
4. Available studies and literature related to investigations of the freeze thaw resistance
of concrete with RCA is collected to provide a theoretical background for subsequent
research on the topic of frost resistance of concrete with RCA. The methodology used
for conducting the literature review in this thesis is based on the systematic guide to
a literature review presented by Okoli and Schabram (2010) modified into a 7 step
approach to be applicable for the purpose of this report (Figure 3.1). The 7 steps are
divided into four phases i.e. a planning phase, a selection phase, an extraction phase and
an execution phase where the execution phase here includes the PLS regression analysis
of the extracted data (Figure 3.1).
16
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Methodology of Literature Review
17
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the applied method providing a systematic literature review
(Okoli and Schabram, 2010). Here the PLS analysis is applied in step 6. Analysis of
findings.
3.1.1
Planning
Defining the purpose of the literature review is the first step in the review methodology
which represents the planning phase (Figure 3.1). The identification of the purpose and
intended goals of the literature review are defined by the objective namely; to quantify
if RCA have an influence on the F-T resistance of concrete, not including de-icing salts
(Section 1.1).
3.1.2
Selection
The literature research is carried out using the search tool ”DTU Findit” provided by
DTU Library. Only published journal articles that are covered by the DTU licence are
included. It should be noted that some relevant literature might be excluded as not all
accessible literature are covered by this search. The combination of key words in this
literature are the ones which got the most hits using ”DTU Findit”. The number of
searches and exact keywords used for the search are given in table 3.1. The function
”Only exact matches” is used to limit the number of articles in each search. A manual
screening of the 296 search hits was performed so only studies that focus on experimen-
tal work and the influence of RCA are included her by reading the abstract.
Table 3.1:
Key words and screening criteria used in selection of relevant literature
concerning F-T resistance of concrete with RCA
Search
Key words
Screening criteria
#1
Freeze thaw resistance recycled
concrete aggregates
Experiments, RCA, frost
resistance, F-T resistance
measured on Mass loss and/or
dynamic e-modules
#2
Frost resistance recycled concrete
aggregates
#3
Air entrainment recycled concrete
aggregates
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Methodology of Literature Review
18
3.1.3
Extraction of Data
With all potential relevant articles collected based on the search and screening the subse-
quent step is the quality appraisal where the articles are examined more closely (Figure
3.1). Their overall quality and experimental design and applied methods are reviewed
and common measured variables are identified (Table 4.2, Chapter 4).
Any articles
which have not measured F-T resistance as loss in dynamic e-modules and/or mass loss
are excluded. With the articles of inadequate quality removed, the potential important
variables are identified and outlined in table 4.4 in chapter 4 and the relevant data is
extracted from the remaining articles and studies and is collected in Dataset0 (Appendix
S).
In studies where measured results are only presented as graphs and not table values
the graphs are digitized to extract the relevant data using the free software tool ”Plot
Digitize” 1. An image of the relevant graph is imported to the digitize tool and the
axis and their respective maximum and minimum values are calibrated. The relevant
observations are marked and their coordinates are summarised into table values which
can be copied to Microsoft Excel and all relevant data are collected in Excel for further
analysis in Dataset0 (Appendix S). Some uncertainty in the digitizing process is assumed
as the coordinates are obtained by clicking at each point manually.
3.1.3.1
Preparation of Data for Further Analysis
The collective Dataset0 includes 111 observations for all studies reviewed in Chapter
4 including data for all variables listed in table 4.2 in the same chapter. As can be
observed the studies included in the review have measured several different parameters
which are only to some extend common why not all studies are included in the PLS
analysis. To obtain data sets of acceptable size and to get comparable observations it
is assumed that the replacement ratio of NA with RCA is the replacement of the total
amount of aggregates. The effect of air-entrainment of RCA is neglected in the PLS
analyses but will be addressed in the discussion. Furthermore, it is assumed that the
performed number of F-T cycles are unimportant as most studies have performed 300
or more cycles which when calculating the durability factor (DF) will become indifferent.
The PLS method is here used as an applied method for quantify the influence of RCA
on the F-T resistance measured on Mass loss and loss in relative dynamic e-modules
(RDM loss) Dataset0 is divided into three subsets: Dataset1, Dataset2 and Dataset3
(Table 3.2). An additional Dataset 4 is obtained for discussion of the durability factor
in chapter 6 (Appendix W).
Dataset1 includes all observation from studies where compressive strength is measured
together with air content (Table 3.2). Dataset2 includes all observations from studies
1http://plotdigitizer.sourceforge.net/
==PAGE:26==
3.1 Methodology of Literature Review
19
where both the relative dynamic e-modules and mass loss are measured and Dataset3
includes all observations from data set 2 where air content is measured additionally
(Table 3.2). The relative dynamic e-modules (RDM) is in the studies expressed as the
remaining e-modules after a number of freeze thaw cycles. In the following analysis the
relative dynamic e-modules is expressed as 100-RDM to obtain the loss in the relative
dynamic e-modules (RDM loss).
Table 3.2: Overview of data sets and their content conducted as subsets of Dataset0
based on the reviewed studies in Chapter 4
Data
set
No.
of
obs
Variables
Studies incl.
Responses (y)
Predictors (x)♮
Dataset1†
App. T
21
Compressive
strength (fc,28)
w/c, RCA repl.
ratio,
NA/RCA, air content,
AE/NonAE
(Bogas
et
al.,
2016),
(Liu et al., 2016)
Dataset2∗
App. U
66
Mass loss, Loss in
relative dynamic e-
modules (RDM)
w/c, RCA repl.
ratio,
NA/RCA, AE/NonAE
(Aghabaglou
et
al.,
2016),
(Bogas et al.,
2016),
(Liu
et
al.,
2016), (Yildirim et al.,
2015),
(Richardson
et al., 2011)
Dataset3‡
App. V
30
Mass loss, Loss in
relative dynamic e-
modules (RDM)
w/c, RCA repl.
ratio,
NA/RCA, air content,
AE/NonAE
(Gokce
et
al.,
2010),
(Bogas
et
al.,
2016),
(Liu et al., 2016)
† Used in the initial assessment of the PLS model approach (Section 5.1 and 5.2)
∗Used in analysis of RCA’s influence on the F-T resistance on a large part of the reviewed studies
(excluding the air content variable) (Section 5.3)
‡ Used in analysis of RCA’s influence on the F-T resistance on small part of the reviewed studies
(including the air content variable) (Section 5.4)
♮w/c [-] explain the water/cement ratio, RCA repl. ratio [%] explain the ratio of the total aggregate
volume which is replaced by RCA, NA/RCA explain whether NA or RCA is used, air content [%]
explain the air content measured and AE/NonAE explain air-entrained or non-air-entrained
The unit less w/c predictor denotes the ratio between water and cement used in the
concerned studies and the RCA repl. ratio [%] explain how much of the total natural
aggregate volume (coarse and sand) is substituted with RCA (Table 3.2). The NA/RCA
predictor is a qualitative variable explaining whether the concrete contains 100 % natural
aggregates or if the concrete contain RCA (Table 3.2). The air content predictor [%]
denotes the measured air content in the concrete and AE/NonAE explain whether the
concrete is air-entrained or non-air-entrained.
3.1.4
Analysis Execution
The last step is the execution of the literature review where the influence of RCA on the F-
T resistance measured by RDM loss and Mass loss is quantified (Figure 3.1). The analysis
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
20
is executed by comparing the findings in the reviewed literature with the results from
the PLS analysis performed on the extracted data. In the following the PLS modelling
approach is described in overall practical terms along with the basic concepts of partial
least squares regression without going into detail about the underlying mathematical
details.
3.2
Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS)
Regression Analysis
Partial least squares (PLS) regression is an applicable modelling method for quantita-
tively relating the input variables (predictors) to the result variables (responses). Data of
an investigated system is divided into two blocks of X and Y, where the X-block contain
the predictor data of the system and the Y-block contain the response data observed in
the system (Carlson and Carlson, 1991). The advantages of PLS are that the method
can model several response variables (Y) simultaneously and it can handle data with
strong co-linearity between variables (Sartorius, 2017). The PLS models can besides
quantification of relations be used to predict expected responses by entering additional
data into the predictor block (X) and increasing the number of relevant variables or
observations would improve the precision of the model (Wold et al., 2001). When fitting
a partial least squares model PLS quantifies linear (or polynomial) relations between the
predictor block (X) and the response block (Y) and their inherent structure (Sartorius,
2017). The results of the PLS analysis can be evaluated graphically and the visual inter-
pretation are often sufficient to understand the relations between the variables (Carlson
and Carlson, 1991).
Partial least squares regression analysis is used in this report as an applied method
to investigate the extracted data. The goal is to use PLS to quantify the influence of
RCA on the F-T resistance using the software tool ”SIMCA”2. The overall approach for
the PLS analysis is based on the method provided in Wold et al. (2001) and the PLS
regression analysis performed on the extracted data is divided into four parts:
• Part 1: Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
using Dataset1 (Table 3.2, Appendix T)
• Part 2: Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
Incl. RCA using Dataset1 (Table 3.2, Appendix T)
• Part 3: PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA using Dataset2
(Table 3.2, Appendix U)
• Part 4: PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA incl. Air Content
using Dataset3 (Table 3.2, Appendix V)
2https://umetrics.com/products/simca
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
21
According to Wold et al. (2001) a good understanding of the responses (Y) and the pre-
dictors (X) of interest is important for obtaining a useful PLS model of the investigated
relationships.
Based on the theory in chapter 4 an understanding of the considered
response variables of F-T resistance and compressive strength is obtained. Dataset1
is used for the analysis in Part 1 and 2, Dataset2 is used for analysis in Part 3, and
Dataset3 is used for analysis in Part 4 (Table 3.2).
With the data sets defined the normal approach in developing a PLS model, as men-
tioned above, is to divide the data set into a training set and a validation set (Wold
et al., 2001). However, here because the data set contain only few observations it is not
possible to divide the data set in a meaning full way into a training and a validation
set. As a result the PLS models established in Part 1 to 4 should be viewed as initial
training models, where the validation remains a prospect for future research.
The fitted models are evaluated on the basis of the goodness of fit statistics explained in
section 3.2.2.1 and the modelled relations and important variables are interpreted by the
relevant loadings- and VIP Plots as explained in section 3.2.2.2. PLS analysis is used
to model the relationship described by Bolomey’s equation as an initial assessment of
the PLS method using the observations in extracted data (Part 1). In Part 2 this initial
analysis is expanded to include RCA to test how RCA would influence the relationship
established by PLS in Part 1. As a part of the initial assessment (Part 1 and 2) the three
most common functional relations (linear-, exponential- and power function) are tested
on the known relationship to investigate how the PLS method cope with non-linear data.
Subsequently the models in Part 3 and 4 are used to quantify the influence of RCA on
the F-T resistance assuming different functional relationships because the F-T relations
are not known a priory.
3.2.1
PLS Regression Analysis in SIMCA
The method used for establishing the PLS models in SIMCA are the same for all four
parts where the overall approach follow the basic principles suggested Wold et al. (2001).
First the dataset, in a excel file, is imported into SIMCA where the observation ID’s
are defined along with the response variable(s) (Y) and the relevant predictors (X). The
variables are likewise defined as qualitative or quantitative variables. Predictors not
modelled in the respective model are marked for exclusion from the analysis. The PLS
method is used to model linear relations and when an exponential relation is suspected
in a given dataset logarithmic transformation is used to transform the response(s) (Y) to
obtain a linear relation. When a power function relation is suspected such as f(x) = x−1,
then both predictor and response variables are log10 transformed. In Part 1 and 2 the
data are first analysed with no transformation testing for a linear relationship. Subse-
quently a logarithmic transformation is used testing for a exponential relation and then
a power function relationship. In the power function relationship (w/c)−1 is used instead
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
22
of logarithmic transformation of both responses and predictors to avoid further complex-
ity in the models as the RCA replacement ratio predictor contain observations of the
value zero. It should be noted that the exponential and the simple power function x−1
can be very difficult to distinguish when the range of x is small and the dataset is small
as is the case here where the w/c ratio is usually between 0.3 and 0.6. In Part 3 and 4
both a linear relationship is tested and subsequently similar analysis are performed test-
ing an exponential relation by logarithmic transformation of the response variable(s) (Y).
With all variables defined the ”Auto fit” function in SIMCA is used to calculate the
optimal number of model components. The goodness of fit statistics are evaluated as
described in the following (Section 3.2.2) and the modelled relations are further inves-
tigated by generating the score scatter plot, the loadings plot and the VIP plot. These
plots are used for investigations of the correlation structure in the data as well as iden-
tification of important variables, and the interpretation of the plots are explained in the
following (Section 3.2.2).
3.2.2
Interpretation of the PLS Analysis
The PLS method is a projection method and is explained simplest from a geometrical
point of view. The predictor matrix (X) with K variables and the response matrix (Y)
with M variables can be geometrically understood as N points in two spaces of K and M
dimensions respectively where N is the number of experiments/observations (Sartorius,
2017). The overall principle in PLS is then to relate the variation in the Y-space with
the variation in the X-space by modelling the variation in the two spaces simultaneously.
The objects (N) in the K-dimensional X space and the M-dimensional Y space are pro-
jected down to PLS components. The projections are made in a way where the variation
in the N points are well described by the PLS components. Each PLS component (di-
mension) (j) expresses a linear relation between an x-score vector tj and an y-score
vector uj. The PLS scores of the Y block (uj) should have a maximum correlation to
the scores of the X block (tj) (Carlson and Carlson, 1991). How the predictors (X) are
combined to form tj and the y-variables are combined to form uj for each model compo-
nent are explained by weight vectors (Sartorius, 2017). The loadings for the predictors
(X) is denoted w. w indicates the importance of these predictors as in how much they
contribute in the modelling of Y. The loadings for the responses Y is denoted c and in-
dicates which responses are modelled in the respective PLS model dimension (Sartorius,
2017). A loadings plot of w and c (w*c) illustrates the relationship between X and Y,
the importance of variables and which responses Y are related to which predictors (X).
Because PLS is based on projections it is possible to have only a few observations (min.
N=5) but the model precision will however increase with more observations (Carlson
and Carlson, 1991).
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
23
3.2.2.1
Model Components and Goodness of Fit Statistics
As suggested by (Wold et al., 2001) the first thing when fitting a PLS model is to eval-
uate model components and the goodness of fit statistics. The number of components
express the complexity of the model and the relations. Calculating more components
than the optimal will result in a so-called over-fit the model where noise is modelled
rather tan variance in Y (James et al., 2013). However using the ”Auto-fit” function in
SIMCA should provide the optimal number of components.
In SIMCA the goodness of fit statistics include R2Y and Q2. These goodness of fit statis-
tics give an upper and lower bound of how well the model explain the data and predicts
new data (Wold et al., 2001). The upper bound R2Y express how much of the variance
in the Y-block that is described by the model and is often refereed to as ”explained
variance”. A good model have a high R2Y statistic which is approaching 1. R2Y =0.9
can be seen as an expression of that 90% of the variance in the response (Y) is explained
by the model (Wold et al., 2001). The lower bound is expressed as Q2 which indicates
how well the model predicts new observations. Q2 can also be seen as an estimate of the
stability/reliability of the model (Carlson and Carlson, 1991). The predictive power Q2
should approach 1 and a model with a Q2 statistic > 0.9 is a very good, while a Q2 > 0.5
is acceptable. A high Q2 statistic is only possible with a high R2Y . Furthermore is a low
difference between R2Y and Q2 desirable as a difference larger than 0.2-0.3 between R2Y
and Q2 imply outliers or irrelevant predictors in the X block (Carlson and Carlson, 1991).
3.2.2.2
Plots
Many different plots can be produced from the PLS model illustrating groups in the
observations, outliers, the modelled relationships and structure. According to (Wold
et al., 2001) some of the most important plots are the scores and lodings plots which
are two of the plots provided by the summary function in SIMCA. In addition to these
two plots are the VIP plots which are also useful for interpretation of the PLS models.
How to interpret the plots are explained in the following.
Score Scatter Plots
Plotting the score vectors (tj) against each other illustrates the positions of the projected
observation points in the vector plane spanned by the PLS vectors in the X-space. This
way the score plots of tj summarises the relationship between the modeled observations
in the X-space and is by default plotted as t1 vs. t2 in SIMCA for (Figure 3.2). Figure
3.2 illustrates the principle of the score scatter of t1 vs. t2 where N denotes the modelled
observations. The score plots are used in the following to investigate outliers in the
observations.
Observations placed outside the ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by a
default significance level 0.05 is categorized as outliers such as N8 in figure 3.2 (Sartorius,
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
24
2017). Score scatter plots can also be used to investigate groupings or patterns within
the observations. A plot of uj will show the equivalent for the Y-space (Carlson and
Carlson, 1991).
Figure 3.2: Schematic illustration of the two dimensional score scatter plot from SIMCA
of the X score t1 for model component 1 vs. the X score t2 for model component 2
Loadings Plots
The loadings plot summarises the relationship among the predictors and responses (X-
and Y-variables) by plotting the so-called x-weights, w* and y-weights c in the same plot
and is by default plotted as w ∗c1 vs w ∗c2 in SIMCA (Figure 3.3). The loadings plots
illustrates the correlation structure of the variables as the w* is modelled to maximize
the correlation between X and Y indirectly (Sartorius, 2017).
Positive correlated variables are placed close to each other and variables which have a
negative correlation are placed opposite to each other with respect to the origin (Figure
3.3a) (Carlson and Carlson, 1991). For a visual interpretation an imaginary line can be
drawn form the response variable of interest (Y) through origin. The respective predic-
tors (X) are projected perpendicular onto this line (Figure 3.3b). In figure 3.3b X1 is
projected onto the line in the same side of origin as Y meaning Y and X1 are positive
correlated. A negative correlation is illustrated for X2, as X2 is projected onto the line
at the opposite side of origin. Variables situated close to origin, such as X3 in figure 3.3b
indicate non-significance for the model (Wold et al., 2001). The position of observations
in the score plots are influenced by the variables which are situated in the same direction
in the loadings plot (Sartorius, 2017).
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Application of Partial Least Squares (PLS) Regression Analysis
25
(a) Loadings scatter plot
(b) The visual interpretation of the loadings scatter plot
Figure 3.3: Schematic illustration of the loadings scatter plot summarising the relation-
ship among the Y variables and the respective X variables and the visual interpretation
(Sartorius, 2017)
Variable Important for Projection Plots
The VIP plots (variable important for projection plots) summarises the importance of
the variables to both explain the predictors (X) and to correlate the response(s) (Y)
(Sartorius, 2017). A VIP value > 1 imply an important predictor and VIP-values < 0.5
indicates a non-important predictor. VIP values between 1 and 0.5 are not well defined
as either important or non-important and their level of importance depends on the size of
the dataset (Sartorius, 2017). The VIP plot is sorted from important to non-important
moving from left to right.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Literature Review
To quantify if RCA have an influence on the F-T resistance of concrete measured by loss
in dynamic e-modules and mass loss a review of available literature is performed based
on the approach described in section 3.1.
4.1
Review of Available Literature
The search for literature on ”DTU Findit” revealed 148 articles matching the key words
of ”Freeze thaw resistance recycled concrete aggregates”, 94 articles matching the key
words of ”Frost resistance recycled concrete aggregates” and 54 articles matching the
key words ”Air entrainment recycled concrete aggregates” (Table 4.1). Some articles
appeared in all three searches which is why the total of 296 hits is not an expression
of 296 different articles. A total of 18 articles remained after screening the abstracts
according to the screening criteria listed in table 3.1.
Table 4.1: Results from literature search concerning F-T resistance performed using
”DTU Findit” for exact matches to the key words
Search
Key words
Hits
Hits
after
selection
Hits
af-
ter
quality
assessment
#1
Freeze thaw resistance recy-
cled concrete aggregates
148
16
9
#2
Frost
resistance
recycled
concrete aggregates
94
0
0
#3
Air
entrainment
recycled
concrete aggregates
54
2
2
Hits in Total
296
18
11
Quality assessment of the 18 articles revealed that 7 out of 18 articles had neither
measured loss in dynamic e-modules nor mass loss due to freeze-thaw impacts. Therefore
only 11 articles remained after quality assessment (Table 4.1). Relevant information
26
==PAGE:34==
4.2 Overview of Included Studies and Measured Variables
27
from the remaining 11 articles is collected in table 4.2 together with an overview of
measured/listed variables in the studies. Within the 11 articles there is a big variation
in measured variables and the performed experiments (Table 4.2).
4.2
Overview of Included Studies and
Measured Variables
The review revealed that the type of recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) vary, as some
studies have used waste concrete (denoted w, Table 4.2) and others have used self created
RCA by crushing concrete cast prior to the study providing those studies with known
properties of RCA. In general the information of the RCA properties is very limited in
the reviewed studies and only a few studies including Gokce et al. (2010), Gokce et al.
(2004) and Liu et al. (2016) have listed the attached mortar content of RCA. The studies
using self created RCA have however described the RCA in more detail compared to
studies using waste RCA. Additionally, there is a big variation in the utilized fractions
of RCA (fine fraction denoted f and coarse fraction denoted c, Table 4.2). Some studies
have substituted a part of the fine fraction of NA with RCA, others have substituted
the coarse aggregates with RCA, yet others have utilized both the fine and the coarse
fraction of RCA. Prior to casting of the new concrete about half the studies have chosen
to pre-saturate the RCA before casting the concrete.
The majority of the studies have used measurements of the relative dynamic e-modules
to quantify the F-T resistance, and many have additionally measured the mass loss due
to surface scaling. Only Niu et al. (2017) and Guo et al. (2017) have measured the F-T
resistance by mass loss exclusively. The American standard test method ASTM C666
seems to be the most popular method for assessment of F-T resistance of concrete to-
gether with the Chinese standard GB/T50082 (Table 4.2). About half the studies have
used air-entrainment of the new concrete, and for those studies using self-created RCA
the RCA is obtained from originally air-entrained concrete in some of the experiments
(Table 4.2). In addition to the F-T resistance, most studies have also measured the
compressive strength of the new concrete after 28 days of curing.
Depending on the main focus in the reviewed studies additional variables have been
measured such as tensile strength and shrinkage (Yildirim et al., 2015) or capillary
absorption (Amorim et al., 2018). These variables are however not included in table 4.2
as these variables are not measured by the majority of the studies.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Overview of Included Studies and Measured Variables
28
Table 4.2: Overview of measured variables and parameters for RCA and the new concrete listed in the reviewed studies. Empty
spaces denote that the variable is not measured/listed in the study
RCA variables
New concrete
Author
RCA
source∗
RCA
Frac.†
RCA
AE⋆
Orig.
fc
RCA
w/c
AM
Absor-
ption
Den-
sity
Pre-
sat.
AE∗∗
w/c
Air
cont.
Slump
Test
method
Mass
Loss
RDM
fc,28
Gokce
et
al.
(2010)
s
f + c
a
x
x
x
x
x
A
x
x
x
ASTM
C 666
x
x
Gokce
et
al.
(2004)
s
a
x
x
x
x
x
A
x
x
x
ASTM
C 666
x
Aghabaglou
et
al.
(2016)
w
f
a
x
x
B
x
x
x
x
Cube
Niu et al.
(2017)
w
f + c
a
x
x
B
x
x
GB/T
50082
x
Bogas
et
al.
(2016)
s
f
b
x
x
x
x
A
x
x
x
ASTM
C 666
x
x
x
cube
Liu et al.
(2016)
s
c
a
x
x
x
x
x
x
A
x
x
x
GB/T
50082
x
x
x
cube
Amorim
et
al.
(2018)
w
c
b
x
x
x
B
x
x
ASTM
C 666
x
x
cube
Yildirim
et
al.
(2015)
w
f
b
x
x
x
B
x
x
ASTM
C 666
x
x
x
cylin-
der
Guo et al.
(2017)
w
f + c
b
x
x
B
x
GB/T
50082
x
x
cube
Richardson
et
al.
(2011)
w
c
b
x
A
x
x
x
ASTM
C 666
x
Kolay
et
al.
(2017)
w
f + c
b
x
x
A
x
ASTM
C 666
x
x
cylin-
der
∗RCA from waste concrete are denoted w and RCA from a self created source are denoted s
† RCA substituting the fine fraction (0-4mm) are denoted f and RCA substituting the coarse fraction (4-16mm) are denoted c
⋆Air-entrainment of RCA is denoted a and non air-entrained concrete is denoted b
∗∗Air-entrainment of new concrete is denoted A and non-air-entrained concrete is denoted B
==PAGE:36==
4.3 Review of influence of RCA on F-T resistance
29
4.3
Review of influence of RCA on F-T
resistance
A close review of the available literature listed in the previous section reveal very con-
tradicting results as to the influence of RCA on the F-T resistance of concrete as sum-
marized in Table 4.3. Eight out of 11 studies conclude that there is a similar or better
F-T resistance of concrete with RCA compared to concrete with NA, while only three
studies suggests a lower F-T resistance (Table 4.3).
Table 4.3: Summary of the literature review of existing available studies regarding F-T
resistance of concrete with RCA
Assessment of
F-T resistance
Number
of studies
Overall findings
Better
4
Several factors like replacement ratio, w/c ratio and higher porosity of
RCA are suggested to contribute to better F-T resistance of concrete
with RCA compared to concrete with NA for concrete with and without
air-entrainment (AE)
Similar
4
The comparable F-T resistance reported for concrete with RCA seem only
slightly affected by the replacement ratio as w/c ratio is identified as the
most influencing factor
Inferior
3
AE is identified to be the most important factor for a good F-T resistance.
The inferior F-T resistance of RCA is mainly attributed the missing air-
entrainment of the AM
A sufficient air-void structure is required for a good freeze-thaw resistance of concrete
because this reduces tensile stresses from the volume expansion of water when it freezes
(Pigeon and Pleau, 2006). In conventional concrete the F-T resistance is obtained by
entraining well distributed spherical air-voids with a maximum distance of 0.2 mm in the
cement paste (Section 2.3). The studies that find a better or similar F-T resistance for
concrete with RCA note that especially the higher porosity of RCA, because of attached
mortar (AM), is suggested to be beneficial for the F-T resistance. Aghabaglou et al.
(2016) find improved F-T resistance of mixtures with replacement ratios beyond 25 %
RCA, and Amorim et al. (2018) find similar results for concretes with 50 % RCA. Like-
wise, Richardson et al. (2011) and Kolay et al. (2017) have reported the RCA concrete
to be slightly more durable than NA concrete and the overall F-T resistance of concrete
with RCA and/or NA is improved using air-admixtures. Guo et al. (2017) find an overall
lower durability of concrete with RCA but the durability performance was observed to
improve with increasing RCA replacement ratio. Aghabaglou et al. (2016) propose the
improved F-T resistance to be attributable to an improved inter-facial transition zone
when using RCA, and that there is a higher porosity observed for RCA that provide
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Review of influence of RCA on F-T resistance
30
a better dissipation of the internal pressure which arise from the ice formation. This
statement is supported by both Yildirim et al. (2015) and Bogas et al. (2016) who find
no significant reduction in F-T resistance for concrete with non-air entrained RCA. The
absorption of RCA is in general known be higher compared to NA because of the higher
porosity. Pre-saturate RCA prior to mixing can support the internal curing of the con-
crete which Yildirim et al. (2015) suggests have a positive impact in the F-T resistance of
the recycled aggregate concrete. This statement is supported by Richardson et al. (2011).
Opposite findings are presented by Gokce et al. (2010), Gokce et al. (2004), Liu et al.
(2016) where they report an inferior F-T resistance of concrete with RCA. AM is sug-
gested to contribute to lower F-T resistance in these studies. This is in contrast to some
of the above that Yildirim et al. (2015), Richardson et al. (2011) and Bogas et al. (2016)
attribute AM to improve the F-T resistance in these studies. When substituting coarse
NA with coarse non air-entrained RCA researchers find the attached mortar of RCA
to interrupt the distribution (maximum distance of 0.2 mm) of the entrained voids in
the new mortar as AM is not containing any entrained air voids (Gokce et al. (2010),
Gokce et al. (2004) and Liu et al. (2016)). In these studies, the higher porosity of RCA
due to AM is not observed to have stress relieving effects because cracks are observed to
initiate in the attached mortar because there is no air void structure to reduce the tensile
stresses caused by ice-formation. Liu et al. (2016) and Gokce et al. (2004) experienced
however a good F-T resistance that is comparable to air-entrained concrete with NA, if
the RCA were obtained from air-entrained concrete. When RCA are air-entrained the
void structure of the attached mortar is similar to the new air-entrained mortar and no
longer the weak link in terms of F-T resistance (Liu et al. (2016) and Gokce et al. (2004)).
From the review it is observed that there seems to be contradictory findings regarding
the influence of RCA. The reviewed literature indicate that other parameters like w/c
ratio and air-entrainment are important for the overall F-T resistance of concrete with
RCA, which questions the actual influence of RCA (Bogas et al., 2016) and Kolay et al.
(2017). In particular there is disagreement about whether AM and its porous structure
contribute to improved or reduced F-T resistance. It should be noted that AM has
only been measured in three out the 11 studies (Table 4.2). In general very few of the
measured variables are commonly observed in most the studies (Table 4.2). Besides the
influence of AM, there are five common variables mentioned to have a varying degree of
influence on the F-T resistance measured as mass loss and/or loss in dynamic e-modules
(Table 4.4).
==PAGE:38==
4.3 Review of influence of RCA on F-T resistance
31
Table 4.4: Summary of most commonly measured variables which might be important
for the F-T resistance of concrete with RCA
Variables
RCA as substitutes for NA (NA/RCA)
Replacement ratio of RCA
Air content
Air entrainment versus non-air-entrainment (AE/NonAE)
w/c ratio
The variables in table 4.4 have been extracted quantitatively from figures and/or tables
in the reviewed studies (Table 4.2). The data are then used in application of the PLS
analysis in the following in an attempt to quantify the actual influence of RCA on the
relationship between the F-T resistance and identified variables in table 4.4.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Interpretation
The application of the PLS analysis is carried out as described in the methods (Chapter
3). The results and immediate interpretation of the results for the four PLS analysis
parts is presented. An overview of different models and their corresponding model vari-
ables can be seen in table 5.1. In the following the terms ”relationship” or ”relations” is
used in the meaning of a functional relationship where predictor variables can either be
correlated positively or negatively with response variables with a functional form that
can be linear, exponential or a power function.
Analysis Part 1 is an initial assessment of the PLS method applied so to model the known
relationship between compressive strength (fc), the air content and the water cement
ratio (w/c) described by Bolomey’s equation (eq.
2.2) (Section 5.1).
The analysis
in Part 2 is an expansion of Part 1, where the models include the RCA replacement
ratio and the qualitative NA/RCA variable. The latter variable state whether natural
aggregates or recycled aggregates are used. In the initial assessment of Part 1 and 2, it
is investigated how well the PLS method cope with non-linear data by assuming either
a linear-, exponential- and power function relation in the data relative to the known
relationship of Bolomey’s (Table 5.1). Part 3 and 4 analyse the influence of RCA on
the F-T resistance measured by either loss in relative dynamic e-modules (RDM loss),
as mass loss or where the two are used in combination.
Again different functional
relationships are evaluated as the relation between the F-T Resistance and the different
predictor variables are not known a priory (Table 5.1). In Part 3, the analysis is carried
out without the air content variables because this permit a larger dataset (Dataset2),
whereas Part 4 includes the air content predictor in the smaller Dataset3.
32
==PAGE:40==
5 Results and Interpretation
33
Table 5.1: Overview of conducted models and corresponding model variables as well as
the assumed relationship (linear-, exponential, or power) in the four analysis performed
Analysis
Model
Dataset
Relationship
Model Variables
#
Linear (L)/
Exponential (E)/
Power (P)
Responses (y)†
Predictors (x)∗
Part 1:
Section
5.1
1.0
Dataset1
App. T
L/E/P
fc,28
w/c, air content
1.1
L/E/P
fc,28
w/c, air content, AE/NonAE
Part 2:
Section
5.2
1.2
Dataset1
App. T
L/E/P
fc,28
w/c, air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl.
1.3
L/E/P
fc,28
w/c, air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl., NA/RCA
1.4
L/E/P
fc,28
w/c, RCA repl., NA/RCA
Part 3:
Section
5.3
2.0
Dataset2
App. U
L/E
RDM loss
w/c, AE/NonAE, RCA repl.,
NA/RCA
2.1
L/E
RDM loss
w/c, AE/NonAE, RCA repl.
3.0
L/E
Mass loss
w/c, AE/NonAE, RCA repl.,
NA/RCA
3.1
L/E
Mass loss
w/c, AE/NonAE, RCA repl.
4.0
L/E
RDM loss + Mass loss
w/c, AE/NonAE, RCA repl.,
NA/RCA
4.1
L/E
RDM loss + Mass loss
w/c, AE/NonAE, RCA repl.,
NA/RCA
Part 4:
Section
5.4
5.0
Dataset3
App. V
L/E
RDM loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl., NA/RCA
5.1
L/E
RDM loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl.
6.0
L/E
Mass loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl., NA/RCA
6.1
L/E
Mass loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl.
7.0
L/E
RDM loss + Mass loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl., NA/RCA
7.1
L/E
RDM loss + Mass loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl.
5.0t
E/E
RDM loss
w/c, Air content, AE/NonAE,
RCA repl., NA/RCA
† The response variable fc,28 denotes the compressive strength [MPa], RDM loss explain the loss in relative dynamic e-modules
measured [%] and Mass loss denotes the mass loss because of surface scaling measued [%]
∗The predictor w/c [-] explain the water/cement ratio, RCA repl. ratio [%] explain the ratio of the total aggregate volume
which is replaced by RCA, NA/RCA explain whether NA (N) or RCA (R) is used, air content [%] explain the air content
measured and AE/NonAE explain air-entrained (A) or non-air-entrained (B)
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
34
5.1
Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS
Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
In the following the results of the initial PLS analysis of Part 1 is presented, where PLS is
applied to model the relationship between the response variable of compressive strength
(fc) and the predictors of w/c ratio and air content known as Bolomey’s equation. The
results from the analysis using a linear relationship is only briefly described (Model
#1L). A more thorough description of the results that use an exponential relationship
follow (Model #1E). Lastly a short summary is given of the results that explore a power
function relationship of (w/c)−1 (Model #1P).
5.1.1
Linear Model
The first initial test of the PLS method explore if a linear relationship can modelled for
the extracted data where the compressive strength (fc,28) is the response variable (Y)
and w/c ratio and the measured air content are the predictors (X). The relationship is
illustrated by model #1.0L and #1.1L (Table 5.2).
Table 5.2:
Model variables and corresponding goodness of fit statistics of modelled
linear relationship between the compressive strength (fc,28) as response variable (Y) and
the different predictors (X). Variables not included are marked with -. Models established
from Dataset1 (Appendix T)
Model Variables
Model
#1.0L
#1.1L
Compressive strength (fc,28) [MPa]
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
-
-
NA/RCA [-]
-
-
AE/NonAE [-]
-
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
1
3
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.501
1.000
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.921
0.930
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.905
0.901
Appendix
App. A
App. A
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics shows an explained variance R2Y > 0.9 for
both model #1.0L and #1.1L (Table 5.2). This illustrates that model #1.0L explains
approx. 90 % of the variance in the response variable of the compressive strength (fc,28)
==PAGE:42==
5.1 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
35
with one model component and model #1.1L explain approx. 90 % of the variance in
the response variable fc,28 with three model components. The predictive power of both
model #1.0L and #1.1L are Q2 > 0.9 which indicate a good capability of predicting
new responses of fc,28. Comparing the two models, model #1.1L has higher measures
of fit indicating that the qualitative predictor variable AE/NonAE increases the models
ability to explain and predict the variables.
Loadings plots for model #1.0L and #1.1L illustrate the modelled relative relations be-
tween the response variable fc,28 and the predictors. These relative relations relations are
similar to what we know from Bolomey’s equation (Section 2.2.1). That is the compres-
sive strength is negatively correlated with the w/c ratio illustrating the models recognises
the relationship between a low w/c ratio and a high compressive strength. Likewise the
compressive strength is negatively correlated with the air content illustrating the models
recognises the relationship between a low air content and a high compressive strength.
The loadings plots can be examined in appendix A together with the score scatter plots
and the VIP plots. The VIP plots illustrates that the air content is considered as an
important variable in model #1.0L and both air content and w/c ratio is recognised as
important variables in model #1.1L.
Comparing the goodness of fit statistics with the modelled relations indicate that a linear
relationship can be a reasonable simple approximation to Bolomey’s equation. However,
as is known the relationship described by the Bolomey’s equation (eq. 2.2) is not linear,
but closer in form to an power function relationship (w/c)−1 or approximately a expo-
nential function which is explored below.
5.1.2
Exponential Model
The second initial test of the application of the PLS method explore an exponential
relationship relative to the known relations in Bolomey’s equation. The PLS analysis
is performed by initial logarithmic transformation of the response variable fc,28 and the
relationship is illustrated by model #1.0E and #1.1E (Table 5.2). Model #1.0E includes
only the w/c ratio and the air content as predictors while #1.1E is expanded to include
AE/NonAE explaining whether the concrete is air-entrained or not.
Model #1.0E explains approx. 91 % of the variance in the response variable of the
compressive strength (fc,28) with one model component (R2Y > 0.9, Table 5.3). Like-
wise model #1.1E explain approx. 94 % of the variance in the response variable of the
compressive strength (fc,28) but with three model components.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
36
Table 5.3: Model variables and corresponding goodness of fit statistics of modelled expo-
nential relationship between the log transformed compressive strength (fc,28) as response
variable (Y) and different predictors (X). Variables not are marked with -.
Models
established from Dataset1 (Appendix T)
Model Variables
Model
#1.0E
#1.1E
Compressive strength (fc,28) [MPa]
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
-
-
NA/RCA [-]
-
-
AE/NonAE [-]
-
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
1
3
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.501
1.000
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.910
0.937
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.898
0.917
Appendix
App. B
App. B
The predictive power of model #1.0E is Q2 ≈0.9 and model #1.1E have a Q2 > 0.9.
This indicates a good capability of predicting new responses of the compressive strength
(fc,28) for both models (Table 5.3). The small difference of 0.012 and 0.02 between R2Y
and Q2 for model #1.0E and #1.1E, respectively, indicate no immediate outliers in the
models (Table 5.3). Comparing the two models show a higher measures of fit for model
#1.1E indicating the qualitative predictor AE/NonAE increases the models ability to
explain and predict the response.
5.1.2.1
Correlation Structure of Modelled Relationship
fc,28 is negatively correlated with the w/c ratio because fc,28 is situated opposite to the
w/c ratio with respect to origin in model#1.0E and #1.1E (Figure 5.1). Both models
identify a exponential relationship in the data where fc,28 decrease for increasing w/c
ratio. The relationship between the air content variable and the compressive strength
(fc,28) variable also appear negative correlated in model #1.0E and #1.1E (Figure 5.1).
The qualitative variable of air-entrainment (AE/NonAE(A)) in model #1.1E is positively
correlated with the air content variable showing that air-entrainment is increasing the
air content which reduces the compressive strength (Figure 5.1b). As the model #1.0E
have only one model component as the optimal number of components, the resulting
loadings plot in figure 5.1a is one-dimensional.
==PAGE:44==
5.1 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
37
(a) Model #1.0E
(b) Model #1.1E
Figure 5.1: Loadings scatter plots of PLS weights w* and c for the one model component
in model #1.0E (a), and the two first model components for model #1.1E (b). The plot
summarises the relationship among the response variable (Y) of compressive strength
(fc,28) and the respective predictors (X) indicating that fc,28 is negatively correlated with
the w/c ratio and the air content predictors
5.1.2.2
Important Variables
The air content variable in both model #1.0E and #1.1E is identified as important vari-
able in explaining the predictor X and but also the compressive strength (Y) as indicated
with a VIP value > 1 (Figure 5.2). In addition the w/c ratio is identified as an important
variable in model #1.1E with a VIP value > 1 (Figure 5.2b). In model #1.0E the VIP
value of the w/c ratio is between 1 and 0.5 which indicate that a bigger dataset in the
PLS analysis is required to assess the importance level for this predictor (Figure 5.2a).
The VIP value of the qualitative variable of air-entrainment vs. non-air-entrainment
(AE/NonAE) is also between 1 and 0.5 in model #1.1E (Figure 5.2b).
(a) Model #1.0E
(b) Model #1.1E
Figure 5.2: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both X
and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.0E and #1.1E.
The importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed
left in the plot
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation
38
5.1.2.3
Data Quality
No critical outliers are observed for the observations in the X-space neither in model
#1.0E nor #1.1E as no observations fall outside the deviation limits (Figure 5.3). Model
#1.0E has only one optimal model component resulting in a one dimensional score plot,
whereas #1.1E illustrate scores of t1 and t2 for the two first model components creating
a two-dimensional score plot (Figure 5.3). The small deviation between R2Y and Q2 in
both model #1.0E and #1.1E in the goodness of fit statistics support that there are no
outliers in the data (Table 5.3).
(a) Model #1.0E
(b) Model #1.1E
Figure 5.3: (a) The one dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.0E of the X score
t1 for model component 1. (b) Two dimensional score scatter plots for model #1.1E of
the X score t1 for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. The figures
illustrate how the X observations are situated with respect to each other (Sartorius, 2017)
5.1.3
Power Function Model
The third initial test of the application of the PLS method explore a power function
relationship relative to the known relations in Bolomey’s equation using the extracted
data in Dataset1 (Appendix T). The PLS analysis is performed by using (w/c)−1 and
the relationship is illustrated by model #1.0P and #1.1P (Table 5.4).
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics show an explained variance R2Y > 0.9 for both
model #1.0P and #1.1P illustrating that approx. 90% of the variance is explained by
the models (Table 5.4). Both models have a Q2 > 0.9 indicating a good predictive power.
Again it can be seen that the R2Y is increased in model #1.1P when the qualitative
variable AE/NonAE is included (Table 5.4). The analysis of using (w/c)−1 show similar
results to the logarithmic transformation in section 5.1.2 why no further analysis is made
for the power function relationship.
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
39
Table 5.4: Model variables and corresponding goodness of fit statistics of modelled power
function relationship ((w/c)−1) between the compressive strength (fc,28) as response (Y)
and the different predictors (X). Variables not included are marked with -.
Models
established from Dataset1 (Appendix T)
Model Variables
Model
#1.0P
#1.1P
Compressive strength (fc) [MPa]
y
y
Water cement ratio ((w/c)−1) [-]
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
-
-
NA/RCA [-]
-
-
AE/NonAE [-]
-
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
1
3
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.553
1.000
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.925
0.930
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.910
0.900
Appendix
App. E
App. E
5.1.4
Overall Interpretation of Modeled Relations
Positive results are obtained with the three initial tests of the application of the PLS
method to explore the three functional relations (linear-, exponential- and power) rela-
tive to the known relation of the Boloemy’s equation (eq. 2.2). Both the linear-, the
exponential and the power function model express relative relations between the pre-
dictors and response variables similar to the relations described by Bolomey’s equation.
The exponential- and power function model are slightly better than the linear model
when comparing the goodness of fit statistics (Table 5.2, 5.3, 5.4). It is observed that
the qualitative variable of whether the concrete is air entrained or not (AE/NonAE)
have a positive effect on the models ability to predict and describe the variables (Table
5.2, 5.3 and 5.4). The VIP plots substantiates this implication as the VIP value for the
AE/NonAE variable is close to 1 (Figure 5.2).
5.2
Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS
Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
The results of the initial PLS analysis modelling the influence of RCA on Bolomey’s
equation in Part 2 are presented in the following. The results of the analysis testing a
linear relationship is described briefly followed by a thorough description of the results
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
40
testing the exponential relationship. Lastly a short summary of the results testing the
power function relationship (w/c)−1 as the results are similar to test of the exponential
relationship.
5.2.1
Linear Model
The RCA replacement ratio and the qualitative variable of NA/RCA is included in the
PLS analysis of the established relations testing a linear relationship building on the
analysis in Part 1 (Section 5.1.1). The expansion of the modelled relationship from sec-
tion 5.1.1 is illustrated by model #1.2L and #1.3L in table 5.5 using the extracted data
in Dataset1 (Appendix T). For comparison model #1.4L is conducted modelling the
relationship describing the compressive strength by the w/c ratio and the replacement
ratio of RCA without the air content predictors (Table 5.5).
Table 5.5: Model variables and corresponding goodness of fit statistics of modelled linear
relationship between the compressive strength (fc,28) as response (Y) and the different pre-
dictors (X). Variables not included are marked with -. Models established from Dataset1
(Appendix T)
Model Variables
Model
#1.2L
#1.3L
#1.4L
Compressive strength (fc,28)[MPa]
y
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
-
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
-
x
x
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
-
Model Values
Model components (A)
2
2
3
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.909
0.675
1.00
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.952
0.953
0.802
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.934
0.823
0.670
Appendix
App. C
App. C
App. C
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics shows an explained variance R2Y > 0.9 for both
model #1.2L and #1.3L. Modelling the compressive strength (fc,28) only by the RCA
predictors and the w/c ratio in model #1.4L results in an explained variance R2Y > 0.8
(Table 5.5). Model #1.2L and #1.3L explain approx. 90 % of the variance in the re-
sponse variable of the compressive strength (fc,28) with two model components whereas
model #1.4L explain about 80 % of the variance with three model components. The
highest predictive power of Q2 > 0.9 is observed for model #1.2L indicating a good
ability to predict new responses. Model #1.3L have a predictive power of Q2 ≈0.8 and
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
41
model #1.4L have a predictive power of Q2 ≈0.7 (Table 5.5).
Loadings plots for model #1.2L and #1.3L illustrate similar modelled relations between
the response variable (fc,28), and the w/c ratio and air content predictors as obtained
in Part 1 (Section 5.1.1). The compressive strength is negatively correlated with the
w/c ratio illustrating the model recognizes the relationship between a low w/c ratio and
high compressive strength. Likewise is the air content a negative correlation with the
compressive strength. The replacement ratio variable is modelled as an negative cor-
relation with the compressive strength in all three models (#1.2L, #1.3L and #1.4L)
indicating a reduced strength with increased ratio of RCA. The VIP plots reflects that
the w/c ratio is the most important variable for explaining the response variable of the
compressive strength (fc,28) in model #1.2L and #1.3L whereas the most important
variable in model #1.4L is the RCA replacement ratio. The loadings and VIP plots can
be examined in appendix C together with the score scatter plots.
Comparing the goodness of fit statistics with the modelled relations show a linear rela-
tionship can be established (Table 5.5). However, based on the knowledge obtained in
chapter 2 the relationship described by Bolomey’s equation is not linear why an identical
PLS analysis is performed testing an exponential relationship.
5.2.2
Exponential Model
The RCA replacement ratio and the qualitative variable of NA/RCA are included in
the PLS analysis of the established relations testing an exponential relationship from
the analysis in Part 1 (Section 5.1.2). The expansion of the modelled relationship from
section 5.1.2 is illustrated by model #1.2E and #1.3E in table 5.6 using the extracted
data in Dataset1 (Appendix T). For comparison model #1.4E is conducted modelling
the relationship describing the compressive strength by the w/c ratio and the replace-
ment ratio of RCA without the air content predictors (Table 5.6).
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics shows an explained variance R2Y > 0.9 for both
model #1.2E and #1.3E (Table 5.6). When modelling the compressive strength (fc,28)
only by the RCA predictors and the w/c ratio in model #1.4E results in an explained
variance R2Y > 0.8 (Table 5.6). Model #1.2E and #1.3E explain approx. 90 % of
the variance in the response variable of the compressive strength (fc,28) with two model
components whereas model #1.4E explain about 80 % of the variance with three model
components. The highest predictive power of Q2 > 0.9 are observed for model #1.2E in-
dicating a good ability to predict new responses. Model #1.3E have a predictive power
of Q2 ≈0.9 and model #1.4E have a predictive power of Q2 ≈0.7. Furthermore a
lower difference between R2Y and Q2 is observed for model #1.3E compared to #1.2E
implying that the variation of the qualitative variable NA/RCA is producing noise in
the model rather than explaining the data (Table 5.6).
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
42
Table 5.6: Model variables and corresponding goodness of fit statistics of modelled expo-
nential relationship between the log transformed compressive strength (fc,28) as response
variable (Y) and the different predictors (X). Variables not included are marked with -.
Models established from Dataset1 (Appendix T)
Model Variables
Model
#1.2E
#1.3E
#1.4E
Compressive strength (fc,28) [MPa]
y
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
-
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
-
x
x
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
-
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
2
2
3
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.910
0.674
1.00
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.956
0.954
0.835
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.944
0.863
0.743
Appendix
App. D
App. D
App. D
5.2.2.1
Correlation Structure of Modelled Relationship
A negative correlation between the compressive strength (fc,28) and the w/c ratio is es-
tablished as fc,28 is situated opposite to the w/c ratio with respect to origin in all three
models (#1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E) (Figure 5.4). The PLS analysis have identified a rela-
tionship in the data where the compressive strength is decreasing with an increased w/c
ratio. The RCA replacement ratio predictor is modelled as negatively correlated with
the compressive strength in all three model (#1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E) indicating a re-
duced strength for an increased replacement ratio of RCA (Figure 5.4). The qualitative
variable of NA/RCA describing whether NA or RCA are used in the concrete is recog-
nised to be positive correlated with the replacement ratio such as a high replacement
ratio is correlated with NA/RCA(R) denoting RCA in the concrete (Figure 5.4b and
5.4c). The qualitative variable of whether air entrainment is used or not (AE/NonAE) is
also recognised to be positive correlated with the air content variable showing a high air
content in the concrete is related to air-entrainment which again is negatively correlated
with the compressive strength (#1.2E and #1.3E) (Figure 5.4a and 5.4b). The air con-
tent variable is however negatively correlated with the compressive strength (Figure 5.4).
==PAGE:50==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
43
(a) Model #1.2E
(b) Model #1.3E
(c) Model #1.4E
Figure 5.4: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E. Summarising the relationship among
the response variable (Y) of compressive strength (fc,28) and the respective predictors (X)
indicating that fc,28 is negatively correlated with the w/c ratio, RCA replacement ratio
and the air content predictors
5.2.2.2
Important Variables
The most important variable for explaining the compressive strength is the RCA replace-
ment ratio with the highest VIP value for all three models (#1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E)
(Figure 5.5). Both air content and w/c ratio are also identified as important variables
in model #1.2E and #1.3E with VIP values > 1 (Figure 5.5a and 5.5b). The qualita-
tive variable of AE/NonAE have a VIP value very close to 1 in both model #1.2E and
#1.3E. The qualitative variable of NA/RCA have the lowest VIP value just above 0.5
which is the limit for where the variables are considered important when included in
model #1.3E (Figure 5.5b). When the compressive strength is only described by RCA
replacement ratio, NA/RCA and w/c ratio in model #1.4E it is only the replacement
ratio which has a VIP value > 1 (Figure 5.5c).
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
44
(a) Model #1.2E
(b) Model #1.3E
(c) Model #1.4E
Figure 5.5: VIP plots summarising the importance of the variables to explain both X
and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.2E, #1.3E and
#1.4E. The importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is
placed left in the plot
5.2.2.3
Data Quality
No critical outliers are observed for the observations in the X-space in model #1.2E,
#1.3E and #1.4E as no observations are placed outside the tolerance ellipse (Figure
5.6). This is substantiated by the goodness of fit statistics as only a small deviation be-
tween R2Y and Q2 is observed for model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E respectively (Table
5.6).
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
45
(a) Model #1.2E
(b) Model #1.3E
(c) Model #1.4E
Figure 5.6: Two dimensional score scatter plots for model #1.2E, #1.30E and #1.4E of
the X score t1 for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating
how the X observations are situated with respect to each other.
Observations placed
outside the tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a
default 0.05 significance level (Sartorius, 2017)
5.2.2.4
Power Function Model
The RCA replacement ratio and the qualitative variable of NA/RCA are included in the
PLS analysis of the established relations testing a power function relationship ((w/c)−1)
in an expansion of models from the analysis in Part 1 (Section 5.1.3). The expansion of
the modelled relationship from section 5.1.3 is illustrated by model #1.2P, #1.3P and
#1.4P (Table 5.7) using the extracted data in Dataset1 (Appendix T).
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics shows an explained variance of R2Y > 0.9 for
both model #1.2P and #1.3P illustrating approx. 90% of the variance is explained by
the models with two model components (Table 5.7). Model #1.4P have an explained
variance of R2Y > 0.8 indicating model #1.4P explain approx 80% of the variance in
the response variable of the compressive strength (Table 5.7). The highest predictive
power is obtained by model #1.2P with Q2 > 0.9 indicating a good ability to predict
new responses. Model #1.3P have predictive power Q2 ≈0.8 and model #1.4P have
a predictive power Q2 ≈0.7. The analysis of using (w/c)−1 show similar results to
the logarithmic transformation in 5.2.2 why no further analysis is made for the power
function relationship.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Initial PLS Analysis - Assessment of PLS Relative to Bolomey’s Equation Incl. RCA
46
Table 5.7: Model variables and corresponding goodness of fit statistics of modelled power
function relationship ((w/c)−1) between the compressive strength (fc,28) as response (Y)
and the different predictors (X). Variables not included are marked with -.
Models
established from Dataset1 (Appendix T)
Model Variables
Model
#1.2P
#1.3P
#1.4P
Compressive strength (fc,28) [MPa]
y
y
y
Water cement ratio ((w/c)−1) [-]
x
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
-
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
-
x
x
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
-
Godness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
2
2
3
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.913
0.678
1.00
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.952
0.955
0.815
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.934
0.830
0.680
Appendix
App. E
App. E
App. E
5.2.3
Overall Interpretation of Modelled Relations
Comparing the three initial tests of the application of the PLS method to explore the
three functional relations (linear, exponential and power function) relative to the known
relation of the Bolomey’s equation including RCA reveal similar results. Both the linear-,
exponential and power function model expanded to include RCA show relative relations
similar to the relations described by Bolomey’s equation (eq. 2.2). The expansion of the
models to include RCA does not change the overall relative relations from Part 1. The
RCA replacement ratio is identified as an important variable for explaining the compres-
sive strength while the qualitative variable of NA/RCA does not improve the overall
explanation of the compressive strength (fc,28) in an overall comparison of goodness of
fit statistics of the linear-, exponential- and power function model (Table 5.5, 5.6 and
5.7). The VIP plots substantiates this with the NA/RCA assigned with a low VIP value.
Comparing the results of Part 1 (Section 5.1) with the results from Part 2 (Section 5.2)
the goodness of fit statistics are improved for both the linear-, exponential- and power
function model when including RCA replacement ratio variable. However, the models
have a lower explained variance when modelling the compressive strength excluding the
air variables. Comparing the results obtained by the exponential and linear models show
highest overall goodness of fit statistics for the exponential relationship indicating the
exponential relationship fit the data better than the linear relationship. The exponential
and the power relationship show almost identical goodness of fit statistics indicating no
considerable difference in the two relationships why the exponential relation are used in
the further analysis of the F-T resistance.
==PAGE:54==
5.3 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA
47
5.3
PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The
Influence of RCA
In the following the results of the PLS analysis of Part 3 are presented using a large
part of the extracted data (Dataset2, Appendix U). Here the influence of RCA on the
F-T resistance measured either as loss in the relative dynamic e-modules (RDM loss), or
Mass loss or the two in combination are investigated using Dataset 2. The PLS analysis
are performed assuming that the F-T resistance (Y) can be described by either a linear
model with the respective predictors (X), or subsequently by assuming an exponential
model by logarithmic transformation of the response(s) (Y).
5.3.1
F-T Resistance - Linear Model
The influence of replacement of NA with RCA on the F-T resistance measured as RDM
loss or/and Mass loss cannot be modelled with a linear model because of poor goodness
of fit statistics in the PLS analysis. No relationships are significant, neither with the
F-T resistance measured by RDM loss or Mass loss, or when the two are modelled si-
multaneously (Table F.1 and F.2 in Appendix F).
5.3.2
F-T Resistance - Exponential Model
The influence of replacement of NA with RCA on the F-T resistance measured as RDM
loss or/and Mass loss can not be modelled with an exponential model because of poor
goodness of fit statistics in the PLS analysis. No relationships are significant, neither
with the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss or Mass loss, or when the two are mod-
elled simultaneously (Table F.3 and F.4 in Appendix F).
5.3.3
Overall Interpretation of Modelled Relations
Poor goodness of fit statistics are observed for both the linear and the exponential as-
sumption why the actual influence of RCA cannot be quantified by PLS analysis using
Dataset2. There can however be observed a general tendency for the linear and exponen-
tial models that the goodness of fit statistics are improved slightly when the qualitative
variable of NA/RCA is excluded as was also observed in section 5.1 in analysing the
compressive strength relationship. Overall higher goodness of fit statistics for the Mass
loss response variable indicating a stronger relation between the Mass loss and the pre-
dictors compared to the RDM response variable. Furthermore, higher goodness of fit
statistics are observed for the exponential models compared to the linear models.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
48
5.4
PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The
Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
In the following, the results of the PLS analysis of Part 4 is presented using a smaller
part of the extracted data. Here the influence of RCA on the F-T resistance measured
either by loss in relative dynamic e-modules (RDM loss) or Mass loss, or the two in com-
bination including the air content variable are investigated using Dataset3 (Appendix V).
The PLS analysis is performed assuming that the F-T resistance (Y) can be described
by either a linear model with respect to the predictors (X), or subsequently by assuming
an exponential model using logarithmic transformation of the response(s) (Y). The pre-
dictors included in the analysis (linear and exponential) are the RCA related variables
of RCA replacement ratio and NA/RCA describing whether NA or RCA is used, the air
related variables of air content in the concrete and AE/NonAE which describes whether
the concrete is air-entrained or not together with the w/c ratio variable.
5.4.1
F-T Resistance - Linear Model
The results of assuming a linear model for the F-T resistance are presented in the
following. First by investigating the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss and Mass
loss individually and subsequently in combination, followed by an overall interpretation
of the results.
5.4.1.1
F-T Resistance measured by RDM- and Mass Loss
Individually
A linear relationship can be modelled between the F-T resistance measured by either
RDM loss or Mass loss with the respective predictors. The relationship for RDM loss
is illustrated by model #5.0L and #5.1L, whereas the relationship for Mass loss is illus-
trated by #6.0L and #6.1L (Table 5.8).
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics shows an explained variance of R2Y > 0.6 for
model #5.0L and #5.1L and R2Y > 0.5 for model #6.0L and #6.1L (Table 5.8). This
illustrates that model #5.0L and #5.1L describe approximately 60% of the variance in
the response variable of RDM loss while model #6.0L and #6.1L describe approximately
50% of the variance in the response variable of Mass loss.
==PAGE:56==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
49
Table 5.8: Model variables and corresponding goodness fit statistics of modelled linear
relationship between F-T resistance measured by the responses (Y) of RDM loss and Mass
loss individually and the different predictors (X). Variables not included are marked with
-. Models established from Dataset3 (Appendix V)
Model Variables
Model
#5.0L
#5.1L
#6.0L
#6.1L
RDM loss [%]
y
y
-
-
Mass loss [%]
-
-
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
2
2
2
2
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.697
0.856
0.705
0.856
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.634
0.651
0.521
0.535
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.450
0.572
0.300
0.390
Appendix
App. G
App. H
App. I
App. J
The predictive power is Q2 > 0.5 for model #5.1L and Q2 < 0.5 for model #5.0L (Table
5.8). Both model #6.0L and #6.1L have an Q2 below 0.5. With a Q2 > 0.5 model
#5.1L have an acceptable ability to predict new data while the remaining three models
are less capable of predicting new data. Model #5.1L and #6.1 have a lower difference
between R2Y and Q2 compared to model #5.0L and #6.0L respectively indicating that
NA/RCA is a non-important variable as the difference between R2Y and Q2 is bigger
for #5.0L and #6.0L where this predictor is included (Table 5.8).
Correlation Structure of Modelled Relationship
A negative correlation between the response variable of RDM loss and the RCA replace-
ment ratio is established as RDM loss is situated opposite to the RCA replacement ratio
with respect to origin (#5.0L and #5.1L) (Figure 5.7). The PLS analysis have identified
a relative relationship in the data where an increased ratio of RCA substituting NA re-
sults in a decreased RDM loss i.e. the F-T resistance is improved by increasing the RCA
replacement ratio (Figure 5.7). The w/c ratio is modelled as an positive correlation with
RDM loss demonstrating a low w/c ratio is related to a low RDM loss i.e. a high F-T
resistance. At the same time the PLS analysis identify the relative relationship between
a high air content and a low RDM loss. Both predictors of air content and the qualita-
tive predictor of air-entrainment (AE/NonAE)(A) are negative correlated with response
variable of RDM loss i.e. a high air content is resulting in a low RDM loss thus a high
F-T resistance (Figure 5.7). The qualitative variable of NA/RCA is centered close to
==PAGE:57==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
50
origin (model #5.0L) indicating the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss is unaffected
by whether NA or RCA is used (Figure 5.7a).
(a) Model #5.0L
(b) Model #5.1L
Figure 5.7:
Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two
model components for model #5.0L and #5.1L. Summarising the relationship among
the response variable (Y) of RDM loss and the respective predictors (X) indicating that
RDM loss is negatively correlated with RCA replacement ratio and the air predictors and
positively correlated with the w/c ratio.
Modelling the F-T resistance measured by Mass loss (model #6.0L and #6.1L) show a
correlation structure similar to the F-T resistance modelled by RDM loss (model #5.0L
and #5.1L). The PLS analysis have identified relative relations in the data where an
increased ratio of RCA substituting NA results in a decreased Mass loss illustrated by
a negative correlation (model #6.0L and #6.1L) i.e. the F-T resistance is improved by
increasing the RCA replacement ratio (Figure 5.8). The w/c ratio is also modelled as
an positive correlation with Mass loss demonstrating a low w/c ratio is related to a low
Mass loss (Figure 5.8). At the same time the PLS analysis notice the relative relationship
between a high air content and a low Mass (Figure 5.8). Again the qualitative variable of
NA/RCA is located close to origin (model #6.0L) indicating the F-T resistance measured
by Mass loss is unaffected by whether NA or RCA is used (Figure 5.8a).
==PAGE:58==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
51
(a) Model #6.0L
(b) Model #6.1L
Figure 5.8:
Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two
model components for model #6.0L and #6.1L. Summarising the relationship among
the response variable (Y) of Mass loss and the respective predictors (X) indicating that
Mass loss is negatively correlated with RCA replacement ratio and the air predictors and
positively correlated with the w/c ratio
Important Variables
The PLS analysis have both identified the w/c ratio and the qualitative predictor of
whether air-entrainment is used (AE/NonAE) as important predictors to explain X and
correlate the RDM loss (Y) with a VIP value > 1 (model #5.0L and #5.0L) (Figure
5.9). Also the air content predictor is identified as an important in model #5.0L with
a VIP value > 1, whereas the air content predictor is slightly below 1 in model #5.1L
(VIP=0.98) (Figure 5.9). The RCA replacement ratio predictor is placed to the right
in the VIP plots with VIP values between 1 and 0.5 indicating the PLS analysis require
a bigger dataset to assess the importance level (model #5.0L and #5.1L) (Figure 5.9).
The NA/RCA predictor has a VIP value < 0.5 in model #5.0L implying that this pre-
dictor is unimportant for describing RDM loss in this model (Figure 5.9a).
(a) Model #5.0L
(b) Model #5.1L
Figure 5.9: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both X
and the correlation to the RDM loss (Y) for model #5.0L and #5.1L. The importance
of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
The PLS analysis have both identified the w/c ratio and air content variable as im-
portant predictors to explain X and correlate the Mass loss (Y) with a VIP value >
==PAGE:59==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
52
1 (model #6.0L and #6.0L) (Figure 5.10). Also the qualitative predictor of whether
air-entrainment is used (AE/NonAE) is identified as an important in model #6.0L with
a VIP value > 1, whereas the AE/NonAE predictor is marginally below 1 in model
#6.1L (VIP=0.99) (Figure 5.10). The RCA replacement ratio predictor is placed to the
right in the VIP plots with VIP values between 1 and 0.5 indicating the PLS analysis
require a bigger dataset to assess the importance level (model #6.0L and #6.1L) (Figure
5.10). The NA/RCA predictor has a VIP value < 0.5 in model #6.0L implying that
this predictor is unimportant for describing Mass loss (Figure 5.10a).
(a) Model #6.0L
(b) Model #6.1L
Figure 5.10: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both X
and the correlation to the Mass loss (Y) for model #6.0L and #6.1L. The importance
of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
5.4.1.2
F-T Resistance measured by RDM- and Mass Loss Combined
A linear relationship can be modelled between the F-T measured by combining RDM
loss and Mass loss as response variables in relation to the predictors. The modelled
relationship for RDM loss and Mass loss combined are illustrated by model #7.0L and
#7.1L (Table 5.9).
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics show an explained variance of R2Y > 0.5 for
both model #7.0L and #7.1L (Table 5.9). This imply that approximately 50 % of the
variance in the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss and Mass loss simultaneously is
explained in the models assuming linear relations. The predictive power Q2 < 0.5 for
both model #7.0L and #7.1L (Table 5.9). The goodness of fit statistics are overall
higher for model #7.1L where the NA/RCA variable is excluded compared to #7.1L.
Likewise is the difference between R2Y and Q2 smaller for model #7.1L compared to
model #7.0L indicating that the predictor of NA/RCA is a non-important variable for
modelling relations in the data.
==PAGE:60==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
53
Table 5.9: Model variables and corresponding goodness fit statistics of modelled linear
relationship between F-T resistance measured by the responses (Y) of RDM loss and Mass
loss combined and the different predictors (X). Variables not included are marked with -.
Models established from Dataset3 (Appendix V)
Model Variables
Model
#7.0L
#7.1L
RDM loss [%]
y
y
Mass loss [%]
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
2
2
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.702
0.856
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.575
0.592
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.381
0.484
Appendix
App. K
App. L
Correlation Structure of Modelled Relations
A positive correlation between the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss is estab-
lished when modelled combined as RDM loss and Mass loss are situated close together
(model #7.0L and #7.1L) (Figure 5.11). The PLS analysis have identified a relative
relationship in the data where an increased ratio of RCA substituting NA results in a
decreased loss in relative dynamic e-modules and mass loss combined i.e. the F-T resis-
tance is improved by increasing the RCA replacement ratio (Figure 5.11). The w/c ratio
is modelled as an positive correlation with RDM- and Mass loss demonstrating a low
w/c ratio is related to a low RDM- and Mass loss i.e. a high F-T resistance. At the same
time the PLS analysis notice the relative relationship between a high air content and a
low RDM- and Mass loss. Both predictors of air content and the qualitative predictor of
air-entrainment (AE/NonAE)(A) are negative correlated with response variables (RDM
loss and Mass loss) i.e. a high air content is resulting in a low RDM- and Mass loss thus
a high F-T resistance (Figure 5.11). The qualitative variable of NA/RCA is centered
close to origin indicating the F-T resistance is unaffected by whether NA or RCA is used
(model #7.0L) (Figure 5.11a).
==PAGE:61==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
54
(a) Model #7.0L
(b) Model #7.1L
Figure 5.11: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two
model components for model #7.0L and #7.1L. Summarising the relationship among
the response variables (Y) of RDM- and Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
indicating that RDM- and Mass loss is negatively correlated with RCA replacement ratio
and the air predictors and positively correlated with the w/c ratio
Important Variables
The PLS analysis have both identified the w/c ratio and the qualitative predictor of
whether air-entrainment is used (AE/NonAE) as important predictors for explaining X,
and the correlation to the combination of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) with a VIP value >
1 (model #7.0L and #7.0L) (Figure 5.12). Also, the air content predictor is identified
as an important in model #7.0L with a VIP value > 1, whereas the air content predictor
is marginally below 1 in model #7.1L (VIP=0.99) (Figure 5.12). The RCA replacement
ratio predictor is placed to the right in the VIP plots with VIP values between 1 and
0.5 indicating the PLS analysis require a bigger dataset to assess the importance level
(model #7.0L and #7.1L) (Figure 5.12). The NA/RCA predictor has a VIP value < 0.5
in model #7.0L implying that this predictor is unimportant for describing the response
variables of RDM- and Mass loss assuming linear relations (Figure 5.12a).
(a) Model #7.0L
(b) Model #7.1L
Figure 5.12: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) for model
#7.0L and #7.1L. The importance of the predictors are arranged so the most important
predictor is placed left in the plot
==PAGE:62==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
55
5.4.1.3
Overall Interpretation of Modelled Relations and Data
Quality Assuming a Linear Relationship
Similar overall correlation structures are observed between the respective predictors and
the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss (model #5.0L and #5.1L) and Mass loss
(model #5.0L and #5.1L) individually assuming linear relations (Section 5.4.1.1). Mod-
elling the two responses of RDM-and Mass loss combined (model #7.0L and #7.1L)
does not change the overall relative relations in the correlation structure obtained when
modelling the responses individually (Section 5.4.1.2).
The RCA replacement ratio is modelled as negative correlated with the responses of
RDM loss and/or Mass loss indicating an increased RCA replacement ratio is decreas-
ing the RDM loss and/or mass loss resulting in a higher F-T resistance (Figure 5.7, 5.8
and 5.11). This imply that there is a tendency in the data that RCA have an positive or
at least indifferent effect on the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss and/or Mass loss.
Similar relative relations are also reflected in the VIP plots for the F-T resistance mea-
sured by RDM loss and/or Mass loss (Section 5.4.1.1 and 5.4.1.2). Both the w/c ratio,
the air content and whether the concrete is air-entrained or not (AE/NonAE) are iden-
tified by PLS as important variables for describing the F-T resistances with VIP values
> 1 or very close to 1 (Figure 5.9, 5.10 and 5.12). The importance level of the RCA re-
placement ratio can however not be quantified as a bigger dataset is required indicating
the importance relative to the other variables are not that significant.
Comparing the goodness of fit statistics for model #5.0L and #5.1L with model #6.0L
and #6.1L a tendency of overall higher explained variance (R2Y ) and predictive power
(Q2) is observed for for model #5.0L and #5.1L (Table 5.8). This indicates that the pre-
dictors (X) fit the variance response variable of RDM (Y) better than the F-T resistance
measured as Mass loss (Y) assuming linear relations. Combining RDM- and Mass loss
(model #7.0L and #7.1L) the goodness of fit statistics are improved when comparing
to the statistics of Mass loss modelled individually (model #6.0L and #6.1L) (Table 5.9
and 5.8). The opposite can however be observed comparing model #7.0L and #7.1L to
the models for RDM loss modelled individually (#5.0L and #5.1L) where the goodness
of fit statistics are lower in model #7.0L and #7.1L compared to #5.0L and #5.1L (Ta-
ble 5.9 and 5.8). This amplify the implication that a stronger relationship is established
between RDM loss and the respective predictors (X) assuming linear relations compared
to the Mass loss.
No critical outliers are observed for for the models as no observations are places outside
the tolerance ellipse (Appendix G, H, I J,K and L). Only a small difference is observed
between R2Y and Q2 for the models in table 5.8 and 5.9 which substantiate the impli-
cation of no outliers in the data.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
56
5.4.2
F-T Resistance - Exponential Model
The results of assuming an exponential model for the F-T resistance are presented in
the following. First by investigating the F-T resistance measured by the logarithmic
transformed responses of RDM loss and Mass loss individually and subsequently in
combination followed by an overall interpretation of the results.
5.4.2.1
F-T Resistance Measured by RDM- and Mass Loss
Individually
An exponential relationship can be modelled between the F-T resistance measured by the
logarithmic transformed response variables of RDM loss and Mass loss and the respective
predictors. The relationship for RDM loss is illustrated by model #5.0E and #5.1E and
the relationship for Mass loss is illustrated by model #6.0E and #6.1E (Table 5.10).
Table 5.10: Model variables and corresponding goodness fit statistics of modelled expo-
nential relationship between F-T resistance measured by the log transformed responses
(Y) of RDM loss and Mass loss individually and the different predictors (X). Variables
not included are marked with -. Models established from Dataset3 (Appendix V)
Model Variables
Model
#5.0E
#5.1E
#6.0E
#6.1E
RDM loss [%]
y
y
-
-
Mass loss [%]
-
-
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
2
2
2
2
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.704
0.855
0.658
0.857
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.518
0.533
0.855
0.859
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.358
0.444
0.741
0.827
Appendix
App. M
App. N
App. O
App. P
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics show an explained variance of R2Y > 0.5 for
model #5.0E and #5.1E and a R2Y > 0.8 for model #6.0E and #6.1E (Table 5.10). This
illustrates that model #5.0E and #5.1E describes approximately 50% of the variance in
the response variable of RDM loss and model #6.0E and #6.1E describes approximately
80 % of the variance in the response variable of Mass loss.
The predictive power is Q2 < 0.5 for model #5.0E and #5.1E and model #6.0E and
#6.1E have a predictive power of Q2 > 0.7. With a Q2 > 0.5 all four models (#5.0E,
==PAGE:64==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
57
#5.1E, #6.0E and #6.1E) have an acceptable ability to predict new data. Model #5.1E
and #6.1E have a lower difference between R2Y and Q2 compared to model #5.0E and
#6.0E respectively indicating that NA/RCA is an non-important predictor as the dif-
ference between R2Y and Q2 is bigger for model #5.0E and #6.0E where this predictor
is included (Table 5.10).
Correlation Structure of Modelled Relationship
A negative correlation between the response variable of RDM loss and the RCA replace-
ment ratio is established as RDM loss is situated opposite to the RCA replacement ratio
with respect to origin (#5.0E and #5.1E) (Figure 5.13). The PLS analysis have iden-
tified a relative relationship in the data where an increased ratio of RCA substituting
NA results in a decreased loss in relative dynamic e-modules i.e. the F-T resistance is
improved by increasing the RCA replacement ratio (Figure 5.13). The w/c ratio is mod-
elled with a positive correlation to RDM loss demonstrating a low w/c ratio is related
to a low RDM loss i.e. a high F-T resistance. At the same time the PLS analysis notice
the relative relationship between a high air content and a low RDM loss. Both pre-
dictors of air content and the qualitative predictor of air-entrainment (AE/NonAE)(A)
are negatively correlated with response variable of RDM loss i.e. a high air content is
resulting in a low RDM loss thus a high F-T resistance (Figure 5.13). The qualitative
variable of NA/RCA is centered close to origin indicating the F-T resistance measured
as RDM loss is unaffected by whether NA or RCA is used (model #5.0E) (Figure 5.13a).
(a) Model #5.0E
(b) Model #5.1E
Figure 5.13: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two
model components for model #5.0E and #5.1E. Summarising the relationship among
the response variable (Y) of RDM loss and the respective predictors (X) indicating that
RDM loss is negatively correlated with RCA replacement ratio and the air predictors and
positively correlated with the w/c ratio.
Modelling the F-T resistance measured by Mass loss (model #6.0E and #6.1E) shows
a correlation structure similar to the F-T resistance modelled by RDM loss (#5.0E
and #5.1E). The PLS analysis have identified relative relations in the data where an
increased ratio of RCA substituting NA results in a decreased Mass loss illustrated by
==PAGE:65==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
58
a negative correlation (model #6.0E and #6.1E) i.e. the F-T resistance is improved
by increasing the RCA replacement ratio (Figure 5.14). The w/c ratio is also modelled
as an positive correlation with Mass loss demonstrating a low w/c ratio is related to
a low Mass loss (Figure 5.14). At the same time the PLS analysis notice the relative
relationship between a high air content and a low Mass loss (Figure 5.14). Again, the
qualitative variable of NA/RCA is located close to origin indicating the F-T resistance
measured as Mass loss is unaffected by whether NA or RCA is used (model #6.0E)
(Figure 5.14a).
(a) Model #6.0E
(b) Model #6.1E
Figure 5.14: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two
model components for model #6.0E and #6.1E. Summarising the relationship among
the response variable (Y) of Mass loss and the respective predictors (X) indicating that
Mass loss is negatively correlated with RCA replacement ratio and the air predictors and
positively correlated with the w/c ratio.
Important Variables
The PLS analysis have both identified the w/c ratio, the air content and the qualitative
predictor of whether air-entrainment is used (AE/NonAE) as important predictors to
explain X and correlate the RDM loss (Y) with a VIP value > 1 in model #5.0E (Figure
5.15a). In model #5.1E only the w/c ratio is identified as an important predictor (VIP
>1) however both the air content and the AE/NonAE predictor have a VIP value very
close to 1 (VIP=0.98 and VIP=0.97 respectively) (Figure 5.15b). The RCA replacement
ratio predictor is placed to the right in the VIP plots with VIP values between 1 and
0.5 indicating the PLS analysis require a bigger dataset to assess the importance level
(model #5.0E and #5.1E) (Figure 5.15). The NA/RCA predictor has a VIP value <
0.5 in model #5.0E implying that this predictor is unimportant for describing RDM loss
(Figure 5.15a).
==PAGE:66==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
59
(a) Model #5.0E
(b) Model #5.1E
Figure 5.15: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both X
and the correlation to the RDM loss (Y) for model #5.0E and #5.1E. The importance
of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
The PLS analysis have identified the w/c ratio predictor as the only important variable
to explain X and correlate the Mass loss (Y) with a VIP value > 1 (model #6.0E and
#6.1E) (Figure 5.16). The air content predictor have a VIP value very close to 1 in model
#6.0E but is modelled with a VIP value between 0.5 and 1 in model #6.1E (Figure 5.16).
Also the qualitative predictor of whether air-entrainment is used (AE/NonAE) have a
VIP value between 0.5 and 1 indicating that the PLS analysis require a bigger dataset
to assess the importance level assuming an exponential relationship (model #6.0E and
#6.1E) (Figure 5.16). Both the RCA replacement ratio predictor and the qualitative
predictor of NA/RCA are placed to the right in the VIP plots with VIP values below or
very close to 0.5 implying that this predictors are unimportant for describing Mass loss
(Figure 5.16).
(a) Model #6.0E
(b) Model #6.1E
Figure 5.16: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors both to explain X
and to correlate the Mass loss (Y) for model #6.0E and #6.1E. The importance of the
predictors are ranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
==PAGE:67==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
60
5.4.2.2
F-T Resistance measured by RDM- and Mass Loss
Combined
An exponential relationship can be modelled between the F-T resistance measured by
the logarithmic transformed response variables of RDM loss and Mass loss combined and
the respective predictors. The modelled relationship for RDM- and Mass loss combined
is illustrated by model #7.0E and #7.1E (Table 5.11).
Table 5.11: Model variables and corresponding goodness fit statistics of modelled expo-
nential relationship between F-T resistance measured by the log transformed responses
(Y) of RDM- and Mass loss combined and the different predictors (X). Variables not
included are marked with -. Models established from Dataset3 (Appendix V)
Model Variables
Model
#7.0E
#7.1E
RDM loss [%]
y
y
Mass loss [%]
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
Air content [%]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
2
2
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.940
0.857
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.697
0.687
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.584
0.643
Appendix
App. Q
App. R
Evaluating the goodness of fit statistics show an explained variance of R2Y > 0.6 ap-
proaching 0.7 for both model #7.0E and #7.1E implying that approx. 70 % of the
variance in the F-T resistance measured as RDM loss and Mass loss simultaneously is
explained in the models (Table 5.11). The predictive power is Q2 > 0.5 for model #7.0E
and Q2 > 0.6 for model #7.1E. The goodness of fit statistics are overall similar for both
model #7.0E and #7.1E, but the difference between R2Y and Q2 is smaller for model
#7.1E indicating the predictor of NA/RCA is a non-important variable for modelling
relations in the data.
Correlation Structure of Modelled Relations
A positive correlation between the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss is estab-
lished when modelled simultaneously as RDM loss and Mass loss are situated close
together (model #7.0E and #7.1E) (Figure 5.17). The PLS analysis have identified a
==PAGE:68==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
61
relative relationship in the data where an increased ratio of RCA substituting NA results
in a decreased loss in relative dynamic e-modules and mass loss combined i.e. the F-T
resistance is improved by increasing the RCA replacement ratio (Figure 5.17). The w/c
ratio is modelled as an positive correlation with RDM- and Mass loss demonstrating a
low w/c ratio is related to a low RDM- and Mass loss i.e. a high F-T resistance. At the
same time the PLS analysis notice the relative relationship between a high air content
and a low RDM- and Mass loss. Both predictors of air content and the qualitative predic-
tor of air-entrainment (AE/NonAE)(A) are negative correlated with response variables
(RDM loss and Mass loss) i.e. a high air content is resulting in a low RDM- and Mass
loss thus a high F-T resistance (Figure 5.17). The qualitative variable of NA/RCA is
centered close to origin indicating the F-T resistance is unaffected by whether NA or
RCA is used (model #7.0E) (Figure 5.17a).
(a) Model #7.0E
(b) Model #7.1E
Figure 5.17: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two
model components for model #7.0E and #7.1E. Summarising the relationship among
the response variables (Y) of RDM- and Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
indicating that RDM- and Mass loss is negatively correlated with RCA replacement ratio
and the air predictors and positively correlated with the w/c ratio
Important Variables
The PLS analysis have both identified the w/c ratio, air content and qualitative predictor
of whether air-entrainment is used (AE/NonAE) as predictors to explain X and to
correlate the combination of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) with a VIP value > 1 in model
#7.0E (Figure 5.18a). In model #7.1E only the w/c ratio predictor have a VIP value
> 1 whereas, the additional predictors of air content and AE/NonAE have a VIP value
between 0.5 and 1 indicating PLS requires a bigger data set to assess the importance
level (Figure 5.18b). The predictors concerning the aggregate type (NA/RCA) and RCA
replacement ratio are placed to the right in the VIP plots with VIP values below- or
very close to 0.5 implying these predictors are unimportant for describing the response
variables of RDM- and Mass loss assuming exponential relations (model #7.0E and
#7.1E) (Figure 5.18).
==PAGE:69==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
62
(a) Model #7.0E
(b) Model #7.1E
Figure 5.18: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to both explain
X and the correlation to the response variables RDM- and Mass loss (Y) for model
#7.0E and #7.1E. The importance of the predictors are arranged so the most important
predictor is placed left in the plot
5.4.2.3
Overall Interpretation of Modelled Relations and Data
Quality Assuming an Exponential Relationship
Similar overall relative correlation structures are observed between the respective pre-
dictors and the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss (model #5.0E and #5.1E) and
Mass loss (model #6.0E and #6.1E) individually assuming exponential relations (Sec-
tion 5.4.2.1). Modelling the two responses of RDM- and Mass loss combined (model
#7.0E and #7.1E) does not change the overall relative relations in the correlation struc-
ture obtained when modelling the responses individually (Section 5.4.2.2).
The RCA replacement ratio is modelled as negatively correlated with the responses of
RDM loss and/or mass loss indicating an increased RCA replacement ratio is decreasing
the RDM loss and/or mass loss resulting in a higher F-T resistance (Figure 5.13, 5.14
and 5.17). This imply that there is a tendency in the data that RCA have an positive or
at least indifferent effect on the F-T resistance measured by RDM loss and/or Mass loss.
The relative importance of the respective variables vary for the F-T resistance measured
by RDM loss and/or Mass loss assuming exponential relations (Section 5.4.2.1, 5.4.2.2).
Only the w/c ratio is identified as an important variable in all models with a VIP value
> 1. The additional predictors of air content and the qualitative variable of AE/NonAE
have VIP values varying between 0.5 and 1.19 indicating a bigger dataset is required
assuming exponential relations in order to quantify the importance level of these pre-
dictors (Figure 5.15, 5.16 and 5.18). This however also indicates that when assuming
exponential relations in the dataset the modelled relative relations are most dependent
on the w/c ratio and the air related predictors become less important relative to the w/c
ratio. The importance of the RCA replacement ratio variable cannot be quantified as a
bigger dataset is required but with VIP values very close to 0.5 or just below it could
imply that the importance of this predictor relative to the other variables are not that
significant.
==PAGE:70==
5.4 PLS Analysis of F-T Resistance - The Influence of RCA Incl. Air Content
63
Comparing the goodness of fit statistics of model #5.0E and #5.1E with model #6.0E
and #6.1E a tendency of overall higher explained variance R2Y and predictive power Q2
is observed for model #6.0E and #6.1E (Table 5.10). This indicates that the predictors
(X) fit the variance in the F-T resistance response variable of Mass loss (Y) better than
the F-T resistance measured as RDM loss (Y) assuming exponential relations. Com-
bining RDM- and Mass loss (model #7.0E and #7.1E) the goodness of fit statistics
are improved when comparing to the statistics of F-T resistance modelled as RDM loss
(model #5.0E and #5.1E) (Table 5.11 and 5.10). The opposite can however be observed
comparing model #7.0E and #7.1E to models for mass loss modelled (model #6.0E and
#6.1E) where the goodness of fit statistics are lower in model #7.0E and #7.1E com-
pared to #6.0E and #6.1E (Table 5.10 and 5.11). This amplify the implication that a
stronger relationship is established between Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
assuming exponential relations compared to RDM loss (Table 5.11).
No critical outliers are observed for for the models as no observations are places outside
the tolerance ellipse (Appendix M, N, O P,Q and R). Only a small difference is observed
between R2Y and Q2 for the models in table 5.10 and 5.11 which substantiate the
implication of no outliers in the data.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Overall Discussion
An overall discussion of the results of the literature review (Chapter 4) together with the
PLS model results (Chapter 5) is presented in the following. The discussion is divided
into first a discussion of the results of the initial assessment of the PLS model approach
in comparison to Bolomey’s equation (Part 1 and 2) (Section 5.1 and 5.2). Following
this is a discussion of findings from the literature review related to the PLS analysis
on the extracted data aimed at understanding the influence of RCA on F-T resistance
(Part 3 and 4) (Section 5.3 and 5.4).
6.1
Assessment of the PLS model Approach
The purpose of the initial PLS analysis in Part 1 and 2 was to assess the PLS model
approach relative to the known relationship between predictor variables of Bolomey’s
equation. These initial PLS analysis show that the PLS method can be applied to find
relative relations between predictors and response variables, but that there are some
uncertainties to the method.
The initial PLS analysis in Part 1 show that the PLS method correctly capture the
relative relations in the data between the response variable that is compressive strength
(fc,28), and the predictors (air content and w/c ratio) described by Bolomey’s equation
(eq. 2.2). Furthermore, the results from the initial analysis in Part 2 show that the mod-
elled relationship can be expanded to include the influence of RCA. Importantly, the
results show that RCA does not significantly change the relative relations modelled by
PLS in Part 1. The overall correlation structure modelled by PLS is not affected by the
three different functional relations (linear-, exponential and power function) tested. All
three relationships tested show very similar results comparing goodness of fit statistics,
correlation structure (loadings plots) and important variables (VIP plots).
All VIP plots show that both air content and RCA replacement ratio are important
variables. The w/c ratio is also identified as an important variable in most VIP plots,
but in some models the variables of w/c ratio as well as the AE/NonAE have with VIP
values between 0.5 and 1 indicating that a bigger dataset is required to quantify the im-
portance levels for those variables. The mutual order of the predictors with VIP values
> 1 is changing in the different models depending on how many variables were included
and functional relationship tested. This indicates that the VIP plots can be used only
64
==PAGE:72==
6.1 Assessment of the PLS model Approach
65
to identify the group of important variables versus the group of non-important variables.
However, the specific ranking order within those groups when the detailed functional
forms are not known a priory and/or when the datasset is small as here cannot be quan-
tified.
There seems to be a tendency for the exponential- and power function relationship to
be marginally better than the linear relationship when comparing the goodness of fit
statistics in Part 1 and 2. A theoretical perspective imply that the power function (in
principle) should give the best fit as the Bolomey’s equation has a power function term.
However an exponential function and the power function are very similar over a small
range of x. The actual range of the w/c ratio in Dataset1 ranges from 0.35-0.53. For
such a small range the Bolomey’s equation can very well be described as a linear function
also (Figure 6.1). As a result the PLS method, with the small size of the dataset, cannot
be used to discriminate whether a linear-, exponential and power function relationship
better describe the data.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of a power function (x−1), exponential and linear relation over
a small range of x similar to the range of w/c in the data (0.35-0.53). The exponential
and linear function fit very well to the discrete points from the power function as can be
seen by r2 ≈1
Overall it can be concluded that the PLS method is very effective method at finding and
establishing the relative relations in the datasets, despite not being able to distinguish
the three main functional forms (linear, exponential and power function). Further dis-
tinction of the exponential- versus the power function at least requires a validation set
and better a much bigger dataset. By adding additional observations the PLS model
can be used to predict new responses which can be compared to the corresponding mea-
sured responses of the validation set. If the model does not predict the new responses
satisfactorily an explanation could be that a wrong functional relationship was used in
==PAGE:73==
6.2 PLS Analysis of F-T resistance of Concrete with RCA
66
the model. The relatively small dataset in this analysis and the following analysis of the
F-T resistance limit the analysis as it has not been possible to divide the dataset into
training- and validation sets of meaningful sizes. For this reason it is only possible to
test the relative relations between variables by PLS but not the exact functional form, as
there to my knowledge is no prior knowledge on the theoretical functional form relating
F-T resistance to RCA.
6.2
PLS Analysis of F-T resistance of Concrete
with RCA
The literature review shows that there are highly contradictory findings regarding the
influence of RCA on F-T resistance. Eight out of 11 studies find a better or a similar
F-T resistance of concrete with RCA compared to concrete with only natural aggregates,
while three studies find a lower F-T resistance. In particular, there seems to be disagree-
ment on whether the attached mortar of RCA have beneficial- or adverse effects on the
F-T resistance. From conventional concrete it is known that the most important prop-
erties for sufficient F-T resistance is a low permeability that most often is obtained by a
low w/c ratio and/or air-entrainment (Pigeon and Pleau, 2006). These same properties
likely also apply to concrete with RCA. However, RCA are known to have a higher poros-
ity that would contribute to better dissipation of the pressure from ice-formation similar
to air-entrainment (Bogas et al., 2016) (Section 2.1.1). The PLS method is used here to
analyse the extracted data in the reviewed literature to better quantify the influence of
RCA in relation to well known important properties of air-entrainment and a low w/c
ratio.
6.2.1
Linear or Exponential Model
The PLS analysis show that it is only possible to establish model with poor relative
relations (linear and exponential) for the responses of Mass loss and/or RDM loss us-
ing the predictors of w/c ratio, RCA replacement ratio and the qualitative variables
of NA/RCA and AE/NonAE (Section 5.3). This indicates that the variation in the
response variables of Mass loss and/or RDM loss cannot be described by the above
mentioned variables alone. According to Pigeon and Pleau (2006) the most important
property for a sufficient F-T resistance is the air content and the air void structure ob-
tained by air-entrainment. For this reason it is likely that the RCA replacement ratio
and the w/c ratio are not the only or most decisive predictors towards of F-T resistance,
but they need to be supplemented by air content.
The results of the PLS analysis in Part 4 show that the quantification of the F-T re-
sistance is significantly improved when the air content is included as predictor (Section
==PAGE:74==
6.2 PLS Analysis of F-T resistance of Concrete with RCA
67
5.4). The PLS analysis show improved models both when the F-T resistance is mod-
elled as RDM loss and/or Mass loss and similar results are obtained for both linear
and exponential models of the extracted data. Marginally better fits are observed for
Mass loss modelled assuming an exponential relationship in the data. However, as was
also observed in Part 1 and 2 the results for the linear- and exponential model are very
similar, and the relative relations investigated for quantifying the influence of RCA on
the F-T resistance do not change substantially.
6.2.2
The Influence of RCA on the F-T Resistance
The majority of the studies included in the literature review find a similar or better
F-T resistance of concrete with RCA (4 out of 11 studies). The results of the PLS
analysis in Part 4 substantiates this view as there is a tendency that increased RCA
replacement ratio is negatively correlated with RDM loss and/or Mass loss in the mod-
els. This negative correlation imply that an increased RCA replacement ratio results in
decreased RDM loss and/or Mass loss, that is a higher F-T resistance. This tendency
in the data suggests that RCA might have a positive or at least indifferent effect on the
F-T resistance. The tendency of a positive effect of increased RCA replacement ratio
could be attributable to the higher natural air content found in concrete with RCA.
Bogas et al. (2016) find a slightly higher air content in concrete with RCA, a tendency
which is also reported by Hansen (1992). Such higher air content could reflect that RCA
provide additional air voids in the concrete which could result in a better dissipation
of the pressure from the ice-formation (cf. Bogas et al. (2016)). This effect is however
more significant for concrete with no air-entrainment. Amorim et al. (2018) suggests
that the increased total porosity of the concrete observed when substituting NA with
RCA could lead to an indirect ”air-entrainment”. The benefits of the higher air content
for concrete with RCA is on the other hand contingent on the size and shape of the voids
as big connected capillary voids i.e. higher permeability are known to reduce the F-T
resistance (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). Liu et al. (2016) describes the micro-structure
of the attached mortar of RCA to be dominated by few large voids which contributes
to an increased porosity but a lower F-T resistance. Further studies of the actual micro-
structure of concrete with RCA and the air void structure are needed in order to assess
the effects of the higher air-content of concrete with RCA. The higher porosity observed
for the fine fraction of RCA could imply that the potential positive effects on the F-T
resistance using RCA would be more pronounced because using the fine fraction of RCA
would result in a higher air content compared RCA in the coarse fraction (Section 2.1.1).
The influence of RCA on the F-T resistance should nonetheless be evaluated with re-
spect to other known important variables such as w/c ratio and air-entrainment ensuring
small well-distributed voids in the concrete. This view is substantiated by the VIP plots
from the analysis in Part 4 (Section 5.4). The VIP plots reveal that there are three
important variables in the models which with almost no exception are the w/c ratio,
==PAGE:75==
6.2 PLS Analysis of F-T resistance of Concrete with RCA
68
the air content and the qualitative variable of air-entrainment vs. no air entrainment
(AE/NonAE). In particular show the w/c ratio a strong importance in the data as this
predictor is assigned with the highest VIP values independently of the additional pre-
dictors and assumed functional relations (linear and exponential). Evaluating the VIP
values of the RCA replacement ratio show VIP values between 0.5 and 1 or below 0.5
indicating a bigger dataset is required for assessment of the importance relative to the
other important variables. However this also indicates that RCA is far from the most
important predictor in order to describe the F-T resistance by RDM loss and/or Mass
loss in the dataset. Also the qualitative variable of whether NA or RCA is used is not
important for describing the F-T resistance indicating that the variance in F-T resis-
tance is much better described by w/c ratio, air content and air-entrainment vs. non
air-entrainment. These observations are in agreement with Bogas et al. (2016) who finds
that the F-T resistance depends more on the w/c ratio than the RCA replacement ratio
as a low w/c ratio reduces the permeability of the concrete and thereby less freezable
water to create stresses in the concrete.
Especially the air content predictor seems to be important for modelling the relative
relations of the F-T resistance. In Part 3, when the air content was not included, it
was only possible to obtain models with very poor explained variance in spite of a
larger dataset used in contrast to the analysis in Part 4.
This amplify the findings
from the VIP plots from Part 4 showing air content is an important variable together
with the qualitative variable of air-entrainment vs. non air-entrainment (AE/NonAE).
Both Liu et al. (2016) and Gokce et al. (2004) argue that air-entrainment is the most
important variable in order to obtain a sufficient F-T resistance.
This argument is
further substantiated by Pigeon and Pleau (2006). According to Liu et al. (2016) and
Gokce et al. (2004) the decisive influence of air-entrainment is on the other hand why
concrete with RCA is observed to have a lower F-T resistance. Both find lower F-T
resistance when RCA have been derived from non-air-entrained concrete. Such lowered
F-T resistance is because the attached mortar (non-air-entrained) will creates in areas in
the new cement paste where the spacing factor of air voids will be above the maximum
of 0.2 mm. The conclusions by Liu et al. (2016) and Gokce et al. (2004) are however
contrary to the conclusions in the majority of the reviewed literature and the PLS
analysis presented here. Air-entrainment is in general seen to improve the overall F-T
resistance but the RCA does not necessarily reduce the effect of air-entrainment nor the
F-T resistance measured by RDM loss and/or Mass loss as seen in the PLS loadings and
VIP plots (Section 5.4).
6.2.3
The influence of RCA on Mass loss and RDM
Even though the RCA replacement is not necessarily reducing the overall F-T resistance
Bogas et al. (2016) reports marginally higher mass loss (surface scaling) of concrete with
RCA. Surface scaling of concrete is often related to saturated aggregates close to the
surface. Such aggregates can create a near surface pressure inside the mortar layer just
==PAGE:76==
6.2 PLS Analysis of F-T resistance of Concrete with RCA
69
above the aggregates when subjected to freezing that result in scaling if the pressure
become too large (Pigeon and Pleau, 2006). Additionally the higher porosity of RCA
can be assumed to attribute to this type of deterioration. The higher level of surface
scaling may also be ascribed to a lower strength of the attached mortar compared to
the new mortar (Amorim et al., 2018). However, when ensuring a low permeability of
the concrete by a low w/c ratio, less freezable water is present in the concrete why these
effects are reduced. This could be the reason why the relative influence of the RCA
replacement ratio on mass loss specifically in Dataset3 is not distinctly reflected in the
VIP plots in Part 4 (Section 5.4).
Two opposing views are dominant in the literature with respect to the influence of RCA
on the internal damage (RDM loss): 1) Strengthening of the inter-facial transition zone
because of attached mortar on RCA; 2) reduced strength of the inter-facial transition
zone because of attached mortar. From conventional concrete exposed to F-T cycles it
is known that the internal damage initiates at the inter-facial transition zone as this
part of the concrete micro-structure is the weakest (Mehta and Monteiro, 2006). In
the strengthening view pre-soaking of RCA prior to casting can contribute to internal
curing. This internal curing is strengthening the inter-facial transition zone by grad-
ual moisture release that enable continued cement hydration (Yildirim et al. (2015),
Aghabaglou et al. (2016)). Additionally, cement particles which are not previously hy-
drated in the attached mortar can hydrate in contact with water in the new concrete
which also contributes to strengthening of the inter-facial transition zone. In contrast,
the attached mortar is at the same time often assumed to be responsible for a higher
degree of internal damage as argued in studies concluding RCA have negative impact
in the F-T resistance. A higher RDM loss is according to Gokce et al. (2010) a direct
consequence of the higher porosity and lower stiffness of RCA because of AM compared
to NA. Both Gokce et al. (2010) and Liu et al. (2016) observed cracks to initiate in the
RCA between the originally natural aggregate and the attached mortar creating local
defects to distress the new concrete. Furthermore, RCA is often angular and elongated
resulting in the possibility of accumulation of water around the RCA particles which can
attribute to a locally higher w/c ratio. This locally higher porosity in the inter-facial
transition zone can result in the internal damage to initiate in this area. Unfortunately,
the PLS analysis here cannot quantify the relative influence of the RCA replacement
ratio on RDM loss specifically in Dataset3.
The presented PLS analysis cannot be used to determine if RCA have a substantial
influence on either Mass loss or RDM loss. When comparing the results from the PLS
analysis in Part 3 and 4 with the literature review, it is apparent that the actual RCA
replacement ratio might be less important.
Of greater importance are probably the
physical- and geometrical properties of RCA. Especially the influence of attached mortar
is attributed to both positive and negative effects on the F-T resistance. However it was
not possible to include attached mortar in the PLS analysis because it was only measured
in very few studies (Table 4.2).
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Reliability of PLS analysis
70
6.3
Reliability of PLS analysis
The PLS analysis of Part 4 suggests that RCA might have a positive influence on the
F-T resistance measured by RDM loss and/or Mass loss. The VIP plots show that the
actual influence of RCA in the dataset is indecisive (0.5 < VIP < 1). At the same time
the PLS analysis show that both air entrainment vs. non air-entrainment, w/c ratio and
air content are important for describing the F-T resistance. Especially the air content
variable seems crucial in order to describe the F-T resistance as only models of very poor
explained variance was possible to obtain when air content variable was not included in
Part 3 (Section 5.3).
It is important to note that the results can only be seen as indicative because the ob-
tained models have not been validated by using a validation dataset. In the PLS analysis
it is assumed that the RCA replacement ratio is a replacement ratio of the total volume
of aggregates (both coarse and sand) (Chapter 3). Implicit when lumping coarse and
fine RCA it is assumed that the properties are similar for both the fine and the coarse
fractions of RCA. This simplifying assumption is most likely not accurate because RCA
in the fine fraction is known to be more porous than coarse RCA (Hansen, 1992). This
could be the explanation why Bogas et al. (2016) find a better F-T resistance for concrete
with RCA using fine RCA and why Liu et al. (2016) observe an inferior F-T resistance
using coarse aggregates. Furthermore, the influence of air-entrainment of RCA is ne-
glected in the PLS analysis which is also seen to have a distinct influence on the F-T
resistance according to the literature review (Gokce et al., 2004). Finally, the number of
F-T cycles performed is neglected and the actual test method has not been considered.
It is obvious that the more F-T cycles the concrete specimen is subjected to the more
severe the deterioration will be of both Mass loss and RDM loss. Instead of modelling
the RDM loss a suggestion for further research could be to model the loss in durability
factor (100 - DF) rather than the RDM loss, as the durability factor normalize the F-T
cycles (eq. 2.6). Despite the durability factor could be better it is not thought to affect
the results in the analysis of Part 4 as the studies have performed 300 cycles or more.
However, the analysis in Part 3 using a bigger dataset is not influenced either by 100-DF
(Table F.5 Appendix F).
In summary despite the mentioned uncertainties it is noteworthy that the PLS analysis
quite clearly demonstrate that it is a strong tool for visualizing and quantifying the
relative relations between the F-T resistance as response variable, and RCA and other
predictors. The initial test (Part 1 and 2) and results of Part 3 and 4 show that the PLS
method is quite robust even for small datasets and different functional forms, and that
it can be used to quantify the relative importance of the modelled predictors.
==PAGE:78==
6.4 Future Work
71
6.4
Future Work
As discussed previously, attached mortar on RCA is thought to have a substantial impact
on the F-T resistance, either positive or negative but very few studies have measured the
AM content. The indicative findings from the PLS analysis performed here illustrate
that the actual influence of RCA and thereby indirectly the effect of AM requires better
quantification by a bigger dataset as well as an additional validation dataset. It is also
suggested that the geometrical and physical properties of RCA (e.g. AM content, size
fraction (grading), air-entrainment) in relation to F-T resistance should be investigated,
rather than just the replacement ratio because the properties of RCA can vary a lot.
Furthermore, investigation should be undertaken of the air void structure of concrete
with RCA with and without air-entrainment according to for example (DS/EN 480-11,
2005) as prescribed in (DS/EN 206 DK NA, 2019).
As a prospect for future research it is suggested that a screening design should be made
before hand using a full factorial analysis followed by an elaborated series of tests based
on the initial results from the screening experiments. Briefly the principle of a factorial
design is that factors (experimental predictor variables) can be varied simultaneously
instead of only varying one factor at the time. Based on the literature review relevant
predictors that should be included to investigate are:
• Replacement ratio
• Attached mortar content
• RCA fraction (grading)
• Air-entrainment of RCA
• Pre-saturation of RCA
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The present literature review reveals that there are opposing findings regarding the
influence of recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) on the freeze-thaw resistance (F-T re-
sistance) of concrete. Four out of 11 studies find a better F-T resistance of concrete
with RCA, four studies find a similar F-T resistance, while three studies find an inferior
F-T resistance of concrete with RCA compared to concrete with natural aggregates. In
particular there is disagreement as to whether attached mortar has beneficial- or adverse
effects on the F-T resistance of concrete. Furthermore, the water/cement (w/c) ratio
and air-entrainment are shown to be crucial parameters for F-T resistance as in conven-
tional concrete, which is why the influence of RCA should be evaluated in relation to
these two variables.
It can be concluded from the initial tests (Part 1 and 2), that the PLS analysis correctly
captures the well known relative relations in the extracted data between the response
variable of compressive strength (fc) and the predictors (air content and w/c ratio) as
described by Bolomey’s equation. Furthermore, the PLS analysis show that the mod-
elled relationships can be expanded to include the influence of RCA as a predictor, and
that RCA does not change the relative relationship between fc and the other predic-
tors. Three different functional forms (linear-, exponential and power function) result in
nearly equally good results with respect to goodness of fit statistics, correlation structure
(loadings plots) and quantification of important variables (VIP plots). On this basis, it
can be concluded from the initial test that the PLS method is a very effective method for
finding and establishing the relative relations in even relatively small datasets, despite
not being able to distinguish the three main functional forms.
In continuation of the initial tests relative relations can be established from the extracted
data concerning F-T resistance of concrete with RCA when including the air content
variable. A linear- and an exponential model give very similar results where the relative
relations investigated for quantifying the influence of the RCA replacement ratio on the
F-T resistance does not change substantially. There is a tendency in the data to show
stronger model relations for loss in the relative dynamic e-modules (RDM loss) modelled
as a linear relation, while there is a stronger relation when mass loss is modelled as an
exponential relation.
The indicative results of the PLS analysis suggests that an increased RCA replacement
ratio has a positive influence on the F-T resistance. However, the actual influence of
the RCA replacement ratio in relation to the other modelled variables such as w/c ratio
72
==PAGE:80==
7 Conclusion
73
and air-content is indecisive because of the limit size of the dataset. Moreover, the PLS
analysis show that both w/c ratio and air content have a more significant influence on
the F-T resistance relative to the RCA replacement ratio. Especially, the air content is
identified as a crucial variable for modelling the F-T resistance of concrete because no
model could explain the variance when the air content variable was not included.
Based on the literature review and the PLS analysis it is recommended that the prop-
erties of RCA such as attached mortar content and size fraction in relation to F-T
resistance is investigated based on a factorial design.
Furthermore it would be rele-
vant to investigate the air void structure of concrete with and without air-entrainment
according to for example DS/EN 480-11 (2005).
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
Aalborg Portland. Cement og beton - Håndbog om cement, beton og mørtel. AALBORG
PORTLAND A/S, 22. edition, 2016.
A. M. Aghabaglou, A. Beglarigalea, H. Yazici, and K. Ramyar. Transport properties
and freeze-thaw resistance of mortar mixtures containing recycled concrete and glass
aggregates. European Journal of Environmental and Civil Engineering, 11, 2016.
N. Amorim, G. Silva, and D. Ribeiro. Effects of the incorporation of recycled aggregate
in the durability of the concrete submitted to freeze-thaw cycles. Construction and
Building Materials, 161:723–730, 2018.
S. H. Bjerrum. Genanvendelse af knust beton i ny beton, 2018. BSc.
J. Bogas, J. de Brito, and D. Ramos. Freeze-thaw resistance of concrete produced with
fine recycled concrete aggregates. Journal of Cleaner Production, 115:294–306, 2016.
R. Carlson and J. Carlson. Design and Optimisation in Organic Synthesis. Elsevier
Science, 3 edition, 1991.
V. Corinaldesi and G. Moriconi. Influence of mineral additions on the performance of 100
% recycled aggregate concrete. Construction and Building Materials, 23:2869–2876,
2009.
Danmarks Statestik. Råstofindvinding på land 2018. Online, 06 2018. URL https:
//www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyt/NytHtml?cid=28286#.
Last visited on 2019-02-
06.
Dansk Beton. Beton styrker bæredygtighed - om bæredygtige fordele ved beton. Tech-
nical report, Dansk Beton, 2017.
Dansk Beton.
Så meget beton kræver femern-forbindelsen.
Online, 2019.
URL
https://www.danskbeton.dk/arkitektur/anlaegsarbejder/saa-meget-beton-
kraever-femern-forbindelsen/. Last visited on 2019-02-06.
DS/CEN/EN 12390-9. Testing hardened concrete – Part 9: Freeze-thaw resistance with
de-icing salts – Scaling. Dansk Standard, 2016.
DS/CEN/TR 15177. Testing the freeze-thaw resistance of concrete – Internal structural
damage. Dansk Standard, 2006.
74
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
75
DS/EN 12350-7. Testing fresh concrete – Part 7: Air content – Pressure methods. Dansk
Standard, 2019.
DS/EN 206 DK NA. Concrete - Specification, performance, production, and conformity
- Rules for application of EN 206 in Denmark. Dansk Standard, 2019.
DS/EN 480-11. Admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout – Test methods – Part 11:
Determination of air void characteristics in hardened concrete. Dansk Standard, 2005.
J. O. Frederiksen and G. N. Munch-Petersen. Betonhåndbogen, chapter 10.3 E-Modul.
Dansk Betonforening, 2015. URL https://betonhaandbogen.dk/media/bogen/kap_
10_3_e-modul_15122015.pdf.
A. Gokce, S. Nagataki, T. Saeki, and M. Hisada. Freezing and thawing resistance of
air-entrained concrete incorporating recycled coarse aggregate: The role of air content
in demolished concrete. Cement and Concrete Research, 34:799–806, 2004.
A. Gokce, S. Nagataki, T. Saeki, and M. Hisada.
Identification of frost-susceptible
recycled concrete aggregates for durability of concrete. Construction and Building
Materials, 25:2426–2431, 2010.
F. Gottfredsen and A. Nielsen. Bygningsmaterialer - grundlæggende egenskaber. Modern
Concrete Technology Series. Polyyeknisk Forlag, 1. edition, 1995.
Z. Guo, C. Chen, D. E. Lehman, W. Xiao, S. Zheng, and B. Fan. Mechanical and dura-
bility behaviours of concrete made with recycled coarse and fine aggregates. European
Journal of Environmental and Civil Engineerin, 2017.
T. C. Hansen. Recycling of Demolished Concrete and Masonry. RILEM, 1. edition, 1992.
A. Herholdt, C. Justesen, P. Nepper-Christensen, and A. Nielsen. Beton-Bogen. AAL-
BORG PORTLAND, 2. edition, 1985.
G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani.
An Introduction to Statistical
Learning - with Applications in R. Springer, 2013.
P. Kolay, S. Sulaiman, S. Kumar, and V. Puri. Materials for Sustainable Infrastructure,
chapter Freeze-Thaw Durability of Air-Entrained Concrete Incorporating Natural and
Recycled Concrete Aggregate Mixtures, pages 185–196. Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2017.
C. Liu, H. Liu, J. Xiao, and G. Bai. Effect of old mortar pore structure on relative hu-
midity response of recycled aggregate concrete. Construction and Building Materials,
247, 2020.
K. Liu, J. Yan, Q. Hu, Y. Sun, and C. Zou. Effects of parent concrete and mixing
method on the resistance to freezing and thawing of air-entrained recycled aggregate
concrete. Construction and Building Materials, 106:264–273, 2016.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
76
P. K. Mehta and P. J. M. Monteiro. Concrete - Microstructure, Properties and Materials.
McGraw-Hill, 3. edition, 2006.
Miljøstyrelsen. Udredning af teknologiske muligheder for at genbruge og genanvende
beton - miljøprojekt nr. 1667. Technical report, Miljøministeriet, 2015.
C. Munch-Petersen.
Betonhåndbogen, chapter 2. Krav til beton.
Dansk Betonforen-
ing, 2017a. URL https://betonhaandbogen.dk/media/bogen/kap_2.0_krav_til_
beton_27042017.pdf.
C. Munch-Petersen.
Betonhåndbogen,
chapter 3.2 Tilslag.
Dansk Betonforen-
ing, 2017b. URL https://betonhaandbogen.dk/media/bogen/kap_3.2_tilslag_
27112013.pdf.
G. N. Munch-Petersen.
Betonhåndbogen, chapter 6 Proportionering.
Dansk Be-
tonforening, 2013.
URL https://betonhaandbogen.dk/media/bogen/kap_6.0_
proportionering_27112013.pdf.
C. V. Nielsen.
Betonhåndbogen, chapter 10.1 Betons trykstyrke.
Dansk Betonforen-
ing, 2016.
URL https://betonhaandbogen.dk/media/bogen/kap_10_1_betons_
trykstyrke_17022016.pdf.
L.-O. Nilsson. Concrete Technology, chapter Durability concept; pore structure, and
transport processes.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-7506-5686-3.X5246-X.
H. Niu, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, and X. Yin. Compressive strength study on the freeze-
thaw resistance of recycled aggregate concrete members. The Open Civil Engineering
Journal, 11:270–280, 2017.
C. Okoli and K. Schabram. A guide to conducting a systematic literature review of
information systems research. 2010.
M. Pepe, R. Filho, E. Koenders, and E. Martinelli. A novel mix design methodology for
recycled aggregate concrete. Construction and Building Materials, 122:362–372, 2016.
M. Pigeon and R. Pleau. Durability of Concrete in Cold Climates. E & FN Spon and
Imprint of Chapman & Hall, 1. edition, 2006.
A. Richardson, K. Coventry, and J. Bacon. Freeze/thaw durability of concrete with
recycled demolition aggregate compared to virgin aggregate concrete.
Journal of
Cleaner Production, 19:272–277, 2011.
Sartorius.
SIMCA 15 User Guide - Multivariate Data Analysis Solution.
Sartorius
Stedim Data Analytics AB, 2017.
Teknologisk
Institut.
Ressourceeffektive
anlægskonstruktioner.
Online,
2019.
URL
https://www.teknologisk.dk/projekter/ressourceeffektive-
anlaegskonstruktioner/39000. Last visited on 2019-02-06.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
77
A. Walter. Betonhåndbogen, chapter 15 Sikring af kvalitet. Dansk Betonforening, 2016.
URL https://betonhaandbogen.dk/media/bogen/kap_15.0_betonlaboratoriet_
20170424_samlet.pdf.
S. Wold, M. Sjöström, and L. Eriksson. Pls-regression: a basic tool of chemometrics.
Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 58:109–130, 2001.
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, and S. Herfellner.
Effects of internal curing on the strength,
drying shrinkage and freeze–thaw resistance of concrete containing recycled concrete
aggregates. Construction and Building Materials, 91:288–296, 2015.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
SIMCA Results - Model #1.0L
and #1.1L
Figure A.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the one model
component in model #1.0L. The plot summarises the relationship among the response
variable (Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
78
==PAGE:86==
A SIMCA Results - Model #1.0L and #1.1L
79
Figure A.2: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.0L. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
Figure A.3: One dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.0L of the X score t1 for
model component 1. Illustrating how the X observations are situated with respect to each
other. Observations placed outside the deviation limits are categorized as outliers
==PAGE:87==
A SIMCA Results - Model #1.0L and #1.1L
80
Figure A.4: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.1L summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure A.5: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.1L. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
==PAGE:88==
A SIMCA Results - Model #1.0L and #1.1L
81
Figure A.6: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.1L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
SIMCA Results - Model #1.0E
and #1.1E
Figure B.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the one model
component in model #1.0E. The plot summarises the relationship among the response
variable (Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure B.2: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.0E. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
82
==PAGE:90==
B SIMCA Results - Model #1.0E and #1.1E
83
Figure B.3: One dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.0E of the X score t1 for
model component 1. Illustrating how the X observations are situated with respect to each
other. Observations placed outside the deviation limits are categorised as outliers
Figure B.4: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.1E summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
==PAGE:91==
B SIMCA Results - Model #1.0E and #1.1E
84
Figure B.5: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.1E. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
Figure B.6: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.1E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX C
SIMCA Results - Model #1.2L,
#1.3L and #1.4L
Figure C.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.2L summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure C.2: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.2L. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
85
==PAGE:93==
C SIMCA Results - Model #1.2L, #1.3L and #1.4L
86
Figure C.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.2L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
Figure C.4: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.3L summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
==PAGE:94==
C SIMCA Results - Model #1.2L, #1.3L and #1.4L
87
Figure C.5: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.3L. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
Figure C.6: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.3L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:95==
C SIMCA Results - Model #1.2L, #1.3L and #1.4L
88
Figure C.7: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.4L summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure C.8: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.4L. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
==PAGE:96==
C SIMCA Results - Model #1.2L, #1.3L and #1.4L
89
Figure C.9: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.4L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX D
SIMCA Results - Model
#1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E
Figure D.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.2E summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure D.2: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.2E. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
90
==PAGE:98==
D SIMCA Results - Model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E
91
Figure D.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.2E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
Figure D.4: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.3E summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
==PAGE:99==
D SIMCA Results - Model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E
92
Figure D.5: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.3E. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
Figure D.6: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.3E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:100==
D SIMCA Results - Model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E
93
Figure D.7: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.4E summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure D.8: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.4E. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
==PAGE:101==
D SIMCA Results - Model #1.2E, #1.3E and #1.4E
94
Figure D.9: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.4E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX E
SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P,
#1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
Figure E.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the one model
component in model #1.0P. The plot summarises the relationship among the response
variable (Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure E.2: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.0P. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
95
==PAGE:103==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
96
Figure E.3: One dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.0P of the X score t1 for
model component 1. Illustrating how the X observations are situated with respect to each
other. Observations placed outside the deviation limits are categorized as outliers
Figure E.4: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.1P summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
==PAGE:104==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
97
Figure E.5: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.1P. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
Figure E.6: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.1P of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:105==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
98
Figure E.7: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model compo-
nent 1 and 2 for model #1.2P summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure E.8: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.2P. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
==PAGE:106==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
99
Figure E.9: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.2P of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
Figure E.10:
Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model
component 1 and 2 for model #1.3P summarising the relationship among the response
variable (Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
==PAGE:107==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
100
Figure E.11: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.3P. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
Figure E.12: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.3P of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:108==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
101
Figure E.13:
Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for model
component 1 and 2 for model #1.4P summarising the relationship among the response
variable (Y) of compressive strength fc,28 and the respective predictors (X)
Figure E.14: VIP plots summarizing the importance of the variables to explain both
X and the correlation to the compressive strength (fc,28) (Y) for model #1.4P. The
importance of the variables are arranged so the most important variable is placed left in
the plot
==PAGE:109==
E SIMCA Results - Model #1.0P, #1.1P, #1.2P,#1.3P and #1.4P
102
Figure E.15: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #1.4P of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX F
PLS Analysis of F-T resistance
- The influence of RCA
Linear Assumption
F.0.1
F-T resistance measured on loss in dynamic
e-modules and mass loss individually
Table F.1: PLS Model variables and corresponding model corresponding goodness of fit
statistics of modelled linear relationship between F-T resistance measured by the responses
(Y) of RDM loss and Mass loss individually and the different predictors (X). Variables
not included in a specific model are marked with -. Models established from Dataset2
(Appendix U)
Model Variables
Model
#2.0L
#2.1L
#3.0L
#3.1L
RDM loss [%]
y
y
-
-
Mass loss [%]
-
-
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c)[-]
x
x
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
0
1
1
1
Measure of fit (R2X)
-
0.490
0.360
0.525
Measure of fit (R2Y )
-
0.0861
0.156
0.158
Measure of prediction (Q2)
-
0.0592
0.360
0.137
103
==PAGE:111==
F PLS Analysis of F-T resistance - The influence of RCA
104
F.0.2
F-T resistance measured on loss in dynamic
e-modules and mass loss combined
Table F.2: PLS Model variables and corresponding model corresponding goodness of fit
statistics of modelled linear relationship between F-T resistance measured by the responses
(Y) of RDM loss and Mass loss simultaneously and the different predictors (X). Variables
not included in a specific model are marked with -. Models established from Dataset2
(Appendix U)
Model Variables
Model
#4.0L
#4.1L
RDM loss [%]
y
y
Mass loss [%]
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
1
1
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.370
0.521
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.110
0.114
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.0715
0.0956
==PAGE:112==
F PLS Analysis of F-T resistance - The influence of RCA
105
Exponential Assumption
F.0.3
F-T resistance measured on loss in dynamic
e-modules and mass loss individually
Table F.3: PLS Model variables and corresponding model corresponding goodness of fit
statistics of modelled exponential relationship between F-T resistance measured by the
log transformed responses (Y) of RDM loss and Mass loss individually and the different
predictors (X). Variables not included in a specific model are marked with -. Models
established using Dataset2 (Appendix U)
Model Variables
Models
#2.0E
#2.1E
#3.0E
#3.1E
RDM loss [%]
y
y
-
-
Mass loss [%]
-
-
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c)[-]
x
x
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
0
1
1
1
Measure of fit (R2X)
-
0.525
0.348
0.524
Measure of fit (R2Y )
-
0.153
0.360
0.355
Measure of prediction (Q2)
-
0.0899
0.303
0.319
==PAGE:113==
F PLS Analysis of F-T resistance - The influence of RCA
106
F.0.4
F-T resistance measured on loss in dynamic
e-modules and mass loss simultaneously
Table F.4: PLS Model variables and corresponding model corresponding goodness of fit
statistics of modelled exponential relationship between F-T resistance measured by the log
transformed responses (Y) of RDM loss and Mass loss simultaneously and the different
predictors (X). Variables not included in a specific model are marked with -. Models
established from Dataset2 (Appendix U)
Model Variables
Model
#4.0E
#4.1E
RDM loss [%]
y
y
Mass loss [%]
y
y
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
1
1
Measure of fit (R2X)
0.353
0.526
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0.251
0.250
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0.185
0.210
==PAGE:114==
F PLS Analysis of F-T resistance - The influence of RCA
107
F.0.5
F-T resistance measured as DF factor
Table F.5: PLS Model variables and corresponding model corresponding goodness of fit
statistics of modelled linear and exponential relationship between F-T resistance measured
as the durability factor and the different predictors (X). Variables not included in a specific
model are marked with -. Models established from Dataset4 (Appendix W)
Model Variables
Model
#2.0LDF
#2.1LDF
#2.0EDF
#2.1EDF
RDM loss [%]
y
y
y
y
Mass loss [%]
-
-
-
-
Water cement ratio (w/c) [-]
x
x
x
x
Repl. Ratio RCA [%]
x
x
x
x
NA/RCA [-]
x
-
x
-
AE/NonAE [-]
x
x
x
x
Goodness of fit statistics
Model components (A)
0
1
0
0
Measure of fit (R2X)
0
0.297
0
0
Measure of fit (R2Y )
0
0.125
0
0
Measure of prediction (Q2)
0
0
0
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX G
SIMCA Results - Model #5.0L
Figure G.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #5.0L. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of RDM loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure G.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the RDM loss (Y) for model #5.0L. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
108
==PAGE:116==
G SIMCA Results - Model #5.0L
109
Figure G.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #5.0L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX H
SIMCA Results - Model #5.1L
Figure H.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #5.1L. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of RDM loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure H.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the RDM loss (Y) for model #5.1L. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
110
==PAGE:118==
H SIMCA Results - Model #5.1L
111
Figure H.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #5.1L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX I
SIMCA Results - Model #6.0L
Figure I.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #6.0L. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure I.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the Mass loss (Y) for model #6.0L. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
112
==PAGE:120==
I SIMCA Results - Model #6.0L
113
Figure I.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #6.0L of the X score t1 for
model component 1 vs.
the score t2 for model component 2.
Illustrating how the X
observations are situated with respect to each other.
Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX J
SIMCA Results - Model #6.1L
Figure J.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #6.1L. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure J.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the Mass loss (Y) for model #6.1L. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
114
==PAGE:122==
J SIMCA Results - Model #6.1L
115
Figure J.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #6.1L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX K
SIMCA Results - Model #7.0L
Figure K.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #7.0L. Summarising the relationship among the response variables
(Y) of RDM- and Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure K.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) for model
#7.0L. The importance of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is
placed left in the plot
116
==PAGE:124==
K SIMCA Results - Model #7.0L
117
Figure K.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #7.0L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX L
SIMCA Results - Model #7.1L
Figure L.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #7.1L. Summarising the relationship among the response variables
(Y) of RDM- and Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure L.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) for model
#7.1L. The importance of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is
placed left in the plot
118
==PAGE:126==
L SIMCA Results - Model #7.1L
119
Figure L.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #7.1L of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX M
SIMCA Results - Model #5.0E
Figure M.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #5.0E. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of RDM loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure M.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the RDM loss (Y) for model #5.0E. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
120
==PAGE:128==
M SIMCA Results - Model #5.0E
121
Figure M.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #5.0E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX N
SIMCA Results - Model #5.1E
Figure N.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #5.1E. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of RDM loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure N.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the RDM loss (Y) for model #5.1E. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
122
==PAGE:130==
N SIMCA Results - Model #5.1E
123
Figure N.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #5.1E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX O
SIMCA Results - Model #6.0E
Figure O.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #6.0E. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure O.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the Mass loss (Y) for model #6.0E. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
124
==PAGE:132==
O SIMCA Results - Model #6.0E
125
Figure O.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #6.0E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX P
SIMCA Results - Model #6.1E
Figure P.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #6.1E. Summarising the relationship among the response variable
(Y) of Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure P.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the Mass loss (Y) for model #6.1E. The importance of the
predictors are arranged so the most important predictor is placed left in the plot
126
==PAGE:134==
P SIMCA Results - Model #6.1E
127
Figure P.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #6.1E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX Q
SIMCA Results - Model #7.0E
Figure Q.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #7.0E. Summarising the relationship among the response variables
(Y) of RDM- and Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure Q.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) for model
#7.0E. The importance of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor
is placed left in the plot
128
==PAGE:136==
Q SIMCA Results - Model #7.0E
129
Figure Q.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #7.0E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX R
SIMCA Results - Model #7.1E
Figure R.1: Loadings scatter plots showing the PLS weights w* and c for the two model
components for model #7.1E. Summarising the relationship among the response variables
(Y) of RDM- and Mass loss and the respective predictors (X)
Figure R.2: VIP plots summarising the importance of the predictors to explain both
X and the correlation to the response variables of RDM- and Mass loss (Y) for model
#7.1E. The importance of the predictors are arranged so the most important predictor
is placed left in the plot
130
==PAGE:138==
R SIMCA Results - Model #7.1E
131
Figure R.3: Two dimensional score scatter plot for model #7.1E of the X score t1
for model component 1 vs. the score t2 for model component 2. Illustrating how the
X observations are situated with respect to each other. Observations placed outside the
tolerance ellipse based on Hotelling’s T2 by are categorized as outliers on a default 0.05
significance level
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX S
Dataset0
132
==PAGE:140==
Author
ID
Author NA/RCA
Repl. Ratio AE/NonAE Sample
Orig. sample ID RDM (%) RDM loss (%) RDM FT cycles Mass loss (%)
Mass loss FT cycles
Fc 28 days w/c 
Air content Repl Ratio w/c-RCA AE-RCA AM
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1N0A1
1 N
0 A
1 VC-VS
77,0
23,0
500
4,4
90
0,55
4,3
0
0,0
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A2
1 R
55 A
2 A1-VS
83,0
17,0
500
3,3
90
0,55
4,5
55
0,35 yes
52,3
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A3
1 R
55 A
3 A3-VS
90,0
10,0
500
2,5
90
0,55
4
55
0,35 yes
30,2
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A4
1 R
55 A
4 B1-VS
94,0
6,0
500
4,7
90
0,55
4,1
55
0,45 yes
55,0
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A5
1 R
55 A
5 B3-VS
91,5
8,5
500
4,0
90
0,55
3,8
55
0,45 yes
32,4
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A6
1 R
55 A
6 C1-VS
85,4
14,6
500
5,1
90
0,55
4,5
55
0,63 yes
52,3
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A7
1 R
55 A
7 C3-VS
81,4
18,6
500
5,4
90
0,55
4,7
55
0,63 yes
32,3
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A8
1 R
55 A
8 B'1-VS
54,8
45,2
90
0,8
90
0,55
4,7
55
0,45 no
55,7
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A9
1 R
55 A
9 B'2-VS
57,2
42,8
150
1,5
90
0,55
4,1
55
0,45 no
45,5
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2N0A1
2 N
0 A
1 OCA-55
77,2
22,8
500
0,55
4,3
0
0
55,0
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A2
2 R
55 A
2 B1-55
94,0
6,0
500
0,55
4,1
55
0,45 yes
32,4
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A3
2 R
55 A
3 B3-55
92,1
7,9
500
0,55
3,8
55
0,45 yes
55,7
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A4
2 R
55 A
4 B'1-55
56,0
44,0
90
0,55
4,7
55
0,45 no
45,5
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A5
2 R
55 A
5 B'3-55
57,5
42,5
150
0,55
4,1
55
0,45 no
55,0
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A6
2 R
55 A
6 B'1(%12.5)-55
55,5
44,5
180
0,55
3,8
55
0,45 partial 
55,0
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A7
2 R
55 A
7 B'1(%25)-55
54,5
45,5
210
0,55
4
55
0,45 partial
55,0
A. Gokce et al. (B)
2C100A8
2 R
55 A
8 B'1(%50)-55
55,5
44,5
180
0,55
4
55
0,45 partial
55,0
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R25B1
3 R
25 B
1 25RC
73,5
26,5
240
1,0
240
43,0
0,485
25
no
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R50B2
3 R
50 B
2 50RC
76,3
23,7
240
0,7
240
42,0
0,485
50
no
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R75B3
3 R
75 B
3 75RC
80,2
19,8
240
0,5
240
40,0
0,485
75
no
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R100B4
3 R
100 B
4 100RC
88,5
11,6
240
0,4
240
38,0
0,485
100
no
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3N25B5
3 N
0 B
5 C
72,7
27,4
240
0,9
240
44,0
0,485
0
no
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B1
4 N
0 B
1 RC
0,5
99,5
300
12,6
300
51,0
0,53
1,3
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B2
4 R
10 B
2 C20R
0,5
99,5
300
19,2
300
49,7
0,53
1,8
10
no
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B3
4 R
25 B
3 C50R
0,5
99,5
300
12,3
300
48,4
0,53
2
25
no
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B4
4 R
50 B
4 C100R
0,5
99,5
300
37,9
300
45,9
0,53
1,4
50
no
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B5
4 N
0 B
5 HC
88,9
11,1
300
0,2
300
81,5
0,35
1,3
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B6
4 R
10 B
6 HC20R
88,9
11,1
300
0,2
300
76,9
0,35
1,5
10
no
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B7
4 R
25 B
7 HC50R
88,9
11,1
300
0,3
300
71,0
0,35
1,9
25
no
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B8
4 R
50 B
8 HC100R
88,9
11,1
300
0,6
300
62,7
0,35
1,5
50
no
J. Bogas et al.
4N0A9
4 N
0 A
9 HCAE
90,8
9,2
300
0,2
300
68,6
0,35
3,9
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006A10
4 R
10 A
10 HCAE20R
90,8
9,2
300
0,2
300
61,3
0,35
4
10
no
J. Bogas et al.
4R015A11
4 R
25 A
11 HCAE50R
95,5
4,5
300
0,3
300
54,6
0,35
4,2
25
no
J. Bogas et al.
4N03A12
4 R
50 A
12 HCAE100R
95,5
4,5
300
0,3
300
46,7
0,35
4,5
50
no
K. Liu et al.
5N0A1
5 N
0 A
1 CC-CG-N
99,0
1,0
250
0,5
250
34,9
0,45
5,4
0
0,00
0,0
K. Liu et al.
5R100A2
5 R
100 A
2 RC-LC-N
80,2
19,8
250
0,4
250
28,4
0,45
5,3
100
0,60 no
35,4
K. Liu et al.
5R100A3
5 R
100 A
3 RC-MC-N
79,8
20,2
250
0,5
250
30,9
0,45
5,3
100
0,45 no
37,2
K. Liu et al.
5R100A4
5 R
100 A
4 RC-MC-E
81,2
18,8
250
0,4
250
32,9
0,45
5
100
0,45 no
37,2
K. Liu et al.
5R100A5
5 R
100 A
5 RC-MC-T
85,0
15,0
250
0,4
250
33,3
0,45
5,5
100
0,30 no
37,2
K. Liu et al.
5R100A6
5 R
100 A
6 RC-HC-N
98,1
1,9
250
0,4
250
32,3
0,45
5,3
100
0,45 no
42,1
K. Liu et al.
5R100A7
5 R
100 A
7 RC-NC-N
83,1
16,9
250
0,5
250
29,3
0,45
5,5
100
0,45 no
42,5
K. Liu et al.
5R100A8
5 R
100 A
8 RC-AC-N
97,3
2,7
250
0,4
250
28,6
0,45
5,2
100
0,45 yes
42,7
K. Liu et al.
5R100A9
5 R
100 A
9 RC-NAC-N
95,4
4,6
250
0,4
250
28,3
0,45
5,4
100
0,45 partial 
42,7
N. Amorim et al. 
6N0B1
6 N
0 B
1 REF
91,2
8,8
300
60,0
0,43
0
N. Amorim et al. 
6R50B2
6 R
9,710075 B
2 RCA15
99,3
0,7
300
56,0
0,43
10
no
N. Amorim et al. 
6R50B3
6 R
16,18346 B
3 RCA25
95,5
4,5
300
54,0
0,43
16
no
N. Amorim et al. 
6R50B4
6 R
32,36692 B
4 RCA50
94,6
5,4
300
44,0
0,43
32
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B1
7 N
0 B
1 C7
77,0
23,0
300
4,2
300
24,8
0,70
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B2
7 N
0 B
2 C6
80,2
19,8
300
2,9
300
30,1
0,60
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B3
7 N
0 B
3 C5
84,2
15,8
300
2,4
300
38,3
0,50
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B4
7 R
50 B
4 C7-50/s100
90,4
9,6
300
2,3
300
29,4
0,70
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B5
7 R
50 B
5 C6-50/s100
90,8
9,2
300
4,2
300
33,5
0,60
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B6
7 R
50 B
6 C5-50/s100
91,3
8,7
300
3,5
300
39,4
0,50
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B7
7 R
50 B
7 C7-50/s50
91,0
9,0
300
3,5
300
27,1
0,70
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B8
7 R
50 B
8 C6-50/s50
91,6
8,4
300
3,2
300
29,5
0,60
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B9
7 R
50 B
9 C5-50/s50
91,4
8,6
300
2,9
300
36,7
0,50
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B10
7 R
50 B
10 C7-50
73,2
26,8
300
7,1
300
27,8
0,70
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B11
7 R
50 B
11 C6-50
78,6
21,5
300
5,1
300
30,2
0,60
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B12
7 R
50 B
12 C5-50
80,3
19,7
300
4,8
300
34,6
0,50
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B13
7 R
100 B
13 C7-100/s100
87,7
12,3
300
4,3
300
23,8
0,70
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B14
7 R
100 B
14 C6-100/s100
88,6
11,5
300
3,5
300
25,8
0,60
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B15
7 R
100 B
15 C5-100/s100
89,5
10,5
300
3,5
300
34,1
0,50
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B16
7 R
100 B
16 C7-100/s50
80,2
19,8
300
6,4
300
18,9
0,70
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B17
7 R
100 B
17 C6-100/s50
84,6
15,4
300
6,4
300
24,3
0,60
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B18
7 R
100 B
18 C5-100/s50
85,3
14,7
300
4,8
300
33,4
0,50
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B19
7 R
100 B
19 C7-100
75,3
24,7
300
6,8
300
22,5
0,70
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B20
7 R
100 B
20 C6-100
76,4
23,6
300
6,8
300
23,6
0,60
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B21
7 R
100 B
21 C5-100
80,1
19,9
300
6,4
300
30,2
0,50
100
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B22
7 R
50 B
22 C7-FRCA-100
78,1
21,9
300
6,2
300
25,0
0,70
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B23
7 R
50 B
23 C6-FRCA-100
83,0
17,0
300
4,9
300
26,1
0,60
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B24
7 R
50 B
24 C5-FRCA-100
84,8
15,2
300
4,5
300
32,3
0,50
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B25
7 R
50 B
25 C7-FRCA-50
84,0
16,1
300
5,9
300
27,1
0,70
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B26
7 R
50 B
26 C6-FRCA-50
85,9
14,1
300
4,5
300
28,7
0,60
50
no
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B27
7 R
50 B
27 C5-FRCA-50
89,1
10,9
300
3,7
300
38,0
0,50
50
no
A. Richardson et al.
8N0B1
8 N
0 B
1 VP
78,6
21,4
56
20,4
56
0,80
0
A. Richardson et al.
8N0A2
8 N
0 A
2 VA
78,0
22,0
56
0,2
56
0,80
0
A. Richardson et al.
8R100B3
8 R
100 B
3 RP
87,6
12,4
56
2,0
56
0,80
100
no
A. Richardson et al.
8R100A4
8 R
100 A
4 RA
86,2
13,8
56
0,1
56
0,80
100
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9N0B1
9 N
0 B
1 0RCA
0,6
99,4
300
50,4
0,45
0
P. Kolay et al. 
9R20B2
9 R
20 B
2 20RCA
300
47,9
0,45
20
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R40B3
9 R
40 B
3 40RCA
0,8
99,2
300
46,2
0,45
40
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R60B4
9 R
60 B
4 60RCA
300
46,2
0,45
60
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R80B5
9 R
80 B
5 80RCA
300
45,4
0,45
80
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R100B6
9 R
100 B
6 100RCA
19,8
80,2
300
44,9
0,45
100
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9N0A7
9 N
0 A
7 0RCA-AE
88,7
11,3
300
38,2
0,45
0
P. Kolay et al. 
9R20A8
9 R
20 A
8 20RCA-AE
83,7
16,3
300
28,1
0,45
20
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R40A9
9 R
40 A
9 40RCA-AE
89,8
10,2
300
27,1
0,45
40
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R60A10
9 R
60 A
10 60RCA-AE
89,8
10,2
300
24,7
0,45
60
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R80A11
9 R
80 A
11 80RCA-AE
300
24,5
0,45
80
no
P. Kolay et al. 
9R100A12
9 R
100 A
12 100RCA-AE
81,5
18,5
300
24,1
0,45
100
no
H. Niu et al.
10N0B1
10 N
0 B
1 RC-0-0
1,3
100
0,64
0
H. Niu et al.
10R25B2
10 R
25 B
2 RC-0.5-0
1,6
100
0,64
25
no
H. Niu et al.
10R25B3
10 R
25 B
3 RC-0-0.5
1,8
100
0,64
25
no
H. Niu et al.
10R50B4
10 R
50 B
4 RC-0.5-0.5
2,4
100
0,64
50
no
H. Niu et al.
10R50B5
10 R
50 B
5 RC-1-0
2,3
100
0,64
50
no
H. Niu et al.
10R50B6
10 R
50 B
6 RC-0-1
2,5
100
0,64
50
no
H. Niu et al.
10R75B7
10 R
75 B
7 RC-1-0.5
2,7
100
0,64
75
no
H. Niu et al.
10R75B8
10 R
75 B
8 RC-0.5-1
2,9
100
0,64
75
no
H. Niu et al.
10R100B9
10 R
100 B
9 RC-1-1
3,2
100
0,64
100
no
Z. Guo et al 
11N0B1
11 N
0 B
1 A-0-0
1,0
50
38,4
0,40
0
Z. Guo et al 
11R9B2
11 R
9 B
2 A-0-30
36,9
0,40
9
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R18B3
11 R
18 B
3 A-0-60
33,0
0,40
18
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R30B4
11 R
30,0 B
4 A-0-100
31,8
0,40
30
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R52B5
11 R
52,5 B
5 A-75-0
32,1
0,40
53
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R61B6
11 R
61,5 B
6 A-75-30
28,1
0,40
62
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R70B7
11 R
70,5 B
7 A-75-60
27,0
0,40
71
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R82B8
11 R
82,5 B
8 A-75-100
26,7
0,40
83
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R70B9
11 R
70 B
9 A-100-0
0,7
50
26,0
0,40
70
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R79B10
11 R
79 B
10 A-100-30
0,6
50
25,2
0,40
79
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R88B11
11 R
88 B
11 A-100-60
1,1
50
25,4
0,40
88
no
Z. Guo et al 
11R100B12
11 R
100 B
12 A-100-100
1,2
50
22,2
0,40
100
no
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX T
Dataset1
134
==PAGE:142==
Author
ID
Author
NA/RCA
AE/NonAE
Fc 28 days
w/c 
(w/c)^(-1)
Air content
Repl Ratio
J. Bogas et al 4N0B1
4 N
B
51,0
0,53
1,89
1,3
0
J. Bogas et al 4R006B2
4 R
B
49,7
0,53
1,89
1,8
10
J. Bogas et al 4R015B3
4 R
B
48,4
0,53
1,89
2,0
25
J. Bogas et al 4R03B4
4 R
B
45,9
0,53
1,89
1,4
50
J. Bogas et al 4N0B5
4 N
B
81,5
0,35
2,86
1,3
0
J. Bogas et al 4R006B6
4 R
B
76,9
0,35
2,86
1,5
10
J. Bogas et al 4R015B7
4 R
B
71,0
0,35
2,86
1,9
25
J. Bogas et al 4R03B8
4 R
B
62,7
0,35
2,86
1,5
50
J. Bogas et al 4N0A9
4 N
A
68,6
0,35
2,86
3,9
0
J. Bogas et al 4R006A10
4 R
A
61,3
0,35
2,86
4,0
10
J. Bogas et al 4R015A11
4 R
A
54,6
0,35
2,86
4,2
25
J. Bogas et al 4N03A12
4 R
A
46,7
0,35
2,86
4,5
50
K. Liu et al.
5N0A1
5 N
A
34,9
0,45
2,22
5,4
0
K. Liu et al.
5R100A2
5 R
A
28,4
0,45
2,22
5,3
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A3
5 R
A
30,9
0,45
2,22
5,3
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A4
5 R
A
32,9
0,45
2,22
5,0
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A5
5 R
A
33,3
0,45
2,22
5,5
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A6
5 R
A
32,3
0,45
2,22
5,3
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A7
5 R
A
29,3
0,45
2,22
5,5
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A8
5 R
A
28,6
0,45
2,22
5,2
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A9
5 R
A
28,3
0,45
2,22
5,4
100
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX U
Dataset2
136
==PAGE:144==
Author
ID
Author NA/RCA
AE/NonAE RDM (%) RDM loss (%)Mass loss (%)
w/c 
Repl Ratio
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1N0A1
1 N
A
77,0
23,0
4,4
0,55
0
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A2
1 R
A
83,0
17,0
3,3
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A3
1 R
A
90,0
10,0
2,5
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A4
1 R
A
94,0
6,0
4,7
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A5
1 R
A
91,5
8,5
4,0
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A6
1 R
A
85,4
14,6
5,1
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A7
1 R
A
81,4
18,6
5,4
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A8
1 R
A
54,8
45,2
0,8
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A9
1 R
A
57,2
42,8
1,5
0,55
55
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R25B1
3 R
B
73,5
26,5
1,0
0,485
25
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R50B2
3 R
B
76,3
23,7
0,7
0,485
50
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R75B3
3 R
B
80,2
19,8
0,5
0,485
75
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R100B4
3 R
B
88,5
11,6
0,4
0,485
100
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3N25B5
3 N
B
72,7
27,4
0,9
0,485
0
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B1
4 N
B
0,5
99,5
12,6
0,53
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B2
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
19,2
0,53
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B3
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
12,3
0,53
25
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B4
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
37,9
0,53
50
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B5
4 N
B
88,9
11,1
0,2
0,35
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B6
4 R
B
88,9
11,1
0,2
0,35
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B7
4 R
B
88,9
11,1
0,3
0,35
25
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B8
4 R
B
88,9
11,1
0,6
0,35
50
J. Bogas et al.
4N0A9
4 N
A
90,8
9,2
0,2
0,35
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006A10
4 R
A
90,8
9,2
0,2
0,35
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015A11
4 R
A
95,5
4,5
0,3
0,35
25
J. Bogas et al.
4N03A12
4 R
A
95,5
4,5
0,3
0,35
50
K. Liu et al.
5N0A1
5 N
A
99,0
1,0
0,5
0,45
0
K. Liu et al.
5R100A2
5 R
A
80,2
19,8
0,4
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A3
5 R
A
79,8
20,2
0,5
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A4
5 R
A
81,2
18,8
0,4
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A5
5 R
A
85,0
15,0
0,4
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A6
5 R
A
98,1
1,9
0,4
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A7
5 R
A
83,1
16,9
0,5
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A8
5 R
A
97,3
2,7
0,4
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A9
5 R
A
95,4
4,6
0,4
0,45
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B1
7 N
B
77,0
23,0
4,2
0,70
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B2
7 N
B
80,2
19,8
2,9
0,60
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B3
7 N
B
84,2
15,8
2,4
0,50
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B4
7 R
B
90,4
9,6
2,3
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B5
7 R
B
90,8
9,2
4,2
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B6
7 R
B
91,3
8,7
3,5
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B7
7 R
B
91,0
9,0
3,5
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B8
7 R
B
91,6
8,4
3,2
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B9
7 R
B
91,4
8,6
2,9
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B10
7 R
B
73,2
26,8
7,1
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B11
7 R
B
78,6
21,5
5,1
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B12
7 R
B
80,3
19,7
4,8
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B13
7 R
B
87,7
12,3
4,3
0,70
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B14
7 R
B
88,6
11,5
3,5
0,60
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B15
7 R
B
89,5
10,5
3,5
0,50
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B16
7 R
B
80,2
19,8
6,4
0,70
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B17
7 R
B
84,6
15,4
6,4
0,60
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B18
7 R
B
85,3
14,7
4,8
0,50
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B19
7 R
B
75,3
24,7
6,8
0,70
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B20
7 R
B
76,4
23,6
6,8
0,60
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B21
7 R
B
80,1
19,9
6,4
0,50
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B22
7 R
B
78,1
21,9
6,2
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B23
7 R
B
83,0
17,0
4,9
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B24
7 R
B
84,8
15,2
4,5
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B25
7 R
B
84,0
16,1
5,9
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B26
7 R
B
85,9
14,1
4,5
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B27
7 R
B
89,1
10,9
3,7
0,50
50
A. Richardson et al.
8N0B1
8 N
B
78,6
21,4
20,4
0,80
0
A. Richardson et al.
8N0A2
8 N
A
78,0
22,0
0,2
0,80
0
A. Richardson et al.
8R100B3
8 R
B
87,6
12,4
2,0
0,80
100
A. Richardson et al.
8R100A4
8 R
A
86,2
13,8
0,1
0,80
100
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX V
Dataset3
138
==PAGE:146==
Author
ID
Author NA/RCA
AE/NonAE RDM (%)
RDM loss (%)Mass loss (%)
(w/c)^(-1)
w/c 
Air content Repl Ratio
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1N0A1
1 N
A
77,0
23,0
4,39
1,82
0,55
4,3
0
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A2
1 R
A
83,0
17,0
3,25
1,82
0,55
4,5
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A3
1 R
A
90,0
10,0
2,48
1,82
0,55
4,0
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A4
1 R
A
94,0
6,0
4,70
1,82
0,55
4,1
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A5
1 R
A
91,5
8,5
4,00
1,82
0,55
3,8
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A6
1 R
A
85,4
14,6
5,12
1,82
0,55
4,5
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A7
1 R
A
81,4
18,6
5,37
1,82
0,55
4,7
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A8
1 R
A
54,8
45,2
0,81
1,82
0,55
4,7
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A9
1 R
A
57,2
42,8
1,47
1,82
0,55
4,1
55
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B1
4 N
B
0,5
99,5
12,6
1,89
0,53
1,3
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B2
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
19,2
1,89
0,53
1,8
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B3
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
12,3
1,89
0,53
2,0
25
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B4
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
37,9
1,89
0,53
1,4
50
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B5
4 N
B
88,9
11,1
0,2
2,86
0,35
1,3
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B6
4 R
B
88,9
11,1
0
2,86
0,35
1,5
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B7
4 R
B
88,9
11,1
0
2,86
0,35
1,9
25
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B8
4 R
B
88,9
11,1
1
2,86
0,35
1,5
50
J. Bogas et al.
4N0A9
4 N
A
90,8
9,2
0,2
2,86
0,35
3,9
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006A10
4 R
A
90,8
9,2
0
2,86
0,35
4,0
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015A11
4 R
A
95,5
4,5
0
2,86
0,35
4,2
25
J. Bogas et al.
4N03A12
4 R
A
95,5
4,5
0
2,86
0,35
4,5
50
K. Liu et al.
5N0A1
5 N
A
99,0
1,0
0,51
2,22
0,45
5,4
0
K. Liu et al.
5R100A2
5 R
A
80,2
19,8
0,41
2,22
0,45
5,3
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A3
5 R
A
79,8
20,2
0,54
2,22
0,45
5,3
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A4
5 R
A
81,2
18,8
0,44
2,22
0,45
5,0
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A5
5 R
A
85,0
15,0
0,41
2,22
0,45
5,5
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A6
5 R
A
98,1
1,9
0,38
2,22
0,45
5,3
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A7
5 R
A
83,1
16,9
0,50
2,22
0,45
5,5
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A8
5 R
A
97,3
2,7
0,38
2,22
0,45
5,2
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A9
5 R
A
95,4
4,6
0,37
2,22
0,45
5,4
100
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX W
Dataset4
140
==PAGE:148==
Author
ID
Author NA/RCA
AE/NonAE RDM (%) RDM loss (%)DF
 DF loss FT cycles w/c 
Repl Ratio
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1N0A1
1 N
A
77,0
23,0 77,0
23,0
500
0,55
0
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A2
1 R
A
83,0
17,0 83,0
17,0
500
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A3
1 R
A
90,0
10,0 90,0
10,0
500
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A4
1 R
A
94,0
6,0 94,0
6,0
500
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A5
1 R
A
91,5
8,5 91,5
8,5
500
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A6
1 R
A
85,4
14,6 85,4
14,6
500
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A7
1 R
A
81,4
18,6 81,4
18,6
500
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A8
1 R
A
54,8
45,2 16,5
83,5
90
0,55
55
A. Gokce et al. (A)
1R100A9
1 R
A
57,2
42,8 28,6
71,4
150
0,55
55
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R25B1
3 R
B
73,5
26,5 58,8
41,2
240
0,485
25
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R50B2
3 R
B
76,3
23,7 61,0
39,0
240
0,485
50
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R75B3
3 R
B
80,2
19,8 64,2
35,8
240
0,485
75
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3R100B4
3 R
B
88,5
11,6 70,8
29,2
240
0,485
100
A. Mardani-Aghabaglou et al.
3N25B5
3 N
B
72,7
27,4 58,1
41,9
240
0,485
0
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B1
4 N
B
0,5
99,5
0,5
99,5
300
0,53
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B2
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
0,5
99,5
300
0,53
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B3
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
0,5
99,5
300
0,53
25
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B4
4 R
B
0,5
99,5
0,5
99,5
300
0,53
50
J. Bogas et al.
4N0B5
4 N
B
88,9
11,1 88,9
11,1
300
0,35
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006B6
4 R
B
88,9
11,1 88,9
11,1
300
0,35
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015B7
4 R
B
88,9
11,1 88,9
11,1
300
0,35
25
J. Bogas et al.
4R03B8
4 R
B
88,9
11,1 88,9
11,1
300
0,35
50
J. Bogas et al.
4N0A9
4 N
A
90,8
9,2 90,8
9,2
300
0,35
0
J. Bogas et al.
4R006A10
4 R
A
90,8
9,2 90,8
9,2
300
0,35
10
J. Bogas et al.
4R015A11
4 R
A
95,5
4,5 95,5
4,5
300
0,35
25
J. Bogas et al.
4N03A12
4 R
A
95,5
4,5 95,5
4,5
300
0,35
50
K. Liu et al.
5N0A1
5 N
A
99,0
1,0 82,5
17,5
250
0,45
0
K. Liu et al.
5R100A2
5 R
A
80,2
19,8 66,8
33,2
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A3
5 R
A
79,8
20,2 66,5
33,5
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A4
5 R
A
81,2
18,8 67,6
32,4
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A5
5 R
A
85,0
15,0 70,8
29,2
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A6
5 R
A
98,1
1,9 81,8
18,2
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A7
5 R
A
83,1
16,9 69,2
30,8
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A8
5 R
A
97,3
2,7 81,1
18,9
250
0,45
100
K. Liu et al.
5R100A9
5 R
A
95,4
4,6 79,5
20,5
250
0,45
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B1
7 N
B
77,0
23,0 77,0
23,0
300
0,70
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B2
7 N
B
80,2
19,8 80,2
19,8
300
0,60
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7N0B3
7 N
B
84,2
15,8 84,2
15,8
300
0,50
0
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B4
7 R
B
90,4
9,6 90,4
9,6
300
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B5
7 R
B
90,8
9,2 90,8
9,2
300
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B6
7 R
B
91,3
8,7 91,3
8,7
300
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B7
7 R
B
91,0
9,0 91,0
9,0
300
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B8
7 R
B
91,6
8,4 91,6
8,4
300
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B9
7 R
B
91,4
8,6 91,4
8,6
300
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B10
7 R
B
73,2
26,8 73,2
26,8
300
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B11
7 R
B
78,6
21,5 78,6
21,5
300
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B12
7 R
B
80,3
19,7 80,3
19,7
300
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B13
7 R
B
87,7
12,3 87,7
12,3
300
0,70
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B14
7 R
B
88,6
11,5 88,6
11,5
300
0,60
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B15
7 R
B
89,5
10,5 89,5
10,5
300
0,50
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B16
7 R
B
80,2
19,8 80,2
19,8
300
0,70
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B17
7 R
B
84,6
15,4 84,6
15,4
300
0,60
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B18
7 R
B
85,3
14,7 85,3
14,7
300
0,50
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B19
7 R
B
75,3
24,7 75,3
24,7
300
0,70
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B20
7 R
B
76,4
23,6 76,4
23,6
300
0,60
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R100B21
7 R
B
80,1
19,9 80,1
19,9
300
0,50
100
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B22
7 R
B
78,1
21,9 78,1
21,9
300
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B23
7 R
B
83,0
17,0 83,0
17,0
300
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B24
7 R
B
84,8
15,2 84,8
15,2
300
0,50
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B25
7 R
B
84,0
16,1 84,0
16,1
300
0,70
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B26
7 R
B
85,9
14,1 85,9
14,1
300
0,60
50
S. Yildirim, C. Meyer, S. Herfellner
7R50B27
7 R
B
89,1
10,9 89,1
10,9
300
0,50
50
A. Richardson et al.
8N0B1
8 N
B
78,6
21,4 14,7
85,3
56
0,80
0
A. Richardson et al.
8N0A2
8 N
A
78,0
22,0 14,6
85,4
56
0,80
0
A. Richardson et al.
8R100B3
8 R
B
87,6
12,4 16,4
83,6
56
0,80
100
A. Richardson et al.
8R100A4
8 R
A
86,2
13,8 16,1
83,9
56
0,80
100
==PAGE:149==
==PAGE:150==
